=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: A Message From the Afronauts 19 Books In 1.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 370
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:00:44.694744
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Dear Reader,
You are about to embrace information that is based on consciousness found
in Nubian literature that represent a much higher understanding than you may
have read before. Nothing you are about to read is new in essence for it has
always existed within your own mind. The understanding of universal law has
existed since the beginning of time and has been presented to Nubians /
black people through the great Nubians in our race. These extracts are based
on historically and psychological research and have been inspired by previous
great writings by As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, Marcus Garvey, Martin
Luther King, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed, Clarence 13X, Noble
Drew Ali, Nuwapians, HTM’s and the AEO’s to name a few. This PDF is
youth orientated, as it is an attempt to link deeper Nubian consciousness with
the commercial realities of today. Brace your self this is not normal black
talk for many of the norms of society are based on untruths and a rejection of
facts. Regard this information as yours to keep. You can use this information
in any way you want as long as it is beneficial to the Nubian race –  This PDF
file is FREE and should always be FREE. You can put this on your own
website or forums to be freely downloaded. You can email this information to
anyone that can benefit from it. We are very keen to have people from the
continent of Africa be introduced to this level of information as we know much
of this type of literature is hard to find out there. Many people may be
offended by the information you are about to read we are sorry but if you truly
respect nature and science you will understand.
The language and diction of these extracts have been watered / simplified
down to allow those just get to grips with the basic mind revolution concepts
that apply to Nubians in the world today. A scientific methodology will be used
as this will minimise room for man-made belief systems to emerge thus
keeping the message undiluted without bias. A message from the Afronauts
(Extracts Vol.1) has 94 extracts written by 27 people from around the world.
These Extracts were then rewritten, arranged and converted to PDF. We have
taken some of the earlier extracts and wrote them out again for this PDF.
These extracts are not the all but rather a hint to even greater information.
The great writers above are your guidelines to a better understanding on
Nubian consciousness. Seek them out if you what to develop further.
Extracts included on this PDF are 4, 11, 28, 41, 43, 48, 50, 52, 55, 37, 17,
9, 26 and 10 other extracts will follow. There may be grammar and
literacy errors –  we apologise in advance. No Endnotes or Index
included. (1- 51 pages)


--- PAGE 3 ---
Extract 4
Universal Laws
Positive and negative must exist within all facets of reality within the
three-dimensional plane  - These are the laws of opposites.
Do you believe or know that there are opposing forces existing in space, time
and matter. Up or down, right or left, good or bad, black or white, Night and
Day, Sun and Moon, Positive and Negative. This simple statement is one of
the first stages of breaking a secret spell. This spell is the reluctance to apply
these laws in real time in the real world. Reader you may not believe this but
that simple law can prove that we are living today in an alternative reality. In
other words the concepts behind what is universally right and wrong in society
have been totally re-arranged. Millions of Nubians already know this but the
black liberals of the west and most of our Nubians in motherland Africa still
seem to have major problems breaking the spell. It is quite astonishing in
2005 the mentality still existing amongst those who call themselves black
liberals and their counter-parts in the black entertainment industry in the US.
We are very concerned about these individuals who in real terms are about
550 black decision makers within US media and entertainment who off the
back of global Americanism are helping higher disagreeable forces dismantle
the Nubian race. It is said by many in the know that there are only two types
of black people. Those here to help the race and those who are not –  the
black liberal become the piggies in the middle whose colour is pink.
The level of what many people today are calling blackness on a commercial
level needs to be upgraded. This so-called commercial blackness is enforced
in essence by these black liberals whose belief systems are based on
university level literature accepted as reasonable by the Caucasian
educational establishments. This includes mis-translations of religious
scriptures. This has created a static black positioning still practised by TV
presenters, chat show hosts, most black artists as to what is acceptable
information for black people to hear in the mainstream media. There is still to
this day a 1960’s loop-hole as to what the definition of blackness can be
within the commercial arena of thought. In other words newspapers,
magazines, music shows and artists will only take an educational point of view
in line with the 1960’s. Yet in the last 40 years the black conscious movement
have provided information and knowledge that far surpasses this liberal
positioning which is now a black hindrance to the development of Nubian
culture that exists within universal laws.
Universal laws are absolutes, which eliminate belief and can always be
scientifically and theoretically proven. It is the elimination of belief, which
leads to facts, which in turn is truth. Therefore information in line with
universal laws are the true guidelines as to what is actually right and wrong in
real time.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Real time represents the real world which the media and TV are not
apart of as their existences are dictated by time (scheduling), physical
space (pages) and individuals point of view (edits & bias).
These are prisons of a bias thought. The media represents the link between
reality and illusion (half-truths are present). Its actual purpose is to always
provide you with an abbreviation of reality (purposely controlled by time, size
and bias) the full truth can not be presented. It is the registered acceptance of
humans that time, size and bias within the media is necessary which then
makes belief acceptable. Belief is then mistaken as a short-cut to the truth. A
belief has infinite room for manipulation. Universal laws are your core links to
reality. The black liberals who come in various types practise this commercial
blackness. They are usually magazine writers, scriptwriters for TV and film,
music artists, video director’s etc. One particular type of liberal who Nubians
must be weary of are those black gangster rappers they are the most
disguised of these liberals. Though they speak with a vicious tongue every
subject matter they speak of are liberal ideals. They always mention drug
taking, homosexuality, and violence. They palm themselves off as products of
the environment even after they have gained wealth. They continually
introduce liberal concepts to listeners. You believe to be a liberal
automatically makes you agreeable. No ! There is good and bad in liberalism
(you will soon understand) for there has to be an opposite. They sell records
not because of the controversy anymore but because they are players in the
liberal movement. They are the weakest rappers because they will never
introduce the masses to so called deeper black concepts, as they know
record sales would drop. They often pretend to be here to uplift the race in
interviews but on record they say the opposite. They are now the elite of the
black liberal movement. Liberals will never commit more than 66% of
themselves to a black cause because by nature they believe everybody is
equal. Therefore passion for their own race will never be equal to those fully
committed. They have become a conscious barrier preventing the Nubian
from achieving their full potential on earth as their liberal black consciousness
is used as a measuring stick by other races as to what is commercially
acceptable blackness. The general black liberal stance on what is acceptable
to follow in itself is a belief system. An example of the black liberal hindrance
is the black Jesus, which is a 1960’s thing. We say a 1960’s thing in the sense
that since then all Nubians world-wide should have by now embraced the
brother Jesus (Yashu’a / Issa) ideology in their own homes there shouldn’t
even be a white Jesus anymore.  The evidence for a black messiah has been
overwhelming for decades yet the liberal quest for equality always pays
respect to the current bias status quo making the truth harder to be
commercially quantified.


--- PAGE 5 ---
The Black Jesus Rumour According to the Bible
King James Version –  The Biggest Selling Version in the World
It is now very important that black people especially African people
acknowledge that the Jesus of the bible is not a white man. According to your
own king James version of the bible when describing Jesus in Revelation
chapter 1 verse 14 –  I quote –  his hairs were like wool as white as snow.
Note that only black people have this woolly hair –  the Caucasian races have
thin straight hair that does not curl. In revelation chapter 1 verse 15 it also
describes Jesus it says and I quote - his feet like unto fine brass as if they
burned in a furnace. Note burnt brass will always provide a very dark colour.
So if the feet of Jesus are the colour black/dark brown and his hair is woolly –
then he can only be of the black race. Please realise that Christianity still to
this day has been rearranged with a white Jesus to make sure that other
races see and believe the Caucasian white race is a superior race. They have
sabotaged black history within the bible and made it their history thus making
other races follow them as a race closer to god. African people need to wake
up. Since you are the black African woolly haired man and the original man to
evolve from the planet earth you become the manifestation of nature in flesh.
This is because etheric gases and particles that exist in nature came together
with the will of the most high to create woolly haired black people first on this
planet earth. It is scientifically impossible for any biological genetics to
naturally become stronger than original and since black people have the
strongest genetics it can only weaken resulting in a weakness of hair –
creating straight hair. So those chemicals relaxing hair also help weaken the
original black genes in the blood of the Nubian race. The King James Version
is one of the oldest commercially accepted versions of the bible. What’s funny
is that if you check Bibles that where released since the 1960’s you will find
that revelation chapter 1 verse 15 has been changed. An example of this is
with the Good News bible first printed 1966 (American Bible society). They
quote His feet shone like brass that was refined and polished, and his
voice sounded like a roaring waterfall. The original King James Version
says burnt brass this latter Good News version says refined and polished.
The evidence is right in front of you wake up liberal !  Why are they changing
meanings 1900 years later? In fact they are completely watering down the
scriptures anyway to prevent you from working all this type of information out.
The phasing out of religion is taking place right now in the west with
Liberalism spirituality taking over which is really Phoenician and Hindu
practices in disguise. They are introducing a citizenship ideology tied around a
New World order. Religious scriptures are a force that challenges this
development. The Bible and Koran once studied in their original languages
(before language modernisation implementation) shed greater light as to:
(1) Who the devil is today?
(2) The realities of Armageddon / New World Order
(3) Who the Caucasians really are and their origins?
(4) Who represent the positive forces of Nature?
(5) Who represents the negative forces of Nature?


--- PAGE 6 ---
It is only after you have learnt the original languages and dialects of the
scriptures with an understanding of colloquial history not following European
guidelines in aiding your research that you will truly have a better
understanding about what was really going on in the past. This in turn will lead
to a better understanding of what is going on in the world today. As it is the
disagreeable people in history whose ancestors today are doing exactly the
same thing to our people.
Liberalism is always in line with the developments in US law. These US laws
written by Caucasians will continue to be in the long term interests (25 years
cycle) of the white middle class and you shouldn’t expect anything less. Black
liberals are the accepted image of Nubians for Caucasians –  the mentally
cloned Nubian created by the media and universities. Many liberals say they
don’t see colour and they think that people who rant about it are backwards.
For these people still do not understand that nature itself must acknowledge
colour as an issue in this period of human development on earth as different
races have different reactions to different climates.  Nature is continually
telling humans there are differences between us but liberalism has warped the
understanding of true equality and has given the world this weird version
which completely ignores universal laws that exist within nature. Human
rights and liberalism are agreeable ideals for races interacting with each
other in areas where differences should have no consequences. The
best worker for the job based on exam results, the right to receive the same
pay for the same job, are economic examples where liberalism (equality)
works and should be maintained. With regards to cultures, genetics, belief
systems and now non-belief systems any individual has the right to apply
universal laws. For if nature over billions of years groomed space, matter and
time up until this very moment and provided you with a natural sexual partner
to conceive a child with (from your same race) –  how can promoting same
race relationships be negative. You say no one thinks its negative! I say
please show me on European TV where black men and women are seen in
positive relationships and I’ll show you ten times more footage on European
TV of mixed race relationships. The ratio would be the same in an equal world
right? In the UK eight out of ten black males marry out of their race. Not even
with other races - no specifically with Caucasian women. What about Chinese
women ? What about Indian women? –  no specifically Caucasian women. In
France it’s seven out of ten –  see the pattern. On a social level what is
equality doing of the blackman + black women = Black Child (human triad).
Equality through liberalism can only be achieved after the differences in
the originality of races are perceived as negative thus rejected. The
universal issue is that nature itself is based on organised chaos resulting in
differences in all forms of matter. This includes differences within races and
cultures. It has been a global agenda since the birth of religions to hide
genetic inferiority amongst the races especially amongst the Caucasian race.
Absolute equality beneficial to every human can only be defined as:
The collective existence of all different human species reaching their full
potential based on those differences –  Absolute Equality.


--- PAGE 7 ---
Understand that because race is based on different genetics pure equality
amongst races can not be achieved.  For a race to achieve its full potential
a universe must exist within that race. This to say that the race must be
able to be self sufficient with every facet needed to reach its full potential
existing within itself.
The Indicators of Nubian Suppression
1. They have an imbalancement in their positioning of race on TV and media.
They would call a comedy programme with a full Caucasian cast like
Friends or Seinfeld just a sit-com instead of a white sit-com. While a
comedy with a black cast like Martin they would call a black sit-com by
definition.
2. They believe (belief) that being accepted by Caucasians is more of a
success than the acceptance of Nubians. Yet they say that everyone is
equal. If that’s so then there should be no differentiation.
3. They truly believe in the hip-hop phrase its all good. They don’t know this
phrase originates from everything is beautiful in Hinduism. Positive and
negative must exist therefore everything can’t be beautiful or all good.
4. They align an understanding of the arts with intellect. They acknowledge
the history of other races from an artistic perspective –  never a scientific
perspective. Thus ignoring facts that lead to the truth.
5. They believe being well read is the defining indicator of intelligence.
6. The follow and acknowledge the isms.
7. They stand-up for hip-hop unconditionally. They are never critical –  it’s all-
good to them. This commercially enforces belief and dismantles sub-
conscious ethical values that lead to a regression of conscious values
concerning what is good or bad for Nubians.
8. They always position physical wealth above mental wealth.
9. Those in the entertainment industries (especially music) always believe
God allowed them to achieve their goal. Yet you watch their god turn on
them if they start kicking knowledge to help their own race –  you’ll see
record sales and sponsorship drop. Their gods are the Caucasian
executives of that label and the CEO’s.
10. They think the –  What I as a black person need to know portfolio ends
with abbreviated Malcolm X literature, Martin Luther King, the black
Cleopatra and the Black Panthers.
11. They don’t notice that the Afro / woolly hair is not present on Darwin’s
theory of evolution even though they say mankind stemmed from Africa.
Understand that Caucasians do now teach in schools in the west that
everybody originated from Africa, but they do not show in their TV
programs that they descended from black people - they show mixed-race
people living in Africa in their books and on TV. They will not tell you that
only black woolly haired people evolved from Africa at least 10 million
years before the other races evolved 17.2 million years ago. Africans of
today are at least 10 million years older than the other races. The Africans
of today are descendants of the pygmy who are the original tar tribes;
those small black woolly haired people who are descendants of an even
older ancient Nubian race. In Mali in 2002 AD archaeologists found bones
of an African man 28 million years old. These are facts don’t doubt this.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Extract 11
Black Liberalism Continued… ..
The so-called blackness liberals live for is a 20th century thing based on
beliefs and values regulated by a 400 year understanding of reality. 400 years
is not a long time when discussing the existence of Nubians on earth. Bodies
have been found of Nubian people in Mali (Africa) that have been carbon
dated to be around 28 million years old. 400 hundred years is not a long time
in our existence on earth. The black liberal mindset has not progressed in line
with the scientific evidence supporting higher Nubian consciousness.
The growth in so-called black liberalism has been the acceptance of sexual
perversions and less regulated drug use. To upgrade the so-called
commercial positioning of what is regarded as black the higher information
and new discoveries that have been present since the 1970’s must be
bestowed to the Nubians at an earlier age. This will lead to an upgrading of
the universal consciousness of Nubians in the west and especially Africa.
Africa now has a youth that are now slowly rejecting many aspects of their
original culture for the ways of the west.
It must now be stated that Liberalism since the 1960’s in particular since 1966
is the commercial introduction to new age indo-Hinduism in the west. You
must try to understand that Liberalism is an actual commercialised religion
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Growth in 
Black 
KnowledgeBlack 
Liberalism
Black Consciousness
Black Liberalism Growth in Black Knowledge


--- PAGE 9 ---
that people have been fooled in to believing is a natural evolution. It is a belief
system manifested in sexual practices existing within absolute nature but not
in line with the actual nature of nature. Positive and negative must exist.
Forces that maintain the continuation of life only represent the positive within
the human species. This is maintained by the man + women = child triad.
Therefore any ideology not in line with this notion is an anti-nature stance in
the reality of human species thus taking on the negative minus attribute within
absolute nature. Positive and negative must exist. This is universal law and it
is the understanding of these laws, which in some respects are common
sense that is the core foundation of truly understanding what is actually right
and wrong within a 3 dimensional plane. People must understand the liberal
movement since the 1960’s has been hijacked by new age Hindu belief
systems who are implementing their belief systems in all aspects of the media
from TV, magazines, films and fashion etc. You will know that it is these
characters called casting directors or assistant etc that influence who is seen
in films or TV. Their job in essence is to cast people in acting roles. It is these
people who are always directly involved in the way black people are portrayed
in the media especially TV and Films. Now know that the caste system stems
from Hinduism and their belief system of the lighter the better. This in line with
their usual promotion of sexual perversion is the reason black people on TV
are always focusing on bad sex (lust) rather than good sex (love). It may also
be noted that there is a blatant agenda within the media to subliminally
brainwash sexual perversion including homosexuality into the black
population. Black America has been taken for a ride on this and the black
Europeans are following suit. Pink power is the colour pink who is pink
amongst the races. Black people please wake up ! The promotion of sexual
perversion only represents the Caucasians overall goal to dismantle nature
itself and then rebuild nature following its own image. Caucasians represent
the anti-nature negative forces within the existence of races. This is
their role in this moment in time within the universal laws of opposites.
There has to be a force that represents the positive and there has to a force
that represents the negative in all arenas of reality. This is not to say the
actual Caucasian individual is negative No. It is agreed by many Nubians that
there are many Caucasians who have done more to help Nubians than
most Nubians have done over the last several decades. Many Caucasians
have travelled to Africa and have dedicated their lives to help the poor. In
comparison there are many blacks who have lived all there lives and have not
taken actions to up lift there own race. We know this so don’t waste your time
thinking this is racist. No ! This is to say that the bad guy and good guy
scenario exists in all space and time and in essence goes back to agreeable
and disagreeable within absolute nature. Internally in every human species
there are good and bad people by nature. It is the actions of races (the
interaction of races) as a collective on a global scale judged over a historical
period say 6,000 years (mans existence according to religion) that tells you
amongst the races who are the agreeable and disagreeable forces. They do
not want to teach you how to apply universal laws as this would reduce the
concept of belief which would in turn allow the individual to logically challenge
every facet of reality. It is belief systems that govern religion, marketing and
capitalism. A belief is the boarder line between a lie and the truth. It creates
the limbo effect thus comatoses an individuals reaction to anything. The


--- PAGE 10 ---
believer is the piggy in the middle therefore nothing changes. It is only the
universal laws of nature and then the study of forces in the form of religion,
culture, sex, etc and the civilisations which respected the laws of nature and
its teachers/messengers that will greatly enhance your understanding of what
is universally right and wrong. All belief systems fear science, as they know
science would challenge the right and wrong of that belief system. Now know
that there is and has been for hundreds of years an agenda to not align
religion with science as the grip of power religious organisation have would
weaken as then the individual could evolve based on knowing facts. This
would eventually lead the individual no longer needing a guide or a preacher
who can manipulate your view of reality within the limbo effect etc.
Caste Directors in the Film called an Alternative Reality
It must also be known that racism against the black race or dark skinned
people in its earliest form came from the Hindu Caste Society. This Hindu
caste system is still practised today in India and is the belief that the purest of
people where light skinned –  white looking people. Scientifically this ideology
is the opposite of the truth and was taken on by the Phoenicians, then the
Greeks, then the Romans and now the Caucasians of the west today who
practise racism against black people within the education, political, economic
and religious system. This is a six ether ideology –  leviathan a law of sin
made by those with straight hair. Science and history now prove without a
doubt that the woolly haired Nubian race where the first race to exist on earth
and have the strongest blood, Nubian DNA and RNA profile tells you that this
Hindu caste system is the genetic reverse of the truth. It is against the will of
nature.  Now know that Mother Nature herself is on the side of woolly haired
dark skinned people. The scientific reality is that the darker you are and the
stronger the curl in your hair, the stronger the DNA genetic coding is in your
blood. The darkest woolly haired black people near the equator regions of
Africa have the strongest blood and DNA on earth. These people are
genetically the highest form of human being on the planet earth past, present
and future. This is scientific fact do not ignore this. Science equals facts, facts
equal the truth and god/nature creates the truth remember that. All this
information does not mean be racist to Caucasians not at all - as that will
make you as bad as them –  but understand who they really are and don’t
reject your history and culture to satisfy another races desire to manipulate
you.


--- PAGE 11 ---
Extract 28
Negative Vs Positive
It must now be stated that if anti-nature negative forces exceed positive forces
(the nature of nature) to an extent that those positive forces own existence is
challenged. A counter reaction must occur to re-position positive and negative
more evenly again. This is like water in a bowl if you push water in one
direction after the event the mass of water will come back in the opposite
direction then eventually settle evenly after a period of time. Within the space,
time and matter of absolute nature this can manifest itself as global events.
Some would call it an Armageddon process.
These events in history will occur from time to time until humans
understand universal law and respect the nature of nature and higher
forces involved in managing nature. It is the negative of humans
dominating the positive that creates a black lash within nature to
readjust the overall role of all species on earth.
The positive (+) is based on forces that preserve and continue the
existence of human life including original genetic preservation.


--- PAGE 12 ---
It is the Caucasian’s secret societies and higher entities behind them that are
enhancing the negative forces on the planet earth. Many Caucasians on the
ground level do not know that they are being used; actually being
brainwashed to play the role of that negative force and through racism, sexual
perversion, war etc. Caucasians challenge the belief systems of other races
and implement their view of reality not knowing that it was universal nature
and higher forces that established their own existence through Nubians. They
now disrespect the forces of nature itself. The individuals behind all this and
higher negative forces have an ultimate goal to totally control the planet and
everything on it. Thus becoming god within our 3 dimensional plane. They are
the furthest away from the original DNA structure of the Nubian race and
since the Nubian race are the first evolutionary of humanoids they poses the
original template as to what nature itself wanted humans to be like, act like
and develop like on earth. Many will tell you this is racist but they don’t follow
universal law they believe universal law means equality. No ! Equality is a
myth. It is the fabric of belief. If man and a women have a child them on a
Genetic RNA / DNA level decisions have been made between cells as to
whose nose the child will physically inherit or whose characteristics the child
will inherit. If the child takes on the mother’s nose then the father’s nose DNA
profile lost the fight. Therefore know that if equality does not exist scientifically
then the notion of equality is a belief system, not fact, therefore not the truth.
Scientifically if every atom and molecule was the same then everything in all
existence would be the same. The fact that the sun was created with more
hydrogen than helium tells you that equality can not be absolute. As the sun
gave birth to planets and the planets gave birth to algae in water which
humans evolved from. If the sun was created based on molecules with
different properties and the imbalance in quantity between Hydrogen and
helium and this sun (Apsu) made this solar system then how can anything
within the solar system be equal in definition? Scientifically every race has a
different DNA structure therefore you are not equal - you are different. People
should be acknowledged for these differences and should not have to
sacrifice their traditions, appearance and cultural laws for this quest for
equality that is not in line with nature. Liberals and Religious people believe all
human species are equal even though their God/Nature made different races
with different DNA and RNA profiles, made certain races more adaptable to
certain weathers and climates, gave certain races genetic properties which
protect them from the Sun better than others such as melanin. Still to this day
millions of years after the evolution of mankind there are secrets still being
discovered within the human body. Liberals and Religious people want you to
think that God or nature created all these differences for NO reason. Yet they
say God or nature is all knowing and all knowing includes science. Then God
must know that the white race is prone to skin cancer and needs sun block
cream. Does this sound like a god that made everyone equal or made people
different? Equality is a belief system that should only focus on the distribution
of economic power. This in turn is apart of capitalism the ultimate belief
system. With regards to genetics, which ties into sexuality, evolution and
cultural values, equality does not exist and was not suppose to exist. Know
that the white supremacist movements are set up by capitalists as a barrier
preventing people from working out that the universal laws of nature have
genetically positioned the Caucasian race with the weakest genetic profile.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Since supremacist groups of all races promote hate towards other races it
makes the truth about genetic inequality be perceived as a disagreeable
notion. It is not a belief it is scientific fact. The system uses supremacists as
social boundaries –  which represent the commercial limit as to what you can
not accept within views of racial inequality.  The viciousness of white
supremacists is so disagreeable in actions that it tricks black individuals into
rejecting the truth behind real genetic inequalities amongst the races (racial
inequality) and focus on the belief of racial equality. The white supremacy
movement belief in racial genetic superiority is a belief system as Caucasians
all evolved from Nubians anyway. For Nubians it is not a belief system it is
scientific fact. The mainstream preserving of equality is now a hindrance to
the development of Nubians on earth. It will continue to prevent us from
reaching our true potential. The scientific truth is out there do your research.
Westernised medical information is based on the genetic structure of the
Caucasian. Since other races have different higher genetic traits quality gaps
in the treatment of Nubians and other darker races will exist within the medical
profession. In other words there are areas of medicine and biological research
that publicly have not been researched or acknowledged that are specifically
more beneficial to Nubians not Caucasians. In particular Eugenics and
genetics in relation to physical traits and their relationship with the
environment (eco-system). Everyone has a role in reality; it is the belief
systems existing in society at this present time that positions the importance
of that role. They have positioned in your mind what is good and bad when
the universal laws of nature are your true guidelines.
Evolutionary Positive and Negative Forces
Life must always exist before death, as life is needed before death can occur.
Death represents the negative secondary forces within existence and life
represents the positive primary forces within existence. Life is a greater force
than death, as life doesn’t need death to exist. Death needs life to exist prior
to the event. Life can’t destroy death, as that will reduce life to the equivalent
of death a negative force. Therefore life and death will always exist. This is
the universal relationship between positive and negative. Now with regards to
gases; positive gases are collective gases that interact together to assist the
full potential of life thus aiding existence. The opposing gases are collective
gases that lead to universal death. These are important definitions as
99.99999 ..% of all existence is in gas form. The opposing symbols of these
gases are 9 and 6. This is the relationship of 9 and 6 ether gases. Nine ether
represents life and six ether represents death. 9 becomes the opposite to 6.
Now know that with regards to humans different gases have different effects
on us. Some gases openly kill us like high level radioactive gases while other
gases are the opposite like oxygen, which preserves life. 9 ether gases aid life
for Nubians while six ether gases aid death for us. These groups of gases aid
the evolution of everything influencing the positive and negative outcomes of
physical level forces including humans –  for if different gas states didn’t exist
everything would be the same.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Depending on the area of location and universal season of earth’s
atmosphere different gases influence evolutionary genetics. Weaker gases
around evolution will have a negative effect on humans that evolved in that
period. This influence is to the degree of physical appearance and nature as
melanin the substance in Nubians affects personality. Therefore people with
less or more of this substance will have different route natures. It must also be
known that earth travels around the sun into different gas regions and this
solar system also travels within the milky way into different gas regions. There
are multiples of lighter etheric gases that earth encounters some good some
bad influencing evolution. The human species have been continually
influenced by natural positive and negative gases since the beginning of time.
They influence the evolution into good and bad things –  the laws of opposites.
People who are the most resistant to the sun (darker human species)
therefore evolved with gases at a higher universal level than those less
resistant to the sun in this solar system. This is because the sun is the central
force of all solar systems. Since the sun is the life force of the solar system
those who are more apt to the sun have a higher life force than those who
aren’t. The sun can only be a positive force to humans as it gives universal life
to everything on earth. So the further away you are from adaptability to the
sun the less in line you are with universal life forces. This will reflect in all
facets of reality concerning those less adaptable to the sun. Genetically the
Caucasian is the furthest away from adaptability to the sun therefore they by
nature will be less in tune with nature as the higher gases tied to the sun
known as 9 ether influenced their evolution the least. The sun is the central
part of nature (the life giver) Caucasian by nature are further away from the
sun and nature. This is one of the universal reasons why the west continues
to destroy the environment for the sake of capitalism. Historically they reject
nature because their genetics are the furthest away from the original tribes of
nature. The advancements in the west are really based on thousands of years
of disrespecting nature –  destroying forestry, enslaving Nubians, most of their
industrial advancements have helped destroy nature. It is scientifically
impossible for any race with weaker genetics that evolved from other races to
be more intelligent than the original races. One reason for the lack of
industrial advances of darker races is because their mindset is genetically tied
to nature so as a human part of nature they are less in the mindset of
destroying it. This is not to say all advancements have been negative NO !
Much industrial advancement have been beneficial to all humans. It is to
explain that historically in their history on earth Caucasians have always been
tied to anti-nature forces –  thus amongst the races they are the negative
opposing forces within absolute reality. As a collective their nature will always
play this negative role on earth. This is based on the universal laws of
opposites.
Everybody has a part of negative and positive forces genetically, mentally and
socially around them. Please know that the 360 degrees between absolute
positive and absolute negative forces must exist on earth. It is the continual
struggle between these two forces manifested on a genetic level involving
elemental chart substances interacting within various sub-divisions of the
brain that generate the notion of will in humans. These sub-divisions of the


--- PAGE 15 ---
brain are genetically, consciously and sub-consciously influenced by external
unnatural forces TV and Media etc and external natural forces solid, liquids
and gas thus creating a positive or negative reaction to an event in time.
Agreeable and Disagreeable spoken in religious and ancient scripture are not
absolute definitions. Therefore indicating the understanding that what is
perceived by good and bad depends on your point of view. It is the notion of
point of view that has been manipulated by negative forces aligned with desire
of me, myself and I which is triggered off by the reptilian part of the brain. Any
action you take has to be in line with universal laws, which are the purest
definition, as to what is truly right or wrong.
This positive and negative exist in all forms of reality. The sun is the life force
9 ether the moon is 6 ether. The sun created planets and life on earth and still
sustains life to this very day. The moon is a dead planet with no life on it.
When it shines at night with different periods such as half-moons etc are
dictated by the sun as it is the sunlight reflection that gives the moon an
identity. Now note that spiritual forces aligned with the moon by nature will be
tied to 6 ether negative forces while spiritual forces tied to the sun will be
more aligned to 9 ether positive forces pro-life. These are all expressions of
the law of opposites a good and bad must exist.
Positive and negative must exist within all facets of reality within the
three-dimensional plane - The law of opposites - up or down, right or left,
good or bad, black or white. These are the laws of opposites. Since the
evolution and the essences of nature select the cream creation of the
humanoid to be represented by the Nubian pygmy (life force) the furthest
genetically by nature away from the Nubian can only represent the death
force. Now understand the Caucasian treatment to all races especially the
Nubian is their role within the laws of opposites. The acknowledgement of this
role is taught through the psychological science of white supremacy (the black
guy always dies in a film syndrome) which is the same force that creates
black suppression. The laws of opposites would suggest that within every
race there are positive and negative as well so by nature there are
agreeable Caucasians. Since capitalism is business that’s bu-sin-ness it will
tend to attract the more disagreeable of all species. Its the disagreeable
Caucasian that controls the position capitalism is given on earth. Therefore
big business will only express the nature of the disagreeable Caucasian and
within the media this is manifested as the Caucasians god complex –


--- PAGE 16 ---
Caucasian physiological supremacy over reality itself. This notion is
continually enforced subliminally through the media brainwashing agreeable
Caucasians as well as other races. Thus turning the nature of humanity
disagreeable. Caucasians have their own internal caste system; blonde haired
with blue eyes is their hierarchy. Brown haired with brown eyes is their lower
class. Caucasians with curly brown hair are regarded the least attractive
amongst their women –  though in reality they have the strongest genes
amongst Caucasians in them. Some of them are protected from skin
cancerous illnesses due to their forefathers mixing in the darker races. The
blonde haired blue eyes ties in with the Aryan race who used the
swastika symbol (Nazi). This symbol is originally a Hindu symbol –
please realise the link between Hinduism and the Caucasians racist
system.
For those Nubians who have figured out the above they are representing the
positive life force not only of the black race but of the world in its entirety
because every race genetically are traceable back to the Nubian seed. Even
within those in the know there are various levels of positive and negative as
well. Please understand that this information is far beyond racism. Racism is
an ism belief system set to divide and conquer mankind. It is the
westernised representation of the Hindu caste system. It keeps the
masses side tracked and teaches the masses to focus their
disagreement with other races not capitalism, which needs economic
variations to exist. Racism is used as a segmentation tool to assist
marketing and aid the execution of political agendas. The information you are
reading is not racist it is far beyond an opinion. This is universal law –  without
the existence of positive and negative, protons and neutrons this reality can
not exist. This is universal law. Now acknowledge that in line with the law of
opposites the Nubian black race being people of the sun are the life forces
within humans –  thus giving birth to the human race and Caucasian are the
representation of the death force –  causing problems on earth. It is within the
Nubian black race that good and bad people exist also as the law of opposite
exists within races as well. We repeat; those who do not follow the positive of
universal laws will become disagreeable.
Extract 41
Nature in Human
Scientifically one of the physical purposes of life (this refers to humans in what
is regarded as a solid) must be to help preserve nature within their
surroundings (earth). It is the forces of nature or God and their messengers
that made humans evolve from algae in water and it is only humans who have
the intelligence to manage environmental climates on a global scale.  For your
existence alone you have a duty to earth and nature to take care of this
planet. Now know that ancient scriptures often described this planet as a
living being. The title Earth is the roman/Greek definition of this planet, as
eras come and go the names and definitions change. The English language
will be no exception in time. In fact most languages outside Europe in Africa


--- PAGE 17 ---
and Asia are much older than English which is the baby language of Latin
(Romans). This is why equality can’t exist as the most spoken languages give
the original race or group of that language dominance over other races
speaking that language. Now eras such as the Romans, Greeks and the
current new roman empire (EU/US) will all come and go. This is inevitable.
The New World order is an attempt to preserve this current new roman
empire (EU/US) era. You will also know that era and error sound the same as
era represents a beginning and an end. This era ended due to an error. This
error will always be tied with the rejection of universal laws and the treatment
of nature including humans. The problem the people of an era (those in
charge of an era - secret societies / governments / MNC’s) be it Roman,
Greeks, New Romans (Today) is that the Nubian genetics existed before all
eras and are tightly linked with nature itself. Therefore, in any time in the
history of the earth including today as long as you are in your original image
with the right knowledge you may be able to exist outside their alternative
reality and step back into the shoes of your ancients. It was the Tama-Reans
–  original Nubian Egyptians that linked nature and science and lived by
universal laws. The Tama-rean Egyptian architecture are still mathematically
ahead of today in design techniques. They call the Egyptians a mystery
simply because the Caucasians are not in line with the Nubian nature.
Therefore they can’t understand Nubian methodology.
With regards to this planet, Earth in different eras was known as Tiamat, Qi,
Terra and many more names (note the phrase War on Terra). In ancient
scriptures earlier definitions of Earth described this planet as an actual being.
Understand that this planet earth is actually alive (a single entity) –  of course it
is; things grow off it including humans. If you push Earth’s (Tiamat) buttons
(destruction of its environments) it will push back. Everything happens for a
reason (that’s all we’ll say on this matter). The laws of opposites must occur.
We may also add that humans for nature’s sake have a duty to look after this
planet and protect it from all negative forces on this planet and from other star
constellations.
The evolutionary mis-conception is that all human species evolved from Africa
at a specific time. Right now they are moving evolutionary attention to
Indonesia. They are eventually gonna start challenging the notion that man
first evolved in Indonesia (Asia) not Africa –  stay tuned. It is known amongst
the higher circles of Nubian consciousness that Nubians have had several so-
called evolutionary periods way before the straight haired evolutionary
periods. We are from a much earlier evolutionary cycle we are a different
species of human than the others with straight hair. We have actually
overlapped in to their evolutionary existence. This is why the evolutionary
concepts are so varied. Your woolly hair tells you that you are from a different
evolutionary cycle –  an earlier time in the history of earth. Another
evolutionary cycle was the dinosaurs. It must be stated that the straight haired
races represent mankind or a kind of man that did evolve from that Indonesia
region. The woolly haired Nubian race who evolved much earlier where the
first race to exist on this planet earth. Therefore the Nubian race is the original
race and the other races are a kind of man –  known as mankind. The original
name of black people were Ptahites or Tars known as pigmies today. These


--- PAGE 18 ---
are according to ancient Sumerian and Egyptians scripture definitions. The
words negro and black originate from European/Arabic definitions of the
Nubian black race. Understand that the genetic composition of the Nubian
race is older than any other race on the planet earth due to your genetic and
celestial heritage. Understand that it is only the Ptahite black race that posses
this woolly hair which is the only hair that grows up to the sun similar to plants
and trees etc –  therefore it is the only hair that is etherically alive. The hair of
all other races grows down with less energy because they are dead hair
follicles. Note too that the woolly hair grows in a curl out of the skull making a
number 9 shape indicating your 9 ether heritage. It is essential that in order to
preserve this 9 ether heritage –  as the original race of this planet earth –  the
woolly hair must be preserved and acknowledged as unique and genetically
superior –  thus making the Nubian black race (Nubians) a deity race amongst
the races. The same way the pygmies in Africa should be respected and
acknowledged by Nubians world-wide as the foundation tribe of the earthly
evolved part of our existence. The black liberals reading this must not prevent
or deter Nubians in their quest to uplift our races.
When discussing the evolutionary forces that have led to the development of
humans we must understand the influence of the reptile species. It is well
known that humans came out of the water and evolved into lizard type beings
then eventually in to Homo Erectus. Homo-sapiens of today evolved
genetically refined much later. Scientists don’t tell the masses about the
carnivore DNA and the Herbivore (herbs) DNA (positive and negative –
opposing forces of reptiles) that existed within these early Dimetrodons and
other lizards that came out of the waters. This is to say that some dinosaurs
that evolved into man had more carnivore traits and some had more herbivore
traits. It is these reptilian traits that existed in reptiles that evolved into humans
that are influencing man still today. The carnal genetic origins of your good
nature and your bad understanding. Through various mixing of beings and
genetic alterations by higher forces within nature/god through the eras it has
watered down to agreeable and disagreeable (not absolutes). These
agreeable and disagreeable traits guide the magnitudes of actions of
individuals triggered off from the reptilian part of the brain that exists in
humans. It also influences peoples belief systems as similar to reptiles /
animals it lacks rationale to use facts to distinguish right from wrong.
Extract 43
MUSICK : When did Black Music turn into Musick ?
What happened is that in the late 1980’s black American music commercially
took on black negative stereotypes. These stereotypes where already present
in the minds of white America. With black men taking the role of the
commercial villain it actually made Caucasians under the Bush era feel better
about themselves (our neighbourhoods aren’t as bad as the blacks). If blacks
are the gangster villains then the opposite must be good right! The truth is that
the economic progress of the black entertainment in the west in the late
1980’s and throughout the 1990’s was in essence based on the sacrificing of


--- PAGE 19 ---
Nubian morality. These include the promotion of ideals detrimental to the
upliftment of Nubians –  not blacks. Nubians are blacks in their original state of
mind. The viscous spiral of these actions by the so-called nigger mentality
movement jumped on the Americanism boat and became a global black ideal
which still today has made the black youth very predictable and easy to
mentally control especially for purposes that will dismantle black communities.
It is the intelligent so-called black superstars who are now realising that words
and actions they have executed in their profession are influencing blacks in
Africa and Europe. Black artists / businessmen in the US especially must
except that they have an international obligation to their race due to
globalisation and Americanism.
In fact lets go a little deeper in to this black music video fiasco. These music
videos (especially hip-hop) practice a racial science that plays off the caste
system. They sexualise the women but with regards to the black suppression
they use multiple light skinned women to visually push out the usually darker
skinned male artist. Light skinned female artists have dark skinned backup to
visually push them out. They use light skinned women to attract black males
who are generally suppressed anyway and white males who subconsciously
see light skinned girls as the product of racial mixing. Therefore it makes
Caucasian males feel more connected to black music. In fact most black
videos are aimed at Caucasians anyway since they have the most disposable
income to buy the product. The growth of western black music correlates with
liberal ideals injected into a hip-hop framework. Now according to marketing
theory the customer comes first. The Kotlers 4’ps must be used to entice a
consumer to buy a product CD single/Lp.  Everyone knows Caucasians are
the main buyers of rap music and have been for over 10 years. So now tell us
who are these African American MTV generation music video aimed at? If you
believe that these videos are for Nubians and you worked in a marketing
department –  you’ll be waiting a long time for a promotion because it has
been stated that Caucasian buy much more rap than black. It is marketing
common sense then to target your video to Caucasians or other black liberals,
as they are the cash cows.  It is the Caucasians buying habits that are
dictating rap not the other way round. This is why the black liberal artist has
low racial morality; they serve another race. You may have noticed that we
continually refer to a link between liberalism and Hinduism it is blatantly
present in US black music. The black liberals have been using Indian melody
structures and rhythms for many years now. Nubian women on videos are
wearing urban clothes tied to Indian fashions not African for that’s too black
for them and the Caucasians market. Nubians realise the true gathering of
spirituality is taken place right now there are those who will follow their true
roots Africa (Tama-Rean) represented by the sun. These are the woolly
haired dark/brown skinned sun people. The opposite are those who will follow
the ways of the Indonesia/Hindu/New Age (The Asians –  Caucasians and
Asians (straight haired)) commercialised through the belief system called
liberalism. These are the original positive and negative human natures of the
world. This is not to say all in one group are bad or good it is to say that these
are the two evolutionary forces of earth and with different evolutionary forces
come different natures. You have to realise the laws of opposite - herbivore
and carnivore, right and left, good guy and bad guy, straight haired and woolly


--- PAGE 20 ---
haired. It is the inequalities of genetics that tells you at this moment in time (a
quarter of an equinox) what side nature is on.
In the late 1980’s many black music artists committed themselves to having
one song per album dedicated to the true upliftment of their race.  The fall of
New York based black consciousness in the early 1990’s dissolved this
conceptual notion. As the foundation conscious black artists were forced to
step down. This gave room for the black liberals to gain momentum. Please
understand black liberals by nature can not care for the upliftment of their race
more than someone who is fully committed to our race. It is these liberals
today that let the caste system and the positioning of the blackman in the
media slide. Some of them are simply too agreeable and do not want to rock
the boat. Some of them are disagreeable but are able to hide their nature in
the free seeming world of liberalism (no moral guidelines to weed them out).
The black liberals are usually from a Christian background and they
dismantled the blackness of hip-hop in the early 1990’s (which was partly a
Black Muslim movement) (religious clash in rap). Liberals through the bias
education system and Christianity fight for equality which is agreeable but can
never be achieved simply because nature is genetically bias - this is scientific
fact. It is these liberals with brainwashed socialised desires and personal
opinions that groom the understanding of positive and negative amongst the
black youth. Rejecting universal law –  though this knowledge is probably
beyond their understanding anyway. Muslims often say that in the church
Nubians pay the preacher money that keeps the community poor. This action
has a spell in it that ties money with religion and sub-consciously makes
Nubians think that any actions to obtain money are overall fair seeming as no
one knows where all the money handed in to the preacher truly comes from.
The preacher represents the good –  therefore It’s all good in the end. Most
black liberals come from Christian backgrounds and it is their quest for money
(any which way they can) that makes them often reject natural racial
preservation. All this occurs under the white Jesus = Caucasian society.
These black liberals do not execute cultural checks in anything they do. What
is a cultural check? A study of anything presented to masses that had an
evaluation to determine if this ‘anything’ is in the best interests of a
certain race –  Cultural Check. Criteria for a Nubian cultural check would be:
1. Is the caste system present?
2. Is the natural Nubian women recognised?
3. What are the negative consequences of this thing to the original state
of Nubians?
4. What will other races perception of the Nubian race become from
this?
5. Does this promote black males in society fairly?
6. Is this in line with black stereotypes?
This is the problem with liberal ideals tied to black music, as it will eventually
force Nubians to sacrifice morality in a quest to gain new consumer markets.
The nature of capitalism always leads to disagreeable actions not in line with
nature.


--- PAGE 21 ---
There is a veteran in the music scene in the Far West who is one of the black
liberal elite. The veteran has brought in most of the negative traits now
embedded in the black youth music. This veteran introduced blacks globally to
the core liberal concepts of drug taking, homosexual practices, sexual
perversion, the degrading of women, the exploitation of racial inequalities for
money.  The Caucasians pay the veteran well for the dismantling of youth.
Other liberals shield the veteran; they all work for the beast and will
continually sacrifice the Nubian morality in order to achieve wealth. They all
have convinced themselves they are representing their race from within the
system - they are not. They have been given wealth in return they must lead
the Nubian astray. He is a nodite of the New World yet claims to be an
Egyptian lover beware of him and his followers.
Extract 48
The Isms
Capitalism has many fancy definitions in essence its just lying about a value
of something desired at that moment in time for profit. A thing or service cost
me $1 I will sell for $5 I make  $4 profit. It is the art of lying about a true value.
Thus making it the driver of business bu– SIN-ness. The science of sin in
order to gain wealth. Someone will always lose in a capitalist exchange
whether it be in money, human life or the environment.  Theoretically
capitalism by nature can only exist within an environment where equality is
not present as a difference must exist for an advantage to be made. Now
know that all isms stem from capitalism, as capitalism has to exist to
create those differences. Capitalism gave birth to liberalism that gave
birth to all the other isms such as Marxism, Weberism, Socialism,
Feminism etc. These are all opposing forces within capitalism, as no isms
would exist if capitalism did not exist first. They are the internal
representations of the positive and negative struggle that exists within
capitalism. The nature of capitalism is in essence disagreeable so there are
disagreeable facets in all isms, These are all belief systems and have
scriptures just like a religion, and their writers are their prophets. Many
followers of the isms are more lost than religious fanatics as at least parts of
all religions have some fundamental truths in line with universal laws and the
laws of opposites in nature. These isms are strongly based on belief as
science can challenge the reasoning within all of them.
These isms are managed by the Caucasian middle class who in essence
must first be liberals before their specific ismistic opinion is manifested.
Liberalism is the world’s biggest religion as it is a commercialised belief
system with many sub-divisions.
Its purpose since 1966 is to dismantle belief systems linked to the core
established religions namely Christianity through the promotion of sexual
perversion and Islam through terrorism, which once researched you will find is
funded by capitalists. All this is to give room for its daddy capitalism to
establish a New World order. As religion would by nature be the main force
against systematic control against human lives, as religion believes only god


--- PAGE 22 ---
has the power to do this. Please understand there is much universal truth in
religion especially Islam and Christianity which in its purest form are very
similar both being linked through the Torah. Though for centuries much
information has been distorted to suit those in religious power at that moment
in time. Much of these distortions are still present today promoting respect for
belief instead of respect for the truth.  Respect for the truth would lead to
religious scriptures continuously being challenged with scientific evidence.
If you have a religious country that needs to be dismantled you merely have to
find core human desires namely sex and money and present that religious
population with ideologies linked to these desires. Eventually the illusion of
freedom will come in the form of liberalism and it will give off the isms –  new
belief systems. Then to support and express these new beliefs and values,
the so-called liberated person will need a product or a service to allow that
liberal belief to be expressed. Only capitalism can enter a country after
liberalism has been established. Therefore liberalism and capitalism go hand
in hand. To destroy capitalism you would have to dismantle liberalism as
well. This is because liberalism through belief systems allows capitalism
to grow. Religion prevents capitalism from growing. A meat factory selling
pork can’t be built on an area owned by Islamic followers.
From 2000 AD we started entering the actual diseconomies of scale of
capitalism itself. This slow economic collapse is not a recession. It is
the actual collapse of an era in time resulting in the actual perversion of
reality being forced upon unknowing masses. Capitalism forces the
evolution of man to be tied to the altering of nature and universal laws.
This manifests in Cloning, further sexual perversions, biometric related
products, and new spiritual concepts that will evolve for the purpose of
creating new isms which eventually becomes new product and service
markets. These will go against the universal laws of nature –  the
universal guidelines of reality.
This all started from the 1960’s in particular 1966. It must be acknowledged
that all the isms and their existence over the last 6000 years occurred due to
the rejection of universal laws that are in favour of Nubians (darker races) and
the right knowledge, wisdom and understanding that accompanies it.
Liberalism historically only focused on sexual freedom for the actual word
Liberalism is linked to the earlier definition of lberlis (Latin) which was
always associated with sexual urges. The original language any word
originated from will give you its true definition - never forget this. Liberalism is
the secret daughter of capitalism and in the times of Greek and roman
civilisations originated from three main areas indo-Hinduism/ Phoenician
practises, Dionysus (old school Greek religion which celebrated sexual
perversion) and European pagan rituals. Hinduism and Dionysus both
acknowledge hermaphrodites as gods (half-man half-women beings) and their
sexual practices. This gave birth to homosexuality practises by the Greek and
roman hierarchies and their descendants the Caucasians of today’s society.
Black Liberals understand that you are aligning your fair seeming
beliefs with ancient Greek, Roman and Phoenician hermaphrodite
worshippers and many of their pagan gods where regarded as demons


--- PAGE 23 ---
even in those times –  do your research. It was individuals within secret
societies throughout the 1800s and 1900’s that practised these sexually
deviant rituals who helped create the climate for liberalism as a political
identity to evolve last century. Liberalism before the political formation was a
belief system that stemmed from paganism and sexual perverse religious
practises aligned with their hermaphrodite gods. Modern day liberalists speak
about freedom when they don’t understand they merely follow these belief
systems with a specific Isms tied in to their personal desires. Desires are 50%
good 50% bad to know whether what you believe in is agreeable it has to sit
in line with positive forces within universal law. In absolute terms universal
laws tells us that the man + women = Child (life) formula is the existence
template of the human species. To exist equals life the opposite is death.
Sexual beliefs and actions outside this formula by nature will directly or
indirectly result in the death of a sperm seed in a man. This can not be
challenged as these universal laws have existed before religious scriptures.
Liberals continually reject these universal laws. To reject universal law makes
you either un-intelligent or disagreeable. They’re WILL falls from GRACE (Will
and Grace). Therefore they exist in the negative of absolute nature thus
becoming an anti-nature force. It is not about hating a non-hetro its about
giving you the correct information in real time as the rejection of universal
laws leads to belief which in turn leads to the manipulation of what is truly
right or wrong. People understand that the demise of religion is what is
correlating the growth of sexual perversion. Many parts of Islam and
Christianity stem from universal laws which are absolute this is why many
parts of religion will always have sacred information. It is universal laws, which
aspects of religion acknowledge that defines in all realities, what is universally
right and wrong? Until humans (not man made) but by nature evolve to
become asexual then heterosexuality (man + women = child (life)) will
represent positive agreeable forces and non-heterosexual practices will
represent a disagreeable negative force within this three dimensional plane
with regards to the human species. The law of opposites must apply. There
must be a positive and negative. It must now be known that Nubians culturally
and traditionally within the Africa and the Caribbean have rejected non-
heterosexual practices. The Caucasian liberals (not all Caucasians) and many
black liberals (not all) wish to help convert Nubians into a mainstream
acceptance of homosexuality. It is illogical for any person regardless of their
sexual preference to promote non-hetro practices as equal to hetro practices.
You are helping negative forces within universal law.   This quest for equality
scientifically can not exist in reality –  it is a myth used to regulate society and
many black liberals are being fooled into believing this is progress. The black
liberals have been influenced by the hard-trodden history Nubians have
endured through the last 400 years. This has made many of them innocently
believe that equality in sexual freedom and racial mixing is in the best interest
of all races. No ! True equality is when all races are allowed to reach their
true potential on the planet earth based on their genetic differences. The
media use subliminal psychology to influence the masses usually associated
with sex, colours, wording, visual positioning and physical appearances.
Those black liberals in the media who are waking up and finally realising that
they are helping the dis-positioning of our race should use these
psychological techniques in reverse to subliminally clean up the black psyche.


--- PAGE 24 ---
The subliminal psychology surrounding racism is the one of the main
enforcers of the spell. You see most of it is so subtle that all races miss them
but your sub-conscious doesn’t. Many of the psychology spells fool Nubians
and help the continuation of internal racism with our race (woolly hair is bad
ideology). This continues the overall demise of Nubians. This is because
society has been arranged in a racial structure based on the Hindu caste
system with the lightest perceived as better. A perfect example of the spell is
Darwin’s theory on evolution in particular the famous diagram. If everyone
evolved from Africa as they are stating then where is the woolly hair on the
Homo Erectus or Sapien. No cavemen have Nubian woolly hair in films or
cartoons. Nubian children still are being raised seeing thousands of pictures,
cartoons, comedy shows etc with Nubians visually positioned away from the
centre of the screen. The Adam and eve still to this day depicted as
Caucasian when anyone who is serious about history will know that there is
no history of Caucasians on earth more than 12,000 years ago max. Yet even
in the 1960’s Lucy black bones where found in Africa over 2 million years old.
That’s in the 1960’s. There is no evidence that Caucasians even existed
on earth more than 15,000 years ago. If you think this is racist them we are
sorry, but it is the truth. This is why they still call events or civilisations that
happened 4,000 years ago ancient. Like ancient’s Egypt or Greeks. 4,000
years is not ancient to an African race that has been acknowledged as
millions of years old even in the 1960’s. Know that purposely or not they are
playing the black suppression game whenever you see:
1. A white Jesus,
2. A white Adam and Eve,
3. A white Noah (whose sons except for Ham’s son Canaan where all black)
4. Anything to do with Darwin’s Evolution Diagram
5. Priorities given to the Caucasian in a mixed race relationship by the Media
if both people are at the same level.
6. Anything to do with the identities of Egyptian pharaohs as they only show
the latter dynasties –  not the Nubian pre dynastic Tama-reans who
actually set up the civilisation and the Tars before them.
7. Any promotion of Nubian hair in TV, Comedy, Films and adverts that does
not include the woolly (natural).
8. Anything that makes Nubians in the west think they’re different from
Africans or the Caribbeans. When scientifically the genes are the same.
9. European adverts that continually depict interracial couples.  What does a
young black child growing up with a single parent think about this?
10. The better visual positioning of lighter skinned females over their darker
skinned females. Light and dark skinned sisters should be standing up
against the divide and conquer caste system together. This Hindu caste
system in disguise (which gave birth to racism) is practised ridiculously in
African American music videos. Though black European music videos are
even worse they’ll go straight to the suppressed core and use Caucasian
women up front.


--- PAGE 25 ---
Extract 50
Hey Tama Re
For any Nubian to call themselves a liberal suggests they want to be free from
negative forces in their lives –  but without accepting the laws of nature and
universal laws all linked to science and theory you can not understand what
freedom truly is.  For a quest for liberation not based on science means you
are rejecting the organised chaos of absolute nature (The differences within
reality in positive and negative conflict). Liberalism blurs the positive and
negative for the preservation of equality, which scientifically doesn’t
exist at the same time. Blacks or black liberals who take on this belief
system by nature can not guide Nubians to their full potential on earth. The
problem is that these liberals are given power roles in the black existence in
the western world and their complete opposites are given power roles in the
African political systems.  The African leaders are clones of colonialism; their
understanding of economics and social treatment are based on Hitler, Stalin
and Lenin. These African leaders use these ideals partly because they where
alternative ideologies to the mainstream liberal ideal of the west, which they
know, would eventually damage their own political and economic status. On
the surface these were negative forces to the ways of Western Europe last
century. These African political leaders use Caucasian economic books to
rule their countries –  but they do not acknowledge the psychological factors
holding back the African Nubian such as:
(1) Capitalistic literatures founding western economics are based on the
nature of western Europeans. Therefore introducing many of these
policies will have adverse affect on Nubians who are different by
nature.
(2) The white Jesus of Christianity that makes black saviours harder to
develop amongst our own race and makes Nubians reluctant to do
for self –  depending only on Caucasians for help.
(3) The lack of black consciousness in Africa –  gives Nubians less
purpose to achieve.
The demise of Africans many would say is mainly due to the colonial powers
leaving these countries after independence with unstable undemocratic
political structures and negative EU/US trade barriers. There are hundreds of
books on this subject that will give you far better insight as to the political and
economical problems of Africa. These are functional problems. We will focus
on the deeper psychological problems. The reality is they is a psychological
problem with African citizens which stems from religion and the manipulation
of history and rejection of universal laws and the right actions based on those
laws.
Christianity is a negative force to Africans, not the Bible, but Christianity they
are two different things. What happens is the white Jesus character is
positioned as a saviour in the minds of Africans. Unlike the west nearly all
Nubians in Africa don’t know the full mentality of Caucasians in the west.


--- PAGE 26 ---
Without studying the diversity in Caucasian nature, and often with the white
Jesus being the only non-black face seen in thousands of villages throughout
Africa –  a god complex occurs. A belief system that ties a certain race or
individual closer to god (God Complex). Millions of Africans believe
Caucasians are their saviours through Jesus so they do not get up to change
their own lives. The corrupt political leaders of Africa use 2nd and 3rd Reich
tactics to maintain control –  because this is all they have learnt from
alternative Caucasian history on how to govern. They could only see this as
an alternative way of managing a country without introducing liberalism, which
in their eyes would lead to the eventual loss of ethical morality. They
continually implement Caucasian economic and religious ideology in to Africa,
which is not in line with the nature of the Nubian, therefore it will never work.
You can tell that these African governments still follow the Caucasian
ideologies from what is taught in their school systems.
The African school education system is completely warped. In Mali today in
the school education system they teach children that mankind is about two
million years old. Yet in that same country bones where found of Nubians 28
Million years old. They continue to follow the European school system, which
is continually warping their universal consciousness. They know more about
Christopher Columbus and Christianity than their own Tama-Rean cultures
that gave birth to these religions there are following. The ancient Egyptian
Cultures, The teaching of their own colloquial culture, The pygmies, Nubian
genetics, and black struggle literature from the west especially African
American literature eg. Marcus Garvey should be actually submerged in the
education system. This will give the African Nubian a self-preservation
complex, which in turn will build a collective Nubian consciousness. Our
Egyptian ancestry being taught in the education system is key in unifying
Africa (Nubia / Tama – Re) as that civilisation has influenced multiple African
regions –  thus establishing a Nubian collective consciousness at a young age.
If you give the youth of Africa this type of information that young Nubian boy
who was destined to grow up to be a police/soldier who would terrorise his
own people may now grow up to be an engineer who now uses his ability to
help his race. The conscious mindset of the African nation must precede the
economic and political development of Africa. If this is not done then civil
wars, corruption and genocide will always sabotage economic progress. This
may sound crazy to people reading this from outside Africa but the truth is
95% of native Africans do not even understand their role in the existence of
the human races. This is because Christianity and Islam are preventing them
from seeing the internal god from inside themselves as all homage is given to
forces outside the continent. They must understand the true blackness behind
these religious scriptures. Please understand we are not disrespecting the
scriptures but rather the way the scriptures have been used. In Africa 90% of
the history taught in the school system should be focused on Nubian history.
The early Egyptians, The birth of languages, The blackness of the bible, The
Nubian empires of Africa, Belief systems in Africa before Islam and
Christianity and their ties with the Egyptian civilisation. In history at school in
the Second World War we are taught about the German Reich’s and the
propaganda techniques they used to brainwash the masses. This has been
taught in the western educational system for many years. In Africa though the


--- PAGE 27 ---
years of colonial rule and the introduction of slavery –  Caucasians continually
used propaganda techniques to brainwash the native African into actions
beneficial to the Caucasians. Since this is history then these propaganda
tactics should also be taught in history as well. The knowledge of this given to
Nubians at a young age will counter-attack the continual inferiority complex
given to Nubians from a young age, as they will now be able to see what
made this inferiority complex evolve (picking cotton complex).  The 90% of
Nubian related history is parallel to the 90% of history taught in the west that
focuses on Caucasian history.
African politics is more concerned with ownership of land as they know that in
the future due to minerals and resources still in Africa this continent can
become a super-power as resources run out elsewhere in the world. This will
happen over the next couple of decades. The US/EU know Africa is a future
hotspot so the end of poverty movement is to make sure the West maintain
economic ties with the motherland. They wish to indirectly have economic
control over Africa and regulate their New World order including Africa from
underground. You say why underground because the Caucasian has about
50 years left to freely walk on the surface of earth between the tropic of
cancer (skin cancer) and the tropic of Capricorn. This definition was really
used by sailing military in early Europe as an indicator of the region they are
actual prone to skin cancer. There are many documents describing deaths of
European sailors due to skin related illnesses. They don’t tell you that in the
European historical past many pure Caucasian seeds died on ships due to
skin cancer. This is one reason why Portuguese and the Spanish did the big
Atlantic and Indian Ocean travels first in Europe because their blood was
more mixed in with the Nubian. Unlike today there was much less racial
mixing so the pure seeds of races reacted to the sun much more quickly.
Genetically racial mixing only benefits the Caucasian race as they need
darker race blood in their genealogy to protect them from the sun and
Liberalism is being used to achieve this objective.
Based on this reality 50 years from now the suns rays will be simply to strong
for their weak genetics to survive in this equator global region thus making
skin cancer a disease that will force them to live in the shade or in cooler
regions of earth. Many Nubians in the west who are not looking after their
body will join them as you will inherit their genetic traits stimulated by the
journeys of death (see extract seventeen). The ID card / Computer chip is
their way of managing the masses through computers as they wont be able to
manually do this in person.
The people living in Egypt of today are not the originally people living there at
the times when the pyramids where being used properly. The white races
mixed in with remnants of the Hyksos dynasty at the end of the real Egyptian
culture. The Hyksos were foreign invaders who destabilised Egypt in the 17th
century BC it is their pictures the west always promotes commercially. This
was at the end of the higher teachings within Egyptian civilisation and lasted
only a few hundred years while for tens of thousands of years black woolly
haired people where living in that part of Africa. When the Hyksos dynasty
moved in and destroyed the ancient Egyptian sciences they pushed many


--- PAGE 28 ---
black people deeper in to Africa including Nigeria, Ghana, Mali, Ethiopia,
Sudan to name a few. Many of the colloquial languages in these regions still
have the same words and meanings from the Egyptian and Sumerian
civilisations. In fact the original Egyptian civilisation included Sudan where
there are ancient pyramids still today that are so old that archaeologists still
haven’t worked out how old they are. Archaeologist rarely talk about the
smaller pyramids in Sudan, Uganda, Ethiopia and Somalia which have
ancient languages written on them from much earlier eras of human species.
It was the pygmies known as Tar Deneg that originally built the pyramids at
least 24 thousand years ago (a very low estimate). The archaeologists of the
west are lying about the age of the pyramids to prevent people of West Africa
and east Africa from knowing their real heritage. The Caucasian race doesn’t
want the African –  Nubian to know that the evolutionary cycle of all the other
races are much later than the woolly haired black race. In other words they
don’t want you to know that black people are an evolutionary generation older
than all the other races –  this in a time frame means that the black race are at
least 17 million years older than the other races. This also means the Nubian
races had civilisations in Africa that existed before the other races even
existed on earth.
The inferiority complex given to Nubians triggered off by the Christian
dominance over Nubians is aided by the passive nature of Nubians. You see
time and time again the laws of opposites can been seen. Nubians by nature
are not aggressive to other races our history alone is evidence. The demise of
Nubians has always stemmed from disagreeable actions from other races.
The passive nature is still present in Africa. It is this passiveness in Africans
that allows disagreeable forces to evolve to a point to where they can’t be
controlled –  say a dictatorship or a military group. Then because of the white
saviour concept installed in them through Christianity they wait for their Jesus
(Caucasian race) to save them. Most Africans from soldiers down to farmers
are in this spell. African Americans with right knowledge are the central force
that can truly change the mindset of Nubians in Africa.
Europeans within secret societies have set an agenda to reduce the
expansion of African development by altering the eco-system environment.
Providing Africa with cars and machinery that release poisonous gases that
destroy the environment. This in turn changes the eco-system, which in turn
poisons the environment and eventually the black people in Africa. Due to the
economic gap between the west and Africa - Africans still buy these products.
Understand that 94% of vehicles driven in Africa today where rejected by the
European quality standards because the where too poisonous to the
environment. Yet these vehicles always end up in Africa. Please never forget
that the Caucasian races will never give you freely something that is truly
beneficial to woolly haired black people. As the upliftment of the black race
will lead to the demise of their white race due to your genetic and celestial
heritage. This is nature’s law of opposites. They know this as in racial terms
black is the opposite to white so they have to hold you down and destroy your
hair and tage (heritage). In order to maintain their economic positioning.
These roles have been played out in nature and time. It is these higher natural
understandings of reality that allowed the ancients to foresee events in time.


--- PAGE 29 ---
It must now be acknowledged that the technology advancements of the west -
though admired by the Africans. Only occurred due the manipulations and
theft of sciences from the black woolly haired race. The slave period of the
1500's set up the western economy that exists today and the oil, gold and
diamonds that are still being taken form Africa today are preserving this
economic advantage. Even today many blacks who leave Africa to live in the
west work in the lowest job positions and are prevented from exceeding in the
west.  What you may not know is that the ancient pyramids of Egypt and
Sudan where libraries with thousands of ancient tablets stating engineering
information, medical procedures, biology, maths and physics etc. These are
the tools to create and develop a society. The woolly haired Egyptians knew
that good technology advancement has to be environmentally friendly. In
other words it can not destroy the land or the environment. The Egyptians and
the Incas based their developments in line with nature.
The technology advancements of the west - though admired by the African
are detrimental to the planet in the long run. The Caucasians forefathers the
Greeks have abused the Egyptian sciences they stole and their ancestors
today are destroying the earth in the process. The industrial enhancements of
the west are destroying the ozone layer in the sky leading to a destruction of
the environment. What most people forget are that these technological
advances thousands of miles away in the west are destroying the African eco
-systems. Many famines in Africa have occurred due to the releasing of
Carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide gases being released by cars, factories
and businesses in the west. Indirectly the technology Africans are admiring in
the west is killing people slowly in Africa and Asia and they know it.
Technology must respect nature for it to be good technology. Now understand
that since the black woolly haired race is the original race of the planet earth
you are the manifestation of nature in man. It will be harder for woolly haired
black people to naturally evolve in a negative economic direction. The Nubian
races will find it easier to economically evolve once their technological
development does not destroy nature as you are the closest link to nature in
man. Under the law of opposites Caucasians are the furthest race / bloodline
away from the black woolly haired race so they have the least respect for
nature that's why they destroy it. What you are seeing from the west is a
higher standard of living at the expense of destroying the planet earth and its
people. Since there is only one earth then any force that is destroying it is a
negative force. It is very important that Africans do not sell their birth right
lands to overseas companies and people of other races whose only intentions
are to exploit African lands and people. Please understand we not wishing
any one to be racist at all. There is good in every type of man but under a
capitalist society where money is now respected higher than the laws of god
who created nature 6 ether negative forces can take control.


--- PAGE 30 ---
Extract 52
Good and Bad colours part 2
All African people must now realise that the Caucasian races have played a
trick within the definitions of the races. Black and white are not actual colours.
You will know this as when you see a rainbow you do not find the colour black
or white in the rainbow. Black and white are absolutes they exist in all colours.
You are not really black but rather brown or very dark brown. The Caucasian
is not white but rather a very pale pink brown. They gave themselves the
white definition to align themselves with light and in religion its says that first
god made light and that prophets where white robes etc. This is all to make
other races see them as saviours and many Africans still believe this even
today.
You must now know that in the bible at the beginning of genesis (Chapter 1
Verse 3) when god creates the light on earth it says let there be light and
that this light is day and it was good. This light is from the sun. The sun is
not white the sun is dark yellow and the surface of the sun under the fire is
black. White was not the original light that created earth. Please understand
that the black and white both have good and bad in it. White light can blind a
human –  but humans can not end up blind in the dark. Ghosts are the colour
white never any other colour. Before god made light he was in darkness so
darkness can’t be negative for god to exist in it when creating life. Understand
that the darker you are on earth the better. The soil that grows plant life is
brown which is the same colour of the Nubian. It is not white.
Nubians in Africa must understand and realise that only right knowledge of
yourself from a genetic and historical level aligned with the right actions
beneficial to your race and nature will truly help our race. This is beyond any
political system and religion. It is well recognised that religion has been
altered to keep Nubian in a ghost spell called gospel. The belief system that
everyone is the same is not correct even in the bible the Canaanites
descendants of Canaan son of ham who is the son of Noah where regarded
as the cursed seed (Genesis chapter 9 verse 18-29).
Many years later in the New Testament Jesus even rejects a Canaanite
women whose daughter is ill and tells her that he was not sent to help her.
(Matthew Chapter 16 verse 21-28 and Mark Chapter 7 verse 24-30) Jesus
suggests she is a like a dog and she acknowledges it. Now who are the
descendants of the Canaanites today? Well if you study the story of Abraham
(Koran/Bible) you will know that he was sent to the mountains to clean up the
lepers the descendants of Canaan they were the cursed seed. Leviticus
(Chapter 13 and 14) describes the cursed seed having thin yellow hair and
white skin. Throughout Genesis through the scriptures of Noah and Abraham
the Canaanites are considered disagreeable as the sons of Ham being cursed
by Noah himself.


--- PAGE 31 ---
In the bible Moses sister Miriam was actually cursed white (Numbers
chapter 12 verse 9-10). (Good News Edition 1966).
The Lord was angry with them; and so as he departed and the cloud left
the Tent, Miriams’s skin was suddenly covered with the dreaded disease
and turned as white as snow. When Aaron looked at her and saw that
she was covered with the disease, he said to Moses “ please sir, do not
make us suffer this punishment for our foolish sin. Don’t let her become
like something born dead with half its flesh eating way.
Time and time again throughout Genesis, Leviticus and here in Numbers etc
the Bible acknowledges white skin as a sign of a disease the evidence is
overwhelming. It is the Caucasian race who are the albino descendants of
Canaan the cursed seed (lepers - Leviticus) according to the bible and even
the messiah himself rejected them. If you do a little research you will find that
within the family and tribal lineage of Noah’s sons Ham, Shem & Japheth
(Genesis  Chapter 10) you will find tribal names actually referring to a colour
from black, darkish red or brown. You will not find this description to the
children of Canaan except Hammonth which name relates to Ham (kham)
which means black the other Canaan tribes have no reference to colour –  the
Amorites, the Hittites, the Jebusites etc. Historians and religious scholars
have made racial origins tied to the scriptures very vague. Remember Jesus
was a blackman (King James Bible revelation Chapter 1 verse 12-16) with
white woolly hair and feet like burnt brass (blackman). Also know that this
was taken from the King James Version of the bible written over 400 years
ago. In many versions of the bible since the 1960’s for example in the Good
News Bible they have changed the statement that Jesus had feet like burnt
brass to Jesus had feet refined and polished. After studying newer bible
versions you will find that all racial descriptions have been completely watered
down or even changed. Please understand that they will continue to downplay
the true racial identity of Jesus. They will tell you its not important - if so then
why over 1000 years after the scriptures have been written they are still
revising it. This makes the truth harder to obtain. Please Nubians people
understand that Christianity has been altered to keep the African mind
enslaved after the physical slavery of the 1500’s occurred.  The description of
Leprosy in the Bible is not the same description of people of Leprosy today.
Why has it changed? The truth must come out. Now entering the world of right
knowledge you must know the truth.
It says in Leviticus chapter 13 verse 30 - I quote - then the priest see the
plague: and, behold if it be in sight deeper than the skin and there be in
it yellow thin hair; then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a
dry scull, even leprosy upon the head or beard.  Note black people with
leprosy still to this day maintain their woolly hair that grows up it never turns
thin and yellow once they have caught leprosy. Only Caucasian have yellow
thin hair growing out of them - not woolly hair. Black albinos still have woolly
hair not thin yellow hair and they are born pale in complexion. It must be
known that the scientific definition of the white race is Caucasians. This word
means caucus Asian  - Dead Asian as caucus means dead. Genetically their
skin is practically dead as it can not fight against the sun therefore their skin


--- PAGE 32 ---
burns and tans. Asians have darker skin that protects them from the sun
therefore they are just Asians not Caucasians. This is not racism its scientific
fact that has been known for decades. Caucasians have the lowest genetic
DNA and weakest blood of all the races on the planet earth. This is why they
die of skin cancer from being in the sun for too long as they lack a chemical
substance called melanin that is needed to preserve your skin this has been
known for decades. On the planet earth black African people have the highest
amount of melanin in their body. Making the sun a friend not an enemy. God
has given you these gifts acknowledge them. Note too that eating fast food or
food not natural (similar to the western world) will damage your melanin.
Nubians please look at the world today ! Nubians still today on an economic,
historical and social level all over the world have continually faced racism. Still
today in Australia, the Americas, Europe and even Africa - Nubians are still
catching racial abuse economically, psychologically and even physically. This
racial abuse has been going on for thousands of years. Do you think your god
or nature who is all knowing would not address racial issues in scriptures?
What we are defining today as Caucasian are described as Canaanites,
Amorites, Hivities, Jebsuites etc. Race has been an issue for thousands of
years but not race as you know it today but rather the natures of races from
physical appearances to cultural practices that are influenced by genetic
differences which define that race.
The Messiah’s Real Name
The name of the messiah is not even Jesus. The letter J did not exist
before the 1500’s the messiah was alive 2000 years ago so he had a
different name. Also know he was called different names by different tribes
similar to Igbo, Watusi or Dogon tribes would call a leader. You are using the
white Caucasians definition for everything you read in the bible be it Hebrew,
Latin or Greek. The name Jesus comes from two words put together Jah and
Zeus. Jah and Zeus. Jah comes from Jehovah and Zeus (the name of the
mythological Greek god).
Jah and Zeus = Jesus
There are positive messages in the bible but only the messages that are in
line with the nature of nature are beneficial to people today. Understand those
6 ether negative forces have manipulated religion to an extent that it trains
black people to become mental slaves to Caucasians through Christianity and
Arabs through Islam. Remember you are the original people of the planet
earth yet you are following another races view as to who or what god is
according to them. That’s why Caucasians will make bible prophets white
looking and Arabs will make their prophets look like their race. Understand
that many parts from the Old Testament where taken from Sumerian and
Egyptian tablets such as the Gilgamish Epics which are old tablets which
describe the flood of Noah thousands of years before the bible was put
together. The Sumerians came from the land known as Iraq and the Persian
Gulf today and many tribes within Nigeria and West Africa are descendants of
them. In Iraq today there are still statues of black people with African physical
features.


--- PAGE 33 ---
The bible is a black book and we mean a black book. It’s a book stating the
genealogy or family tree of a part of the black race guided by supreme beings.
Genesis means gene Isis the genealogy of Isis. The Caucasians have taken
many events that happened in Egypt changed the names and places and put
their race their instead. You as Nigerians, Ghanaians, Togo etc are
descendants of the Hamites the son of Noah whose son Canaan though
albinoism is the father of the last Caucasian race. Therefore genetically you
are the direct forefathers of the Caucasian race. They are your albino children
who had to move west due to the hot weather creating skin cancer in their
genes. This albinoism and the dieting of pork means there is a chemical
imbalancement in their conscience. This results in the white race by nature
having a negative affect on other races in the long term. You must remember
the universal laws of opposites. Right or left, up of down, positive or negative,
right or wrong. Sun or Moon. Amongst the races Africans are the darkest
Caucasians are the lightest. It is scientific fact that everyone on earth
descended from the Nubian race. Therefore you gave life to mankind you are
the life force of earth so there has to be an opposite. The opposite from who
Nubians are becomes the Caucasians they represent the death force of
nature amongst the races. Because they descended from the Nubian race a
part of that death force is in us also this is our negative nature, the will to hate
each other, kill each other, fight amongst ourselves cheat each other out of
money or business etc. These negative black people are the people that blur
the laws of opposites.
Please do not waste your time believing this is racist –  science is telling
you equality does not exist. Science is the understanding of nature.
Humans evolved from nature. Therefore the fundamentals of theory
apply, its in science Protons and neutrons, its in theory negative and
positive, its in religion God and the Devil, up and down, herbivore and
carnivore, black and white these are the universal laws of opposites.
Don’t doubt this.
Extract 55
The Egyptian Conspiracy part 4 : To The African
Your black family in the west know that there is a constant struggle in Africa.
but you must realise that your quest to become westernised will result in the
spiritual destruction of the black race. To become westernised or
industrialised are two different things. To be industrialised is an economic
advancement. To become westernised is in real terms (behind the wordings)
is to take on the Caucasian nature. Africa must only take good technology
from the west (technology that doesn’t destroy the environment). Nothing
else. African people must re-establish their own cultural traditions in line with
agreeable life and economic forces. Applying universal law to any tradition
will tell you what parts of those traditions are good or bad. All Africa must
acknowledge that all Nubian cultures have ties with Tama re –  Egypt. The
Egyptians are admired by the west because the original Egyptians where
more advanced than those of the west Greeks/Romans. You are the


--- PAGE 34 ---
descendants of the original Egyptians not the Greeks, Phoenicians and
Hyksos mixtures that live there now. The key to the destiny of Africa is to
improve the knowledge of your ancient history and biblical knowledge applied
under right knowledge. This then should be implemented in the school system
raising the mindset of future generations knowing about the truth of who they
are and their heritage. Then these future leaders of business and politics will
know truly what is in the best interest for the Nubian race. With your Egyptian
heritage taught properly in all African countries, a universal sense of heritage
will occur in Africa which turn will destroy any inferiority complexes that will be
gained when interacting with other races. Today the Arabs and Caucasians
together are concealing the truth about the Nubian presence in Tama re
Egypt. The original name of Egypt. Let us give you a brief understanding of
Egypt. The Caucasians and Phoenicians from the Hyksos dynasty where the
last tribes living in Egypt culture they where the new school Egyptians 1500
BC to present day. The middle school Egyptians where the dark skinned
Nubians of Somalia and Sudan descent that mixed in with the Sumerians
1500 BC to 7000 BC and then the old school Egyptians where the west and
central Africans 7000 BC to at least 24,000 BC (that’s a low estimate). The
original pyramids of Giza and those in Sudan, Mali and Uganda where built by
the Tarites / Ptahites ancestors of the pygmies at least 24,000 BC (that’s a
low estimate). Evidence based on earth mineral deposits suggests that the
pyramids in Egypt could be up to 14 million years old and the smaller
pyramids in Sudan may even be older. Many archaeologists know this is true
but are not being recognised by Egyptian authorities that now control
everyone’s access to the pyramids. As they know independent researchers
can find out information about the conspiracy to conceal the truth about the
age of the pyramids and how black people in the past were really using the
pyramids. The Caucasian did not build any of the great buildings in Egypt or
anywhere else in Africa.
They want to change the history of Egypt to prevent the real children of Egypt
the west and east Africans from discovering that the 1st structured way on
earth or civilisation - way of life is the of Nubian races forgotten way of life.
This is now called Nuwaubu, which was practised by your forefathers in Egypt
with an ancient science now known as Solar Biology. This science used the
body to reactivate 9 ether force gases in nature from the sun to help you on
earth and on other spiritual planes. Remember the sun (stars) is positive it is
alive it feeds the world. They destroyed your ancient scriptures thus making
99% of Nubian Africans worldwide forget these Egyptian sciences. Again,
Nuwaubu is all knowledge, all wisdom, all understanding –  finite and infinite.
Nuwaubu is the science of sciences and the science in sciences--and it also
has phases or degrees. Nuwaubu is the spiritual science that existed many
years before the great flood of Noah, even before the existence of the straight
haired races 17 million 250 thousand years ago. Therefore it is the science of
the original creative forces and the original spiritual science of the African
pygmies and Ethiopians in general. Why? Because mankind didn't even exist
yet...i.e. the mankind straight haired races started evolving around 16 million
years ago starting with the black and brown Phoenician and Hindu races (the
original man) who were the first straight-haired (fur) people who came out of
the waters of Indonesia. This is their evolutionary man (prime-mate). Black


--- PAGE 35 ---
Nubians are from a much earlier evolutionary cycle where the climate was
different resulting in the 9 ether curly woolly hair and dark skin. You are much
older than the other races.  They will not teach you your heritage because
they know you are from a higher evolutionary cycle. You are not a part of
mankind you are Nubian Ethiopian Ptahites who were living and interacting
with spiritual beings for millions of years. Scriptures where needed to guide
you after these spiritual beings left this planet so that you will not forget your
heritage or them who you call angels they are called Elohim in Hebrew
which means these beings which is a plural. Elohim has been translated
into English from Hebrew to mean God. Christianity want you to believe
that the world is 6,000 years old because that’s how long the Caucasians race
has been recorded in history. You will not find any history concerning the
Caucasians anywhere more than 15,000 years as they came from black
albino tribes and also mixed in with albino Indians. They did not evolve from
the ground.
Extract 37
Spirituality of the Sun and the Moon
The Caucasians and Hindu took our ancient African sciences but aligned
them with the moon and gave the world Luna Astrology to counter attack the
African sciences now known as solar biology. They use negative conscious
gases we call 6 ether. It is these 6 ether conscious gases which are
reactivated through the Caucasian version of Christianity. It is these gases
which make people speak tongue in churches and lose their mind. It is what
you call a gospel which means ghost spell. 6 ether gases represent the dead
while 9 ether gases represent life. It is these 6 ether conscious gases that
exist within oxygen that in your blood stream spark your brain in church to fall
to the ground or foam in the mouth etc. In turn it dismantles the rational part of
the brain which questions things thus making you subservient in nature. This
keeps you in a spell believing that Caucasian are here to help and that they
are your masters. This led to you giving up your African land resources to
them allowing them to exploit your lands for their personal wealth. This has
led to the young Africans giving up their culture for the western ways. To
know what is good or bad you must know that any belief system that
does not promote you, your own culture, your own race and your own
physical appearance (all differences) in a positive manner has to
revised. Even though there is evidence that people of the Nubian race are in
the bible, films, pictures and books still promote a white Jesus and white
prophets. Many disagreeable people use these negative six ether forces to
cast bad spells at night, as they need the moon present. There are good and
bad forces out there in all cultures. In the west this six ether force that
promote comatosia can be triggered off through music, TV and drugs like tea
and coffee which originate from India and Asia. It was your forefathers that
used good forces to summon rain to help crops and to improve harvests etc.
The whole Nubian race once educated will be able to access the higher 9


--- PAGE 36 ---
ether forces easier as a new sun cycle enters. 9 ether is for life aligned with
the sun. 6 ether is for death signified by the moon. These are the laws of
opposites.
Many biblical prophets of the bible went to Egypt including Jesus, Abraham,
Moses, and Mizrayim that actually means Egypt. Some of the political rulers
of Egypt in scriptural times were disagreeable but just like today the leaders of
your African countries may be corrupt but that does not mean all people living
in that country wish to be corrupt also. Note that at the end of the lords prayer
–  The Amen actually is a name of the Egyptian god Amen Re. In Revelation 7
verse 11 to 12 it says.
All angels stood round the throne, the elders, the four living creatures.
Then they threw themselves face downwards in front of the throne and
worshipped god saying Amen ! Praise, glory, wisdom, thanksgiving,
honour, power and might belong to our god for ever and ever Amen !
Please note that Amen here is mentioned twice at the beginning and the end.
The prayers are calling the actual name Amen –  our god for ever and ever
Amen. It says in the beginning they worshipped god saying Amen ! Amen is
the name of one of the highest Egyptian gods. At the end of the Lords prayer
it says forever and ever Amen. In revelation chapter 3 verse 14 it says.
and unto the angel of the church in laodiceans write; these things saith
the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of
god.
This quote shows the definite article The Amen. The Amen means its referring
to someone or something. Please realise the truth that the bible is a book that
was put together by the Romans who took many of its information from
Sumerian and Egyptian tablets written by Nubian people who are direct
descendants of west and east Africans. These tablets are the Gilgamish
epics, which has the story of Noah, the Enuma Elish that has many parts of
the Old Testament, and the Egyptian stories of Horus where many parts of the
New Testament came from. These tablets where written at least 2000 years
before the bible by your ancestors the Egyptians and Sumerians who both
acknowledged a supreme god known as ANU or ANNU.  Evidence does
suggest that many of the events of the bible are true but they have been
altered by the Romans in Italy between 65 AD and 325 AD. This was
purposely done to allow their roman white race to freely roam the earth with
everyone believing they are the chosen race of god and dominate everyone
and they are still doing this today through capitalism. Wake up Africa put your
way of life first do not fall for the liberal movement in the west which will only
open your market to allow capitalism and white dominance to take over and
destroy your traditional African values.


--- PAGE 37 ---
Please take heed Africans that certain factions of the west are purposely-
altering history to position Hinduism and the East Indian culture as the origin
of mankind.  Once the Nubian race has weakened their genes by mixing in
with the Caucasian and altering their appearance and knowledge in line with
the Caucasians definition of reality. They will push Hinduism as the main
religion of the world. Hinduism is the thought process that is behind liberalism.
This change from Christianity to Hinduism is already happening in the west.
Caucasians are now rejecting traditional Christianity values and through
liberalism are unknowingly being introduced to Hinduism and Chaldean
practices but they are still acting like they are Christian –  they are not –  they
do not follow the sexual laws of the bible or Koran.  Remember Caucasian
means carcass Asian –  dead Asian due to their pale skin. The east
Indians are just Asians they give the Caucasian life through their
spiritual forces tied to sexual freedom with gave birth to liberalism in the
1960’s.  Those who do research will know there was an influx of gurus and
spiritual guides in the US and Europe from India/Asia in the 1960’s. This influx
influenced western music and fashions still today. It converted the youth of the
west to liberal ideals, which are still being played out today. This was the
foundation of Liberalism, as you know it today. The civil rights movement is
one of the last human rights inline with nature. Since then liberalism has been
warped. It is a commercialised religion –  a belief system followed by all
commercial ideologies –  as a guideline to this reality. In reality it is no different
than another belief system because it rejects scientific fact for the desires of
me, myself and I. I is the negative quest for freedom (desire) WE is the
positive. It is the WE that is tied to universal laws (the collective –  Nature)
that focused on the absolute preservation of life within all facets of reality.
Liberalism will never support the factual teachings of genetic inequalities as it
proves equality is not reality. Liberalism is the spiritual force of capitalism it
creates options for desires, which eventually leads to products and services.
Also remember the Hindus gave birth to the caste system which is the lighter
you are the better your are. This was used by the Romans, Greeks and is still
used today as racism.
Extract 17
The Journey of death
The journey of death is the presence of solids, liquids and gases (SLG’s) in
the atmosphere that will result in a death within the genealogy of an individual.
These SLG’s are usually man made and are commercially bought. The
commercial Journeys of death are usually desirable items or crutch products
(products that wouldn’t be needed if the human looked after their own
biological system themselves). They are negative elements within sleeping
pills, cigarettes, intoxicants, perfumes, creams, alcohol etc. The media
already tells you that specific products have been found to contain chemicals
that damage the body –  but they don’t explain the journey of death. For
example it is the cigarette smoking of many grandparents in the 1950’s that
are resulting in the death of their grandchildren today years after the
grandparent have died.


--- PAGE 38 ---
Journey of Death: Cigarette
A man who started smoking cigarettes at the age of 16 in 1948 then had a
son at 24 years old (1956). This son started smoking since he was raised in a
house with a smoker (his father). At 17 years old he started smoking as well
(1973). At 26 years old (1982) the son has another son. This grandson starts
smoking at 12 years old (1994) in 2008 at the age of 26 years this grandson
will be diagnosed with cancer. Though his father and grandfather never
needed any medical treatment because of smoking. The grandson has
inherited an altered DNA structure from birth that allowed cancer to manifest
in him. He has internal organs that from 2008 have had 8 years (grandfather)
+ 9 years (father) + 14 years (Himself) = 31 years of genetic mutations
altering tissues in the body not to mention decades of passive smoking. This
is because the 8 years (grandfather) + 9 years (father) where both prior to the
conception of the father and him. The grandson died in 2010 of lung cancer.
The journey of death was 52 years and spread over three generations.
Now understand that this is just one product say your family takes on several
killing you softly –  products like alcohol, cigarettes and fast food. These can
be combined to speed up the journey of death for someone in the future of
your family if not you. Please realise that everything you do to yourself has
genetic consequences for your bloodline.  If you care about the well being of
your own family tree after you are gone then you must make an effort
genetically clean up your biological system before you conceive your children.
This is implemented by finding out what diseases / illnesses have hit your
family going back four generations (even if you haven’t got it). Then for 6
months prior to child conception (depending on the potential inherited trait)
you should counter-attack it in your or your partners biological system prior to
conception. Some potential illness inherited within the child can be avoided or
greatly reduced.  It must be acknowledged that fast food is a catalyst for
journeys of death it can make diseases that missed you surface in your
offspring –  be careful. Nubian women must also need to know that this
journey also applies to hair as weaker hair follicles are forming in Nubians
growing up in the west especially the US.  Some Nubian women in the US
have regressed their hair to such an extent topped with Caucasian blood
sadly due to slavery that there genetic traits are more aligned with black
Asiatic (dark skinned Indians) not Nubian. They tend to be promoted as the
elite in black beauty. What these and those who smoke weed do not
understand is that the continual altering of your genes will damage you’re
future generations who will need healthy genes to survive on earth. The weed
damage parts of the brain involved in mental positioning and parts of the 35%
of the brain that 99% of all humans have forgotten how to use. The Nubian
straightening of the hair will regress future generations in line with Caucasians
thus making them more apt to illness commonly associated with Caucasian
(this is already happening). Furthermore the flakness of hair will cut off the
etheric energies from the sun which will be needed to survive in the sun cycle
which has just started. If you have an Ice age in the history of earth then the
opposite must occur on earth (laws of opposites). Beware of the Caucasian
establishment they will only tell you half-truth not the all. Global warming is
indeed one of the main causes of the slow rise in temperature that has been


--- PAGE 39 ---
occurring for over 60 years. They are telling the world now because it is too
blatant to deny. In London England they built a flood barrier for the river
Thames (The Thames Barrier) in 1984. In 2004 (twenty years later) water
levels in the UK have just began to rise. They always know in advance. The
jump in global warming from 2000 AD onwards is not just because of global
warming it is also because earth is entering a universal suncyle. This sun
cycle will last thousands of years with great consequences for those who are
not genetically fit. We are living in times far more serious than most can
imagine the alternative reality that black people are living in; the MTV / Hot 97
FM (New York) generation is so far away from what’s actually going on its
scary. The whole Nubian race must pay very close attention to Africa. A
protection of African ideology must be implanted in Nubians across the world.
The agreeable old ways must be preserved.
Extract 9
Man, Women and Child
When approaching the relationship between man and women from the
domain of universal laws we understand that the collective differences
between man and women working together becomes their equality. This
theoretically is perfected in their children. We say theoretically because many
couples do not undertake the full preparations required in creating offspring
that genetically can reach their full potential. In this extract we will abbreviate
some of the requirements.
This is NOT the full extract –  For higher information we recommend you
read books by the Nuwapians and The Ancient Egyptian Orders (AEO’s).
The Physical Pregnancy –  Stage One
The journeys of death must be seriously counter-attacked before conceiving a
child. This is especially more important with the male who dictates the sexual
preference of the child (X/Y). Though the Female carries the Child for 9
months (9 = life forces). The male for several months prior to the conception
of the child must clean-up his biological system (purify the sperm). You must
know that blood tests can reveal your health condition going back three
months. This is to say that any intoxicants from the last three months may still
be present in the system. The male must make an attempt to be at the most
physically and biologically healthy before conception. This means a complete
reduction in alcohol, intoxicants and fast food. In addition taking all medical
actions necessary to reduce the potential of family related illnesses and
diseases occurring in their offspring is a must. An example would be bad
eyesight. They often say carrots are good for the eyes. Introducing carrots
into the parents dietary 6 months prior to conception can reduce inherited bad
eyesight. Though computers and the lack of good sunlight around them are
the main causes of bad eyesight nowadays. We must also say that it is not
healthy for women to be continually around computers through pregnancy.
Radiation from computer can have influence on her biological system and
psychological system (stress), a bad chair will also influence the body


--- PAGE 40 ---
development of the child inside as at different times it will reduce the amount
of oxygen and blood that enters the child through the womb. The parents
must study their genealogy and take the appropriate actions to alter their own
systems to counter attack the rebirths of the genetic illnesses. Children should
be conceived preferably before 35 years of age. If older than 35 years couples
man and women should drink the equivalent of 12 cups of water a day. Under
35 you should drink 10 cups of water a day. This is because brain cells start
to die at that age and water can be used to persevere them longer.
An improved pregnancy template should be around one year - 3 months
prior to conception (male) and 9 months after conception (female).
Based on a strict a reduction in intoxicants, alcohol and fast food.
Vegetarian elements must be included in the dietary three months prior
(man/women) and 9 months (women). For Nubians food that contains
Vitamin BI2 should be included in your dietary as this aids your melanin.
The Psychological Pregnancy –  Stage One
The physiological mindset of the female is very important to the development
of the Child during and after pregnancy. With better dieting comes a better
mental state. Through the pregnancy it is highly recommend that the female
stimulate the mind not the eyes. Less TV and more reading –  especially
conscious reading in the first six months of pregnancy is recommended. A
child can inherit the mind techniques from their parents (not the specific
information but the methodology e.g. how to work out a maths equation). Fast
food through pregnancy will slow down the manifestation of higher intelligence
evolving in a child.
There is no child in this world that genetically improves with the aid of
fast food during and after pregnancy. Therefore it should be
permanently avoided.
Fast food is the anti-nature (negative) force of the biological system it can only
do harm internally to the parents and the child. Nubians must realise the
true goal of fast food is not just mass-profits, it ties in with negative
equality as it’s the secret quest to reduce the genetic inequalities of
humans. This creates the same illnesses and diseases amongst the masses
and regulates the political driven cures. Heath is a bu-sin-ness please don’t
forget it. Everyone becomes easier to control through regulated bad health
from bad fast food. This disagreeable quest for equality is at the expense of
reducing variations in human genetics that are in favour of darker races. This
is one of the negative sides of equality that can not be seen unless you
understand the laws of opposites. A good and bad must exist. These are the
techniques mankind uses to control nature. There is a war going on between
mankind (represented by capitalism and the societies behind it) and the forces
of nature. Nubians are supposed to be on the side of nature (Neteru) due to
your genetic heritage, which they are also trying to reduce through fast food.


--- PAGE 41 ---
Now back to the psychological positioning of women influencing the child.
Only agreeable forces must be around the women during and after her
pregnancy. More importantly these must be on a literal level. This is a deep
subject as it refers to forces in real time that are good for you –  not what you
believe is good for you but what you know is good for you. Your child’s initial
rationale is always based on knowing things. It is society that sadly teaches a
child to believe things. A child in its adolescent age is tied to universal laws
much more closely than any other period in life. They do not see the biases in
race. When you take something they like away from them they cry because
there is no belief system present yet in their minds to suggest that they will get
it back or get a new one. You can tell the child that you will give it to them
later or get them a new one but they will still want that specific one (toy/sweet
etc). You think its because they haven’t developed the rationale to share, trust
etc. This is partly true but it is generally because they base their reality on
facts not belief –  unlike most adults. Their primary evidence is based on their
five senses not opinions yet. Therefore children don’t actually believe their
parents/guardians therefore raise a fuss or cry until they get that specific thing
etc. All this is really trying to say is that through children you can see that the
fundamental genetic coding of humans are based on an understanding of
facts not beliefs. It is through socialisation belief systems exist and sadly most
adults follow belief systems be it an Ism (capitalism, liberalism, functionalism
etc) over actual facts –  scientific proof and logical rationale. Facts are primary
indicators and beliefs are secondary indicators not the other way round. Facts
are the positive representation within the laws of opposites and beliefs are the
negative.
Adults think that horror movies and bad music etc do not affect them. They
are wrong anything negative or positive will remain active or dormant within
the conscious or sub-conscious of an individual. It is through bad day and
night dreams negative thoughts in the sub-conscious can be released. If you
don’t dream you junk up your mind. This leads to stress in the daytime. Many
people sleep but can’t remember their dreams one reason (as there are many
reasons) is that negative thoughts were released and that your mind blocked
these thoughts from reaching parts of the brain from remembering the dream
events when you are awake. Sexual thoughts (wet dreams) are high-level
mind junk. They are harder to get rid of because they align themselves with
brain process that stimulate sexual organs they are easily reactivated through
TV, media and porn. Dreams are the representation of solutions or problems
the more regulated your sleeping habits are the easier it becomes to manage
your psychological health.
A child in its adolescent age is a Knower not a believer. It bases what is right
and wrong on what it can see –  not opinions. This is why Nubian children
must not be introduced to forces with stimulate belief. Rap music videos are
visual belief systems –  nothing is real what you see (Nubian children should
not be raised by this music at all). Children programmes that enforce black
suppression should be avoided (see extract four). Programmes that do not
show the positive interactions of men and women should be avoided.
Programmes with men dressing up like women and visa versa should be
strictly avoided. Many children who grow up to become homosexuals/lesbians


--- PAGE 42 ---
have sadly been brainwashed by the media at a very young age through
adverts and adult television. If you study the percentage of homosexuals in
the west compared to the east you will realise the media and gays/lesbians
inside the media machine are clearly the driving force behind the
brainwashing. If it were normal the ratio would be universally the same across
the world as they claim its genetics. We are telling you that homosexuality as
a way of life stems from sexual rituals practised by the Romans and the
Greeks –  which traces back further to demonic hermaphrodite gods.
Homosexuality as a way of life was created by capitalism to exploit it
economically and use it to dismantle religious beliefs. This would give room
for the New World Order Citizenship (which religious factions by scripture law
would be against). All this is based on a false perception of equality which is a
genetic myth. We will stress this to you - positive (hetro = life) and negative
(non-hetro = death) must exist as opposing forces within absolute nature. It is
not about being homophobic (a trick to reverse the perception of illness), it’s
not about disliking anyone anymore its about knowing everyone’s role within
absolute nature. Then acting accordingly to that role. In fact when applying
the laws of opposites you will find that hetrophobia must exist as well.
His-story continually tries to tie the black civil rights with gay rights. These are
subtle attempts to undermine the black existence in the west. Now applying
the laws of opposite you will now know that they are the complete opposite.
Black civil rights are the representation of the original seed of Earth the
Nubian (life forces) coming up. Gay rights are the representation of death
forces within a sexual reality coming up because only heterosexuality creates
life.  We will repeat this one more time - life and death forces (positive and
negative) must exist within absolute nature. The identification of right and
wrong based on its influence on the continual existence of humans in absolute
terms will suggest what the right actions are to take. For now you know more
and believe less.
Africans should be very careful in sex as HIV aids is killing more black people
in Africa than anywhere else in the world. HIV/Aids was manufactured in the
US and is being used to kill off the Nubian black race in Africa and America.
Sex in Africa must be controlled. The virgin marriage would be a solution. This
is why US hip-hop youth music is no longer a music beneficial to black people
especially the African as it continues to promote loose sex within the black
race which will lead to the further spread HIV/Aids. Furthermore these music
videos don’t teach the youth anything about their heritage and culture. They
do not show black women in their natural image and they follow the caste
system –  the lighter skinned women with straight hair are seen as more
beautiful than the darker skinned women. Know that black liberals who want
you to believe they are Christian (but they are not) run the US music industry.
They work for the Caucasians behind the scenes who use money to tell them
what to do. They are being used to slowly brainwash black people throughout
the world to reject their culture and take on the European way of thinking.
These black musicians in the US do it because the Caucasians who are their
manager’s etc pay them millions to sell their soul. Let your children know that
this music is here to help dismantle our race. The good positive black
music that is made is pushed down and does not get played on prime-


--- PAGE 43 ---
time radio or TV. We see an emergence of young black music artists from
Africa copying the US, wearing US clothes and copying their music videos,
they are lost souls –  if black people all come from Africa then we should all be
following African culture not the other way round.
Extract 26
Higher Evolutionary Sciences Part 7
Please understand that this solar system travels as a whole across the galaxy
and that this actual galaxy travels across the universe this is scientifically
proven. But what scientists’ aren’t telling you is about the role 9 ether and 6
conscious ether gases play in reality. Understand that from a scientific
perspective atoms and molecules are the substance of matter and anti– matter
it is the combination of gases that created the sun which in turn made planets
which in turn made life on earth - all under the will of the most high forces
absolute nature. Now know that 2000 AD marked the end of a 6,000 year
winter period in this solar system. It was within this period that 6 ether gases
represented by thought processes linked to the moon had a dominance over
the earth. Global warming is linked to the entering of the sun cycle, which
begins in 2000 AD onwards and will last for thousands of years to come. This
galaxy is on a 72 million-year cycle around the universe. The creation or
evolution of the Nubian black race started within a sun cycle that’s why your
hair is woolly and grows up to the sun with 9 ether heritage. The other races
evolved within a winter cycle on the planet that’s why their hair is straight and
grows down and doesn’t have the power to curl.
African people must now embrace the science of your hair 9 ether when your
hair curls it forms a circle. This is your scientific link to all space-time and
matter. As everything in existence is made up of atoms, which are in the
shape of a circle, the sun, the planets, blood cells etc are all circles the curl of
your hair in to a circle is your genetic link to the creation of the universe itself.
You are closer to the genetic peak of what human beings can evolve in to on
earth more than any other race. The hair symbolises creation itself the dot,
the line and the circle must have existed before the atom. The fundamentals
of all existence within a three dimensional plane.


--- PAGE 44 ---
A hair that curls into a circle is the physical representation of all existence in
man. It is a symbol recognised throughout all the boundless universes. All
planets, all stars, all atoms, gas particles, blood cells indeed all existence for
they are all circles. Your curly woolly hair is the link to everything - absolute
nature. All humans are tied to absolute nature as the dot and the line are
covered by all races (see hair diagram) but the curl of the hair into the circle is
the completion of 360 degrees –  absolute as anything that travels the line of
the circle will travel forever. It represents a universal template in reality itself
the nature of nature. Understand that if the circle curl of woolly hair is a
universal symbol and all suns and planets are circles, then you are genetically
tied to the creation period of the universe. Remember you are people of the
sun with skin that is protected from the sun more than others –  can you see
the link. Know that because your hair grows up to the sun you are tied to the
universal ecosystem of nature as every plant/tree grows up to the sun as well.
This is why you are the manifestation of nature in human flesh. See from the
stem of the hair which eventually curls in to a circle overall makes the 9
shape. This 9 shape as stated; being tied to nature through the circle
becomes the human representation of 9 ether on earth, as life force gases
had to exist to create all existence including the creation of this solar system.
These are hints to the science of your woolly hair that will never be taught by
Caucasian –  please understand that.
One of the best things you can do in serving your God or nature is respecting
it. This means respecting the environment, which was made by nature
(neteru), or God. Now understand this doesn’t just relate to looking after
animals, forestry, reducing CFG gases etc. It also implies to the agreeable
treatment of all solids, liquids and gases needed to preserve pro-life forces.
These life forces include forestry, water and most importantly the human
species. For a human to actually look after themselves through good dieting
and health in their original state preserves the positioning that nature or God
genetically gave that individual. Now understand that when you destroy your
own body through drugs, preventable diseases etc you are also helping to
destroy nature itself.  This is because you are a part of nature. To harm
yourself you are actually aligning yourself with the negative death forces
within absolute nature. This is why suicide is negative you are sacrificing your
own existence to the death forces within absolute nature. To eat healthy, diet
correctly, stay fit enhances your own life which represent the positive force of
absolute nature. Now this also includes the physical appearance. It is very
concerning the regression of the woolly hair in the west especially the US. If
your god loves you, is all knowing, created everything, then why would you
change how he made you. Lets be serious ! You are rejecting the way god /
nature made you and are following the Caucasian appearance.  Now
overstand the laws of opposites exists on different facets of reality. The
opposite physical appearance to the Nubian race is the Caucasian race.
Someone here represents life forces the other death forces. Who is it ? Let’s
see. The woolly hair to become straight needs a heat or chemical reaction
that destroys proteins in the hair follicles which maintain the genetic properties
needed in hair growth up to the sun. The destruction of the hair proteins is a
genetic death. Nubian women are aligning themselves with death forces –  anti
nature as you are killing off the genetic ties with nature. Nubian women are


--- PAGE 45 ---
continually tempted by their own black actresses, music artists and models to
change their hair –  the eve syndrome (temptation) –  they be-lie-eve (belief) it
is an improvement. Now please understand it is liberalism within marketing
that makes you think this is normal. Suppression within our race is still running
rampant and this marketing enforces it. Another brainwashing technique they
use is to show you African women with woolly hair in the poorest conditions
on TV they also show homeless black or insane women with woolly hair. The
reality is they don’t have the time to look after their hair in its woolly state
simply because they are just trying to stay alive. Many Nubian women rebel
against this physical positioning the media has giving our women with woolly
hair. Nubian women must realise that you are following someone else’s image
of beauty.
The elite of the Nubian women are those in their original image as it was
women in this image who were the first beings who evolved from water to give
birth to all human species. Though scientist working for government agencies
are now trying to link the birth of mankind with Asia. They are trying to alter
history as you read this. Nubian women you are in a league of your own when
you are in your natural state. When Nubian women take on Caucasian traits
(straight hair / dyed hair / contact lenses) you give positioning power to
Caucasian women. The beauty of women will be based on their terms.  They
will only guide you further away from your natural state. The suppression of
Nubians is continually enforced through black hair products like Dark &
Lovely. The lovely element to them must represent the straightening of the
hair as you are dark by nature. Amongst women the physical leader of the
straightened hair is the white women whose race due to their weakness of
genes and genetic mutations has the most variety of hair and eye colours.
They have successfully converted the other races in to thinking this is an
advantage in beauty when the variation appearance reflects a weakness in
genes. The spiritual leader of the straightened hair is the Asian Indian woman.
Liberal white women all get their spirituality from East Indian cultures. The
spiritual unification of the Asians is taking place right now the Caucasians and
the Indian Asians are joining their spiritual forces to go against the sun
movement. On a social level this is seen in the Caucasian women and her
followers adapting to Indian fashion. On an economic level this is seen in the
west building tighter links and joint ventures with India and Pakistan. It is also
seen through the growth of small retail businesses throughout the world. They
are a genetic family unit –  the Caucasian and Asian.


--- PAGE 46 ---
Time after Time
Know that it is Luna astrology which gave birth to the Julian and Georgian
calendar that was used to establish the 60 seconds in a minute, sixty minutes
in an hour etc. You must now know that this is not the original time frame of
this planet. The Greeks and Phoenician Caucasians altered the measurement
of time in their favour to give them an advantage over the other races. The 60
seconds, sixty minute one hour time frame has only been used for about
2,500 years. Your African forefathers in Egypt and Nubia did not use this time
scale to measure a day. Now know that your ancestors the Tama re
Egyptians used the following time frame 100 seconds equalled a minute, 100
minutes equalled an hour and their where 10 hours in a day, and 30 days in a
month. This is why time is measured in what they call seconds. The original
time frame was measured in we call firsts (moments). They called it seconds
because our time frame of firsts was the original. This was the original time
frame of Africa before 6,000 years ago. Other races had different time frames.
What the Roman/Greeks Caucasians did is that once they destroyed Egypt
and the Nubians moved deeper into Africa. They changed time and through
the power of trade forced everyone to follow their Julian Calendar 2050
years ago. A Roman time frame measuring time based on Greek schedules of
the sun. This later evolved into the Georgian Calendar 450 years ago. This
time frame will not be as accurate as the Tama Rean. This is why they had to
introduce an extra day in a leap year to compensate for the inaccuracy in
time. Please ask yourself why would an extra day be needed every four years
if time were correct? Caucasians still today use the Julian Proleptic
calendar as an ancient time frame (timeframe for the BC’s). Ask yourself
what time frames were being used in Egypt prior to the Julian (roman) time
frame? All this was done to give the Caucasians an economic advantage and
it was when they introduced Africa to Christianity that they gave you this
Georgian altered time frame which gave them the advantage as it is a time
frame in line with their nature. Even today all across the world black
people are always known for arriving late to a place –  comedians make
fun of it. It is because our genetic body clock is use to a different time frame.
You will also notice that the number six is present in their time frame 60
seconds and 60 minutes this is linked to those 6 ether negative forces which
help the Caucasian create the illusion that they are superior to everyone else.
This science that makes Africans follow the Caucasians is an actual pseudo-
science. It is a psychological science triggered off by the Caucasians
manipulated version of Christianity. The pictures of the white Jesus, to church
windows showing the white apostles, and the white hand of god seen in
pictures and films –  they are there to re-enforce Nubians and other races to
follow their way of life and their system. This process is known as Leviathan.
Leviathan means the laws of ignorance creating belief leading to eventual sin.
Biblically it’s a sea creature representing the beast. If the Nubian black woolly
haired races are the fathers of all races then due to the laws of nature no
other race or type of man can be more intelligent than that original race.
Though due to the lack of right knowledge, right wisdom and right
overstanding (not understanding but overstanding) and the acceptance of


--- PAGE 47 ---
European nature over your own African nature –  Nubians as a collective have
regressed to a negative state. This negative state can bee seen in many
blacks in the west who use cream to make their skin colour lighter and dye
their hair a traditional Caucasian colour. They are in western music videos. It
is very important that African people teach their children not to be influenced
by American hip hop rap as these singers, dancers and artists are in the
image of the Caucasian race and do not practice or acknowledge their African
heritage. This is very important, as the west have introduced MTV music to
the African Continent. They are now attempting to destroy African cultures
using hip-hop to influence the minds of African youth to reject their own
culture and take on a European culture. This is a law of sin leviathan as the
agreeable side of African culture is the original culture of the planet earth.
Extract 10
The New World Order Nubians Beware –  Part 2
Now know that the law of opposites was in favour of the Caucasian race
through the winter-moon cycle for the last 6,000 years. You will now realise
that slowly over the last 30 years other races are catching up with the
Caucasian in caste system order. First the oriental race made big
developments in the 70’s and 80’s, the Indian Asians have come up in the
80’s and 90’s, now it will be your turn –  but these other races have taken on
the Caucasians why of thinking to develop. You must not give your lands
away to other races as in this century and the laws of nature will work on your
side only if you respect nature and the spiritual forces behind it starting from
knowing and understanding the truth about your great culture. This includes
not being apart of the New World order.
Africa this is so important. Understand that in the west they are now putting
together a system where human rights will be reduced. They are brining in a
system where everyone human in America and Europe will have to have their
fingerprint, a scan of their eyes and blood properties stored on a master
computer. They want everyone Europe and the US to have this by 2012 AD.
They want to give everyone in Europe an ID card, which will eventually be
used to buy and sell products. They want to get rid of cash forcing everyone
to work for the system using these ID cards. The chip used in the credit card
is the early stage of introducing this system globally. With this ID card they will
know wherever you are.  If you speak against the government they will know
who you are and where you are. They have introduced laws in the US and
Britain. To allow police to take you and put you in prison without telling you or
anyone else why you have been arrested. With DNA information from the
eyes, blood and fingerprint gained from the ID Card they can work out what
the characteristics etc of your future children and relatives will be. In turn they
will control the future of mankind. They are also setting up laws to prevent
people from growing their own food. All this is to control human evolution.
Then through the internet they have set up laws to allow them to see any
information from e-mails, business flies etc anywhere in the world if needed.
This is to control all human information. Once control of food, DNA bloodlines
and all information is achieved. They will have control of time itself preserving


--- PAGE 48 ---
this era. There overall goal is to create a New World where the nature of the
Caucasians is practised through capitalism and liberalism is higher than god.
To achieve this they must take control of 75% of the world and have them
follow their way of life. Even if you are white and disagree with them you will
also be a considered an enemy to them. Because black people are the
opposite to them and your heritage is far greater then theirs they have to
slowly destroy your DNA to reduce your genetic capacity to stimulate change
in the world. They want to reduce your genes through bad food, black on
black crime, diseases, lightening of the skin so that the Nubian black race will
not be able to live under the sun. In other words they want our races to reduce
to a level where we too die of skin cancer like them as the temperature of the
whole world will rise meaning they will find it harder to live on the surface of
the planet.  In the west Skin cancer has now risen 700% over the last 25
years and it will continue. Black people who follow the lifestyles of the
Caucasians will alter their own DNA and catch skin diseases like them. With
the DNA of people and races they can introduce specific diseases or poisons
to target and eliminate races or even individual families. Do not take this for a
joke. This is real and it is happening right now. You need to now know the
truth. This ID card is the Mark of the Beast 666 written in Revelation chapter
13 verse 11-18. It says.
The beast forced all the people, small and great, rich and poor, slave
and free, to have a mark placed on their right hands or on their
foreheads. No one could buy or sell without this mark on your hand or
forehead.
The fingerprint ID is on your hand and the eye-scan is the machine that goes
on your forehead. The second beast mentioned in Revelation in chapter 13
verse 11-18 is the UK and the first beast mentioned is the USA wounded by
the 911 attacks in 2001.
Please do not take this lightly the US & UK are the main instigators in
pushing in a bio-metric system tied with ID Cards. The US are already
gathering this information. To enter the US they now require an eye-
scan and fingerprint from you at the airport.
Also know that in Revelation chapter 15 verse 2 it says and I saw those who
won the victory over the beast and its image and over those whose
name is represented by a number. The image of the beast is a physical
description it is accepting the way of the Capitalist Caucasian over your own
culture. To honour the image of the beast is to take on the Caucasian way of
life including the acceptance of the white Jesus. Those who follow the beast
will have their name represented by a number. This number will be the digit
code written on the ID card, which will be used when accessing bank
accounts etc. You will also note the bible actually states in Revelation chapter
13 verse 18 that you will need intelligence to work this out.


--- PAGE 49 ---
Please do not reject this information as a joke or an opinion this is
happening right now in the west.
1. The first stage of the beast was the barcode.
2. The second stage that we are at now in the ID card being brought in
by the US/EU. The media always downplay the day that legislation
concerning ID cards are passed through government. They have
continually set up media events to distract the public of the US and
EU. Know that this is truly one of the most important legislation’s of
this era –  don’t be fooled by the downplaying of the media they work
for those secret societies don’t forget that. They want this ID tied to a
bio-metric system in place by around 2012 AD. They are weary of the
Mayan calendar. These societies are the Carlyle group, bilderbergs
and the high level freemasons to name a few.
3. The final stage will be the eventual computer chip implanted in the
right hand or forehead before 2035 AD. There are hundreds of books
on this subject that have been written for over 40 years by people
from all over the world. Please do not take this lightly it is happening


--- PAGE 50 ---
right in front of you. Go online and read up on this New World Order
subject, as only the intelligent will know what to do. We recommend
you read Revelation Chapter 13 (The unlucky number).
The intelligent will know that developing countries will become a safe haven
for those who wish to avoid the beast. This is why now the EU is trying to
reduce 3rd world debt –  they could have done this in 2000 or 1980 when the
Ethiopian famine was at its peak or in the 1970’s. They waited until they got
the technology to introduce the mark of the beast ready and they will use it as
way to solve monetary problems in Africa. Africans must make others aware
of this as the Bible suggests that people with the mark of the beast are not
favourable in heaven. This mark of the beast is apart of the New World Order.
This is a world made by nature / god yet these societies want to create a New
World for themselves and negative higher entities. Africans must realise that
we are all now living through parts of the book of revelation and only the
intelligent will be able know what is happening and what is really going on.
Africa must continue to live off the land and not let a monetary system
tied to computers dictate the economic progress of the continent with
regards to buying or selling. In essence you must maintain a cash
society. As this will maintain individual freedom. Secondly no genetic
information must be given to assist a bio-metric system.
Unlike the west you have more time to avoid the beast. It is very important
that you keep control of our lands and make them able to be self-sufficient for
our race.


--- PAGE 51 ---
Please listen very closely. A= 6, B=12, C= 18, D= 24, E=30 etc. go
through the whole alphabet adding 6 to each number until you get up to
z = 156. Then put the following word together using numbers then add
the numbers up. For example the word bad BAD would be 12 + 6 + 24
which = 42.  Now apply this to the word COMPUTER. Then do the same
for the word NEW YORK.
Now know that it is computer that is the devils tool to gain control of the world
and that New York will be a key city in achieving this. The United Nations
headquarters is located in New York and it is this institution that governs the
economics of the whole world. Do not reject this information. You are
receiving this information at the right time in history if you don’t know this
already - please do not reject it.  Maintaining a cash society is a method of
slowing all this down.


--- PAGE 52 ---
#


--- PAGE 53 ---
Dear Reader, 
 
Many people question universal law they think that this is an opinion or an 
interesting read. All thought process within a three-dimensional plane journey 
through the laws of opposites. From the day you are born you have to 
acknowledge these laws –  for what goes up must come down (gravity). We 
have told you that you already know this information –  you may have not read 
it laid out within black consciousness before though. It is there, it’s in every 
facet of reality, it is tied to nature itself or the god behind nature if you wish. 
How can this be a belief system –  you live (life forces (+)) and you die (death 
forces (-)). Many people may not like what they read because they believe
 in 
equality but they don’t know it. We have told you that this is a scientific myth 
not proven from the creation of the sun down to your own DNA structure. It is 
not a scientific fact –  therefore it is a belief system. In 2005 you must embrace 
facts. For the facts we are given you are tied to nature (the laws of opposites) 
–  thus universal. Do you get it ! We are also stressing that there are great 
writers out there with greater information –  use this extract as a stepping 
stone to the greater teachings by: As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, 
Marcus Garvey, Amunubi Rahkaptah, The Honourable Elijah 
Mohammed, Clarence 13X, The Ancient Egyptian Orders (AEO), The 
Nuwapians &  Noble Drew Ali. This is why we don’t want our own names 
associated with the PDF. Its not about us –  its about these writers. We are 
giving you this information free on PDF because we care about the Nubian 
race –  it’s as simple as that. We have realised that there are many people 
especially in Africa who can not afford or have access to any knowledge 
beneficial to our race. This is an attempt to correct that. Your knowledge 
becomes the equivalent to what you are reading once you understand what 
you are reading. Put this on any web-sites or forums you wish as long as it is 
beneficial to the Nubian race - we don’t mind at all. E-mail it out to people it 
can uplift –  spread the word –  let it become your word. This PDF is youth 
orientated put together by 16 people globally from the black scene. It is then 
centralised and converted to PDF. You are reading the Nubian voice of many 
not the few. This is a FREE PDF Extract. 
 
Warning! There are many people who will perceive this as negative. This 
is awareness literature. We have stated on many extracts that there are 
good people in all races.  There are people of other races who have 
done more to help the African than most Nubians on earth have done. 
We have stated this at the beginning of these extracts. Liberals of all 
races by nature will not respect scientific facts so their intentions will 
never lead to the full upliftment of the Nubian race as scientific facts 
lead to the truth and it is the truth that shall make you free. They wear 
away from absolutes as that challenges equality.  
 
Extracts included on this PDF are 14, 10 updated, 30, 12, 16, 23 & 72 other 
extracts will follow once the information has been abbreviated and centralised. 
There may be grammar and literacy errors
 –  we apologise in advance. No 
Endnotes or Index included. (1- 32 pages).


--- PAGE 54 ---
Extract Fourteen 
 
Entertainment –  Part Two 
 
When dealing with universal law an understanding should arise that 
challenges the notion of stars (the commercial fallen angel). One of the 
biggest scams in this alternative reality is the belief that you are not the star. 
For the illusion is that the person on the other side of the screen or speaker is 
more important than you. All so-called stars serve you not the other way 
round. If they don’t treat you right you don’t buy their product. The problem 
with Nubians is that since black people are so badly represented in the 
western media –  we allow disagreeable actions taken by our so-called stars to 
slide.  We have stated in other extracts that most of your entertainers are 
black liberals whose interests do not lie in the full upliftment of our race. 
This is why they are positioned as stars –  to lead you astray. The growth 
in black music correlates to the lack of Nubian consciousness present in the 
industry. As stated earlier your black liberal music artists are sacrificing the 
Nubian morality to satisfy Caucasians who are the main buyer of black music. 
This all started from the nigger talk –  which initially attracted the white racist 
into black music in the late 1980’s. Although we acknowledge mainstream 
MTV hip-hop as more negative than positive we know that for many blacks it 
is their only way to achieve wealth within their system. This notion has also 
created a bigger problem with too many Nubians being lost in music. Too 
many Nubians give negative music too much room in their lives. It has 
become a crutch for black people. Many Nubians literally waste their lives 
away lost in the illusion of music, which is the marketing of sound frequencies. 
You don’t know that many of the keyboard frequencies in music disrupt parts 
of the brain associated with rationale thinking –  it even damages these brain 
cells. You don’t know that the beast has taken over music. This is to say that 
technology now dictates what’s new in music - as new sound is what is 
considered new music. Every melody you ever here now has been played 
before –  there is nothing new in western music anymore. This is one of the 
real reasons why music sales are in decline. On a deeper level you may hear 
many older people say that music in the past was better than music today. 
This is universally true because it was in the past that the original melodies 
and structure where created –  music of today lives off the past. This is seen 
all too often in cover songs or samples in rap. We told you evolution is the 
decay of originality this is what you are seeing. What they will not tell you 
about samples is that the consciousness of the original song is maintained in 
the sound frequency usually looped. From a guitar lick to a vocal sample as 
well as a complete loop of a melody played by a band. Samples connect the 
past to the present. They do not want Nubians to go back as that is a 
revolution. They want Nubians to move forward into a future they can control 
called evolution. The laws of opposites will always apply. This was happening 
in the late 1980’s a group like Public Enemy would sample James brown –  
revitalise late 60’s music which in turn would attract the masses to that period 
again then in turn to black movements of that era. Human nature was subtly 
expressed through samples especially complete loops. Hip-hop of today have 
completely taken out the human element of sound they have generally taken


--- PAGE 55 ---
away the DJ and samples with the keyboard electrical frequency as president. 
With no natural life in the music it will lead to a mentally dead youth, which is 
evolving right now –  perfect for a New World order. This is why music is much 
louder today than it was in the past as raising the cloned sound forces the 
metabolism of the human body to react –  thus dance. Previous generations 
listened to music less harmful to the eardrum yet they still danced. 
 
Within universal laws evolution and revolution must be opposites. Nubians 
must now know that those in a quest for evolutionary change that has genetic 
implications are representing negative forces within absolute nature. This is 
because evolution is the decay of original existence and they do not wish 
to preserve it. Everything in solid form is born, lives and then dies/destroyed. 
This is universal. Evolution is the universal death process of existence. So 
those who support genetic change from race-mixing to breast-implants are 
supporting this decaying process in nature. This is universal. Now the 
Caucasians as stated are the last stage of human evolution therefore by 
nature they will be in favour of genetic change as that is them.  For 
Caucasians as a collective to oppose, evolutionary forces would go against 
their true nature as they are a product of that force. This is a negative trait for 
those of original existence (Nubians). Please don’t be fooled Nubian! 
Please understand that to be in favour of evolution (decay of originality) 
rejecting genetic preservation you are rejecting the universal templates that 
nature has provided. There are opposing consequences for any action an 
individual, a family, a business, a belief system, even a whole race take as a 
collective. These are the universal Laws of opposites.  
 
Those in the know
 follow mind revolution while those who believe follow 
mind evolution. Its about going back (your own history, you own god, 
your own traditions) to work out what your real future is suppose to be. 
Back to the future! 
 
The evolution and revolution scenario is a very revealing subject as it can be 
used to simply identify which Nubians are truly here to help our race and who 
are not. Those who promote the continual change of Nubians inline with 
liberalism are evolutionists. Those who promote change in line with the way 
we where are revolutionaries. As the way we where was not based on these 
key liberal ideals. We are slowly trying to get you to understand the trickery 
behind liberalism. So many Nubians are being led astray by this movement 
please wake up. They lead you astray by narrowing information inline with 
their understanding of reality. Understand to truly create change within 
Nubians you need the right information reaching the right people at the right 
time. Liberal ideals have been designed to cut off parts of information 
beneficial to Nubians that are not in line with the Caucasians nature. Do you 
get it? The information we have been living by up until now has resulted in the 
situation we are in today –  FACT ! Liberalism blocks the higher levels of 
information beneficial to Nubians thus preventing Nubians from reaching their 
full potential. Nubians be very weary of the controllers of information –  chat 
show hosts, music artists even website moderators and members (some are 
liberals or caucscaian in disguise). Their true intentions may be to control 
information beneficial to our race. Be careful!


--- PAGE 56 ---
Extract Ten 
 
The New World Order Africa Beware –  Part 2 –  UPDATED ! 
 
Now know that the law of opposites was in favour of the Caucasian race 
through the winter-moon cycle for the last 6,000 years. 
6000 years is a 
quarter cycle of an universal equinox –  24,000 years. To be concise it is 
24,896 years.  Like all cycles in nature it goes through seasons –  The 
last 6,000 years was the universal winter season. This century we are 
entering the summer season –  global warming is merely one reason for 
the rise in temperature. If there is an ice age then there must be an 
opposite (sun age) (law of opposites). You will now realise that slowly over 
the last 30 years other races are catching up with the Caucasian in caste 
system order. First the oriental race made big developments in the 70’s and 
80’s, the Indian Asians have come up in the 80’s and 90’s, now it will be your 
turn –  but these other races have taken on the Caucasians way of thinking to 
develop. You must not give your lands away to other races as in this century 
and the laws of nature will work on your side only if you respect nature and 
the spiritual forces behind it starting from knowing and understanding the truth 
about your great culture. This includes not being apart of the New World 
order. 
 
Africa this is so important. Understand that in the west they are now putting 
together a system where human rights will be reduced. They are brining in a 
system where everyone human in America and Europe will have to have their 
fingerprint, a scan of their eyes and blood properties stored on a master 
computer. They want everyone in Europe and the US to have this by 
around 2012. They want to give everyone in Europe a universal ID card, 
which will eventually be used to buy and sell products. They want to get 
rid of cash forcing everyone to work for the system using these ID 
cards. The chip used in the credit card is the early stage of introducing this 
system globally. With this ID card they will know wherever you are.  If you 
speak against the government they will know who you are and where you are. 
They have introduced laws in the US and Britain. To allow police to take you 
and put you in prison without telling you or anyone else why you have been 
arrested. With DNA information from the eyes, blood and fingerprint gained 
from the ID Card they can work out what the characteristics etc of your future 
children and relatives will be. In turn they will control the future of mankind. 
They are also setting up laws to prevent people from growing their own food. 
All this is to control human evolution. Then through the internet they have set 
up laws to allow them to see any information from e-mails, business flies etc 
anywhere in the world if needed. This is to control all human information. 
Once control of food, DNA bloodlines and all information is achieved. They 
will have control of time itself preserving this era. There overall goal is to 
create a New World where the nature of the Caucasians is practised through 
capitalism and liberalism is higher than god. To achieve this they must take 
control of 75% of the world and have them follow their way of life. Even if you 
are white and disagree with them you will also be considered an enemy to 
them. Because black people are the opposite to them and your heritage is far


--- PAGE 57 ---
greater then there’s they have to slowly destroy your DNA to reduce your 
genetic capacity to stimulate change in the world. They want to reduce your 
genes through bad food, diseases, lightening of the skin so that the Nubian 
black race will not be able to live under the sun. In other words they want our 
races to reduce to a level where we too die of skin cancer like them as the 
temperature of the whole world will rise meaning they will find it harder to live 
on the surface of the planet.  In the west Skin cancer has now risen 700% 
over the last 25 years and it will continue. Black people who follow the 
lifestyles of the Caucasians will alter their own DNA and catch skin diseases 
like them. With the DNA of people and races they can introduce specific 
diseases or poisons to target and eliminate races our even individual families. 
Do not take this for a joke. This is real and it is happening right now. You need 
to now know the truth. This ID card is the Mark of the Beast 666 written in 
Revelation chapter 13 verse 11-18. It says  
 
The beast forced all the people, small and great, rich and poor, slave 
and free, to have a mark placed on their right hands or on their 
foreheads. No one could buy or sell without this mark on your hand or 
forehead. 
 
The fingerprint ID is on your hand and the eyescan is the machine that goes 
on your forehead. The second beast mentioned in Revelation in chapter 13 
verse 11-18 is the UK and the first beast mentioned is the USA wounded by 
the 911 attacks in 2001.  
 
Please do not take this lightly the US & UK are the main instigators in 
pushing in a biometric system tied with ID Cards. The US are already 
gathering this information. To enter the US they now require an eyescan 
and fingerprint from you at the airport. 
 
Also know that in Revelation chapter 15 verse 2 it says and I saw those who 
won the victory over the beast and its image and over those whose 
name is represented by a number. The image of the beast is a physical 
description it is accepting the way of the Caucasian over your own culture. To 
honour the image of the beast is to take on the Caucasian way of life including 
the acceptance of the white Jesus. Those who follow the beast will have their 
name represented by a number. This number will be the digit code written on 
the ID card, which will be used when accessing bank accounts etc. You will 
also note the bible actually states in Revelation chapter 13 verse 18 that you 
will need intelligence to work this out.  
Indeed people don’t realise the times 
we are living in. We are living in the times of scriptures now.  This is one 
reason why liberalism and sexuality is pushed out through the media so 
strongly. It is to side-track the masses in to rejecting religion thus rejecting 
scripture study because if studied the masses would see the correlation’s are 
now so blatant the masses would have to addresses it through revolution.  
Note the word Revelation –  ties in with Revolution. The RE is present. A 
revelation means to let a secret be known as a secret event has 
occurred in the past. Revolution as stated in extract 30 Vol.2 (NFMW) is 
the implementation of change to get back to the way we where. To 
execute a revolution you must know your past. Revelation is going back


--- PAGE 58 ---
(to past scriptures) to the get to the future (events that are occurring 
now and in the future). The RE also ties in with the Amen RE which is 
praised in the book of revelations (see extract 37 Vol.1). This Amen RE 
is our Egyptian god from the Nubians original civilisation and is the 
Amen stated at the end of the Lord’s Prayer. All this is no coincidence! 
 
Development of the Beast
 - Please do not reject this information as a 
joke or an opinion this is happening right now in the west.  
 
1. The first stage
 of the beast was the barcode. 
 
 
 
 
2. The second stage that we are now in is the ID card being brought in 
by the US/EU. The media always downplay the day that legislation 
concerning ID cards are passed through government. They have 
continually set up media events to distract the public of the US and 
EU. Know that this is truly one of the most important legislations of 
this era –  don’t be fooled by the downplaying of the media they work 
for those secret societies don’t forget that. They want this ID tied to a 
biometric system in place by around 2012 AD. They are weary of the 
Mayan calendar.


--- PAGE 59 ---
The Mayan Calendar suggests that in the year 2012 a global event will 
end this time. A specific date quoted is December 21st 2012. These 
societies working for the beast such as the Carlyle group, bilderbergs 
and the high level freemasons to name a few acknowledge this date 
(don’t be fooled). They want the second stage of the mark of the beat 
implemented by this period. As stated earlier on extracts terrorism is 
being used to create fear in the west so that the masses give up their 
human-rights to take on the mark of the beast. If an event occurs with 
global consequences they will need the mark of the beast to control the 
masses within their New World order. There are many people of all races 
that know about this information. Once again you will also see that the 
Caucasian establishments are continually lying about dates, history and 
genetics. For example when studying the Mayan calendar and their 
maths you will find that their time frame glossary are far beyond the time 
frame of existence the Caucasian establishment publicly wish to teach. 
The Mayan recorded events using the following time references.  
 
1 Pictun = 20 Baktun = 2,880,000 days = approx. 7885 years 
 
1 Calabtun = 20 Pictun = 57,600,000 days = approx. 158,000 years 
 
1 Kinchiltun = 20 Calabtun = 1,152,000,000 days = approx. 3 million years 
 
1 Alautun = 20 Kinchiltun = 23,040,000,000 days = approx. 63 million 
years 
 
Ask yourself why would the Mayan use a time frame reference this big to 
record events in the past and predict events in the future ? The 
Caucasians are completely lying about time in history and there is a 
reason. It is because they did not exist on earth for more than 15 
thousand years. Therefore through history they have shrunk your 
concept of time inline with their existence. Their history gets patchy 
after 6000 years ago because that’s how long they were recorded in 
history. The Asian (Indian and Phoenician) are their representatives in 
earlier eras. They have turned our history in to mythology. It must be 
stated that there are many Caucasians that do recognise that the 
commercial dates of this reality are completely wrong but you will know 
that whatever information gets onto the TV screen concerning history it 
will always be in line with a Caucasian agenda.  The reconstruction of 
the Egyptian history is their current project –  watering down the black 
existence in Egypt. With the growth of archaeology technology they 
have slowly been closing down key areas of the Giza pyramids away 
from independent researchers and tourists in a quest to conceal the 
imbalance in TV history and real history concerning Egypt. Now 
mummies are appearing all over Egypt with government archaeologists 
managing the whole project with computers now identifying what they 
look like - who do they always seem to look like? They are building a 
whole Egyptian City out there aimed at tourists –  they want this to be an 
even bigger attraction than the pyramids themselves. We’ll see what


--- PAGE 60 ---
faces they’ll draw on those walls. Know that many of the inner chambers 
in the pyramids and ancient buildings across Egypt, Sudan and Somalia 
were dwarf size. The average man would have to bend down and even 
crawl through the pathways. This is because the African pygmies known 
as Tar-Deneg where involved in the constructions of these great 
buildings. They want you to believe homo-erectus were uneducated. We 
say home-erectus because this is how far we are going back with 
regards to Nubian civilisations.  Since the home-sapien brain today only 
utilises about 35% (simultaneously) –  12-15% normally of its capacity 
realise that a homo-erectus brain working at say 65% would be more 
than the homo-sapien of today in comparison. There are many issues 
not revealed to the masses about our history. They are also altering our 
Sumerian history as well in the Middle East especially in the Persian 
Gulf for the Nubians in Nigeria, Ghana and Sudan are Sumerian 
descendants. 
 
3. The final stage will be the eventual computer chip implanted in the 
right hand or forehead before 2035 AD. There are hundreds of books on 
this subject that have been written for over 40 years by people from all 
over the world. Please do not take this lightly it is happening right in 
front of you. Go online and read up on this New World Order subject, as 
only the intelligent will know what to do. There are at least 150,000,000 
google entries on this subject. That’s at least 150,000,000 web pages 
with information on the subject from all races from all over the world. Do 
you think it’s all made up? Also haven’t you ever wondered why it’s 
hardly spoken about by your so-called superstars or on TV? Music is 
supposed to represent creative freedom - speaking your mind. Yet how 
many artists mention this subject? 150,000,000 web-pages tell you this 
is a serious subject –  but let’s say 99% of these pages were false or lies 
–  that would still leave 1,500,000 web-pages –  the amount of data is 
simply too much to ignore! Many people after reading all this will still 
ignore this information because this information stimulates change in 
their perception of reality which conflicts with the desires they have 
successfully achieved in this reality. 
 
There is a program being played in the west in several countries and 
even over here called Big Brother. This program is the perfection of 
liberal ideals being used to camouflage the New World Order. The 
program is really about surveillance conditioning –  adapting you to a 
reality with no freedom. The program uses sexuality as the distracting 
tool aiding a socialisation agenda preparing the masses for the real big 
brother –  New World order. It also devalues the understanding of the 
New World Order making it be perceived as –  NO BIG DEAL! The 
emergence of Reality TV is not a coincidence as we entered a new 
century these programmes popped up out of nowhere for most of these 
reality shows world-wide are created and controlled by one company 
called ENDEMOL. They call it endemol we suggest they are trying to 
END-THEM-ALL. The big brother show uses an Eye as the symbol. This 
eye is tied to the eye on the pyramid on the back of the US dollar bill, 
which states novus ordo
 seclorum - which means New World Order.


--- PAGE 61 ---
This dollar bill link has been known since the 1970’s –  its not new 
information. We have been told of a book out there in the west called 
Leviathan 666 - The Beast As The Anti-Christ written by the Ancient 
Egyptian Order. Try to search this book out. It is the Nubians Guideline 
for what is going down with the New World Order. The best guideline 
we’ve seen out there specifically for Nubians.  
 
The biometric system will not only bring forth-draconian leadership but 
it will also create a two-tier planet. One with the beast using liberalism to 
disguise the loss of real freedom and the other against it or cant afford it 
implemented. It is inevitable that if the New World Order is successful 
eventually a new type of slavery will emerge because they control all 
aspects of your life, which means they control you. And what do 
disagreeable anti-nature forces do once they control you? They either 
exploit you for their needs or dispose of you. !   
 
 
The intelligent will know that developing countries will become a safe haven 
for those who wish to avoid the beast. This is why now the EU is trying to 
reduce 3
rd world debt –  they could have done this in 2000 or 1980 when the 
Ethiopian famine was at its peak or in the 1970’s. They waited until they got 
the technology to introduce the mark of the beast ready and they will use it as 
way to solve monetary problems in Africa. Africans must make others aware 
of this as the Bible suggests that people with the mark of the beast are not 
favourable in heaven. This mark of the beast is apart of the New World Order. 
This is a world made by nature / god yet these societies want to create a New 
World for themselves and higher entities. Africans must realise that we are all 
now living through parts of the book of revelation and only the intelligent will 
be able know what is happening and what is really going on.


--- PAGE 62 ---
Africa must continue to live off the land and not let a monetary system 
tied to computers dictate the economic progress of the continent with 
regards to buying or selling. In essence you must maintain a cash 
society. As this will maintain individual freedom. Secondly no genetic 
information must be given to assist a biometric system. 
 
Unlike the west you have more time to avoid the beast. It is very important 
that you keep control of our lands and make them able to be self-sufficient for 
our race. 
 
Please read the following: 
 
A= 6, B=12, C= 18, D= 24, E=30, F= 36, G=42, H=48, I=54, J=60, K=66, 
L=72, M=78, N=84, O=90, P=96, Q=102, R=108, S=114, T=120, U=126, 
V=132, W=138, X=144, Y=150 and Z=156  
 
Go through the whole alphabet adding 6 to each number until you get up to z 
= 156. Then put the following word together using numbers then add the 
numbers up. For example the word bad BAD would be 12 + 6 + 24 which = 
42.  Now apply this to the word COMPUTER. Then do the same for the word 
NEW YORK.  
 
COMPUTER 
 
C= 18, O=90, M=78, P=96, U=126, T=120, E=30, R=108 = 666
 
 
Know that 90% of all computers in the world since the 1960’s have 
components in then that can be traced back to one company. This 
company is IBM. Know that in the 1960’s and early 1970’s this company 
then based in Brussels (prior to globalisation) had a master computer 
called the BEAST 3666. These components created by IBM where and 
still are to an extent fundamental parts of all machinery –  commercial 
and industrial. An updated version of this master computer still exists 
today –  The name of the person in charge of this master computer has 
never been publicised. IBM has patents over some of the fundamental 
elements of all computers. They influence the development of 
computers. This in turn influences the development of technology. This 
in turn influences the development of society as a whole (globally). 
China have purchased IBM’s PC Business ($1.25 billion) from the US. 
Wherever IBM goes power goes as computers control the world. 
Brussels (European Union), Texas (US), now China. They say China in 
the next 15 years will be the new global super-power. It is often 
mentioned that China does not practice democracy (equality), respect 
human rights, with a state controlled economy. Therefore if China 
becomes a super-power –  Free trade will not be the president ideology 
of economical Earth. A clash of ideologies can only lead to conflict. It 
always starts off cold then over the years it becomes hot.


--- PAGE 63 ---
NEW YORK 
 
N=84, E=30, W=138, Y=150, O=90, R=108, K=66 = 666
 
 
New York is often referred to as the belly of the beast. Now know that 
the computer is used by the ultimate disagreeable forces in this day and 
time to gain control of the whole world and that New York is key in 
achieving this. The United Nations headquarters is located in New York 
and it is this institution that governs the economics of the whole world. 
The IMF (World Bank) is also located in this city. These are the 
organisations controlling third world debt.  Earlier on this extract we 
told you that once the system has control over food, money and trade. 
Then requires your DNA you become a slave on their terms. This means 
you can become a slave when they see fit in history –  it only takes the 
threat of war or terrorism to trigger all this off. Terrorism that trickle 
back to capitalists anyway.  
 
The goal of terrorism is to destabilise an economy taking away the 
freedom once existing in that country. The governments of the west are 
implementing systems that take away your human rights. Therefore the 
introduction of surveillance and ID cards means that the country have 
sacrificed human freedom. This in turn means they have already lost the 
war on terrorism. Theoretically then the goal of the terrorist and the 
government is the same –  they both what a reduction in YOUR human 
rights. 
  
You think liberalism is gonna save you. As stated Liberalism is a part of 
capitalism. All these ideologies work for the same team. The Luciferians 
who exist in all races, all religions, all societies, many of them don’t 
even know they are playing this role within absolute nature. They are the 
peak of anti-nature (-) (death forces) forces on earth. They focus on 
manipulating ideologies this is why liberalism is so dangerous now for it 
allows anything to be fair-seeming in their eyes. They all believe bad 
(death forces) must come before good (life forces). The bad is a war or 
genocide the good is their reality in flesh after the death forces. Now 
remember Extract 28 –  Positive & Negative (Extracts Vol.1) 
 
Life must always exist before death, as life is needed before death can 
occur. Death represents the negative secondary forces within existence 
and life represents the positive primary forces within existence. Life is a 
greater force than death, as life doesn’t need death to exist. Death needs 
life to exist prior to the event. Life can’t destroy death, as that will 
reduce life to the equivalent of death a negative force. Therefore life and 
death will always exist 
 
The Luciferians use the reverse ideology of above for death occurs first 
in their actions (war, genocide & terrorism) with an objective to create 
life afterwards based on their ideology. Therefore they can only 
represent anti-nature forces. When you have global situations based on 
a reverse understanding of life and death then the forces behind these


--- PAGE 64 ---
situations are the peak of anti-nature (-) forces. If some of these anti-
nature forces then give their own people a new system –  New world 
order (id card / biometrics system) by nature this system can only be 
disagreeable as anti-nature forces such as death (war / terrorism) was 
needed to create this system. To accept willing this new system ties you 
with anti-nature forces. This is why your religious scriptures (revelation) 
tell you that there is a mark of the beast that the masses will all receive 
rich or poor. From 2008 onwards you will find it much harder to get this 
level of literature. They will use their laws against this type of 
information to prevent the masses from waking up. Thus allowing the 
New World Order to succeed. You don’t know that you have a few years 
left - we reckon about 3 years left to gather the necessary information 
needed to guide you for the next 40 years. After this period say 2010 all 
information online will be too regulated and distorted to allow you to 
even understand what’s going on and if you don’t understand what’s 
going down you will have no idea on how to react to it. You will need 
universal laws (+) and (-) as a guideline. 
 
Do not reject this information. You are receiving this information at the right 
time in history if you don’t know this already - please do not reject it.  
Maintaining a cash society is a method of slowing all this down. This 
means not using credit cards because of laziness. Not giving 
unnecessary data freely in questionnaires or telephone surveys etc. 
Anything, which leads to you giving away any information about 
yourself, your family etc which, has no immediate benefit to you or your 
family specifically should be avoided. Ties between Nubians in the west 
and Africa must be improved. 
 
Extract 30  
 
Nubian Feminism, Menism & Work 
 
When dealing in the reality of plus and minus all facets of the isms become 
questionable. A mistake that so many people do is that they forget that the 
Caucasian middle class of different eras have been the main force behind the 
positioning of value systems in society. Regardless if it is universal it has 
always been so called universal based on the terms and implementation of 
the Caucasian –  feminism is no exception. The upliftment of women is needed 
as men through the eras have leaned towards the disagreeable due to the 
uneven balance in genetics tied to muscular arrangements. There are other 
reasons to consider as well which we will discuss later. Nubian women know 
that the growth of feminism is a chain reaction to the struggles of the black 
civil rights movements in the 1950’s & 60’s and before that in the early 1900’s. 
Black women of the US are the founders of so-called modern feminism - do 
your research. They will give you all the sociology based feminist the Ann 
Oakley’s etc. but they rarely go into the US black history as the anti-slave civil 
rights movements in the 1800’s and early 1900’s was the first challenge to the 
uneven economical power obtained by the white man. White women saw the 
white man power structure as disagreeable as well.


--- PAGE 65 ---
We can only stress that the 1960’s (especially 1966) was a turning point in all 
the isms –  Liberalism. It was in this period that there alignment with universal 
laws and nature became warped. The beginning of the demise of the family 
unit based on the introduction of belief systems in the commercial arena 
(media and music) that truly led to the rise in drug taking, sexual perversion 
etc. These new belief systems where put out in the West and trickle back to 
Hindu gurus and spiritual guilders from India who visited the west in the 
1960’s.  They were partly used to counter-attack the potential minority 
economic growth obtained through civil rights. Before you get hooked on 
drugs there must be a fair-seeming ideology present in society. Drugs where 
introduced to blacks in the late 1960’s and through the seventies in the west 
and ever since has been a burden to the race. It was the liberals quest for so-
called happy drugs in the 1960’s that created the drug trade distribution 
channels which later got exploited by the harder drugs in the 1970’s. Many 
Nubians got lured into drugs because they accepted those liberal ideals. It 
takes two to tango the drug dealer and you. If your mind has a belief system 
present –  facts are ignored as taught by liberalism then it is inevitable that 
drug taking will be perceived as fair seeming. Liberalism stimulates desires 
which over-shadow rational thought. You need warped belief systems out 
there first before you can lure people into things that are detrimental to them 
in real terms. Drug taking is one example. 
 
Liberalism from drug-taking to sexual perversion where introduced to create 
new isms that would eventually lead to new consumer markets - legal or 
illegal which only big business would really be able to profit from. It was and 
is an economical booster similar to the business of war. The societies 
who have been practising sexual perverse acts since the Roman Baths and 
the Greeks where behind the introduction of Liberalism since the 1960’s. You 
can trace back the funding of these movements in the 1960’s to big business.  
 
Liberalism did not naturally evolve in the 1960’s it was planned. The 
music, the drugs, sexual experimentation etc are all tied to the gurus 
and spiritual guilders from the east and those businesses that allowed 
them to set up establishments in the west.  Caucasians studied their 
history they know that their real sprit force comes from the Phoenicians 
and Hindu. It was the Karma Sutra (Hindu doctrine) that is the basis of 
Indian sexual experimentation
 (not Nubian) that led to the porn industry. 
 
A mistake that many people do is that they assume that documented actions 
in the ancient past where considered agreeable by all in that period in time. 
For they continually forget that documented actions (rituals) may be 
specifically tied to that tribe, culture or race. Note there are millions of Indians 
who are do not follow Hinduism. There are many Hindus who do not study the 
Karma Sutra. We are trying to say that Hinduism is tied to the nature of the 
Caucasians and Asian. It’s different from the Nubians nature. When liberalism 
(which originated from indo-Hinduism) influences Nubians you are taken on a 
way of life not indigenous with your true nature. For if it was your true nature 
then it would have been indigenous with our race. It is Egyptian Tama-rean 
values which many African tribes still practice today (though they have 
forgotten) that is the true heritage of the Nubian.


--- PAGE 66 ---
This is why we must recognise positive and negative universal laws as 
these laws out live ALL eras. 
 
To the Nubian women the agreeable side of feminism is that it teaches 
women to empower themselves and gives women the confidence to be self-
sufficient. As in different times in her life a women may need to stand on her 
own two feet (single-mother, widower or divorcee etc). The disagreeable side 
of feminism is that it continually helps dismantle the relationship women have 
with their mother –  called Mother Nature. It helps knock many women out of 
sink with universal laws as Caucasian women now govern the doctrine. 
Please understand Caucasian women represent the anti-nature force 
between the races of women –  though their nature will not be to the extreme 
of the Caucasian man as all women give birth to life (life forces). (see extracts 
Vol.1). 
 
Feminism is now being used to drag women into capitalism so that they 
too can be ideologically controlled by the beast just like men. For the 
women who stayed out of commerce was unreadable by the system. 
They didn’t know if that women is raising a new nation or teaching their 
child ideologies against a new world order. Many of these women don’t 
seem to be as money driven as men –  they are more attached to 
universal laws by nature –  since they are usually mothers giving and 
preserving life (raising a child - positive life forces). To preserve an 
alternative reality perfected through the New World Order you will have 
to warp all natural concepts –  the natural mother, heterosexuality, love 
before money as these are all tied to human nature (universal laws). 
 
Feminism is luring women into the system making them easier to control. 
While this is happening they are gonna take control of the child and in school 
socialise a value system that raises the child to grow up with fair seeming 
ideologies in favour of the new world order –  currently phrased as citizenship. 
 
Feminism subtly is turning women into men. This is often manifesting itself in 
the form of Lesbianism or women who focus too much on money. The latter 
are women who become very materialistic and tend to buy luxury items. Note 
that feminism is the granddaughter of capitalism. Liberalism is the mother of 
feminism. The pattern is right in front of you. The materialism of the women 
will only serve capitalism –  supply and demand. We will repeat this; liberalism 
and capitalism go hand in hand. They are the same force helping to dismantle 
nature. The lesbianism is the liberal part of feminism as stated in earlier 
extracts liberalism stems from the word l
berlis (Latin) which was always 
associated with sexual urges. The same way a woman can give birth to a 
male or female. It is feminism that gave birth to the civil movements of both 
lesbianism and homosexuality. This is why many homosexuals’ 
characteristics are in line with strong women. There is a general feminine out 
of men occurring in the west created by the alignment of homosexual men 
and heterosexual women who are subtly using homosexual men as a 
measuring stick against heterosexual men. Heterosexual women due to 
liberalism are aligning themselves with anti-nature (death forces) as only


--- PAGE 67 ---
heterosexuality can create life (life forces). Heterosexual women should also 
realise that homosexual men feed off the women’s nature. Heterosexual 
women are the indirect governing force of homosexuality –  for they have to be 
–  for if it was a heterosexual man there would be no homosexuals as the 
hetro-man are focused on women. Hetro-women must realise that hetro-men 
as a collective don’t align themselves with lesbians. Yet many hetro-women 
align themselves with homosexual men much more than hetro-men do with 
lesbians. There is an imbalance present. For hetro-women to reach their full 
potential they must not align themselves or be influenced by other sexual 
natures for they are the original mothers of nature –  it will lead to a regression 
in women out-of-sink with her nature. Now please understand that sexuality is 
only one facet of human nature this is not an indication as to the overall 
existence of an individual being agreeable or disagreeable. Please 
understand that positive and negative forces in nature must be acknowledged. 
 
All this is a process to dismantle the man + women = child (triad of 
human life forces).  This can only be the outcome of interacting with 
people with sexual preferences other than heterosexuality. It is the 
heterosexual women influenced by other sexual preferences who will 
not install heterosexual values in her offspring. Overlapping gender-
roles due to feminism leading to a rise in sexual perversion in her 
children in adulthood. The education system and the media will assist 
this development as they represent anti-nature forces as sexual 
perversion is a force against religion. They want to water down religion 
to allow the New World order to manifest successfully –  Non-
heterosexuality is one method of achieving it. Non- heterosexuality can 
not create life therefore it represents a death force in nature. 
Heterosexuality creates life therefore it represents a life force in nature 
(laws of opposites). The system wants you to think that these 
developments are evolution. It is really eve-illusion. Eve (mother of all 
living) being lost in belief systems. Evolution in real terms is the decay 
of original existence –  the alteration of whatever was original. 
Revolution is going back against evolution (Re-evolution). To say 
revolution means there was a time in the past where things where better. 
The Caucasian by nature will have to teach you that evolution is 
agreeable because by nature they where the last evolution stage of the 
human species.  
 
Feminism makes women see the world through the reptilian eyes of 
capitalism instead of through the eyes of nature. Nature will tell you through 
genetics that women and men have specific roles in reality and that these 
roles are different –  it is the liberal quest for equality seen through capitalism 
that enforces the belief that they are not equal –  but they weren’t suppose to 
be in the first place. Equality as stated on earlier extracts is a genetic myth. 
When dealing with the relationships between man and women there will never 
be an equal existence due to human will. It is men and women together in 
differential harmony that creates a universal equality amongst them. For both 
men and women together focusing on their individual strengths and 
weaknesses for the same objective creates harmony –  e.g. raising their child 
together. You were never meant to be apart. Evolutionary forces created the


--- PAGE 68 ---
opposing force against heterosexuality. When we discuss strengths and 
weaknesses we don’t mean the women stays at home and the man goes to 
work. For if the woman is more educated than the man then she should go to 
work. Whoever goes to work the money they bring home is to benefit the team 
(couple).  It is menism that makes men believe they are better. This is not all 
socialised through gender roles for gender roles are actually tied to nature. 
These isms are merely opposing forces amongst the sexes created by 
capitalism. Money equals power and those who want it regardless of gender 
or race will see anyone who prevents them from getting it as a disagreeable 
force. The nature of capitalism will always lead to division and feminism and 
menism are evolutionary forces of capitalism. Gender roles have existed 
before all eras and are based on DNA and RNA profiles in sink with XX  
(female) or XY (male) chromosomes. With different chromosomes will come 
different traits. We must respect the will of nature. This is why gender roles 
are necessary. Capitalism does not want gender roles as that ties humans to 
nature. Therefore through liberalism it will try to dismantle it.  
 
Many people understand the notion that money is the root to all evil. 
Now know that the SIN was purposely put into the word bu-SIN-ess 
because the word SIN actually refers to an ancient anti-nature force 
actually called SIN. When you are called a sinner that actually refers to a 
demonic belief system tied to the moon. We told you the moon is dead 
(death force) the sun is alive (life force). They tied these anti-nature 
forces from the moon with Bu-SIN-ness –  that’s why money is the root 
to all evil. The seventh day of rest is called SUN-day then bu-SIN-ness 
commences on MON– day using MON— ney. You really read Monday but 
say Munday. Moon and Mon are the same it is just the English language 
has altered it similar to Sol and Soul. It’s all about the destruction of 
nature. To counter-attack this we must align our knowledge back with 
nature represented by the sun giving life (+) to all aspects of nature. AS 
YOU READ THIS AFRONUAT SERIES YOU WILL BE SHOWN THE TRUE 
DEPTH OF WHAT YOU HAVE JUST READ! 
 
Changing the subject slightly we want Nubians to be weary of mainstream 
pop music for the ways of the moon are continually expressed within it. They 
give off spirituality not aligned with the sun also known as Sol (solar) which 
also ties in with Soul. Their spirituality ties in with Layla (which basically 
means moon worship) (oasis = illusion) which alters the soul/sol (solar) 
hardening the human soul (rubber soul) (Beatles). Both these bands 
acknowledged the Indian spirit forces. That genre of music represents the 
moon (Sin) the drugs, the sexual perversion etc and it is the black liberals 
today in music that are slowly guiding the black masses in that direction. 
There is much more to know about this subject search out the writers 
mentioned at the beginning of these extracts. With regards to work in general 
universally the office worker is not a greater achievement then the doctor. The 
doctor is not a greater achievement than the office worker –  you all play your 
role in society. It is merely money in this day and time that dictates the 
importance of the role. So when you see people within the medical profession 
on low pay know that your system in monetary terms does not respect life. For 
those doctors and nurses are trying to preserve it.


--- PAGE 69 ---
Feminism (pro-women) and its opposing force Menism (pro-man) are 
simply here to divide and conquer the sexes –  thus making man and 
women focuses on obeying the ways of capitalism (anti-nature forces) 
over the ways of nature (universal laws). Man due to muscular biological 
arrangements gained an advantage over women through the eras. 
Gravitational forces aligned with the biological system of women also 
influence her progress. 
 
Through the eyes of nature (universal laws) it is clear that the child-
bearing aspect of women is by far the most important role amongst all 
human species. Therefore know that nature has positioned women as the 
internal controller of life and men as the external controller of life. The internal 
controller of life refers to the 9 months of nurturing and developing the child. 
The external controller of life refers to man’s control of the environment. They 
are both equals. It is illogical to believe that any job in the capitalist system is 
of more importance than raising a child. The biological nature of women has 
existed before all isms. In time technology will naturally reduce the muscular 
advantage man has over women. The question is will women be in the image 
of man or in the image of their natural selves. We would also like to state here 
that the push for the lowering of sexual activities legally is a negative. For the 
biological structure of the brain is perfected between 21 – 25 years depending 
on the planning of your own conception by your own parents. The RNA and 
DNA profiles that exist in man (sperm) and women (brain signals assisting 
pregnancy) will not be at their full potential. Women should also realise that 
breast-feeding is now essential in child bearing for the calcium provided is 
specifically designed for you offspring –  cows milk is random.  
 
Nubians realise they do not want planned conceptions and pregnancies 
occurring amongst our race. As planned conceptions will strengthen 
offspring genes and the race as a whole. We are giving you highly 
abbreviated information on this. We recommend Nubians search out 
Nuwapian and AEO (Ancient Egyptian Order) literature as many simple 
procedures prior to conception and during pregnancy may have a life-
time of rewards for Nubians. We also advise you to search out a book 
called How To Eat To Live
 by The Honourable Elijah Mohammed. 
 
Both men and women must realise that this is an alternative reality we are 
living in based on belief systems. These belief systems are so advanced that 
they have made 70% of the work force believe that in the office; what they are 
doing is something more than typing letters on a keyboard on to a screen 
using Microsoft office. Hundreds of millions of people do this everyday in the 
west. It is the amount of money they receive that makes them believe 
how important a job can be.  You will find that the employment field that 
have a direct influence on a perception of reality are the hardest to enter –  
media, music and entertainment. To manipulate the masses you must have 
anti-nature forces existing in these fields constantly. Know that liberals and 
non-heterosexuals are in this field of businesses in abundance. In essence 
their objective is to make you reject the laws of nature that would put their 
existence at a disadvantage. They don’t even know that their movements 
were all planned by secret societies whose goal is to alter nature in their


--- PAGE 70 ---
favour. As stressed through the extracts it all goes back to the Romans and 
the Greeks, then the Phoenicians and the Hindus. One big gang the 
Caucasian and Asian family unit –  who often fight amongst themselves. 
 
All Caucasians anti-nature forces from racism to slavery come from this 
lineage of ideologies. The Aryan race movements link all these 
ideologies –  do your research. They all have sexual perverse practices 
out-of-sink with universal law tied to rituals. Often these rituals where 
linked to hermaphrodite gods. These practices have never been phased 
out and have been turned by secret societies through liberalism into 
non-heterosexual activities today. 
 
Nubian women must realise there is a specific plan to regress you. For the 
Caucasian to continually have the upper hand in the laws of opposite they 
have to hold down the Nubian. Mentally the Nubian man –  physically the 
Nubian women (your hair –  her-it-age). The black liberal unintentionally has 
set traps that many women have falling in to. We told you on earlier extracts 
about the 1960’s loop-hole. This is seen in the ‘strong black women 
syndrome’ inherited in the 1960’s still being used today. The problem is that it 
creates an imbalance in the nature in the Nubian women of the west. For a 
worldly sister is all –  strong, gentle, intelligent, flexible you’re all of that. The 
strong black women syndrome –  only makes black women focus on the 
muscular attributes of their nature. Women of other races are being socialised 
to focus on the feminist attributes of their nature. This attracts the suppressed 
black man to women of other races. Note it is the black liberals since the 
1960’s who are preserving this strong black women syndrome –  which is 
promoted especially through US chat shows. To destabilise black women 
means you have destabilised Mother Nature, as she is the manifestation in 
flesh of her –  the original mother of the earth. The plan is to disrupt black 
women socially –  not economically but socially through liberalism tied to sex 
and money.  They are successfully creating social barriers between black 
men and women –  leading to single parenthood –  thus allowing the system to 
take over the socialisation of the child –  though the media that can only raise 
you child to reject universal laws and take on belief systems –  the isms
. It is 
these belief systems that raise your child into believing that drug use, 
adolescence sex, non-heterosexuality, violence to get by, are fair-seeming as 
they know less about right and wrong but believe more. 
 
The strong black women syndrome also has a reverse effect on Nubian 
women as well (laws of opposites). Many women have completely rejected 
the trait to the extent that their value systems are not in-sink with their race. 
Liberalism then takes over. Many of these women are in the entertainment 
business and do well there because they are not in the true image of the 
Nubian women. We repeat the strong black women has been over played but 
these women are now under playing it. There needs to be a balance.  
 
A mistake that many people do is that they believe that if that Nubian isn’t so-
called strong (pro-this or pro-that) then they ain’t black –  but rather a sell-out. 
This is what we call commercial blackness –  it is positive for most –  but it is 
still a belief system. The real so-called blackness has to be tied to the


--- PAGE 71 ---
universal understanding of science and nature and their interacting with 
positive and negative forces within absolute nature. An example of this is the 
notion of hip-hop (a so-called black music). We say 90% of this genre of 
music is not in the interests of helping the mindset of Nubians in real terms.  
We say this because we base our understanding on the upliftment of Nubians 
in line with positive and negative forces. We don’t use the position of black 
people within liberal terms as a definition as to what is good and bad for our 
race. We use terms in line with nature. These extracts are not pro-black 
they are pro- nature. There would be nothing wrong with a Japanese women 
saying Japanese man + Japanese women = Japanese child as that is their 
nature of self-love. 
 
Acknowledging and utilising the strengths and weaknesses between women 
and men based on their inequalities becomes the route to equality for 
humans. Women understand that there are other reasons why there are 
inequalities between the sexes in favour of men. Feminism wants you to 
believe that men are all n all the reason –  the enemy. No women have 
external forces influencing their decision making and development.  
 
The Moon 
 
The moon has a grip on womankind that is influencing her development with 
regards to capitalism. The moon from puberty to menopause influences her 
period cycle and the discharge of blood.  This gives women a natural genetic 
time management structure that makes multitasking for her easier to achieve 
than a man. This and the biological bonding between parent and child will 
make women find raising a child generally easier than men. The moon 
influences the women’s mental and biological routines unlike the man. This is 
what gives men an advantage in commerce.  
 
The moon is one reason for the position of women and men merely exploit it.


--- PAGE 72 ---
The moon is currently 238,855 miles away from earth. If the moon was more 
than 347,000 miles away from earth women would be controlling the planet 
right now as this would alter the gravitational pull which gives women period 
cycles. They claim the moon is 4.5 billion years old.  
 
The moon was also known as Luna. This is where you get the science Luna 
astrology. This gave birth to the Zodiac, which has 12 sections 
(Constellations). Now know that your Forefathers the Nubian Egyptians 
created the Zodiac originally called Denderah or Dendera. Unlike the Zodiac 
of Luna Astrology the Denderah was divided into 36 constellations - three 
times more than Luna Astrology. There are 24 constellations missing in the 
Zodiac because those constellations are not aligned with the nature of the 
Greeks-Phoenician-Hindus. They are tied to the Nubian heritage. 
Nubians 
are missing at least 2/3 of our astrological history and sciences set up 
by our Tama-rean Egyptian forefathers. 
 
The nature of capitalism in essence is disagreeable to the development 
of nature. If men and women believe that the continual wealth gained 
from capitalistic enterprises is an achievement –  then they have aligned 
themselves with anti-nature forces and it’s by products in the form of 
materialism, greed and liberal belief systems that reject the laws of 
nature. As capitalism by nature can only lead to the destruction of 
nature in a quest to achieve something new. 
 
Nubian men do acknowledge internationally that the system is a set up 
against them. It is Nubian women who are slowly rejecting this notion due to 
the economic growth of black women in the west. Some Nubian women often 
get tricked by equality that makes them think the black man is too lazy. 
Though the un-Intelligent black man often plays this role for they do not see a 
universal commitment to their race. We say universal because for you to help 
yourself helps the whole race eventually. All Nubians must accept that in 
order to dismantle a race you must first dismantle the Nubian man + Nubian 
women = Nubian Child (formula of life). It is the strong black women 
syndrome that by nature will conflict with the male gender role of Nubian men 
–  therefore a relationship break down happens all too often. Caucasian 
women are generally socialised to be the opposite of the Nubian women. This 
attracts the Nubian male, as it is the opposite of the strong black women. All 
this is because of the dismantling of gender roles out-of-sink with nature –  
introduced by liberalism. Liberalism will only aid evolution the death of original 
existence.  
 
Nubian men and women together within each individual relationship 
should find out their strengths and weakness as a duo. The notion me 
and you against the world is an appropriate term.  
 
For many who have just read this extract –  they may have thought that 
the extract focused heavily on women and didn’t include problems 
about Nubian men. If so then the divide & conquer spell is still there for 
any problem that affects women is the intelligent man’s problem as well 
and visa versa. You are a universal team –  don’t let the isms divide us.


--- PAGE 73 ---
Extract 12 
 
TO BE OR NOT TO BE 
 
We always talk about nature in these extracts –  for human nature is linked to 
DNA. It is well known that children that eat fast food and too much red meat 
are more excited, noisy and disruptive than those on a vegetarian diet. As 
usual the system won’t tell you the importance of DNA because they want 
your DNA through the ID card / biometric system (especially the Nubian). The 
Nubian due to indigenous heritage of earth can by nature change eras. This is 
the new roman era we are in now EU/US. Era’s are controlled by natures 
which recently in the earth’s history say the last 6000 years has been tied to 
race. Though it wasn’t always like that. 
 
Many people do not understand what is going on with regards to natures. The 
Caucasian is literally in a war against nature itself. Darker races are a part of 
this as they are genetically closer to nature than the Caucasians –  Nubians 
are the closet to nature. Understand now only Caucasians wish to climb the 
highest mountains, wish to fly around the world non-stop in an air balloon, sail 
around the world non-stop in a raft. Be the first to do this, the first to do that. 
Haven’t you noticed how these events in real terms are not even important yet 
still manage to get to the main news? The reasoning is two-fold.  
 
(1) It is a subtle form of white supremacy –  they highlight the conquering of 
so-called boundaries given by nature. They highlight their race as the 
beings that did this –  thus becoming a force conquering nature –  a god 
amongst the races. It’s about re-adjusting their existence in history. They 
also do this through programmes like the greatest songs of all time, the 
greatest films etc. They create environments where the Caucasian opinion 
on reality is tied to the greatest this or the greatest that. ! 
(2) There is a deeper reason behind this as well. It is actually to become. 
Caucasian as a collective are not comfortable in their existence. This is 
why they continually challenge nature. Nubians are comfortable with 
nature that’s why you do don’t think to climb the highest mountains. 
Always think what is the purpose of these pointless stunts it can only be a 
message to nature that they can overcome it. They will forever wish to 
become something (evolution) while you are something. This is why 
they take other cultures fashions, foods, music etc. They need to become. 
There is a deep-rooted inferiority complex in Caucasians and they lash out 
against physical and environmental nature in the form of slavery, 
industrialisation, racism etc. Anything to create an imbalance between the 
races as they know genetically the sun (the life giver) has the least respect 
for them. To become something was a driving force influencing the 
industrial progression of the west. Since the demise of Egypt they decided 
that they must never lose the upper hand within the laws of opposites tied 
to economics.  Don’t be fooled Nubians they have absolutely no problem 
in lying about history, dates and genetics : 
 
Right (+) + Wrong (-) = half-truth = Belief Systems


--- PAGE 74 ---
(+) + (-) = - (Scientific Theory of Positives and Negatives) 
 
Its not about right or wrong to them it is merely about preserving their 
positioning amongst the races by any means necessary. Its like the 
white Jesus –  their societies don’t care if the real messiah was black. 
They don’t even care if the messiah was white either for them its about 
what’s in the best interest of their race it just so happens that in this 
time in history they will enforce a white Jesus amongst the masses. 
They are slowly leaving the white Jesus through liberalism in the 
direction of Krishna (Christ). The they
 are societies behind the new 
roman era this includes many sections of religion as well. We are all in a 
time where right and wrongs are completely warped. Any black face on 
the TV may have been a good thing in the 1980’s but now it’s 
questionable. We know you know the laws of opposites already for they 
have always been there namely life and death. It is about reacting 
correctly to these forces no matter what current belief systems claims is 
normal. We assure you they know about these laws of opposites and 
have perverted them through the ages –  making bad seem good. 
 
There is much information the average reader of this does not know. You 
think, we think it’s all about black this and white that. For if solids, liquids and 
gases are the same (influenced by frequencies) existing within absolute 
nature (everything around you). Then we are all equal in absolute terms. This 
is why we tell you that this information refers to a three-dimensional plane and 
that positive and negative are roles existing with absolute nature. Races 
become important in this day and time (6000 years) because nature/god 
through the Sun is highlighting these differences. It is the socialisation from 
the media and the education system that is blurring this reality from being 
recognised.   
 
Extract 16 
 
Reasoning Seasoning 
 
Please do not think that these extracts are here to enforce racism, hate 
between the sexes, hate amongst sexual preferences because they are not. 
For a Nubian to use this information in a quest against say a Caucasian for 
the sole purpose of –  I’m better than you syndrome can be considered 
negative. As a collective Nubians are not better than another race for it is 
nature /god that dictates who is truly better. We are all merely different. We 
are giving you the knowledge of self that reminds you of your role in nature 
and your relationship with nature/god. It just so happens that in this reality, in 
this time in history on earth genetics are in our favour. This is why absolute 
equality can be defined as: 
 
The collective existence of all differences amongst human species 
reaching their full potential based on those differences –  Absolute 
Equality.


--- PAGE 75 ---
We say this time in history because if the humankind partook in deep space 
travel in the future to another planet the terms and conditions of the laws of 
opposites differ.  Please understand its not about racism or hate etc this is 
beyond those isms. We acknowledge that even as you read this information 
many people will never accept it. For they were not suppose to as a positive 
and negative reaction to anything is the law of opposites. Can you see this is 
not normal black talk it is touching on the foundations of reality be it positive 
and negative. We stress that you know most of this information already as it is 
really common sense tied to scientific facts and research. There is a war 
going on right now between life forces (+) and death forces (-) in all existence. 
All we are showing the reader are the many different facets of this war.  
 
From the spiritual level to the physical level down to the social level. All 
humans have good and bad in them but it is the direction of universal laws in 
nature and the laws of opposites, which give you that universal direction. 
Many of these universal laws will conflict with what is considered right and 
wrong in this society –  because this reality is not real. It is man made by 
governments, secret societies, liberalism, mistranslation in religions etc which 
have re-constructed society to suit their own agendas in their moment in time 
in history. Note that we are only referring to the three dimensional plane and 
also note that certain religions once purified are tied to universal laws 
therefore the truth. 
 
MOVEMENT RATIONAL OF THOUGHT


--- PAGE 76 ---
The time axis above represents thousands of years of manipulation in belief 
systems –  which in essence within humans on the 3rd dimensional plane lead 
back to desires out-of-sink with universal laws. The movement of thought 
starts above the factual truth as the will of humans challenges rationale. The 
alternative reality represents the ultimate goal of secret societies and their 
higher entities on higher planes. They’ve used religion now they are using the 
isms to warp the masses into rejecting nature’s structure. Nature is 
everywhere therefore it is free –  you are suppose to be free –  yet in the west 
they are willingly giving up their human-rights to assist the new world order. 
Equality is one facet of freedom not the all. To become free means you are 
allowed to reach your full potential based on your differences (absolute 
equality). Equality cuts off the top end of freedom (those who have the ability 
to do even greater things based on their differences). They believe (belief) the 
giving up of human rights to tackle terrorism or street crime etc is in their best 
interest when really it is just a game to preserve anti-nature forces on earth 
permanently. For the biometric system is only concerned with getting your 
DNA the physical representation of your soul on the third dimensional plane. 
They are very keen to get the Nubian DNA and alter it –  cutting off your 
genetic heritage. They must regress you through racial mixing, drugs, and the 
overall destruction of the Nubian man + Nubian women = Nubian child 
(Aids/Non-hetro practices). They know the universal rise in global temperature 
will loosen the solids into more liquids. This universal rise in heat activities 
etheric gases which exist within the other section of the properties of air. 
 
 
This aligned with good health and good access to water H2O hydrogen &
 
oxygen will allow the brain to expand and activate additional parts of the brain 
(that have genetically remained dormant). This will bring new global 
awareness thus leading to an end of an era. They’re new Roman Empire era 
(EU/US). We know you may have never heard of this info before –  but what 
you must realise is that everything has a purpose. Your appendix and tonsils 
have a purpose related to this –  they will never tell you this information. Many


--- PAGE 77 ---
Africans and Caribbean’s already have access to this higher brain activity but 
sadly they use it to do disagreeable things because they attach these 
activities to the moon (-) not the sun (+). Now imagine a whole race utilising 
this higher brain activity which was perfected by the original Nubian Egyptians 
before it got diluted in to pagan rituals after the demise of the black Egyptian 
civilisations. Say that Nubian race had actual schools in Egypt teaching this 
brain activity tied to natural sciences often mistaken as black magic by the 
unintelligent. Say other races saw this level of science as a threat. Say the 
other races destabilised these higher sciences by re-arranging religious 
scriptures directing the focus of the Nubian away from themselves towards 
another race. Say another particular race many years prior also mixed in with 
these descendants from Egypt and re-arranged the focus of these sciences in 
the direction of their own nature. This warped the usage of these sciences 
aligning these sciences to the moon (death forces) not the sun (life forces) –  
thus controlling the nature of many people who know these sciences to use 
the science specifically to harm their own kind especially those spiritually 
representing life forces. Say sadly those representing life forces lived and died 
never aware of these sciences they have because all there lives they where 
lost in other belief systems. Imagine that! 
 
 
 
 
 
Extract 23 
 
The Liberal Spell –  Part One 
 
To a liberal anything that is not in line with equality, all sexuality as equal, 
freedom to do what you like within governed law is disagreeable. We often 
state that the law of opposites is beyond racism and that racism is a belief 
system. Racism in not absolute there are villages in China, the Amazon, 
Central Africa and Russia where the natives never see people of other races 
–  how can racism exist there! –  Racism is not universal.  Does life (+) and 
death (-) (laws of opposites) exist there?  You will have to say yes if your 
serious for the laws of opposites are universal. Now if these laws are 
universal then they must exist within every human facet of reality including 
evolution and genetics. For everything in existence be it solids, liquids and 
gases have protons (+) and neutrons (-) in it. Now the Sun gives life to this 
solar system which earth is a part of. Any human that has a disagreeable 
reaction to the sun in descending order is an opposing force to the sun. For 
the sun is the life giver to earth –  a central part of nature in this solar system. 
Therefore by nature amongst the facet of reality called human species the 
human species who react to the sun (the life giver) the worse represent the 
negative force amongst humans. They are being rejected by the sun before 
the other races.


--- PAGE 78 ---
Nubians can never reach their full potential as a collective without an 
understanding of universal laws tied to nature as everything in existence is a 
part of absolute nature. Religion has many aspects tied to universal nature –  it 
has simply been the misuse of information (mis-translations) that has blinded 
many people. Meanwhile liberalism has disguised itself within human rights 
blinding those outside of religion as well. 
 
People have to understand the game called liberalism. In the 1970’s 
universities where bombarded with literature supporting these ideologies. It 
gave the so-called intellects –  those graduates who now are the decision-
makers of society today their own belief systems to run with as the 1960’s 
gave birth to new desires. Since these people where the first to live life based 
on these new ideals –  it became their baby. They run the media in the west 
right now so they let their baby shine! They don’t understand that liberalism 
serves capitalism that’s why the societies let it manifest. Negative forces are 
allowed to run rampant within liberalism –  but because liberalism says –  its all 
good –  do what you want ! –  They don’t realise that this also applied to MNC’s 
(Multi-national companies) who now have more rights than human beings. 
Globalisation is the machines version of Liberalism.  It conceptually arised at 
the same period and first sprouted out economical equality just like liberalism 
does socially. They wished for Businesses to be free to expand into new 
markets! What has globalisation (which is really international capitalism) done 
for the Nubians of the African continent? Liberalism is the counter-part to 
globalisation in social terms.  
 
· Globalisation teaches to reach out to new markets  
The liberal version is new races and cultures  
 
· Globalisation promotes fair trade  
The liberal version is equality.   
 
· The outcome of Globalisation for Nubians in Africa has been a rise in third 
world debt and Civil wars. 
The outcome of Liberalism for Nubians has been drug use, sexual 
perversion and a rejection of their Nubian heritage for Caucasian 
ideologies. 
 
Globalisation was really triggered off by the west realising in the 1950’s 
that they are running out of resources so they have to have economical 
ties with countries that posses those resources. The correlation is there 
do your research.  
 
We really want our brothers and sisters in the west especially Black 
America to really start understanding universal law for it was all our 
forefathers the Nubian Egyptians that perfected it. We see the native 
African due to suppression reject their own ways and we see Nubians of 
the west doing the same thing. We see women in South Africa actually 
go in to prostitution to raise money to buy products to lighten their skin 
and straighten their hair. They catch STD’s while they do this. We see 
children in Togo actually praying in church wishing they where actually


--- PAGE 79 ---
white. How do we counter-attack this negativity in Africa (Tama-re). It 
has to start with Nubians in the west especially Nubian Americans as 
the west socially follows Americanism. The black liberals of the west 
must seriously sit down and understand that science and religion 
(studied in its original languages) are continually revealing that there is 
a genetic imbalance amongst the races. Now equality can work in 
universal terms tied to economics –  but within facets of reality –  
sexuality, race & genetic preservation there are clear differences in 
nature. Please realise the understanding of time itself has been shrunk. 
Liberals base their understanding of right and wrong on laws 200 years 
old. The laws of nature precede all laws and isms for nature/god could 
have created all humans with the same complextion –  instead we have 
different races who must be allowed to reach their full potential based 
on their differences. The Nubians full potential can only be achieved 
with the genetic preservation of the race thus preserving our original 
existence. Genetic preservation is a human-right for all races. The 
rejection of original existence can only have an adverse effect on the 
race that rejects their original existence for nature provided you with a 
genetic purpose which manifested into who you are at present. We feel 
sadness in those Nubians who reject this information but we do realise 
that via nature there will be 33% in favour, 33% undecided and 33% 
against. We wish to reach those undecided as in global terms it is these 
33% within the Nubian race (often black liberals) who are the deciding 
factor as to the development of the whole Nubian race. There is still 
much information that needs to come out. Stay tuned! 
 
 
Extract 72 
 
Random Points in Nature –  Part One 
 
1. Every individual has a specific role within reality –  It is society 
guided by positive and negative forces at a moment in time that 
dictates which role is more important. The point of view at that 
moment in time will always be a belief system if universal laws are 
rejected. 
 
2. The Dot, the Line and the Circle must have existed within reality 
before the existence of the atom. For the atom has substance within 
it sealed by the completion of the circle. Since the first dot, line and 
circle can not be identified as a solid, liquid or gas it must be 
recognised that there is an existence of additional dimensional 
planes.  
 
3. A force must have exerted the movement of elements leading to a 
collision of elements leading to the big-bang based on the universal 
laws of cause and effect. This force must have been created by a 
higher non-human existence.


--- PAGE 80 ---
4. Positive and negative forces must exist within all facets of reality 
leading to a balance within absolute nature - which is infinite. 
 
5. The collective existence of all differences reaching their full potential 
based on those differences equals absolute equality. 
 
6. The opposite of nothingness is everything therefore they are equal.  
 
7. The creation of nothingness had to take place before something 
could exist. It is an assumption that nothing is darkness as gases 
still exist in darkness. The original nothingness must have no gases, 
no solids and no liquids present becoming absolute nothingness. 
 
8. The death of any individual is just as important as the death of any 
other within the three dimensional plane. It is the emotional 
attachment of the humans that dictates its importance within their 
own mind. This emotional attachment is influenced by positive and 
negative forces. 
 
9. There will always be higher forces governing human species as a 
collective. Something (humans) can never be a greater force than the 
elements of nature as humans evolved from nature or the most high. 
 
10. Scientifically the most powerful force in reality within a three-
dimensional existence can only be gases interacting with each other 
in harmony. Solid, liquid and gases are the same existence in 
different frequencies. It is the Gases State that maintains all 
universes. 99.99999999 etc % of all existence is in a gaseous state. 
Hydrogen is an elemental substance that exists in all forms of 
existence. 
 
11. Any direct or indirect action, thought process or ideology that is 
detrimental to the existence of the man + women = child triad (the 
foundation of human existence) is an opposing negative force within 
absolute natures governing of human species. As the destruction of 
this triad represents the destruction of human existence. This triad 
represents the continual existence of human species therefore is a 
life force (positive). Opposing negative forces exist within sexuality 
and any actions, which create solids, liquids and gases that are 
detrimental to the human species biological system. 
 
12. The change of any physical trait on a human that is biologically 
functioning properly according to your genetic profile in nature is the 
physical regression of that individual as negative opposing forces 
that exist in reality at that moment in time only influenced it.


--- PAGE 81 ---
13. The forces that directly or indirectly assist existence within absolute 
nature represent the nature of nature. These are positive agreeable 
forces in the form of solids, liquids and gas as existing is life. The 
forces or actions that directly or indirectly assist the process of 
death are anti-nature forces. 
 
14. Absolute nature can be defined as all positive and negative forces 
existing within all space, time and matter. Anything that exists is a 
part of absolute nature. 
 
 
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE FORCES EXISTING WITHIN INFINITY 
 
15. The acknowledgement of cause and effect within all science 
suggests that even universal laws have to be governed. Therefore it 
must be acknowledged that there are higher forces that must exist in 
or outside a three-dimensional plane as a force that pushes 
elemental chart substances within gases together must have an 
original source that exerted that force. This is prior to the big bang. 
 
16.  Universally darkness exists before light can occur. If universally life 
(+) exists before death (-) then universally darkness must have 
positive forces within it as life is continually created within its 
presence. A seed is planted underground it sprouts out in darkness. 
The actual conception of a child takes place inside the women in 
darkness. The god of the bible created all life in darkness. The 
universal big-bang first occurred in darkness, the universe is 
darkness. Your brain and heart function in darkness, you existed for 
9 months in darkness. The presence of darkness precedes all new 
life. How can darkness be disagreeable? 
 
17. A facet of reality can be considered any genre in nature. Examples 
include; race, sexuality, genetics, gender, governing laws, ideologies 
etc. They influence how humans exist within nature.


--- PAGE 82 ---
18. On earth the opposite of woolly hair is straight hair. An opposing 
force must exist within nature (+ and -). A negative effect will occur 
as a collective to those who reject their original positioning by nature 
for an imbalance then becomes present within nature itself. This 
imbalance can affect other facets of reality. The curl of the woolly 
hair in to the circle represents the universal link between original 
human existence and absolute nature –  for every facet of reality 
through the atom is based on circles. 
 
19. Evolution is the death of original existence. Since original existence 
birthed life for evolutionary forces to exist. The preservation of 
original existence on a genetic level must be preserved as guidance 
to the original intentions of nature. Revolution is the reversing of 
evolutionary force –  therefore they are opposing ideologies. Original 
existence is tied to revolutionary forces. 
 
20. Your DNA / RNA represent the scientific YOU. For any third party to 
obtain this means they partly have control over you entire existence. 
Your existence proceeds your own life time. It includes further 
generations tied to your bloodline.  
 
21. Only the highest supreme force in all existence, space, time and 
matter within all dimensions was the first to ever exist or create. 
 
22.  Existence is a gift. 
 
23. Life must always exist before death, as life is needed before death 
can occur. Death represents the negative secondary forces within 
existence and life represents the positive primary forces within 
existence. Life is a greater force than death, as life doesn’t need 
death to exist. Death needs life to exist prior to the event. Life can’t 
destroy death, as that will reduce life to the equivalent of death a 
negative force. Therefore life and death will always exist. 
 
24. Positive and negative forces will always exist within every facet of 
reality. Era’s will socialise these forces in line with their ideology at 
that moment in time. The rejection of universal laws will lead to an 
end of an era.


--- PAGE 83 ---
ADDITIONAL NOTES  
 
How Do These Extracts Work? 
 
We have at present around 2,742 pages of Nubian literature on many 
subjects. We then run the dictionary software through the documents to 
looking out for key words e.g. Egypt. The software them finds say about 
164 pages on the Egyptian subject. These pages are then sent to writers 
who will abbreviate it. Then the abbreviations are sent to a few writers 
who centralise the diction and grammar. Then put it out. You are reading 
a global black voice through these extracts whose goal is merely to 
uplift our race with information necessary for them to change the 
outcome of our race. We stress that the writers quoted in the beginning 
of these extracts are the bases of many of the extracts you are reading 
to further develop we strongly recommend you search them out.  With 
these extracts and others of this nature spread the word, e-mail it out to 
friends, put it on websites or forums for downloading because the 
Nubian consciousness needs to be updated. Give Nubians a chance to 
read something new and uplifting about themselves for Nubian 
consciousness is never limited.


--- PAGE 84 ---



--- PAGE 85 ---
Dear Reader,
Nubian consciousness can not be limited by the commercialised views within
an alternative reality. That is a reality based on opinions, agendas and belief.
For the most words can do is stimulate understanding. There are times when
the norms of information have to be challenged in o rder for an individual to
develop. You a re about to embrace information that is based on
consciousness found in Nubian literature that represent a much h igher
understanding than you may have read before. Nothing you are about to read
is new in essence it is whether you have had access to this information before
which dictates that. These extracts are based on historical, psychological and
astrological research. They have been inspired by previous great writings by
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed,
Clarence Jowars Smith, The Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO), Credo
Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop, The Nuwapians, Holy Tabernacle Ministries
and The Journey Home Group to name a few. This PDF is youth orientated,
as it is an attempt to link deeper Nubian consciousness with the commercial
realities of today. Brace your self this is not normal black talk for many of the
norms of society are based on untruths and a rejection of facts. Regard this
information a s yours to keep. You can u se this information in any way you
want as long as it is beneficial to the Nubian race –  This PDF file is FREE
and should always be FREE. You can put this on your own website or forums
to be freely downloaded. You can email this information to anyone that can
benefit from it. We a re very keen to h ave people from the c ontinent of
Africa be introduced to this level of information as we know much of this
type of literature is hard to find out there. Many people may be offended
by the information you are about to read we are sorry but if you truly respect
nature and science you will understand
The language a nd d iction of t hese e xtracts have been watered / simplified
down to allow those just get to grips with the basic mind revolution concepts
that apply to Nubians in the world today. A scientific methodology will be used
as this will minimise room for man-made be lief systems to emerge thus
keeping the message u ndiluted without bias. These e xtracts were then
rewritten, arranged and converted to PDF. These extracts are not the all but
rather a hint to even greater information.  It is highly recommend you read
previous extracts (Vol.1 & 2) before venturing into this edition.
Extracts included on this PDF are 3, 7, 20, 25, 26, 61 and 5 other extracts will
follow once the information has been abbreviated and centralised. There may
be grammar and literacy errors – we apologise in advance. No Endnotes or
Index included. (1- 33 pages).
The great writers above are your guidelines to a better understanding on
Nubian consciousness. Seek them out while you still have time!


--- PAGE 86 ---
Extract 3
The Science of Truth
Something has happened to the truth over the ages its value has been diluted
through belief systems and different agendas in history. In this day and time
this is no exception. Many Nubians have an understanding of the truth but do
not realise that a real truth will be out-of-sink with this alternative reality. The
gap be tween the real truth an d this alternative reality allows the isms to
manifest – liberalism is one b y-product. Nubians must realise that t he
Caucasian establishments have absolutely no respect for the absolute truth.
This is because e volutionary forces have po sitioned them with e conomic
control over the world. This has instilled a  belief system that man is above
nature and is absolute god. For that is why isms can manifest. They follow the
understanding of truth tied to evolution – in other words the truth becomes a
stepping stone to further development (evolution). This refers to their
development as a race and their nature. They will not accept anything be it
a truth or a lie that disables their positioning on earth. The truth actually
means nothing to them. They realised to maintain control they have to exist
outside reality (the truth) for the truth would by the laws of opposites put them
at a disadvantage amongst the races within ab solute nature. They perceive
this disadvantage a s an inferior position when it is merely different.  The
Caucasian masses don’t realise they have been bombarded b y anti-nature
forces (-) persuading them to take on the negative role amongst the races. As
a collective they excepted this role when the religious scriptures and history
where re-arranged e .g. White Jesus as from then on they would ha ve to
continually conceal the truth (lie) thus always possessing an anti-nature force
within their establishments. This anti-nature force then trickles down a nd
brainwashes the general Caucasian masses. Many Caucasians still to this
day don’t know they are actually being brainwashed by their own system to be
come racist, a liberal, a Marxist – the isms. They get sucked in through the
half-truths of the isms for there is some truth in all of them


--- PAGE 87 ---
It is once they align their understanding with ne gative forces, which lean
towards evolution and the rejection o f (1) biological (physical body and
genetics), (2) Heterosexuality and (3) environmental originality (all nature); it
then becomes a belief system. This is because human existence is dependent
on these facets continually being preserved. Many of the secret societies and
the h ierarchy of education a nd class s ystems lean towards a be lief system
that makes man the absolute god. Therefore being the sole controller of
reality the truth becomes what they want it to be. Since they see their race in
charge globally only their view can really be the truth. This ideology is
continually pushed subconsciously through the media, religion, entertainment,
politics and h istory throughout the whole world. It is also h idden gently
throughout the English language.  Nubians must not waste their time trying to
convince the Caucasian of anything ± it is pointless their nature is guided by
their own belief. Their use of science will only aid an a genda inline with their
nature and if it helps their biological system then other races may be included.
Nubians are becoming lost within the fabrics of the Caucasian nature and its
creating all kinds of problems for our race. For every Nubians thought process
being directed to Caucasians through b lack s uppression o r even p ro-
blackness drains mental energy away from our r ace a s a collective. This
energy should be channelled inward towards our own race. It s not about
showing to o ther r aces that Jesus (Yahusa /issa/ Horus) is a Nubian it is
about making sure our children as early as possible know our truth. It is our
truth because we are of original existence. In fact to be absolute with this do
you know that only the p ygmies in Africa can truly define what is beautiful?
For they existed o n earth first so their definition on an ything is the original
definition of anything therefore is precedent! Let Caucasians live their lives on
their terms and let us live our life on real terms ± absolute equality. Everyone
has the right to reach their full potential which can only be archived when you
live b y y our own na ture. If liberalism m ade sense then the Orientals would
have be en liberal's 3,000 years ago, the Incas would ha ve become liberals
4,000 years ago. Do you think that t he white middle class writers behind
liberalism in the US/EU which in reality is about 700 books and a bout 200
speakers (since the 1960's) posses an understanding on human nature better
than every other race and civilisation o ver the last 12 million years! Let the
even balance of economic distribution amongst races (in their true nature) be
the example of equality (not racial-mixing and sexual perversion).  Though the
world has not seen Nubians in their true image as a collective for thousands
of years. O ur true image is our r ace a t its peak. For people of mixed race
reading this don't think we are negatively representing you for your existence
is as important as everyone e lse it is just t hat original existence must be
acknowledged a s part of the o riginal i ntentions of nature. This is the o nly
reality that the Caucasian through the EU/US era would be able to prosper in
because a reality based on facts would lead to their disadvantage. Therefore
just for survivals s ake a lone they will have to p reserve this reality by any
means necessary and if that means lying about history so be it. If that means
lying within religion so be it. If that means brainwashing their own race to
become racist against others so be it. If that means mixing in with other races
to inherit blood that will protect them from the sun in the future (like they did in
US slavery and now through liberalism) then so be it. If that means sending
missiles into outer space to try and destroy a so-called meteorite then so be it.


--- PAGE 88 ---
Please understand the Caucasians do not respect the truth in anyway or form.
In fact t hey can’t accept the truth –  for that would conflict with their nature.
You see if you d on’t respect universal l aws and o penly teach and p romote
ideologies out-of-sink with b iological nature then theoretically how can you
respect the truth. For the truth = fact = reality. Reality is governed by
nature. To d isrespect nature means you don ’t acknowledge reality in
absolute terms – the truth is reality so you will not respect it. The truth
will be used only if it is in the interests of the Caucasian. It means nothing to
them to change dates, religious interpretations and genetics to achieve a goal.
You can show any establishment in the west out-right facts and they will
completely ignore it if it is not beneficial to their r ace. The Caucasian a re
loosening their ties with religion - watering it down because technology will be
their new controlling tool. They don’t need religion when they have liberalism.
This is why we are living in an alternative reality controlled by isms. The truth
is regressing to a nature of belief. They customise the truth through so-called
new information o r so-called new discoveries. Their liberal religion starts in
the west but really goes back to the east. Those who claim to be atheists are
really following the Greek word called Atheos (from privative a- + theos "god")
meaning "without G od, godforsaken, abandoned b y the gods". It  implies a
higher force still exists but the individual has been rejected b y that f orce. It
was these Greeks who h ad many cultural rituals within their hierarchies
aligned with sexual perversion and lust (out side religion) thus giving the word
Atheos purpose. Haven’t you noticed all belief systems outside religion a re
always tied to the freedom of sex? It is because sex can create or destroy life.
Non-religious belief systems will always align themselves with the latter
because the scriptures of religion where tied to universal laws. Everyone via
nature follows s omething – many may think they are no t religious but by
nature something they do will be tied to a religion or pagan ritual somewhere
on earth. This is why we a re stressing liberalism is tied to many religious
practices and pagan rituals (some demonic) forgotten by the masses through
eras but remembered by those with agendas - your secret societies. They are
merely letting you believe its freedom and outside a religion.
Extract 7
Love, Lust & Money
Love should not be measured by money. This may sound old fashioned but
old fashioned is revolution. You may now realise that Lust has become the
driving force of society. I n fact you know this already we see p rogrammes
always saying sex sells everything. Know that money itself – which is tied to
moon-ney (moon) is the basis of bu-sin-ess. The sin in business is an ancient
force tied to spiritual death represented by the moon. You well know the lack
of money can destroy marriages and relationships. Nubians must accept it as
a negative force in their lives to be able to have control over it. This means
use it and achieve as much as you can within the positive side of nature – b ut
you must acknowledge it as the beast’s tool to control you. For when you read
the dollar bills or coins with messages like ‘in god we trust’ it is a trick to align
money with god in your minds thus making anything to obtain money seem


--- PAGE 89 ---
more fair-seeming ± in the eyes of God. Materialism especially in women is
the by product of money and lust for the materialist women know that many
men that satisfy her needs will eventually want sex in return. Money has
already intervened in that relationship - it can only speed up the demise of a
relationship that was not meant to be. Be careful for there are disagreeable
ancient spiritual forces around money ± you must realise this for you know all
too well that people will do any type of sin to gain it. A sin can only occur if
negative forces are the influencing factor. There are millions of people in the
world who have lots of money in the bank who do not even use it.  Millions of
people sadly die-leaving millions untouched with no  beneficiaries. Many of
these people where lost in the spell of money. It was a driving force in their
lives but once they achieved wealth it completely lost its value. This is
because anti-nature forces are more concerned with what actions you actually
took to obtain the money not the money itself. The Sin force enters many
people minds and makes them commit an act, which was really disagreeable
but in an alternative reality seemed fair seeming. Sin (bu-sin-ness) gives them
money but leaves them spiritually empty in their latter years or after the event.
This is why many people get more of a thrill actually making the money than
using it. Don't let the negative forces of money dictate you in to disagreeable
actions detrimental to the Nubian race. These politicians and entertainers
don't know that money and lust are tools that have been used to destroy
human na ture for thousands of years. I t is a p sychological drug that gives
humans a high called power. Similar to belief systems it can destroy rational
thought leading to negativity ± anti-nature forces tied to the reptilian brain.
It must be known to Nubians that the actual understanding of Love has been
warped b y the Caucasian in particular the Romans. Culturally all races are
defining their expressions of love ba sed on the Roman, Greek, Phoenician
and Hindu lineage. Nubians reading this please understand all we can do is
give you the information it is up to you what you want to do with it. People
realise that it is liberalism that is now the controller of Love a s that now
defines how it is expressed. Romantics (romance) stem from the Romans
(Roman-antics). The roses on Valentines day, serenading, even French
kissing are not traditional expressions of Love for Nubians. Go to the villages
throughout Africa and see if this is the norm. You will not see it. The
expression of Love is now tied to money and lust. We must stress to Nubians
that lust must be controlled especially when conceiving a child.
This is one reason why the conception of a child must be planned with
the intentions of t he parents to create a child that will i mprove their
lineage. This will eventually improve our race as a whole. The intentions
of intercourse to create a c hild should b e k nown by man and women
prior to the event thus making the Child be conceived out of Love. The
initial purpose of existence is then p resent t hus a ligning the mental
plane and the physical plane in harmony. For once the mind is focused
on conceiving a c hild the brain will assist t he project much more
effectively. Then the man will provide the best sperm for its offspring.
This a ided with the parents cleaning up their biological system
(especially the man) prior to conception will greatly improve the child’s
overall traits throughout t heir whole lives.  Now a c hild whose birth


--- PAGE 90 ---
(conception) is unplanned was born ou t of lust regardless of t he
relationship of the parents because the intentions at conception was not
to create a child at that specific moment in time (the actual climax this is
referring to). It was the parents wish to either satisfy themselves or each
other - that was the purpose of that sexual act the child thus becomes a
by product of the actual event created by lust. A child of an unplanned
pregnancy after conception may face weeks with the mother not dieting
to aid the child’s development – worse the mother unaware may indulge
in intoxicants detrimental to the child throughout their entire life.
The reptilian section of the b rain p lays a key role in lust. The planning o f
conception is so important. They have not told you how important it is ± the
sex that purposely creates a child is a sacred act (+) (love). It is not the same
as sex for pleasure (lust) (-). For a man and women who are unified their sex
would no t have ne ither positive (+) or negative (±) consequences because
their sexual activities would be planned anyway. There are laws of opposites
in every facet of human nature please don't forget that.
Extract 20
We Were Never Alone
As mentioned many times on previous extracts belief allows anti-nature forces
to control i nformation. A worse scenario is when the individual gives these
anti-nature forces trust. Many people give the media, education system and
TV trust. Once these forces gain trust they now have a p sychological control
over you. The alternative reality now can manipulate you. An example is the
leap year (extra day) which proves this time is not concise ± though has man
as a collective challenged this time structure? We are u sing this as an
example because this extract focuses on a subject generally rejected by the
masses of all races. In this extract we wish for you to put logical trust in nature
in line with The WE (the collective) and not The I (me, myself and I). It is the
latter within human nature that prevents humans from developing universally.
To control the masses you must narrow their thought process, which in
essence na rrows their immediate understanding o f reality. Then through a
system you give them hints of new information or discoveries controlling the
momentum of consciousness within h uman de velopment.  We ask you to
logically trust nature for it's all around you in solid, liquids and gases - it aids
all existence positive and negative. Now molecules and atoms are universal
we have stated that hydrogen is a fundamental part of all existence. Now if
hydrogen an d helium are the core components of t he Sun a lso known a s
Apsu in ancient scriptures. Then all stars must have elements of hydrogen in
them. If all stars have template components within them then that means they
will have a similar nature. If these stars have a similar nature then they will
eventually create solar systems. There are over 30 billion stars within the
Milky Way alone. These stars by nature will become solar systems as
hydrogen and helium have lead to the creation of this solar system and these
two elements are universal. Therefore the template of this solar system alone
will tell you that there is so-called e xtra-terrestrial existences out there. For


--- PAGE 91 ---
any solid, liquid a nd gas foreign to this planet earth is an extra-terra-astral.
With terra meaning earth and astral meaning space. The laws of opposites
alone would tell you that there would be an imbalance in absolute nature if the
existence of at least 30 billion stars could not create additional life. Those who
are religious must also recognise that religious sc riptures constantly have
extraterrestrial information within them but due to mistranslation and agendas
have not been bestowed by the mainstream teachings of religion.
Nubians world-wide must start t o understand the importance of t he woolly
hair. As mentioned on other extracts the circle, which is tied the circle curl in
the woolly hair, represents a link with all universal existence that is the circle.
This includes all atoms, all gases, all stars and planets (all circles). You are
tied to original existence. Now know that when we say original existence we
do not just refer to this planet NO! We are referring to absolute nature itself.
This precedes the existence of life on earth. We are stating that the existence
of hydrogen and helium as universal substances which create solar systems,
which in turn create planets, which in turn created humans suggests that the
Nubian h umanoid template must exist in o ther star constellations.
Furthermore the creation period of other star constellations may have
occurred almost infinite years prior to ours. As a species The I (me, myself
and I) makes us believe we are the central part of all existence.  It is The WE
(the collective e xistence) that will allow you to understand that everything
including our human species has a specific role in reality within the three
dimensional plane. The role in essence will either be positive (agreeable) or
negative (disagreeable) in line with un iversal l aws and we really do mean
universal laws. There a re tons of books suggesting a relationships between
the Tama-rean Egyptians (Nubians) and extra-terrestrials in particular beings
from the Orion star constellation referred to as The Neteru. You must know
that the word Orion stems from the Greek word Ouranos that actually means
heaven in the Greek bible ± do your research. The original Greek translators
of the b ible a ligned the Orion constellation with Heaven. This s ame
constellation in earlier eras tied in with the Tama-rean Egyptian civilisation.
Our Tama-rean Egyptian forefathers where op enly in communication, living
and mixing in with extraterrestrial life.


--- PAGE 92 ---
This geographical precision is no coincidence. It symbolises the relationship
between beings from the Orion constellation and the indigenous Egyptians at
that t ime the Tar-Deneg. The Egyptians shown through h istory and TV are
much later civilisations whose ties with the stars weakened through the
dynasties becoming a belief and then eventually mythology after the alteration
of belief systems by the Greeks and the Phoenicians. This evolution took
several thousand years and is still continuing right now through the rejection
of positive (life forces) ( +) to take on death forces (-). The death forces
represent anything against the preservation of original existence of all races
within all facets of reality. This includes cultures and the physical being.
The 46 Egyptian dynasties represent the 46 chromosomes in humans. It is the
tar denegs (pygmies of Africa) in the cream period in Egyptian Tama-re
history that interacted with beings from other star constellations. Most of this
was prior to homo-sapiens as we know ourselves today. It must be stated now
that the Egyptian civilisation was really Egypt, Sudan a nd Uganda it moved
along the river Nile. Egypt today was actually Lower Egypt. Upper Egypt was
Uganda and Sudan. The maps of the world today are bias to Europe don't be
fooled.
You must know that pyramids through tetrahedron science po sses
gravitational properties. These p roperties tied to magnetism influence a ll
humans. Pyramids have been strategically plotted throughout the world as a
gravitational counter-balance reaction to ad d stability to this near oblong
planet earth. Earth (Tiamat) is not universally 360 degrees round in shape due
to meteorites showers and explosions in previous eras. The global positions
of most pyramids have been influenced by extra-terrestrials in communication
with humans to help even the weight of the planet. You play a role in this even
today with a d isproportion of humans leaning more weight to their right side
(right-handed). Haven't you e ver wondered why more p eople are right-
handed? Ask the liberals if this is equality in motion or is it differentiation
(everything happens for a reason ± cause and  effect). Please realise these
are the gravitational l aws of opposites which a re universal. Counter-acting
forces are needed to create balance ± you are a part of nature remember. For
if the earth was fully balanced - humans would generally be ambidextrist.
It is well documented that the Kings and Queen's chambers within the Giza
pyramid are mathematically aligned with the Orion and Sirius Constellations.
They both have shafts from within the actual chambers, which directly point to
these constellations.
Referring to the Pyramid diagram on the next page!
The p yramids shafts (red lines) to the left are d irectly in line with the Orion
constellation while the shafts to the right are aimed a t Ursa Minor star
constellations via Draco (a Draconian reptilian star system). Both shafts are
linked to the king and queen chambers. Some d ynasty pharaohs and kings
were bu ried within the Giza Pyramid. Different shafts were a ligned with
different constellations representing the different extra-terrestrials that
influenced the Egyptian cultures.


--- PAGE 93 ---
The Shafts of the Giza Pyramid
(1) Orion Constellation
(2) Sirius (A and B)
(3) Thuban
(4) Ursa Minor Constellation (Via Draco)
Beings from Orion and Sirius called the Neteru also known as the Anunnaqi to
the Sumerians in earlier eras of Egypt t aught t he tar-denegs vibrational
techniques allowing them to manipulate their own b odies into lighter
frequencies associated with a gaseous state. They had the ability to separate
what is k nown today as your spirit from the bod y. I t was then the spirit at
death that would travel through the shaft directly to Orion or Sirius. For many
it was a lifetime o f training within Egyptian schools understanding sciences
and sacred practices within secret orders that allowed them to reach this level
of enlightenment. This was before the most of the dynasties.
Ancient Egypt went through evolution as well. Many of the sacred orders went
underground through the development of the dynasties and the conflicts with
the Hyksos dynasties. The Greeks also sabotaged the Egyptian sciences
using spies and strategic tactics dismantling the education system and
economic stability. Alexandra the Great is a historical figure involved in these
agendas. The Neteru in physical form thousands of years prior had left earth
via a Manjet (boat) craft back to the Orion constellation leaving knowledge
and events with humans. Some of these events were put into scriptures and
on Egyptian walls that today have be en watered do wn a nd simulated into
religion b y all cultures. You must understand that space crafts where
acknowledged by the Tama-reans.


--- PAGE 94 ---
Abysos in Egypt
In Abysos (Egypt) near a small town called El-Balyana, some 45-km north of
Luxor on the West Bank of t he Nile the temple of Abydos is located. This
temple was originally build by Seti I and finished by his son, Ramses II. It was
once a  c ult centre of Osiris. As s tated the h igher gods were from a much
earlier era of t he tama-rean Egyptian h istory. This temple is around 3 ,000
years old.
Hieroglyphics within this temple clearly show a landing bay with
unquestionable crafts.  Several craft designs from today are p resent - all
present on one Egyptian tablet on a wall. Throughout history within all cultures
there ha ve b een do cumented writings and illustrations of space crafts
including the Incas, the Aztecs, t he American Indians and many oriental
civilisations that have not been introduced to the west yet. It is nothing new
and Egypt through cuneiform is no exception.
(See lightened section in next picture inside Aybsos Temple)


--- PAGE 95 ---
Even closer!


--- PAGE 96 ---
Furthermore this object (below) was found in 1898 in a tomb at Saqquara,
Egypt. It is c arbon dated as being created n ear 200 BC (2000 years ago).
Aeroplanes were un known e ven at t ime of t he d iscovery of this item. The
Saqquara Tomb has Egyptian ties with the schools of Imohotep a high
ranking Egyptian deity craftsmen.
Plane Model Found In Saqquara Egyptian Tomb


--- PAGE 97 ---
You must realise that everything goes in cycles technology is one facet
of reality. Depending on the nature of existing species in economic
control technology travels is a  certain direction. It only takes a war, a
natural disaster or a disease to knock back technological advancements
if the information p roviding this technology is destroyed. This is what
has happened to the Tama-re (Nubians). I t was destroyed by The
Phoenicians through manipulations, then Greeks a nd the Hyskos
through war, and much later by the French (Napoleon’s men) and o f
course by the Caucasian / Arab Egyptians of this day and time. Take a
native New Yorker who depended all this life on computers. Throw him
in to the middle of the desert region of Sudan (take away all his gadgets)
see how far he gets!
These crafts in the Abydos temple where not built by humans s olely they
where influenced by extra-terrestrials. The cylinder ship is a container, which
is seen by many people in UFO sightings even today in 2005. Now to even
design a vessel of this nature means you a re venturing long distances (say
constellations), as storage is the key design trait. Ancient scriptures are often
written in a manner that a child can un derstand to try and make them
universally understood in the future. They are also written in a  way to h ide
their true meaning until those in the know are ab le to de cipher it. Not
everyone can know the truth e ven the laws of opposite would suggest t hat
even within the truth some people will know it but most will believe it. If the
truth gets into the wrong hands then that force can literally manipulate
all existence. The Caucasians a re playing that role today. Remember
many Caucasians do not know or understand the role they are playing ± many
of them do not even realise they are racist or are leading other races astray
from their true nature. There are agreeable and disagreeable within all races.
The Egyptian civilisation lasted much longer than they are telling you. We told
you the Caucasians times and dates are in line with an a genda to preserve
their position in this reality. You don't know that the Caucasian h ierarchies
(royalty) of Europe would actually eat the bodies (cannibalism) of the forgotten
pharaohs believing they would inherit t he wisdom of t he gods. Do your
research. The real Egyptian civilisation is not concluded by the creation of the
Sphinx or even the p yramids. It is the people that create a  c ivilisation their
buildings are how they expressed their nature. The history you see on TV are
post god (extra terrestrial) eras in Egypt ± thousands of year after usually.
They focus on the latter dynasties where Phoenician / Hyksos blood were
mixed in with the Egyptians then called kemetite. These where thousands of
years after the tar-deneg eras. The Caucasians mention Khufu a lot in their
history programmes because Khufu a llowed Caucasian b lood through the
Hyskos and Greeks into the lineage of kings and pha raohs. It is the
passiveness on a DNA level within Nubians that allows other races to exploit
us ± even then it was no exception. Caucasians will only focus on areas of the
past that tie them into history. Do they teach you the history of this region in
Africa before the Pyramids? To know that history ask the villagers of Sudan,
Mali, Somalia e ven Niger, Nigeria an d Ghana they might know better
considering they where living there then. Please understand the Caucasian
will always promote h istory tied to Nubians as mythology and stories. They


--- PAGE 98 ---
have no respect for history outside their existence. They will travel all around
the world finding n ew historical discoveries that will always be tied ba ck to
them. You must understand this! Archaeologists usually get funded b y
western governments and p rivate institutions. There is an a genda behind
anything that reaches the ne ws c oncerning a ncient history associated with
Nubians. Let's be serious! ± Outside this framework of knowledge you a re
reading  - in this day and time within this alternative reality. I s Egypt even
important to the average Joe on the street working a 9 to 5 just trying to pay
bills! We think not ± then ask yourself how come an ything to do with Egypt
can by-pass almost any event and get to main national news? The average
person learns about Egyptology as a child for one-or-two lessons at school
that's all. Yet a new discovery concerning a persons life 3000 yrs ago can get
straight to world-wide news! They are spending literally millions of dollars just
trying to find out what a pharaoh looks like ± what's the point of that! Couldn't
these guys just use that cash to build a new hospital? How important is it to
know what a pharaoh looks like anyway! You should know by now that these
pharaohs will all be Greek looking so you shouldn't waste your breath.
Can you und erstand what we are saying! They know heritage is
important, they know race is important, they know genes are important
they know history is important. Right now they are spending millions to
conceal the truth of their existence on earth. The truth means absolutely
nothing to them – to lie a bout extra-terrestrials, cures for diseases,
genetics etc –  are just duties in preserving this era in their name.
They do not want Nubians getting back into their ancient stuff especially this
century for this is the wrong century in their time. The sun cycle is the return
of Re (Sun) in man for it was written in the very last chapter of the entire Old
Testament. (The book of Malachi)(King James Version) that t he SUN of
righteousness (UV rays) will burn the d isagreeable in those last days (an
end of an e ra). Sun cycles (what we a re en tering n ow) and moon cycles
(climaxing with an Ice a ge) are p redictable cycles in n ature an d opposing
forces. Don't get spooked out! The Suns rays (re) are of absolute importance
to nature illustrated by the cover of this very book with Pharaoh Ankhenatum
acknowledging the sunrays. You must also know that the animal faces of
kings and gods not just in Egypt but within other cultures was not spookism.
Specific individuals in scriptures were giving animal bodies or faces to
describe either their personality or their role within their family, tribe or race. If
a man were known for being a brupt then how w ould you e xpress that
universally through imagery (hieroglyphics) for they would not know whom in
the future would receive this information. They would a lign them with a
creature (animal) known for that nature. Therefore many years in the future
people would still know what the nature of that individual amongst their own
people. We recommend you search out literature b y the Ancient Egyptian
Order to seriously know about our heritage in relation to this day and time, as
most books on Egypt have not put the pieces together. The establishments for
purposes which really trickle back to white supremacy don't want Nubians to
realise that these ancient tribes the Anunnaqi and the Neteru (which actually
means nature) spoken about by multiple ufologists including Zecharia Sitchin
are Nubian (black to brown/green) races. These races are from the Orion and


--- PAGE 99 ---
Sirius constellation and visited earth firstly interacting with the African pigmies
(tar-deneg), t hen later with the Egyptians, I ncas, Aztecs and American
Indians. Pyramids are traits from that constellation. They helped e stablish
those civilisations – up grading h ome-erectus to homo-sapien. Thus making
man ‘in ou r image, after our likeness’ (Genesis 1:26). Our is a plural
meaning more than one. The darkness in the atmosphere of the p lanet in
the beginning (Genesis) was from a meteorite shower that ended a previous
evolutionary era of man. It is the homo-sapiens existence that is recorded in
the Torah (Old Testament) based religions. Homo-erectus Nubians existed on
earth millions of years prior.
To the average reader this information may sound crazy we understand!
It did for m any of us too in the early 1990’s – but t he facts from
scriptural evidence, scientific and ancestral research are just too much
to ignore if your are in a serious quest t o know the truth o f our
existence. You must research all information to know the truth and not
rely on belief. Scriptural i nformation must be s tudied in their original
language a nd the original version it was written in with its original
definitions. These are usually literal definitions. Remember symbol-isms
and metaphors where not commonplace in original texts as taught today
– they lead to belief in anything if not interpreted properly.
Extract 25
Natural Gas
Gases have etheric information stored in it. The so-called DNA patterns of
nature exist in gases. When we say DNA we don’t mean the human version
we mean there are forces within gases some agreeable some disagreeable to
humans that influence b ehaviour, genetics and physical development of the
human species. You may say no way – bu t it is obvious for if radioactive
gases are inhaled by women through pregnancy it can lead to deformities in
the child. This is a very simple e xplanation of t his s cenario search out
Nuwapian literature for better information. The etheric gases are breathed in
through the no se (not t he mouth) by Nubians. The nose is originally for
breathing in and the mouth is for breathing out carbon dioxide, which is then
taken in by plantation. Nubians you have a relationship with trees. Trees seen
from a distance are the woolly hair of the planet earth. There colours (trunks)
are all shades of brown (like Nubians) and at the top they grow bushy leaves
(afro). Their leaves grow up to the sun (like ou r woolly hair does). They
blossom in the sun (like Nubians). The template is right in front of you - know
you a re tied to nature. Now know that trees get energy from the Sun u sing
photosynthesis. The Nubians also get energy from the sun that interacts with
our melanin stimulating hemoglobin proteins helping to manage our biological
system. Now w hen you a lter the environment it creates an imbalance in
nature. We all know that the destruction of forestry is creating climate change.
Please understand that the destruction of the Nubian as a race is detrimental
to the actual eco-system of nature governing this planet. If original existence
is altered an adverse effect within nature occurs – it mutates - also known as


--- PAGE 100 ---
evolution. Since Nubians are of original existence a ctions to alter this
existence will have a reverse effect on our race. Caucasian are not of original
existence therefore their negative a ctions to themselves will not have the
same consequences as the negative a ctions Nubians take towards
themselves. If Nubians globally reject positive forces (+) and take on negative
forces (-) as a way of life out-of-sink with nature reverse negative forces will
attack the Nubian existence until Nubian progress back to original existence.
The concentrations of these forces are much stronger with Nubians because
we a re genetically tied to na ture more than the o ther races due to he ritage
and age.
Continuing with the nose understand there is a purpose for everything ± with
regards to the human bo dy of Nubians their will only be positive
reasons for the existence of physical traits because you are of original
existence. Therefore nature or God must provide you with traits to
enhance your existence as a life force as you gave birth to all the races.
Now know that the gases that are breathed in through the nose are filtered for
purity (unlike the mouth). Nubians need more o xygen intake when dea ling
with b iological development of adjustment (more than any other r ace)
because extra gases  are needed from nature to assist the melanin within the
biological system. This is especially important through a woman's pregnancy.
More genetic information is needed in a  Nubian (darker skinned) women
through pregnancy to upgrade the child's biological reaction to the suns rays.
The basic template is Albinoism (the lack of melanin) similar to Caucasians
though they generally have even less genetic information governing their skin.
The lack of genetic information forces tissues to mutate leading to cancer. For
darker skin more information is needed to be  s tored within the o xygen and
hydrogen an d water within the human b ody which interacts with the DNA /
RNA profiles. Different brain signals are needed for darker skinned races
when dea ling with an issue such a s the skin's reaction to the sun. The
Nubians indigenous nose b y nature was designed to take in more etheric
information (within o xygen) making the purifying of melanin and the general
movement of oxygen more accessible in the body. People with broader noses
in a lifetime take in hundreds of tons of more oxygen and water than those of
thin noses. It is specifically people with da rker skin that need more o xygen
because their genetics require a dditional information to p rotect them from
certain natural diseases like skin cancer or other skin related illnesses. They
always tell the masses that you are what you eat but they always forget to tell
you that you are also what you breath and drink. The broader nose was given
to you b y nature / god to help you survive sun cycles (which we ha ve just
entered now).
This is why the tama-rean Egyptian are so important to Nubians. It is because
they perfected the actual universal laws of nature to scripture level. People do
not understand that the level of technology today could have been established
to this magnitude thousands of years ago b y the tama-reans. Respecting
nature they did n ot t ake technology in that direction ±  because they knew
better. They knew the difference between good technology and ba d
technology. Good technology is any advancement that does not create death


--- PAGE 101 ---
forces that challenge original existence (the template of nature). In 2005 this
ideal still has not be learnt by the west or the lost Nubians of the east. Of
course the standard of living is greater in the west but for hundreds of years
they have b een destroying the eco-system in the p rocess (bad technology).
These followers of Sin within bu-sin-ness are either unintelligent, disagreeable
or are partaking in an agenda assisted by forces who are not influenced by
environmental forces needed for humans specifically to survive in.
It is a bsolutely illogical for humans to continue to damage an
environment t hat will be needed for the actual existence of t heir own
species. Where people opinions lie within this notion will truly suggest
who is intelligent and who truly is not.
It must be stated that new information, solids, liquids and gases control
the development in hu man n ature as a  collective.  I f t he e nvironment
becomes warped then solids, liquids and gases will follow especially in
highly industrialised regions. Therefore the mental development of
humans as a collective will be reduced.
The original Egyptians generally known as Tama-reans used good technology
minimising e nvironmental change respecting n ature. This is why their
astrological knowledge was so advanced in comparison to their everyday life.
These Nubians where solely driven by knowledge as their walls indicate. Any
information relevant to their existence was written on walls, ceilings and roofs
to stimulate the minds wherever they roomed within the region. Think of your
neighbourhood totally filled with walls describing your Nubian h istory and
sciences. It would a 24/7 conditioning of knowledge. They knew that the eyes
indirectly pick up information that enters the subconscious. These a ctions
raised the consciousness of those regions. Sadly today it is marketing that
has taken over that ideal w ith ad verts now catching your eyes indirectly
usually for the purpose of recreation (wreck-creation)
The Nubians Guide To Our Solar System
The earth (once known as Tiamat) is claimed to be 5 billion years old. It was 4
billion years old in the 1980's ± they jumped an estimation of 1 billion years in
15 years. It must be know there was a cooling off period on earth after being
released by the sun ±  they claim it took 2 b illion years. Have you e ver
wondered what Saturn, Neptune, Uranus, Pluto, Jupiter where do ing within
this 2 b illion year period. That's 2000 million years remember. Know that a
planets distance from the sun (Apsu) if further than earth will have a quicker
cooling off period. Also realise bigger masses need more energy from the sun
to push out. We are saying the planets of this solar system where not created
at the same time. For the energy to push out Jupiter in comparison to mercury
can not be the same. The three largest planets Jupiter, Saturn and Uranus
are grouped in po sitioning. Universal l aws would suggest t hat t hese three
planets where the first planets to be spat out of the Sun. Original existence
equals maximum strength therefore the largest masses would be spat out
first. Saturn is not an actual planet it is the rings that keeps the environmental
storms and gases in tacked. These were additional gases the Sun didn't need


--- PAGE 102 ---
to exist. Earlier in 2005 they revealed the moon planet Titan near Saturn. This
moon planet is actually larger than the planets Mercury and Pluto. They also
stated that Titan has the conditions of earth 4 billion years ago. Four billion
years ago they claim this planet Earth had no life an d was c ooling off from
initial creation. The big mistake people do is that they continually forget that
the establishments give you theories on reality. They want you to believe that
the planets? Where spat out of the Sun then rested in positions in line with
each o ther in mathematical ratios (Bodes Laws). If you do a scientific
simulation test you will never have p lanets (molten rocks with d ifferent
masses) being spat out to rest in ratio positions. They also want you to
believe that the asteroid belt was NOT a planet in an earlier time in this solar
system. If not then how did it get there? The ancient scriptures suggest that
the asteroid belt was indeed a planet ± often known as Meldek.
To say that a p lanet had the conditions of earth 4  billion years ago means
Titan has or had life on it. This is why the ancient scriptures like the Enuma
Elish writes about planets (including Titan) in their entirety as beings. The
collective grouping of beings on a planet.
Ancient Sumerian Version of this Solar System (Enuma Elish)
Tiamat (earth), Apsu (Sun), Gaga (Titan –  Saturn moon just visited in 2005),
(Marduk = Manjet), Anu (central planet of this solar system when Enuma Elish
events were recorded). Please study the rest for yourself.


--- PAGE 103 ---
The Enuma Elish was describing events that occurred multiple millions of
years ago. The same way you in 2005 read books about the Dinosaurs. The
time the scripture is written does not refer to the actual time of the event. The
existence of t he larger planets in this s olar system m ay have b een a
difference of several hundred million years. It  only takes around 20 million
years to get to from a fungi to a human. Scientists today say two million years.
Once you understand revolution and evolutionary forces you will understand
that the sun is going through evolution (the decay of original existence) in the
past the etheric energy ± electromagnetic waves where stronger than today.
The conditions necessary for life e xisted a mongst most planets within this
solar system - much more common place in the ancient past. We are at the
latter stages of life within this solar system. The etheric gases are in tune with
electromagnetic energy, which sparks gases to create atmospheres within this
90-150 million-mile region from the sun in line with the development of
human-species. It has been slowly lowering over billions of years. O ver
millions of years to come if an e vent outside this s olar system doesn't
intervene this harmony of gases with the sun will eventually leave earth reach
Venus, leave Venus reach mercury. These planets in descending order back
to the sun can have hu manoid a tmospheric life a s we know it develop on
them. We are at t he end of the Earth, Mars and Luna (moon) r eign of t his
solar system as the dominant planets of this solar system. The Enuma Elish is
writing about an ea rlier era in universal history when Saturn, Jupiter and
Neptune where central bodies amongst the p lanets with regards to life.
Momentum trickles back to the Sun. All this is evolution the decay of original
existence. In the past the Sun was much stronger so the rays interacting with
gases were much stronger covering several planets - creating life. You must
realise many beings and h umans evolved on other planets in this s olar
system with a head start in existence of millions of years and reached a stage
in technology beyond us today and where forced in to deep space travel as
their planet demised. Some have e volved over millions of years in to non-
human entities due to the lack of indigenous gases and sun energy in other
universal regions. We say indigenous because their DNA is based on  the
nature of the Sun their species first evolved in. They then come back to their
indigenous solar system and a bduct people (their ancestors with their
indigenous DNA). They will tend to abduct Caucasians because their DNA
structure is the least complicated and easiest to simulate. They look for those
with the DNA most close to their strand. Some of these beings evolved from
Nubians, Orientals or Caucasians in their past ± the same way we e volved
from apes. Completely different types of beings that over a period of t ime
evolved to who they are now. Do you get it! We are saying that humans may
evolve in to what you a re calling Greys / Reptilians over the ne xt several
thousand years. This is because the en vironmental conditions of Earth by
then will force humans to evolve (decay) into what you are now calling extra-
terrestrials. In the future if we continue as we are now destroying this planet
then eventually it will be inhabitable for us. By then with future technology we
too will have to venture to o ther r egions (star constellations) looking for
resources and minerals to help our human species survive. This is the spiral
of evolution. Many of these beings visiting earth are millions of years further
down the chain. To b reak the chain it all goes back to respecting u niversal
laws and aligning our selves with nature (positive life forces). Preservation of


--- PAGE 104 ---
nature (revolutionaries) over the destruction of nature (evolutionists) these are
the laws of Opposites. Nubians rarely get abducted also be cause many
beings k now the Nubian lineage is of original existence signified on ea rth
through the circle (hair curl) for some of them where once human. They also
know of your celestial forefathers so they rarely touch Nubians. There a re
agreeable and disagreeable amongst them. Believe it or not but Nubians must
also realise that there is a high likelihood that many of these beings (not in the
image of t he Negroid) will not have stronger DNA than u s within this s olar
system due to our original indigenous existence. There are higher entities out
there against our kind (Nubians). Some are mistaken as spirits and gods by
their followers on earth they often use caste as a tool. Humans mainly due to
unintelligent eco-management are slowly creating extra-terrestrial
environments on earth. This is too say that the conditions for life on earth are
becoming less s uitable for human e xistence on ly non-human forces c an
benefit from this. These a re just some of the many global situations
concerning extra-terrestrials there are many more - some good some bad.
Everybody must realise that our own DNA structure is based on reptilians. We
came out of t he water as lizards millions of years ago and ha ve scaly skin
when we deh ydrate. The mans seaman (sea-man) is s imilar to a  tadpole
concluding a t t he fertilization of the o vum (egg) like reptilians. The baby is
groomed in liquid for 9 months. The scaly skin some people naturally have is
actually an inherited reptile skin trait. All humans have a reptilian part of the
brain from our early eras in e xistence. Climate change will correlate with
evolutionary change o ver thousands of years the destruction of the
environment will i nduce ph ysical evolutionary change in humans inheriting
more features associated with e xtra-terrestrials. It will occur if sunlight is
reduced by nuclear war, meteorite showers or unintelligent use of resources
which is currently happening now on earth. More gases detrimental to human
existence will exist in the atmosphere the body will adapt to all this change.
Different gases create different types of beings within evolution. In this solar
system all planets came from the same source the Sun. Then in the history of
these planets the same gas properties must have existed. There was a period
in this solar system when many planets had life who over millions of years like
us evolved to an advanced level where species could travel amongst planets
and beyond. Remember these planets had different cooling off periods due to
mass and distance from the sun a nd a lso may have en countered different
external forces such as meteorites from other constellations resulting in what
they are today. The following ancient tablets describe these ancient events.
The Emuna Elish, The Gilgamish Epics, Tablets of Etana, Tablets of Anzu to
name a few. Archaeologists want you to believe these tablets are stories and
mythology because it is a pa rt of Nubian h istory being that is was our
ancestors that where associated to these tablets on earth who recorded this
information the Sumerians and Babylonians. The Caucasians truth is only
based o n a reality where they existed. They did not exist in these ancient
periods on ea rth so they will turn it in to mythology. The Gilgamish Epics
tablets actually states that Gilgamish the man was two-thirds god a nd one-
third man. It actually states this fraction. This means there a re genetic
properties in god (eloheem) and man. Remember elohim is a plural meaning
‘these be ings’ also remember that ‘Allahumma’ i n the Koran 39:46 and


--- PAGE 105 ---
elsewhere means a `Group of Allahs'. These are referring to a group of beings
interpreted as a collective as GOD with one of these beings as the Most High
of the Gods. The Sumerians and Egyptians our relatives regarded the Most
High as Anu / Annu and it was his ancient tribe known as the Anu-nnaqi that
took on the role of angels in scriptures. The story of Noah in the Old
Testament came from a previous earlier story within the Gilgamish Epics. In
this tablet it was Anu / Annu the Egyptian and Sumerian Most High God that
warned Noah (Utnafishtim) about t he flood. With regards to ancient t ablets
ask yourself why would our ancestors record stories on tablets persevered in
temples and no t provide real tablets about t heir history? Why would ou r
ancestors value stories to a level of writing it on tablets? Archaeologists want
you to believe that the Sumerians weren't concerned about their own history,
king's and queens, cultures etc no! They where more concerned about writing
stories on tablets and putting them in ancient temples! How long does it take
to write a so-called story on a tablet? Since it's a tablet did you know that if
there were a mistake they would have to write the whole tablet again. Tablets
take days to write. All tablets in ancients times similar to today would have to
be p roof read. Archaeologist want you to believe these sacred tablets are
stories made up for amusement yet are found in premises which where the
Sumerian e quivalent t o the US senate. The Egyptians where the same.
Archaeologists want you to believe these Egyptians where not concerned with
real history either. They're Egyptian god scriptures where just stories written
on tablets as well. These must be amazing stories if these same God
characters are drawn on walls on pyramids and other sacred buildings across
this entire region of Africa, which is 640 by 770 miles. It seems every Nubian
race seems to be  into writing about stories not history ± I hope you a re
working all this out. Scriptures s uch a s the Enuma Elish and the Gilgamish
Epics are Sumerian Babylonian scriptures similar to the Bible we use today.
Though the Bible has taken parts of these earlier scriptures and updated them
for the Romans. They grouped `these be ings' (elohim the p lural) into one
entity today called God. That's why there's (little g) god, (big G) God and
Gods (more than one) mentioned in the Bible. The Romans / Levite priests did
this to centralise control of belief and ideology with their empire and race at
the time. Their descendants are doing the same thing today with the New
World Order. When any belief system outside Latin a nd German u se the
actual word God to describe their creator you will know they are giving
leadership to the Caucasian way of thinking. To call you creator God means
another r ace is defining your definition of reality. Remember we are not
against the scriptures NO! This is to say that there are mis-interpretations
that have influenced the Nubians understanding of our history. Your Nubian
forefathers both the Sumerians and the Egyptians acknowledged Anu / Annu
as their definition of God. I n fact there a re d ifferent t iers of gods including
humans (hence different G & g) (John 10:34) (King James Version) states; ‘Is
it Not written in your Law, I said, Ye Are Gods? (Psalm 82:6) supports this
by stating `Ye Are Gods; All of You Are Children of the Most High’ now if
man is a god then the Most High is the Highest of t he Gods. The Prophet
Moses is called a God. (Exodus 7:1) ‘I have made thee a god to pharaoh
and Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet’. The higher gods in the Torah
based religions are described as Angels and their ruler is the Most High.


--- PAGE 106 ---
One of the fundamental parts of Liberalism, which is rarely discussed, is that it
is believed man is free from god. This is because liberal ideals are continually
outside the scriptural boundaries of religion. The Marxist ideology in particular
pushes the notion that man is god.  For man to be a  god they would have to
be in harmony with the forces of creation and its preservation. These forces
are tied to nature therefore humans would have to be in tune with nature to be
closer to creation forces. To be in tune with nature means respecting nature
which includes yourself (genealogy and b iological system (health)) and the
preservation of the natural environment. Capitalism is an ISM not Nature.
Nubians must now realise that t here is a n agenda within the global
ufology arena to p revent Nubians from aligning themselves with this
level of understanding. They do no t want you to know about your
relationships in the past in Africa a nd the Americas with b eings from
other constellations because it was these beings (tied to u s) aiding
tribes like the Incas, Egyptians a nd Sumerians who established the
scientific foundations of this planet. For once you start understanding
our universal existence. The ‘powers that be' have less control over our
creative potential which then becomes limitless.
They have se parated religion from science a nd history when they are
really the same (once studied properly) – both being tied to the universal
laws of nature.  They are whitewashing Ufology the sa me way they
successfully whitewashed Christianity and Egyptology – don’t f all for
the trick again. They always say in sci-fi films and movies that Aliens are
coming! If THEIR extra-terrestrials (probably Aryan) where ever to come
it would either be through the government introducing them or through
a global event say the World cup or the Olympic Games. It would have to
be a global event nevertheless!
The Dogon
Many Nubians in Africa (Tama-re) don’t realise that extra-terrestrials have
interacted with many of the village tribes positively and negatively for million of
years. Many beings have been mistaken as gods or spirits in rural Africa.
Some tribes do acknowledge them for who they really are. O ne tribe in
particular is the Dogon tribe of Mali. The Dogon Tribe lives in the q uite
isolated mountainous region of Bandiagara, south o f the Sahara Desert in
Mali, West Africa. The Dogon people state that in their history they have been
visited by beings from Sirius. They say that beings came from the Sirius star,
a main star in the Sirius s ystem which ha s a tiny, unseen companion star
named after Digitaria seed called Sirius B. The most secret traditions of these
people all involve the star (Sirius B) which they named after the tiniest seed
known to them, for which the botanical name is Digitaria. (The Dogon´s name
for Digitaria is "Po"). They also say that there is a third star in this s ystem,
Sirius C a red dwarf.
The Dogon o penly speak about water lizards (reptilians from the Sirius star
constellation) coming down interacting and e ven b reeding with them. They
have statues thousands of years old with reptilian h umanoids with humans.


--- PAGE 107 ---
They have examples of star maps thousands of years old showing the Sirius
constellation. Their 3000-year-old ancient maps show star r otations
impossible for anyone to have seen up until the last century.
Example of Dogon Star-Maps of Sirius
These star m aps are e stimated to be 3,000 years old. Sirius B was only
discovered in the 19 70's. I n 1995, two French astronomers published the
results of many years studies of motions in the Sirius system, and announced
that a third, small star C of a type known as a "red dwarf" seems to exist in the
Sirius star system. This was only ten years ago. Yet the Dogon have maps
and statues dating back 3,000 years.
It is time for Nubians to acknowledge the extra-terrestrial existence in Africa.
These reptilian beings where known as the Nommos mixed in with Nubians in
Mali (openly stated by the Dogon Mali). This is just one example. There are
still tribes in African and their Nubian descendants in the west who don know
they have traces of extra-terrestrial blood in them. Many blood complications
and skin illnesses (like scaly skin) are by products of their ancestors in Africa
in the village interacting with extra-terrestrials be it thousands of years ago. A
DNA profile to change b y nature could take several thousand years. A
chromosome change could take millions of years. The change would be a
collective change a s well. Therefore know that when blood d iseases arise
they are e ither man-made o r have been influenced b y external forces.
HIV/AIDS is no e xception. Whenever you hea r about t ribes in Africa and
extra-terrestrials always ask yourself. What do the tribes gain from this? It
can't be money for they all still live in the same conditions.


--- PAGE 108 ---
Extract 26
Fossil Evolution
In terms in line with na ture e volution a t its peak can ne ver be greater than
original existence. For it needs original existence to exist. Being the decay of
original existence within a  three-dimensional plane a nd p resent within a ll
facets of reality it becomes a natural cycle. This cycle has to be governed. Its
is the du ty of those of original existence to govern e volution for original
existence is the template of nature. Original existence must be acknowledged
and p reserved b y those o f original existence. It actually concerns us that
those original existences (Nubians) are no t wishing to p reserve it. It greatly
concerns us that most Nubians on earth are not in tune to the African Tama-re
existence of t he p ygmies in various parts of Africa. For the Nubian doesn't
know that the p reservation of this s pecies within the Nubians race is a
preservation of original existence a mongst all humans. These scientists in
search for the e volutionary truth of humans are really c oncerned with
preventing (1) an und erstanding o f t he ex tra-terrestrial i nvolvement in
human evolution. (2) A real understanding of the Nubians existence on
earth.  We have stated that the races as we know them today began the fungi
level j ourney to homo-sapien 1 7,250,000 years ago. Mainstream history
teaches that man is about 2 million years old.  That is referring to one cycle in
human e volution. The last cycle p rior to this day and time. The creation of
species is not a one-off event. The dinosaurs are an earlier cycle there are
different cycles through d ifferent t imes. The world's population today is
generally from this last cycle except for the Nubian who has over lapped into
this cycle. We are from a much earlier age in the history of earth. We told you
that t he sun in earlier times was warmer due to evolution has lowered in
overall temperature in line with the physical traits of straight hair.  The homo-
sapien o f today has existed for about 50,000 years and can be genetically
traced back to Tama-re (Africa). There have been previous homo-sapiens and
home erectus that have existed on earth from earlier evolutionary creations of
humans. It was usually an a stronomical event such a s a meteorite shower,
global flood, disease (die with ea se) or earthquakes that takes out previous
existences of humans. There ha ve b een bo nes found of homo-erectus 28
million years old in Mali. In the in the Chilga region of Ethiopia bones of man
have be en found 27 million years old. I n Ethiopia they also found homo-
sapien bones 160,000 thousand years old near a village called Herto in the
Afar region in the east of the country. They are described as the oldest known
fossils of modern humans, or Homo sapiens (to date that is). These bones are
of people from an earlier era of homo-sapien in Africa that have over-lapped
in to the current 50,000 existence of homo-sapiens. It is not from the same
lineage it is from an earlier evolutionary lineage of Nubian. Please understand
that because there were d ifferent evolutionary cycles and e xpeditions by
different cultures in the ancient past there are bones of man left all over the
world. They could with enough money and time provide evidence on almost
anything in line with their agenda. They will only promote sc ientific facts
that support t heir agenda at t his c urrent t ime in h istory. Haven't you
noticed that in the 1960's they found bo nes of 2 million years old. In the


--- PAGE 109 ---
1970's they found bones of 4 million years, in the 80's 12 million years, in the
90's 18 million years ± do you get it! This is the truth they want you to know in
line with their agenda in this reality. Nubians have e xisted for millions of
multiple decades more than other races. Our ancient traditions were to burn
the dead with the gases revitalising nature. This is why it becomes harder to
find ancient bones. It was religion that brought in the burial practice.
Most of the bones they have found in the past where really much older in age
± but they decided to not let this level of information out yet. Please take this
information in. They are altering history to align the creation of all civilisation
with the Indonesian and Asia. They are desperately trying to find links with the
Caucasian and the Indonesian. We are telling you this is happening right now.
They are slowly trying to pha se out t he genetic Nubian o ut of history and
eventually out of existence. The genetic Nubian is the Nubian tied to original
existence. Those with woolly hair with broad noses and dark skin. When we
say `out of existence' we mean ou t of any position that can influence the
straight haired po sition in reality. O nce they have perfected the New World
order they will shed ties with o ther nations. They are gathering all the
materials and resources throughout the world right now to maintain this New
World reality. If your in are really in tune to the media you will already
notice that in films and TV programmes set in the future you never see
or hear about t he presence of Africa (Tama-re). Have you ever seen
anywhere a scene on any film / TV showing any west / east African city
say 200 years in the future? or even 100 Years in the future ? ± You have
been warned. Many Nubians believe racism has actually decreased in the
west. It is really because most Nubians in the spotlight have taken on the
Caucasian image. There is a correlation between the treatment of Nubians
and the collective state of their woolly hair in the west. If Nubians in the west
simple grew w oolly hair again you would see the commercial treatment of
black people change out there straight away.
Extract 61
RE-member Our Time
There is an international space station called Mir (220 miles above earth). Mir
is the ancient name for the Egyptian Pyramids. In this station you find people
representing all cultures except the continent of Nubian Africa (Tama-re).
Nubians are not apart of their future the future of straight hair. They are
studying a so-called meteorite. They have bee n hinting about this meteorite
coming to earth for many years now in the news. As usual they have made
you be lieve this is a h ypothesis. Yet t his hypothesis s eems to b ypass all
events to get straight to the main national news.  Planets have gravitational
pulls the moon is evidence alone. The other planets have gravitational pulls
on earth as well even Pluto. If a foreign ob ject enters this solar system this
seriously heightens gravitational pulls on all planets including earth. It would
drastically influence a tsunami, winds, land movement (creating earthquakes)
and even climate change on all planets in the solar system especially a planet


--- PAGE 110 ---
with atmosphere. Say this so-called meteorite (similar to Hailey's comet) was
on its own o rbit, which d ipped in to this solar system. Say those who study
stars say the Aztecs, the Egyptians, the Mayans could calculate its return to
this solar system. Say they looked at their own ancestors' history and read the
same events before in their ancient scriptures. Say they recognised it was the
same so-called meteorite in their ancient t exts. They could p redict f uture
events based on the so-called meteorite orbit RE-turning to this solar system.
These scriptures then became RE-ligious scriptures such as the book of RE-
velations. We say RE-turning which ties in with RE-volution (going back),
which ties in with RE-velation (past scriptures to see future events), which ties
in with RE (Sun = Star) which all tie in with RE (Gods of Egypt) who ride on a
giant boat called Manjet across the stars (constellations) fighting off serpents
(reptilians) (According to Egyptian stories? found in sacred tombs) and h ad
links with the Orion constellation. The international space station is called Mir
(which is named after the Egyptian Pyramids).
Extract 5
The Casting Directors
Nubians we must now understand racism from a mental positioning using the
laws of opposites. It is k nown b y most within this level of knowledge that
racism is much more than the notion that we are merely different ± that's what
liberals s ay is the reasoning. No! I t is tied to an cient belief systems, which
have become by products of actual anti-nature forces. The universal ideology
of the straight haired races has been to position da rker skin an d their
associated culture in a submissive position compared to those of lighter-skin.
All over the world this is evident not just with the Nubian race but within a ll
races with variation in complexion. This is a global phenomenon, which must
have global rationale leading to this treatment. The only forces that have had
global influence on all cultures are religions.
It must be stated that Hinduism is the o riginal belief system of the straight-
haired races. This belief system still subtly exists within a ll belief systems
governing those with straight-hair. Since Nubians are strongly present in the
Torah. Through the Torah a specific acknowledgement of Nubians v ia
heritage and tradition should be acknowledged. Therefore those who do not
acknowledge the Nubian presence must have a reason. If out-right facts are
rejected then the reasoning must be tied to a belief system. For facts have to
be investigated o r challenged o r excepted. You will know that t he mere
collective rejection of a Nubian messiah at an institutional l evel based o n
biblical facts indicates either unawareness (which is unlikely) or that a deeper
rooted belief system is present. Worldwide it is the Hindu caste system (tied to
Dharma) that is directly in line with detrimental ideologies against Nubians.


--- PAGE 111 ---
An Abbreviation of The Caste Ideology
Dharma within Hinduism suggests that people are born in to a distinct
caste. It is the darker skinned that represent the lowest of the caste for it
is believed in their past lives they were disagreeable as lower castes
must have se rved society poorly to b e born into their caste. The dark
caste being negative and the white caste being positive maintains social
and cosmic stability.  Some Hindu texts describe both gods (devas) and
asuras as being assigned to castes. In Hindu religious stories there are
also many wars between the good Aryans and the dark skinned demons
and devils. The different Gods also have dark skinned slaves. There are
stories of demon women trying to seduce good Aryan men in deceptive
ways. There were also marriages between Aryan h eroes a nd d emon
women. Many believe that these incidences really occurred in which, the
gods a nd the positive heroes were people of Aryan o rigin. And the
demons, the devils and the dark skinned slaves were in fact the original
residence of India whom the Aryans coined as monsters, devil, demons
and slaves. I n the caste hierarchy the dark skinned Mahars were
outcasts. The skin colour was an important factor in the caste system.
The meaning o f t he word "Varna" from Sudra Varna is not class or
status but skin colour.
The caste ideology is one of t he governing forces within their alternative
reality. Ask the abo riginal i n Australia! Ask the Nubians in the US prison
system! Ask Nubians in South Africa who became victims of apartheid. This is
an international i deology that surpasses religion. For millions of Christians,
Muslims, Jews and Hindus world-wide practice their religion but still execute a
racial bias in their every day lives. For they must if globally Nubians are not
treated a s equals at t he least. Now understand if this ideology is practised
internationally on a subconscious or conscious level then it must be
recognised that directly or indirectly in real terms Dharma (Caste) is a belief
system bigger than an y belief system. This is because it is universally
practised worldwide throughout all races and cultures including Nubians
(lighter the better). Therefore traces of Hinduism must exist in values systems
that govern those with straight hair to create a global environment where
Nubians worldwide a re be ing mistreated.  Do you un derstand if someone
anywhere in the world d oes s omething negatively bias to a Nubian solely
based o n the colour of t heir skin then they are following the Hindu caste
system whether they know it or not. To Nubians this can only be an a nti-
nature force especially since Nubians are of original existence. Hundreds of
millions of people worldwide are practising Hindu traits but simply don't know
it ± liberalism is an updated version of Hindu ideologies tied to sexual
diversions. Does this mean the East Indian is a negative person directly no! It
doesn't because they are living their life based on  their scriptures
following their Gods ± not ours. It is the same way a soldier takes - orders
good or bad ones. The Caucasians amongst the races have never had up and
downs their progress is tied to evolution it only goes up a s long as the
opposite races are down namely Nubians. They have not felt what is called
racial cycles of progress yet - due to their young age as a race. Everything
moves in cycles in line with e volution if the universal l aws are rejected.


--- PAGE 112 ---
Nubians have witnessed 360 degrees of the cycle of racial progress. These
progression cycles are tied to sun a nd moon cycles. We are en tering the
upward cycle on b oth. Please understand anyone that knows the scientific
facts about Nubians yet still believes they are an inferior r ace to any other
race is a follower of the caste system ± be it a belief system. For once science
is ignored it becomes a belief. Remember your GOD no matter what religion
must represent the truth ± so your god positioned Nubians with these pro-sun
genetics. If Nubians are disagreeable and god created the sun which is the
life giver then why would god let the world get to a point where lighter races
die first due to skin cancer.
Nubians must realise Caucasian can only be evolutionists by nature. Do not
be fooled by the white supremacy. They need the blood of Nubians or darker
skinned races and Nubian resources be it labour, land and materials to
maintain their economic positioning in this alternative reality. Though on ce
they stock up on these their nature will change to times past. Geographically
in the west there is an influx of east block Caucasians. They are the original
Gypsies descendants of t he Hyskos / Ayran-Phoenicians. They have some
Nubian blood in them. Many countries in the west are using those from the
east block to replace the lower caste once positioned for Nubians in the west.
European Nubians be careful for once they have full control of African
resources they will push you out of existence. We h ave stated many times
that it was the lineage from Hindu to Phoenician to Greeks to Romans to the
western European of today that has taken on this caste belief template. This
template exists within the religious institutions and hierarchies and in the past
was used a s a justification for slavery against Nubians by the west and the
Middle East.
The understanding o f the caste system in the e yes of the Caucasian and
Hindu is real. When a global system creates black disagreeable Nubians from
that drug dealer to the corrupt African politician aiding disagreeable forces -
Caucasians who follow the caste ideology will believe that this is our social
order within the races (chaos). When Nubians try to emulate other races be it
straightening the hair or the rejection of our own cultures and belief systems.
Those of straight hair following the caste ideology see these a ctions as the
Nubian moving up the caste ladder. They will help that Nubian as in their eyes
their lighter caste order is agreeable so by helping a Nubian move in to the
nature o f a lighter caste order they are a ctually helping to improve o verall
nature (in their eyes). Many Caucasians are not intentionally racist it is that
the caste ideology is present in so many areas of reality amongst people of all
races it simply brainwashes the masses.


--- PAGE 113 ---
Visual Positioning
The masses receive da ily an o verload of subconscious material supporting
this White bias racial structure. The white Jesus is just one of many symbols
influencing this notion. Earlier we gave you a h idden e xample of this notion
through extract 3.
The structure of t ruth d iagram was purposely designed to be b ias to white
(We hope you noticed).  The visual positioning was the following:
(1) The Truth existence was white the false existence was black
(2) The False black font was smaller than the Truth font
(3) The whole diagram was under a white background representing the
Caucasian reality we are living in. This is to say that many black
ideologies within society are s till using Caucasians definitions a nd
guide lines. Examples are the white Jesus, black meaning bad (black
market) even the definition o f the Creator as GOD which is really a
Greek word (theory-mono) which was then updated by the Germans
in 750 AD. Remember the Germans historically where behind the
Reich’s who u se a Hindu symbol ‘ The Swastika’ representing the
Aryan Race. The highest caste of the Hindu.
(4) 70% of t he whole diagram is white with 30% of t he diagram
representing the colour black.
(5) The ac tual word truth was up the page the actual word false was
down
(6)  Within the half-truth section we made the truth font white a nd h alf
font black. (Half in size).
(7) The false (black) was tied to a realm – how comes the white truth
isn’t in a realm?
(8) The white truth oblong is bigger than the false black oblong
(9) The white truth oblong was on top of the false black oblong
Please Turn To Next Page… !


--- PAGE 114 ---
The Bias Version (Negative Visual Positioning)
The More Balanced Version


--- PAGE 115 ---
Now please u nderstand this is just an example o f t he uneven visual
positioning o f colour. Everyday the h uman e ye takes in h undreds of these
consciously and sub-consciously all in favour of the lighter definition of colour.
From TV to magazines, posters, cartoons and b ooks etc. This imbalance
against Nubians which is really the practising of the caste system enters the
psyche of all races c reating the continuation o f t he imbalance.  It often
manifests in Nubian children who draw pictures of themselves or family but do
not add colour to the skin. Understand that in ancient times no scriptures were
written o n actual white p aper they were e ither written on  brown pa per
(papyrus) or grey / brown tablets even further back. Recycled pa per is light
brown. They made paper white bu t t raditionally it never was that colour.
Furthermore after a pe riod of t ime the white p aper actually becomes brown
again an yway if it is not stored correctly. It 's actually an a dditional
manufacturing cost to make paper white.  Believe it or not this is how deep the
spell goes!
The Nubian youth especially in Africa ca n no t live a nd inherit a youth
rationale based on the Caucasian west. This is to say that you must
understand that MTV rap music, tattoos, sexual perversion (a
hermaphrodite rationale), excessive drinking and clubbing are negative
traits used to dismantle all races. Many Nubians in the west are simply
blind to see this for they follow the s in in bu-sin-ness. Their r ationale
aligned with the SUN (nature) is gone. They have a ligned themselves
with the MOON or MON (mon-ney).
The quest to be free should be tied to nature not desires. Many of us lost
in this reality have inherited an artificial WILL that creates an imbalance
between the physical and the mental planes. It positions the physical as
senior aligned with desires. For those with universal knowledge would
know that t he mental is the life force of t he physical for you h ave to
think of something before you do it. The mental is precedent existing at
least two life times simultaneously before your physical could even exist
(your parents). The mental i s fed b y internal and external i nformation
coinciding with your biological system (your Health). Respect f or the
mental must be given p riority over the physical tied to d esires a s the
mental manages your existence.
The collective mental (consciousness of a race) manages our physical
existence as a  collective. When everyone is thinking the same with
regards to physical traits, liberal ideals and black suppression then we
will have progress as a collective ± Moving as one. Liberalism by nature
will always be a gainst t he unification o f a group. This is because this
regulates ideals dismantling the isms. The side of liberalism tied to
nature is agreeable (freedom of speech or looking after the environment)
but the liberal ideals which do not respect the human body or genealogy
(non-hetrosexuality or the right t o take drugs) are disagreeable to
human existence (the individual or the c ollective). To actually promote
the latter is an illogical rationale in reality strongly suggesting there
MUST be hidden agendas around this warped understanding.


--- PAGE 116 ---
To break the deep spell of the caste system and b lack s uppression Nubian
must learn to respect themselves. This respect is based on an un derstanding
even before race as we are referring to the actual body itself as that is the first
commitment to a ligning your self with po sitive forces ± your commitment t o
improve your own hea lth and correct bad d ieting (die eating). For the less
intoxicants inside you will allow the re-emergence of rational thought in line
with na ture because on ly nature will be your catalyst assisting your own
existence. Not intoxicants which b ecome journeys of death within your very
own b loodline. O nce rational thought is obtained ne w awareness which is
partly your brain reactivating dormant parts of the sub-conscious will stimulate
thought. Intoxicants bad food, bad drink even bad music dampen this region
of the b rain from creating new intelligence (in-tell-agent) your mind (agent)
inside taking over your body (desires). Lets talk very briefly about dieting
these slim fast etc products will never collectively help p eople lose weight
because everybody has different DNA and RNA profiles aligned with different
metabolism natures. These products are customised to work only for certain
metabolism profiles that are often influenced b y genetics. That's why they
don't work for all. What ever you do to lose weight water (H2O) hydrogen and
oxygen consumption will be essential as only natural things can create clean
developments within na ture - your body is no exception. We say clean
developments as all too often by products (side affects) occur when dealing
with products from the bu-sin-ness called health.


--- PAGE 117 ---



--- PAGE 118 ---
Dear Reader,
It is highly recommend you read previous extracts (Vol.1, 2 & 3) before
venturing into this edition.
This PDF file is FREE and should always be FREE. You can put this on your
own website o r forums to be freely downloaded. You can email this
information to an yone that can benefit from it. We are very keen to h ave
people from the continent of Africa be introduced to this information as
we know much of this type of literature is hard to find out there. Many
people may be offended by the information you are about to read we are sorry
but if you truly respect nature and science you will understand.
The language a nd d iction of t hese e xtracts have been watered / simplified
down to allow those just get to grips with the basic mind revolution concepts
that apply to Nubians in the world today. A scientific methodology will be used
as this will minimise room for man-made be lief systems to emerge thus
keeping the message undiluted without bias. 21 writers where involved in both
Vol.3 an d Vol.4 e xtracts. These e xtracts were then rewritten, arranged a nd
converted to PDF. These extracts are no t t he all but rather a hint to e ven
greater information.
Warning! There are many people who will perceive this as negative. This
is awareness literature. We have stated on many extracts that there are
good p eople in all races.  There a re people of other races who h ave
done more to help the African than most Nubians on earth have done.
We have s tated this at t he beginning of t hese ex tracts. Liberals of all
races by nature will not respect scientific fact so their intentions will
never lead to the full upliftment of the Nubian race as scientific facts are
a facet of the truth and it is the truth that shall set you free. They wear
away from absolutes as that challenges equality.
Extracts included on this PDF are 6, 8, 15 and 72 (Updated). Prior to the
extracts there is a questions and answers section.  Other extracts will
follow once the information has been abbreviated and centralised. There
may be grammar and literacy errors –  we apologise in advance. No
Endnotes or Index included. (1- 22 pages).


--- PAGE 119 ---
A Wake Up Call For Sum
Through volume one, two and three of these extracts you have digested 1/3 of
the 94 extracts. After reviewing general feedback from readers. We have tried
to answer some issues concerning the extracts. We have clearly stated at the
beginning of the e xtracts to search ou t these great f orces in your quest for
higher knowledge just like we did. They include:
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, Amunubi Rahkaptah, Wu Nupu Asu
Nupu, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed, Clarence Jowars Smith, The
Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO), Credo Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop, The
Nuwapians, Holy Tabernacle Ministries and The Journey Home Group.
Please search them out !! Their inspirational literature stimulates the mind
just like we are trying to do for you.  There is a precious need to upgrade the
Nubian consciousness – ou r existence will not improve u ntil the collective
embrace new information beneficial to the upliftment specifically of the Nubian
tama-rean race. Regardless of where you a re in the world there a re
fundamental similarities in our treatment as a race. Macro problems need
macro solutions. This is where the understanding of positive (+) and negative
(-) forces come in to p lay. The fear Nubians have of embracing their true
potential not inline with the Caucasian rationale is a very sad affair. If
knowledge is limitless, but your rationale is fixed then a gap in information will
exist. A theoretical rationale aligned with positive life forces (+) beneficial to
the upliftment of Nubians c an only be a greeable. A very big mistake many
Nubians are doing is that they base the truth on what makes them feel good
as a person not on what is fact. For very few people both are initially the
same. Many do not want to accept that positive and negative forces overlap
into genetics and race. If you’re very own genetics are fixed a t conception
then that means they are templated. What makes you think that nature does
not have fixed templates? Do all humans breathe in oxygen – YES – that’s a
template! The intake of oxygen and water for humans are one of the homo-
sapiens universal laws of existence. This means there is a template rationale
to preserve existence. The liberals will say to each there own. This means
there’s nothing wrong with racism, corruption and lies in history etc as these
forces are practising their so called own. Without a collective understanding of
right and wrong you have chaos. Nature is the ultimate dictating force as to
what is right and wrong and you are a part of nature (or God). It is important
now that conscious Nubians make the effort to spread the black word using
these extracts or even your own literature using parts of these extracts if you
wish. Conscious Nubians must not base reality on 400 years and also realise
that we are all linked to Tama-re (Africa). Mainland tama-reans (Africans) and
overseas Tama-reans (African Americans, Caribbeans, south Americans and
Nubian Europeans) must centralise rationale in line with the p reservation of
original existence. Those who call this a negative no tion do not respect our
race and our right to express Nubian consciousness.
There a re good and b ad in all races we are trying to spark awareness
within the good of our race.


--- PAGE 120 ---
If Nubians where told that later this millennium (2900’s – with no
external intervention) based on racial mixing and g lobal morality rate
trends a mongst Nubians on earth last century as a race we will be
extinct. That’s a Nubian race at least 27 million years old. Now step out
of a 1 20-year m entality into your universal Nubian consciousness a nd
realise there is real reasoning behind preservation of original existence.
This ex tinction refers to the e limination o f woolly hair and very black
skin the true trait of original existence. The Indonesian / Hindu lineage
will then become the original race of earth as the Nubians left will not be
of original existence. We will stress that they do not want the existence
of woolly hair on this planet.
Nubians worldwide must seriously start t o recognise that t hose amongst us
especially the women who a re bearing woolly hair and ha ve da rk sk in
represent t he h ighest genetic position not just within ou r r ace but within a ll
human species. They are the elite representatives of original existence on
earth and must be respected as that over all other Nubian types.
Updates, Questions and Explanations
The Rationale
Question: These extracts are complete falsehood only a fool will follow
this stuff?
Answer: Many parts of these extracts are actually impossible to disapprove
unless you are rejecting the will of nature itself. Many people do no t want to
be forced in to ab solute decisions as that dismantles freedom within their
mind. Please understand the b ig mistake the masses are doing is that they
assume desires are agreeable. This is not the case there is at the least a 50%
chance that your desires will be ne gative. We suggest desires lean much
more to the negative because natural understandings are rejected. Below we
will let you yourself decide what is right and wrong.
+           -
Life  Death  
Peace War
Love Hate
Happy Sad
Good Bad
God  Devil
Now if you a gree with the abo ve then put t hese into the table, Black or
White, Heterosexuality or Non-heterosexuality and Original or non-
original. These are all opposites so they can be put in the table above.
This is where the problem comes for once information gets specific it forces
people to choose! It will force you to challenge the so-called norms of society.
If you have been socialised in these norms then this request will be perceived
as negative ± when in reality it is neither a ne gative o r positive. Now as a


--- PAGE 121 ---
Nubian you would have to put black as (+) if you love yourself and race. Now
to be original means to be the first. If it is stated globally that Africans where
first to exist then why would this be wrong to put in the positive (+). As stated
Heterosexuality is the only sexual preference that creates life, it can only go in
the positive (+). When you do not acknowledge absolutes you are rejecting a
whole section of your own mental consciousness tied to rational thought.
There is nothing universally wrong with applying a (+) and a (-) to opposites
then acknowledging them. Now these e xtracts are ba sed on ab solute
decisions ± do you think anything that is a solid, liquid or gas ± might exist or
believes to e xist or actually exists. Look around you right now touch
something (solid), breathe in and out  (gas) & drink some water (liquid). So
nature deals with ab solutes it will either exist or not exist ± based on facts.
You a re apart of nature so there is absolutely nothing wrong with app lying
absolutes in understanding reality. Yes! It will come to a point where people
don't like this understanding - that is because deep down they are content
with this reality. To prove this information is wrong you would have to prove
that positive and negative to humans does not exist. This means everything is
good o r bad simultaneously. This also means there is no such thing as a
physical death (-), which is c learly not t he case. Please understand the by-
product of anything you physically do will eventually assist capitalism. Many of
the practises in the world e specially in the west do no t respect nature. You
believe na ture doesn't have laws but it does. Seasons are environmental
laws, Life and death are universal laws, and conception is a law tied to human
existence. Laws like these must be a cknowledged since we a re a  part of
nature.
We write openly knowing that at least 66% of the readers will not be in tune to
the information from the offset and of them 33% will NEVER except this type
information written b y us or anyone e lse.  A mistake so many people a re
doing is that they say there are some good parts and some bad parts in these
books. This alone tells us that you have not worked it out. This is because you
have a pre-fixed ideology in your mind, which requires the information you are
reading to be in line with that ideology ± for you to recommend the book. You
have already limited your consciousness in line with your personal rationale
(desires). You a re limiting the g rowth o f your own consciousness based on
what makes sense to you ± tunnel vision. The Truth for you can then only be
what you want it to be. You should be doing research into what we say ± go to
those writers we p romote at t he beginning o f the b ooks ± ask the Nubians
organisations out there questions on what we have written ± search online the
key notions in our extracts - stimulate new awareness.
Can't you see that equality its self means to equal something or to be even.
To achieve this good and bad must be balanced. The equal is both good and
bad. So there is bad in equality also as well as good. The bad is the sacrifice
of higher potential to even the balance amongst the many. Equality is one of
the biggest tricks of the ages ± it can NEVER be achieved and those in power
positions in this world know it. It is the limbo effect. You will be running around
all your lives trying to a chieve something that even Religion, Nature and
Science d oes not practice. If Religion were e qual then e veryone would be
saved in The book of Revelation no t just 144,000. Yashua (Jesus of 2000


--- PAGE 122 ---
years ago) himself stated that he has first come specifically for the ‘House of
Israel’ (Matthew 15:24). It was Paul NOT Jesus that included Gentiles in his
own opinion of the scriptures. If nature were equal then Caucasians would not
be prone to cancer more than other races or Nubians would not be prone to
sickle cell. If everyone were e qual then in science clones would not have
defects. Some people would not have a different reaction to diseases or cures
or organs in transplants.
Please be  very careful around the internet many people have a lternative
agendas. TV companies and people in the media study Nubian web sites to
see what they can get away with within mainstream media. Many Caucasians
are o n Nubian web sites in disguise just to try and control the wave o f
information reaching our people. Many Nubians who d o not represent t he
black man + black women = Black Child way of life a re online trying to
deter your understanding. There a re many agendas behind what you read.
Know that it is actually an understanding of positive and negative that will truly
tell you what is in the b est interests for Nubians. A righteous Nubian may
disagree with aspects of the message but they would not openly try and deter
others from receiving it. They may merely state they disagree. There are
many people online that believe they have peaked in their knowledge when
knowledge is infinite.  The essence is that everyone wants to be in control of
his or her reality. We remind them that they are apart of absolute nature.
To state that humans are all governed by positive a nd negative forces
that must exist within o r around solids, li quids a nd g ases – is not an
opinion – it is 100% Absolute Fact! Some of the positive a nd n egative
understanding stated in these extracts will only apply to Nubians since
every race is different.
Question : You talk a bout a black Jesus this is very hard to b elieve.
Films, TV and geographical history suggest that Jesus was indeed white
or at least like Israeli today ?
Answer: You are right this is very hard to believe – but pretty easy to know.
Many respect the English language too much and define reality today on its
colloquial definitions not the real definitions from its source languages it came
from. Who told you that all metaphors and symbolism are fact? For this is how
many scriptures are governed. Yet what’s wrong with reacting to what you are
actually reading. I s basing your understanding o n what you a ctually read
better than basing your understanding on someone’s interpretation o f a
scripture. Many Nubians c ontinue to base their lives on metaphors and
symbolism’s which are opinions as everyone can interpret the bible differently.
Instead of what the actual scriptures say word for word (with regards to literal
definitions). This creates an alternative perception of that scripture and if you
live by this scripture then it becomes an alternative reality. We stress that the
black traits in the description of the Messiah have been changed.
(Vol.1 page 5).


--- PAGE 123 ---
It is now very important that black people e specially African people
acknowledge that the Jesus of the bible is not a white man. According to your
own king James version of the bible when de scribing Jesus in Revelation
chapter 1 verse 14 ± I quote ± his hairs were like wool as white as snow.
Note that only black people have this woolly hair ± the Caucasian races have
thin straight hair that does not curl. In revelation chapter 1 verse 15 it also
describes Jesus it says and I quote - his feet like unto fine brass as if they
burned in a furnace. Note burnt brass will always provide a very dark colour.
So if the feet of Jesus are the colour black/dark brown and his hair is woolly ±
then he can only be of the black race.
We are finding it very hard to understand why people reject the words of
their own scriptures. Yet claim to be  representing that religion. Belief has
intervened. Remember Rev 1:15 was c hanged to refined and po lished in
later versions of the bible. Please ask yourself why? Why are they still revising
scriptures? Have you actually seen burnt brass?  Why is hair being used as a
descriptive symbol? In Daniel 7:9 (King James Version) he says:
I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit,
whose garment was white as s now, and the hair of his head like pure
wool;
Some say the Ancient of Days is a description of Jesus others say it is angel,
some say it is the angel called Michael or Melchisedek. If you want that
description to be  Jesus then this is more e vidence ± hair of his head like
pure wool. If you want it to be an angel then you now better recognise that in
your Bible Nubian angels existed. What do you want it to be?
The white Jesus is a very complicated subject. It goes far deeper than much
of what we have mentioned so far in the released extracts. Know it or not this
subject is becoming a divide a nd conquer issue within the Nubian
consciousness arena. Nearly all Nubians that disagree with those who speak
of the b lack J esus do not actually go and  do research in to the h istorical
background of the Christianity practised today.  We see attempts by Nubians
in the west to give p resence to a black Jesus ± but many of them still give
their black Jesus image straight thin hair ± Not woolly hair. Nubians we have
been so lost in skin we have forgot about our hair. The pro-white factions of
Nubians please try and understand the rationale. The notion of equality is also
questionable here. The last physical slavery period in ou r existence saw
Europe d ismantle Nubian cultures. The p resence of Christianity in Europe
then was much stronger than it was today. They prayed extensively to a white
Jesus to make sure they succeeded in controlling Nubians and ha ving safe
journeys through the oceans back and forth with Nubians. If you truly believe
in the power of Jesus then you must accept that the white Jesus answered
their prayers and continued to help the Caucasians for two hu ndred years.
The Caucasians ended slavery on their terms. Remember this was prior to
secularisation and Christianity was practised much more strongly than it is
today. G eneral caucscaian belief was much stronger. They prayed for
assistance in harming Nubians ± these events occurred - now ask yourself did
their prayers work? Nubians please listen we have etheric ties with na ture


--- PAGE 124 ---
when we give out our prayers (etheric mental energy) these forces go to the
image in your mind the white Jesus then channel through to the white male
who is the physical manifestation of that image. The Caucasian feed off your
mental strength regardless if they are a greeable or disagreeable. With all
mental energy from all races channelled through the white Jesus the
Caucasian race gain a  god complex leading to intentional or unintentional
white supremacy. Tama-re (Africa) is the only continent what has not
economically progressed last century – it has become worse. Our hundreds of
politicians, thousands of soldiers throughout Africa must have similarities in
their nature that allow them to become corrupt or easily controlled. It is moon-
ney (money) that leads to sin  (bu-sin-ness) and badly interpreted Christianity
which creates loop-holes in rationale thought allowing disagreeable forces to
take o ver. Within tama-re many of t he traditional religions within the village
are really the b irthplaces of nearly ALL religions on ea rth. Most of the
traditional religions s tem back to the Egyptians and the Sumerians or the
stars.
Until we as Nubians in Tama-re (Africa) as a collective understand and
embrace the nature of our original existence on a religious, historical
and scientific level we will always be controlled by evolutionary forces
detrimental to our existence.
In addition people are having problems accepting there a re d ifferent tiers of
Gods according to the actual scriptures (Vol.3 page 22) – do your research.
In fact there are different tiers of gods including humans (hence different G &
g) (John 10:34) (King James Version) states; ‘Is it Not written in your Law,
I said, Ye Are Gods? (Psalm 82:6) supports this by stating ‘Ye Are Gods; All
of You Are Children of the Most High’ now if man is a god then the Most
High is the Highest of the Gods. The Prophet Moses is called a God. (Exodus
7:1) ‘I have made thee a god to pharaoh and Aaron thy brother shall be
thy Prophet’. The higher gods in the Torah based religions are described as
Angels and their ruler is the Most High.
ALL T HIS IS NOT NEW INFORMATION IT HAS BEEN KN OWN FOR
DECADES. You may have never been giving the information free on a PDF
though. You have to go and get the King James Version of t he b ible (the
biggest selling version in the world) and compare it with versions s ince the
1960’s that will clearly show that racial phrases have been changed. You in
your own minds have to step up to the plate and openly except whether you
want t o base your life on facts from you o wn scripture o r 2nd hand
interpretations from a preacher or institution. Please do not fool yourself in to
thinking that these a re our words – go and get t he King James Bible and
many other earlier bibles for yourself and compare notes. We would also like
to state that Revelation: 13 verse 11-18 should clearly be d efined literally –
many institutions believe its s ymbolism. Ask y ourself where in the spiritual
realm can you buy and sell? And have you ever heard of the existence of rich
and poor in the spiritual realm? Your religious institutions don’t want to go into
the mark of the bea st because it relates to commerce – in the real world
with real consequences in this day and time!


--- PAGE 125 ---
We will conclude this a nswer in saying that any Nubian that believes
within the entire volumes of Messages from the Afronauts that there is
no information beneficial to the upliftment of Nubian consciousness ± is
a disagreeable force (-) within ou r r ace. As many aspects of t hese
extracts are beneficial to all races e .g. planned p regnancies, good
dieting etc. So you can tell that those who say it isn't have an agenda.
Question: This Information Seems Racist!
Answers: This is not racism – though many people out there would prefer it
to be. We have stated that many Caucasians have d one more to he lp
Nubians worldwide than most Nubians themselves. This even includes us
writing this. Do you think we want the Caucasian demise. This would make us
a ne gative force. NO! The e quality spell is a d eep one enforced through a ll
reality 24/7. Many will not be able to shake it off. They do not understand that
nature or The Most High (God) and messengers are a dictating force behind
all realities. There is a clear genetic imbalance amongst the races on a DNA
level. For if a man and a women of the same race have a DNA compatibility
higher than with other races then why should that not be known. Why does
this partnership e ven e xist – e verything has purpose. Many people n eed
equality to simply fulfil or justify desires. It is they’re becoming! (Extract 12).
There is a difference between e quality and human rights. Human rights are
tied to laws – they are a chievable. Equality is ambiguous based on op inion
(belief of treatment) it can never be achieved due to human will alone. Nature
does not practice equality. A plane sadly crashes some live some may die.
We have stated that the sun attacks Caucasian more than other races. Many
liberals don’t like these statements. If Caucasians where not filled with
negativity they would a ctually acknowledge these rules and stay out of t he
sun – it would he lp their seed. Now is that a ne gative statement f or the
Caucasian existence or a positive one! Equality is promoted b y the western
system only after economic control over other countries and races have been
achieved. When a war or terrorism occurs see where equality lies within the
media. Go online to google type ‘democracy a myth’ You will find many
websites from all nations challenging democracy. If democracy is
questionable then why do you think equality isn’t. In fact democracy is tied to
laws so that is easier to achieve. Equality is tied to nature and nature does not
practice equality – po sitive and negative forces create overall balance. Many
people within their minds only concentrate on what they perceive as negative
from the extracts. They internally brainwash themselves in to negativity. We
wrote briefly on p lanned pregnancies, the journey of death, the reduction of
intoxicants do you think that applies solely to Nubians. Many Caucasian and
liberals of all races do not understand the a mount of falsehood and
disagreeable actions taken in history to create the environment they are living
in today. Most have been trained to see the 400 years as the template. It goes
much much further back in to regions of understanding that are simply too
complicated for the average person to grasp who has based their rights and
wrongs on society today. The e xtracts are merely hinting o n thousands of
years of agendas and d isagreeable a ctions that are still templated in to the
fabrics of this reality detrimental to how Nubians are living today. Overstand
that almost every facet of reality must be touched by specism what we today


--- PAGE 126 ---
are calling racism to create a  global climate detrimental to the dark sk in. It
goes to levels that we ha ve not even mentioned throughout these e xtracts.
You a re limiting the Nubian consciousness by rejecting new information
beneficial to our race.  You may disagree with many aspects written but don't
be a tool that prevents others from receiving this information for it may have
not been meant for you in this day and time. If we respect nature and a part of
that is preserving nature ± then a part of that is preserving existence ± which
is life. Every race has life so they must all be appreciated with differences that
are a llowed to be stated. For not acknowledging your differences you a re
rejecting purpose in nature. This may allow disagreeable forces to dictate your
purpose in life making you what they want you to be.
Question: Why Secrecy Over The Authors?
Answers: This is because we want you to focus on the words not the writers
± a nd a lso concentrate on those who influenced u s mentioned in the
beginnings of the extracts. These include As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi,
Marcus Garvey, Amunubi Rahkaptah, The Honourable Elijah
Mohammed, The Ancient Egyptian Orders (AEO), Clarence 1 3X, Noble
Drew Ali, Credo Mutwa, The Nuwapians a nd Th e Holy Tabernacle
Ministries. We tell you op enly to check these writers and o rganisations to
upgrade your knowledge ± if you haven't already. Much of what we write was
first stated and researched by these forces. What you have been reading is
the ba sic run down on information ±  not the a ll. We h ave giving you much
information free ± because we truly want to stimulate new awareness. There
is no a genda b ehind this negative to Nubians. What we a re no ticing is that
sadly the information is not being downloaded because it is free. Capitalism
has purposely devalued p roducts and services that are free. I n the mind of
many Nubians these extracts c arry less value be cause they are free. The
mon-ney spell i s present - it devalues anything not tied to money. If these
extracts where released formally with controversial reviews - that would
stimulate reaction. Sadly Nubians need a  negative reaction o r an e vent t o
stimulate change. We recommend that Nubians should never turn away from
free b lack conscious information. We also suggest t hat there is already
enough information on the Internet to lift the global N ubian consciousness
these extracts are just one in the many ± though a little deeper (as they call it)
than most. In fact we must state there is no such thing as deep information ±
many define ou r literature a s that. It  is merely words that stimulate b rain
signals ± like taste buds - knowledge buds. Nubians need knowledge buds to
grow. If you are not getting them you are not moving forward.
Question: What's wrong with anyone doing anything they want. If I want
to smoke drugs and get drunk ± it's my right?
Answer: This is the basis of the extracts everyone has the right to do what he
or she wants. This includes pointing out positive and negative decisions in this
reality. We b elieve Nubians should be a llowed to know the positive and
negative forces s pecifically influencing us as Nubians. Please understand
there are actual rights and wrongs that are not acknowledged b y liberalism.


--- PAGE 127 ---
Another mistake that people do is that they don't realise positive (+) actions
must have a greeable rationale behind them. Specifically concerning the
question - drugs and drink are journeys of death. They should be controlled.
For your self and your future seed if you are planning any. People continually
believe there are no rules in e xistence - the fact you d ie is a rule in n ature
amongst normal human beings.
We have stated that since humans are a part of nature preserving your own
self is a positive life force action. Products that are harmful to your own body
represent death forces (-) in nature. A belief system that truly cares for their
people would make this k nown. This is why most isms are h ighly
questionable.
Questions : There Is A Lot Of Contradictions In The Extracts ?
Answer:  Some are actually based on grammar errors. Though most will be
tiers of the truth. People must understand the tiers of the truth de pend o n
what angle you approach this literature. Your understanding of the truth must
be based on an evaluation of all i nformation concerning that subject. An
example is the moon. We have stated that the moon represents death (-) and
the sun represents life (+). We have also stated that the moon has put women
in a  c ycle influencing their behaviour in society. We h ave a lso stated the
moon (luna) is tied to sin (luna-tic). Now w ithin the gravitational sphere of
reality the moon acts as a satellite for earth and shields earth from meteorites
(that's a positive). Its gravitational pull also adds balance to the gravitational
management of earth stabilising it (a po sitive for those living on ea rth).
Someone from a scientific angle will see the moon as a positive some from a
spiritual angle may see the moon as a negative. It 's about trying to reach
different belief systems enhancing overall Nubian awareness.
Many readers will not be ready for information that challenges their
understanding of religion, The isms, Race, history, sexuality, Ufology etc. you
will need to have knowledge of all to know things ± not believe things for all
facets of reality are inter-linked.  The current black platform of acceptable
information CAN NOT lead to the full potential of our race because agendas in
mans laws (usually based on Caucasian ideals) are dictating the positioning,
therefore still becoming a controlling factor as to how far the Nubian race
develops.
Since Nubians are of original existence there is no measuring stick as to
what we can achieve or how we go about archiving it. It is only positive
and negative rationale aligned with right knowledge that will allow our
full potential to manifest. Many people challenge what we say by using
tools from an education system that is aligned with the nature of t he
Caucasian middle classes ± of course what you are reading will conflict
with those ideals. It is those ideals that have led to the world we a re
living in today!


--- PAGE 128 ---
Extract 8
New Age Capitalism
Evolutionary forces have pushed capitalism as the main global belief system
of earth (tiamat). The governing force of the ISMS. Liberalism is the spiritual
force that assists capitalism and as stressed throughout the extracts they go
hand in hand. Nubians please realise that t he sex se lls notion is the
unification of liberalism and capitalism. It is used as the ultimate driving force
of capitalism because it stimulates the strongest desires within humans. The
sex force triggered off by the desire (lust) is becoming the core marketing tool
to sell products to p eople be low 35 years. This coincides with b rain matter
which after 35 years naturally demises if the individual is not controlling their
health or is not getting the correct access of water intake. The will to create
and do ne w things is most evident within humans between 25 ± 40 years of
age. To subdued the mind within this age period (20-40) is key in maintaining
this reality. This is the period in human age of most revolutionary change. The
real intelligence of an individual is defined in this period. This intelligence is
based on the understanding of positive and negative rationale within universal
laws. This then influences the rationale of your offspring and so on. Money is
another core desire. Now both money and sex are u tilised b y the beast
(system) for the same objective to sell products and services. Those who
follow commercial trends by nature will not have a sufficient rational thought
governing their actions. Their understanding of universal positive and negative
will be blurred regardless of their education.
The e volution of liberalism (sexual urges) can only lead to a he rmaphrodite
rationale ± ph rased in commercial terms as a unisex ideology. This is
historically in line with the hermaphrodite gods of the Hindus and Phoenicians
where the core ideals of liberalism originally came from. Now a serious
question here would b e what is the pu rpose of t his evolution? We suggest
Hinduism in disguise through new ageism will be the driving spirituality force
of the New World Order. Nubians worldwide a re a lready living in a Dharma
(caste system) r eality don't forget t hat. When a Nubian a ccepts there
economic or social position and even plays on these positions to get by (eg.
Rap music) ± they are e xcepting the social order established b y the caste
system managed within capitalism through e conomic s egregation and
segmentation (marketing). This s ocial order originally stems from Hinduism.
People don't realise that capitalism itself is based on religious templates. It is
a subtle belief system whose god is called SIN a moon god, which ties into
Moon-ney (mon-ney). Those in control of t his s ystem are generally those
secret societies that are involved in ancient satanic rituals. These forces put
the Sin in bu-sin-ness. They also made sure that the word profits tied in with
Prophets. The masses of bu-sin-ness follow profits while those of religion
follow Prophets. What's interesting is the word Profess is linked to both words
but the definitions associated with religion such as to pretend, claim- falsely,
self-declared give a de ceptive tone to the notion. Add an ion or ional (an
extension of the same word) which no w aligns the word with bu siness i.e.
profession o r professional and the definitions become socially respected,


--- PAGE 129 ---
showing high standards, skill and quality. Be careful with the English language
there a re literally thousands of altered meanings detrimental to the masses
(especially Nubians) from knowing any truths in reality. It is an actual planned
language created b y the h ierarchies of Europe mainly Latin - it did no t
colloquially evolve. Many of the mistakes, mispronunciations and an cient
meanings disguised in common words were pu rposely put in the English
language to conceal original definitions which would lead to the truth.
Job in Capitalism
The b iblical (Old Testament) writings on JOB are another example of how
capitalism has taken religion warped it for economical purposes. According to
many biblical scriptures Job was a man who was put through much suffering
as a test in faith. Through his life he be lieved he was faithful to God but bad
things c ontinued to happen to h im and h is family. Satan tested him by
influencing the de ath o f his family, giving him diseases and much turmoil.
After many years God rewarded Job for keeping the faith. The book of Job
was taken a s a template by the original capitalists and u sed a s an
understanding o f what a JOB within capitalism is today. I n the capitalist
template of Job a government is God. The turmoil lasting many years is the
career within bu-sin-ness (parallel to b iblical j ob). Keeping the faith is the
continual i nvestment into saving institutions expecting a reward after you
retire. This is your faith in the government (God). These include p ension
schemes, insurance's or savings accounts. There pa y-out at retirement are
your r ewards for your services to the system parallel to b iblical Job who
received wealth at the end of his turmoil. The template is there and they are
both called JOB. This understanding of capitalism refers to the western ideals
of business many people in developing countries do not have this commerce
structure enforced. Know that an Era is a system governing a way of life. If
you exist outside an era then what ever happens to that era will have the least
effect on you. A collective de parture from an e ra can be considered a n
Exodus.
Extract 15
Time is of Es-sense
Nubians as a collective a re lost in time. As s tated on p revious extracts our
body clock time has been altered as well as our calendar time indigenous to
our existence. We are living in a time-structure based on the nature of those
with straight-hair. There are much more ad vanced issues concerning time,
which we will not get into within these extracts ± search ou t the Nuwapian
literature for these h igher sciences. O n this extract we will focus on the
evolutionary and revolutionary understanding of time which leaves the Nubian
consciousness static. The spell is to control your understanding of what the
future can be so that evolutionary forces can continue to create the future in
their image.


--- PAGE 130 ---
Everything was, i s and will be just as important as now ± therefore
everything is the e quivalent of now. This means the past is just as
important as the future if not more, as it is the past that creates now and
the future.
These extracts are always based on our original existence, which can only be
understood b y revolutionary thinking. Many people reading these e xtracts
would say all this is in the past lets move on ! We’ve been hearing this stuff for
years – you’ve got to get with the times ! These people are evolutionaries for
they do no t understand that everything is NOW therefore each moment in
time is just as important as the other. Time is constant it does not evolve or
revolve therefore e verything is important. One whole section of their mental
rationale is missing for r evolutionary and e volutionary thought must exist
within all understanding. The truth is that many Nubians on a sub-conscious
level are a ctually content with the position o f our r ace. Negative visual
positioning, suppression, desires and external religious force influence this
sub-conscious.  External religious force is the invisible p ractising o f religion
within capitalism through a ll types of the media ±  many who do  not study
scriptures, will not notice this religious force within the media. It is this force in
the media where the most brainwashing against Nubians is executed. They
use stories and situations from religious sc riptures and history in TV, The
news, films, music, and magazines etc and p lay out all the scenarios with
Caucasians subtlety re-conditioning their alleged e xistence within the real
scriptures. They do not openly state the religious aspects of what you are
seeing. To many it is just an advert, TV drama or film but it is really an re-
enforcer of the Caucasians positioning intentionally or unintentionally. This
pseudo effect (pretending to be) enters the Nubians sub-conscious making it
harder for Nubians to see the word for word truth within their own scriptures or
take on an understanding outside what Caucasians are teaching about reality.
Extract 6
Commercial Information on Melanin in hue-mans
In humans visible melanin is found in skin, hair, the coat of the retina, t he
medulla and zona reticularis of t he adrenal gland, t he inner ear, and the
substantia nigra (in La tin, literally "black s ubstance) and locus caeruleus
("blue spot"], of the brain.
Dermal melanin is produced by melanocytes, which in the skin are found in
the stratum basale of the ep idermis. Although human be ings generally
possess a similar concentration of melanocytes in their skin, the melanocytes
in some individuals and races more frequently express the melanin-producing
genes, thereby conferring a greater concentration of skin melanin. Some
individual animals and humans have no or very little melanin in their bodies,
which is a condition known as albinism. (Paleism & Carcasasiansism)


--- PAGE 131 ---
Because melanin is an aggregate of smaller component molecules, there are
a number of different types of melanin with differing proportions and bonding
patterns of t hese component molecules. Both pheomelanin and eumelanin
are found in human skin a nd ha ir, but eumelanin is the most abundant
melanin in humans, as well as the form most likely to be deficient in albinism.
Eumelanin polymers have long been thought t o comprise n umerous c ross-
linked dihydroxyindole polymers; recent research into the electrical properties
of eumelanin, however, has indicated that it may consist of more basic
oligomers adhering to one another by some other mechanism. Thus, the
precise nature of eumelanin©s molecular structure is once again the object of
study. Eumelanin is found in hair and skin and colors hair from brown to black.
In humans, it is more abundant in peoples with dark skin. Pheomelanin is also
found in ha ir and skin and is more ab undant in fair-skinned humans.
Pheomelanin imparts a yellow to reddish hue and, thus, is found in particularly
large quantities in red hair. Neuromelanin is a byproduct of dopamine
metabolism, and is found in the substantia nigra and locus caeruleus of the
human brain and the inner ear. Its role is uncertain, but neuromelanin, as its
name suggests, is a known neurotransmitter.
(1)  Melanin deficiency in genetic disorders and disease states
(2) M elanin d eficiency definitively has been connected for some time
with various genetic abnormalities and disease states.
While pe ople with a lbinism have no rmal amounts of neuromelanin in their
brains, there ha s been a fairly well known, but little-understood, connection
between albinism and deafness in certain mammals for more than a century
and-a-half. For example, in h is 1859 treatise On the Origin of Species,
Charles Darwin ob served that "cats which a re entirely white and  have b lue
eyes are generally deaf".[1] Neuromelanin is not present in the b rains of all
mammals, but it has been detected in primates and some carnivores, like cats
and do gs. In h umans, depigmentation a nd deafness occur together in
Waardenberg©s s yndrome. I nterestingly, similar patterns of albinism and
deafness have b een found in o ther mammals, including dogs, rodents and
humans. Further, persons with Parkinson©s disease, a disorder which affects
neuromotor functioning, have been shown to have melanin deficients in the
substantia nigra. While no d irect correlation be tween race an d the level of
melanin in the substantia nigra ha s been ob served, t he significantly lower
incidence o f Parkinson©s in b lacks than in whites has "prompt[ed] some to
suggest t hat cutaneous melanin might somehow serve to p rotect t he
neuromelanin in substantia nigra from external toxins."[2]
In addition to melanin deficiency, the molecular weight of the melanin polymer
may be decreased due to various factors such as oxidative stress, exposure
to light, perturbation in its association with melanosomal matrix proteins,
changes in pH or in local concentrations of metal ions. A decreased molecular
weight or a decrease in the degree of polymerization of ocular melanin has
been proposed to turn the normally anti-oxidant polymer into a pro-oxidant. In
its pro-oxidant state, melanin has been suggested to be involved in the
causation and progression of macular degeneration and melanoma.


--- PAGE 132 ---
Extract 72
Random Points In Nature ± Part 1 & 2 (Updated) (1-50)
1. Every individual has a specific role within reality ± It is s ociety
guided by positive a nd n egative forces a t a moment in time that
dictates which role is more important. The point of view at t hat
moment in time will always be a belief system if universal l aws are
rejected.
2. The Dot, the Line a nd the Circle must have ex isted within reality
before the existence of the atom. For the atom has substance within
it sealed by the completion of the circle. Since the first dot, line and
circle can no t be identified as a s olid, li quid o r gas it must be
recognised that t here is a n existence of additional dimensional
planes.
3. A force must have exe rted the movement of elements leading to a
collision of elements leading to the big-bang based on the universal
laws of cause a nd effect. This force must have been created by a
higher non-human existence.
4. Positive a nd n egative forces must exist within all facets of reality
leading to a balance within absolute nature - which is infinite.
5. The collective existence of all differences reaching their full potential
based on those differences equals absolute equality.
6. The opposite of nothingness is everything therefore they are equal.
7. The c reation o f nothingness had to take place before s omething
could exist. I t is a n assumption that nothing is darkness as gases
still exist in darkness. The original nothingness must have no gases,
no solids and no liquids present becoming absolute nothingness.
8. The death of any individual is just as important as the death of any
other within the three dimensional plane. I t is the emotional
attachment of t he humans that dictates its importance within their
own mind. This e motional attachment is influenced by positive a nd
negative forces.
9. There will always be higher forces governing hu man species as a
collective. Something (humans) can never be a greater force than the
elements of nature as humans evolved from nature or the most high.


--- PAGE 133 ---
10. Scientifically the most powerful force in reality within a three-
dimensional existence can only be gases interacting with each other
in h armony. Solid, li quid and gases are the sa me existence in
different f requencies. I t is the Gases State that maintains a ll
universes. 99.99999999 etc % of all existence is in a gaseous s tate.
Hydrogen is a n elemental substance that exists in all forms of
existence.
11. Any direct or indirect action, thought process or ideology that is
detrimental to the ex istence of t he man + women = child triad (the
foundation of human existence) is an opposing negative force within
absolute natures governing of human species. As the destruction of
this triad represents the destruction o f human existence. This triad
represents the c ontinual existence of human species therefore is a
life force (positive). O pposing n egative forces ex ist within sexuality
and any actions, which create s olids, li quids a nd g ases that are
detrimental to the human species biological system.
12. The c hange of any physical trait on a human that is biologically
functioning properly according to your genetic profile in nature is the
physical regression o f t hat individual as negative opposing forces
that exist in reality at that moment in time only influenced it.
13. The forces that directly or indirectly assist existence within absolute
nature represent the nature of nature. These are positive a greeable
forces in the form of solids, li quids a nd gas as existing is life. The
forces or actions that directly or indirectly assist t he process of
death are anti-nature forces.
14. Absolute nature ca n b e defined as all positive a nd n egative forces
existing within all space, time a nd matter. Anything that exists is a
part of absolute nature.
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE FORCES EXISTING WITHIN INFINITY


--- PAGE 134 ---
15. The a cknowledgement of cause a nd effect within all science
suggests that even universal laws have to be governed. Therefore it
must be acknowledged that there are higher forces that must exist in
or outside a three-dimensional plane as a  force that pushes
elemental chart substances within gases together. There must be an
original source that exerted that force. This is prior to the big bang.
16.  Universally darkness exists before light can occur. If universally life
(+) exists before death (-) t hen un iversally darkness must have
positive forces within it as life is c ontinually created within its
presence. A seed is planted underground it sprouts out in darkness.
The ac tual conception o f a c hild takes place inside the women in
darkness. The god o f t he bible c reated all li fe in d arkness. The
universal big-bang first occurred in d arkness, the universe is
darkness. Your brain and heart function in darkness, you existed for
9 months in d arkness. The presence of darkness precedes all new
life. How can darkness be disagreeable?
17. A facet of reality can b e c onsidered any genre in n ature. Examples
include; race, sexuality, genetics, gender, governing laws, ideologies
etc. They influence how humans exist within nature.
18. On earth the opposite of woolly hair is s traight hair. An oppo sing
force must exist within nature (+ and -). A negative effect will occur
as a collective to those who reject their original positioning by nature
for an imbalance then becomes present within n ature itself. This
imbalance can affect other facets of reality. The c url of t he woolly
hair in to the c ircle represents the universal link between o riginal
human existence a nd absolute nature ± for every facet of reality
through the atom is based on circles.
19. Evolution is the death of original existence. Since original existence
birthed life for evolutionary forces to exist. The preservation o f
original existence on a genetic level must be preserved as guidance
to the original i ntentions of nature. Revolution is the reversing o f
evolutionary force ± therefore they are opposing ideologies. Original
existence is tied to revolutionary forces.
20. Your DNA / RNA represent the scientific YOU. For any third party to
obtain this means they partly have control over your entire existence.
Your existence proceeds your own life time. It includes further
generations tied to your bloodline through procreation.
21. Only the highest supreme force in all existence, space, time a nd
matter within all dimensions was the first to ever exist or create.
22.  Existence is a gift.


--- PAGE 135 ---
23. Life must always ex ist before death, as life is needed b efore death
can o ccur. Death represents the negative sec ondary forces within
existence a nd life represents the positive primary forces within
existence. Life is a greater force than death, as life doesn't need
death to exist. Death needs life to exist prior to the event. Life can't
destroy death, as that will reduce life to the e quivalent of death a
negative force. Therefore life and death will always exist.
24. Positive a nd n egative forces will always ex ist within every facet of
reality. Era's will socialise these forces in line with their ideology at
that moment in time. The rejection o f universal laws will l ead to an
end of an era.
25. Mental rationale and desires are usually opposing forces within the
physical body. We say usually as the sub-conscious rationale of an
individual may become an influencing factor. Love is tied to mental
rationale and Lust is a core desire. Desire is often mistaken as Love.
26. The truth DOES NOT evolve. The truth remains as original existence.
It is the treatment of t he truth that changes. Only revolutionary
practices will lead to the truth in anything. This means an event in the
immediate or distant past will always become the basis of the truth
you wish to find NOW. Therefore e volutionary forces will always
become secondary to revolutionary forces.
27. A truth must exist if you exist
28. Evolution will NEVER lead to NATURAL perfection, as the template of
perfection must have ex isted in the past t o even b e used as a
comparison to guide evolution. Natural perfection means nature was
the guiding force.
29.  Capitalism is the management of Evolution.
30. Money becomes the blood of capitalism hence liquidity.
31. Liberalism is the management of desires within Evolution.
32. Genetics have a n influence on d ecision making throughout an
individual life as well as socialisation.


--- PAGE 136 ---
33. The fair-seeming acknowledgement of Death Fo rces becomes the
core rationale for the demise of original existence.
34. To h ave c ontrol over your desires means higher intelligence can
develop within that individual. The laws of opposites would suggest
that many people by nature due to socialisation and g enetics may
not have natural i ntelligence. This refers to the universal
understanding of what is right and wrong for a human being.
35. Liberation and Liberalism are different practises. Liberation is tied to
human rights. Liberalism predominately is tied to sexual desires.
36. The belief system behind liberation is NOT liberalism. Liberalism
through the isms as a n ideal i s tied to capitalism. The definition o f
Liberation is to BE FREE. This freedom logically must allow an
individual to naturally exist. To be c ompletely FREE means you are
detached from forces which willingly or unwillingly do you h arm.
These include DEATH FORCES that are detrimental to o riginal
existence. Original existence must exist before a nything else ca n
exist. This is why original existence represents birth and evolution
represents death for something must change in original existence to
allow any death to o ccur. Your natural state of being is your first
state therefore ca n on ly equal original existence. The longer you
preserve all facets of original existence the longer nature will aid in
preserving your existence. Many parts of liberal-ISM aiding capital-
ISM are tied to DEATH FORCES that do no t preserve the original
existence of the human biological and genetic system within nature.
To willingly align yourself with death forces means you represent the
death (-) within the balance of positive (+) and negative (-) in nature.
Desires blur positive and negative rationale.
37. To respect nature you must respect yourself since you are a part of
nature.
38. The c limax of evolution is ex tinction (death). Whose closer to this
stage of existence be it an individual, tribe or race will logically take
on any necessary action (+) or (-) to preserve their existence.
39. The caste system is a universal practice by those with straight hair
symbolised by darkness is bad while light is good.
40. Carbon b ased sciences a re sciences of nature with p ositive a nd
negative outcomes depending on the forces using those sc iences.
Carbon is tied to all existence.


--- PAGE 137 ---
41. Only those of original existence can be the true definers of reality
since they existed first to create definitions. Evolutionary forces can
influence these definitions only to the peak of a belief system if it is
not in tune with the definitions given by those of original existence.
42. In comparisons with celestial bodies the moon will always represent
death in comparison to the s un representing life. Since a  Sun will
always give birth to a moon directly or via other planets. This gives
the Sun a life force (+) identity.
43. The true meaning of any word can only exist in the original language
it came from.
44. All facets of reality are inter-linked to reject one facet say religion or
science means the truth b ecomes bias. For a truth must exist on
different facets of reality to become universal.
45. The rejection of absolutes or even the will to find absolutes means
that individual, tribe or r ace does not acknowledge universal rights
and wrongs. As Nubians universal progress in real terms can on ly
occur when positive and negative forces are acknowledged with right
knowledge of self guiding our consciousness in line with the nature
of our original existence.
46. As a c ollective mental balancement must exist before physical
balancement.
47. The only universal rationale of t hought is the understanding o f
positive life (+) f orces a nd n egative death (-) f orces. Those who
follow the (+) through all facets of reality regardless of race will lean
towards the a greeable. The plus a nd minus chart preserving their
original existence is a simple template.
48. Only anti-nature forces will prevent any individual from learning and
reacting to information beneficial to their existence. These a nti-
nature forces exist in all races including Nubians. They are ke y
players in preserving racial ignorance.
49. Those of original existence in a quest t o alter their existence a re
actually BECOMING something. Those who maintain their original
existence merely ARE! There is no need for evolution - you ARE ALL-
READY!


--- PAGE 138 ---
50. Prior to the interaction o f elements which led to the s o-called big
band theory. The prime ex istence was darkness with substance
needed to create that very darkness within the three dimensional
plane. These dust and etheric gas particles actually are a part
universal darkness. Now know that nature in its self within a three-
dimensional plane came from darkness therefore it is a black thing.
Since these etheric gases a nd du st particles in d arkness c reated
light (suns) darkness is a n existence prior to po sitive a nd n egative
forces relevant t o hu mans within ou r understanding of reality. I t is
beyond good and b ad it becomes the initial universal trait. Light is
merely a part of darkness. They are not equal. Light needs darkness
to exist darkness does not need light. Light is a  different f orm of
darkness. The Nubian is the representation of pure darkness on earth
tied to universal darkness via the sun, which is jet black on surface.
This makes s unlight an evolutionary stage of darkness. All colours
when pu shed to their visual brightest are perceived as white. Thus
indicating that white is an evolutionary colour it can never represent
original existence. The universe becomes an infinite ex istence of
darkness, which g ave birth to solar systems. Therefore universally
darkness can on ly represent t he source of all existence. The
revolutionary rationale of a Nubian in essence refers to the physical,
mental and spiritual j ourney back to the original existence of pure
blackness. This ties the individual to absolute nature for nature will
always be traced back to darkness, which gave birth to all light. This
revolutionary and evolutionary process must exist to create purpose.
Higher forces must be involved in this universal process. All original
creational forces exist in darkness, which is blackness physically
represented by the e lement carbon on the three dimensional plane.
Nature is indeed a black thing! The real Nubian cycle of t hought is
beyond the c ommercialised arena of rationale, which h as been
altered to p revent t he Nubian mind from r e-evolving. This in the
simplest of expressions is merely going b ack to b lackness ± your
mental, physical and spiritual home within the ALL. Close your eyes
and open them its there its everywhere! The Nubian is the physical
representation amongst human species of this original existence.


--- PAGE 139 ---



--- PAGE 140 ---
Dear Reader,
Many readers of the Afronauts series are not following up on the data given
within these extracts. We can only stress that in order to re-evolve (if have not
done so a lready) you should search out these forces that we continue to
mention at the beginnings of our volumes. Many of the questions and answers
would be covered in a much higher level of depth by the following.
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed,
Amunubi Rahkaptah, The Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO), Clarence
Jowars Smith (5%), Credo Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop, The Nuwapians,
Holy Tabernacle Ministries a nd T he J ourney Home Group, Marcus
Garvey & Noble Drew Ali.
Because of t he lack of time you ha ve been receiving different levels of
information simultaneously through these extracts. Please see this as ca tch
up literature only!  For many of the concepts and information are not new
and have been around for decades. If this level of literature is new to you then
you are far behind on what’s REALLY out there for we are not giving you that
higher information. For some people (not all) this information may be too
challenging o f the no rms or so ab stract they will not even understand its
relevance.  For those who feel that they are e quipped with Nubian
consciousness that can benefit our race –  they must make attempts to reach
their brothers and sisters. Write your own literature, go to websites and open
new subject matters to stimulate a wareness. Study the internet t o find
Nubians who do not know the so-called b lack basics and make it a du ty to
upgrade their consciousness. Try to a void the ways of the believers these
people can not see facts so they will forever be questioning the blackness of
Egipt or the b lack Messiah (be it Jesus/Yahusa/Issa/Haru/Horus) because
they don’t react t o p rimary or secondary evidence therefore they forever
remain in limbo.  We are especially keen for this notion to be concentrated on
Africa. Some of us here in urban Africa see the d ecay of traditional values
being taken over by western ideologies. We are referring to the actual nature
of urban an d rural Africa no t industrialisation –  but the moral and e thical
approaches to reality. The rejections of ones true culture for someone else’s.
You should know by now within the law of opposites there will always be
people who will disagree with this information - it is expected –  (+) and (-)
must exist - that’s nature! If you believe that it is a coincidence that Nubians
are the first race to evolve by will of nature or The Creator from the waters of
Tama-re (Africa) and also have the most protective sun heat genes – then
you must accept that either:
(1) your God does not have absolute purpose in creative actions or
(2) your God is not in control of nature or
(3) your interpretations of Scriptures are not representing the Most High
Forces in existence
We feel that a higher existence must have been influencing macro purpose –
the collectives ie race genetics and ph ysical nature e tc. Furthermore these
forces must be traceable back to a supreme governing source as there are no


--- PAGE 141 ---
border lines between solid liquid and gases within space, t ime and matter.
Religion doe s suggest t his but it does not cover the changing inequalities
within na ture, which reveal the nature o f nature, which does not practice
genetic equality amongst t he races s imultaneously within the same space,
time and matter. Since nature is infinite the change in inequalities may have a
time frame tied to revolutionary (+) and e volutionary (-) forces. The p eak of
evolution is extinction! For you reading this and us writing this were all born
and are on the evolutionary path. To slow ageing we eat better food and look
after our body. This is a revolutionary notion the seeking to remain in the past
(young). To live longer we must slow down the physical evolution of our body,
which will only evolve to d eath. Can you see reader we are all actually
basing our lives on the laws of opposites as e volution in our own lives
will lead to death – our attempt to live longer and eat better is trying to
slow down the process –  a revolutionary notion. This is universal, as a
race the preservation o f original existence is our r acial revolutionary
notion.
Now through your children your DNA lives on even after you have passed on.
That's the cycle - for sadly the parents passing did occur but the child gives
new existence to the DNA of the parent. It is called RE-production. The RE is
present ± going back. As a race through mental discipline Nubians must take
control of our universal cycle. This does not mean a primitive rationale this
means RE-introducing the mental rationale or our ancients in line with (+) life
forces in today's society. Now knowing what is right and wrong based on trial
and error known as scientific facts then acting upon those notions ± belief has
little room in this reality.
Facts = Truth = Reality = Real Existence = Nature
Therefore by accepting facts you are aligning yourself with nature and since
Nubians are of original existence you are directly tied to nature. The rationale
of nature can be studied through universal laws. Believe it or not but nature /
God has already gifted you to be able to even read this ± we all could have
passed a way at child b irth a nd you know millions of babies do. There a re
agreeable notions within most religions but because Nubians are of original
existence you need even more than a scripture. You need an agreeable metal
rationale based on your true nature that existed no t before the Creator and
guides but before scripture religion. The main religions are governed by those
with straight±hair who ha ve a ltered and mistranslated many aspects of
religion in line with their nature. Be it European, Middle-eastern o r Indian.
Much of this today is NOT a conspiracy (though centuries before it was) but
merely that they can only see the world through their own eyes and nature.
Human nature is basically anything positive o r negative e xpressed by the
collective of a group or individual. The scripture Nubians read have been re-
written and taught based on interpretations given by distinct factions of certain
races for thousands of years. In that period the nature and view of that faction
will leak to the scripture leading to mis-translations and worse metaphors and
symbolism that can be easily tweaked in line with the agendas of governing
factions behind the re-writing of scriptures. 1,700 years ago a  Levite p riest
can mis-interpret one line which 1,700 years later will take the meaning of the


--- PAGE 142 ---
paragraph in a completely different direction.  In fact scriptures are hea vily
watered down now, as they would conflict with political agendas. They gave
you liberalism to challenge religion meanwhile concealing real political
agendas that are against religious ideals. In e ssence the New World o rder
which will need the growth of fear and de-valuing of death by the media to be
successful. The media b y nature will devalue dea th through war and self-
inflicted d iseases. Making you see their death as justifiable because these
people did not take heed. They will give one page in a paper to the death of a
retired star and have a  page to the de ath of hundreds in an explosive o r
natural disaster in the other side of t he world ± e specially if it occurred in
Africa. Know this is the de -valuing o f death in your mind based on b ias
thought. One person is not the equivalent to hundreds in reality.
These PDF’s are youth orientated because it is the younger generations
that will have the greatest chance of preparing the Nubian conscious
upgrade of themselves and their future offspring or junior children. The
shortage of black role models would not be an issue if the youth were
trained to know not believe in their original existence for no other man
existed before our original existence. With positive (+) and (-) negative
clearly identified with natural universal reasoning within the child’s mind
it becomes harder for negative forces to lead our children astray.
Regard this information as yours to keep. You can use this information in any
way you want as long as it is beneficial to the Nubian race ± This PDF file is
FREE and should always be FREE. We are very keen to have pe ople from
the continent of Africa be introduced to this level of information as we know
much o f this type of literature is hard to find o ut there. A scientific
methodology will be used a s this will minimise room for man-made belief
systems to emerge. These e xtracts are not the all but rather a h int to e ven
greater information.  It is highly recommend you read p revious ex tracts
(Vol.1, 2, 3 & 4) before venturing into this edition. For Nubians bearing the
knowledge know that we a re trying to p rovide a simplification of the
knowledge as many may not know the basics - much information will be too
overwhelming if too concise - information should be given in stages.
Extracts included on this PDF are 73, 22, 18, 19 & 21 others will follow
once the information has been abbreviated. There may be grammar and
literacy errors – we a pologise in advance. (1- 19 pages). Eight Writers
contributed to Vol.5 PDF.
The great writers above are your guidelines to a better understanding on
Nubian consciousness. Seek them out while you still have time!
Warning! Many people may perceive this as negative. This is awareness
literature. We have stated before that t here a re g ood p eople in all races.
There are people of other races who have helped the African more than most
Nubians on earth have done. Liberals by nature will not respect scientific facts
so their intentions will never lead to the full upliftment of the Nubians race as
scientific facts lead to the truth and it is the truth that shall set you free. They
wear away from absolutes as that challenges equality.


--- PAGE 143 ---
Extract 73
It Does Matter !
This is very abbreviated information. On this subject we strongly recommend
you search out the original literature by The Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO),
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi and Th e Honourable Elijah
Mohammed.
For the initial darkness that is a universal trait in all sources of existence
within astrophysics is scientifically referred to as dark matter. This dark
matter is acc ompanied b y dark e nergy so know that t hese ex istences
existed before s uns / stars a nd continue to exist right now actually
holding and sustaining un iverses together.  This in turn allows the
rotation of solar systems and sustains all gravitational forces. Know that
etheric (ether) energy and p articles a re intertwined within d ark e nergy
and matter.  This dark matter is conscious because you are. This is to
say that the darkness which refers to dark matter, dark energy, etheric
substances lighter than hydrogen o r helium, and substances
manipulating the a tom where involved in creating suns which created
planets which hu mans evolved from. The properties of all life exist
within this darkness so it must be conscious. This is why nature is sum
type of darkness ±  a black existence. Suns a re representatives of t he
darkness in solid form ± they are a ll jet black on the surface a nd give
existence to solar systems. The light exerted from the sun at its
evolutionary stage is perceived as white by the human eye. If you study
nature you will see this evolution for all dead human bodies turn pale in
complexion after death h as occurred. I t is the furthest evolutionary
stage from the initial cycle of life. Hence (Caucasian) caucus±Asian
refers to the living dead Asian. When you study land climate colours the
two most extreme environments are desert very light badge (white sand)
and po lar regions very light white blue s urface (white ice). The lighter
the climate the less life is present. Don't doubt this. Your climates that
represent life a re dark green and dark brown. Green is plantation and
brown is soil. The correlation between life and death forces amongst the
races is parallel to the colour of life and death regions on earth. Is this a
coincidence! We s tated on earlier extracts concerning the human eye
that rainbows do no t have the c olour black or white in them because
these colours exist in everything. The birth template is blackness which
brightens (evolves) past the spectral standard colour to become merely
brightness perceived as white. Natural light can NEVER be white as that
is from the sun, which is black on surface. Since everything came from
darkness ± dark energy - every colour from within the three-dimensional
plane can only be an evolutionary stage of the colour black based on the
human eye. Please ack nowledge that t he blackness was the first
absolute colour to ever exist within a three dimensional plane and even
at this stage there where and still are different types of light just existing
within darkness at different frequencies and speed. The human eye can
not perceive many of these black lights. From a religious perspective


--- PAGE 144 ---
the (+) good and (-) bad occurred with the introduction of light (which is
the sun and solar-plex (inner sun)) it is the nature of the straight haired
races to align an existence closer to them as a greeable. Therefore the
light becomes the good and the darkness becomes the bad. Remember
evolution! The darkness of the universe gave birth to Suns. The same
way the darkness of human existence Nubians gave birth to other races.
This dark to light cycle is forever NOW. Nubians represent this darkness
within the cycle at birth stage and Caucasians represent light within the
cycle a t death stage.  To the reader of t his information you should
realise that no matter what you b elieve in b e it a se ven-day creation,
evolution over millions of years or an instant creation of earth. Solids,
liquids a nd gases where present t hen and still are now, they all exist
within absolute nature and dark matter and energy is the existence that
holds universes together. The darkness was always there and the black
coding o f t his original existence exists in d ifferent f acets of reality
through colour including the surface of the sun and Nubians within the
human species.
Oil is a trapped state of matter in liquid form. It changes from solid to
liquid to g as. Oil due to surrounding solids is trapped in liquid form
while in its transformation from solid to gas. When a living solid dies be
it humans, plants or animals etc. It decays and exerts liquids and gases
if the temperature of the vessel is not controlled. If tightly packed to a
degree that no additional gases can interact with the s olid vessel for
millions of years it becomes black liquid, as there is no oxygen available
to transform completely to g as in d ecaying mode. I f t he s urrounding
solids are plantation which are created and fed by sunlight from the sun
(which has a  black surface) via photosynthesis etherical properties
which can no t get back to the universe a re trapped in compressed
solids. Since the sun grew the ancient plantation that creates oil and the
sun is jet black on surface. Oil is the liquid energy given to earth from
the sun. It is a reflection of the etheric energy given by the sun in liquid
form. I t is the liquid, which was s upposed to evolve back into g as at
plantation d eath to aid pho tosynthesis interacting with the s un. The
black oil represents the black sun surface, as that is where this liquid
via photosynthesis was originally generated. Coal has a similar
relationship within n ature being a black existence. Know that oil
scientifically is a c omplex liquid mixture of hydrocarbons ± note the
hydro represents hydrogen and the carbons represent carbo (charcoal)
black.  Within humans you have carbo-hydrates which is the carbon in
your blood. Nubians know that this blackness is in everything around us
and within u s. We a re the template of t his natural blackness on earth
which is traceable back to dark energy.
The scientific establishments of the west will eventually try to alter your
understanding o f dark energy because darkness e xcludes ALL
Caucasian hu manoid existence as original. This will occur as more
astrological events happen o ver the next several years. They are in a
quest t o find the s ecrets of t he universe merely to re-package it with
their nature. We are telling you that the causcains societies are in a war


--- PAGE 145 ---
with the forces of nature. They are trying to fight the demise of t heir
existence. For what goes up must come down. These are the laws of
opposites and they know these laws. Nubians are the opposite so they
will have to hold you down the most. Racism is the commercialisation of
this routine.  A part of the downfall of Nubians has been merely to reject
these laws of opposites, which are tied to hu man existence within
nature. Remember nature for humans is a ll solids, liquids, and g ases
within space, time and matter existing within a three dimensional plane.
Their collective existence as a governing force is fact therefore the truth.
Nothing that can b e recorded by man scientifically can exist out side
nature. Therefore the longer Nubians be-lie-eve in a force not in their
image the harder it becomes for Nubians to RAISE UP. For you are most
tied to n ature in your original existence, with your original mental
rationale tied to absolute nature, which is separated into positive a nd
negative forces which all stem from the original blackness of existence.
The c loning, IVF treatment and o ther new birth techniques are really
attempts to h elp p reserve the Caucasian existence on earth in the
future. The journeys of death (see ex tract 17 Vol.1) are now in effect
preventing many women from naturally conceiving this is why we are
stressing that if you live by the Caucasian n ature and eating and
drinking h abits you will find h ardship in the future. YOU being your
family lineage for your family lineage exists within you. The sec ret
societies have a greed that t hey must kill off certain amounts of t he
population over several decades in order to make the New World Order
easier to implement.
Theoretically absolute nothingness must be a borderline between
dimensional planes as this refers to no solid, no liquids and no g ases
present in a fixed do main. This would only leave a n existence un-
recordable to the human eye. You have absolute nothingness. Then you
have nothing, which scientifically can be considered any element lighter
than protons, neutrons and electrons not recorded within the elemental
chart. The e lemental chart has 118 (elements or attributes) which are
scientifically acknowledged as elements existing on earth o r the
atmosphere. As a c ollective they combine to create earth's existence
and everything on it. As a c ollective the s ubstances become the
ingredients of nature on earth within their solid, liquid and gas states.
There is a sc ientific relationship between the Most High / Creator and
nature itself - religion generally accepts this notion. However they will
not delve into the facts that a s upreme force must have purpose in
everything it does. This means purpose ex ists within dark matter to
create a Sun, then planets, then a Nubian race first with unique hair that
with an abundance of melanin in the real world. They say this can't be
the will of God because that's inequality. Yet t hey believe to g ive the
masses a  White Jesus or a Pale version o f the Prophet M ohammed is
equality in motion. You may not see c olour but t he higher forces of
Nature or God do if they are to even exist. For everything has purpose.


--- PAGE 146 ---
Once a gain we would like the reader to be weary of the moon. This is
because those of straight hair will align the Moon with their notion o f
spirituality. The moon is a dead celestial body though scientists are
trying to align internal light with this satellite to create the perception of
this planet as a life-giver. This in turn will give s trength to Luna
Astrology. Those who delve deeper into astrological history will find an
existing warped appreciation for Saturn from those of straight hair.
Remember Saturn is a gaseous abode that was rejected by the Sun. It
represents negative gaseous properties that interfered with the chemical
balance of t he Sun ± therefore Saturn was s pat out of t he Sun as a
negative gas force to it's existence. The scientific history of celestial
bodies will correlate with the real nature of those who align themselves
with certain celestial bodies (planets).
Any Nubian journey into our existence will eventually reach a scientific stage
for these are facts ± we recommend that you search out the writers we have
quoted to gain that knowledge.
Extract 22
Negative Existence
The creation stage of negative forces, which b y nature correlate with
evolutionary forces c an o nly represent negative e xistence within the
conscious or sub-conscious mind. We say evolutionary because a
development in the rationale of an individual, t ribe or r ace had to o ccur to
assist new actions. New negative movements or ideals do not just pop u p
within the commercial scene they have to be  whispered to you through
external sources usually indirectly to a llow it t o bu ild up within your sub-
consciousness. In simpler terms if the media tells you long enough from
different angles and p erspective the sa me thing d irectly and indirectly
you sooner or later accept it as fair seeming. A typical example is tattoos
clearly introduced to commercial blacks by rap music in the mid-1990's which
you will find promote the perspective of all cultures but rarely the woolly haired
African. Tattoos where meant f or the light skinned. Commercial blacks are
people whose ethics are dictated by TV and the media. This media no tion
includes any national black media a s that platform will represent black
liberalism by nature. Our notion sadly includes most music that is channelled
through these platforms as well. Rap music in the west continually selects
musical styles and notions from other cultures such as East Indian, Latin and
oriental and submerges these ideals into the music in a  quest t o create
something-new (evolution). Any other culture e xcept Sub-Saharran Africa.
Check the music videos of today. There would b e nothing wrong with this
notion if there were a n even balance between conscious rap an d the
mainstream rap of today. It must be said that this is a western black thing. It
has been suggested by many that in order to control the Nubian of the west
you merely need to control the ideals of black music. A frustrated youth
channel their energy through music as a stress release mechanism. Bad rap


--- PAGE 147 ---
music has negative e xistence within it be it harmful sound frequencies and
lyrics, which block the stress release. This then continues to build up in the
individual making it easier for the negative notion in the music to manifest in
real time. Nubians once again know that you are tied to nature. Nubians feed
off sound the same way we feed off sunlight (ether). If the sound is bad it is
inevitable that the mental rationale will be influenced a s well and if
disagreeable forces wish to guide Nubians on a negative path all they have to
do is manipulate this medium. This is why the notion of superstar has to be
reduced in the young Nubians mind as that will reduce the amount of negative
forces from controlling our youth. The youth shouldn't need a singer on a song
or actor on TV as a role model ± that should be you.
Hip-Hop as an existence or better said as a nature is your current template as
to how the demise of Nubian culture e volves. In e ssence it was originally a
way of thinking aligned with one race and how that race express their thinking.
Like the life cycle it started off pure matured then de cays. This is evolution
and it is usually those senior listeners who where there at the birth stages who
will have a better understanding of the cycle. The more the sound decays the
more it leaves original existence. This is not a bu-sin-ness thing it is a
culture/nature thing. Nubians wondering ho w our great civilisations
crumbled should realise they are s eeing the reasoning today in flesh
through hip-hop. It started off as black music for black people, then became
black music for everyone and  now is music for everyone. Sadly our mis-
directed love for evolution really tied to capitalism has stripped down the
black culture of hip-hop. The DJ is gone the Break dancing is gone. This is not
to say that t hese were good or bad things NO it is to say that t he human
element is missing (culture) and ha s been taken over by the machine
(capitalism). Money (moon-ney) is blurring the real loss of control of black
music. Though to a black liberal this is good (evolution).
This process also happened to Jazz Music earlier last century and will
continue with hip-hop and any other Nubian existence that can be turned into
a product or service for the masses. It is the process of altering the nature of
the genre to allow Caucasians to obtain economic control, which then dictates
the a ctual sound an d message. This can on ly be the outcome for that's
evolution the death of original existence. If black people created it then
evolution can on ly be the journey away from that race. Nubians realise
this latter stage hip-hop can not actually represent the true specific interests of
our Nubian race. It is now just one faction within the liberal movement. Hip-
Hop from Africa must not use the nature of western Hip-hop a s a guideline
anymore for the west will make it very hard for Nubians in Tama-re (Africa) to
gain access to the conscious rap of the west which is becoming harder to find.
The Liberal be it of any race generally carries a rationale which they believe is
beyond science and religion it is this oneness notion. For if everything is one
then only pure harmony can be present amongst all. This journey can only be
achieved through evolution. They praise this notion of evolution. It is actually
what t hey truly believe in therefore it becomes their r eligion. For what you
think about the most per second is more of a governing force in your life than
what t hink about one da y a week. To successfully take on the journey of


--- PAGE 148 ---
evolution you would need the backing o f science an d social science as
primary evidence. Then h istory as s econdary evidence. The life cycle of
humans is not in favour of evolution for this cycle will climax with death. We
are strongly suggesting Nubians that social evolution ha s done a ctually
nothing to help our existence or the environment for what we call slavery was
the evolution of the US/EU regions. The death of original existence being the
American Indian and the Nubian of Tama-re. Technology is out-side evolution
and revolution because it is mans decision that dictates what technology
represents at the time using it. This is why industrialisation is not negative
but must consider its relationship with nature at all times!
The sexual revolution o f the 1960's in the US and Western Europe was
indeed a revolution for the Caucasian, which means to go back. This is why
the East Indian spiritual guides where their at the time through literature and
religious sects guiding the causcains back to their Phoenician / Hindu Aryan
roots and of course this gave b irth to the new age liberal i deals practised
today throughout the western media ± the sexualisation of everything. This
can only lead to the diversification of sexual practice and growth in the death
of life (sperm) ± through lust. For the actual birth of the child equals life. Death
accompanies evolution. To change s omething you have to destroy the
previous state.  There is an evolution occurring within the media tied to their
promotion and positioning of deformity in the mind. As evolution commences
existence de cays within a ll facets of reality. The straightening o f hair is our
Nubian decaying from original existence though this can be reversed. You are
seeing much more media a ttention being g iven to ph ysical deformity than
previously before. Deformed animals and programmes and news on deformed
people a re now commonplace in the west. The e ssence is to convert
deformity into beauty in your mind ± remember liberalism today stems from
the Phoenician and Hindu ways ± who have highly deformed beings depicted
as Gods. The promotion of deformity will also be used to justify the rationale
to support genetic s licing (as a cure). This manipulation of genes which is
already in motion is tied to the notion of evolution. The dea th of creative
thought tied to revolutionary actions is what t hey wish to a chieve for that
rationale will end a New World o rder era. They wish to genetically govern
human na ture itself on a scientific level. Now w hen we write this type of
information p lease understand that we research nature. Those who study
would know that it would be  inevitable that decay in e xistence would o ccur
and the forces assisting this decay are negative (-) for they aid the journey to
death (usually unintentionally). For in economics it is called the dis-economies
of scales. It is a universal cycle in time. Those ou t there in the know w ill
understand that once you simply acknowledge the forever cycle of revolution
and evolution and opposing forces (laws of opposites) you begin to know and
not believe for these processes are forever occurring in existence. Eventually
cloning will be forced upon the masses as agreeable - as a cure for the decay
of mankind. This will be taken on by the new agers, liberals and those with the
real Hi ndu rationale for their gods are h ighly deformed and regarded a s
beautiful to them. Therefore g enetic alterations in the human e xistence to
them is tolerable.
Nubians must not get lost in these ways. It is their nature not ours.


--- PAGE 149 ---
Now due to the decay process in reality negative existence (actions which are
seen as bad (-) in the past) will eventually be perceived as good by those out-
of-sink with na ture. This is the e volution o f negative ex istence. It will
evolve to be perceived as fair-seeming by those lost in this alternative reality.
Only the intelligent will have the mental rationale to witness this evolution and
act accordingly. Euthanasia is a prime example. It is the ME, MYSELF and I
wishing to take over nature in the life cycle. The WE (collective) is death due
to natural causes for everyone's time of death was dictated by nature. That is
WE not I. See where the liberal stands on this one for the I is not oneness
with na ture. Understanding science tied to p reserving original existence is
your universal method of knowing right from wrong minimising n egative
existence within you and around you. The latter is of course bad people, bad
music, bad media etc. We must all acknowledge what is negative before we
can overcome it. Nubians in the west still do not truly understand the negative
existence within the media detrimental to the Nubian existence. This includes
the b lack media. Do no t fool yourself into thinking that in the west black
magazines, shows even channels are a ll 100% beneficial to our r ace.
Remember they are all reflections of black liberalism by nature ± they have to
be or they would not be allowed to reach the masses.
No commercial medium will give our race the right knowledge necessary
to stimulate change to reach our full potential ± it is as simple as that.
Know this! Nubians bearing right knowledge should be weary of media
platforms ac tually positioning ou r awareness. Commercial positioning
of our race in the west must not be used to define our existence. This
positioning will be governed by those representing liberalism.
European TV especially has the highest level of Nubian suppression on earth.
France, Britain, Germany and the Netherlands s imply do no t promote the
black nuclear family respectfully at all through their mediums greatly reducing
the continuation of Nubian seed in those regions. It actually calls for
intelligence a nd du ty for Nubians in those regions to p reserve their
blackness out there. For couldn't intelligence be considered any action
taken to preserve and continue ones own existence.
When speaking a bout intelligence you must realise the notion has been
greatly tied to a cademics. To earn a de gree o r m asters doesn't guarantee
success in life. For any person that shows gratitude to the fellow man in reply
to a favour given to him is actually practising intelligence. This is because you
are raising the potential for this and other people to help you in your own life
in the future. This is intelligence within the science of life. Your ego will try
to intervene which is tied to the reptilian part of the b rain. There a re forces
within YOU that will try and prevent you from reaching your full potential as
WILL is guided by (+) and (-). To revolve we a ll must identify when these
forces in our nature are actively taking control of our actions. You know there
is an inner +/- war we face for every decision we take.


--- PAGE 150 ---
When discussing negative existence it is obvious that money plays a part in
the reasoning behind negative actions. We will always stress that money has
the subtlest ties with negative spiritual forces. The moon-ney (money). Know
that the moon (Luna) is NOT a part of the original creation process from the
sun. It came much later after decay had already existed within ou r solar
system it is a product of evolution. Money has control over people who have it
and can easily make them partake in negative actions.
You h ave to b e in a good mental rationale to control the forces of
money. This rationale is aligned with nature therefore you will not be
prone to destroying nature which includes your nature, your culture and
universally human lives.
The sun is the physical source of nature. Therefore those understanding
nature will be ab le to control money more wisely for the Sun p recedes the
moon-ney. Many parts of Africa especially West Africa over the years have
mixed money into the ancient and traditional customs and rituals. We are
especially concerned with these customs with money being introduced to
children for this dilutes the way money should be positioned in society in their
minds. Then when the child reaches adulthood they will do anything to gain it
± life itself is devalued for money.
Extract 18
400
For you are a ll and always will be Tama-rean if original existence is
preserved. The 45 0 years of physical and no w mental slavery scientifically
represents a genetic disruption in the DNA within a segment of t he Nubian
woolly haired be ing that departed from m ainland Tama-re. The mixture of
Caucasian blood is the only real difference in many Nubians in the west from
their counterparts in Tama-re (Africa). Many Nubians in the west BELIEVE its
more than this. That's the illusion. 450 years is not a long time when waying
up the existence of the Nubian race. Nubians reading this surely must know
first hand that there are facets in the core Nubian segments now known a s
African, Caribbean and African American who have rejected the notion o f
oneness. This notion o f oneness is the centralisation of Nubian
consciousness. The on eness of liberalism can not work if inequalities in
genetics exist between races for that influences their nature. Please
understand that you are all Tama-rean not African for Africa actually means to
divide. The name was c reated within the e ra o f the Nubian abduction of
workers. Tama-rean is the colloquial terminology given to Africa by our
definers of our r eality the Nubian Egyptians (Tar). The notion of Africa is a
notion, which was birthed, in a d ivided continent by another race. The notion
of Tama-re refers to a period b efore a ll documented enslavement by other
races against the Nubian. Since those of original existence still exist within all
continents of earth a nd where de scribed a s s uch b y our ancients prior to
division then we can all be acknowledged as tame-rean if we wish.


--- PAGE 151 ---
Many Africans in Tama-re today are critical of the western Nubian for not
being black enough or for romanticising Africa –  when our reality here today is
much different – it is a collective struggle over here. The more ignorant of
us even d issociate themselves with Caribbean a nd US descendants due to
slavery and say we are better. Nubians now with knowledge of self know that
these Africans represent Africa –  not Tama-Re. You will find that many of
these characters have changed their traditional N ubian n ames for English
ones. They have completely rejected their colloquial customs and follow the
white Jesus. They are indeed African for Africa means to divide.  They are not
representing Tama-re a time when as a Nubian race we were no t forcefully
divided – The knowledge of self is not present and the Caucasians who gave
them Christianity made sure it would not be there either. The flip-side is the
African American and West Indians (living in the EU/US) who follow the media
and edu cational system of the west (governed b y the Caucasian na ture).
They position their understanding of Africa from the Caucasians perspective
and usually reject their African history because the Caucasians have many of
them in the 400-year spell of existence. If your conscience is based on a
400-year history and throughout that history all your taught is s lavery
concerning your race –  it will have a negative affect on that race. Know there
are millions of years of missing d ata in our existence which science a nd
history are slowly revealing. Data that have pu rposely been concealed.
Nubians have b een roaming the ea rth for millions of years before the
existence of all other r aces. Those Nubian bo nes found in Ether-utopia
(Ethiopia) carbon dated as 27 million years old is just one example. The curl
in your hair r epresenting The circle and the dark melanin skin (the
blackness) as stressed throughout these extracts are symbols tied to REAL
ancient forces in the cream periods of universal existence.  These can b e
recorded as NOW since they are eternal – forever existing. A force must push
particles (existences) together to create motions that led to the big bang.
Nubian factions who see themselves as better than any other Nubian stock
based on this 400 year cycle are those who do NOT bare right knowledge and
are indeed unintelligent. Many of t hese pe ople be lieve this quest of Nubian
black knowledge will interfere with their relationship with the white Jesus (the
Caucasian race). For they are lost in the 4 00-year spell for didn’t the
Caucasians of Europe actually go to war with ea ch o ther within this period
several times! but today due to the n eed to p reserve their existence they
unite. When any black person worldwide assists the nature of division within
our race they are indeed African for that means to divide (plural "Afer"). In fact
it has been suggested that the historian Leo AFRICAN-US (1495-1554) tied
the name of the continent with his own surname combining the ‘Land of Afri’
stated by the Romans and ‘Afar’ the Phoenician definition. So Nubians know
that we are accepting the Caucasian definition of our own land. A very sad
affair indeed.
We must once a gain become Tama-rean in na ture for we ALL were in our
past. To brothers and sisters in the Caribbean remember that the title West
Indies is really referring to South American tribes who migrated to the region
that were mistaken as Indian. It does not refer to our woolly haired black
existence. The Caribs which led to the name Caribbean migrated a cross


--- PAGE 152 ---
Brazil through the interior of Guyana to the north until the coast of Venezuela
and finally to the a rchipelago of t he islands k nown a s the Caribbean today.
We continue to except European definitions for all aspects of our existence.
These definitions are really psychological spells that continue to bu rden our
race with negative complexes. Definitions must change if we are to return to
greatness as a race since all Nubians as a race are the o riginal definers of
this planet.
The African Nubians so-called blackness is questionable when they change
their original names to European usually Christian names to be a ccepted by
the Caucasians in their land. For the Orientals and Indians do not frequently
change their names to satisfy other r aces. The Nubian however especially
from Africa today change their identity to satisfy the west. For many Nubians
in Africa a re rejecting the public existence o f their original li neage thus
aligning themselves with evolution - the decay of original existence. If you do
not respect your own lineage then why should anyone respect you ± for you
are now adapting to the image of another race.  This is a very negative trait
taken on by the African Nubian in abundance for you a re rejecting the
names of your own forefathers, language, tribe and race. This is a template
example of Nubian suppression and those who challenge this notion are a
negative force within our race for they put the ideology of another race ahead
of their own. What makes Nubians represent our so-called blackness is
our universal allegiance to oneself and kind.
Nubians be weary of the media when dealing with Tama-re (Africa). You will
now notice that when we sadly face famine in our outer-regions s ubtly the
western media will actually blame nature itself for the event. They lean away
from the no tion of EU/US trade barriers, international debt, civil wars with
ammunition supplied b y the west and middle-east, and environmental
pollution from the west creating these harsher global climates. These factors
will make any country already billions of dollars in international debt find it
hard to help there own. Famine is Man-Made it is not a natural disaster.
Mineralogists and en vironmentalists can p redict crop failures month's even
years in ad vance ±  k now that it can a lways be p revented. Understand the
blaming of nature may not sound important but there is reasoning. It disguises
the real political and economical story behind e vents and installs in the
Nubian mind a rejection of God. For many will think why is God/Nature doing
this? When really it is man doing this and a  particular type of man at t hat.
Kuwait and Arabia have harsh environmental climates but they have the
financial resources to p revent national famine o ccurring amongst t heir poor
population. They seriously do no t want Nubians getting back in line with
nature at all. If you understand this day and time you will find it easier to avoid
problems in life. Animals are still tied to nature - before any major natural
disaster they will let you know something is going to happen ± especially birds
they will always leave before the event.


--- PAGE 153 ---
It is obvious that natural disasters are becoming more commonplace ±
for the Armageddon process is in effect. We advise Nubians not to take
in these e vents as random. Remember the decay of existence is
occurring ± the re-shuffling o f reality. I t is a n end o f an era we are
witnessing. This process is peaking slowly and may take se veral
decades but it is in motion and some of us through ou r genes may
witness the end. Negative existence be it disagreeable actions based on
negative forces which include e gos, greed, l ust, and h ate will slowly
drag the unwise into this Armageddon p rocess. This a lso includes
words which create negative images in the mind as well as the TV and
media for they will eventually result in n egative ac tions. The
Armageddon process is speeding up evolution, which in turn increases
death, be it t hrough war, diseases and un intelligent choices. These
unintelligent choices are the journeys of death ± drugs, i ntoxicants,
alcohol etc The beast is now eating itself the same way the body of a
human in starvation will eat its own bod y fat to survive. Liberalism is
blurring this process thus becoming fair-seeming to the unwise. When
we say liberalism here we are referring to the western media for they are
all li berals by nature as that is the legal standpoint of rationale. The
media machine of Africa is also warped tied to political agendas but the
majority of Africa don't have access to the media machine so the spell is
less present.  This Armageddon process is not forever tied to Sun and
Moon cycles for their where millions of years with these c ycles
occurring with only Nubians existing on earth.
Extract 19
Whose Nature of Blackness ?
We must understand that t he Caucasian e stablishments have successfully
created a mental positioning of so-called blackness as a militant rationale. An
ideology that eventually suggests physical conflict. They allow the Malcolm X /
Black Panther's symbolism to continue this thought process. Know that it is
the Caucasian liberals that continue the positioning o f t hese figures in o ur
history.  They allow this part of our struggle to be recognised within the
education system be it a black history month. The liberals are narrowing the
Nubians understanding of so-called blackness to the physical plane. They will
not provide you with the h igher spiritual and mental rationale o r scientific
attributes supporting our existence. Since Malcolm and the BPs - suggested
and un dertook physical actions in trying to a chieve their goals. Subtly the
media use these notions as a representation of `blacks violent nature'. They
are p resent in the education system to re-enforce the b lack s tereotypes of
violence in the eyes of the Caucasians and they align the colour black as a
negative around them. These are templates within black education therefore
the Nubian will not revolve (go ba ck) further. Most Nubians leave the
education system without gaining the ne cessary understanding o f so-called
blackness, which is really just one facet of Nubian nature. This prevents the


--- PAGE 154 ---
development of right knowledge be cause a t the stage of right knowledge
Nubians will be challenging social templates and eventually questioning which
nature is agreeable ? These include the challenging of liberalism and religion.
The so-called b lack education at school i s the Caucasians blackness for
liberals have to govern the doctrine. Many Nubians figure this out then search
deeper into their history. Few delve to the level of understanding o f our
sciences which will automatically tie the Nubian to nature for the substances
to execute science are classified elements of nature. To know your Nubians
nature as a science is beyond rationale that stimulates violence o r aids
Nubian de ath - it isn't even about blackness anymore it's about your r ole
within nature. Nubians are taught to detach real mental science from real life.
Therefore you can not align yourself with nature. Your God must be in control
of nature or is tied to nature so this rationale will still apply.
The system wants the death of the real N ubian na ture, which ha s
commercially been warped a nd tied with a notion of blackness that is of a
militant nature and rationale within the public perception. Thus c reating a
negative identity within the minds of all races especially Nubian. The true
nature of a Nubian is an opposing force to the true nature of the Caucasian.
This holds black liberalism in place, as Nubians of this nature can't evolve into
the d omain of pro-blackness. They want commercial blackness to be  about
the extremes ± militancy or smiley face liberalism. They have to separate the
natural scientific rationale of Nubians from the physical actions of blacks. For
anger ( militancy) creates negative a ctions while soft liberalism allows the
death of original existence to continue via evolution. It has always been about
knowing your Nubian na ture, which n eeds sc ience, history and religion to
reveal i t. For if t he genetic template is there - the woolly kingly hair / dark
melanin skin - then a spects of your original nature be  it 17,250,000 million
years ago or 400 years time will still be present within us. When getting back
to original existence regardless of what is ever taught to you by any race the
nature o f the original N ubians will have to be a greeable because you
represent life ± g iving birth to mankind. I f you a re taught that Nubians are
negative then those who evolved from that race must be as well. Theoretically
our symbol of blackness does not have to be a black fist in the air or Malcolm
X holding a gun near a window. For these represent oppressed periods in our
existence ± to use these symbols to represent who we are as a people means
a continue struggle in our existence ± it is the 400 year spell of existence.
Arguably a Nubian symbol could merely be a circle. The Sun, The Atom,
Planets all creation existences - we are in that creational family lineage
of existences since we are of original human existence. There are
indeed symbols ex isting within Nubian consciousness that represent
our existence more specifically. This notion is really to make the reader
acknowledge that the commercial positioning of Nubians in the west will
never represent our original existence. For our original existence is out
side the c ommercial arena of t hought. So when Nubians a pproach an
understanding o f t heir blackness or better yet their existence ± a sk
yourself are you b asing the rationale on commercial interpretations
(given by black and white liberalism) or by nature for Nature is forever
NOW ± thus universal expressed through science.


--- PAGE 155 ---
Extract 21
Evolution Ain't Revolution ± UPDATED !
You continually read evolution this ± evolution that within these extracts
± understand the essence of this English word stems from EVE. This is
because e volution is the s low decaying journey to d eath from original
existence. According to the Bible it was EVE that gave Adam the apple
that made them both fall from grace a nd then receive the c urse of
finding h ardship in life onwards. This is the decay of t heir original
existence. EVE- olution. We will state here that Nubians existed millions
of years prior to this e vent which religion b elieves is 6 000 years a go.
Remember the country of CUSH (Genesis chapter 2 / verse 13 ±  Good
News Bible) already existed. Cush / Cushites are an African tribe who
were present before the Garden o f Eden. O utside religion they were
existing in Africa for thousands of years prior. They migrated to Asia as
well. I n the King James Version it calls CUSH = ETHIOPIA (do your
research). These tribes a lso mixed in with the Hindu in earlier times.
Also consider the following that in the c ountry of Havilah (Genesis
chapter 2 / verse 12 ± Good News Version) pure gold, rare perfume and
precious stones existed. Perfume is a chemical substance put on people
± rare perfume means different types of perfumes ex isted ± who
searched these perfumes out to even distinguish which is rare or not in
the land o f Havilah? Remember EVE did no t even exist yet. The
statement pure gold means that different t ypes of Gold existed - an
alchemist would be needed to d istinguish what gold is good o r bad -
because a t t hat t ime Adam and Eve did no t know right f rom wrong
because they had not even been put in the garden of Eden yet. It is also
well documented that Gold takes millions of years to develop in earth.
Please understand the Nubian existence precedes the bible not by a
couple of hundred years but by millions of years. It is the dark skinned
woolly haired / Afro to bald Pigmy / Ptahite / Tar Deneg (our forefathers)
who existed before all religions merely following nature and the forces
of nature represented by extra-terrestrial / spiritual forces as a guideline.
It was absolute nature via the sun that created their and our existence all
from that original darkness - the initial source of all existence within the
three dimensional plane.
What you are reading must be stressed for there is an agenda to control
the history of existence. Right now commercially the ca uscains have
created a perception that they are the originators of existence on earth.
Science and history is clearly proving otherwise. This perception is now
being g iven to the Hindu lineage. Archaeologists a nd ufologists a re
centralising their thoughts with the East Indian and Indonesia existence.
Most of t hese people are not hear to reveal any truth about our
existence. They do not want the Nubian (woolly haired) present within
the global mental rationale of original existence. For this challenges the
Dharma (caste ideology). This is the oppressor's structure of governing
this alternative reality. Nubians must understand all origins stem back to


--- PAGE 156 ---
the darkness ± dark energy / matter and ether. All this will become more
important over the decades as  decay amongst t he races e volves. So
know they are manipulating history as we speak and introducing genetic
laws now that will become controlling tools for the masses in years to
come.
Realise that Christianity wants us a ll to b e-lie-eve that since the
beginning of time with millions of years of tribes and cultures existing
within Africa (Tama-re), with bon es of our Nubian forefathers carbon
dated millions of years old. That God first made himself present
amongst man in particular the Caucasian only 6000 years ago and that
his only son is specifically here for the Caucasians living in Israel today
and you believe this is equality. Many are happy to except this as a way
of life because in essence they accept t he rationale of reality being
governed by the Caucasian n ature not t he RACE. For the nature
originally stems from the Hindu. The Caucasians will align
agreeableness with themselves due to their position within religion. This
in turn has a negative effect on their nature making it easier for them to
justify oppressing o ther races. Since they are believed to b e gods
chosen they are allowed the privileges of controlling the world as gods
chosen children. This privilege is given to them by the unwise of ALL
races who are merely BELIEVERS tricked in to mental suppression. All
praising the notion o f evolution and b elief, w hich are influenced b y
technology which is governed by the Caucasian n ature. For the future
developments of t echnology will eventually change what mankind can
do in comparison to what the biblical God can do. Many are fooled by
intelligence tied to academics ± this only represents a  certain type of
intelligence. An intelligence c ommercially governed by the Caucasian
nature. It will be liberalism that will continue the ease away from facts in
to the palm of belief. Liberalism pushes desires, which in turn stimulate
emotions, which blur rationale thought. Rationale thought is the domain
of facts and right reasoning. They can't have the masses following facts
for that would b reak the s pell of ignorance (ignoring the facts). They
need this spell in place to control us all.
Once you follow the way of the believers it becomes very hard to react
to the truth this means on the physical plane. The momentum to actually
change physical direction ± which could merely be don't eat t hat! or
don't say that for that really means this ! Becomes hard because we pay
homage to the source of that belief. This is not just referring to religion
this is referring to anything. We must all study the validity of the source
as a guideline as to whether you should be following it or not. In these
extracts we try to induce rationale thought which aids reasoning. Now
please understand the rationale here ± for acknowledging nature can
NEVER be a  belief because it is existing right now w ithin you and
around you as you read this! All this ca me from the Sun which came
from the darkness / blackness ±  The All - which must be c onscious
because we are a ll products of it. If you travelled into the darkness of
space avoiding celestial bodies (planets) you will travel forever =
infinite. Solar systems are pockets of evolution within this darkness.


--- PAGE 157 ---
Now since YOU are a part of this Nubian and exist within this existence
cycle of darkness / blackness then to actually believe in yourself
strengthens our collective blackness for carbon and melanin are
universal existences highlighted the most amongst Nubians on earth.
There are no boarder lines between carbon, melanin and hydrogen (that
exist within your blood and flesh) within solids, li quids a nd gases in
space, time and matter. They ALL exist within you and around you so in
reality in the real world you are truly one with nature ± OVERSTAND that
(refer to AEO/Nuwapian literature). Furthermore if your actions a re
aiding your own race and you are representing your race primarily then
you are showing respect to nature for that is what made us who we are.
All races have a s pecific relationship with n ature - we are trying to
present the rationale of our Nubian relationship through these extracts.


--- PAGE 158 ---



--- PAGE 159 ---
Dear Reader,
We wish to thank those who have spread much of what we write. All we are
trying to do is to reveal or update the black message in this mess –  age. Much
of what you are reading is NOT NEW we stress this so please don’t think this
information has just come out of a hat. Much of this information is around 30
years old –  though some parts have been updated for today. A unification of
Nubian thinking is needed and the template to achieve this can only be
scientific facts –  then rational thought based on those facts. The light that
slows down to create dark matter could only be a black light. This black light
transfers to dark energy. This occurred within NOTHING, which really is
something, but perceived as nothing by those who do not bare scientific
knowledge. Those who re-wrote scriptures did not understand the science.
Why have we stated this here - it is because the real journey into correcting
our existence must start at the beginning and work its way up? There are
thousands of years of misinformation that the black reader must be aware of
in order for Nubians to reach their full potential on earth. If you believe the
blackness projected in the media and TV (this includes our own media) is
solely what is needed for us to progress as a race. Then know our true
potential will never be reached. It is only right knowledge that’s needed to
change our global position –  you think its money. Money will only turn into a
destructive tool if right knowledge is not in place within the Nubian before
receiving it. Many African leaders are supremely wealthy but do not bare the
universal knowledge of self and kind to change our global position. The moon-
ney turns their nature into sin (disagreeable) to their own kind (Nubian) but a
friend to those of other races who wish to use Tama-re (Africa) to help THEIR
own kind. We stress that your journey into improving our condition on earth
WILL leave the norms of today –  which are not really NORMS. For norms
stems from the description of The Norman’s - Scandinavian/French settlers
that dominated western Europe in their middle ages. In other words what you
are believing is NORMAL is really the understanding of reality based on the
Caucasians rationale. The real definition of normal must be actions taken that
do not have any detrimental affect on you physically, mentally and culturally in
any form and allows the continuation of your existence. This then excludes
intoxicants, illogical sexual practices and belief systems based on the nature
of someone else. The Nubian history, sciences and genetic composition all
exist outside their definition of normal –  that’s why we will find it very hard to
achieve racial goals because we are basing normality on their values –  which
universally is an opposing force to our own self and kind. Their value system
is heavily based on evolution, which is the slow journey to death away from
our original existence. Again we stress the original understanding of what you
are reading stems from the following Nubian writers namely:
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed,
Amunubi Rahkaptah, The Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO), Clarence
Jowars Smith (5%), Credo Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop, The Nuwapians,
Holy Tabernacle Ministries and The Journey Home Group, Marcus
Garvey & Noble Drew Ali.


--- PAGE 160 ---
Many readers are not following through on what we write they are not seeking
out these writers. Most questions you may have about our literature in 2005
have been answered with much more depth by these writers’ decades ago.
We are just touching on the key subject matters –  therefore we give you
extracts - 94 in total. We now have over 3,000 pages of information that has
say 40 pages on a subject matter that eventually gets narrowed down to a few
pages –  making it an extract. This does leave little loop-holes which hopefully
would be filled by the reader checking out the original writers mentioned
above. Our very blackness is at stake right now - there are forces actually
taking away our blackness. One is evolution aided by certain parts of religion
(not all) (mis-teachings). The another is the Caucasian rationale aided by
liberalism. Then there are the commercial disagreeable forces within the black
race (black on black suppression). Another we have not touched on in much
detail are the black mysticism scene (throughout Africa and the West Indies)
who have mostly corrupted the ancient African sciences and are now lost in
paganistic practices which stem back to Chaldean and Phoenician orders.
These orders got watered down through time and age and through evolution
got dragged into the Nubian existence corrupting the usage of theses
sciences. These ancient sciences are now sadly used for black on black
expressions of hatred of self and kind and are heavily tied to money (moon-
ney) via the moon. Most evident in Africa. In the ancient past these African
predominately Egyptian / Sumerian sciences were taught in ancient schools
and secret orders for the benefit of Nubians existing with nature. On a
differing note –  please beware of the Aryan movements hidden within
Egyptology –  don’t be fooled –  their nature is not in line with our ancient
ways of Ptah (Tar). They help conceal the Nubian existence in Egypt.
They may sacrifice themselves to prevent Nubians from working out our
true heritage. These and other negative movements strive on negative
numbers and dates namely 6 or 9 reversed to make 6 again. Historically
and biblically 6 is a bad number. All these forces are destroying the
blackness of mind by diluting the black understanding with negative (-) forces
and it is time for the pro-life forces (+) to take back the blackness in the name
of righteousness, justice and nature. In simpler terms they have made
blackness seem bad while white becomes good. For the darkness is the
source of all existence within a three dimensional plane. In different facets of
reality negative forces need somewhere to exist they have trained the
common man to accept these negative forces within the blackness. Nubians
must fight this negative rationale against us which has been commercialised
as stereotypes within the media. Your role in all this is merely through science
(not belief) to realise that blackness is the birth template of nature and the
light (white) is the decaying. Then teach your seed accordingly. We have told
you this is forever Now and you should know this for as you get old your own
hair turns white –  no matter what race you are –  it is evolution it signifies
decay. That is nature telling you what white represents on this planet –
we know this sounds very harsh but facts are facts. Winter is the season of
death in nature signified by white (Snow) and the cold –  less carbon is
generated (less burning). Sperm also represents this pattern in the sense that
brain cells are sacrificed by the man to create sperm –  and it is this sperm
within the women in darkness that creates life. In fact, its not even white for
white and black exist in everything solid –  it’s really represents ghostation. It


--- PAGE 161 ---
is the existence left when key chemical properties of rejuvenation have left.
Now understand decay which is evolution –  there is a decay in rationale which
is a by product of evolution. This means those who submit to evolution will
generate a rationale that will be out-of-sink with universal nature. It is
universal nature that gives the highest degree of life to existences that are
original. The decay in rationale is the journey from acknowledging and
respecting universal processes and order within all existences to then merely
thinking about the individual –  Me, Myself and I. This decay strengthens
desires. This leads to the person then becoming out of touch with nature and
universal order. Then the ISMS can claim them in the name of liberalism and
capitalism. Remember Liberalism is the daughter of Capitalism –  they go
hand in hand. Liberalism creates the rationale that capitalism exploits. This is
why liberalism has been given room in society –  it fights against universal
laws eventually allowing Capitalism to expand as universal laws and religion
(to an extent) block how far rationale can logically expand before becoming
anti-nature. Seriously step back and think! The Caucasian can not teach you
that white and evolution are the same and that it signifies decay. For their own
survival’s sake and positioning amongst the races, they cannot really teach
you or themselves this. The consequences are universal it would lead to the
demise of Christianity since the Caucasian rationale governs the doctrines
and images and the demise of liberalism. It would also lead to an inferiority
complex within their race. Therefore, what they did is to reverse the rationale
behind the darkness to push this inferiority complex on to the Nubian. To
correct all this would give birth to a reality based on nature directly - not
channelled through belief. Belief has to exist in society for the Nubian to reject
their original existence.
These PDF’s are youth orientated Regard this information as yours to keep.
Use this information any way you want as long as it is beneficial to the Nubian
race –  This PDF file is FREE. We are keen for Nubians in Africa to be
introduced to these extracts as we know much of this type of literature is hard
to find out there. It is highly recommended that you read previous
extracts (Vol.1, 2, 3, 4 & 5) before venturing into this edition.
PDF Extracts included are 76 (Revised) others will follow once the
information has been abbreviated. There may be grammar / literacy
errors –  apologises in advance. (1- 11 pages). 8 Writers contributed to
Vol.6 PDF.
The great writers above are your guidelines to a better understanding on
Nubian consciousness. Seek them out while you still have time!
Warning! Many people may perceive this as negative. This is awareness
literature. We have stated before that there are good people in all races.
There are people of other races who have helped the African more than
most Nubians on earth have done. Liberals by nature will not respect
scientific facts so their intentions will never lead to the full upliftment of the
Nubian race as scientific facts lead to the truth and it is the truth that shall set
you free. They wear away from absolutes as that challenges equality.


--- PAGE 162 ---
Extract 76
Planetary Nature and the Blackness - REVISED
The second biggest existence is a Universe. Know that the template of
revolution and evolution occurs within this existence. A Universe
actually expands and retracts in size. This process can actually take
millions of years depending on the size of the Universe. This is one of
the original universal cycles and everything within a galaxy is influenced
by this cycle. Within this Universe, it has been suggested that the
duration of this cycle is 18 million years via evolution (expands) (-) and
18 million years via revolution (retracts) (+). By analysing the movement
of constellations over thousands of years you can see this universal
cycle. The laws of opposites (opposing forces in nature) can not be
avoided. If you walk into a room with five doors and choose one to open
–  the final decision will always be whether you open that specific door
or not. Any decision in life will always come down to a yes or no to
proceed with an action.
Negative powers will make the subject of evolution always focus on the
Nubian existence on earth. There has always been a quest for Nubians
to change –  our quest for change as Nubians is to re-introduce our race
to mental quality that will lead to the better existence of our race. The
Caucasian will always focus on evolution amongst races leading to the
nature of the opposing races following the Caucasian rationale. Nubians
bearing the woolly hair / dark skin WILL ALWAYS be targeted for
evolutionary purposes simply because you are of ORIGINAL
EXISTENCE. This is the nature of all evolutionary forces be it
biologically i.e. a disease that will try to alter the original cells in a body
or socially and economically amongst the races through the Caucasians
since they are the last stage of evolution within human species. This
includes introducing a Caucasian interpretation of science, history and
religion. It is undeniable that the universal darkness regarded as space,
dark matter, dark energy and ETHER is forever NOW. It will always be in
existence –  forever and ever Amen. For The Amen really refers to the
creative state of darkness represented by the BLACK/BROWN BALL on
the head of the AMEN RE –  The high ancient Egiptian deity. That is what
the Amen of the Lords Prayer in Christianity is really acknowledging -
the blackness/darkness –  origin of existence.  Many parts of Christianity
were really taken from Egiptian doctrines then diluted by the Greeks and
Romans. Note here that you have Amen Re (the original interpretation)
Then you have Amen Ra the Phoenician / Hyskos interpretation which
they aligned with Fire & Sun worship It is this Ra the West teach.
Remember the Phoenician rationale really stems back to the Inbus
valley where this type of worship is still practised today.


--- PAGE 163 ---
The original Amen Re (Re being Sun rays) represents the universal
blackness of energy. It is about Science not religion. The black ball
(black/brown circle) on the head of Amen Re (The Amen) is the initial
blackness of existence –  the carbon, the dark matter, the dark energy,
the jet black sun, the ETHER indeed THE BURNING (please refer to
Amunubi Rahkaptah –  The Nine Ball Series). The circle as stated is a
universal matter (shape) in all existence and the blackness is the initial
state of existence –  The Amen. In revelation chapter 3 verse 13-14 it
says. (King James Version).
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches. And
unto the angel of the church in laodiceans write; these things saith the Amen,
the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of god.
Indeed the Amen is a separate existence to God and witnessed the
creation of God. It is the initial blackness of nature –  forever and ever
Amen. This is what it says in the King James Version of the bible –  don’t
believe this statement get the King James version for yourself to know –
not believe. The good news version as usual changed the meaning they
say.
This is a message from the Amen the faithful and true witness, who is the
origin of all that God created.
In many respects this is true as well as it is the gas particles of carbon,
hydrogen, ether, dark matter and energy –  The Blackness which is the
origin of solar systems. In revelation, Chapter 3 verse 15-16 you will
read references to HOT and COLD, now remember THE BURNING
anything organic from nature when burnt will give off carbon –  humans
are no exception (carbon dioxide / carbon-hydrates). These black
particles are of universal existence. They are everywhere at once –
forever existing - the blackness - The Amen. The Sun continually gives
off new black heat particles refreshing solar systems including our
planet through photosynthesis which then generates black starch in
plants and hydrogen and carbon liquids (oil type substances) on
planets. Therefore, we should recognise that space exploration is also
for the gathering of raw materials like oil, uranium etc - capitalism is still
in effect. All this blackness refers to the Sun heat genes and the burning
which Nubians / Nubuns are a product of via nature. This is why the
description of the messiah of having ‘his feet like unto fine brass, as if they
have burned in a furnace’ (King James Version –  Revelation 2 verse 14)
ties in with the universal burning of existence –  life. When you blow on
to your hand, you should feel heat –  your body is generating heat for
this to take place. The burning is universal it is the blackness –
everyone has it but the Nubian seed bearing dark skin and woolly hair is
the direct representation of this burning in nature in flesh and blood.
Within this solar system it could only be the Nubian that bears the
highest genetics and strongest blood simply because the Nubian has
the highest representation of heat genes within our composition
formula.


--- PAGE 164 ---
Amongst the human species, we are the only existence to develop from
a gases state to a solid state. This means gases interacting with sun
heat energy and ether developed fungi in water which eventually
developed in to homo-erectus - from gas to solid. All other races
evolved from solid to solid be it from Nubians (homo-erectus) or
monkeys. The template of indigenous humanoid existence on earth
existed before other races but not before the Nubians bearing woolly
hair and dark skin.
It was and is the expanding and retracting of a galaxy in size over
millions of years which influences evolution primarily - though different
gas regions in solar systems and gas particles also influence the nature
of planets and species that exist on those planets. If these species
where created at different times then they will have different natures and
compositions. Another influencing factor is the actual health of the Sun.
This refers to what stage is the Sun at concerning its own existence. A
dying star can not generate the same heat particles as when it was at
full strength. This influences the eco-systems and all planetary products
within that solar system. Now referring specifically to this solar system
it is well accepted that all planets came from the sun but now we must
realise that planets where spat out of the sun to allow the Sun to
function properly. One planet in particular namely Saturn was caste out
of the Sun in a gases state –  which it still is today. Now understand at
earlier periods in this solar system the gas abode called Saturn being
caste out of the sun was still hot like other planets cooling down but
unlike other planets its was gas not solid –  it was another Sun in the
sense that it exerted heat within this solar system as a gas ball. So there
was a time be it hundreds of millions of years ago when Saturn was still
hot while cooling down and gave other planets its own sun energy (like
photosynthesis). Saturn is around 740 million miles away from Earth
and is over 10 times bigger. Gases from Saturn would leak into our
region of this solar system contaminating the eco-systems of planets.
Scientists have suggested that Earth took 2,000 million years to cool
down after leaving the Sun. Now Saturn is much bigger than Earth so
you should realise that this gas abode called Saturn in its Sun state may
have been active as an anti-sun for several hundred million years. These
gases from Saturn are out of sink with the nature of this solar system as
the Sun rejected these gases. Unlike the sun though it has negative gas
properties, which were and still are destructive to the eco-solar system.
These gas properties exerted by Saturn once gave off a warped version
of photosynthesis, which influenced evolution on earth. Saturn helped
create earth’s initial diseases  (mutations in earth’s eco-system) in
essence death forces on earth influencing the + / - within earth’s eco-
system. Understand that as an anti-sun back then heat from Saturn
would take around 64-66 minutes to reach earth and this was occurring
daily for millions of years. This was before the rings of Saturn today
which now keep the gases in tacked since they have now cooled down
like the other planets. The Sun’s heat only takes 8 minutes and that’s 93
million miles away. These events may have occurred multiple millions of
years ago but once foreign particles enter an eco-system especially if


--- PAGE 165 ---
the eco-system is within its creation stages they can remain submerged
within that eco-system forever or until higher forces are able to rectify it.
Negative gas and solid particles still exist today dormant within the seas
and plantation on earth and rises and falls in temperature can reactivate
them creating so-called new diseases. It must also be stated that it was
Saturn within this period as an anti-sun that stimulated atmospheres on
some of its own moons in particular Titan. This is why scientists say
Titan had an eco-system similar to earth. These moons are really
meteorites that were drifting into our solar system that got trapped in
Saturn’s gravitational pull within the anti-sun period. In fact Saturn is
one of the original sources of evolution in this solar system. It is an anti-
nature force since its gas particles where rejected by the sun.
Understand (+) and (-) exist in all facets of reality. Saturn is number 6 –
being the sixth planet and has often been interpreted as Satan / Saturn.
You have Satur-day, then Sun-day, then Mon-day.
Saturn the SUN and the Moon.
Amongst planetary bodies in this solar system, Saturn represents 666,
the Moon represents 333 and the Sun represents 999. (Nine to the power
of Nine to the power of Nine = infinity (do the maths)). 333 + 666 = 999.
They equal 999 only because they originate from the Sun. The moon is a
second evolutionary generation planet. It did not come directly from the
sun –  hence 3. Once atmospheric gases be it carbon, hydrogen or
oxygen etc leave an environment it becomes dead –  hence the Moon.
Saturn being gases rejected by the Sun is an opposing force (-) and
takes on the opposite symbol to 9 which is 6 –  but it is NOT the
equivalent to the Sun as 9 is the highest in rank. Now 6 to the power of
six to the power of six is limited, 3 to the power of three to the power of
three is limited but 9 to the power of 9 to the power of 9 is Infinite. 9 is
the highest ranking of number within the original sequence as 10 is a
another tier sequence 1 and 0. Suns are the highest ranking abodes in
universes so people who are most adaptable to the Sun are closer to the
lineage of nine ether –  original universal creation forces –  the governing
forces of universes. It is the woolly hair that curls into the 9 in shape
signifying your universal positioning.
Now take in the rationale - the gas particles that created the Sun
represent life forces still today since they help vitalise living organisms.
Gas particles rejected by the Sun can not be in tune with the existence
of living organisms on earth. Therefore, amongst planetary bodies in
this solar system the Sun represents 9 Ether (conscience pro-life forces)
that preserve the continuation of existence. Saturn in this solar system
represents 6 ether (anti-nature gases) since it was caste out of the sun.
The moon with no atmospheric gases represents death amongst the
celestial bodies. On earlier extracts, we have mentioned the Moon is tied
to 6 ether. This still applies, as the journey to death is evolution from
nature to anti-nature, which decays to death. This is a very rough
abbreviation on the subject we strongly recommend that to overtsand
these issues you should search out literature by Ammunubi Rahkaptah


--- PAGE 166 ---
namely The Nine Ball Series. These books were written in the late 1960’s
and may be hard to find but they are out there –  search them out.
Nubians have to understand what you have just read is from the basic
creation of planets which you have been taught at school as a child –
but they do not teach you that if the sun is a predominate gas ball which
spits out a gas ball (Saturn) the composition of Saturn must be negative
to the Sun. If you don’t like the taste of something you spit it out. This is
simple science. There is a reason for not teaching Saturn’s influence on
nature –  it is because Saturn and the Moon are tied to certain belief
systems still practised today. Historically the Romans and the Greeks
acknowledged Saturn as an existing force and their decedents still do
today subtly. The Romans in particular associated Saturn with
agriculture. They acknowledged Saturn as the God of Agriculture. This
is because Saturn as stated helped warp the eco-system adding
evolutionary forces (decay) –  anti-nature. With this rationale, the
Romans did just that –  they destroyed nature - lands, people and
cultures. Their descendants as a collective still take on this rationale
today. Those with straight hair govern these belief systems and many
still today have aligned their very nature with Saturn and the Moon.
These groups took on the celestial nature of Saturn via evolution. In
other words since Saturn scientifically is anti-nature in gas form. These
groups aligned their nature with this planet because the Sun via nature
is genetically against the Caucasian the most amongst the races.
Saturday is their tribute to Saturn it is on the 6th day of the week and
correlates to Saturn the 6th planet.
Through science and astrophysics, you can see the real history of
planets and their influence on earth. Nubian reader please understand
there is a deep rooted mess that needs to be tidied up by right
knowledge before Nubians as a collective can reach our full potential.
We stress this mess goes back thousands of years. Now Nubian ask
yourself this. What is the real name for Saturday? Since the Greeks and
Romans are only around 6,000 years old (max) - we have existed
millions of Years –  Scientific fact - so what were we calling Saturday
back then? Know now that there is a need for Nubians to create our own
universal language.
It is very important that Nubians never forget the blackness –  This
rationale. Once you forgot the blackness as the universal source of
existence, it was inevitable that evolution in the form of mis-teachings in
religion, other races, and anti-nature forces against your physical and
cultural existence would lead us astray. There is a never-ending war
going on between evolution (-) and revolution (+) and since Nubians are
of original existence by nature our strength exists within revolutionary
actions within nature. Technology is not on any side until the individual
use technology to manipulate aspects of nature aligned with evolution
or revolution. The continual harsh treatment of Nubians over thousands
of years has been because Nubians could not see this war as
evolutionary forces by nature will attack revolutionary forces in their


--- PAGE 167 ---
quest to become original existence. Those of original existence by
nature would always have to be agreeable because without life (+) you
can not have death (+) so evolution will always be a negative journey via
nature for those who are original. One of the issues of existence must
be the science of improving your standard of living while satisfying the
natural traits of original existence. This Universe over the last several
decades has actually started the retracting process. Retraction suggests
elements move closer to their centre point. In solar systems, the central
point is the Sun. This would lead to a rise in temperature. Solar systems
too have retracting and extracting natures in smaller intervals, which in
our solar systems are linked to divisions within our equinox. Therefore,
you have Universal size change, Galaxy size change, and solar system
size change. Then you also have size change influenced by different gas
regions of other solar systems –  literally bouncing off other solar
systems with different densities and gravitational forces. Dark matter
stabilises these universal occurrences.
Nubians will have to know these subject matters if we are going to reach
our full potential –  Why? –  Because it was the gases which as a
collective create the blackness and it is the blackness (space) which is
the source of all existence. Our genetics actually grew with the
universes in gas form which then through the jet black sun gave birth to
planets then the Nubian. Our genetics in gas form exist within the
blackness, which holds this solar system together. Don’t get spooked
out by this statement this is scientifically true. If everything on earth
originated from the Sun that was created by a combination of gases
within the blackness then the properties of this blackness of the
universe exist within us. These universal properties merely transfer from
different states over periods in time namely gases, liquids and solids.
NOW the darker skin means the properties of this universal blackness
has been preserved. Furthermore the woolly hair, which curls into a
circle, represents the universal template of existence –  everything is a
circle. You can create any solid shape in existence –  then rotate the
object fast and it will ONLY create the shape of a circle. THIS IS
UNIVERSAL LAW. So, know that the very dark skinned Nubian bearing
tight woolly hair from Sub-Sahara Africa with broad noses in pygmy
form is the representation of nature itself in flesh in this solar system.
For this being is what the gases of this universe groomed in to human
existence first with the strongest genetics amongst humans. KNOW
THIS FOR THIS IS A PART OF BLACK HISTORY !!
We MUST not neglect the woolly hair, as it is our crown within nature.
There are certain traits in nature that only the Nubian existence can
comprehend because our genetics posses the rationale of original
existence –  for other races have been touched more by evolution. The
unintelligent Nubian will become a victim of evolution because they
rejected the universal laws of nature. Unlike the other races, nature
primarily influenced their evolution –  but the Nubian who openly decides
to reject their original existence is openly conflicting with the forces of
nature.


--- PAGE 168 ---
As stated on other extracts the blackness in gas form –  be it ether,
carbon, space or dark matter represents 99.999999999 etc % of all
existence. This is scientific fact. Many do not even understand this
notion. All existence refers to all gases, all liquids and all solids in and
around all planets and all gases between all planets and Suns in all
universes. They had to turn the blackness into nothing and disconnect it
as a creation substance within absolute nature. Once the blackness
within the human mind was perceived as nothing something had to fill it
namely (-) negative forces. This is because man associated positive
forces with light. Universally all black lights e.g. Electro-plasma, gamma
or UV rays had to exist before light for the human eye. This is because
light perceived by the human eye must derive from an existence that did
not have light present –  darkness. The combination of these black lights
creates white light. So know that what you are calling white light itself is
an evolutionary stage of darkness –  a certain type of darkness.
Furthermore, this darkness consists of many black lights usually
perceived as ‘nothing’ by those interpreting scriptures in religion.
Therefore, they due to the lack of scientific knowledge gave ‘something’
(existence) to light.
The darkness which human perceive in a darkroom still exists exactly
where it is even when the room is full of light. You breathe out carbon
but you can not see it but under the right circumstance i.e. burning
something organic you will see the blackness. When the Caucasians
started delving into this blackness, it created an anti-nature effect
because evolution has influenced their understanding of nature. Carbon
exists for natural purposes primarily. When the Caucasians started
using it in industry for self and kind, they alter its purpose resulting in it
now conflicting with other facets of the Eco-system. They are now using
the blackness literally to destroy human’s existence within nature itself.
Carbon exists for nature’s sake (universal cycles in nature) not solely
for mankind.
Those of any race in tune with nature will bare the best rationale of
using the elements of nature properly but it will be those of original
existence who by nature will be most in tune with nature when they are
thinking in their right minds. This is because evolution (the journey of
decay) has had the least effect on them.
Revision Note: On earlier edition of Vol.6 extract 76 stated that a Galaxy
expanding/retracting process was 18 million years. This Really refers to a UNIVERSE.
Wording error due to language conversion. The Galaxy expanding/retracting process has
been suggested to be 24,000 years (equinox template).


--- PAGE 169 ---



--- PAGE 170 ---
Dear Reader,
It is highly recommend that you read previous extracts (Vol.1 to 6)
before venturing into this edition.
After studying cyberspace and after discussions amongst ourselves. Some
queries about our writings have led us to give further comments in this
volume. We will also add that we are not online regularly here in Africa. We
receive and send writings to associates (usually in different languages from
many countries) who then translate it, convert it to PDF then put it online on
various sites.  We have decided to address some queries found online.
We can only stress that in order to re-evolve (if have not done so already) you
should search out these original forces that we continue to mention at the
beginnings of our volumes. Many of the questions and answers would be
covered in a much higher level of depth by the following. These are the real
sources of most of the rationale in what you call black consciousness today.
You can find much writings on these writers and organisations online –  do not
be afraid to search them out.
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, Amunubi Rahkaptah (Nine Ball -
Liberation Information), The Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO), The
Nuwapian Nation of The Moors, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed,
Clarence Jowars Smith (5%), The Holy Tabernacle Ministries, Credo
Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop, The Journey Home Group, Marcus Garvey
and  Noble Drew Ali.
We study these writings, science, psychology and what we call Verbal
Rural Nubian information. If you find this PDF and the other volumes
don’t be afraid to let others know about it. E-mail it out to friends,
families and other Nubians who simply need to hear information
beneficial to our race. Take this information and use it WISELY to re-
condition our race and break the main spells that have large segments
of our race in disarray. We try to write this information to allow those
from any Nubian background to be able to understand the rationale. One
thing all religions, sciences, and other perspectives have in common is
that they all acknowledge nature as an important factor in our lives.
There are real processes in nature, which are universal that simply
conflict with the rationale that governs views of reality today. Nubians
must seriously start to understand the opposing forces of evolution and
revolution in real time.
This PDF file is FREE. You can put this on your own website or forums to be
freely downloaded. You can email this information to Nubians who can benefit
from it. We are very keen to have people from the continent of Africa be
introduced to this information as we know much of this type of literature
is hard to find out there. Many people may be offended by the information
you are about to read we are sorry but if you truly respect nature and
science, you will understand. There are processes in nature itself that are
allowed to be stated since they naturally emerged.


--- PAGE 171 ---
A scientific methodology will be used as this will minimise room for man-made
belief systems to emerge thus keeping the message undiluted without bias. 8
writers where involved in this Vol.7. These extracts are not the all but rather
a hint to even greater information. The greater information is from
organisations and writers we have mentioned above. We are trying to give
you the Nubian basics and YES some of the information is very challenging
of the norms you have been given as reality. The actual writers of these
extracts are on a journey also –  with different writers (from different Nubian
schools) putting forth-different subject matters we all learn from each other as
we hope you are from these extracts.
Warning! There are many people who will perceive this as negative. This
is awareness literature. We have stated on many extracts that there are
good people in all races.  There are people of other races who have
done more to help the African than most Nubians on earth have done.
We have stated this at the beginning of these extracts. Liberals of all
races by nature will not respect scientific facts so their intentions will
never lead to the full upliftment of the Nubian race as scientific facts are
a facet of the truth and it is the truth that shall set you free. They wear
away from absolutes as that challenges equality. Real equality must be
in line with ALL DIFFERENCES as well as all similarities being known
and respected by All.
This PDF is mainly a questions and answers volume. Other extracts will
follow once the information has been abbreviated and centralised. There
may be grammar and literacy errors –  we apologise in advance. No
Endnotes or Index included. (1- 16 pages).
UNIVERSAL MATTERS
Please refer to the ANCIENT EGYPTIAN ORDER (A.E.O), and Amunubi
Rahkaptah (Nine Ball - Liberation Information). For much more depth on
this subject matter.
First of all when we talk or write - we write in a manner that can relate to
anyone. For information has to be made universal. Diction often lapses to
allow ALL to enter. Diction also lapses because some of the original literature
is written in both European and African languages.  Those who convert it may
commit errors. We see many black intellects in the world of cyberspace more
concerned about errors in one line than telling others about subject matters
and concepts or the WRITERS WE MENTION AT THE BEGINNING OF
EVERY VOLUME. For every specific spelling discrepancy you find also write
a specific positive notion for balance –  then let a new reader decide.
Furthermore, the critical intellectuals should write their own literature
BENEFICIAL TO NUBIANS in our main segments. This means writing
something that specifically Nubians from Jamaica, Ghana or France can
relate to simultaneously. We all simply need better information to create a
better existence for ourselves. Much of what we write is for Nubians of all
backgrounds –  much of what we write may seem simple to some - that’s fine
–  as long as the many understand it - that’s all that counts.


--- PAGE 172 ---
WE repeat - go to the writers and organisations mentioned at the
beginning of every volume. THIS IS WHERE MOST OF THE EXTRACTS
ARE DEVELOPED FROM. Even at the beginning of certain extracts, we
state certain writers. There may be GRAMMAR & LITERACY ERRORS.
THIS IS STATED AT THE BEGINNING OF EVERY VOLUME.
Many people read literature about the universe but do not reason that you are
actually a part of it. If we told you that the emotions love, hate or honesty etc
come either from Suns or higher spiritual forces you would think this rationale
is crazy. Well these emotions manifest in the mind right which is a part of the
body that evolved from the ground of planet Earth that originated from Suns
which comes from substances that as a collective represent darkness
(space). Astrology (Zodiac) suggests that certain star regions influence
human life on earth. These solar-systems have different compositions.
Therefore, they give off different energy through light. They train you to follow
every star region except for the Star / Sun of our very own solar system,
which created our life on earth. Light has different frequencies and only
existences that can vibrate at certain frequencies can see the light at that
frequency. At a certain frequency, light is in line with the human eye. So light
outside our frequency to us would be considered a different dimension e.g
aura - scientifically proven to exist around humans.  We have stressed the
darkness / blackness of existence is the prime state of existence. There are
different universes that exist in different dimensions or vibration frequencies
for what is the purpose of dimensions if existences can not exist within it.
These existences that vibrate at higher frequencies regress to this frequency
–  a frequency in line with this three dimensional plane. Therefore, they
become elements that the human eye can see and the human mind can
acknowledge. The trademark example is ice, water and air. They are really
the same existence at different frequencies. This is why we mentioned the
understanding of nothingness. The domain of bi-aps and quarks for these
elements are lighter than hydrogen and helium and are not considered gases.
Solid, liquid and gases are what are generally considered –  somethings.
Elements outside this trinity are definitely considered nothing. Though the
common man has been taught that nothing is darkness / blackness which
really is a collection of many creational substances which in governed
intervals within space, time and matter can create, rejuvenate, and
manipulate. These gases as a collective where known by ancient Nubians as
9-Ether (ether as upper air –  the burning blackness of matter into all things).
All this ties in with Triple Stage Darkness. Now the space time continuum
estimated at 14 billion years old (a very low estimate at that) is NOT the
expansion and retraction of a universe. A collapse of a solar-system within a
galaxy can force a part of a Universe to fall back on to itself. Even within their
notion the universe can retract but not to the extent of the extraction. The 18
million years we stated refers to the suggested retraction / extraction period of
this universe. You have a circle of existence (scientists call a universe) inside
this circle are galaxies. This circle expands with galaxies in it. Now what we
are suggesting is that within this circle you have clusters of galaxies, which
move in the same current or direction (frequency or dimension). These
clusters are universes. This is similar to a bowl of water, which has different


--- PAGE 173 ---
currents within it. These clusters of galaxies vary in size and existing within
the same current makes their existence dependent on each other thus
becoming a universe. Ethiopian scientists’ suggested this as well in the
1970’s. These Ethiopian scientists were not respected by the west the same
way the west doesn’t respect alternative medicine. They only respect their
view and have millions of Nubians world-wide following their view. We assure
you that when Nubians give out theories that challenge their existence they do
not respect it. The same way the archaeological data of Nubians existence
has been heavily pushed underground. People don’t understand that the
writers don’t own this information –  WE ALL DO. There are different Nubian
schools expressing their rationale throughout these extracts. In extract 76
(Vol.6) we stated that the SECOND biggest existence is a universe based on
a three dimensional reality. There are higher dimensions of existence and
within these dimensions, a reality is present. Other dimensions are
scientifically acknowledged but rationale vary because this now steps into
their understanding of religion believe it or not.  Existence from higher
dimensions can manipulate existences at lower planes. The same way a
programmer can manipulate existences from a two-dimensional perspective.
Cycles are always present - you have Suns that continually burn out light
throughout their existence which then collapse into black holes that MUST
take back the light. Light is NOT the controlling existence in universes.
Blackness / darkness controls light. Black holes end when the same amount
of light the Sun gave out is returned. We told you the surface of Suns are
black thus imploding into Black Holes. This creates balance in the universe.
Mainstream science today does not discuss in detail the role of Black Holes in
relation to the existence of universes. To conclude this simply –  we strongly
suggest different dimensions; densities and matter create different universes.
These are clusters of galaxies. Mainstream science has grouped all these
clusters of galaxies together. Furthermore, the existence that this very
universe is expanding into (based on scientists today) must be bigger than the
universe for the universe to grow into it. What are the properties of these outer
regions? Its all theoretical –  but one thing that isn’t that can be seen right now
are the laws of opposites –  extractions (-) and retractions (+) are a part of it.
The idea of ever lasting evolution is the real agenda. They must promote
this notion as natural. For once it’s natural within your minds you will let
evolutionary forces become the governing forces of your own existence. For
evolution then becomes the representation of NOW. Who are the governors
and definers of the direction of evolution –  today? Once you realise the
universal existence of cycles, it creates true momentum to change. With
regards to the universe it means its creation was organised as its
characteristics fit within a process. This gives rationale proof of higher
governing forces in existence. Nubians must learn to trust nature. Study its
universal cycles for (+) and (-) must exist in anything within a cycle. Therefore
elements that go away will eventually come back and if solar systems extract
and retract so must the origin of these solar systems. This is universal order.
They do not want Nubians understanding universal cycles because the prime
existence of the universe is closest to Nubians amongst human beings. The
blackness of existence.


--- PAGE 174 ---
Q: Aren’t the laws of opposites opinions on right and wrong?
You have cycles in nature that are forever existing. The core markers of this
cycle relevant to humans are namely life (+) and death (-). We stress that
these are the universal laws of opposites which through these extracts have
been explained in relation to different facets within nature namely race,
genetics, cultures and the rationale of these based on the laws of opposites
played out through revolution and evolution. All existing within Absolute
Nature. Many aspects of what we write in this day and time will be perceived
as far fetched because many readers have NOT truly reasoned out these
laws which are universal. POWERS THAT BE DO NOT WANT THE NUBIAN
TO RESPECT THESE LAWS AS THESE ARE SOME OF THE GOVERNING
FORCES OF NATURE. Therefore, a Nubian bearing the knowledge can use
this rationale within the cycles of nature as guidance. A Nubian not
acknowledging these laws can easily fall victim to disagreeable forces that
can guide them to the death of themselves, their culture and our race. For
rationale and mentalities itself are also tied by cycles and universal laws.
THE UNIVERSAL LAWS OF OPPOSITES
There are many other laws that have not been mentioned in these extracts.
The laws of opposites can be considered a starting point as it is commercially
acknowledged as well. We all live and exist within these laws of opposites be
it gravity (up or down), our own life cycle –  birth (+) to death (-), day and night
etc. To reject the validity of these laws of opposites in existence is
unquestionable for your own life is based on it. Now the journey from life (+) to
death (-) can only take place via evolution –  thus becoming the journey of


--- PAGE 175 ---
decay to death. The only force to counter attack this is pro-life in rationale,
which becomes revolution. The source of pro-life is original existence, which
is present at the birth stage. To be more specific it is the highest stage of
existence before decay. The basic practising of pro-life is the mental, physical,
biological and even spiritual preservation of original existence for that is the
original intentions of nature itself.
Original existence is not just an individual it also refers to a lineage that
carries the DNA of you within it. Now as an individual in real time -
revolutionary actions are primarily mental actions. This is because the
physical existence of man can not reverse. We can only slow it down. Only
the mentality can be reversed this will allow the physical more opportunity to
reach our full potential as an individual and as a race. Mental revolution in
today’s society that applies pro-life forces in line with our original existence is
one of the prime stages in improving our race. Pro-life also refers to the
preservation of nature itself –  acknowledging stages in cycles that represent
life. We regurgitate much of the rationale in these extracts to show you the
laws of opposites within different facets of nature. Now to answer your
question –  the governing forces of absolute nature set up these laws and
humans naturally fulfil these laws as a part of nature. Suns have solid birth (+)
and solid death (-) in other regions of the universe with no influence from man.
So understand that the laws of opposites are NOT an opinion its a universal
trait.
Q: Why are black people at the bottom of global progress
amongst the races ?
ANS: The answer is as complex or as simple as you what it to be. There are
literally hundreds of reasons such as specific events in history detrimental to
us, prejudice agendas within religion, politics and education seeded many
years ago still existing in the governing doctrines of this reality. Also consider
half-truths in science or better said cover-ups in the allowance of information
about the Nubian reaching the public domain and do not forget the straight out
lies concerning archaeological data supporting origins of cultures and races.
This list goes on and on. Every facet of the reasoning is just as important as
the other. With regards to nature and the laws of opposites the Nubian demise
is because Nubians are generally following a 3rd generation evolutionary
rationale within this reality which as expected is now in decay when compared
to the processes of nature itself. This rationale conflicts with the your 1st
generation rationale which actually exists within your genes (in original
existence) since we are directly from the waters of earth. This 1st generation
rationale will be heavily tied to nature and the forces of nature that establish
the nature of nature. These higher forces set up what is called universal
cycles for example seasons in earth’s atmosphere or within this solar system,
and also the actual journey from birth (+)-to-(-) death. These forces are
universal creational forces forever existing within space, time and matter for
life and death will always exist within the three dimensional plane. These
forces where known by our Nubian ancients as 9-ETHER (ethanol = burning =
produces carbon = the darkness). All solids in existence e.g. planets, moons,


--- PAGE 176 ---
organic life originate from SUNS that are CONTINUALLY BURNING. ALL true
Suns are created within the DARKNESS of space. Religiously God must have
created this process or be an actual apart of this process. Within the cycle of
human existence Nubians exist at the birth (+) stage as the original
inhabitants of this planet which through traces of our existence have then
evolved (for various reasons) from darkness to light to become the Caucasian
at the other end of the cycle. This is FOREVER in line with universal order as
the darkness always precedes light. What is known, as universal / absolute
equality is when nature within cycles allows segments within itself to reach
their full potential at different times NEVER simultaneously. However, there
may remain continuous, universal order within this as Suns will always be
dominant over planets and darkness will ALWAYS be the predominate
existence in all universes. True equality must allow all segments or individuals
to follow there true nature anywhere on earth as long as that rationale is NOT
harmful to the products or cycles of nature itself. Now over 66% (2/3) of the
Nubian existence is following this 3rd generation rationale governed by the
Caucasians norms and values which are based on their nature. For the
Caucasian there is no conflicting within themselves they live according to their
nature. As the latest product of human evolution via nature their rationale will
be the furthest away from the original intentions of nature due to evolution
itself which universally is the journey to death from birth. For Nubians to follow
this rationale creates a war within ourselves –  for you are actually fighting
nature within yourself. This creates dysfunctional issues within our own race.
The 2nd generation rationale which gave birth to the 3rd is the Phoenician -
Hindu mentality based on their traditions and cultures they gave birth to
Dharma (white = heaven / black = hell) taken on by people bearing the 3rd
generation rationale as guidance to their survival for after light is present it
fades away within the cycle of nature eventually starting again from darkness.
For Suns are created or manifest in the darkness. The Caucasians existence
is based on maintaining this caste system it is a simple as that - through the
belief that white is good dark is bad. Many aspects of Liberalism (sexual
perversion / death as an option) are merely a reflection of their original Aryan-
Hindu / Phoenician / Hittite Code roots which they are brainwashing the world
into thinking is universal. It is their nature. They need darker races to follow
this nature –  so that we reject our true nature allowing them continual
dominance over races as they will be the only race utilising their full potential
living by their real nature.  Evolution via nature has made the Caucasians
rationale conflict with universal laws –  religion to an extent helped control their
growth towards anti-nature. They now live through the spirituality of Liberalism
and the mechanics of capitalism. These give freedom for death forces to
manifest within your body via intoxicants, drugs, alcohol, cigarettes etc all
speeding up your journey to death but are perceived as fair-seeming to many.
These people have not re-evolved to realise that to actually aid the
killing of yourself you are aiding the killing of nature since you are a part
of nature.  For many of these people, the sad reality is that they were actually
destined to play out their own demise –  for a positive (+) and negative (-) will
always exist within absolute nature. Your freewill is an opportunity for some to
change this. Liberalism creates this rationale of decay. For Nubians, this
decay will result in the lack of births generating children to change our world.


--- PAGE 177 ---
This does not mean that ALL in a race are negative NO for the notion
agreeable and disagreeable exist in scriptures. This means good and bad can
exist in ALL RACES. However the nature of all races are different with those
of original existence (Nubians) in their RIGHT MINDS as the SUNS on earth
representing nature in flesh. For segments in nature to work properly you
have to keep that segment pure for the manifestation of that segment is the
natural way that segment is suppose to be in accordance to nature itself.
Before you even get to the political and economic solutions on how to improve
our condition a true leader will need to grasp the rationale of nature through
science, religion and history and respect facts which are the representations
of nature right now. This is a revolutionary notion for you are mentally going
back to the way we where not the way other forces want us to be. Technology
is outside this notion as that is not organic it can be used to do revolutionary
or evolutionary things depending on the mentality of those using that specific
technology. Nubians understand that technology is passed down - a positive
person can create something (pass away) then it can be picked up by a
negative person who then uses the template to create something bad –  say a
new weapon of mass destruction. There was a book in Egipt called ‘The Book
of Magic’ (research this). In this book many of the foundation mathematics
where written. Now ask your self why is this mathematical Egiptian book
called the book of MAGIC. Isn’t Magic hocus-pocus !? –  Yet it’s a
mathematics book. Most of the foundation mathematical roots stem from the
Egiptians. What has often been interpreted as sorcery in ancient times was
really elemental sciences often taught in Pyramids –  known as MIR. This led
to the word MIR-ACLES. Nubians gave up facts / maths / science within
nature for spookism and religions outside Africa. Science & facts give
traditions proven purposes without this rationale implemented African culture
regresses to belief as seen today in many regions. That’s why in Africa
progress is hard. The Nubians that fled into Sub-Sahara from the Nile
Regions had hardly any ancient scriptures or teaching methodology. Then
evolution took us on the ride we are still on today. The Nubian reader must
realise that our forefathers, even today in the village, reason that those who
bare the highest universal knowledge should to be in leadership. Now the
Moon-ey has intervened (buying leadership). Money not managed mentally
will only guide man in to desires away from universal rationale. Capitalism has
been devised to exploit the weakest. Therefore, since Nubian are at the
lowest position they have made Nubians bare the most exploitation. Many
black leaders due to deep rooted mental suppression in all walks of life have
accepted this exploitation of our race as tolerable and partake in these actions
against their own kind themselves. They are the CAIN characters of our race.
In conclusion we could have answered this question merely saying that black
people fell off because we are not proud to be black or we are deaf, dumb and
blind or because of racism from other races which are all true in many
respects –  but we need the rationale present to KNOW this not BELIEVE
these notions. The governing force of rationale are cycles in nature. This is
not the absolute answer but one aspect of it !
Please search out literature called Right Knowledge Series / Breaking
the Spell written by As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi and the H.T.M.


--- PAGE 178 ---
Q: In Extract 18 (400) (Vol.5) it is said that Africa means to
divide - ‘Afer’ does not mean this ?
ANS: Firstly we stated the following on that extract:
In fact it has been SUGGESTED that the historian Leo AFRICANUS (1495-
1554) tied the name of the continent with his own surname combining the
‘Land of Afri’ stated by the Romans and ‘Afar’ the Phoenician definition’.
Understand the Romans through wars gained the northern regions of Africa
their definition does not cover the whole region ie –  Sub-Sahara. There
references to Africa are climate based (weather descriptions). The original or
should we say the earliest description associated with the actual word
AFRICA given by those who are NOT Nubian within the last 6,000 years was
the Arabic definition ‘FARAQA’ which means to divide or separate. These
where Phoenician –  Arabs. The Phoenicans also used the term AFAR.
Together you have AFARAQA (Africa). We used this original definition to
describe the mentality of Nubian throughout the world who follow the rationale
of other races which will only lead to division within our race. The
SUGGESTED as stated above refers to the commercialised definition given
by the west who continue to pay homage to the Romans and their belief
systems tied to Saturn, Jupiter and Venus (Moon) (desires). The death of Leo
Africanus 1554 AD coincides with the initial abduction of workers from Africa
which started around 1554-1555 AD. Thus sealing his surname with the
continent. For Nubians here in Africa if your colloquial tongue does not have a
word in it other than Africa to describe this continent then TAMA-RE can be
used as that stems from the early Egyptian Nubian civilisations that have
roots in nearly all African regions. There is a spell in the word Africa because
the origins of the word come from other races. Now when we as a race except
this word and then align that very word with our own hair AFRO it aligns our
very existence as being defined elsewhere.
Know our hair in its original state was known as 9-ETHER representing
creational forces on earth since we are the first definers and builders of
this planet - defined by Egyptian Tar descendants. ETHER ties in with
ETHIOPIAN.  Prime Ether is from Suns and on the surface of Suns there
are giant flares reaching 1000’s of miles in to the atmosphere. These
flares usually curl into the symbols similar to 9 just like the woolly hair
of Nubians –  do your research. This is known as GRANULATION. These
are symbols of your universal heritage within nature itself –  Know this !
Please refer to The Nine Ball - Liberation Information (Vol.1) written by
Wu Nupu Asu Nupu & Amunubi Rahkaptah


--- PAGE 179 ---
Q: In the day you can see, in the night you can’t how can
darkness be good ?
ANS: You are judging right and wrong from the perspective of man inside the
rationale of belief. Many people do not understand what we have written and
they get spooked out. Everything in all existence within the three dimensional
plane came from existences that as a collective create darkness. Light itself is
a by-product of darkness –  in other words you need the properties of
darkness to create light. Without darkness light can’t exist without light or
should we say white light darkness still exists. We say white lights because
black lights are present in darkness. The darkness which has been labelled
void or nothing may have existed billions of years before white light
represented as frequencies of heat from Suns which are jet black on their
surface. When you think of light you always think of something visible to the
human eye. Light in tune with the human eye is an evolutionary stage of light.
This darkness as dark matter and energy holds universes together. Nubians
MUST seriously take in this rationale which is clearly proven through science.
What you are calling white in terms of the human eyes in some respects is
actually an illusion. Sir Isaac Newton (English Scientist) re-established that
the colour Red, Blue & Green as a collective rotated on a circle quickly will
visually create the colour white. There are illusionary properties in the colour
white –  the colour of ghost. The moon is an example of this illusion as
moonlight is really the reflection of the Sun on its surface. Moonlight is 2nd
generation Sunlight. That is Sunlight that went to the moon, them off the moon
comes to earth. Since the moon is dead it alters this Sunlight. This is a
different light –  so know that those who follow the lunar calendar are following
reasoning based on events from a dead planet, which gives off a lesser light.
In earlier times in this solar system, Saturn gave off heat signals that could
penetrate earth’s atmosphere at night.
Generally, religion ignores scientific facts. There is a deeper agenda in this as
well. It is because through science and research racial origins, genetics, even
the potential origin of higher forces can be challenged. It is not about
disapproving scriptures for there is historical evidence supporting much in
religion it is about preventing the masses from really knowing the origins of
races, tribes, customs, events, even the origins of actual good (+) and bad (-)
according to the scripture (this is where darkness and light come into the
equation).  Even in the main religions, the darkness is also acknowledged as
a governing existence.
In Koran 6:1 it clearly states:
‘Praise be to Allah who created the heavens and the Earth, and made the
darkness and the light’.
Remember The Most High Allah is being praised for creating light and
darkness. In the bible (King James Version) Amos 5 :18 it states:
‘Woe to you who long for the day of the LORD! Why do you long for the
day of the LORD ? That day will be darkness, not light. When he said ''


--- PAGE 180 ---
It goes further to Amos 5:20 it states:
‘Shall not the day of the LORD be darkness, and not light ? even very
dark, and no brightness in it ?’
The main quote concerning light is of course in Genesis 1:3 it states:
''And God said, "Let there be light," and there was light. And God saw
that the light was good, and He separated the light from the darkness.
God called the light "day," and the darkness he called "night." And the
evening, and the morning were the first day ''.
For this event to occur God must have existed in darkness.
Now take this rationale in - for God to say that the light was good means that
bad white light exists if light itself has to be judged. For those who really do
research into the origins of words they will discover that Lucifer (a name for
the biblical devil) actually refers to ‘shining light’ –  Do your research on this.
Even in Corinthians 11:14 it says ‘Satan himself is transformed in to an angel
of light’. In Luke 10:18 it says ‘I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven’.
We have mentioned that there are illusionary forces in white light.  What we
are trying to say hear is that your perception of light as the ALL GOOD is NOT
based on facts or science therefore it is a belief system. GOOD CAN EXIST
ANYWHERE Where positive (+) life is respected. In the real world for
atmospheric reasons, human beings could not exist in a planet bearing
continuous day and no night.  Nubians must understand how deep the spell
goes within the English language they purposely set up white and light to
rhyme (synchronise) –  aligning the words together. Now the opposite are
black and dark –  they are not in sink when spoken. This makes sure that
white is in the thinking domain of light. This helped develop the caste-racist-
mind way of thinking still in full force today. For it helps position the rationale
that White = Light = Right (all synchronised). The reverse of this becomes
Black = Dark = Wrong/Left (all out of sink). Those who put the English
language together set this up. Nubian brothers and sisters please wake up
from this spell !
Please understand that what you actually read within scriptures compared to
what is preached to you is now two different things. The scripture (in its
original language) is closer to the facts than what is preached, as what is
preached will forever have room for the biases of man. These biases are just
like desires as it is what YOU (the preacher) want reality to be. The King
James Bible was written in 1611 AD. It was written in a time when hell was
described as brimstones and flames with those in hell being burnt to crisp –
basically looking like people from central Africa. Your proof of this is within the
religious art work of Europe in that period. Also know the abduction (often
kidnapping) of workers from Africa was already established. Through the
preachers in religion, they had to make darkness bad to justify their political
and economical actions (slavery) within the real world against Nubians. On a
scripture level this stems from the Romans using religious sects they


--- PAGE 181 ---
governed to group 66 writings together (some from previous spiritual
scriptures) - tweaked parts in line with the roman agenda - and called it the
Bible. They left out writings which conflict with how they wanted to position
Christianity an example is the Book of Barnabus, which contradicts, key parts
of the new testament. On a mentality level they got the rationale to make
black bad from the Greeks and the Phoenicians who got it from the Hindu
(Dharma –  caste). The Phoenicians in particular as the Hyskos dynasty (your
light skinned Egyptians) of Egypt –  killed off the original Nubians (black) in the
region and forced us into Sub-Sahara (though many of us where there
already). They altered the Egyptian ways, which only Nubians could utilise
sensibly since we via NATURE / NETERU set up the doctrines. The
Caucasians celebrate these light skinned Egyptians. It is more complicated
than this so take this as merely an over view. Now to conclude this answer
please take in the rationale –  if scientifically everything in existence came
from darkness and God in religion created or dwells in darkness. Then
darkness posses the creation forces of existence. Therefore, darkness MUST
have GOOD (+) in it. Furthermore, this Good must have existed before the
Good you perceive within light.
Please refer to a book called The African Origin of Civilisation –  by Cheikh
Anta Diop for commercial proof of the Nubians Sumerian and Egyptian
existence.
Q:  To focus on similarities not differences creates progress?
We will stress this again. There are good and bad people within all races.
There are people of other races who have done more to help Nubians than
most Nubians on earth have ever done to help their own kind.
There is a conflict going on simply between those in line with nature and those
not. This lineage with nature is bigger than a race. All races are involved in
this conflict. We have told you on earlier extracts that for Asian couples to
raise their child within an understanding of Asian man + Asian women = Asian
child or white couples to say white man + white women = white child –  CAN
NEVER BE NEGATIVE TO ANYONE. They are acknowledging their
existence in line with nature. It is not a black thing –  it’s a pro-nature thing.
The real truth is that many are not intelligent enough to treat those who are
different fairly when those differences are fully expressed. Understand there
are agendas governed by Caucasians to mix genes. They have created a
perception that it is in the best interests of all races for this to occur as it
destroys social boundaries. This in reality is partly true but it becomes
evolution –  which universally is the journey of decay –  so what is the actual
decay that occurs ?  Something in existence has to regress for evolution to
exist and it will climax in some type of extinction. The regression is the Nubian
genes who are simply the highest on earth –  it’s as simple as that. This then
changes the whole direction of human existence –  since Nubians are of
original existence. The roots from the tree of life (The original DNA strands of
Human existence) are being cut. A new tree will then be planted following the
nature of someone else. This new nature WILL NOT be of original existence


--- PAGE 182 ---
but rather evolution. Therefore by cutting off the original intentions of nature
(cutting off the roots) the tree falls and decays. Our Nubian ancestors will
need our very genes (darker skin) for the next several hundred years to
survive the changes in global warming –  the sun cycle.  Large sections of the
Caucasian race (not all) need these genes also they are taking them off
Nubians, Hispanics and Orientals right now. Many people simply do not
understand the depth of what they are reading. Understand you are reading
rationale based on time as NOW because nature is forever existing through
cycles. In other words NOW is just as important as 2050 AD or 4004 BC. So
much of what we are saying is based on macro rationale. The regression of
Nubian genes especially in the west is happening right now and because our
great grandchildren in the future exist in your DNA today, everything in
generation Nubian time is as important as NOW.
Sadly, the forced mixing on Nubians has purposely been done many times in
history. It was done by the Cannanites (original albino Caucasians) who did
this with darker races in the Caucus Mountains (Caucasian). The Hyskos
dynasty (light skinned) of Egypt did this to mix into the lineage of kings and
queens. More recently, they did this through US slavery to Nubians and
American Indians. They also did this with the aboriginal in Australia. Each
time they do this they actually regress the genes of darker races who all have
stronger blood. This in turn regresses the genes of the whole human race.
Many Nubian Americans have now inherited diseases and illnesses that
simply do not exist in Africa from the Caucasians blood. Much medical
hardship in the future of your own family lineage even after you have passed
on can be avoided by accepting this information. We DO apologise to those
who read this and see this as racist / negative. We can see that someone who
trusts the ways of today would perceive this as that. We say please research
this information, please ask yourself why are we different, please ask yourself
why is their winter and summer. It is because nature has established cycles
and processes. Everything is on a journey of existence. This refers to their
very existence as a facet within nature which is on it own journey e.g. the
human race. This journey gives off different compositions in evolutionary
order. We are explaining the complications within this evolutionary journey
amongst the facet within nature called human beings.
Nubians please think this through you have liberals, societies and capitalists
who want to convert Nubians to their doctrine of existence –  putting you out of
sink with nature. They study all black literature and writers to devise ways of
trying to change our rationale. They subtly disrespect our ancient forefathers
and your Nubian culture –  from the mental backdoor. In other words
archaeologists or black specialised historians would know that many of the
villains or bad guys in films or even historical documentaries e.g. names,
places or customs –  where of Nubian or ethnic decent.  They often do this
with Gods from the original Nubian cultures of the Egyptians, Sumer and
Olmecs. The standard disrespect is to make you continually believe that many
biblical names and tribes were Caucasian. When we see them do this without
a care –  it really makes you realise the depth of their ways against Nubians.
The more you research the more you begin to realise how rooted the
campaign against us has become.


--- PAGE 183 ---
Now to answer the question –  similarities are equal to differences they need
to be respected equally to create true balance in nature. Always remember
everything would be exactly the same with no freewill but rather a fixed will
and their would be no cycles in existence -  if nature created the version of
equality taught today. This is NOT absolute equality which allows everything
to reach their full potential without intervention thus respecting the original
intentions of nature or god.
Q: Please explain the Sun-Cycle ?
Firstly we will provide you with an interpretation of the sun-cycle. For more
concise information we recommend you search out the following writers
namely: As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, Amunubi Rahkaptah (Nine
Ball - Liberation Information) and The Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO).
Scientifically and historically, you will find references to global changes in the
weather. A prime example often commercially discussed is the ice age. In this
period they claim that the temperature of earth generally lowered for a fixed
period of several thousand years and that man after this event emerged
sufficiently more highly developed. There is evidence to support this event  -
but NOT in reference to the whole planet. They purposely exaggerated the
global size of the ice age to create a new starting point for mankind within
your minds. This is because the Caucasian race has only been recorded on
earth for around 15,000 years MAX there is multiple evidence that suggests
even less than that. There are Nubian bones found in Mali and Ethiopia and
the Congo that are well over 20 million years old.
Once you truly understand this age gap between the races you will see that
Nubians in the Americas and in the west Indies are still very much Tama-rean
in heritage a few hundred years is nothing compared to an existence of
multiple millions. Even in the 1960’s there where Lucy bones found in Africa
which were 3.5 million years old even then. Now just like you have winter and
summer this solar system itself has seasons. What they are calling the ice
age was the winter season in this solar system and what you are calling
global warming is the sun age we are now entering. The global warming is
two-fold:
(1) Natural Global warming (sun-cycle)
(2) Man-made global warming.
The natural version is the opposing season of the ice age or moon cycle,
which we are entering right now. The ancients knew that those bearing
healthy melanin genes can provide offspring to prosper through sun-cycles. If
you do research you will find out that right now the Sun’s surface heat is
raising. In fact the actual temperature of Mars, Earth, Jupiter, Venus and
Mercury are ALL rising –  indicating a solar system change in temperature. A
Sun cycle. The second global warming is man made and if continued will
result in all races being vulnerable to the Sun not just Caucasians. This is one
of the intentions of the secret societies who know the darkest races are at an


--- PAGE 184 ---
advantage so to destroy the ozone layer will lead to negative equality
amongst the races reaction to the Sun –  in other words we all go down in the
shade together. They have pushed equality as an existence within your mind
which isn’t really equality because they do not teach you the differences on a
genetic level between the races at school or even within the general medical
arena. They purposely leave out these differences to create equality in your
mind. Over the next several decades nature will force these differences to
surface (its starting already) then you will see which Nubians follow nature or
the doctrine of existence written by the Caucasians. Remember the
authorities in the west will completely blur this scenario –  setting up new
diseases for Nubians to counter balance the rise in cancer or mutation related
illnesses in the west. The Caucasians are fighting nature –  and they are
trying to get Nubians on their side. The Nubian abundance of hemoglobin /
stem cell is a key trait in controlling many biological mutations in Caucasians.
They need black blood so they will need to register our DNA. Here in Africa
they get our blood through testing for diseases in the outer regions. In the
west they usually get our blood through diabetes testing and through
registering DNA / ID cards they will know all blood types. Now back to the
Sun cycle. Melanin creates imbalances between those who have a lot and
those who don’t. Even within the African continent alone, there are blood
types that only exist in certain regions. Why are there so many blood types?
Something has been added or taken from certain humans to create these
differences. Whether you are taking in this information in or not the global
warming is here and growing. You can read these extracts and think nothing
of it –  as if its just some brothers and sisters ranting about black stuff ?! But
hopefully by now you should have looked in to the writers we mention at the
beginning of every Afronaut Volume –  and realised the depth of information is
just too much to ignore. Nubians in Africa and the west need to start waking
up !
For us as Nubians it is important that we keep or melanin pure and healthy.
For those who don’t take heed their lineage (genes) will evolve and become
Nu-asians (Neutroidism) no longer bearing Tama-rean (African) traits. No
longer people of the Sun. No longer in original existence or they’re original
natures. No longer black people. No longer in line with their original position
within the universe. Sadly, many will not take heed to what they are reading…
we hope YOU do.


--- PAGE 185 ---



--- PAGE 186 ---
Dear Reader,
It is highly recommended that you read previous extracts (Vol.1 to 7)
before venturing into this edition.
After studying cyberspace and after discussions amongst ourselves. Some
queries about our writings have led us to give further comments in this
volume. We will also add that we are not online regularly here in Africa. We
receive and send writings to associates (usually in different languages from
many countries) who then translate it, convert it to PDF then put it online on
various sites.  We have decided to address some queries found online.
We can only stress that in order to re-evolve (if you have not done so already)
you should search out these original forces that we continue to mention at the
beginnings of our volumes. Many of the questions and answers would be
covered in a much higher level of depth by the following. These are the real
sources of most of the rationale in what you call black consciousness today.
You can find much writings on these writers and organisations online –  do not
be afraid to search them out.
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, Amunubi Rahkaptah (Nine Ball -
Liberation Information), The Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO), The
Nuwapian Nation of The Moors, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed,
Clarence Jowars Smith (5%), The Holy Tabernacle Ministries, Credo
Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop, The Journey Home Group, Marcus Garvey
and  Noble Drew Ali.
Warning! There are many people who will perceive this as negative. This
is awareness literature. We have stated on many extracts that there are
good people in all races.  There are people of other races who have
done more to help the African than most Nubians on earth have done.
We have stated this at the beginning of these extracts. Liberals of all
races by nature will not respect scientific facts so their intentions will
never lead to the full upliftment of the Nubian race as scientific facts are
a facet of the truth and it is the truth that shall set you free. They wear
away from absolutes as that challenges equality. Real equality must be
in line with ALL DIFFERENCES as well as all similarities being known
and respected by All.
This PDF is mainly a questions and answers volume. Other extracts will
follow once the information has been abbreviated and centralised. There
may be GRAMMAR AND LITERACY ERRORS –  we apologise in advance.
No Endnotes or Index included. (1- 10 pages). Four writers contributed
to this question and answers section.


--- PAGE 187 ---
Ques: This information sounds too simple?
Ans: Intelligence in itself runs in cycles based on the rationale of the
individual. For any journey into the knowledge of a subject will peak, when
what you know becomes simple or natural. You could learn to play the piano
and at first, it may be a difficult task but after months of training, what you first
found hard should become easier. Many readers are taking in what we write
assuming its very simple –  and to some respects it is –  but on whose terms.
Many Nubians are clearly fooled by the English language. They think English
grammar and prose is the execution of intellect. They have not reasoned out
that UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE is the real procreator of intelligent thought
leading to RIGHT KNOWLEDGE. This is mental, physical and spiritual
knowledge, which can not be restricted to one facet of reality. In 2006 a
Nubian not bearing the knowledge of AT LEAST physical self (the BASIC
template) can not execute the actions that can align themselves with nature.
Nubians must now embrace the answers to the QUESTIONS OF SELF. i.e (i)
The original names for Nubian races and our HAIR (Cushites / Ptah / Pygmy),
(ii) The original names for so-called Africa, (Nubia / Tama-re / Ta) (iii) The
influence on earth of our ancient Nubian civilisations (Sumer / Olmecs / Tama-
re / Moors / Tar Deneg), (iv) The blackness of religion (A Nubian lineage), (v)
The blackness of original existence (9-Ether –  the collective blackness of
gases that create Suns)  (vii)  The names of our original Gods whose names,
identities and history with man were altered and put in scriptures (The Amen /
Anu / Ano / Abaanaa / El Elyon ‘The Most High’) prior to the actual name
GOD (vi) THE BLACKNESS OF NATURE ITSELF. Any Nubian who has not
started the journey into these arenas of thought no matter how educated they
are CAN NOT BE BEARING UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE prior to RIGHT
KNOWLEDGE. They can not execute UNIVERSAL INTELLIGENCE. This all
reveals your TRUE position within NATURE itself. For the past is as important
as the future, therefore our ancient names and words are just as valid today.
Academic knowledge is just ONE FACET of universal knowledge it is not the
sole definer of intelligence in fact it’s just  of many and a bias one
at that. This is NEVER to say that its negative but rather the Caucasian
rationale is continually promoted through many aspects of it especially the
PROFESS (opinion) subject– matters namely History, English, Archaeology,
Psychology and Sociology.
The maximisation of intelligence is when all facets of knowledge are being
executed for the same purpose based on your role in nature as a person a
group or race. Please reason that history, science and religion all begin in
darkness / blackness. History turns in to science the further you go back as
science becomes the key indicator to assumptions in pre-historic data. Then
as science, it goes further back to THEIR NOTHING prior to the big bang.
Religion goes back to nothing, which then led to god creating light. Therefore
the darkness / blackness has both ends covered within your rationale of
existence namely science and religion. These gases which as a collective
create this blackness after the nothingness become the prime existence of
existences within a three dimensional plane. Therefore, the prime execution
force of absolute nature within a three dimensional plane is the collective
blackness of existence and the Nubian is just the personification of this force


--- PAGE 188 ---
on earth in human form in this solar system. In fact evolution has contributed
to the lightening of the skin from actual black / blue skin to brown. ISN’T THIS
RATIONALE SIMPLE –  yet how many people out there acknowledge it ? We
are just trying to give the Nubian reader the template of awareness. We hope
a Nubian taking in these extracts will gain some of the basic facets of Nubian
consciousness. These extracts will only give the fringes of the blackness we
all need –  search out the writers and organisations for the rest. For those who
question the importance of our literature based on the language should realise
that in their mind only the west can guide them as you are defining
intelligence on their terms.  The laws of opposites + / - is one part of universal
knowledge. Universal laws could be considered a template that allows you to
execute RIGHT KNOWLEDGE. Many Nubians in 2006 have not even
REASONED OUT these laws in nature in REAL TIME as NOW meaning they
can’t see that the rejection of these laws within nature has contributed to our
condition today. Once you abandon RIGHT KNOWLEDGE only
EVOLUTIONARY FORCES can guide you, as that is merely change
concluding in decay and eventually death. The opposing journey forward in
line with RIGHT KNOWLEDGE and a UNIVERSAL UNDERSTANDING
(which is still change) is an execution of REVOLUTIONARY RATIONALE.
The prime symbol of existence in a three dimensional plane must surely
be the CIRCLE for nature’s existence is based on this existence - a
forever cycle. The creator of the circle MUST BE THE CREATOR OF
EXISTENCE. Within theoretical discussions It has been suggested that
the circle must have been created and existed in a higher dimensional
plane prior to the 3rd dimensional plane and was introduced to this plane
within absolute nothingness as a function process that existences in
nature now fulfil naturally. The original positive (+) and negative (-)
forces pulled and pushed on the smallest and lightest existences
forcing them to take on the shape and reasoning of the circle. The circle
gives + / - equal share of its existence creating the circle shape. These
existences in PRIME STAGES OF DARKNESS eventually grew into
atoms. The reasoning of a circle means that these existences can
execute actions repeatedly but never having an absolute end as
anything travelling on the circle will travel forever. Solids, Liquids and
Gases are one of the prime cycles of existence –  existences will forever
move in to different states within this trinity. This is why you have a
DEADLINE –  thus indicating that travelling on a line (direction) will reach
an end. The circle however is INFINITE. Everything in the three
dimensional plane is made up of circles –  from atoms and molecules to
planets and Suns and of course YOUR 9-ETHER HAIR. These
descendants of the circle follow a cycle from beginning to end to
beginning etc. The initial reasoning of circles / cycles occurred in PURE
BLACKNESS. This occurred way before the existence of liquids and
solids and what you are calling light that can been seen. The reason we
have stated this here is that the circle as cycles in nature produces
facets and existences that represent stages on a cycle. Many readers
have not realised that what they have been reading throughout the
extracts is an expression of these cycles. Cycles that many believe are
negative or unintelligently believe don’t exist at all.


--- PAGE 189 ---
In conclusion, simplicity does not represent a weakness of intelligence but
rather a stage of intelligence. The reader’s own intelligence will dictate what
stage THEY can reason out the information given. As usual we say DON’T
SKIM READ THESE EXTRACTS –  check out the writers we always mention
at the beginning of the volumes. Then seriously reason that if the first
inhabitants of the world where Nubian, then the original Gods, sciences,
customs, definitions –  way of life must be traceable back to Tama-re / Nubia /
Africa.
Ques: There are some very ‘OUT THERE’ statements and concepts why
should anyone believe this information ?
Ans: You shouldn’t believe this information but KNOW IT. We do admit that
many readers who are not aware of any of the writers we have ever
mentioned will find much of what is written as so called -–  OUT THERE.
Though we will always remind you that the information you are reading is
decades of years old and we will always tell you to read up on the writers
mentioned at the beginning of every volume. The essence is that many
Nubian readers don’t believe or really know themselves. Therefore many can
not work out what is really hear to help them. If you do not know yourself then
how can you define what is right and wrong according to your true nature.
They need to SEE TO BELIEVE instead of RESEARCH TO KNOW. For what
you may see may actually be an illusion. You have to realise that a global
conspiracy set up hundreds of years ago (still being played out in factions
today) dictates the actual mainstream way of thinking that has been created
through religion, education, the media and the isms. These facets have been
puppeted by societies and their representatives in bu-sin-ness and politics.
The reality they have created simply conflicts with many aspects of nature and
universal order. This creates a reasoning for the masses (especially Nubian)
out of sink with nature. These illusions set up by the system are simply
needed to control you.  The caste system, capitalism, the other isms, science,
history and religion are all touched by reasoning detrimental to the natural
existence of the Nubian, Moor, Ethiopian, Tar, Tah, Tama-rean, Blackman,
Negroid, African etc. These forces have contributed to evolution pushing our
truths in this day and time to the far end of normality. Many readers of the
extracts got to Vol.3 and read about extra-terrestrials and then turned off
because that was challenging their view of a reality. Yet hundreds of millions
of people believe in spirits, ghosts (g-hosts / host of gases) and the zodiac –
these existences influence man but are they human as you know it ? In fact
many should realise that the rise in supernatural media / TV / Films has
contributed to the rise in supernatural belief. The trick is to see to believe over
research to know. Through research you will find there are thousands of
artifacts and pictures on ancient walls throughout the world in all civilisations
dated thousands of years old depicting ships in the sky or even extra
terrestrial life. Religion has extra terrestrial reasoning within it. We have told
you that the very word NATURE originates from the word NETERU the names
of Tama-rean –  Egyptian / Egiptian Gods who as a collective were divided into
elements of nature –  earth, wind, fire, water etc. This collective equals nature
itself and the prime existence in nature are gases which as a collective make
the blackness / space. Then you have the Anunnaqi gods from the Sumerian


--- PAGE 190 ---
lineage of Nubians who through Anu and Annu / Anun-Re where also
acknowledged by the Tama-rean Egyptian. The followers of these forces be it
SPIRITUAL forces, forces within NATURE, extra-terrestrial BEINGS whatever
makes you comfortable with regards to definition were NUBIAN brown to
black skin people –  bearing woolly hair. Your people –  Your blood. Nubians
where specifically following THE AMEN of the bible also known as ANU for at
least 22,000 years –  way longer than Nubians have ever followed Christianity
or Islam. At the time when Nubians where following this rationale Tama-re
(Africa) were the global leaders in economics, science and maths etc –  the
foundation civilisation of the world. In fact what you are reading about are the
origins of Christianity and many parts of Islam. NUBIANS [especially in Africa]
MUST REALISE THIS AND NOT GET CAUGHT UP IN THE ISLAM (ASIAN)
VS CHRISTIAN (CAUCASIAN) WAR OF BELIEF. THIS WAR IS BEING
PUPPETED BY BU-SIN-NESS AND POLITICS SETTING UP THE NEW
WORLD ORDER AS A CURE. Christianity especially is the altered version of
Nubian history and Hinduism where we now follow a white Jesus (JE-hovah –
z-EUS) rather than the original  HARU / HERU / HORUS where the story of
the messiah CLEARLY originated from. PLEASE RESEARCH ALL OF THIS
FOR YOURSELF !
Many people are looking for a deep explanation to blackness. They want it
written with a PHD signature. We give out the basic construction of Nubian
consciousness. THIS IS NOT MEANT TO BE THE ALL. It is meant to be
FREE Nubian literature that can be found in cyberspace for the sake of
AWARENESS.
Ques: Elaborate on the Moon and Money ?
Ans: We will simplify this answer for within the extracts we have over 110
pages of information on this subject alone. In essence, Money be it cash or
credit induces a negative rationale within humans. This is not to say don’t
utilise money for the sake of helping your people. NO this is to say that if this
force is not controlled it becomes the route to evil –  the weak minded tool
against nature. You will notice that society especially in the west has now
been arranged in a way that forces Nubians to partake in actions spiritually
destructive to our race in order to archive wealth. You will generally have to
sell your soul to succeed. Our big entertainers often do - as well as some of
our brothers and sisters in the system who indirectly work for govt agencies or
associates eg. police / welfare. If you have read the extracts to this point then
this is nothing new. So now lets look at the origins –  Money as stressed is tied
to the moon –  in particular a moon god actually named SIN also known in
different cultures as SINGHE, SIVA, LUNA, KINGU, VENUS, ISHTAR,
NANNA all these representations of this Moon Force were tied to DESIRES.
The strongest desires in humans today are the desire for MONEY and SEX –
their origins are the moon with the same type of force. The women’s biological
reaction to sexual reproductive potency is dictated by the Moon. The triple X -
XXX associated with sex films is really the women’s XX chromosome being
pushed to the extreme –  hence XXX.


--- PAGE 191 ---
In the bible it stresses that man should not follow the LAWS OF SIN –  the
ACTUAL LAWS of sin –  for SIN was a way of life executed by followers of the
Moon Gods. We mention sex here because liberalism / sexual perversion
which you think is outside religion really stems back to these ancient ways of
life practised by the Hindus and Hittites (one of the forefathers of the
Caucasians). In fact most of these demonic ancient practices and symbols
exist today in mainstream culture disguised within what you call the norms of
society –  but the Nubian should realise these practices won’t be considered
negative to races who BELIEVE themselves as the original seed of earth.
They will see these traits as natural expressions of self and they have fooled
many black people to except these ways as normal as well. Now
OVERSTAND that evolution itself has contributed to this rationale as
universally that is the journey towards death away from original existence and
these tribes have a higher evolutionary composition than Nubians. Therefore,
their understanding of what is natural will be different. The more black people
embrace these ways the more dominance other races and forces will have
over us for it tells other races that you have rejected your nature to
incorporate their rationale. DO NOT FOLLOW THE WAYS OF TV / MEDIA
BLACK ENTERTAINERS –  MOON-NEY SIMPLY CONTROLS THEIR
NATURE. They want you to perceive rationale outside equality as
confrontational when really it can show the imbalances and cycles of nature –
when explained by those bearing universal Intelligence. The moon as an
opposing force to the sun and the rationale of ancient man was the
destructive rationale (-) within nature executed by facets of the Hindus, Aryan-
Hindus, Chaldean, Phoenicians, Hittites (Caucasians), and the lost Nubian
tribes. These Nubian tribes did not bare RIGHT KNOWLEDGE rejecting
original Sumer and Tama-re (tar) the same way many nubians today reject
their culture. The Hittites of today tend to wear silver (moon) over gold (sun).
THE NATURE OF THE MOON GOD SIN WORSHIP HAS BEEN
TRANSFERRED IN TO THE WORSHIP OF MOON-NEY AND BUS-SIN-
NESS. All bu-sin-ness commences after the day of rest SUN-day on MOON-
Day (Monday). This is why in the scripture it describes MONEY as the route to
all evil.
The opposing force to the moon is the SUN - THE AMEN. The Tama-rean
Egyptians originally from UGANDA and SUDAN and the lower and mid Nile
regions –  ARE YOUR ORIGINAL EGYPTIANS (Tar / Anu people) who
followed the AMEN-RE represented by the Sun. The Amen was the governing
spiritual force over the other EGYPTIAN GODS who as a collective were
known as NATURE. Originally known as NETERU. The early Caucasians
followed much of this moon rationale and since the moon ends the day cycle
the Caucasian of the Caucus mountains could roam more freely at night
without the RE / RAYS of the sun attacking them –  they bore respect for the
Moon - till this very day. Know that if sunlight gives out energy such as
photosynthesis then moonlight which is 2nd level sunlight (evolutionary light)
must give out a weaker energy to those of evolution. This is why historically all
negative creatures / myths of deformed men commercialised last century into
films about Dracula, Werewolves etc. are based on the deformity occurring at
night. This is not the creational darkness we refer to in these extracts.


--- PAGE 192 ---
THE BLACKNESS / DARKNESS WE REFER TO EXISTS INSIDE OF YOU
IN GAS FORM (THE BREATH OF LIFE) AND IN THE MENTAL /
SPIRITUAL PLANE. BEFORE YOU SLEEP, MEDITATE OR PRAY YOU
WILL CLOSE YOUR EYES AND SEE DARKNESS –  SO REASON THAT
THE DOORWAY TO HIGHER CONSCIOUSNESS WILL ALWAYS BE
CHANNELLED THROUGH DARKNESS PRIOR TO ANY LIGHT. THE
SAME WAY THE DARKNESS OF SPACE CREATES SUNS & THE
NUBIAN RACE GAVE BIRTH TO ALL LIGHTER HUMAN SPECIES.
Nubians must seriously understand what’s happening! because the moon
worship is concerned with blood sacrifices. This is why horror films are staged
at night. They need blood to interact with oxygen and light. The light subtly
burns blood creating blood vapours which in gas form emanate within the
atmosphere. Corpuses do the same thing –  decay the atmosphere. Blood
needs organic darkness to stimulate life. In other words it needs to remain
inside a living body as once it interacts with oxygen or excessive light (heat) it
mutates. In the real world WARS especially GENOCIDE satisfy MOON
worship. MOON REASONING is about the death of nature while SUN
REASONING is about the life. For the SUN is ALWAYS burning generating
heat for life to exist. The Nubian force is primarily from the Sun but universally
from Ether which is the collective gases creating the blackness that creates
Suns. These gases will EXIST FOREVER –  FOREVER NOW. Celestially the
Moon signifies evolution (another cycle –  a day). Now after reading this study
symbolism within the system you live in to see whether they respect the Moon
more than the Sun –  also see how actual black gases are positioned in films /
TV. In fact reason that most of what you will witness within the media / so
called entertainment will almost be the exact opposite of what you have been
reading throughout the extracts! The reader must realise that this subtle moon
worship is in every facet of society its in religion, mainstream traditions, lunar
astrology, even the opening of Wall Street is dictated by the moon.
Now OVERSTAND that you had a moon cycle which historically has been
suggested to be 6,000 years and a ¼ period of an equinox –  24,000 years.
This century the 2000’s marks the end of the moon cycle into a sun cycle.
Earlier on Vol.7 of these writings we briefly discussed the Sun cycle and that
global warming is the burning in of an new age and burning out of an old one.
Burning out is the decay of burning –  burning out is the end of life. This
change in natures order is bigger than a life time this is why many Nubians
can’t really comprehend the understanding of NOW or that darkness /
blackness is the prime existence of nature. The Caucasian in the form of the
Hittites and Hyskos (for that is their lineage) were and still are LITERAL SUN
WORSHIPPERS through their interpretation of RA. This was after they left the
Caucus mountains as now the moon cycle was in meaning that the global
warming of the last sun cycle had ended –  resulting in a lowering in global
temperature. These caucus tribes began to sun-bathe to verify too themselves
their existence under the sun. Members of these tribes where sent to coastal
regions to simply bathe and the tan they gained would be used as an indicator
as to the climate of hours the Caucus tribes were allowed to wonder freely in
the day.  They believed that if the sun burnt their skin they could cool off in the
water / sea nearby. THIS IS THE ORIGINS OF SUN-BATHING TODAY. The


--- PAGE 193 ---
Caucasian reasoned that in order to maximise existence within the day they
would have to gain Nubian blood and in generation intervals mix in with the
Nubian seed for unlike today pure seed Caucasian would catch skin diseases
within days of sun ray access. The Caucasian today in this generation (the
last 25 years) is doing the same thing. To many splinter caucus tribes the
Nubian seed were considered supreme beings (gods on earth) because
Nubuns already had civilisations set up and could exist in night and day with
minimal skin diseases. They had already DEFINED EXISTENCES. These
events occurred between 3,700 –  4,000 BC. There were immigration laws that
forbid Caucasians from entering Nubian regions –  the Caucasian then (not
now) were known as TAMAHU ‘Living Filth’ –  to the original Egyptians –
FACT !!! So when you see the Caucasian historians and archaeologists
parading around as if they had anything to do with the original Egyptian
civilisations know it is ONE BIG LIE. In fact if you study Tama-re you will find
that FOREIGN GODS were brought in to this region by the Hyskos and
Phoenicians. One of the most evident of these gods is SAIS. What’s
interesting about this specific god is that in Egyptian Hieroglyphics the word
SAIS simply means SIX.  SIX ETHER a foreign spiritual force to those original
Egyptians / Tama-rean Nubians bearing NINE ETHER. 9 is the opposite to 6
therefore 6 is foreign. The governing Tama-rean gods of nature were of 9 –
The 9 ENNEADS. Most of the archaeologists you see on documentaries don’t
really know the origins themselves –  they don’t learn cuneiform - they use
previous warped writings as guidance thus continuing the deception. The
Caucasians were ONLY called Tamahu because as PURE SEED Caucasians
(unlike today) they could incur skin diseases very easily and also because of
their dieting of raw meat and for living and sleeping with dogs (Canine /
Canineites / Cannanites). This is why the Messiah Yashua / Essa / Jesus of
the New Testament at first rejects a Cannanite women whose daughter is ill
and tells her that he was not sent to help her. (Matthew Chapter 16 verse 21-
28 and Mark Chapter 7 verse 24-30) Jesus suggests she is a like a dog and
she acknowledges it. The Bible picked up on these events as the HAMITES
known as the Khamites (Kham) (Ham) giving birth to a CURSED SEED –  The
CANNANITES –  Leprosy Albinos (Leviticus Chapters of the Bible).
Remember all these events where under Nubians following AMEN / ANU.
Therefore the Caucasian (Hittites, Cannanites, Amorites etc) via nature
through the Aryan-Hindu (caste) took on the worshipping of the MOON as the
SUN does not position them higher than other races. Today they have taken
aspects of these worshipping practices and gently submerged them into
normality within the western society as well as the east. SADLY many
Nubians NOT bearing the RIGHT KNOWLEDGE still practice the ancient
versions of this Moon rationale –  Mysticism in Africa. For many Nubians have
knowledge but not RIGHT KNOWLEDGE –  as the knowledge and actions
they execute daily are not beneficial to our race. Many people lost in these
practices don’t know that some of these rituals (NOT ALL) are really following
Black Hindu deities brought to Africa through the Chaldean and Phoenicians.
With a caste system ideology subtly submerged within some of these watered
down mystic teachings –  a black person lost in this rationale will be
unintentionally serving forces that are here to dismantle our race. These
forces could easily guide them to bring continuous hardship to people from
their OWN NUBIAN RACE.


--- PAGE 194 ---
THIS IS A VERY SERIOUS SUBJECT - NUBIANS HERE IN AFRICA WILL
HAVE TO EVENTUALLY ADDRESS IT IF AS A RACE WE ARE GOING TO
REACH OUR FULL POTENTIAL –  FOR IT REALLY COMES DOWN TO
LEARNING THE ANCIENT KNOWLEDGE OF EXTRACTING THE BAD
DARKNESS (-) FROM THE GOOD DARKNESS (+). THE GOOD
DARKNESS IS THE SUN, 9-ETHER, DARK MATTER AND ENERGY –  THE
DARKNESS WHICH KEEPS ALL EXISTENCE FOREVER EXISTING
WITHIN THE THREE-DIMENSIONAL PLANE –  ABSOLUTE NATURE.
Remember if the origin of existence is the blackness then both (+) and
negative (-) will exist within it.
Please refer to Amunnubi Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball –  Liberation
Information Series) and The Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO) for the
original teachings.


--- PAGE 195 ---



--- PAGE 196 ---
Dear Reader,
It is imperative that all previous volumes are read before commencing in to
Vol.9. Those readers who often skim read will eventually miss reasoning that
would potentially answer your queries about these extracts.
When evaluating comments from cyberspace on our extracts it is now clear
that those against this information do not have the full intentions of uplifting
the Nubian. This is because they WILL NOT mention the writers we mention
at the beginning of every volume as this is where much of the inspirational
research and issues come from. They don’t want other readers to actually
take that journey in to researching our own existence. The writers we mention
are from different sides of Nubian awareness. They do not want our people on
a journey of enlightenment. That’s en-light-en-ment the real light we should be
following and this light starts in the mind in darkness –  the mental. THE
LIGHT IS KNOWLEDGE –  FACTS –  TO KNOW NOT BELIEVE THINGS.
ONCE THINGS ARE KNOWN YOU ARE ALIGNED WITH NATURE
BECAUSE NATURE IS REAL –  IN YOU AND AROUND YOU RIGHT NOW.
Now know that this very light is one of the black lights that helps
generate holographic images and conscience activated by RNA, DNA
and Neuromelanin which your very nature interprets inside the darkness
of brain matter. The quality of these elements are based on your dieting,
genetics, socialisation and access to nature –  sunlight, water, etc.
Minute pulses within brain matter generate these images and reasoning that
CAN ONLY occur organically (naturally) inside that brain in darkness. This
mental darkness is a link to Ether. The darkness of nature seals all light
with Suns as the greatest of all lights existing within the infinite darkness of
space, time and matter. The opposing forces of this literature don’t
understand that carbon, hydrogen, gravity, (+) and (-) forces, dark energy and
dark matter existed before the light that allows humans to see. They don’t
understand that these elements were needed for you to even exist to reach a
stage before you could even define what darkness and light is. They don’t
understand that moonlight is a light and fire is also a light and that Ghosts
emulate light and negative forces historically have followed these lights. They
don’t understand that the light you see from the sun originates from the sun’s
black surface and is an evolutionary stage of sun energy. They don’t
understand that anything organic burning will release carbon (black gases)
that can ONLY travel up there and as it does it disappears back into nature
itself –  thus the blackness is always there! This is why the Nubian must
overstand the basics. PRO-LIFE is reasoning that preserves life and any
teachings, actions or anything mentally or physically consumed that does not
aid the continuation of your own life and your lineage (Nubian) within nature –
REPRESENTS NEGATIVE FORCES. For cycles to exist RE must be present.
The RE is in re-volution, re-plenishing, re-cycling, re-production etc. Without
the RE - existence will reach an end. Since the truth of your existence and
original languages, cultures and writings etc are in the past your must go back
–  re-search. Once black reasoning is found again it becomes your future
because you will live it after you have found it. They try to deter the new
reader by making the grammar an opposing issue leading to a new reader


--- PAGE 197 ---
rejecting this information. In fact doesn’t this even suggest that English is the
dictating nature of intellect and who governs English … right! Did you
understand what was written regardless of grammar error? If the answer is
YES then that is all that counts! Many of the comments we find suggest that
what we write is even over the heads of many readers. That’s why we ask the
reader to check out the writers we have mentioned throughout the extracts.
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, Amunubi Rahkaptah (Nine Ball -
Liberation Information), The Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO), The
Nuwapian Nation of The Moors, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed,
Clarence Jowars Smith (5%), The Holy Tabernacle Ministries, Credo
Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop, The Journey Home Group, Marcus Garvey, Dr
Joseph Ben-Joachannan and Noble Drew Ali.
We are stressing to the Nubian reader that commercial media WILL NOT
/ CAN NOT give the Nubian the right information to enhance our position
as a race. This is because in order to give you this Right Knowledge
they would have to sacrifice the deeper levels of the caste system
ideology, which is how they have governed society for hundreds of
years. This even applies to Tama-re / Africa as this light (good) –  dark
(bad) ideology is the fundamental controller of reasoning.
A black continent taking on this ideology will have less respect for there own
existence thus leading to less respect for life. They will continue to look for the
light –  white –  right, which will manifest itself as the white Jesus Christ in their
minds. Many don’t study scriptures for the messiah said in his own words in
Matthew 24:4-5 –  “take heed that no man deceives you. For many shall
come in my name saying I am Christ; and shall deceive many”) (King
James Version). Now many will say this refers to false prophets and indeed, it
does because the white Jesus is not the real image of the Messiah. Read the
quote again it says many will come saying I (the woolly haired –  burnt brass
feet messiah –  Nubian (Revelation 1: 14-16)(King James Version) am Christ
(Caucasian Jesus Christ of today) and shall deceive many. Remember the
messiah says they will come in HIS NAME. In others words they will say the
Caucasian Christ is the Messiah (Him –  The Nubian). Then you have Matthew
24: 23 “Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there;
believe it not” (King James Version). Then you have the well-known quote in
John 1:41 - “He first findeth his own brother Simon and saith unto him, We
have found the Messias, which is, being interpreted the Christ” . (King
James Version).
The Caucasian Jesus Christ is the European interpretation of the Messiah
whose visual image overlaps in to Zeus, Sri Chitanya and the Hindu deity
Krishna (Christ). Also, remember the letter J did not even exist before the
1500’s AD. (Research this for yourself). They do not want Nubians following
their own existence (image) for that’s the root to breaking the caste system
since you are of original existence bearing ancient genes which personify in
what you are today calling afro (Granulation Ether). These Genes are from a
much earlier strand of existence on earth and from the etheric existences
before the evolutionary cycle of the other races.


--- PAGE 198 ---
Regard this information as yours to keep. Use this information any way
you want as long as it is beneficial to the Nubian race –  This PDF file is
FREE. We are keen for Nubians in Africa to be introduced to these
extracts as we know much of this type of literature is hard to find out
there. PDF Extracts included are 68, 69 & 70. Others will follow once the
information has been abbreviated. THERE MAY BE GRAMMAR / LITERACY
ERRORS –  apologises in advance. THIS IS STATED ON EVERY EXTRACT
RELEASED. (1-18 pages). Five Writers contributed to the Vol.9 PDF.
The reader MUST understand that the writers we mention represent the
FINE PRINT behind many of our concepts. THEY are your REAL
originators to a better understanding on Nubian consciousness. Seek
them out while you still have time! WE merely wish to improve REAL
awareness as the Black Media of the West is not really here to help you
but rather introduce you to Black Liberalism. They have successfully
confused liberation with liberalism. Liberalism is tied to capitalism. The
more different people (segments) buy a product the more sales are
generated. It is in the interests of bu-sin-ness to have these ideals out
there. Black Liberalism is concerned with the preservation of evolution
within the Nubian mind. The big trick in liberalism is the belief that NO
truths actually exist and that everything is just an opinion –  therefore
you become in charge of your own destiny as you follow what’s good
for you –  desires. Yet, it is their system that gave you these very desires.
These desires always seem to aid evolution over revolutionary
reasoning –  they don’t want the Nubian to get back into their original
existence and reasoning. If you asked Nubians living within multi-racial
countries as to whether they think racism exists a high majority would
say YES. If you know for a fact that the racial treatment towards Nubians
in the past was negative then why do you believe that the mistreatment
of the Nubian stock would not be present within religion, history and
science. There is also a trick in science, which we will touch on briefly
within this volume and it is the trick of labelling. They purposely label
scientific components and elements in a way that disguises the Nubian /
Tama-rean origins of science and the very blackness of nature itself. All
this also helps with the preservation of the caste system.
Warning! Many people may perceive this as negative. This is awareness
literature. We have stated before that there are good people in all races.
There are people of other races who have helped the African more than most
Nubians on earth have done. Liberals by nature will not respect scientific facts
or reasoning so their intentions will never lead to the full upliftment of the
Nubian race as scientific facts lead to the truth. They lean away from
absolutes as that challenges equality. We do not suggest that in absolute
terms equality is bad NO. We say that equality should be implemented after
the truths have been recovered and are acknowledged. This would alter the
criteria of equality –  the rules as to how equality should be implemented.
Equality has to be based on the evaluation of differences –  not the
customisation of similarities. This will allow people to prosper in accordance to
the true abilities they have been given within nature.


--- PAGE 199 ---
Extract 68
The Spell Casters
As we have stated many times throughout these extracts, the caste system in
the past and present is used as a global social structure tool to create a light
world. This illusionary world where light is considered more value than dark
which is really one of the world’s biggest spells. We say SPELL meaning
actual A, B, C spell. They have grounded so many tricks in to the populous
mind to continue this illusion. Understand that European languages can all be
traced back to the Middle-Eastern languages as well as Sanskrit and Hindi.
This is their lineage as we have stressed. The very words Shade and Shadow
describes the creations of darkness under light. The origin of these two words
are the same SHAD (Aramaic / Hebrew) and CHALD (Kaldai) which both refer
to demons and Nubians are the nearest human existence to this shade IN
THEIR MINDS. This aids the caste reasoning taken on by the Arabic / Persian
lands from the MOON VALLEY, TIGRIS EUPHRATES to the INDUS VALLEY
of the Hindu (research these facts).  So Nubian reader understand the English
language to get by - but do not use this language as an indicator of divine
intellect for the caste system is hidden all over the reasoning of words.
Please understand that the real truth is that darkness will FOREVER be used
to assist creation and rejuvenation for Suns (in space) and sons (inside the
female) by nature need this presence to be created. Since the Nubian is the
highest existence with these original properties in this solar system the early
Greeks, Romans and Arab writers or better said RE-WRITERS took original
ancient scriptures altering the relationship between light and darkness on all
levels. Thus leading to a reasoning that the Canaanites were cursed with
black skin or that Jesus / Yashua was a Caucasian. This contradicts the very
scriptures themselves once studied in their original languages as shown
throughout these extracts and through the writers we mention. Know that
many of the earlier creation scriptures when describing the beginning use
darkness as the starting point not light. Imagine a reality where Nubians all
wore white at funeral ceremonies (not black). Our ancients did just that the
Tama-reans wore white at funerals because that symbolised evolution in
existence –  that’s the light they talk about at death. To preserve THEIR
existence those who represent this evolution within the facet called human
species (The Caucasian tribes) had to down graded our existence in history
and scriptures.
WHILE NUBIANS CONTINUE TO EXCEPT THIS CASTE REASONING WE
WILL FOREVER BE IN THE SPELL OF IGNORANCE FOR WE ARE
IGNORING THE SCIENTIFIC FACTS THAT LIGHT AND DARKNESS ARE
NOT EQUAL –  LIGHT IS A SUB-DIVISION OF DARKNESS. THERE ARE
MANY OTHER BLACK LIGHTS IN EXISTENCE. WHAT WE ARE CALLING
LIGHT IS MERELY ONE OF MANY DIFFERENT LIGHTS THAT HAPPENS
TO BE IN THE SAME FREQUENCY OF THE HUMAN EYE. THE BRAIN
THEN CONVERTS THIS FREQUENCY OF ENERGY INTO EXISTENCES
THAT YOU CAN SEE.


--- PAGE 200 ---
The original Egyptians (Tama-reans) as well as the Sumer (our Nubian
ancients) both executed this reasoning in their ancient teachings. It was the
Greeks who called this understanding in Kemet, Egypt –  TAMA-RE of higher
sciences Mystery Schools or even Sorcery. However, even this period was
thousands of years after the TAR-DENG (pygmies). Those who represent the
light of Ghostation amongst the human species will have to maintain this
caste reasoning as an attempt to preserve their existence and control over
those darker races. To aid this agenda religion has been used as a tool to
downgrade the Nubian existence on many occasions. It is stated in the Bible
many times that GOD is LIGHT e.g (1 John 1:5) so whoever is closer to this
light is closer to GOD.
· In Complexion, the Caucasian is closer to the light (GOD).
This represents the physical Interpretation of God.
· In their academics, globally the Caucasian is closer to the light (God)
which could be considered enlightenment. Per every 1000 people on earth
there is a higher percentage of Caucasian literate than any other race.
This represents the mental Interpretation of God
· In generosity, the Caucasian countries give more money to famine than
any countries of darker people.
This represents the giving nature of the follower of God.
All the information above is TRUE –  FACT though there are agendas that
have resulted in these reasons. It would be very easy for a Pro-Aryan
movement to use the BIBLE in comparison with reality to prove the Caucasian
is the closest to GOD. This is because the Romans and the Greeks set up the
scriptures to preserve the control of the Caucasian over other races. The
Nubian and other races feed into these notions. This continues the caste
system rationale. Also bare in mind that according to the Bible GOD said ‘let
there be light’ (Genesis 1:3). Therefore God can not be light if it didn’t exist
prior to these words being spoken. Always remember a god that created this
universe and all existence (far more complicated than relaying information to
man through a book) would not have error or contradictions in biblical subject
matter. UNLESS MANKIND HAVE ALTERED REASONING OR
MISTRANSLATED ISSUES. In fact according to the bible from Genesis 1:1 to
1:3 it reads (King James Version). ‘In the beginning, God created the heaven
and the earth. And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was
upon the face of the deep. And the spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters’. And God said let there be light; and there was light’. Now reader
understand that according to the bible light first appeared in Genesis 1:3. This
could suggest that HEAVEN was created in darkness because it was later in
Genesis 1:14 before God ‘let lightS appear in the sky to separate day from
night’ (the forth day)(Good News Bible). This also means that the spirit of God
moves in darkness because light on earth did not exist yet. Furthermore,
water existed before light –  this means oxygen and hydrogen existed before
light. This means land underwater existed before light and this brings in to
play the other elements on the periodic chart. In the Good News bible they
call Heaven the Universe –  Genesis 1:1 ‘in the beginning, when God created
the universe’ (Good News Bible).


--- PAGE 201 ---
This DOES NOT mean that the scriptures are negative it simply means there
have been subtle agendas set up hundreds of years ago by factions within
other races that must be reasoned out by the Nubian reader. You may think
that there are no racial agendas in the scriptures but go to the Bible and study
Acts 13:1 “Now there were in the church that was at Antioch certain prophets
and teachers; as Barnabus, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius
of Cyrene, and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch,
and Saul”. (King James Version). Now read the Good News Version –  Acts
13: 1 “In the church at Antioch there were some prophets and teachers:
Barnabus, Simeon (called the black)”. Don’t believe us - get these books for
yourself to KNOW not believe. Know that the region Niger was not called
Niger before the 14th Century (Hausa)(if you think they are referring to the
country?!). Even if it did refer to Niger –  that is a Nubian region anyway. All
this tells you that there where racial issues in those periods unlike what most
religious organisations have you believe today. Why isn’t Simeon portrayed as
a Nubian anywhere in history! –  The agenda to conceal the blackness of the
Bible and original existence within science, history and religion is real and is
happening right now. Sadly, the Nubian will not see HOW CLEAR the agenda
is because they are lost in the light created by the caste system –  white-light-
right. We will stress the following to the reader PRO-LIFE in line with the
nature of nature is your guideline. This is concerned with the preservation and
continual existence of life itself in accordance to your position within nature.
This means the preservation of the original existence of the Nubian –  The
Evolutionary (taller) Ptahite / Pygmy. Let’s look at science briefly. When
studying an indication of cleanness we look at the teeth the whiter the teeth
the cleaner right –  they commercially label the yellow/brown substance that
attacks this whiteness of the teeth as TAR TAR. White teeth - Black TAR.
They have used white and black as opposites when the Tar substance is
actually yellow/brown. As we have stated throughout the extracts TAR as
PTAH the Original creator represented the darkness, the original (prime)
existence within the three dimensional plane. Now because whiteness is an
essential issue with teeth they made sure the opposite was the enemy TAR
and that Tar (they’ve called it) leads to tooth decay. You think this is a
coincidence! Now let’s look at Gases in science. There are certain governing
gases within the elemental chart which for some reason they have called
NOBLE gases. We have stressed that the combination of all gases will
FOREVER generate darkness (space) yet they gave certain gases the title
NOBLE gases. NOBLE stems from the word ARYAN (Sanskrit) and the
European interpretation of ARYAN is blonde hair / blue eyes –  PURE WHITE
–  FACT (please research this).
Now ask yourself why are they calling these gases ARYAN knowing the
blackness of space, time and matter? It is their attempt to create some kind of
reasoning that light scientifically plays a governing role within infinite
darkness. This also tells you that those scientists in earlier eras of European
history studied our ancient scriptures they know about the blackness of
nature. This subject about gases goes to much higher levels search out the
Ancient Egyptian / Egiptian Order (AEO) for the best information about our
existence. There are literally thousands of these so called little coincidences
which really continue to sub-consciously CASTE (black (down) –  (up) white)


--- PAGE 202 ---
the SPELL (A, B, C) on the world to follow this racial bias which all stems
back to the Aryan Hindu doctrine. For more information concerning these
issues search out literature by the H.T.M Holy Tabernacle Ministries, they
released many books on issues like this throughout the early 1990’s.
Now know that amongst the earlier Tama-rean Gods their was PTAH known
as the ORIGINAL CREATOR. PTAH is spoken as TAH / TAR. Do you
remember the saying Tar babies? These are really pygmies! PTAH was the
very darkness of existence and it is said that this existence gave its powers to
the AMEN / AMUN who as you should know if you have researched
represented the SUN who then was the father force of the other Tama-rean
gods allocated to divisions in nature i.e. earth, wind and fire etc. as a
collective known as Neteru which actually means NATURE.
You are reading the original interpretation of the Big Bang Theory thousands
of years before the European interpretation. For PTAH (Space / The
darkness) gave its powers to the AMEN (Sun) who released portions of his
(Planets) with his children NETERU (Nature –  earth, wind and fire) creating
the PTAHITES / TARITES / TAR-DENG (pygmies) on earth. These Ptahites
grew to become the Nubian race.
The Ptahites / Tars in earlier eras in Tama-re / African history often had
conflicts with the Cushites (forefathers of many East African warrior tribes of
today) who were tall while the Tars were small (pygmies). Till this very day
many African tribes can be traced back to these two sub-groups (the original
opposing forces within our race) for if everything came from darkness then
opposing forces will also exist in our race. This darkness being the Nubian
race. This continual division amongst our tribes led to the title FARAQA
THEIR original word for Africa, which means to divide & separate.
The Caucasian will forever try to make the Nubian submit to evolution
using as many different methods as possible. They need you to leave
original existence darkness (black culture / skin / hair) to go to the light
(Caucasian reasoning / lighting of skin / regressing of hair (genes)). This
will put them on the top half of universal order.
ALL THIS IS NOT A CONSCIOUS AGENDA BY THE CAUCASIAN MASSES
(UNLIKE THEIR ELITE). THIS IS NATURALLY BEING PLAYED OUT FOR
UNIVERSALLY EVOLUTION IS THE JOURNEY AWAY FROM ORIGINAL
EXISTENCE AND CAUCASIANS ARE THE REPRESENTATIVES OF
EVOLUTIONARY FORCES WITHIN THE HUMAN SPECIES. SO THEIR
NATURE IS TO TAKE YOU AWAY FROM YOUR ORIGINAL EXISTENCE.
AS A COLLECTIVE, THEY WILL PLAY OUT THIS ROLE WITHIN NATURE.
The reader must understand all this and not get caught up in the notion of
what you are reading as racism. Many of the contributors to the volumes read
this literature and we do see how harsh it may come across –  but the reader
must understand ‘there are NO maybes or exceptions in nature’. Evolution is
universally the journey away from original existence and within the same state
be it a solid it is actually the journey to death –  THIS IS UNIVERSAL LAW.


--- PAGE 203 ---
The Caucasian race represents the current prosperity of evolution amongst
the human species. Within the facet called human species as the highest
representatives of evolution without acknowledging universal laws they will
undertake the greatest actions leading to the overall death of humanity.
Through space, time and matter the original intentions of nature itself will be
more in tune in those who have been subjected to evolution the least. On
earth this is the woolly haired Ptahite / Tar (Pygmy) who later became the
Nubian race. Always remember the very word Caucasian originates from
Caucus-Asian and stems from them dwelling in caves in the Caucus
Mountains and this mountain region where the founding white tribes lived just
happens to be near The Black Sea –  Coincidence!
We are sorry if we offend the reader but the darkness to the light (as seen
from the darkness of space as it creates a sun) is the real journey of
evolution. They have merely used light as the starting point to brainwash the
masses when really it is darkness as life must exist before death.
Different existences must represent beginnings and endings of cycles for if
they didn’t there would be no cycles. There would be no summers or winters
even life and death. If the beginning is known and preserved as the woolly
haired Nubian then you will ALWAYS exist on the top half of universal order.
This is beyond ERA LAWS and reasoning. These ERA LAWS and reasoning
are today controlled by the Caucasian tribes and are within religion, liberalism
and the isms. They are predominantly reasoning that simply ignores facts that
can be proven –  thus becoming belief systems that will position their nature
(in disguise) as the way forward. Universal order contradicts their notion of the
west being the first world and Africa being the third world –  first means
beginning. The fact Nubians in politics excepted this notion tells you they are
lost in the light. Of course, everybody knows it all started in Africa / Tama-re
but we do not live or THINK by it.
Now realise that many of the so-called primitive (prime active) rural
tribes of Ta-ma-re are off-shoots of the collapsed Sumerian, Tama-rean,
Cushite, Tar eras living by the notion of NO TO EVOLUTION. Indeed
many are suffering because of the extremity of their decisions but what
the Nubian reader must reason is that the lineage of some of these
tribes are actually hundreds of thousands of years old. The founders of
some of these tribes were living in times before the existence of RACES.
Most of our older tribes did not even record TIME itself because it had
no value. They did not evolve and there where no other races present to
measure up against nor did the agriculture or eco-system change.
Furthermore, they believed that ever-lasting life was the continuation of
their own seed - their original existence. There where duration periods
of tens of thousands of years in our continent amongst our elder tribes
where nothing actually happened. There was no reason for anything to
happen, land space was not an issue, other races weren’t around,
dinosaur weren’t around, there was no religion, there was no pollution
which creates imbalance in the eco-system, therefore the re-cycling of
food was good. They had a routine of living directly in line with nature.
They simply lived off the land and KNEW they came from the ground


--- PAGE 204 ---
(the black mud –  ADAM) but were assisted by higher tiers of existence
that left traces of their existence within nature itself. The lack of
recorded time left big gaps in our history that allowed the west to set up
history based on a six thousand-year reality. The trade-off for our
forefathers was to extend their ERA (be it a tribe) to tens of thousands of
years rather than hundreds. Once you say YES to evolution the journey
to death speeds up if you are not intelligent enough to understand
universal laws.
The BREATH OF LIFE given to Adam made from black/brown mud (Koran /
Genesis) had to be certain gases. These Gases of life (Creators Breath) exist
inside you in darkness for it was blown into you. This is similar to the universe
itself because the darkness of space must have gases within it to create life
as it is these gases which create Suns, then planets and life.  The gases that
create and rejuvenate matter were known by our ancients as 9-ETHER.
The development of the ancient Nubian is highly mental (spiritual) rather than
physical it is this mental that developed to levels over thousands of years of
existence which led to what you are calling Ancient African Sciences. Many of
these sciences got mixed up with Chaldean, Phoenician & Hindu practices
and regressed to what is now called black magic. Some of this black magic is
really the evolutionary (decayed) state of the ancient Egyptian and Sumer
mystery teachings diluted by Chaldean, Phoenician & Hindu practices. Now
because the Nubian mental is now lost in the light there are very few that can
clean up this African mysticism and tell our brothers and sisters that they are
being used as pawns in a much more ancient agenda to dismantle our race
from the inside. These black sciences were actually used by Nubians
against the Phoenicians, Hyksos and early Greeks to protect our way of
life. The caste system could not work in Africa if the highest sciences where
being executed only by Nubians who did not acknowledge their interpretation
of Gods from Europa (Europe), the middle-east down to the Indus valley
(Hindu). Through earlier strands of liberal ideals the woolly haired Nubian got
influenced by the Phoenician Egyptian. The Phoenician reasoning comes
from the Chaldean and the Hindu. Understand that in earlier times the spread
of religion and rituals were a part of globalisation for other races. Islam and
Christianity are no exception though the reader must be made aware that
MANY OF THE CHRISTIAN & ISLAMIC TRADITIONS where ALREADY
ESTABLISHED WITHIN THE VILLAGES OF AFRICA BEFORE THE BIBLE
AND KORAN WERE EVEN PUT TOGETHER. The Phoenician / Hindu
influence altered many of the black mind sciences into hate of self and kind
because they followed doctrines tied to The Moon Gods, The Aryan and Gad.
These black sciences now have to be cleaned up and taken back to its
prestige state representing life in line with universal order. Please do not
be afraid of the black talk this is the real way nature works –  study the
science of nature for yourself. If all gases in space can only create the
colour black and these very same gases are the source for all solids and
liquids in existence including the sun, which is black on the surface. The
blackness can not be negative for this very blackness is needed for
anything to exist within the three dimensional plane.


--- PAGE 205 ---
In rural Africa when a Nubian is gaining success those still representing this
mysticism will have to do something to stop you –  thus slowing down the
progress of the Nubian race. The reality is that the Nubian mental back then
was using more brain matter than humans do today. This higher brain matter
was stimulated by sun-cycles. There are ups and downs within our race in
accordance to universal cycles in nature. We are entering a new sun-cycle
right now. This higher consciousness within certain stock within our race could
execute what is now perceived as miracles. Miracles in reality can ONLY be
the manipulation of elements be it solid, liquids or gases within space, time
and matter within the three dimensional plane –  therefore a science. Belief in
other than self and kind has greatly weakened our black mental. Nubians
back then and even now have to re-evolve because if higher existences were
involved in our creation then traces of these higher existences must be
present within us –  especially within the mental. It was the Tar Tama-reans
and Sumers that perfected our black mental into science.  Then thousands of
years later it was the Phoenicians / Greeks who took the LOWER DEGREES
and added Ghostation light (white reasoning) to these sciences e.g the title
Noble over Gases. Their en-light-en-ment is moonlight which assists
evolution. In other words the light many Nubians are following is really
moonlight (evolution) instead of the sunlight (revolution) because the sun
existed before the moon. Man is between these two forces.
When we write about the Sun and the Moon the reader MUST
understand it is not about worshipping these forces –  its simply about
knowing their influence within nature.
SUN-MIND is manifested in the preservation of original existence. Technology
and money can be used to improve your standard of living in a PRO-LIFE
manner but NOT SACRIFICING our GENES, our original ways of life,
traditions and MENTAL REASONING and NATURE. Most parts of Liberalism
challenge the original Nubian mental reasoning. The Nubian reasoning that
existed before religion could only be science and facts based. This is because
there was no beliefs systems. EVOLUTION MUST OCCUR BEFORE BELIEF
CAN EXIST. Back then we knew where we were from. Therefore, there was
no belief. The ancient black sciences reached a level that would be perceived
as miracles. One reason for religion is to disguise the facts that ancient races
create races either through evolution or the manipulation of genes (science).
Our ancient races have been documented within our own scriptures as the
Anunnaqi, Ptahites, Neteru, Tar-Deng etc. The Negroid existence becoming
the first race on earth takes on the role of the CREATOR RACE. Religion
does not like evolution because of this fact. This could be why the unlearned
preacher always tells you to follow the light (1 John 1:5). Regardless of the
fact that the 1st race was very dark skinned Nubians. Regardless of the fact
that dark matter and dark energy are the origins of the universe. Regardless
of the fact that all light combined can only give the colour black. Light is
energy which means all energy originates from blackness. Therefore,
according to the bible the light of God in line with actual facts could NOW be a
black light (energy) which could explain why the spirit of God existed in
darkness before god even said ‘let there be light’ (Genesis 1:3). Now think
about that.


--- PAGE 206 ---
Extract 70
Know your L’s
We are stressing to the reader that our liberal Nubian brothers and
sisters have not studied –  ALTERNATIVE CAUCASIAN RELIGIONS
throughout the Roman, Greek and Phoenician eras. It is VERY CLEAR
that the core representations of liberalism came from the worshipping of
BAAL / BEL, the HITTITE CODE (Caucasian offshoot tribe) and various
strands of Greek Mythology which promoted sex worshipping and
hermaphrodite gods. Most liberal reasoning is merely a re-vamp of these
practices. Within the Caucasian existence on earth this all originated
from the Aryan Hindu Doctrine. They want you to believe their views are
universal –  this is simply NOT TRUE, whether they know it or not. They
are really expressing the earlier caucasian way of life –  NOT OURS –
DON’T BE FOOLED. Now even further back (before the Caucasian race
even existed) via the Asian (the first Asian not Cauc-asian) liberal ideals
go back to the indo-Hindus of Indonesia (BALI / BAALI / BAAL / which
hosts their EDEN). This is another reason why they are trying to tie the
origins of mankind with Indonesia. Within the western media, they are
trying day and night to water down the mainstream religions to slowly
bring in this alternative hell-enistic liberal rationale. It is very important
that Nubians in the west especially in the U.S understand these
agendas. The mistreatment of Nubians in the history of America has
made many Nubians perceive this liberal rationale as a SAVIOUR –  A
Free Desire Reality. Many Nubian in the west are using the Caucasian
reasoning to express their understanding of freedom. THIS IS OBVIOUS!
For the villagers of Ta-ma-re do not practice these Caucasian liberal
ideals and all Nubians originate from the ancient Negroid tribes.
Once the Nubian understands the origins of monotheistic religions and the
isms they will clearly see the trickery behind liberalism. Remember the ISM’s
are understanding usually based on individual interpretations of alternative
religions. These are then used as opposing forces against the monotheistic
religions. These alternative practices have nothing to do with the ancient black
existence of Ta-ma-re.
The Nubian must now know that the Caucasian as Canaanites set up the
foundations for the current liberal ideals today. It is well documented
that the Canaanites were involved in sexual perversion including
Homosexuality and bestiality. They are the forefathers of the Greeks and
Romans. It is also documented that these Caucasian tribes followed
alternative gods such as BAAL / BEL. For those of you who study know
that Baal becomes Bel through the Akkadian writings. This Bel was also
followed by the Druids of Europe. Baal is associated with the Moon gods
and originates from the Mesopotamians as Baal-Hadad from the same
lineage of the Moon God SIN. Amongst the Cannanites Baal was also
known as Baal Poer a deity that was associated with sexual orgies on


--- PAGE 207 ---
Mount Peor in Moab. As a Canaanite God Baal was associated with
fertility (Sex). In Bali / Baal there are Baal temples with statues
representing sexual perversions (Orgies). Canaan (the first Canaanite) is
also known as Libana in early scriptures. Libana (English) in Hebrew is
lbanah (leb-aw-naw)(3842 - Strong's Hebrew Lexicon Dictionary) this
word refers to the Moon and Whiteness. Then you have Lebanon (the
region) which actually means ‘white on mountain’. This really refers to
the early Caucasian tribes that settled there in Palestine (Pale-stine).
They immigrated to this region from the Caucus Mountains. This region
biblically was the LAND OF CANAAN where Baal was worshiped and
even today, many parts of that region still have the word Baal
incorporated in to the names of places e.g. Baalbek. So now in English,
you have LIBANA (Moon) and BAAL / BEL (Sex). This gives you the
word:
LIBERAL –  LIB-BEL-RUL (LIBANA –  BEL (BAAL) –  RULE)
The reasoning of forces tied to the moon –  desires based on the
practices of the Canaanites –  the earlier Caucasian. Key liberal traits
today are the updated version of these Canaanite practices. The
whiteness tied to these words is their light –  don’t forget it. The Moon
came about hundreds of millions of years after the Sun therefore it is a
product of evolution. Evolution is the slow journey to death. Just like the
regular consumption of Alcohol, Drugs, Intoxicants speed up physical
death and non-heterosexuality breaks the human cycle of man, women
and child which preserves human existence. Then you have abortion,
death at the birth stage of the life cycle and Euthanasia, death at the end
of the life cycle. These are all key liberal ideals. Scientifically liberalism
preserves the unnatural Rites of Death in society. It aids the pre-mature
death of human existence. The very word Jezebel describes a sexually
active women with multiple partners. Jezebel stems from the word Izebel
which actually means ‘baal exalts, baal is the husband to the uncaste’
(Modern Hebrew). If caste is colour based then un-caste means –  no
colour –  Caucasian. Futhermore, the God Baal exalts her –  ranks her
high. Now go to the bible (Religion) Revelation 2:20 ‘Notwithstanding I
have a few things against thee, because thou sufferest that woman jezebel,
which calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to
commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols’. (King James). Now
go to science. The Moon influences the menstrual cycle of women and
within this cycle induces a sexual uplift desire to pro-create. The Moon
also pulls on women just like tides (the sea) to make her release an egg
and because there is a fixed amount of eggs in the female body the
Moon actually helps end her ability to give life –  it aids the internal death
of her ability to conceive. The Moon has always been tied to Sex. The
Nubian must understand that Liberalism is the commercialisation of
Canaanite practices. As stated way back in Volume One it is lberlis
(Latin) the expression of sexual desires (lib-ido / lib-ertine / lib-idinous) –
BUT they won’t tell the masses that LIB has white connotations or
before Latin (Romans) it really stems from alternative Caucasian
religions in particular the worship of BAAL. Another clue can be found
in the word LIB-ATION which is the act of pouring drink on the ground


--- PAGE 208 ---
as an offering to the Gods (research this FACT). Now what GOD are they
referring to for Lib goes back to Libana (lbanah) –  The Moon –  The Moon
Gods. We have stated many times the Caucasian tribes by nature took
on the worshipping of the moon and fire because the Sun would not
give them equal existence within Ta-ma-re and other regions with darker
people. Moonlight from the moon is really evolutionary sunlight –  light
from the sun that hits the dead moon which alters the light which then
comes to earth. This moonlight is the light of evolution the journey to
death. The rites tied to these alternative Caucasian rituals and practices
have been passed through to liberalism. In fact in Hebrew the very word
‘liberal’ has connotations with the word NOBLE which actually means
ARYAN and goes further back to the ARYAN Hindu doctrine. These
words all tie in together because it is the Caucasians direct racial
lineage –  NOT OURS. The wearing of silver instead of gold goes back to
the dress wear of the Canaanites, Hittites and Amorites (Mountain
Dwellers) (Caucus Mountain –  Caucasian tribes). Silver represents the
moon while gold represents the Sun. There are many issues we have not
mentioned about these alternative religions that the intelligent Nubian
must know. Search out literature by the AEO or the HTM’s etc to
understand where, how and why these alternative religions are
disguised in society today.
The majority of liberals do not know the origins of what they believe in –
but even if they did most will not change because it is a desire based
reasoning. Many Nubians are completely lost in the light (Moonlight)
even the Nubian of Africa –  The City Dwellers who assume everything
from the west is beneficial to our race. It is important to state here that
the early Caucasian would take customs from darker races and alter it
inline with there own desires –  give it a different name, a different origin,
change the dates –  a different reasoning. So research is key in
identifying what is really right and what is really wrong. This is why
science must come into play in revealing truth. What you are calling
Marxism, Weberism, and Functionalism all stem from the study of
alternative and monotheistic religions which challenge the European
Christian reasoning at that time. They would simply study alternative
religions and generate a so-called new reasoning. These actions where
usually helped by discreet organisations in Europe. What your calling
Women-rights is not a part of liberalism –  they are a part of human-
rights, what you call race relations is not a part of liberalism –  they are
issues within human-rights. These are not under liberalism but through
political channels and the alerting of meanings behind words in
dictionaries, they have got mixed up with it. The wording of Liberation
and Liberalism were purposely set up to create confusion. They have
tied liberalism with freedom to continue their Caucasian alternative
religious practices openly. They need liberal ideals in society to aid
capitalism so they had to give the reasoning a political platform. They
also need the preservation of this reasoning because this reasoning is
the way they have been able to maintain control over the world through
sex and moon-ey (money) and bu-sin-ness.


--- PAGE 209 ---
Now see the relationship between sex and money (moon-ey) through
Lib-BEL-rul-ism and bu-SIN-ness –  as Bel/Baal-hadad was the relative of
the Moon God Sin (Mesopotamian Gods who were taken on by many
tribes in the early Caucasian / Aryan lineage). This symbolises the
relationship between capitalism and liberalism - money and sex.
If it were globally known in schools that liberalism stems from
Caucasian-Canaanite worship, would darker races follow it? It has to be
disguised. It is in our own opinion (The Afronaut writers) that they will
have to push liberal ideals to the extreme (moon worship reasoning –
desire driven) to counter-attack the REAL SUN because once again the
arrival of the sun-cycle will bring back their genetic problems –  like
times past. They will have to recruit as many darker people as possible
to the liberal reasoning to preserve these Caucasian practices within
other races. Thus preserving aspects of the Caucasian nature through
racial-mixing and the Nubian altering of their own existence to follow the
image of the Caucasian. If the Nubian alters themselves in to the design
of another race then the mental appreciation of that race has then
manifested itself into the physical. So a mental part of that race is
reborn again through you. This is true! Because when a child you know
looks like or acts like one of their parents you also know you see (the
image) or feel the presence of that parent in your mind. To successfully
control the world the Caucasian has to be everywhere at once through
their image in religion (the white Jesus), through liberalism (their
alternative religion), through other races taking on their images
(Nubians, Orientals, Hispanics) and through their bu-sin-ness controlled
by discreet societies. Even worse is that the Nubian through religion is
also trapped in a 6000-year reality. This means you reject the reasoning
of Nubian existence within your own genes which are millions of years
older than all other races.
The reader must understand that some of the agendas we speak of
throughout these extracts are actually being played out via nature. The
Caucasian will naturally wish to take darker people away from their
original existence since they are the highest products of evolution.
It is so important that the Nubian understands or better said overstands
universal laws. Throughout these extracts, we have only given out reasoning
from just the laws of opposites –  there are many other laws a Nubian must
know. These laws allow the intelligent to reason where discrepancies in
society are coming from. When writing about the preservation of our existence
a note must be mentioned about our Languages. Nubians in Africa must
protect their languages and teach their offspring to speak and write their
language before European languages. Our languages are being lost.
Dictionary vocabularies of our languages are not complete and have
been regressing in words & grammar for many years. Much colloquial
tongue is now missing from our dictionaries –  this must be reversed.
For new inventions or discoveries from the west a descriptive word from
the colloquial tongue should be made & recorded in new dictionary
editions. This helps preserve our languages in the long-term.


--- PAGE 210 ---
Extract 69
The Stabiliser
Nubians within the western world must understand that they are one of the
prime stabilisers of the west. In other words through the caste system you
have been used to create balance economically, socially and psychologically
within countries considered multi-racial. This is because the Nubian has
become the victim of the scapegoat doctrine. The Nubian bares the weight of
the problems of society as it manifests within evolution. This is true! Western
countries with high deviancy (crime rates) continually have Nubians tied
primarily to these figures and statistics. Therefore, we become the focus of
the problems within society. This sits parallel with the caste system. We
mentioned the Nubian as a scapegoat because the real problems of society
can only occur from the top end of economic power (Caucasian upper /
middle classes). These parties are the only forces that legally have the power
to govern their society. Therefore, the Nubian historically bares the runt of
failures in economic programmes established by the now draconian forces.
Many Caucasians who are not fulfilling their desires within the western system
will tend to lash out their frustrations on the Nubian existence. They use their
warped history and government statistics to hold down the black existence
which leaves the down trodden Caucasian believing they are living better off
than the darker races –  to them life now isn’t that bad after all. This strategy
helps condition the white masses in to not rebelling against their upper class
masters. Many Caucasians are quite satisfied in positions in society where
they can play GOD over other races in a situation –  usually in areas of
business where their decision can influence the progress of our existence.
This satisfies the controlling desires of the Caucasians given to them through
the caste system and the white-light-right reasoning.
In global regions where there is one predominate race in existence there is
usually unrest & turmoil. Eastern Europe, Russia, The Middle East, many
African and South American regions where there is a high predominate race
will tend to have unrest because there is not an opposing force (race) to
subsist on within capitalism and other isms. In the west, they use the Nubian
to subsist on but more recently, they have been using Islam as well. The clash
of the Asians –  the Asian and Caucasian is a result of evolutionary forces.
The Asian is the spiritual father of the Carcus-Asian (Caucasian) –  the sons
will go against their fathers. The caste system is in favour of the Caucasian
and since all races follow this reasoning –  you should be able to work out the
outcome.  The Nubian should stay out of this conflict.
The Caucasian needs alternatives to subsist on, manipulate, build and
destroy. Yes ! We wrote BUILD and destroy because they need TO HELP and
NOT HELP at will. Its called the GOD COMPLEX. Since all races
psychologically follow the caste system this allows the Caucasian room to
execute their God Complex. The overwhelming assumption by the Caucasian
is that GOD is a Caucasian. This is re-enforced through the white Jesus (the


--- PAGE 211 ---
Son of God) and through all other races acknowledging this white Jesus as a
saviour. To obtain the standard of living found in the west the European
colonised the world aided by Christianity –  FACT. There lies a good argument
that GOD HELPS THE CAUCASIAN BEFORE OTHER RACES because
while they were taking over regions held by darker people they were praying
to this GOD and the Caucasian Jesus and their prayers were answered.
Doesn’t the outcomes of praying to the Jesus and God of the bible judged
over a period of 6,000 years suggest that GOD helps the Caucasian FIRST.
This very notion follows the Hindu caste system? Remember according to the
unlearned preacher today in 2006 it was the CANAANITES that were
CURSED with BLACK SKIN. Throughout the bible, isn’t darkness bad and
light good? This is according to the unlearned reader.
Remember! Nubian reader that our interpretation of THE MOST HIGH
(Psalm 82:6) existed thousands of years before the Caucasian version.
With the Nubian lost in the light we have taken on their interpretation of GOD.
What we are trying to say here is that all these scenarios create a God
Complex for the Caucasian. This makes their reality easier to live through. It
has given them confidence through the eras to manipulate the religious
scriptures themselves and to set up a reality in their favour. This is why many
Caucasian still don’t believe racism even exists because the god complex
makes other races follow their light - both religion and liberalism end in the
light. In other words there is light at the end of the tunnel. This symbolises
your journey from darkness to light (evolution –  the journey away from your
original existence). The Caucasian masses don’t see or understand this god
complex therefore they can’t see many of the problems in society such as the
caste system or prejudices because these issues are under the radar of their
reasoning. Even worse is the Nubian so lost in the light they cannot see our
own problems either.
This Caucasian God Complex went too far when they added their own
elements to the periodic elemental chart –  which had originally 99 elements.
These 99 elements are the recorded elements that are the fabric of nature
within this solar system. To add their own elements to this chart tells you they
wish to alter nature itself. They are placing their ideas in REAL TIME in par
with nature itself. They do not truly respect nature. ALL THIS IS SIMPLY
BECAUSE THEIR REASONING CAME FROM EVOLUTION.
The Nubian genes are the highest substances based on these 99 elements.
This is because you have the strongest blood and DNA within the highest
form of existence on earth –  now known as the human being.
Many people from other races will read black awareness literature and say to
themselves –  Why do black people think they are the only race with
problems? Why do they think ITS ALL ABOUT THEM? These people must
understand that what you call society today from religion to science is based
on Roman and Greek ideals (the reasoning of straight haired races) which are
ALL evolutionary (altered) ideals from TAMA-RE (Africa). Therefore, African
history is the origin of world history and since over 4 billion people follow


--- PAGE 212 ---
religion based on Christianity or Islam which originally stems from regions of
darker people then ask yourself this: if the truth behind the blackness of
religion was known would all these conflicts throughout the world over the last
2,000 years had occurred if the Negroid existence in religion was known and
accepted. We say this because if the Negroid existence were accepted there
would be no Christianity because it was the Greeks and Romans
(Caucasians) that set that up. There may not even be a Bible because it was
the Greeks and Romans (Caucasians) that set that up. Remember the Bible is
66 different books all put together and formally released in 325 AD in Italy.
The original writings where the core concepts of the bible came from would
have been used which are Tar Deng –  Ethiopian (Egyptian / Tama-rean), The
Moors (Nubian Arabs) and Sumerian doctrines –  all Negroid stock.
SO UNDERSTAND THIS BLACK COVER UP TILL THIS VERY DAY HAS
TAKEN THE WORLD ON AN ALTERNATIVE PATH WHICH HAS LED TO
THE DEATHS OF MILLIONS OF PEOPLE WORLD-WIDE THROUGH THE
AGES (RELIGIOUS & LAND CONFLICTS). THEREFORE IT IS A GLOBAL
ISSUE –  OVERSTAND THAT.
This extract is an interpretation of the SCAPEGOAT DOCTRINE from THE
NINE BALL SERIES written by Amunubi Rahkaptah (1967 –  1972). This
timeless information can be found in cyberspace by the keen Nubian
researcher. Much of the writers we mention have information online search
them out –  upgrade your knowledge then wisely spread the word.


--- PAGE 213 ---



--- PAGE 214 ---
Dear Reader,
There is a ceiling on what we can write about within these extracts. In order to
gain that higher reasoning we highly recommend you search out the writers
and organisations below.
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, Amunubi Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball -
Liberation Information), The Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO), The
Nuwapian Nation of The Moors, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed,
Clarence Jowars Smith (5%), The Holy Tabernacle Ministries, Credo
Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop, The Journey Home Group, Marcus Garvey, Dr
Joseph Ben-Joachannan, Noble Drew Ali and the other degrees of Dr
Malachi Z. York.
We are only giving you the basics –  Use this literature wisely to create
awareness amongst our Nubian race. This is Nubian Race information.
Stimulate these concepts amongst your Nubian peers, family and friends.
Remember that by nature not all Nubians will be able to comprehend much of
what we write. Many will never except this information because they do not
understand the principalities of nature –  those universal laws. Some Nubians
will openly reject these writings and the writers we mention because it
challenges their view of reality. Once writings are based on reasoning from
proven facts, they actually live within the minds of the reader. The acceptance
of those in tune with this information, those undecided and those who
disapprove will balance out over time. Many will reject this now and it could be
up to 5, 10 even 15 years time (after they have forgotten this literature and the
draconian ways are in) before they understand the reasoning. Within time
itself the respect for facts will balance out. This information IS NOT the higher
knowledge –  we can not give you that information on this platform. SEARCH
OUT THE WRITERS –  We give you extracts –  they give you whole books !
Nubian overstand that the race card is a key tool being used to bring in the
mark of the beast in the west. They need to create racial melting pots to
frustrate the white working / middle classes to give up their rights and accept
draconian laws as a way of controlling immigrants. The western media is
highlighting racial concerns to convince the Caucasian that a New World
order reality is beneficial to them. The Caucasian by nature will accept these
terms because the caste system will still be apart of the New World order. The
Nubian of Africa must look inwards not outwards. We must focus on the
development of our regions for ourselves first –  not to merely gain control of
resources just to give them away to other races in foreign business deals.
Those Nubians who study abroad must come back and help to upgrade our
conditions. The Nubian of Africa must actually start thinking black as black.
Overstand this! Many of us here live according to traditions and cultures
passed down to us. However, an evaluation has not been taken as to the
origins of what your basing reasoning on. In other words we don’t know the
extent of belief over facts that exist within traditions. Most Nubians don’t know
that many parts of monotheistic religions are an evolved version of village /
tribe customs from Africa (Tama-re) and Sumer.  The Nubian must start to
apply a scientific rationale –  follow what can be proven. Science can be used


--- PAGE 215 ---
to support our traditions not suppress them. This is not a ghostized scientific
rationale, which focuses on destroying nature to support evolution but rather a
mental rationale aided by the universal laws –  the principalities of nature. This
would naturally guide a black race into the notion of allegiance to self and kind
because all existence originates from the blackness of nature where the
creation of anything natural exists. The true reality is that the black race can
only be called by the names given to you by our ancients simply because we
are of original existence. In other words when we take on names and ways
given to us by other races it regresses our existence and disturbs universal
order within nature itself. The backlash of this will affect the Nubian because
we are not living by our true nature which by nature would be pro-life because
original existence could only represent life –  you can not have death before
life.
Regard this information as yours to keep. Use this information any way
you want as long as it is beneficial to the Nubian race –  This PDF file is
FREE. We are keen for Nubians in Africa to be introduced to these
extracts, as we know much of this type of literature is hard to find out
there. PDF Extracts included are 77 & 29. Others will follow once the
information has been abbreviated. THERE MAY BE GRAMMAR / LITERACY
ERRORS –  apologises in advance. THIS IS STATED ON EVERY EXTRACT
RELEASED. (1-12 pages). Four Writers contributed to the Vol.10 PDF.
Warning! Many people may perceive this literature as negative. This is
awareness literature. We have stated before that there are good people in all
races.  There are people of other races who have helped the African more
than most Nubians on earth have done. Equality should be implemented after
the truths have been recovered and are acknowledged. This would alter the
criteria of equality –  the rules as to how equality should be implemented.
Equality has to be based on the evaluation of differences –  not the
customisation of similarities. This will allow people to prosper in accordance to
the true abilities they have been given within nature.


--- PAGE 216 ---
Extract 77
The Changing Existences of a Universe
When studying our universe one should realise that the expansion of
the universe follows the same routine as the DNA strand within humans.
Since we are products within this abode of blackness (this universe)
then it makes sense. We state hear that the extraction (evolution) and
retraction (revolution) of our universe is occurring while the collective
universes continue to expand in the spiral formation. The extraction and
retraction occur on the spiral formation of the journey of universes and
are never equal in size. The 18 million years suggested for our universal
change be it evolution or revolution is one of four equalling 72 million
years (18 X 4 = 72). Within each cycle, existence must change but within
the whole 72 million years, existence should return to a state similar to
the beginning of the cycle –  because all cycles are circles. The
blackness of space is the forever-existing presence throughout all
cycles. It is the darkness which generates light (suns) similar to your
black mental consciousness that through electric pulses generates
images within the mind. The mind is darkness. 72 million years is the
time our scientists have suggested this galaxy completes a circle
rotation. This is why when we suggested that all existences that go
away must come back (Vol.7 Universal Matters) it is based on the
principalities of nature –  universal laws. We must also add that under
the principalities of nature within universal structure there must be a
central sun within this galaxy or universe and that all solar systems
rotate around this sun within this galaxy. When a sun is created there is
an intensity of gases and matter compressed then released as a sun. It
is like snow which is gathered then compressed by the human hand in
to a solid. The collective state of gases –  the blackness –  is compressed
by dark matter to create True Stars known as suns. A universe shifting
from extraction to retraction or through the compression of matter
within retraction intensifies gas potency to create suns. This intensity
can also put pressure on a sun which intensifies then releases gases
(heat gas particles –  sun flares).
A dimensional shift (extraction or retraction) can create suns or implode
suns leaving a dimensional hole where light leaks in to another
dimension. This is why black holes must take back the light. This is like
a balloon where pressure has been given to the balloon from the outside
which then bursts a hole which leaks out the gas inside. This light or
other particles which get sucked in by black holes can trigger off
evolution or revolutionary action in that other dimension (frequency of
existence –  another universe).  There are different frequencies of
existence outside the human eye. A simple explanation would be that if
you existed in the same frequency of infra red then you would see an
actual laser bean from the remote control to the Television. However, in
that same frequency the person holding the remote control may be
invisible because their body is vibrating outside that frequency which


--- PAGE 217 ---
allows you to see them. Within the human visual spectrum, a
concentration of dark matter seen within this atmosphere on earth
would be a black light. The Nubian must understand that the universe is
conscious blackness which has existences within it moving forever at
different speeds at different frequencies simply creating the colour
black in the sky which you see at night. The African Nubun is the
highest form of these conscious existences in this solar system
channelled in to existence in our physical realm via the Sun, which is jet
black on its surface. This is just like a projector in the sense that
everything you see on the screen was brought out through light from
the projector but the projector needs darkness for this light to be seen.
A projector also needs someone (or an older Nubian race) to manage
what is seen from the projector. The Nubian must start to remember
again that the principalities of nature are universal. We also suggested
that a universe is the second biggest existence this is because the
universe is growing. This means additional space must exist for the
universe to grow into it and this space must be bigger than the universe
–  reason that out.
Using universal laws the Nubian should reason that if any planet existed
with conditions suitable for human existence then the composition of
the sun(s) within that solar system must be similar to that of our own
sun. If so then that planet by nature could give birth to woolly haired /
bald pigmy –  black Ptahite. If the Nubian was first born on our planet
earth then we would be the first born on any planet with similar
conditions. If you have never heard this concept before then you should
realise the concealing agenda within Ufology. When you think about a
human type of extra-terrestrial they make sure to plant in your mind a
Caucasian when obviously the Nubun stock would be first to develop on
any earth type planet –  if they claim that planet has the same
composition as our own earth and our sun. They don’t want the Nubian
to realise that our blackness is a universal existence. New beings –  Nu-
bians –  from the ground by nature would approach nature with a
scientific rationale because while developing you would have to learn
nature within you and around you for the first time with no socialisation.
No belief could have existed and if other ancient Nubian races already
existed then what we saw would simply be recorded and expressed as it
was seen. Who would you be lying to if you were the only race in
existence at that time who were involved in these events. Also reason
that elder Nubian races known as the Neteru or Annunaqi from earlier
universal cycles recorded in our Tama-rean and Sumerian scriptures
would have existed and added to the development of the Nubian human
strand of today. This is the same way you the woolly haired Nubian
today exist and have lived through the development of all other races on
earth up until right now. As the first race we saw the Asian, Caucasian
and Mongoloid evolve in their evolutionary cycle and recorded their
tribal development in scriptures. For more information on this subject
matter, please read literature by the AEO. You should also know now
that the very word NUBIAN stems from the word NUBUN that in
cuneiform actually means ‘BEFORE LIGHT’ (research this). Cuneiform is


--- PAGE 218 ---
the father of nearly all languages on earth. In this our ancient language
NUBUN means before light –  thus blackness. It refers to the Nubian
living on earth before Light = White = Right reasoning because lighter
races did not exist on earth and if GOD was perceived to be light (like
today). Then the NUBUN existence was before their religions. When we
say before religion this does not refer to an understanding that a creator
does not exist NO! Ancient Nubun races perceived as angels / spirits (by
religion) became our creators (from Homo-Erectus to Sapien) and
because we are their descendants we become gods (Psalms 82:6).
However, the original creative forces go even further back to the
blackness of nature. One name for the representatives of this ancient
blackness is PTAH / TAR known as the ORIGINAL CREATOR by the pre-
dynastic Egyptian / Tama-rean for there are different creators that came
later. This is one reason why the Hebrew word for God is Elohim
meaning –  THESE BEINGS –  A PLURAL. The scientific identity of this
blackness can be regarded at this level of literature as dark matter, dark
energy and ether. From a basic scientific reasoning, you can see
FOREVER that all gases in space make the colour black. Therefore, this
blackness is the collective unification of all existences in its earliest
form –  gases. The same way all colours originate from black. Light is
merely a part of this. Religion created fear of blackness to make sure
descendants of the original Nubian tribes would reject their own NUBUN
existence (before light existence). This mentally preserves the existence
of lighter races especially the Caucasian as a governing force in the
world today –  simply put the caste system. A good question for all
Nubian to think about would be whether the Nubian would be following
middle-eastern Islam or European Christianity if the races and regions
governing the doctrines where more deprived than Tama-re (Africa). The
caste system means you only look to lighter races for guidance who
through the ancient Greeks and Romans took your scientific rationale
from Tama-re.  They then extracted science and philosophy out of it and
gave us back monotheistic religions be it a Caucasian and watered
down Hindu version of our Nubian spiritual concepts. There are
universal concepts in The Torah, New Testament and Koran that are
beneficial to all but there are also issues in the bias teaching of religion
that have helped create an environment detrimental to the Nubian
progress on earth. If subject matter in schools where not separated and
you where taught history, the origins of religion, which were then cross-
referenced with science and genetics the average Nubian (even as a
child) would be able to work out the basics of our original existence.
We hope that by now the Nubian reader would have began to at least
reason that the main isms stem from alternative religions and practices.
The key ingredient in all of this is belief. Many people who delve in to the
isms should start to realise they live in a similar reality to religion –  its
just that most don’t know the origins of the opinion they believe is their
own. You have people saying I am a socialist, I am a passionate-
conservative, I am a democrat, and I’m a liberal yet in their own personal
lives many will play out all these ideals in different situations. These are
simply belief systems within capitalism. The same way you have


--- PAGE 219 ---
Christianity with various sects and Islam with various sects. The more
belief out there the easier society is to control. Many tend to say the
more fear out there the easier society is to control but fear is a type of
belief anyway.
Throughout extracts 76 (Vol.6) and Universal Matters (Vol.7) we have
tried to create awareness about universal processes because these
principalities influence existences on earth within cycles. For evolution
to occur on earth there must be universal changes in the atmosphere, in
the potency of sunlight and gas particles which influence liquids and
solids that in turn dictate the present and future of life on earth. Races
can only evolve (evolution) via the natural regression of genes, the
scientific manipulation of genes and the biological system or the
altering of the atmosphere / eco-system. If this planet within this solar
system within this galaxy is rotating along a 72 million year cycle then
just like our own planet there must be seasons of change. Within a
certain season 18 million year cycle evolution will take a certain
direction. The Nubun lineage exists outside this current 18 million year
cycle with bones found in Ethiopia (27m), bones in Mali (28m) and bones
in the Congo (20m +). All other races are from this current cycle bearing
straight hair in line with their ¼ season (18m years) within the 72 million-
year cycle. The Nubian is simply from a much earlier universal season.
A sun at different intervals would release different gases or particles based on
the universal season the sun is entering within a galaxy. In a winter season
sun rays (Ra), sun flares or other gas particles from the sun would enter
planetary atmospheres and trigger off evolution. Within a universal summer
season, sun rays (Re), sun flares or other gas particles would enter planetary
atmospheres and trigger off original creation or revolutionary change. Original
creation is black similar to the origin of all existence. The Nubun genes,
black/brown woolly hair, black skin, as well as oil, coal, carbon, in essence the
burning of matter represent original existence within their facet because the
sun is forever burning.
In old age humans generate white hair. This is a cycle of nature. Within
the evolution of human beings, the Caucasian race represents the white
hair stage (recessive genes) of this 18 million year evolution cycle. They
will need you to perceive this information as racism when really it
reflects the latter stages of a universal season in human evolution. Over
the next several thousand years humans could either decay further into
appearances similar to extra-terrestrial humanoid or maintain the human
design by taking heed to PRO-LIFE reasoning –  respecting nature. In
fact, any being bearing white skin by nature possess recessive genes
anywhere in the universe. This is because the surface of all Suns before
decay or a winter universal season is black. Life is always the first
season. Recently the western news have revealed that a rocket has been
sent to the sun to gather new information about it. They are really trying
to find out ways of preventing sun flares from hitting earth as these
bursts give of heat particles detrimental to humans especially those with
recessive genes. They stated in the news that satellites could be


--- PAGE 220 ---
knocked out by these flares which really suggests that the flares could
reach earth’s atmosphere –  raising temperatures. There is much
information online about sun flares –  research this. The least evolution
occurs with the Nubun because melanin is a stabiliser and because the
Sun forever burns this forever means, that melanin is revitalised to
stabilise our genes. The less melanin and right knowledge inline with
nature the higher the degree of evolution resulting in different hair and
eye colours because more melanin is needed to stabilise the genes. Our
melanin correlates with dark matter, which is another type of stabiliser,
which holds this universe together –  both are black in origin and are
related. Now with a higher –  cleaner potency of melanin within the
human body especially neuro-melanin coated around the brain, other
parts of the brain usually not activated by mankind of today can be
activated more easily. The ancient Nubian tribes living via nature in hot
climates with a cleaner eco-system and diet lived in the best conditions
to utilise this higher brain activity.
When new cycles begin the prosperity of that cycle must first gather
strength to allow the being of that region in space, matter and time the
ability to fulfil their position. This is why certain animals that evolve
exist in certain regions of the world. Their genetic composition is most
suitable for that region. This is why absolute equality is a real equality –
different existences which over a period (an era / a season / a cycle)
reach their full potential never within the same space, matter and time of
each other. However a higher discussion would be that if the blackness
of nature –  dark matter and energy, 9 ether and space is forever present
throughout all era’s then potentially those of original black existence
could exist at the top end of universal order forever. All other forces
knowing this would forever have to regress the black existence in an
attempt to enhance their position within nature.
Many concepts from this extract were taken from The NINE BALL SERIES
and BIBLE INTERPRETATIONS AND EXPLANATIONS written by Amunubi
Rahkaptah (1967 –  1972). This timeless information can be found in
cyberspace by the keen Nubian researcher. Much of the writers we mention
have information online search them out –  upgrade your knowledge then
wisely spread the word.


--- PAGE 221 ---
Extract 29
A Race between Life & Death
One of the key issues that a Nubian must reason is that negative forces must
exist in all facets of existence be it in solid, liquid and gas. Even within this
trinity they must exist within all sub-divisions this includes humans. Now there
is a duality in existence for a negative force perceived by some may not be for
others but universally amongst humans any existence that contributes to the
end of your physical, biological and cultural existence is a form of negative
force (in any facet). Throughout these extracts you have read about the
various ways this occurs. In essence, these negative forces represent subtle
facets of evolution, which will climax in death - extinction.
The Nubian reader must realise that negative forces within evolutionary cycles
need the living to contribute to death. Death needs the living to speed up
death. This is because only the living can instigate pre-mature death.  The
forces of death exist primarily in evolution. Scientists know that the human
body potentially being self-sufficient should work much longer than 120 years
naturally. Scientists have been trying to find cures for death itself for decades.
Evolution holds the secrets behind death. Within the human visual spectrum,
the only existence that will be present forever is the colour black –  every other
existence in the human visual reality will eventually evolve or revolve back in
to black (space). This includes the Sun and the black hole after the Sun –
THIS IS FACT. THE NOTION OF BLACK REPRESENTING DEATH IS
UNIVERSALLY WRONG BECAUSE BLACK IS THE ONLY EXISTENCE
THAT WILL BE PRESENT FOREVER WITHIN THE THREE-DIMENSIONAL
PLANE. The Nubian must seriously try to understand this and shake off the
notion of this as racism. There are good and bad people in all races –
socialisation is only one facet that influences human behaviour - genetics is
another. Death is a cycle in nature –  but pre-mature death (killing of oneself or
race) satisfies anti-nature forces. The intentional and unintentional goal of all
negative forces must be to bring forth some type of death or end to
something. Within the Nubian existence, PRO-LIFE is a force that can slow
this down and the highest peak of this rationale is the preservation of your
original existence. Negative forces will focus FULL attention on disrupting
Tama-re because we represent the roots of existence. Our older lineage’s
have been targeted Ethiopia, Niger, Central & South Africa and right now
Sudan who all bare the ancient Nubian genes and have been targeted
through civil wars, forced famine, aids, racial cleansing etc. To get any
information to Africans from Africa we have to channel subject matters
through the west in to cyberspace to come back to our brothers and sisters
over here. All this becomes one of the conflicts of nature the preservation of
life (+) Vs (-) the preservation of death –  evolution is the proxy of death. For
the very word DEVIL backwards spells LIVED to have lived means you are
now dead - it’s the will of the dead that all races must reject and this death
reasoning contributes to humans partaking in actions that speed up the death
of our ties with nature and our own existence.


--- PAGE 222 ---
Reason This Out –  Many people say that Mother Nature is dying the forestry
is decreasing, deserts are growing, the eco-system is now out of whack –
these are all true and are happening right now. However nature is not actually
dying - nature can never die –  it is mankind’s relationship with nature that is
being detached. In other words, nature is leaving the conditions that support
the commercial understanding of evolution. The destruction of natural
resources to satisfy industry. Why is this occurring? It is because the
Caucasian race disrespects the blackness of nature. They alter CARBON
within nature to satisfy industrial desires. Carbon is a part of the ancient
blackness of nature. Elder tribes in all races from the Tama-rean to the
American Indians understood the balance of nature. The European Caucasian
due to bearing the highest exposure to evolution can not sit inline with the
preservation of nature naturally.
A sold-ier has SOLD a part of their conscience to fulfil the will of the dead –  to
instigate death usually for MOON-ney. This is because the system now owns
you –  you must fulfil the wills of a system –  which will be based around death
since you are a soldier. This is not absolute as PRO-LIFE means you have
the right to defend yourself as opposing forces wish to take away your life, but
there must be a balance as to whether your actions are actually preserving
your life or fulfilling the wills of bu-SIN-ness. An alternative media political
analyst in the west stated that ‘soldiers have the most power in the world but
they just don’t know it. They could bring down governments in a day –  not
through war –  but through peace. They could simply refuse to bare arms
leaving any political power without a safety net. That’s why it’s so important to
install patriarchy through money in them as a control mechanism.’
Using universal laws you should now reason that before you have
darkness perceived as bad there would be darkness perceived as good.
This is because life must exist before death. Therefore if everything
came from darkness (+) or (-) then life (+) was first. This blackness /
darkness allows elements to exist (life). Without the darkness nothing
would exist because everything came from that state.
This is UNIVERSAL REASONING and our ancestors in Tama-re had no fear
of light or darkness because their reality was based on facts - scientific
rationale. Our ancients would grind herbs and plantation in to black liquid
formulas and use certain combinations for healing and rejuvenation purposes.
This is early science. The early Caucasian with no understanding of herbal
medicine perceived this rationale as negative and till this very day they make
tablets white to help preserve white as good in your mind. The whole Nubian
race must break this colour spell to be universally aligned back with nature.
Monotheistic religions have so many comparisons between light (good) and
darkness / black (bad) that it was inevitable that the Nubian being dark
skinned would submit to the caste system taking on an image of a messiah
which even the actual Bible itself (Revelation 1:14-16 –  King James) does not
acknowledge.  The way today’s society is based on white-good and black-bad
–  black market (illegal), black day (bad day), White (Pure) etc –  was almost
the complete opposite in ancient times –  those NUBUN era’s (before light
times). The Nubian / black people of today must actually start to know


--- PAGE 223 ---
themselves. Since nature is black in creation and the mind / mental is one of
natures vessels, creation forces can help you but to connect the dots you
have to be in tune with nature. Scientific facts are the early stages of a real
black consciousness that can create real changes in real life. NEVER
FORGET –  FACTS = TRUTH. It all starts in the darkness of the mind. Belief
gives room for negative forces to run rampant –  it slows down judgement
allowing that force to potentially continue guiding the individual or race in any
direction. The judgement is YOU realising that this is wrong then improving
your status. Belief based on half-truths is what the Nubian is facing right now
globally. Now if you have a reality based on a semi-lie –  be it –  white (pure)
and black (impure / corrupt) then some type of judgement will occur via nature
to correct the wrongdoing. No scientist can disapprove that the universe is a
collective existence of elements, which personify blackness (space) and that
any solid in existence anywhere will finally be sealed in darkness be it a sun,
planet or moon. Blackness is the origin of ALL existences –  our black history
starts here.
The Nubian should now logically reason why many black organisations say
the Nubian is one tier of god. This is because all existence originates from the
blackness of space, time and matter and the Nubian has the highest genetic
composition of this blackness on earth (Psalms 82:6) –  the bible does not
reject this notion. Religion takes away the Nubians comprehension of TIME
itself –  thus leaving our race in a limbo state. In other words the Nubian is
living in the time-zone of other races be it 6,000 –  10,000 years. In fact this is
the Caucasian time-zone so the Nubian must reason that Religion is based on
their time (existence). The Caucasian race as stated many times in these
extracts is no more than 10,000 years old while your existence is millions of
years. This is why God is perceived as the light –  evolution –  the extraction of
light from darkness. The Caucasian race using religion has actually shrunken
time itself in line with their own existence. Please reason this out. Our Nubian
ancestors called themselves NUBUN ‘before light’ in cuneiform (before
monotheistic religion). This description of ourselves as the original beings
would not sit well with the Caucasian tribes - Greeks, Romans and Arabs. It
becomes much harder for other races to subsist on an older NUBUN race that
knows light is secondary to darkness. Therefore, to change your concept of
time in line with their existence is essential in taking control. In addition, they
would have to make sure you do not apply science to religious reasoning
because venturing in to these areas will lead you back to your dark-skinned
Nubun ancestors.  They are the reality waiting for you at the end of the tunnel
of facts –  not light –  but blackness –  however this blackness is in the mind –
its their genes which are your genes.
The Nubun ancients inter twined science and spirituality together in fact many
of the scientific words and definitions used today stem from the Neteru Gods
of Tama-re and their Nubun tribes –  your ancestors - FACT (Refer to AEO).
They do not want the Nubian of today venturing in to this level of reasoning
because REAL THINGS CAN HAPPEN SINCE YOU ARE BLACK AND
NATURE IS BLACK IN ORIGIN.  They need you to perceive black as bad to
prevent the Nubian from controlling the love for yourself. We state here the
notion of controlling your love for self and kind –  because the light (Caucasian


--- PAGE 224 ---
reasoning) will prevent you from fully embracing your blackness since they
told you black is negative –  the caste system. Loving and respecting the PRO-
LIFE (+) of your black existence will inline you back with nature because all
existence originates from darkness –  dark matter, energy and ether (9-Ether).
The Nubian is then aligning themselves with universal creation forces. The
very word NUBUN tells you that our ancestors knew about the blackness of
nature since they named themselves and us after this notion to make sure
future Nubian generations could trace their journey back to ORIGINAL
EXISTENCE.


--- PAGE 225 ---



--- PAGE 226 ---
Dear Reader,
There are now restrictions within cyberspace making it much harder for the
Afronauts to release material - all we can do is try. It now becomes more
important for the spreading of the word to commence. We don’t own this
information. This information is for our Nubian race and as a collective comes
from the writers we mention at the beginning of our extracts. The
organisations we continually mention are around (especially in the west).
They are not hard to find and they are the authors of the black mental
development.
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, Amunubi Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball -
Liberation Information), The Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO), The
Nuwapian Nation of The Moors, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed,
Clarence Jowars Smith (5%), The Holy Tabernacle Ministries, Credo
Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop, The Journey Home Group, Haru-Hotep Tar,
Marcus Garvey, Dr Joseph Ben-Joachannan, Noble Drew Ali and the
other degrees of Dr Malachi Z. York.
We can only stress that Nubian progress on earth must not become too multi-
dimensional as what we are concerned about from the west is the identity of
black consciousness which is slowly being identified with black liberalism. In
other words the way our consciousness is packaged and presented does not
bare right knowledge, wisdom or understanding of our true existence and
nature. Therefore, it is a product of evolution not original existence, yet
another form of belief system. Many aspects of liberalism in earlier times
where associated with alternative Caucasian (Greek / Roman) / Aryan
colloquial practices (refer to previous volumes). The Nubian should make
these facts known to their offspring preventing this reasoning from leading
future Nubian generations astray. There are so many invisible forces
detrimental to our existence i.e. racism, the English language, parts of
religion, parts of liberalism etc. Understand that other races don’t actually care
if this level of information is right or wrong there concern is whether you (the
Nubian) live by it or not. Many Nubians have all the black literature by the
writers we mention but still do not live by it because the isms regress facts
into belief. Liberalists especially soak up all our concepts and facts then
discharge them via upper class diction as rhetoric diluting the potency of the
knowledge aimed at improving the conditions of our race. Those who are
intelligent by nature will know that universal facts are the foundation of reality
for the Nubian still to this day will not except the most obvious truth that all
existence came from darkness / blackness therefore agreeable forces (+) of
any kind first came from this domain within the three dimensional plane. It is
this very fact which the Nubian will not recognise as a collective that has led
to the Nubian mind submitting to reasoning of other races in the form of
religion, the isms, caste systems, bad technology and bad dieting. This does


--- PAGE 227 ---
not mean that all concepts of reasoning giving to you from another race are
negative NO ! but the Nubian should realise that the best information could
only come from those in our race living in accordance to our true nature in
their right minds. This means the best of our information would exist before
any belief systems governed by another race. Use this literature wisely to
create awareness amongst our Nubian race. This is Nubian Race information.
Stimulate these concepts amongst your Nubian peers, family and friends.
Remember that by nature not all Nubians will be able to comprehend much of
what we write. Many will not except this information because they do not
understand the principalities of nature –  those universal laws. SEARCH OUT
THE WRITERS WE MENTION AT THE BEGINNING OF OUR VOLUMES –
We give you extracts –  they give you whole books !
Warning! There are many people who will perceive this as negative. This is
awareness literature. We have stated on many extracts that there are good
people in all races.  There are people of other races who have done more to
help the African than most Nubians on earth have done. We have stated this
at the beginning of these extracts. Liberals of all races by nature will not
respect scientific facts so their intentions will never lead to the full upliftment of
the Nubian race as scientific facts are a facet of the truth and it is the truth that
shall set you free. They wear away from absolutes as that challenges equality.
People against this literature wish that this information was delivered with
militancy but it is not. We study nature and cycles and respect purpose in
nature. Those who claim to be intelligent don’t reason that existence and
purpose are universally related. To exist automatically means you have a
purpose –  if you truly believe in equality. Therefore, there is purpose in race
within nature. Nature includes science. This is why the caste system conflicts
with nature because it does not respect the scientific facts that the darker the
skin the higher the blood composition. It becomes another belief system –  be-
lie-f system given to the world via the Hindu doctrine.
Absolute equality can be defined as the allowance of all differences in
existence reaching their full potential. This means PRO-LIFE reasoning must
be allowed to be expressed. This PRO-LIFE reasoning means that anything
mentally, physically, genetically and culturally consumed that leads to the
death of your original existence and lineage is allowed to be stated and
acknowledged. However, once the Nubians deals with these notions from a
scientific rationale they will find that many parts of THE ISMS and RELIGION
do not fit into the PRO-LIFE rationale for they reject differences and universal
order in nature ((+) -> evolution -> (-)). The very order they still claim either
God or Nature created. A tree by default will take in carbon dioxide - if this is
not available, it will take in other gases at the expense of mutation also known
as evolution. This is what’s happening when the Nubian does not respect or
preserve their original existence on a cultural and genetic level for we all
abide to the laws of nature.
Facts are the core representatives of nature right now while be-lie-fs are
the expressions of evolution within nature. For the truth always existed
prior to the belief.


--- PAGE 228 ---
It is also important that we state here that the Nubian reader must not get lost
in the notion of free literature as junk mail. The reason why we say this is
because the internet has bombarded the masses with what they call junk mail
and junk sites. These are usually for the purpose of gaining marketing data
from those who click into these sites or pop-ups. Marketing data which will
eventually reach agencies that will sell-off information to any third party. We
state this here because online black information is slowly being cut-off by junk
mail and sites making the Nubian researcher less likely to find the REAL
information. This in turn devalues our truths into notions of belief. The
intelligent researcher should dip into the black cyberspace arena understand
the key notions then study the writers we mention (outside cyberspace).
We are very keen to have people from the continent of Africa be
introduced to this information as we know much of this type of literature
is hard to find out there. Many people may be offended by the information
you are about to read we are sorry but if you truly respect nature and
science, you will understand. There are processes in nature itself that are
allowed to be stated since they naturally emerged.
Extracts included on this PDF is 78. Other extracts may follow once the
information has been abbreviated and centralised. There may be
grammar and literacy errors –  we apologise in advance. No Endnotes or
Index included. (1- 8 pages). Two writers put this volume together.


--- PAGE 229 ---
Extract 78
Black Mind Universe
Eventually the Nubian will have to address darkness from a scientific
perspective for the reality of darkness within the three-dimensional
plane will always be a collection of gases post a sub-atomic reality
associated with quantum physics via westernised science and (+) or (-)
spirituality via religion. Here we will try to discuss the order and
disorder of darkness for if everything within the 3rd dimension reality
came from gases which personifies the colour black (space) then within
this blackness (+) and (-) must exist as all by-products of dark matter /
ether be it galaxies, solar systems, planets and beings exist within the
(+) and (-) routines of nature. The laws of opposites –  one principality of
nature. Now within the blackness of space (+) and (-) would be
represented as ORDER and DISORDER. In other words within a certain
area within space, time and matter where the combination of gases are
in harmony balance exists creating ORDER –  remember gases have
different weights and reactions to each other and gravity. When the right
combinations of gases are present within space, matter and time you
have the universal order of darkness. In this region in a galaxy or
universe a SUN can personify.
Overstand this notion of PERSONIFY as a forever existence such as
darkness (Space) / blackness (Nature) being present means that
anything that is created by nature within it has no real universal time but
rather a human time (according to human beings). In other words the
personification of the Ptah / Pygmies on earth could be millions of years
or a day but could be regarded as instant to a forever existing presence
i.e. the blackness of nature –  because time is not necessary if you have
existed forever. Now this blackness is coded in gases, which becomes
liquids and solids most potent in Nubun descendants. This is one of the
universal reasons why the ancient Nubun tribes of Tama-re (the physical
descendants of universal nature in flesh and blood in this solar system)
rarely recorded time in their history. The ancient nubun reasoning is that
the Nubian race is the actual being therefore our ancient history was felt
as important to ALL NUBUN DESCENDANTS (including Nubians of
today) therefore TIMELESS. If you think that events and names in our
existence thousands of years ago are not important now. Then you do
not understand nature –  if time rotates as a cycle / circle like a clock,
planet, solar system, galaxy then equality exists within 360 degrees.
Therefore, our ancient history is just as important as now –  remember
the genes of our ancients are in you right now. It is very important that
the Nubian reader understands these notions because ‘those who
execute higher reasoning may not be perceived as intelligent by those
of lesser degrees’.


--- PAGE 230 ---
We stress to the reader that many parts of intelligence have been
subconsciously aligned with the NATURE of the Caucasian race, which
by nature is based on evolutionary reasoning. They refuse to accept the
reality that everything influences everything therefore your genetic
composition will have an influence on mental reasoning in a situation.
This is merely your role in nature which governing opinions in society
dictate as superior or inferior.
The Nubun in their right mind bares ancient reasoning conducted by a
descendency of DNA / RNA traits which in gas form are by-products
from the existence of ORDER via the SUN within the universal blackness
of nature within space, time and matter. Blood, Carbon and Melanin are
proof of these facts. The lesser degrees of order in blackness correlates
with evolution. In other words the regions in space with less harmony
within the blackness of gases when converted into sunlight trigger off
evolution. Furthermore pre-fixed disorder via light energy (a lesser light)
would be moonlight or rejected gases by the sun and light energy from
other stars in disorder regions within the blackness of gases within the
universe. It must also be noted here that the composition of black gases
even within order in a specific region of space may still differ slightly
from another region of order in space. If original existence moved from
different parts of space, there may still exist variation in composition
because you can not have the same existence within the same space
within the same matter within the same time. In fact the Nubian must
now understand this notion of DISORDER because energy exerted from
regions of disorder will be perceived as ORDER by those of evolution
because their existence originated from these regions in space, time
and matter.
To commercialise what has just been read means that Luna astrology,
and continual reasoning based on the moon are highly questionable for
the depth to uncover the (+) or (-) influences of energy have not been
publicly acknowledged. The lack of universal scientific reasoning leads
to the expectance of belief and potential negative forces. In addition, if
the reasoning came from other races then their lineage goes back to
gases more prone to disorder regions of the universe at their time of
creation. The core traits of original existence will not change because
the blackness of nature will always be there. Therefore all forms of white
light are based on time –  black lights are not. This means that any form
of light in the human eye frequency will have a beginning and an end,
but black lights are infinite within the three dimensional plane. This is
because they existed before white light (human eye light). It is this
perceived light in the form of sunlight which allowed time (as we know
it) to begin on earth as it was used as a recording mechanism.
Therefore, reason that black lights existed before the notion of time.
ALWAYS REMEMBER LIGHT IS A BY-PRODUCT OF DARKNESS –
THESE ARE FACTS.


--- PAGE 231 ---
The Nubian must strip these notions of blackness tied to void, nothing,
ugly, death, satanic, bad, evil, empty etc and realise that for millions of
years on earth ONLY dark skinned Nubun tribes existed prior to the
evolution of other races. Therefore how could these notions make sense
in an all black race planet prior to evolution. In addition, the Nubian
should reason that in those Nubun eras what you perceive today as pro-
blackness would have merely been living in accordance to your nature.
There was no other races back then to release this pro-black stance by
Nubians of today.
Therefore in reality the original notion of PRO-BLACKNESS would equal
PRO-NATURE which would initially equal PRO-LIFE.
One of the quests in promoting your blackness is by living by the
reasoning of the original Nubun tribes (the authors of our black culture
globally). This reasoning must be adapted to society today and they
lived by the laws of nature, which then reached a scientific level via the
Tama-reans (TAR EGYPTIANS) and SUMER. We mention here that a
scientific level does not necessarily mean more intelligent it just means
that a different methodology in recording and executing reasoning
within nature was developed.
Understand the Egyptian lineage (1) ANU PEOPLE / TAR (PTAH) TAR
DENEG EGYPTIAN (PRE-DYNASTIC) eras were thousands of years
before the (2) Dark skinned Phoenician Egyptian (DYNASTIC), which
was several hundred years before (3) The light-skinned Egyptians –
HYKSOS / White Syrians (DYNASTIC), which were hundreds of years
before your (4) Greek / Arab descendants (Lower Egypt).
It is the (3) and (4) who the west are determined to position in your mind
as the Egyptian culture. They are relentlessly using any medium
possible (films, school education, cartoons, documentaries, history
books, TV Shows) to prevent the Nubun continent of Africa from
seriously embracing their REAL Tama-rean existence. Never forget the
Dynastic Egyptians acknowledged PTAH as the person-ification of the
ORIGINAL CREATOR. The representative of universal creative forces in
flesh and blood (Ptah / Tar / Tar Deneg –  The Pygmies of central / east
Africa along the Nile regions). Documentaries don’t cover upper Egypt
properly in their programmes because the further you go back the
blacker it gets. They focus on evolution not revolution.
Nature originates from the blackness of space, time and matter. To live
by the science of nature is a Nubian doctrine given to other races. It
could only be that way because we are of original existence. The arrival
of evolution in the form of other races and animals till this very day has
made the Nubian attach their blackness with a period of existence
perceived as the beginning of our culture. For example, if you say you’re
a black Hebrew then you are saying that your existence is no more than
6,000 years old. If you say you’re a black Muslim then you are saying
that your existence is no more than 10,000 years old. If you say you are


--- PAGE 232 ---
a Roman Catholic then you are saying your faith is no older than the
Roman Empire. Yet scientific evidence will tell you of Nubun existence
in Africa of more than 20 million years. So understand the blackness of
nature is beyond their notion of time and we are a part of this blackness
in physical form on earth. The Nubian must realise the blackness of
nature is real and is clearly in science and also in religion when read
with understanding. You have a common notion describing a very dark
environment called PITCH BLACK. However, study the word PITCH as it
has several meanings. One meaning refers to sounds and frequencies.
We told you that light similar to sound has frequencies of existence. To
really say PITCH BLACK is scientifically referring to light at a certain
pitch (frequency). Within this black frequency range, there are other
lights, which the common human-eye cannot measure. It is these
frequencies in space bearing conscious energy that is holding existence
itself together within the three dimensional plane. The detachment of
purpose within reality is why the Nubian can not work out their
existence. The very fact you are dark skinned with hair that curls in to
the circle –  The number nine –  9-Ether should tell you that universal
forces are in black as everything exists in a circle called a universe
which is the forever changing existence from the initial stage of gases
which personify BLACK.
If all universal elements within the three dimensional plane originate
from gases which merely create blackness / darkness then this template
is similar to the human mind in the sense that inside your skull is brain
matter existing in darkness yet a whole reality exists within human
senses and consciousness. Inside brain matter are electric pulses which
stimulate thought and reaction. Within the blackness of nature these
electric pulses are light energies from SUNS created by dark matter (the
brain matter of the universe) which initially stimulate the growth of all
creations.
Overstand this parallel. Nature is a living existence.
Please refer to The Nine Ball - Liberation Information (Get From Behind
The Nine Ball) (Vol.1 & 2) written by Wu Nupu Asu Nupu & Amunubi
Rahkaptah


--- PAGE 233 ---



--- PAGE 234 ---
Dear Reader,
In cyberspace, we see a cycle of knowledge. Black web-sites / forums build
up information then go bust. Then start again. Study this routine. So you have
100’s of web pages of information which can stimulate the Nubian mind that
simply disappears. Ask your web-site moderators why would they abandon
100’s of pages of black literature about all our subjects written by people from
around the world. For these are your black libraries.  These web-sites / forums
usually comeback more watered down. In recent years, the journey of black
consciousness tends to begin privately within cyberspace, then on to books
then eventually social movements. The opposing forces to our existence know
this. They take great interest in the behaviour of the black cyberspace scene.
These Afronaut volumes are the collective gathering of Nubun information.
Starting as black consciousness in the early volumes, then developing in to
NATURE KNOWLEDGE giving the Nubian the foundation to execute RIGHT
KNOWLEDGE. The writers we mention are your true guidelines.
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi, Amunubi Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball -
Liberation Information), The Ancient Egyptian Order (AEO), The
Nuwapian Nation of The Moors, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed,
Clarence Jowars Smith (5%), The Holy Tabernacle Ministries, Credo
Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop, The Journey Home Group, Haru-Hotep Tar,
Marcus Garvey, Dr Joseph Ben-Joachannan, Noble Drew Ali, Afroo
Oonoo and the other degrees of Dr Malachi Z. York.
SIMPLY PUT –  If the original tribes of earth were of Nubun descent then at
their time of existence reasoning was based on nature knowledge and
spiritual sciences. The origin of black consciousness began with the evolution
of the straight haired races for an opposing force must exist to allow racial
consciousness to emerge. Prior to this the Nubun tribes executed nature
knowledge and our own spiritual sciences. The elite of the ancient Nubun
tribes were actually perceived as Gods by other races. Men in ancient history
have been regarded as Gods, Khrasts or Messias in their chosen era. There
are different tiers of Gods biblically acknowledged (refer to vol.1). The belief
system known as the caste system and all its variations world-wide (racism)
has damaged the global positioning of the Nubun race. This belief system is
not supported by scientific evidence and is merely an evolutionary force used
to offset the blackness of nature and its direct descendants. The laws of
opposites and the cycles of nature stated throughout these extracts represent
the raw generalisation of ancient Nubun teachings. In other words we are not
giving you the details just the generalisation. The writers we mention above
are the fine-tuners SEARCH THEM OUT. The Nubian mind must start to
realise that black consciousness is the purest hybrid of human mental
reasoning in nature. A hybrid in the sense that the conscious reasoning based
on nature itself existed prior to any black consciousness known today.
However it’s the descendants of the Ptah –  Nubun tribes that existed before
the evolution of other races that executed nature spiritual knowledge and it is
their DNA within our race NOW that stimulates our black consciousness
TODAY. This is the journey of consciousness from NATURE to PRO-BLACK
(as it is known today). Pro-blackness in its original undiluted form is really a


--- PAGE 235 ---
PRIME VARIANT of nature knowledge. This is why Pro-blackness in its purest
existence could only equal pro-nature which would initially equal pro-life. All
other races posses variants of nature knowledge but due to evolution, theirs
can only be a SECONDARY VARIATION. The black liberal must take in these
words because TIME has been used as a tool to control our race. Time in the
sense that they have squeezed our Nubun existence into a six-thousand year
reality. If you were taught that black people on earth were speaking parts of
the language called cuneiform for at least 40,000 years in the Uganda and
Sudan region. Then why would you call on a God in a language your own
family is older than? As a Nubun descendent you had relatives that existed
before these western and middle eastern languages and races –  FACT. Many
of the languages in Africa today are variants of dialects from Sumer and
Cushite tribes which originally stem from cuneiform (which when written
becomes pre-dynastic hieroglyphics). Most Sub-Saharan African dialects are
thousands of years older than Sanskrit and Hindi –  the origin of nearly all
European based languages of today. They don’t really want the Nubun to
have a true understanding of cycles in nature and time for it would minimise
the validity of belief systems which are needed to control ERAS. The Reader
must try to understand that Black liberalism is a tool being used to assist the
watering down of black consciousness. They must make sure that black
liberalism cuts off NATURE KNOWLEDGE, which leads to RIGHT
KNOWLEDGE –  reasoning based on facts. They do not want you to study the
writers we mention then go and do real research using nature knowledge as a
guideline. They know you would arrive at the past thus making it the
future.
The mainland African must seriously understand this –  you will not see
conscious rap music from the west on African TV screens. We question the
mentality of the African media machine to allow these videos on to our
screens. Do they actually believe that sex / gangster rap videos from the US
are going to stimulate positive change in urban Africa? You see, if western
reasoning is regarded as GOOD by default then the African mind can be
guided in any direction by those who authorise western ethics. Urban Africa
should know that there are millions of conscious Nubians in the US and
Europe who oppose the current form of Rap and R&B music given to the
world as NORMAL by the MTV / BET / pay per view machine. We are very
keen to have people from the continent of Africa be introduced to this
information. Many people may be offended by the information you are about
to read we are sorry but if you truly respect nature and science, you will
understand. There are processes in nature itself that are allowed to be stated
since they naturally emerged.
This PDF is a questions and answers edition. Other extracts may follow
once the information has been abbreviated and centralised. There may
be grammar and literacy errors –  we apologise in advance. No Endnotes
or Index included. (1- 12 pages). Four writers put this volume together.
We openly give permission for theses extracts to be freely downloaded to
be put on any black conscious websites or forums whose intention is to
improve the mental and physical conditions of our Nubian / African race.


--- PAGE 236 ---
Ques: If the laws of opposites and universal cycles are facts then why
aren’t people fully embracing these laws ?
Ans: Corrupted philosophical ethics given to the world via Greek and Roman
philosophies which go further back to teachings and reasoning from the Indus
valley (via the Phoenician) and Bali (Indonesia) are supplanted in the
mainstream understanding of western ethics. We state here that these are
corrupted philosophies because it was the pre-dynastic Tama-reans who lived
out characteristics within nature to allow philosophy to even exist. Through
time and age (evolution) the Egyptian concepts got diluted by the Greeks
Hellenistic reasoning. The laws for opposites within nature BY NATURE have
positioned the Nubun tribes and their Nubian descendants in a position which
should destroy the white supremacy of today going back to the caste system.
This would also reveal the truths behind religion for everything would have
been taught and accepted in a sequence of order. The same way you should
respect your father’s wishes, and grand father like wise. Other races through
reasoning would have to accept purpose in original existence. To accept
purpose in existence means you would have to accept the Nubun notion of
God, Customs and traditions as the original intentions of nature. However, this
is not equality, as you know it because this means that the potency of the
forces of nature would be most aligned with Nubun descendants. This is
proven through your 9-ether hair scientifically acknowledged as the healthiest
and Nubun blood scientifically proven and acknowledged to be the strongest
of all races. Drop the notion of black supremacy, as these are scientifically
researched facts. Ask yourself this - why didn’t all races sprout out at the
same time in all different climates across the globe? It is because nature has
a universal order in creation or change. With evolutionary reasoning by
default, the European man allowed the world to acknowledge Africa as the
birthplace of mankind. This is because the hidden notion given from religion is
that dark = death and light = life. Therefore, the dark-skinned African man
(representing death) progressed to become the light-skinned European man
(representing life). The problems in our African continent are holding their
caste system together. The west show a downtrodden Africa to give
Caucasians a GOD Complex and to preserve the idea of black = bad and
white = good within the consciousness of the masses globally. However BY
NATURE the creative forces of all existence must first exist in the collection of
gases and matter which will FOREVER personify the colour BLACK prior to
creating SUNS. NATURE IS A BLACK THING. The variation between the
beginning and the end are your opposites –  birth and death. Within that
journey reproduction commences thus creating a cycle / circle.
There are countless variants of cycles in the form of solids, liquids and gases
co-existing within the three-dimensional plane. Absolute equality within races
exists within a cycle far bigger than the individual life-span. In other words the
Nubian of today [2007] is living through the ending of the Caucasian driven
era of rulership on earth. A commercial example of cycles can be seen in
economic discussions about the economy of China becoming the new global
market leader over the US. This will bring in a new economic era.


--- PAGE 237 ---
By the laws of nature which personifies the variations of existence
within cycles; BY NATURE the Nubian race is destined to return to their
original position and existence on earth. However only those who are
intelligent BY NATURE will overstand the journey back to original
existence or better said ORIGINAL REASONING. A commitment to your
race is a commitment to NATURE because you are respecting the
original intentions of nature itself –  be it you a NUBUN descendent.
Technology which we call the creative altering of hybrid elements can be a
part of this journey if it is used for revolutionary purposes. Good technology is
essential in development but the universal evaluation of technology will have
to take place before that specific technology is used. Nearly all technology are
compound layers of concepts which all started in Ta-Ma-RE via the Egyptians
/ Khemet. Original existence could only be pro-life in reasoning. Within nature
technology disguises the fact that evolution is a form of decay. For the core
forms of technological advancements i.e transport and energy all result in a
form of damage to the eco-system and eventually human life. There are
consequences in altering any element within nature for the original intentions
of nature are not being respected. The same way the original Nubun tribes /
races on earth are not being respected. Reason this out.
The laws of opposites and universal order within nature by Universal rights
within many facets would position our race higher than others on earth due to
our original existence. The father figure race –  symbolised by the woolly hair /
Afro as ALL OTHER RACES prior to racial mixing bare STRAIGHT HAIR.  It
would be and is an unconditional right. Unconditional respect would have to
be bestowed to the NUBUN races. Belief systems block these universal
rights. This is not equality as you know it. Now because of cycles in nature our
race is going through a death cycle (moon cycle) in the form of evolution. In
other words for cycles to exist there must be change, now if the Nubun race is
at the top end of racial order then this change can only be downward resulting
in our conditions in recent centuries. The rise of other races especially the
Caucasian race could be considered the practice of absolute equality within
nature. Anything up must come down and visa versa. Belief will NEVER carry
stronger potency for change than FACTS. It is belief in the form of religion and
those isms that will prevent the Nubian from reasoning out the real
characteristics of nature. It is not to say in absolute terms that they are
completely negative. It is to say that right reasoning is not present within the
Nubian mind when information from these two arenas are captured and used
in everyday life by the Nubian. The laws of opposites and nature laws are
universal and for that reason they will not allow mainstream teachings to take
on this reasoning because evolution does not represent order but rather dis-
order and the Caucasian race is the highest representatives of evolution on
earth. Therefore, they have taught all races to follow opinions, psychology,
belief systems and desires over facts and pro-life reasoning. Desire is the
mental driver behind capitalism in the form of profit - it goes back to the moon.


--- PAGE 238 ---
Ques: Simplify light and darkness as opposing forces ?
Ans: Darkness as the collection of gases after the emergence of dark matter
and energy (post sub-atomic) then gave birth to light as one of the initial
opposing forces within absolute nature. With light came time within space and
matter because no time can exist in darkness because there is no framework
within the human concept of darkness to record time. Therefore light set up
the basis of time to allow change in existence to exist in the form of revolution
(+) or evolution (-). With all gas particles in the form of circles this induced the
reasoning of existences within space, time and matter to fulfil the notion of the
circle / cycle. With the initial POSITIVE light giver known as Suns that are all
jet black on their surface overstand that this symbolises the reasoning that
behind any light is the creative thought of darkness.  Meditation, dreams and
prayers induce creative thought all executed in darkness –  overstand this
parallel. The human body repairs itself to the best of its abilities when the
retina nerves system are off (Medically induced sleeping or natural sleeping).
Darkness is forever senior to light in existence. Light can only exist in
darkness. This is timeless information and will remain true forever. This
means that this remains as truth right NOW and was true 2,000 years ago and
6,000 years ago. Both darkness and light are a part of the same thing –
different reflections of absolute nature.
Science is commonly defined as a branch of knowledge or study dealing with
a body of facts or truths systematically arranged and showing the operation of
general laws. So the first people to apply scientific reasoning could only be
Nubun tribes from Ta (Africa). Understanding right from wrong in accordance
to your nature is a natural exercise. Millions of years ago the ancient Nubun
tribes reasoned that when a being fell ill through plenty of rest and sleep their
health usually improved. This notion presented some of the initial reasoning of
darkness as a creative presence –  rejuvenating the body. This is still true
today. The human body when ill has to cut off light (sleep, meditation or
prayer) to allow brain matter to focus its resources on its internal self. This is
nature. For 9 months in darkness light is cut off from the presence of the baby
in the womb to allow brain matter to focus on the development of the babies
vital organs. This is nature. Babies have a black substance discharge at birth
called Meconium. The appearance of Meconium is a sign that the baby's
bowels are unobstructed and functioning properly.  This is nature. For the
blackness of nature in the form of carbo-hydrates (carbon & hydrogen) is
essential in creation. As a race the Nubian of today must take in this
reasoning and hold back the light. In racial terms the light becomes white-
light-right reasoning which is often taken on by all races as a default right. We
assure you that the journey of right thinking could only start from original
existence - this is universal order. The Nubian must try to reason out the
relationship between light and time. From the perspective of darkness light
becomes one of the initial forms of evolution. In addition, from the perspective
of light, darkness becomes a form of revolution as the origin of light is
darkness. THERE IS ALWAYS A TYPE OF BEGINNING / CHANGE WITHIN
SPECIFIC SPACE IN TIME AND MATTER. This means within a specific area
within space, time and matter a change of some kind will eventually happen
and that change will be the beginning of something. Philosophical arguments


--- PAGE 239 ---
give rise to the question of seniority between the egg and the chicken. The
answer is simply the egg, which came from the growth cycle of nature. A
women of today can not give birth specifically to an algae which will eventually
grow in to a human over millions of years. There is always a beginning prior to
the first rotation of a cycle. In fact the chicken and the egg scenario is a
regurgitation of ancient Egyptian teachings concerning the egg (life) being
born from primeval waters chaos. The early Caucasian took this reasoning
and cut off the beginning. This cuts off nature’s role in creation and allows god
concepts to emerge.
Ques: How do you express spirituality?
Ans: Surely reasoning is one way of expressing spirituality. A REAL religious
person should read their chosen scriptures and gain laws and
commandments from it. They should then live by those notions.  Therefore,
the world will perceive your spirituality from your actions, which are based on
your interpretation of scriptures. This interpretation is from your direct
understanding of scriptures or an interpretation channelled through a
preacher, imaan, rabbi etc. Now through these extracts we are trying to get
the Nubian to understand that the liberalistic reasoning in the west is really the
hidden spirituality of Greek and Roman –  Aryan, Canaanite, Hittite practices
and traditions which followed gods such as Belos (Zeus), Bel, Baal (sex) who
are Caucasian interpretations of Hindu deities. Off shoots of this spirituality
have become the reasoning of what you are calling Liberalism (as liberalis
(Latin) (sexual urges)), capitalism (bu-sin-ness / Moon (Moon-ey) and the
other isms of today. Money and sex are desire-based reasoning. We will add
death to this list as well for recreational practices which manifest from
liberalism usually will result in physical / mental damage to the human body –
drug-taking, alcohol, intoxicants, loose sex etc. The journey to the death of
yourself –  evolution. Reasoning is an expression of spirituality for once you
except a certain way of life you will live by it. You will find that most so-called
atheists and liberals who don’t believe in a creator or religion are merely
following the alternative pagan practices of the Canaanites, Greeks and
Romans –  THEY JUST DON’T KNOW IT. These alternative practices are not
in public scriptures they are hidden within western society as special days in
the year, recreational practices, words and phrases, societal habits and
customs usually commercially acknowledged. This is why research is
necessary to find the origins of customs and once the intelligent Nubian finds
these origins they should realise that the liberal lifestyle taken on in the west
goes back to alternative Aryan god worship.
To simplify all this –  Liberalism is watered down Baal / Bel / Belos spirituality
in disguise - Lib-ber-rul (Let-bel-rule). It’s a disguised religious reasoning
whose scripture is submerged within the ethics of western society. It is so
disguised that tens of millions of people believe it first emerged in the 1960’s
as a change in western ethics.


--- PAGE 240 ---
Lets elaborate on this subject –  In essence one of key subject matters
throughout these Afronaut extracts from vol.5 upwards is this hidden
spirituality as reasoning which goes back to Belos. This Belos is another
name for Zeus. It is stated many times by many writers the fact that the image
of Belos (Zeus) has a remarkable resemblance to the God of the Michael
Angelo Sistine chapel in Rome and many depictions of the white Jesus. (See
diagrams).
                               Zeus                   Je-sus (He-Zeus)
REMEMBER –  JAH or JEHOVAH (JEH) and ZEUS put together makes
JESUS. Also remember the actual letter J did not exist before 14th century.
THESE ARE FACTS –  RESEARCH THIS. This means the transfer of the
letter J to certain words can not be natural colloquial development and to a fix
this letter J with God (Jehovah) or the messiah (Jesus) should tell you there
are other agendas taking place within religious institutions. They have
rejected original words and meaning written and spoken by those original
biblical writers. Ask yourself why have they introduced the letter J over 1000
years after the events written in the bible to describe the father and the son?
Another hint found in language is the Spanish term for Jesus which is He-
Zeus. That’s HE-ZEUS. You think this is a co-incidence. (see diagram). So
you have Zeus (Belos), Bel, Baal all gods taken on by the original Caucasian
races whose image has been overlapped in to monotheistic doctrines to
subtly promote the original spirituality of the Caucasian race. This spirituality
personifies as the reasoning behind lib-bel-rule-ism which is now even altering
mainstream Christian reasoning. It is focused around sexual urges (liberalis
(Latin)). Most people of all races simply don’t know these issues.
Many of the dysfunctional issues within the black Nubun race of today stem
from this issue because many Nubians are really taking on practices and
reasoning not indigenous to our true nature. We now find much information in
cyberspace about the black Jesus but bearing FACTS should tell you that the
messiah could have never have been called J-esus.


--- PAGE 241 ---
When dealing with right knowledge you are dealing with a spirituality that is
timeless –  facts –  pro-life. The most intelligent reasoning must be to take
actions which preserve ones life and universal existence (Pro-Life). Right
knowledge is a fluid reasoning held secure by the laws of nature. You will
always need facts to induce progress within the three dimensional plane. The
notion of reasoning based on facts is an ancient spirituality that existed
before all religions.
Religion is based on belief yet all truths must exist before belief. FACTS =
TRUTH. Nature is the provider of facts and science is one method of
obtaining facts from nature. Right knowledge can never be dated within time
like religion because natural facts are timeless. There will never be a time
when right knowledge will become out-of-date because facts induce change
and conscious and conscience decision-making within space, time and
matter.  To live by facts is a timeless notion that out dates all belief systems.
THE NUBIANS TRUE CULTURE REASONING. Evolution of some kind must
occur before belief can even exist.
The implementation of factual reasoning in society would be the following: If
new information is obtained which improves your original existence mentally,
culturally and physically then you should upgrade your actions and adapt to
the improved notions. This is change but aligned with life not death –
therefore it is a revolutionary rationale. The laws of nature are timeless forever
NOW. Within these laws the individuals intelligence allows them to move in
positive of negative directions in accordance to their being and race. It is at
the disadvantage of all lighter races if the Nubian acknowledges and lives by
the laws of nature because nature has positioned the lightest as the
representatives of evolution. An example is language if you know the original
man is African then the original indigenous language of earth came from Ta
(Africa). Therefore an understanding of universal order should tell you that
world-wide education institutions should be teaching children that all
languages stem from TA-MA-RE (Ta) Africa be it cuneiform. In Africa they
should even be teaching this language. The original vocal tones are Nubun.
Yet mainstream western institutions end the history of language at either Latin
of further back to Hindi or Sanskrit –  the straight haired lineage. In fact, this is
a subtle confession that the Nubun is from a much earlier racial lineage that
has over lapped and mixed in to the straight haired racial existence.
They will be reluctant to teach the laws of nature and universal order for the
beginning is where nature is most creative and that ALL TYPES of natural
evolution represent decay in nature –  with no exceptions. The cycles / circles
of nature which existence travels on will eventually turn evolution in to
revolution over time.  Revolution is the journey back to life if evolution is the
proven journey to death –  symbolised by your very own human existence –
from birth (+) –  evolution –  death (-). To improve your life you must live by
facts –  dieting is a prime example. To go back to life you must obtain the best
quality of life which can only be gained by living based on facts. FACTS =
TRUTH = REALITY.  Back to life back to reality. In the English language, both
be-lie-f and be-lie-ve have a lie supplanted within the word. This is no
coincidence.


--- PAGE 242 ---
If you have no access to information be it intellectual books, TV, cyberspace,
newspapers etc. Then how would you be able to differentiate the validity or
quality of information. Therefore, you could only rely on primary evidence in
the form of physical existence. Now you have thousands of villages and town
regions throughout Africa who are given the physical existence of the
European as agreeable in the form of Jesus, angels, the red cross,
humanitarian aid helpers etc. Meanwhile the causes of suffering within Africa
are represented by the black solider, black policeman, black politician, black
bandits and robbers. Even the Nubian man who takes a stand to help their
own people will either be aided by the Caucasian reasoning via a physical or
mental presence. This is why we the Afronauts stress to the Nubian reader
that African society plays out the caste system thus submerging the Nubian in
to a coma-reasoning which will submit to the evolutionary nature of the
Caucasian race.
A simple way of dismantling the caste reasoning is to have more
western Nubian humanitarian aid helpers and entertainers involved in
African development. However, they must be bearing traits of original
existence (woolly hair) when amongst their Nubun relatives in Africa.
For the African will then see their image in the form of a saviour. Usually
the African see an EX-1980’s new romantics (Roman-antics) music artist
as the saviour. These singers and actors follow the ideals that go back
to the Zeus (Belos), Bel, Baal and the Kabala / Cabalah. Any help in
developing our continent is a good thing but the intelligent Nubian must
make sure that the indigenous Nubun does not submit to the new-age
reasoning that they will bring for they are very keen to dismantle ancient
African power and our Nature Neteru spirituality which has become
dormant because the Nubun masses still follow monotheistic religions
governed by races millions of years younger than us.
All this is why many Africans today in 2007 are not able to fully comprehend
why Nubians living within the west tend to complain about racism and why
they perceive injustice from the behaviour of the Caucasian throughout
history. The indigenous African must learn to put trust in real history as a
teacher –  our history –  not his-story. This is referring to Global black history.
For venturing into this arena of study will lead to the conclusion that, the
Caucasian race has caused much suffering to darker races over periods of
thousands of years. As a child, we all learn that you should not play with fire
or you will get burned. The fire in question here is light-white-right reasoning
which will soften the Nubian to allow the exploitation of our race and the
dismantling of our original existence. Many of our ancestors did not listen to
this type of knowledge resulting in the global climate our race is facing today.
Many Africans simply do not accept black writings. In other words the
writers we mention at the beginning of volumes are perceived questionable by
the indigenous African reasoning because; [1] They have no access to the
materials which would allow them to research their original existence /
heritage. This is because the west have made sure that much of the Nubian
ancient data [tablets, ancient scriptures] are spread throughout the western
world in museums making it almost impossible to correlate data. Many


--- PAGE 243 ---
writings by Cheikh Anta Diop will remind you of the conspiracy to hold back
primary evidence supporting our ancient heritage. [2] The African education
system is based on western ethics therefore; the importance of the Nubun
existence is not submerged in to the mind of the African child. Once the
Nubun child is groomed in western ethics they become detached from the
nature reasoning and then submit to evolution in the form of white-light-right –
they WEST WATCH all their lives. There is a correlation between white-light-
right and the Moon (Moon-ey) in the more developed regions of Africa. For the
quest for money in the minds of many Africans is really just to imitate the
lifestyles of the Caucasian race over your own culture. Many parts of this
western lifestyle are based on value systems which go back to Greek /
Roman / Aryan practises. THIS MUST BE MADE CLEAR. [3] Religion which
portrays black as bad and white as good will always be detrimental to the
Nubian existence on earth. It is a psychological form of the caste system. This
even includes moon cycle religious practices within what is called today
traditional Africa customs. Many of these where really brought to Africa by the
Phoenicians and earlier by the Hindus via the Cushites. Their descendants
are many of the east African warrior tribes. Scientific reasoning and spiritual
research will be needed to evaluate which customs are really beneficial to our
existence and with are not.
There are many other issues out there and in totality they cloud the
judgement of the Nubian reader from taking in the rationale of the
extracts which can be proven directly from nature itself right now –  The
laws of opposites and universal cycles in nature. These are real
characteristics in nature itself and the REAL question is weather the
Nubian reader is intelligent enough to acknowledge these routines in
nature and use these FACTS to aid their reasoning in everyday life.
FACTS = TRUTH = REALITY
The truth remains as original existence however, the way it is interpreted
changes within a cycle. The best interpretation of the truth could only be given
by those closer to the event of which gave that truth. When we say that all
truth must exist before belief we are illustrating yet another cycle in nature.
              1                     2                     3                      4
TRUTH – > EVOLUTION – > BE-LIE-F -> REVOLUTION -> TRUTH
The Nubian reader must try to understand this because the personal mind
influenced by desires and socialisation with any specific issue can start at any
of these four positions. In fact a truth can exist in all four positions but the
potency to stimulate change is regressed at the evolution stage and is at its
lowest point at the be-lie-f stage which can be a half-truth or a complete lie.
Even if the information received is a complete lie the truth still exists within
absolute nature as an opposing force. This is the same way we stress that all
existence within the three dimensional plane came from darkness –  dark
matter & energy governed by conscious sub-atomic existences. This is true
right now as you read this. In the daytime you don’t see the darkness of space
but you know its still there.


--- PAGE 244 ---
The truth does not change it is merely views of the truth that does within
existence. The truth must equal a fact. Therefore, the truth remains as original
existence. Now within the understanding of positive and negative, Facts =
Truth and in comparison to belief must exist as a positive. Meanwhile at the
same time belief must lean to the negative if the fact is known. A belief can
also be a 100% lie. Therefore, a lie is a variant of a belief. In conclusion this
means that Truth = Facts which represents (+) and ALL BE-LIE-F SYSTEMS
represent (-) within the laws of opposites. A lie is the far extreme of a belief.
The lie needs be-lie-vers for it to be successful. With this understanding
belief is a philosophical form of evolution - the journey away from the
truth (original existence). The same way the history of the NUBUN / TAR /
PYGMY races was a reality which became mythology via westernised
Egyptology which broke off into what is known as belief systems today.
Evolutionary forces within nature assist belief systems. These evolutionary
forces are in the form of solid, liquid and gas states. Don’t get spooked out by
this statement for you have wine & SPIRITS, and GIN (JINN - an Islamic term
for a bad spirit). These stimulate an alternative reasoning in a person and are
usually harmful to their own body and environment. Bad music is another
form. They all trigger off a type of chemical imbalance, which stimulates
alternative reasoning in the person - intoxicated personal uncontrolled belief
systems. As a chemical formula they manipulate RNA coding which alters
your behaviour. Even if you are intoxicated your brain still has to control
thought and vital organs but with a dampened RNA the quality of thought is
regressed. MOST COMMERCIAL liquids (soft-drinks, alcohol, tea & coffee)
have chemical formulas which have side-effects that dampen RNA signals to
your DNA. Remember all chemicals (liquids) heated up become gases.
Most people in the world today when given facts will reject facts for
belief because belief allows personal interpretations to exist within the
human mind. These interpretations are usually influenced by desires –
good or bad in accordance to your TRUE PERSONAL NATURE.
What we are trying to do here is show the reader where the truth sits within
existence and how even within mental reasoning there exists cycles and
opposing forces. To overstand the routines of nature mentally and physically
is to bare witness to the physical reality of space, matter and time as a
collective. Once the physical is OVERSTOOD then the spiritual journey
begins. You will not be able to understand the physical without an
understanding of science and nature knowledge.


--- PAGE 245 ---



--- PAGE 246 ---
Dear Reader,
It is highly recommended that you read previous extracts (Vol.3, 6 & 9)
before venturing into this edition.
We are not online regularly here in Africa. We receive and send writings to
associates (usually in different languages from many countries) who then
translate it, convert it to PDF then put it online on various sites. We have
decided to address some queries found online. We can only stress that in
order to re-evolve (if you have not done so already) you should search out
these original forces that we continue to mention at the beginnings of our
volumes. Many of the questions and answers would be covered in a much
higher level of depth by the following. These are the real sources of most of
the rationale in what you call black consciousness today. You can find much
writings on these writers and organisations online –  do not be afraid to search
them out.
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi (The Christ Series), Amunubi
Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball - Liberation Information), The Ancient
Egyptian Order (A.E.O)(Egyptian Initiation), The Nuwapian Nation of The
Moors, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed (Message to the Blackman),
Clarence Jowars Smith (5%) (Supreme Mathematics), The Holy
Tabernacle Ministries (Right Knowledge Series), Credo Mutwa, Cheikh
Anta Diop, The Journey Home Group, Haru-Hotep Tar (Solar Biology),
Marcus Garvey (Journey Home), Dr Joseph Ben-Joachannan (African
Origins of The Major Western Religions), Noble Drew Ali (Moorish
Science), Afroo Oonoo (The Nature of Nature Series) and the other
degrees of Dr Malachi Z. York (Holy Tablets).
Here in Africa we study the rural African ways and the cycles of nature
including which forces represent these cycles. We then take these rural
concepts that match up with the writers we have stated throughout these
Afronauts Volumes. We then compile extracts. WE ONLY WRITE ABOUT
ISSUES THAT CAN BE VERIFIED BY OTHER WRITERS OR RURAL
AFRICA. What we write about overlaps into topics of many black conscious
writers who wrote about these issues many years ago. In some cases
decades ago. The majority of Africans, and from what we can see western
Nubians as well simply have not been introduced to the higher levels of black
information. In Africa the cause is the lack of resources and the side-tracking
via religion, politics and physical suppression but in the west it really stems
from mental suppression. We ask for Nubians downloading this material to
spread its value amongst our people discreetly. ESPECIALLY TO MAINLAND
AFRICANS. We state that though we are keen to reach our own continent this
information is universal Nubian knowledge since it is scientifically based. The
Nubian of the Americas, the Caribbean and Europe will find core relevant
issues concerning our race stated in these extracts as well for we are all
descendants of the African pygmy. We give you this information to stimulate
global Nubian awareness. As usual the trick is in Time. 450 years is nothing
compared to a race millions of years old. The less you know about our ancient
past the less you will be able to reason out nature and our universal


--- PAGE 247 ---
blackness. Most of the books from the writers we mention are almost
impossible to find in Africa. Even within African universities you will not be
able to find many books by the writers we have mentioned. These extracts are
trying to group key Nubian issues so that hopefully a Nubian who manages to
download these PDF’s which are generally small files that can fit on to a
floppy disk storage device will have an opportunity to read common and
hidden Nubian issues within our race. It is astonishing that over 90% of the
so-called learned Nubians do not even know what melanin actually is! Can not
work out that our Ta-ma-rean, Khemite, Egyptian, Sumerian eras have been
concealed! To this very day in western TV they are still propagating a
European Egyptian reality.  TA (land), MA (water), RE (Sun-rays) is one of the
ancient descriptions of Africa by our ancestors. Our hair curls like granulation
on the Sun in to a circle forming the 9, our skin emanates sun-heat genes
from the bone marrow guided by melanin to make you black. It is these sun-
heat genes from within our blood that make our Afro curl. These genes where
once intelligent energy from the actual sun now stored in Nubun DNA and
now personify as Nubian hair follicles. The 9 curl represents our universal
existence. We are the only race bearing this trait similar to the Suns of the
Universe –  The True Stars. (refer to Nine Ball –  Liberation Information).
The 9 Curl of Suns –  Granulation
Regard this information as yours to keep. Use this information any way you want as
long as it is beneficial to the Nubian race –  This PDF file is FREE. We are keen for
Nubians in Africa to be introduced to these extracts, as we know much of this type of
literature is hard to find out there. PDF Extracts included are 79, 71 & 13. Others
will follow once the information has been abbreviated. THERE MAY BE
GRAMMAR / LITERACY ERRORS –  apologises in advance. THIS IS STATED ON
EVERY EXTRACT RELEASED. (1-14 pages). Three Writers contributed to the
Vol.13 PDF.
Warning!: Many people may perceive this literature as negative. This is awareness
literature. We have stated before that there are good people in all races. There are
people of other races who have helped the African more than many Nubians on earth
have done. Equality should be implemented after the truths have been recovered and
are acknowledged. This would alter the criteria of equality –  the rules as to how
equality should be implemented. Equality has to be based on the evaluation of
differences –  not the customisation of similarities. This will allow people to prosper in
accordance to the true abilities they have been given within nature.


--- PAGE 248 ---
Extract 79
The Face of SMAT
When dealing with the order of creation know that the initial trinity of
existences within the three dimensional plane must be space, time and
matter. However with regards to the human eye frequency the initial
unification of this relationship will forever personify darkness / blackness.
Blackness is the face of Space, Matter And Time (SMAT). Everything
begins from darkness for even light must exist within space, time and matter.
Darkness is the dimensional manifestation of Blackness. This is why all
light is sealed by blackness. The Nubun ways from creation were based on
the initial overstanding of scientific order in creation. Simply put - Our ancients
simply knew BY NATURE that blackness has creational properties within it far
greater that light which in essence manipulates matter for the varying degrees
of blackness. Why do we say for blackness? Because all existence will
forever exist in darkness and in fact are evolutionary stages of darkness
including light itself. This planet, solar-system, galaxy all exist INSIDE dark-
matter and energy and creative gases and chemicals which as a collective are
know as 9-ether stated by descendants of the original Ethiopian races Tarites
/ pygmies in their pre-dynastic existence. Concerning the human eye, only
space, time and matter is before blackness within the three dimensional plane
so this blackness will forever be associated with this trinity. This is one of the
reasons why the ancient Ta-Ma-Re-ans (Egyptians) recorded PTAH / TAR as
the original creator physically represented as the African dark skinned pygmy.
TAR is Black. PTAH is also regarded as the opener of existence for within the
blackness of space and time, matter is moulded in to things. The laws of
opposites extracts opposing forces from an existence. In other words
variations within an existence become a certain type of opposing force.
Hence, woolly hair as oppose to straight hair, black as oppose to white etc. So
this scientific reasoning between light and darkness must be played out within
facets of nature within this darkness, and we are all inside this darkness
(matter and energy) right now. However the Nubian reader should now know
that those who have an understanding of nature knowledge can actually
create opposing forces and have the masses be-lie-ve they are natural
opposites when really they are just variations of the same thing. A left wing
and a right wing are both attached to the same bird (eagle). Those given
rulership throughout eras have often used this method of manipulating the
masses. The issue here for the dark skinned woolly haired Nubian is to realise
that factions from other races have given our race an alternative
understanding of opposing forces. They have given our race a reasoning
based on two ideals associated with light (good) and darkness (bad). Now
listen to reason. The concept of black as bad can only be as old as the faction
or race that created that notion so now know that the arrival of the Caucasian
race helped breed this notion (recorded in mainstream history as six to ten
thousand years old). If the Caucasian race is around 6 -10 thousand years old
then their understanding of black in the form of evil, ugly, satanic, negative etc
is also. The Nubian has taken on their understanding of darkness and light
instead of an overstanding via nature itself seen through science providing


--- PAGE 249 ---
you with the obvious truth that all existence is from darkness including light
itself. Our ancients simply knew this and lived by this reasoning which is really
natural science. The ancient Nubun tribes used raw elements direct from
nature. What is today known as a scientific experiment in our ancient times
was known as a ritual. However you must now know that the original Nubun
races where predominately vegetarians and lived and reasoned as such. The
human body is designed to be vegetarian (vege-TAR-ians) and in your
original existence the Nubun races would play out this initial characteristic in
accordance to nature. This was thousands of years before blood became
associated with customs, traditions and rituals. The west makes sure to
enforce in the minds of the masses an idea of a caveman with fuzzy hair, fire
worshipping and meat eating. However the truth is these cavemen notions
came from Caucasian tribes living in the Caucas mountains. We hope by now
that the Nubian reader can see how religion can blind the Nubian from
knowing the scientific truth about blackness by switching your understanding
of God (good) to light. This makes the opposite ‘darkness’ as the devil (bad)
by default. All the Afronaut writers want is for the Nubian to simply see who
they really are and align themselves back with nature allowing our race to
move forward in our right minds. One thing we will say about these volumes is
that most readers will not be ready to truly embrace the reality that equality
between two existences at the same time is a myth –  not real –  a belief
system. This statement suggests a dysfunctional attitude to nature but
reasoning will tell you that the difference is the equality. Absolute equality is
the only real equality in existence and that becomes those with a difference
achieving their full potential based on that difference in accordance to nature
–  NEVER in the same space, time or matter. This means each individual
should be allowed to execute their TRUE nature that could only be found
within their genetic, cultural, mental and spiritual origination. It is the nature of
nature that would govern (+) and (-) for a human being. Cycles in nature for
good and bad according to humans gives room for specific species to reach
their full potential based on their nature be it good or bad. The problem with
implementing absolute equality is that natural intelligence is needed for you
would have to respect each race for WHO THEY REALLY ARE IN
ACCORDANCE TO NATURE. This would be studied through scientific
evidence and reasoning, racial origins, historical actions including cause &
effect, and religious systems including their origins via race and scripture
origination. All these facets must be respected within a TIME SEQUENCE OF
ORIGINATION TO BE ALIGNED WITH NATURE. Other races will not
implement absolute equality simply because nature is a black thing this
means universal rights would be bestowed to the Nubun descendency. These
facts are already known globally BUT NOT REASONED by the masses. In
other words as soon as you where told [1] the scientific attributes to assist
cause and effect within nature, [2] Original existence stems from Africa, [3]
that all light combined make blackness / darkness and [4] the Sun was
created by gases which personify black you should have realised our
universal position. The light-skinned Phoenicians and Greeks altered many
Egyptian scriptures, extracted philosophy and religion out of it, mixed it up
with the ways and reasoning of their own Gods and set up the foundation for
Christianity which the Romans finalised later in 325 AD. Many of their
societies and lodges in Europe and the US today stem from the Phoenician


--- PAGE 250 ---
Egyptian eras. You will find Cleopatra needles (obelisks) in all major cities in
the west in fact in some key major cities real obelisks were actually cut from
actual sacred temples in Egypt and where shipped over to the west. THIS IS
A FACT (research this one). Ask yourself why are they travelling thousands of
miles just to take poles from ancient Egyptian buildings abandoned over 1000
years ago to place in predominant areas in capital cities throughout the
western world? Once you research this and find this to be fact then you
should reason that the issues concerning the black existence of Egypt
(Tamare) will always be relevant to society NOW as right now in 2007 they
are still not respecting the Nubun tribes and nature forces that set up this
civilisation. Ask yourself why ? As usual you will have opposing forces to this
information. We state clearly here that there are agreeable people in all races
and that many Caucasians have contributed to the development of Africa far
more than many Nubians have done. THIS IS A FACT. We are not here to
propagate racism. We write to refine the mental reasoning of the Nubian mind
as a being once known as PTAH. In other words if the whole black race were
one collective mind with no memory loss from creation then how would it be
reasoning? Would a black mind at least 20 million years old take on a belief
system given to them via colonialism only a few hundred years ago originating
from a race between 6 – 10 thousand years old? Would a black mind at least
20 million years old take on any doctrine from races younger than itself by
millions of years? Further more would a black mind take on doctrines that are
regurgitation’s of its own Nubun way of life. These are issues black leaders
globally should be recognising.
Extract 71
Those Broken Wings
After touching on the origination of liberal reasoning via racial and spiritual
origins we will now delve in to the leviathanic identity. What does this mean? It
means that within the very word liberalism lies two forces namely the moon
and the sun both based on the reasoning of the Caucasian racial lineage. We
have stated that LIBERAL -> LIB-BEL-RUL breaks down as Libana, Bel (Baal)
& rulership because it was these forces or alternative religious reasoning lived
by the Canaanites, Hittites & Amorites the fathers of the Greeks and Romans
that constitute to the identity liberalism is given today. The masses believe
this liberal reasoning is outside religion. Liberalism in a standard English
dictionary is associated with sexual urges. We stated in VOL.9 p12 that Baal
was associated with the Moon Gods amongst the Mesopotamian Gods.
However there are many Baals (different Baal Gods) whom the early
Caucasian and Asians followed and they have been grouped together within
the Bel (Baal) in liberalism. The actual bible mentions this fact several times
an example is JUDGES 2:11 “Then the Israelites did evil in the eyes of the
LORD and served the BAALS.” (King James Version). Whether it is BAAL,
BEL or BELOS (Zues) be it a Sun God, a Storm God or a Sex God they are
still the origins of an ISM known as liberalism today. SIMPLY PUT –  if a liberal
person today was alive in the middle east 2500-3000 years ago they would be


--- PAGE 251 ---
following these Gods as their belief system is aligned with many of the
practices of these Baal followers. Now what we want the Nubian reader to
know is that one of the Baal / Bel Gods is a Sun god. Within the origins of
Liberalism. Lib-Bel-rul that’s LIBANA-BEL(BAAL)-RULE The sun god Baal /
Bel represents the DAY while the LIB as Lib-ana (lbanah / leb-aw-naw)
(Aramaic / Hebrew) which refers to the Moon represents NIGHT. So you are
dealing with life (Sun) and evolutionary (Moon) forces all based on the
Caucasian reasoning. The left wing and the right wing belong to the same
bird. This is why in VOL.9 (p12) we stated that Baal is associated with the
moon Gods for night and day are opposing forces within the same 24 hours.
Within the Mesopotamian lineage of Gods they are actually relatives. That’s
Baal-Hadad (Sun/Storm/Sex) and the Moon God SIN. This is why there is
good and bad reasoning in liberalism. However, this liberal good will always
be more in favour of the Caucasian race by default over any other race
(judged in the long term) as the reasoning by nature stems from their
existence. To reiterate this –  you are dealing with good and bad from the
same origin of reasoning –  Romans -> Greeks -> Phoenicians -> Hindu. NOT
OUR NUBUN LINEAGE. We will state that some parts of liberalism are based
on universal laws and are indeed agreeable to all. The problem is that the sex
of liberalism is used by liberalism to create equality instead of obtaining
equality from natural scientific facts and reasoning. To be right is the journey
to knowing and accepting a truth. What we mean here is that the Caucasian
driven divergence of sexuality is used to unite society today. Yet this
divergence as forced racial-mixing (integration), non-heterosexuality and
sexualisation of life has been tied with their racial lineage for thousands of
years. Nowadays psychological manipulation via the caste system reasoning
brainwashes the majority of darker races to mix outside of their natural race.
Simply respecting facts on all levels including science are the real right tools
to bring REAL equality in accordance to nature. If the reasoning of an ideal
stemmed from a specific race then that reasoning is most suitable for that
race unless that race abides to the sequences, orders and cycles of nature in
PRO-LIFE (+). Universal reasoning at its best can only be given by those who
have lived through the most changes in nature. This is the Nubian race.
You will often hear many liberal minded people say that they don’t believe in a
specific God but still feel a higher presence or spirituality in their lives. As
stated way back in VOL.3 (Science of the truth). They do not know the true
origins of what they believe in. They often believe ‘they are moving with the
times’ yet really they are living out the forgotten past of the Caucasian race.
Many liberals must wish to dismantle religion as that blocks the acceptance of
their desires as agreeable. If this occurs this so-called universal spirituality or
consciousness described by many liberal writers will eventually be giving a
new name or an ISM title. If it’s not based on facts then it is yet another belief
system. Yet another spell. Most liberals often throw the word NATURE into
their belief system views. Do they know Nature stems from Nurture which
originates from the word Neteru (African Tama-Rean Gods) who were then
taken and warped / altered by the Greeks in particular HOMER? Do they
know of the Nature of Nature or Absolute Nature?


--- PAGE 252 ---
Africa MUST be made aware that liberalism serves capitalism. Once liberal
reasoning enters our continent it will create new lifestyles which need
products and services to satisfy that very lifestyle which will all stem from
other races especially the Caucasian. This liberalism is a BY-PRODUCT of
the Save Africa movement introduced by the west in recent years. You will
see this in the music events that commercialise this notion. It will leave Africa
vulnerable to further exploitation from capitalism governed by the Caucasian
nature. The economic help is good but western social ethics must be rejected.
BY NATURE IT CAN ONLY BE NUBUN DESCENDANTS THAT CAN SAVE
AFRICA TO ITS BEST DEGREE. Liberalism as the spirituality of capitalism
will indeed create an Africa in the image of the Caucasian race. Religions
from Europe & the Middle East are just earlier stages in the dismantling of our
original existence. If the African and Latino race left Christianity this religion
would regress into mainstream liberalism in around 30 years. In fact sooner or
later those BAALS will become more common in the west again. Some writers
say they are watering down western religion to re-introduce these forces
openly –  once liberal ideals peak (disguised within humanitarianism). You
should know that global warming is a strategic hindrance to the global
dominance of the Caucasian races. So you should reason that they are in a
race against NATURE to control as many FACETS of reality as possible prior
to the global warming / sun-cycle BY NATURE preventing them physically
achieving this goal in those lands directly. So they will intervene in developing
countries buy up land and resources to gain a strategic influence in the
development of all darker nations. Meanwhile liberal ideals will disconnect the
Nubian from ancient forces in nature and our true Nubun reasoning. This
reasoning is needed for Nubians to reach their full potential UNIVERSALLY.
Many Africans leave our continent to study and live in the west and get
soaked up by liberal reasoning then contribute to the brain-drain of our
continent. They turn a blind eye to issues concerning Africa as they are to
busy living in the image of someone else.
Extract 13
More Melanin
Part A: More Melanin Discussions from Cyberspace
Your brain and body can't function without Black Melanin! Few people know
what Melanin, the pigment that colours the skin & hair, is Found in almost
every organ of the body and is necessary in order for the brain and nerves to
operate, the eyes to see, and the human body to reproduce! At the core of
your brain is found the "locus coeruleus," a Structure that is BLACK because
it contains large amounts of (neuro) Melanin which is essential for it to
operate! In fact, all the most Crucial brain structures contain a heavy
concentration of melanin. Melanin in the brain increases from the lower
primates and reaches its peak in the BLACK HUMAN. "All humans possess
this Black internal brain evidence of their common black African Origin. The
All Black neuro-melanin nerve tract of the brain is profound proof that the


--- PAGE 253 ---
human race is a Black race, with many variations of Black, from Black-Black
to White-Black, all internally rooted in a vast sea of Brain Blackness." (Dr.
Richard King). Know the following
[1]  Melanin is the chemical key to life itself!
[2] It is the major organizing molecule for living systems!
[3] It's found everywhere! - in animals, plants (that's why raisins are brown),
soil, oceans, clouds even stars & comets!
[4] It is essentially linked to the DNA of the genes!
[5] It shows the potential to reproduce itself!
Black Melanin is necessary in order for humans to reproduce! Melanin is
present at the inception of life: a Melanin sheath covers both the sperm and
the egg! In the human embryo, the melanocytes (skin pigment cells), brain
and nerve cells all originate from the same place; the neural crest.
Melanocytes resemble nerve cells and are essential for conveying energy.
When Melanin is missing or insufficient in the Ectoderm of the early embryo
(blastula), this causes the mother to lose her baby; in the case of lighter
races, a defective baby is produced. Black Melanin is the super absorber of all
forms of energy. It has "black hole" properties. It can convert light to sound
and back again! It stores, transforms and conducts energy! The colour of
Black is the perfect absorber of light and all energy frequencies, giving Black
Melanin these properties! Thus scientists Describe Melanin as acting like a
"black hole." Melanin can rearrange its chemical structure to absorb ALL
wavelengths of energy (sunlight, X-rays, music, radar) and can transmute and
store this energy for later use! In The Isis Papers, Dr. Cress Welsing writes
that Melanin gives us the ability to use our bodies as direct connections with
the God Force, The source of all Energy - like plugging a cord into a wall
socket. It also gives our hair antennae-like ability. (see page about black
peoples hair)
Part B: Melanin and Racial Differences (from Cyberspace)
The science of Genetics shows that Blacks can produce all races but it is
impossible for a brown, yellow or white race to produce a black race. A
Japanese scientist showed that inside melanocytes (pigment cells) are tiny
packets called melanosomes that contain melanin. The four stages in the
maturing of these melanosomes counts for racial differences:
Stage 1: The melanosome is empty & doesn't have the machinery to make
melanin.
Stage 2: The melanosome has the machinery to make melanin, but is empty
of melanin.
Stage 3: The machinery is there and the melasosome is half filled with
melanin.
Stage 4: The machinery is there and the melanosome is completely filled with
melanin.


--- PAGE 254 ---
Whites have mainly stages 1 & 2, whereas all people of colour have melanin,
with Blacks having more of stage 4. Melanin granules are "central computers"
and may analyze and initiate body responses without informing the brain.
Melanin slows ageing & protects you from damaging effects of sunlight. The
Darker your skin (genetically) the less it ages. Thus whites often Have
wrinkled skin in their 30s while Blacks often have smooth, unwrinkled skin
even in "old" age. All people of colour have Melanin circulating in the blood
due to spillage from the melanosomes (Melanin packets). People containing
high levels of Melanin (mainly Blacks) will always show a positive test for the
use of marijuana! The chemical species found In the urine which indicates
someone’s use of marijuana is also found in the urine of Blacks! The Melanin
molecule is so stable that it has been found in 150-million-year-old dinosaur
fossils! It is highly resistant to Chemical and physical analysis, thus its precise
structure is unknown!
"BLACKNESS" is a divine, cosmic principle of the Universe. BLACK is the
meaning of Kam or Khem - the name which the ancient Egyptians called
themselves. From this word we get "Chemistry," the study of the building
blocks of Life. Life is founded upon CARBON, the Black element present in all
living matter. Black carbon atoms link to form Black Melanin, which has "Black
Hole" properties! Black Holes are found at the centre of our own galaxy and
countless others. In physics, a "Black Body" is known to be a perfect absorber
and perfect radiator of all forms of light and energy. This "Black Body
Radiation" is at work in the electron, as shown by Nobel prize winner, Richard
Feynman. The electron is responsible for ALL "Khem-ical" changes in matter.
It has been Present since the creation of the universe. The scientist, Jean
Charaon proved that the electron has all the properties of the Black Hole, plus
it exchanges "Black Photons" with other electrons, enabling it to continuously
accumulate data. This means that if we view the electron as a carrier of
memory, it has experienced everything in creation since the very beginning.
Blackness is fundamental to the operation of the Universe of Energy. God is
the Giver of All Energy: "Blackness" allows the perfect reception of all
wavelengths of Energy.
Melanin gives Black people high physical, mental & spiritual ability. Melanin
refines the nervous system in such a way that messages from the brain reach
other areas of the body most rapidly in Black people, the Original People.
Black infants sit, stand, crawl and walk sooner than whites, and demonstrate
more advanced cognitive skills than their white counterparts because of their
abundance of Melanin. Carol Barnes writes "...your mental processes (brain
power) are controlled by the same chemical that gives Black humans their
superior physical (athletics, rhythmic dancing) abilities. This chemical is
Melanin!" The abundance of Melanin in Black humans produces a superior
organism Physically, mentally and spiritually. This why all the founders of the
world's great religions are Black. Melanin is the neuro-chemical basis. For
what is called SOUL in Black people. In the same way Blacks excel in
athletics, they can excel in all other areas as well (like they did in the past!)
once the roadblocks are removed!


--- PAGE 255 ---
Is God Black? The Original Man was BLACK, "made in the IMAGE of God"
his Parent, according to scared books. Children look like their parents. All the
other races are but evolution variations of the Original Black Race. Most
whites have calcified pineal glands which thwarts Melatonin production,
thereby limiting their moral capacity. Located in the brain, the tiny pineal &
pituitary glands regulate the body's other glands. Esoteric tradition regards the
area of these glands as the third eye, seat of the soul, and the mystical
Uraeus represented by the cobra on the Forehead of Egyptian royalty/crowns.
Why did Africans view the European? As a child of God, but the Europeans
viewed the African as a soulless savage? Because of "melatonin," described
as a mentally & morally stimulating humanizing hormone produced by the
pineal gland. Scientific reveals that most whites are unable to produce much
melatonin because their pineal glands are often calcified and non-functioning.
Pineal calcification rates with Africans are 5-15%; Asians - 15-25%;
Europeans -60-80%! This is the chemical basis for the cultural differences
Between Blacks and whites, causing some Black scholars to raise the
question that the European approach, that of the logical, erect, rigid, Anti-
feeling posture reflects a left brain orientation and reflects that they lack the
chemical key of melatonin to turn on their unconscious and therefore cannot
get into feelings. Carol Barnes writes "Melanin is responsible for the existence
of civilization, philosophy, religion, Truth, justice, and righteousness.
Individuals (whites) containing low levels of Melanin will behave in a barbaric
manner." Melanin gives humans the ability to FEEL because it is the absorber
of all frequencies of energy. Dr. Welsing writes "Since melanin is a superior
absorber of all energy, it is essential to establish this understanding of God
and 'all energy.' The fact that the albinos (whites) lack melanin may also help
to explain ...why, in the view of many non-white peoples they (Whites) lack
'spirituality" and the capacity to tune in to, and thereby establish harmony and
justice..." The scientific evidence of Melanin threatens the ideology of white
supremacy. After considering Melanin to be a "waste" product of body-
metabolism which "served no useful function," Western (white) science has
now discovered that Melanin is the chemical key to life and the brain itself! All
studies and facts about Melanin suggest that after 400 years of attempting to
make inferior the Black race, "Western science is facing the sobering reality
that, by its own self-defined standards, Black people are probably superior to
whites in both intellectual potential and muscle co-ordination." (Sepia
magazine interview The central role Melanin plays in the body has been
"suppressed to maintain the mythological inferiority of blacks...and the
defensive clinging to whiteness as some token of superiority." (Dr. Richard
King) The "superiority complex" of white people is a defence mechanism and
a mask for their deepest Inferiority complex which they project onto people of
colour. Psychologists say insistent denial means reality in the opposite way.


--- PAGE 256 ---
Part C: "Messed-up Melanin" is killing Melanated people! (from Cyberspace)
Nubian and darker races should be weary about "designer drugs," structured
to chemically bind with and alter the Melanin molecule, causing it to become
toxic and even fatal to highly Melaninated people! Carol Barnes, who
documents this subject, writes, "MELANIN can become toxic to the Black
human because it combines with harmful drugs such as cocaine,
amphetamines, psychotic, hallucinogens, Marijuana...etc." The molecules of
these drugs resemble the Melanin molecule! The body is fooled and its
balance is thrown off as it relies on its drug-wrecked Melanin in order to
function. Even legal drugs such as Tetracyclines, neurolepts (tranquilizers),
have strong affinity to bind to Melanin. Herbicides (paraquats,' agent orange'
[dioxin]) bind irreversibly with Melanin & remain in the Black human
throughout life causing many disorders. Drug abuse by Blacks is more likely
to occur because Melanin causes Blacks to become addicted faster and stay
addicted Longer from these drugs, which are deliberately placed in Black
communities. Drugs are destroying the heart of Native American and Black
Society, causing many deaths.
Part D: Melanin and Reasoning (by the Afronauts)
All Nubians should know the above information about melanin. Research
more for yourself and upgrade your scientific understanding of our blackness.
What we the Afronauts would like to state here is that:
In essence melanin is pure light itself in solid form as molecules and
cells and exists everywhere in the universe. When pure sunlight (light
that has had no solid intervention) reaches a concentration of melanin
(inside nubians) the energy absorbed gives melanin cells
consciousness and allows them to function independently of the brain.
Neuro-melanin acts and reasons differently from other parts of the brain
–  almost as a brain within the brain and helps control vital organs and
the management of energy (usually from light) in you and around you.
Through blackness itself (the organic manifestation of this colour /
existence) melanin, carbon and ether communicate via black lights. Now
because blackness is the visual surface of space, time and matter parts
of this trinity are accessible via neuro-melanin. This is one of the
reasons why we have dreams, visions or an idea for they need space,
time and matter to exist prior to the thought being extracted from the
mental / spiritual to the physical be it your physical reaction to the
thought. In other words the blackness of nature the face of SMAT acts
as a catalyst for Suns via sunlight, black-lights, melanin, carbon to
transfer energy between different states. This energy eventually
becomes information within brain-matter which neuro-melanin helps
convert into brain signals, dreams, visions or an idea which you except
as thought. The average human only uses 10-12% of the brain when
thinking at a time (35% access to the brain in entirety in all types of
thinking). The ancient Nubuns used a much higher usage of brain-
matter. It is our dormant brain-matter that assisted the ancient spiritual
ways.


--- PAGE 257 ---
Contaminated melanin will lead to contaminated thoughts and brain
signals. This contamination occurs via bad food, bad sound, bad light,
diseases & chemical imbalances.
The mental is darkness, your prayers, visions, dreams are most
receptive when white light is cut off –  sleep or meditation etc. So you
release prayer and thoughts in darkness but because it’s your personal
darkness, you have no fear of it. Melanin connects this mental darkness
to the physical world. Overstand that energy can not be destroyed
merely transferred to different states and melanin absorbs all energy.
The body generates certain types of energy as emotions and melanin
helps stabilise energy in and around your body. Emotion leads to
physical actions therefore induce that melanin influences reasoning.
The Caucasian lacking in melanin simply will not be able to comprehend
certain types of reasoning mentally and physically from other darker
races and with the caste system they have been giving a god complex
so they will usually perceive our reasoning as negative. The lack of
physical reasoning just stated refers to their brain signals governing of
skin for the lack of neuro-melanin weakens their ability to absorb energy
in the form of black lights such as UV rays.
Melanin via sunlight helps convert the ancient spirituality of the nature
of nature found in the blackness of nature as 9-ether, sunshine & black
lights in to reasoning via neuro-melanin which then leads to right
physical actions and thinking in accordance to your original existence.
Neuro-melanin is an opposing force to the reptilian part of the brain !
The cleaner the melanin the more healthy and emotionally balanced the
Nubian will become. Melanin is refreshed by sunlight but damaged by
intoxicants which also damage the other parts of the brain not used by
humans today. Modern scientists want you to be-lie-ve that Humans
naturally have 88% brain capacity not utilised from creation. Reason this
out. This world today is based on 10-12% brain matter (simultaneous
matter usage) of a potential 100% brain matter usage. Therefore, the
interpretation of all things may not be the full picture. The ancient
Nubun tribes were using higher brain matter aided by stronger sun-
energy (sun-cycles / sunlight) and cleaner eco-systems aiding health.
This led to higher creative and spiritual output. The templates of this
higher reasoning are dormant in Nubian DNA today. The problems
stated about contaminated-melanin in this extract must be corrected
before higher reasoning can return to Nubians in this day and time. The
laws of opposites BY NATURE will extract those intelligent enough BY
NATURE to improve their bloodlines to be able through future
generations to reach our true racial position. This is in comparison (the
opposite) to the majority of Nubians who will continue to regress our
race further in to evolution the journey of all types of actions towards
racial and physical death.


--- PAGE 258 ---
The 9 curl in Nubian hair follicles represent the physical completion of
the circle from the dot & the line. For everything universally is a circle
while the blackness of the hair itself represents original existence. Most
races have black hair bearing some high melanin but the tightness of
the 9 curl on Nubians represents original pure sun energy from the
Nubian genes itself.


--- PAGE 259 ---



--- PAGE 260 ---
Dear Reader,
We are not online regularly here in Africa. We receive and send writings to
associates (usually in different languages from many countries) who then
translate it, convert it to PDF then put it online on various sites. We have
decided to address some queries found online. We can only stress that in
order to re-evolve (if you have not done so already) you should search out
these original forces that we continue to mention at the beginnings of our
volumes. Many of the questions and answers would be covered in a much
higher level of depth by the following. These are the real sources of most of
the rationale in what you call black consciousness today. You can find much
writings on these writers and organisations online –  do not be afraid to search
them out. Some of these books have been sent to us from the West.
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi (The Christ Series), Amunubi
Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball - Liberation Information & The Bible
Interpretations and Explanations), The Ancient Egyptian Order
(A.E.O)(Egyptian Initiation), The Nuwapian Nation of The Moors, The
Honourable Elijah Mohammed (Message to the Blackman), Clarence
Jowars Smith (5%) (Supreme Mathematics), The Holy Tabernacle
Ministries (Right Knowledge Series), Credo Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop
(Civilization or Barbarism / Origin of Civilization), The Journey Home
Group, Haru-Hotep Tar (Solar Biology / Parchments Series), Marcus
Garvey (Journey Home), Dr Joseph Ben-Joachannan (African Origins of
The Major Western Religions & Lecture Tapes), Noble Drew Ali (Moorish
Science), Afroo Oonoo (Moonset & Sunrise / The Nature of Nature
Series) and the other degrees of Dr Malachi Z. York (The Black Book,
The Gold Book & The Holy Tablets).
Since we are rarely online we thank those in cyberspace for helping to
inform other Nubians out there about our FREE literature. There are
many people who do not want this quality of information being put freely
online. Some will try to deter Nubians from reading this literature by
using virus complaints to negative reviews. They will deter the Nubian
from accessing these PDF’s. By nature there will be negative reviews.
What we ask of the helpers is to find places in cyberspace that these
pdf’s can be stored and explain exactly how to download the files as
many people in Africa including ourselves don’t have access to free
software. Please open forums and let people know about YOUR
information Nubian ! For it is for me and you - Nubians of Africa and
elsewhere. Simply let people know the quality of the information !
PDF Includes one question & extract 80. Others will follow once the
information has been abbreviated. THERE MAY BE GRAMMAR / LITERACY
ERRORS –  apologises in advance. THIS IS STATED ON EVERY EXTRACT
RELEASED. (1-9 pages). Two Writers contributed to the Vol.14 PDF.


--- PAGE 261 ---
Question: You say that Nubian tribal bloodlines are millions of years old
yet I can’t find this information on the internet ?
Ans: Take in the reasoning - The ancient Nubun tribes cremated the dead.
Many of the bones they are finding in the far out remote regions of Ethiopia,
Uganda, Chad & Kenya 4, 5, & 6 million years old were actual outcasts from
humanoid tribes actually due to their appearance and physical composition.
Most of these where not related to human-ptah but species of humanoid from
a different lineage of beings. In fact some of these ancient bones come from
staged experiments between man and ape dictated by higher Nubun
civilisations indeed Nilothilic civilisations which much later became Egyptian.
Much of the ancient fossils and bones information found in cyberspace
archaeological news DOES NOT represent the full story. For example
melanin in your genes helps personify black / dark skin. The bones found in
east and central Africa when given an assumed visual image trying to prove
the missing link between ape and man do not bare woolly hair or black skin.
How did the sun-heat genes (melanin) enter Nubian DNA based on this
assumption ?  Where are the genes to make the hair curl ? Today they say
they can trace back DNA genealogy to these African regions if so then where
did eye colour mutations come from? If you shave the arm and leg hair of a
gorilla / monkey today their actual skin under the hair is white ! In fact the
50,000 years lineage of human genealogy that many writers speak of is really
based on the Cuthite tribes mixing in with the Hindu / Dravidian tribes with the
Nubun black DNA being dominant. This makes scientists assume we all
originated from the same region as the African Gene is found world-wide.
When the Nubian mixes in with any tribe or race our genes take over
(because they are the strongest). This is why they say all humankind
stemmed from Africa. THE NUBUN RACE CAME FROM A MUCH EARLIER
CYCLE OF EXISTENCE THAN THE OTHER RACES. If you go online right
now you will find notions of a 50,000 year homo-sapien existence on earth yet
study further online and you will come across a 130,000 years Ethiopian
homo-sapien existence. Both notions will be given by senior western
Anthropologists –  we repeat they all deal in half-truths –  some innocently
some purposely. The depicted Monkey (Moon-KI) of half-man / half-ape types
still bare straight hair on their body because in their evolutionary process they
were influenced by certain types of moonlight energy and moon gravitational
forces. The same forces that influence tides at Sea - hence MONKEY ->
MOON-KEY. (Please refer to Afroo Oonoo [Nature of Nature] and Amunubi
Rahkaptah [Nine Ball Liberation] for the best Overstanding). Throughout
history you will find that the dead where usually cremated or buried in the
same land area. Yet most ancient bones are rarely found in mass groups ?
These beings where outcasts within their ERA of existence the same way
even today in the rural village those who have done bad are exiled from the
village in disgrace. Some where actual alternative beings in earth’s existence
–  NOT becoming homo-sapien in the future and died out within their era. They
don’t mind revealing that original existence is from Africa but they will not
present original existence with black skin or woolly hair. The Ptah-nubun
tribes strictly followed nature and cremated or lay the dead to rest at sea then
much later mummified the dead. Now lets get specific! The Ptah– Nubun-
Ethiopian race personified on earth at the Nile Junction around Lake Victoria


--- PAGE 262 ---
this is according to the dynastic (Egyptian) and pre-dynastic (Tama-rean)
writings (refer to A.E.O and Dr Joseph Ben-Joachannan). This was through
Sun-energy (Amen)(RE) concentration within the purest waters (MA) within
the best land (TA) composition creating carbo-hydrates (carbon/black) which
over hundreds of thousands of years grew into the African pygmy who existed
as pygmies / Tar Deneg for millions of years. Then changes in this solar-
system triggered off a new type of evolution which led to the Nubian race we
are today and also the later evolution of straight haired races. Subtly the
Moon is worshiped in different ways by many races because the moon aided
their existence at the expense of lower amounts of melanin in their genes –
sunlight-energy. [Please refer to Afroo Oonoo [Nature of Nature] and Amunubi
Rahkaptah [Nine Ball Liberation]. Other ancient Nubian races intervened
between pygmy and Homo-sapien and are recorded within our ancient history
now played out as African and Sumerian mythology. We were simply in
elemental form at the right place at the right time in existence pre-disposed by
Nature / Neteru itself. This is proven by the Nubian bearing the strongest
blood genes. In essence many ancient apemen bones where really sprouts of
creational lineage’s within the primary humanoid creational region of earth
(Africa) but not at the right place or time to personify as a full fledged Homo-
Erectus -> Homo-Sapien. The potency of ether gases and sun energy was not
as strong as the waters along the Nile. The rivers in that region of Africa
millions of years ago carried special sub-atomic ingredients and minerals and
these ape-men are by-products from other rivers within east Africa with less
substance to assist the full development of Homo-erectus. Some however
where helped by ancient Nubun races from earlier cycles via rituals,
experiments & mixing of genes. Many of those ape-humanoid bones being
found in Africa are those weaker creational lineage’s such as Ardipithecus
Ramidus. This is the real reason why life can only stem from certain regions
on earth because those regions bare the best conditions for Homo-sapien life
at that time and cycle within nature. This is not equality as the masses teach.
What we are saying here is that at the same time that these ape-humanoid
beings where roaming Ethiopia there where fully fledged African pygmies –
Ptahites in existence living and cultivating the land bearing woolly and bald
hair and we are their direct descendants.
Many alternative archaeologists know the dates given by the mainstream
institutional historians / archaeologists are misleading and have been so for
decades. There are hundreds of fossil discoveries that you won’t find in
Cyberspace or in the public domain because private institutions funded these
projects. They only give you half-truths (Science of the Truth –  Vol.3) and use
that half-truth to aid further agendas. The complete truth means closure - the
end of that subject. The belief can not be utilised for any gain after facts have
been revealed. Reason this out –  If the whole truth came out the
archaeological industry would collapse as well as religion because everything
is now KNOWN –  beliefs and concepts are over. So you will never get the full
story concerning African Anthropology and Archaeological discoveries. The
missing link notion between man and monkey within evolution is there to keep
the masses in limbo. It gives room for all types of belief systems to emerge
from Ufology, to religion, to other concepts from Anthropologists. They would
have told the world the truth decades ago if the Caucasian race were of


--- PAGE 263 ---
original existence on earth. In fact Africa should be careful because while
surveying our lands for fossils western mineralogists will know our lands
properties –  African leaders should make sure all land details are disclosed as
this information can be sold off to corporations who do not have our best
interests at hand.
Extract 80
Do Numbers Lie ?
Part A: The Zero Question
[1] You have 3 stones on a table you times (X) those 3 stones by 4 and you
get twelve stones
[2] You have 4 stones on a table and you times (X) those 4 stones by 3 and
you get twelve stones
[3] You have 4 stones on the table you times (X) those 4 stones on the table
by nothing (0) and you get nothing (0) –  No stones on the table –  they are all
gone. In the physical world 4 stones would still remain on the table but in
maths the answer would be Zero (0) regardless of 4 X 0 or 0 X 4.
There are mathematical theoretical reasons for the answer but the real reason
is because nothingness represented as 0 is the equivalent to variant
somethings and these ideals forever exist as opposites. Back in Vol.4 we
stated this in Extract 72 - Random Points In Nature –  Part 1 & 2 (Point 6 of
50) and many readers thought this was an expression of simpleton diction.
However, these opposites are based on the scientific and psychological
classifications of elements based on human senses. They are opposites
according to how mankind have dictated thought processes within science.
The Nubian must surely know by now that this zero / naught / cipher symbol
seen throughout all existence is a representative of the SMAT circle of Space,
Matter & Time BY NATURE. [Refer to A.E.O & Amunubi Rahkaptah –  Nine
Ball Liberation]. Any formula of sum must equal zero when multiplied by Zero.
THEY ALL FIT INSIDE THE CIRCLE (Naught). THIS IS ABSOLUTE
NATURE. The variations of numbers from 1 to infinite represents the variation
of existences. This is also the acknowledgement that everything is a part of
nature. Everything from the atom to the Sun and even the rotation of a galaxy
is based on the circle. However cycles are parts of circles and opposites exist
this is why 9 is the opposite of 6. However, 6 is not the equivalent of 9 in
ranking. Is this nature within symbols showing you the truth behind equality?
Thus making the actual difference the equality? As usual zero has been taken
through the philosophical lineage of the Romans -> Greeks -> Phoenicians ->
Hindu. At the stage of the Hindu zero is nya meaning void or empty (Sun – >
O –  Sun-ya). It was here that the problem began because they did not fully
overstand that: The totality of nothing as the opposite of something exists
within absolute matter. They exist within absolute matter because nothing is
merely an interpretation based on their level of mental reasoning. There are
always sub-atomic particles present where nothing is perceived to exist.
Absolute Nothingness is the appropriate term. We mention the Hindu here


--- PAGE 264 ---
because it was this misinterpretation of nothing which eventually became
associated with darkness, empty, void which eventually led to an imbalance
between something and nothing which finally got tied in with religion and led
to darkness as bad while light is good –  the caste system. With their
understanding of science they perceived this as fact. Though we will state,
that there where other forces that influenced this caste notion as well. It was
the Hindu -> Phoenicians -> Greeks -> Roman lineage that took on this
template BUT the African bearing higher knowledge in their very sun-heat
genes as Tama-rean knew better. Greek philosophy could not stand up
against the Tama-rean sciences. The Greeks then had to be taught by the
Nubun Egyptians –  FACT. The writings of Greek philosophers themselves will
openly tell you they where taught by Nubun Egyptians (refer to Dr Joseph
Ben-Joachannan). The Greeks supplanted the dark-skinned Phoenicians
then ghostized the philosophies leading to the ways we live and teach today.
The tongues and hands of learned Nubians where cut off by the Greeks and
Romans military greatly slowing down the potency of ancients teachings. This
is one of the reasons why the many sciences didn’t get back to Sub-Sahara.
Try to overstand this zero discussion because in essence they devalued the
cipher (zero), the circle, cycles therefore not fully overstanding the processes
of nature. They made the zero represent the bottom when it really represents
everything that’s why any value of (X) times (0) = (0). Once the zero became
the bottom position of things it led to interpreted values being attached to
variations of existence for they now had a mental structure for the order of
things. They gave the position of the zero (0) to the (X) (Cross). This cross
identity gave room for the Swastika on a philosophical level as it helped tie
this symbol into the their interpretation of the characteristics of nature. We will
state that a natural order had already been provided by the wants and needs
of the physical body but what we are trying to explain here is why many so-
called intellectuals in the ancient past would still take on reasoning against the
preservation of nature and the black skin of Nubun descendants. You can’t
have a caste system without a bottom mentally existing and you could not
implement a caste reasoning in the world without philosophical reasoning
supporting that rationale. In the future, the numerical Zero (0) Cipher will be
reclassified in mathematics as representing everything not just the beginning
or ending. You will also reason the facts that it is from the blackness of nature
as SMAT (Space, Matter and Time) which grew Suns (A prime circle of
nature). The same way your sun-heat genes (black melanin) grows organic
circles as hair follicles of 9 (9-Ether Granulation - Afro).


--- PAGE 265 ---
Part B: Messages from the NINE’s
Regardless as to whether you have taken in these doctrines or not we know
that those who are intelligent BY NATURE will not reject FREE Nubian
literature. The purpose of this section is to inform the intelligent reader that
there is indeed REASONING present within our Volumes. Though we remind
the reader that we are students ourselves and that there are many
organisations that will be able to clarify much of the information we give –
please search them out –  we write extracts they write books and even
lessons. They are online right now search them out. Way back in Vol.1 & 2 we
gave you formulas based on the number 6. The key maths we gave you were:
The Six Sequence
A= 6, B=12, C= 18, D= 24, E=30, F= 36, G=42, H=48, I=54, J=60, K=66,
L=72, M=78, N=84, O=90, P=96, Q=102, R=108, S=114, T=120, U=126,
V=132, W=138, X=144, Y=150 and Z=156
Computer
C= 18, O=90, M=78, P=96, U=126, T=120, E=30, R=108 = 666
New York
N=84, E=30, W=138, Y=150, O=90, R=108, K=66 = 666
Now if the reader ventured in to the number 9 (the opposite of 6) they would
have also found more revealing co-incidences. Always remember numbers
reveal issues in nature. We will state here that all the words used in these
maths scenarios are English versions of expressions because the English
language as stated several times throughout the volumes did not naturally
evolve it was a planned language with thousands of hidden notions in words,
diction and grammar.
The NINE Sequence
A= 9, B=18, C= 27, D= 36, E= 45, F= 54, G=63, H=72, I=81, J=90, K=99,
L=108, M=117, N=126, O=135, P=144, Q=153, R=162, S=171, T=180,
U=189, V=198, W=207, X=216, Y=225 and Z=234
[1] Libana + Bel + Baal  Lib(Libana) Bel(Baal) Rul(Rules) -> LIBERAL
L(108) + I(81) + B(18) + A(9) + N(126) + A(9) = 351
B(18) + E(45) + L(108) = 171
B(18) + A(9) + A(9) + L (108) = 144
Total  = 666
Whether you except this or not there are issues within liberalism that the
majority of Nubians world-wide do not know or understand. Numbers reveal
potent issues in nature –  please refer to Vol.9, 12 & 13 for more information


--- PAGE 266 ---
on these issues. The general plot is that liberalism is really based on
Caucasian Aryan rites and customs –  usually based around sex. Remember
the number 6 in Latin is Sex. They have preserved these rites within western
ethics by aligning the liberal notion with issues not really under the liberal
banner such as climate change, racial issues, environmental issues etc. The
pure definition of liberalism is Liberalis (Latin) which solely refers to sexual
urges –  homosexuality, orgies, paedophilia and even bestiality as the Greeks
and Roman aristocracy partook in these activities. These rites go further back
to the Phoenicians -> Hindus -> Indus Valley / Bali (Baali). Do not be fooled
Nubian by Lib(Libana) Bel(Baal) Rul(rules) –  The numbers don’t lie. We told
you in Vol.13 that the Sun and the Moon come together within liberalism. That
is Libana (moon) and Bel (sun) now these two words come together as
Lib(Libana) Bel(Baal) Rul(rules) and in the Six Sequence see their totality.
The Six Sequence
A= 6, B=12, C= 18, D= 24, E=30, F= 36, G=42, H=48, I=54, J=60, K=66,
L=72, M=78, N=84, O=90, P=96, Q=102, R=108, S=114, T=120, U=126,
V=132, W=138, X=144, Y=150 and Z=156
Bel/Baal -> S(114) + U(126) + N(84) = 324
Libana   -> M(78) + O(90) + O(90) + N(84) = 342
Total  = 666
There are real issues within liberal ideals and those Nubians who are
intelligent by nature should reason out these facts and act accordingly.
Indeed there are other issues within the NINE sequences that must be
addressed. All we can do is give you the information then state the reasoning.
The Nubian must have an open-mind to allow facts to enter for these are un-
refutable facts you are reading right now. The numbers reveal nature’s issues.
All we can do is give you the facts and we apologise if we offend anyone !
The NINE Sequence
A= 9, B=18, C= 27, D= 36, E= 45, F= 54, G=63, H=72, I=81, J=90, K=99,
L=108, M=117, N=126, O=135, P=144, Q=153, R=162, S=171, T=180,
U=189, V=198, W=207, X=216, Y=225 and Z=234
[2] Hell -> becomes ‘Shehole’ in Aramaic/Hebrew and means ‘underworld,
grave, pit’ that’s She-HOLE ->Pit
H(72) + E(45) + L(108) + L(108) = 333
[3] Lucifer  Means ‘Shining light or light bearer’ (Biblical Devil / Satan)
L(108) + I(189) + C(27) + I(81) + F(54) + E(45) + R(162) = 666


--- PAGE 267 ---
[4] Jewish -> Greek / Russian Khazar descendants lifestyle (True Origin)
J(90) + E(45) + W(207) + I(81) + S(171) + H(72) = 666
[5] Jesus -> The integration of Jehovah + Zeus (Je-Zeus & Zeus image)
J (90) + E (45) + S (171) + U (189) + S (171) = 666
The Nubian reader must understand that Yashua, Heru, Har, Horus,
Tammuz, Messias, Isa, Essa which are all other names for the messiah
written in other sacred scriptures including our own Nubian scriptures
do not add up to 666.  We are stressing to the Nubian reader that the
Caucasian has used the image of Zeus over the Nubian reality. This is
why in John 1:41 - (King James Version) it clearly states. “ He first
findeth his own brother Simon and saith unto him, We have found the
Messias, which is, being interpreted the Christ” . It is the Caucasian
interpretation which is the opposite of reality. Therefore if the REAL
image of the messiah is (the woolly haired –  burnt brass feet –  Nubian
(Revelation 1:14-16))(King James Version) then the opposite is Straight
hair / White skin. The Zeus image has taken away the true-identity of
Christianity itself and the English language has further distorted the
Nubians position on earth and the psychological positioning of the
Nubians existence in the Bible. This is why it would make sense that
JESUS the actual word NOT the actual Messiah types would equal 666
for it represents the opposite of the truth –  The Black Messiah.
                     Zeus                   Je-sus (He-Zeus)
If 666 (SIX) is the number of the beast (-) then the opposite should logically
represent the number of the (+) of Nature - NINE (9) and would be
represented by certain types of existences within Nature [Refer to Amunubi
Rahkaptah –  Nine Ball Liberation]. Eventually the above un-refutable facts will
be picked up by others within cyberspace and used. Remember where you
found this info first. We state clearly here if you use this information NOT
to improve the conditions of Nubun descendants (those bearing woolly
hair by NATURE). You will face consequences by NATURE.


--- PAGE 268 ---



--- PAGE 269 ---
Dear Reader,
The writers below are the real sources of most of the rationale that is called
black consciousness today. You can find much writings on these writers and
organisations online –  do not be afraid to search them out. Some of these
books have been sent to us from the West.
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi (The Christ Series), Amunubi
Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball - Liberation Information & The Bible
Interpretations and Explanations), The Ancient Egyptian Order
(A.E.O)(Egyptian Initiation), The Nuwapian Nation of The Moors, The
Honourable Elijah Mohammed (Message to the Blackman), Clarence
Jowars Smith (5%) (Supreme Mathematics), The Holy Tabernacle
Ministries (Right Knowledge Series), Credo Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop
(Civilization or Barbarism / Origin of Civilization), The Journey Home
Group, Haru-Hotep Tar (Solar Biology / Parchments Series), Marcus
Garvey (Journey Home), Dr Joseph Ben-Joachannan (African Origins of
The Major Western Religions & Lecture Tapes), Noble Drew Ali (Moorish
Science), Afroo Oonoo (Moonset & Sunrise / An Introduction to the
Nature of Nature Vol.1 & 2) and the other degrees of Dr Malachi Z. York
(The Black Book, The Gold Book & The Holy Tablets).
There must be some where in cyberspace where FREE BLACK
LITERATURE can be found outside the framework of money / business which
covers multiple Nubian issues. Afronuat writings have been put out there as
one of those stimulating vessels. We hope the reader realises by now that this
is not normal black literature. This literature will get your mind ready for many
of the writers above who have all influenced these writings. WE WANT TO
UPGRADE THE NUBIAN MIND! And its got to start from the beginning –
BLACKNESS so you will read issues always bringing the subject back to
Blackness. What concerns the Afronauts is the quality of published black
literature from the west who still have not reasoned that all facets of reality
must be over-laid within their message to obtain a universal effect. A serious
writer will mention science, history, religion and even ufology and the Laws of
Nature including cycles and origins. They must also be intelligent enough to
reason –  out the REAL reasoning of our ancient African cultures. Excluding
the writers above –  Right now in March 2007 we obtained books written by
PhD black authors especially from the U.S and clearly see their knowledge is
still based on a liberal framework given to them by the ethos of their society.
To upgrade Nubians we MUST now receive REAL KNOWLEDGE, which
weeds out belief, opinions from facts. The MACRO issues –  religion, the isms,
racial origins, racial scientific facts, genetics, the practice of equality, and the
theft of birth-rights within Nature most western black authors shy away from.
They are not serious at all –  the signs are in the times –  in other words
events are happening right now especially draconian implementations. So a
serious writer will let their people know these MACRO ISSUES! This PDF
includes Extract 81 & 74. Others will follow once the information has
been abbreviated. THERE MAY BE GRAMMAR / LITERACY ERRORS –
apologises in advance. THIS IS STATED ON EVERY EXTRACT
RELEASED. (1-15 pages). Three Writers contributed to the Vol.15 PDF.


--- PAGE 270 ---
WHAT THE AFRONAUTS WANT TO MAKE CLEAR
[1] Many of the extracts are written, submitted then centralised at different
times by different writers this is why the extracts are in different Volumes NOT
in numerical order. Many Afronaut writers are from different backgrounds
within our race but centralise reasoning around blackness. This is why we
focus on the blackness of nature in our literature for the scientific facts are
undeniable for those who are intelligent and allows the Afronaut writers to still
be united within the messages regardless as to where they are from. There
are different levels of information stated within these volumes and the black
authors and organisations above we continue to mention are the real sources
that will allow you to COMPLETE your understanding of what you are reading
as FREE NUBIAN LITERATURE.
[2] In our literature we purposely repeat and regurgitate information from
different perspectives in an attempt for the details to be clearly identified
within the consciousness of the reader as through time information can be
forgotten but if stated more than once it remains in the mental longer.
[3] We use the King James Bible as the Christian reference book because it is
the biggest selling bible source. Therefore, most people will have access to
the book making it easier for them to compare notes. In this Volume, you will
need the book at hand.
[4] Many people are still confused about our writings concerning liberalism.
The reason is because when they venture in to research they will find it stems
from a European political background. Know this !  Liberalism in fact ALL
ISMS are regurgitation’s of belief systems from the Roman -> Greek ->
Phoenician -> Hindu eras (usually within their religions and philosophy).
LIBERALISM by true definition and LIBERATION are two different practices
and have been mixed together to conceal the original sex and immoral rights
executed by the Caucasian hierarchy of Europe stemming from the Greeks
and Romans through eras and still practised today. It allows their behaviour
patterns which challenge pro-life reasoning within nature to be accepted as
normal. They must live by their true nature to excel within nature so they
will convert societal reasoning towards the direction of their true
desires. LIBERATION is the TRUE identity of what many are perceiving as
LIBERALISM. This is why when studying liberalism you will find it has so
many alternative definitions. They left the notion ambiguous to allow certain
rites through to eventually manifest as acceptable within nature now sealed by
actual laws. The more belief is out their the easier it becomes to fulfil desires
and the more belief is out there the more products and services are needed to
satisfy that very belief. This allows CAPITALISM more room to expand within
society. Nubian reader please don’t be confused by our writings on liberalism
for what you perceive as good within liberalism is REALLY liberation.
[5] There are agreeable people in all races.  There are people of other
races who have helped the African more than most Nubians on earth have
done –  FACT. Equality should be implemented after ALL FACTS have been
recovered and are acknowledged by all.


--- PAGE 271 ---
[6] It is usually seen from a liberal perspective that so-called black
consciousness is really based on a form of rebelling against the system you
reside in or because you have witnessed mistreatment towards the black
race. This literature is beyond those notions we would expect a Nubian
regarded as successful in their life to still take heed to the information stated.
These writings are the early stages of nature knowledge. The core reasoning
behind these writings is to upgrade the average Nubian mind which should
eventually help upgrade their black bloodlines. In addition we want the Nubian
reader to be able to work out where to go and when. By nature many people
WILL NOT, even CAN NOT adapt their reasoning to this quality of
information. Many are not intelligent by NATURE. They can not see how the
fact that ALL LIGHT COMBINED EQUALS DARKNESS has any relevance on
their everyday lives. The scientific reason is that these individuals do not bare
enough ‘Ethereal Knowledge about Positive Nature to keep themselves
mentally alive enough by Reason to Practice The Laws of Nature and adhere
to The Nature Knowledge given in Nature Science.’ (Stated by Afroo Oonoo –
Moonset & Sunrise). These people have not identified the true identity of
nature which as a collective is SMAT visually seen by humans as blackness in
its original existence within the three dimensional plane. Positive Nature –
Pro-life starts in Darkness and many Nubians simply are not intelligent
enough to except these facts. Since positive and negative must exist for
balance BY NATURE there are Nubians who actually CAN NOT align
themselves with this level of information which stems from the writers we
mention. They are sealed in ignorance by the mistakes and lack of nature
knowledge fed to them within their own socialisation via bloodline relatives
and an orchestrated media / education machine –  though religion is the main
instigator. A winner can only be a winner if a loser is present and a loser can
only be a loser if a winner is present. Therefore, who can be the real winner?
If the loser isn’t present there is no race to be won. A real winner is anyone
who is SELF-SUFFICIENT and does not need anyone to prove to themselves
they are something. On earth as the ONLY being bearing woolly hair by
nature we are suppose to be that SELF-SUFFICIENT BEING and should not
be relying on any other race for REASONING –  this includes religious
understandings from other races, customs and traditions if it is not based on
facts or the laws of nature in pro-life. We use a race scenario as an example
because the racism birthed via the caste system is designed to position those
dark skinned as the loser of the race and it’s that loser that is used as a
measuring stick for the winner. In other words when the Nubian stops existing
on the frequency of reasoning given to them by other races - the race (racial
positioning game) they have set up will end. REASON THIS OUT ! To act
upon a fact is the best intelligence one can have for it means brain matter was
successfully able to convert right knowledge in to right actions. An example as
to the lack of natural intelligence amongst so-called intellects can be see from
a Doctor or Nurse who partake in alcoholism or drug abuse –  knowing the full
consequences of these actions. These characters do not posses natural
intelligence and their brain matter can not convert positive knowledge in to
positive actions. Its this link between converting known facts in to physical
actions within brain matter that the Nubian must remember again to enhance
the development of our culture and race. The gases and chemicals which


--- PAGE 272 ---
assist this process universally are known as 9-Ether by our ancients and now
you. For there was a correct way for things to happen in gas and sub-atomic
form as blackness to create SUNS. To say that some one lacks intelligence
by NATURE does not mean they posses a complete inferior mind. Based on
the requirements of intelligence in most societies many can be master
intellectuals within their field of education and still take on the actions of the
Doctor or Nurse stated earlier. It really means the natural orders for survival
and well being they are not been able to reason out because Lust (of any
kind) which blurs reasoning has successfully blocked the RNA signals to DNA
to induce a chain-reaction within the body from the brain that stimulates self-
preservation actions. So understand that Natural intelligence is the highest
intelligence and all other forms of knowledge are utilised by natural thinking
always. In addition you should reason that anyone who understands Natural
intelligence and uses it in Pro-life are the real intelligent flesh and blood
beings BY NATURE regardless of their race, credentials or faith. For they
care about themselves and nature since they are a part of ABSOLUTE
NATURE. However, the responsibilities of using natural intelligence may differ
between races actually because of the differences that exist. Many are not
intelligent enough to execute self-preservation via pro-life because their being
exists in the MENTAL RACE (winner and loser) stated earlier in this section.
Now a REAL question for the Nubian reader then would be –  Did GOD create
the notion of self-preservation? Look at nature for the answer - if you cut
yourself your skin will naturally heal or attempt to repair itself. So self-
preservation as a race is a natural order within nature and abides to nature
laws in PRO-LIFE since preservation maintains a certain type of life. This
simple example will show you how nature works but the Nubian race as a
collective can not reason out these facts and accepts the regression of our
genes, customs and ideologies as normal. Until the Nubian can use Nature
knowledge to see that ALL DIFFERENCES exist to allow cycles to manifest
which in turn follow a circle / cycle which ALL MATTER changes within you
will not be able to correctly judge the agreeable and disagreeable
consequences in actions towards our race in any shape or form. Everything
that becomes stimuli within the physical being and mental mind has to be
evaluated (with no exceptions) as to whether it supports the self-preservation
notion –  PRO-LIFE as a person, group or race. We really hope that the
Nubian reader is able to overstand that these Volumes are NOT about racial
slandering as racism is now being used to prevent you from reaching your full
potential as the branding of black literature as racist will forever block REAL
KNOWLEDGE from being bestowed to the Nubian race. Racism is ambiguous
for many people will not see that the white Jesus is racism until they fully
overstand his Nubian identity according to the actual bible itself. The authority
on what racism is are indeed the Caucasian race as they established the laws
concerning racism but how can the least victimised of the species dictate what
racism is and how it TRULY effects other races. So Nubian try to see through
the race card (a US phrase) which will forever be used to block knowledge
that is made to re-organise the Nubian mind in to true love of self and kind.
Scientific facts, The laws of opposites and Nature knowledge in general are
far beyond ISMS as challengers. ISMS are ERA based reasoning. Real
Knowledge re-establishes issues that influence cycles within nature itself and
identifies their origins, purpose and techniques.


--- PAGE 273 ---
Extract 81
Black Concentration
You read and hear many people express views on the laws of nature. We all
study nature to see these laws which are frameworks used by nature itself to
do what is does perfectly for good or bad in our own personal opinion. Many
forget the following [1] Solid, liquids and gases are the same existence but
at different frequencies. There are no real borderlines between this
trinity and [2] Energy can not be destroyed only transferred to different
states. The acknowledgement of these facts will allow you to understand the
true identity of the laws of nature which is that the Laws of Nature are really
BLACK SUN LAWS. This is because orders and cycles of nature are
established via sub-atomic existences attached to matter birthed by SUNS
(origins of planets) or BLACKNESS (The Face of SMAT –  Space, Matter &
Time) hence BLACK SUN LAWS. The Nordic Aryan / Hindu notion of
extraterrestrials will always submit to these facts as ALL BEINGS and ALL
PHYSICAL elements come from planets which are offspring’s of Suns. This
notion also correlates with the SUN itself –  as its surface is jet black and also
Nubians who bear black skin and a solar-plex as our forefathers the ancient
Nubun-Ptah tribes are the highest human offspring of the sun in this solar
system. In a standard dictionary God means ‘to be in control’ therefore SUN
GOD refers to the control a sun has over a solar system. This control is the
governance of the laws and cycles of nature and represent –  SUN MIND =
MIND of SUN re-introducing nature laws and cycles via the principalities of
absolute nature to a region of space as everything on earth came from matter
from the SUN and gases which personify blackness. There are cycles and
principalities that gases, sub-atomic energy and particles follow to create the
best blackness for a SUN to personify. So the principalities within blackness
lead to the principalities within nature on earth established by SUNS.
Therefore the laws of nature are primarily BLACK SUN LAWS. The Laws of
Nature are synonymous with acknowledging the SUN. The blackness of
nature (face of SMAT) in concentration of its best blackness (collection of
gases) creates Suns –  the best blackness within that sector of the galaxy. Its
in the scientific understanding of Egyptian spirituality you will truly know the
Nubun existence of the REAL Tama-re / Egypt. Egyptologists merely wish to
deceive the masses about Egypt as all their business lodges and secret
societies are all based around Ghostized Egyptian practices. In fact know that
variations of many of the secret practices in those lodges you will find openly
in rural villages within Africa, India, South America and even China. Do you
really think that within over 150,000 villages (that have customs thousands of
years old) throughout the world no one is practising customs similar to those
secret societies? (many sadly demonic). The Caucasian race is no older than
10,000 years overstand this! They have reaped the benefits of absolute
equality and have been using nature knowledge in their favour (caste system /
white (good) & black (bad)) against darker races up onto this very day. The
lower degrees of knowledge was given to them when the Greek philosophers
went to Egypt to study. The higher Egyptian sciences the Caucasian races will
never know because only Negroid genes in Nubians in their RIGHT MINDS


--- PAGE 274 ---
could execute the knowledge properly. African power is tied to genes and
genes are expressions of order within Nature / Neteru. Once the Negroid
Egyptian went Sub-Sahara, the true Egypt / Ta-Ma-Re faded away. The light
skinned Phoenicians and Greeks in the latter Egyptian eras Ghostized /
warped the Sun-reasoning which to this very day has led to Caucasians sun-
bathing (literal sun-worshippers) which was originally in earlier times an
attempt to verify themselves to the SUN GOD –  RA. But Ghostation is the
journey to death and this journey is personified in their sun-bathing activities
hence skin-cancer. This literal-physical sun-worshipping signifies the lack of
nature intelligence as the mental sun-mind is REASON that’s RE-SUN –  the
RE as Amun / Amen-RE the SUN (forever and ever Amen) and this is
governed by science in PRO-LIFE for the sun will always burn to give out rays
(Re) for life to exist. NUBIAN OVERSTAND THIS! IT WAS NEVER ABOUT
LITERAL WORSHIPPING OF THE SUN BECAUSE THE SUN VIA SUN-
LIGHT IS IN YOUR GENES (MELANIN) THAT’S WHY YOU ARE BLACK.
SUN MIND is NINE MIND! Nubuns have the sun inside them and these facts
are known even today in rural Africa. Right now in 2007 there are still warrior
tribes up in Ethiopia and East Africa that still call Nubians / Nubuns - SUNS
(research these facts) for Ether and Ethiopian are the same.
The Moon has intervened in the potency of the laws of nature. The potency
refers to the execution of the classic notion ‘what goes around comes around’-
which was originally known as Gadur by Nubians now known as Karma via
Buddhism / Hindu. In other words it has helped extract opposing forces in the
form of races and animals which in turn helped establish certain belief
systems challenging cycles and orders within nature laws. This is one of the
true reasons why the actual word SIN is tied to the moon via Mesopotamian /
Babylonian doctrines because sin made many un-natural actions seem
natural. The Hindu religion devalued the notion of SIN in nature to allow
alternative sex and the caste system to emerge which offset the Suns
blackness –  represented by universal orders and cycles in nature but in
human form as those dark skinned. In Hinduism SIN / papa is NOT regarded
as disagreeable to nature but rather an act against dharma or moral order.
The Hindu in recent centuries has perceived this moral order as the caste
system with dark skinned humans as descendants of demons and light
skinned humans as descendants of angels (research this). What’s interesting
is that Demon becomes DE-MOON -> DEAD MOON yet the scientific facts
are that those of dark skin have higher SUN-HEAT genes (melanin) within
them –  blackness is the combination of all types of light (as stressed). Nubian
reader can you now see the trickery behind religious doctrines world-wide?
Now lets break this down scientifically!  Since melanin induces reasoning as it
absorbs light energy to make you black. It is the lack of melanin that
influences reasoning as well which over hundreds of thousands of years will
eventually evolve in to what is known today as religions, customs and
traditions. Therefore, different amounts of melanin will create different racial
reasoning which will lead to different cultures and belief systems. The moon
now pulling on earth (making it a global influence) altered earth’s original eco-
system influencing monkey –  MOON-KEY types to evolve in to races. While
the ALREADY EXISTING female pygmy menstrual cycles changed altering


--- PAGE 275 ---
our DNA profile to become taller into Nubuns / Nubians we are today. The
small remaining pygmies today are descendants of the original Ptah-Pygmies
who stayed on the equator line where earth’s gravitational forces are most
stable thus being physically affected the least but the laws of nature
compensated the lack of physical change by mentality change. This is
absolute equality as what goes up must come down –  The laws of opposites.
Other ELDER NUBIAN RACES often recorded as Gods in so-called African -
Sumerian mythology intervened in the development of the homo-sapien. The
variations in melanin deposits amongst races creates different reasoning and
in essence different belief systems because light-energy will now have a
different influence on the mind based on your NEURO-MELANIN PROFILE.
So now reason that if the laws of nature are indeed BLACK SUN LAWS –
based on facts and facts = truth then the opposing force is belief or a lie (but
lies exist in be-lie-f) represented by the MOON interpreted as SIN.
Furthermore, we will add here that belief can also be a half-truth so there is
some truth in belief just like the moon was originally a part of the sun via a
planet. So there is some SUN in the MOON as there is some good in most
religions. It is this SUN / MOON relationship that the spirituality of liberalism
stems from (refer to Vol.14 & 13). Since the MOON originates from the SUN
the notion of agreeable and disagreeable applies which means nothing is
100% bad or good. If something is 100% bad or good it could not fulfil a cycle
/ circle. This is one of the true reasons why the moon plays a dominant role in
religions because the agreeable and disagreeable existence creates a half-
truth -> Belief. Belief has helped postpone the consequences of negative
actions towards the cycles and orders in nature. This is true as someone can
tell a lie but be believed therefore only Gadur (Karma) can re-adjust the
wrongdoing. Now to make this information clear. In essence since the moon
stopped spinning on its own axis it has influenced reasoning on earth first
genetically, then biologically and thirdly mentally helping to create variations in
thought which led to belief systems. This occurred via gravitational forces
pulling on the earth and moon-light energy conversion within earth’s Eco-
system.
Eco-system change -> cultural and species change -> belief systems emerge
This process took millions of years but has been high-light-ed in the last
6,000 years in the forms of religion. The highlight became the reasoning of
the Caucasian racial lineage over other species. See the word play as high-
light means –  important or focus point. The opposite is low-darkness which is
not recognised as an opposite to highlight or of value. There is no balance in
reasoning present today. This is only a part of the picture for higher
information on this subject matter we strongly recommend you obtain Afroo
Oonoo –  An Introduction to the Nature of Nature Vol.1 & 2 and also
Amunubi Rahkaptah - The Nine Ball - Liberation Information. Both book
series are very hard to obtain in Africa but we have been told that they can be
obtained overseas.


--- PAGE 276 ---
Millions of years ago in our solar system the Moon stopped spinning on its
own axis and became dependent on earth and then increased its pull on the
earth and female beings (which it still does today creating tides at sea) this
influenced the laws of nature on earth and pushed evolution into the direction
it is today. Menstrual cycles were different prior to this event. This event
forced the survivors of our ancient Nubun tribes to work out specific times in a
season when to conceive a child. Unlike today SEX was not based on lust
and conception was always planned (strategic dieting and timing / genealogy
compatibility). This is a type of black mind concentration as it was our Nubun
forefathers forcing the best potential in our race to exist as flesh and blood
beings. Nubun tribes existed on earth before the moon regressed and it’s the
melanin (the gene stabiliser) that kept our gene pull from regressing to
straight hair. In earlier cycles in this solar system Saturn also influenced earth
via light energy. All straight hair races evolved after the collapse of the moon
–  their existences stems from this event so they lean strongly to Luna (moon)
astrology and many of their different religions are really governed by Moon
Gods or have moon based symbolism within them.
The CaucAsian race are the highest product of evolutionary forces on
earth which originate from the moon. The Hindu / Asian are the highest
product of revolutionary forces on earth that originate from the moon.
The African Nubun / Pygmy (Ptahites) are the highest product of
revolutionary forces on earth that originate from the Sun. The Nubians
of today are the highest product of evolutionary forces that originate
from the sun –  but because melanin stabilises the genes the change
from Ptahites (pygmies) to Nubian is very little in comparison to other
races. This is why only Nubians / Nubuns posses woolly hair we are
from an earlier heritage on earth before the moons pull on earth
maximised. However, it must never be forgotten that evolution is
UNIVERSALLY the journey to death from original existence.
The last burst of moon-pull around 6-10,000 years ago on earth triggered off
albinoism within the Hindu/Asian and Phoenician/African races which led to
the main branch of the Caucasian race (though there are other reasons which
led to the other Caucasian race types). The Caucasian manifestation is
disguised within the notion of the ice age as western scientists say a new type
of man evolved after the ice faded away. PLEASE TRY TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT YOU HAVE JUST READ. The Sun still played the dominant role in the
development of ALL RACES but the influence of the moon in evolution varied.
As the gravitational pull of the moon increased the potency of moon-light
energy increased making races became lighter. Moonlight still possesses sub-
atomic energy as all light does. This energy soaks into the earth, plantation,
beings and seas at night then slowly influences sunlight energy in the day as
it hits earth’s plantation, seas etc which eventually are consumed by beings.
This over millions of years resulted in variations in groups of species. A
certain alternative / warped type of photosynthesis occurs in moonlight –  it is
2nd generation sunlight from the sun via the moon. In sun-cycles the potency
of the moons influence decreases as the heightened sun-rays over power the
residue moon energy left in sub-atomic particles on earth. All these issues
coincide with the journey this solar system and galaxy are taking while


--- PAGE 277 ---
entering new etheric gases and matter regions within a new quarter region
within its current universal rotation (cycle) influencing the potency in sun-rays.
In addition, light energy from other constellations has also influenced the
existence of races within this universal cycle as well. Energy absorbed by
existences with different DNA profiles be it an individual, tribe or race will
create different reasoning. BUT THOSE BEARING WOOLLY HAIR BY
NATURE KNOW THIS SCIENTIFIC FACT - THE COLLECTIVE EXISTENCE
OF ALL LIGHT IS BLACKNESS. This blackness utilised through SMAT via
melanin and carbon based sciences were executed to VERY high degrees by
the Nubun ancients. The targeting of energy to influence specific types of
matter. They perfected it to a level perceived as MIRACLES knowing which
tones influence which matter –  hence ancient words (tones / vibrations) within
scientific experiments now described as rituals were focused to have very
specific consequences. Because nature is a black thing the potency of mind
energy exerted by black melanin within Nubuns will have a stronger influence
within nature itself than those with lower compositions. Therefore the Nubian
mind, skin and genes will forever be targeted with stimuli innocently and
purposely from other races to change and regress from our original existence.
NEVER FORGET THE COLLECTIVE EXISTENCE OF ALL LIGHT IS
BLACKNESS –  THIS IS SCIENTIFIC FACT. This means the greatest of all
lights is blackness, as this is the totality of all light. So now within right
knowledge ENLIGHTMENT becomes correctly known as ENDARKMENT.
Since both positive and negative (religiously known as pure light and amber
light) both originate from the same source this blackness of nature is the
ultimate balancer and unconditional life giver –  PRO-LIFE. The SUNS OF
NATURE are the concentration of pro-life blackness. Nature was seen
from the perspective of darkness in the ancient past unlike recent eras which
switched the perspective to light via religion and the caste system. Never
forget dark skinned races were roaming the earth for hundreds of thousands
of years before the Caucasian race even existed. There is absolutely no way
you would have the notion god = light / devil = darkness if all races on earth
where dark skinned. So Nubian reader you should know that we have been
tricked by other races interpretation of reality. Now with regards to the Nubian
/ Nubun bearing woolly hair by nature black mind concentration must surely
involve the collective usage of facts from all facets of reality. This entails the
gathering of academic knowledge cross referenced with spiritual knowledge.
This means a fact must remain logical in religion, science, history, and
genetics. So if religion says one thing yet science says another then it is a
half-truth at its peak –  if not a complete lie. Often science says one thing
which religion also states at a higher level not perceived as scientific by
science. The maximisation of intelligence is when all facets of knowledge are
being executed for the same purpose based on your role in nature as a
person, a group or race. So intelligence must be the acceptance of facts –
things that remain true when aligned with science, history, genetics, religion
etc. At this level of literature, Black Mind Concentration is based on the
focusing of facts and Nubian / Nubun cultural reasoning aligned with your
position within absolute nature witnessed through scientific understanding.


--- PAGE 278 ---
Extract 74
Money Makes the World Go Round (UPDATED)
This is a common societal phrase within the westernised countries especially
in the US and seems very innocent and catchy to hear. But like many societal
phrases there are often hidden meanings. As stated MONEY stems from
MOON-NEY and goes back to the moon as an influencer to reasoning ->
desires and the Moon God is actually called SIN. With the SIN being put into
BU-SIN-ESS -> that’s why money is known as the route to all evil and EVIL
spelt backwards is LIVE -> So money becomes the route to LIVE because if
you don’t have money you will find suffering and hardship. So the desire is to
use money to live out desires.  The truth is that once you have been given the
right knowledge and align yourself with nature you now can use money to do
good rather than bad. To do good you may need to live in a comfortable
environment to allow your mind to focus on the right things so money will be
needed to create that right environment. The usage of good and bad with
money depends on the mind of the user of money. In the west those societies
know that money can be used to create positive change if it gets to the RIGHT
MINDS and now they are in the process of getting rid of money for a cashless
society to have entire control of money and the being. AFRICA DO NOT GIVE
UP CASH. The Caucasian race fooled by capitalist driven staged terrorism
are giving up their rights in the secret hopes that it will help manage potential
economic growth of ethnic minorities and immigration in their favour. The
Caucasians who are intelligent by NATURE are those who are actively raising
awareness against the notion BIG BROTHER. The Afronauts will tell you that
the essence of big brother is an attempt to preserve this ERA which in effect
is an attempt to control the circle of SMAT. They wish to make nature itself
follows in their direction or image long enough for them to set up where and
how they can prosper within the sun-cycle. To take away human rights,
control genetic information, create a surveillance culture, control food qualities
and consumption will help preserve this era as these are tools that stimulate
change physically, genetically and mentally. It is well documented throughout
cyberspace that the western elite’s within certain blood lineage’s are behind
these agendas and the actual Caucasian race are merely tools being used to
suppress the orders and cycles of nature to give them enough time to achieve
their goals. To suppress nature is to suppress blackness –  because nature is
a black thing.  To suppress nature you must create an alternative reasoning –
such as light = good and darkness = bad when the SCIENTIFIC TRUE
REALITY is that the TOTALITY OF ALL LIGHT IS BLACKNESS.
Money is synonymous with power, quality, importance, achievement etc. Yet
this is where the problems begins for the upliftment of the Nubian mind
because it should be the governance of right knowledge and factual reasoning
that stimulate these attributes.  In other words the black movements will not
be perceived as important or success worthy because the financial status is
not present amongst the black leaders, organisers and students. Therefore,
respect for the message is not balanced. Even worse is the devalue of things
that are FREE. Many people are reading literature like this and other writers


--- PAGE 279 ---
but by default question validity –  yet assume credibility by nature from so-
called western institutions. Those who are intelligent by NATURE will be
able to respect information whether it was given by an [1] institution, [2] the
media or [3] an individual. Then use REASON and validity techniques to see if
the data given is worthy. NEVER FORGET all three have agendas positive
and negative and all three can give you a truth, a half-truth, or a complete lie.
Therefore you should treat all three equally and investigate all three the same
way.  When we write we stress to you that the writers we mention at the
beginning of our Volumes are the authors of much information we state –  go
there for the full breakdown. In essence, what we are stating is that money
helps cut off the potency of the information to stimulate change when that very
change will put you back in line with nature. ESPECIALLY IF THAT
INFORMATION IS FREE or given by those with a perception of a low financial
status. This is when MONEY works as MOON-NEY and the MOON GOD was
known as SIN. Do you think it’s just a co-incidence that gambling is regarded
as a sin –  yet they give you CASINOS –  CA-SIN-OS. Furthermore, CA can be
pronounced KA in certain ancient Egyptian dialects and KA means Spirit –  so
you could have Spirit-Sin that stimulates gambling. The desire for money
(Moon-ney). Scientifically the moon over a long period of time can influence
reasoning in humans to ignore orders in nature established by the sun. Within
western reasoning casino goes back to European hierarchy (especially
Italians) who used casinos as Villas for orgies and prostitution. This was
before the gambling notion but the SIN was still there. All this tells you that
MOON / SIN is no great revelation as the relationship between Moon-Money-
Sin is known by the orchestraters of the English language and they use these
notions to spellbind the masses into living a way that represents their TRUE
BELIEF SYSTEMS which are hidden within that ambiguous reasoning of
liberalism as well as capitalism and religion.
When discussing true belief systems you will eventually find the GREEK
based notion of LOGOS which within most dictionaries you will find is based
on two areas of definition. Namely [1] lo·gos –  noun (often initial capital letter)
Philosophy - The rational principle that governs and develops the universe. or
[2] Theology - The divine word or reason incarnate in Jesus Christ. John 1:1–
14.  - Christianity In Saint John's Gospel, especially in the prologue (1:1-14),
the creative word of God, which is itself God and incarnate in Jesus. Also
called The WORD. The actual quote is John 1: 1 (King James Bible) ‘In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God’. This means LOGOS via the GREEKS is the actual WORD aligned with
God. Now if you step out of Christianity into GREEK philosophy you will find
that the word LOGOS attains to another word known today in BU-SIN-ESS /
marketing called LOGOS which refers to a LOGO (from the Greek 
= logotipos) as a visual existence, symbol, image or icon which becomes a
trademark or brand representing a product, service or lifestyle. Remember
LOGO and LOGOS are both of Greek origin and have similar meaning in the
sense that they centralise the consumers wants and needs in to a symbol
(represented by the Logos / Brand identities) OR centralise universal
principles, philosophy and rationale (represented by LOGOS centralised as
the WORD).


--- PAGE 280 ---
Please try to remember what you have just read –  and now read on.
Now go in the King James Bible and read the whole John 1 Chapter 1 and I
John chapter 1 & 2 and you will find many comparisons between darkness (-)
and light (+). Eg.1. ‘And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness
comprehended it not’ (John 1:5). Eg.2 The same came for a witness, to bear
witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe. He was not that
light but was sent to bear witness of that light. That was the true Light, which
lighteth every man that cometh into the world. (John 1:7-9). Now in I John
Chapter 1 you have ‘But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanseth
us from all sin’ (I John 1:7). Eg2 ‘we have heard of him, and declare unto you,
that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all’. (I John 1:5). Eg3. Again, a
new commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him and in you:
because darkness is past, and true light now shineth. He tha saith he is in the
light, and hateth his brother, is in darkness even until now (I John 1:8-9). (All
King James Bible). There are other light / dark quotes if you read the john
sections. In addition, you will also find much writings about the Anti-Christ.
Examples –  Eg1. Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that
Anti-Christ shall come. Even now there are many Anti-Christ’s; whereby we
know that it is the last time. (I John 2: 18). Eg2. Who is a liar but he that
denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is the antichrist, that denieth the Father
and the Son. (I John 3:22). (All King James Bible). So to conclude this
paragraph –  you have various comparisons between light (good) and
darkness (bad) in both John Chapters and also mentioned are the Anti-Christ
as those who say Jesus is not the Christ. Nubian reader we hope your
working this out ! If not lets explain this !
Simply put –  The biggest most popular LOGO ever to have existed by far is
the Caucasian Jesus which encompasses the image of the GREEK god
ZEUS. This is the brand image of the Caucasian race. Brands represent
lifestyles and it is their lifestyle that Nubians in the spell aspire to follow. The
biggest marketing campaign ever is Christianity. However, this marketing
campaign can not work if the real messiah is Nubian (Revelation 1:14). Which
by coincidence just happens to be the very next book after John in the bible.
Therefore in the very same chapters of the bible where John mentions the
WORD which is synonymous in Greek philosophy with LOGOS / LOGO they
made sure that blackness is seen as bad. Furthermore in those SAME JOHN
Chapters and verses it states that those challenging the notion of Jesus Christ
are Anti-Christ’s. This SEALED the Zeus Jesus image as Original in your
mind. That’s why in both John 1:1 and I John 1:1 the ‘WORD’ is mentioned at
the very beginning of the chapters identifying LOGOS which as a LOGO (both
of Greek Origination from the same word group) was the Zeus Caucasian
male image and those who challenge this Zeus image with the Nubian black
Jesus (Darkness) (mentioned throughout that chapter) are antichrists (also
mentioned throughout those chapters). This is why there are constant
comparisons between darkness and light in those John Chapters to prevent
the reader from overstanding the Black Messiah. Its all subtle psychology as
they give light and darkness ambiguous identities to allow the readers mind to
interpret these existences in various ways including race. This is also why


--- PAGE 281 ---
these are some of the most famous quotes of the bible. Even more revealing
is that within those very same chapters namely John 1:41 - (King James
Version) it clearly states. “He first findeth his own brother Simon and saith
unto him, We have found the Messias, which is, being interpreted the
Christ”. So right here in that very same Chapter you have John telling you
there is a difference between Christ and the Messias –  YET in I John 2:18 the
same John is telling you that if ‘you denieth that Jesus is the Christ’ you are
an Anti-Christ. Can you see the conflicting rationale? In fact the word
MESSIAS is actually an EGYPTIAN WORD concerning the anointing of
messiahs (FACT –  research this!). Also bare in mind that the whole book of
revelation was given to ANOTHER JOHN and as you should know by now in
Revelation 1:14-16 (the woolly haired –  burnt brass feet –  Nubian is the
Messiah) (King James Bible). Therefore, the Greeks centralised the whole
principles and rationale of GOD / JESUS in to The WORD –  known as
LOGOS then as a LOGO gave the world Jesus as the Zeus image
(Caucasian man) to counter attack the revelation 1:14 description and also
psychologically spellbind darker races in to mental suppression and easier
exploitation. Furthermore, this gave the Caucasian race a god complex which
has given them confidence to victimise other races and cultures ever since.
The reason why there are contradictions in the bible is because words in the
bible have been altered and mistranslated to allow certain types of brain-
washing agendas to take place through the eras from the Greeks -> Romans
– > Medieval Europe up until this very day. If you saw white-light-right as the
product then you will see how successful Christianity has become in
marketing those notions. All this works because of the GREEK centralisation
of the following:
Logos – > Logo – > Zeus – > White Jesus – > White Supremacy
     Zeus (Father)           Je-sus (He-Zeus) (Father/Son)
Now see the LOGOS dictionary definition AGAIN namely : [1] Lo·gos –  noun
(often initial capital letter) Philosophy - The rational principle that governs and
develops the universe. or [2] Theology - The divine WORD(LOGOS) or
reason incarnate in Jesus Christ (HE-ZEUS –  Spanish –  Zeus image).
John 1:1 (King James Bible) ‘In the beginning was the Word (Logos), and the
Word (Logos) was with God, and the Word (Logos/Logo -> Zeus) was God’.


--- PAGE 282 ---
In Vol.14 we showed you simple maths formulas concerning JESUS.
Remember in Revelations 14:18 it says ‘count the number of the beast’
(King James Bible) count means to calculate. This also refers to binary
numbers which brings the credit card and computer chip in to the notion. Yet
the preacher will still tell you this is all symbolic. Though the real question is -
Did Jesus the actual word naturally equal 666 (directly by Nature) OR
was the word set up by individuals who translated the bible to equal that
number (indirectly by nature)? (Refer to Vol.14).
The answer is that regardless of how the word originated there are still
serious issues that must be addressed.
[1] If directly by NATURE Jesus equalled the number 666 stated in Vol.14
(meaning –  no one involved within any Christian based institutions over the
last 1700 years influenced these facts). Then you in your RIGHT MIND should
seriously be evaluating what you are following –  if you are Christian as the
message came directly from nature. The mathematical odds of the actual
word Jesus equalling 666 which represents the complete opposite in the bible
(The Beast) are so high its virtually impossible.
[2] If indirectly by Nature (meaning –  people who established the notion of
Christianity today namely Greeks -> Romans -> Medieval Europe set up the
actual word Jesus knowing it equalled 666). Then you should still be
questioning the true motives behind Christian teachings given to you by these
institutions.
The answer to the question can only be one or the other - directly or
indirectly by nature.
However, we must never forget that this Jesus issue is based on the
Caucasian race tampering with scriptures and words. This is why we stated
that Haru, Har, Heru, Issa, Tammuz, Messias who are earlier messiah type
descriptions (prior to the letter J existence) DO NOT equal 666. So anybody
who has read Vol.14 and now Vol.15 of the Message from the Afronauts –
The Laws of Opposites MUST SERIOUSLY understand the Trickology that is
being played on the African, African American, European Nubian, West
Indian, South American –  Those bearing woolly hair by nature –  all
descendants of Ptah from the blackness of nature via SUNS. However it is
those who are NOT INTELLIGENT BY NATURE that will disregard this
literature as they can not convert logical information within brain matter into
reasoning to stimulate the right actions to change the direction of their lives
into the respect for facts over belief. A true God MUST exist where facts are
always present for a sequence of facts must take place for the physical world
itself to exist right now, which that same god created.


--- PAGE 283 ---
xxxx


--- PAGE 284 ---
Dear Nubian Reader, 
 
 
The writers below are the sources of most of the rationale that is called black 
consciousness today. You can find much literature from these writers and 
organisations online –  do not be afraid to search them out. Some of these books 
have been sent to us from the West. Now at Vol.16 the intelligent Nubian should 
be fully aware of these writers and organisations for the consciousness in our 
literature could not be given without the initial information base. Check these 
forces out. We all owe it to ourselves and our bloodlines to understand who we 
are by NATURE. 
 
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi (The Christ Series), Amunubi Rahkaptah 
(The Nine Ball - Liberation Information & The Bible Interpretations and 
Explanations), The Ancient Egyptian Order (A.E.O)(Egyptian Initiation), The 
Nuwapian Nation of The Moors, The Honourable Elijah Mohammed 
(Message to the Blackman), Clarence Jowars Smith (5%) (Supreme 
Mathematics), The Holy Tabernacle Ministries (Right Knowledge Series), 
Credo Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop (Civilization or Barbarism / Origin of 
Civilization), The Journey Home Group, Haru-Hotep Tar (Solar Biology / 
Parchments Series), Marcus Garvey (Journey Home), Dr Joseph Ben-
Joachannan (African Origins of The Major Western Religions & Lecture 
Tapes), Noble Drew Ali (Moorish Science), Afroo Oonoo (Moonset & 
Sunrise / An Introduction to the Nature of Nature Vol.1 & 2) and the other 
degrees of Dr Malachi Z. York (The Black Book, The Gold Book & The Holy 
Tablets). 
 
One of the reasons why many people will not be able to fully comprehend the 
LAWS OF OPPOSITES is because they do not have true respect for TIME which 
causes an imbalance in SPACE and MATTER concerning REASONING. This in 
turn creates imbalance in their BLACK CONSCIOUSNESS. Mineral rock layers 
in mountains and raw materials will show you that this world is millions of years 
old. The lack of respect for time usually driven by religion (which stems from a 
lack of nature knowledge) will not allow you to venture in to the heart of African 
culture as this culture pre-dates monotheistic religions and the Caucasian race. 
In addition many people do not understand facets of existence which means a 
grouping of types of matter. For example is the fork the opposite to paper? –  NO 
(they are different facets) but is it the opposite to the knife? –  YES (they are of 
the same facet). Some then will say that the Orientals use sticks to eat (but they 
use TWO sticks).


--- PAGE 285 ---
You will find the opposites everywhere in existence as these are principalities 
within the LAWS OF NATURE. This includes all types of matter including race for 
races are a facet of existence and everything exists within ABSOLUTE NATURE 
which is all space, all time and all matter –  past, present and future –  THE ALL. 
In addition anything that exists in solid and liquid form whether it can be proven 
or not to exist MUST originate from SUNS and any natural gas state whether 
proven or not to exist must exist outside earths atmosphere initially –  Why? - 
because planets come from SUNS which are created by gases which will forever 
personify the existence of space as BLACKNESS (via human senses).  
 
Sub-atomic existences would exist in what you call nothing prior to 
existing in what you call something. The original nothingness perceived via 
human senses is darkness.  
 
It’s the most obvious TRUTH which can be witnessed every night as the stars 
can not OUT-SHINE the black light of nature –  that’s why you still see space 
between the stars. As stated on the very first page of the Afronaut series Vol.1 - 
This information YOU have always known but have forgotten to REASON what it 
represents. Many of our ancestors bearing scientific reasoning knew the 
blackness as PTAH (pronounced TAR) and knowing that everything came from 
blackness (triple stage darkness) reasoned that the dark skin represented 
ORIGINAL CREATION. The original intentions of NATURE as BLACKNESS via 
SUNS in this solar system. Many will never overstand these facts because 
agendas thousands of years in motion have completely altered what black is, 
how it is perceived, how it works in nature, the relationship between light and 
darkness and its influence on matter, and how our Nubun blood relatives treated 
blackness through the ages. Forces against our race will do anything in their 
power for you not to transfer your energy back towards yourself. They can not 
have you bearing nature knowledge. They have completely altered what nature is 
in Prime time. PRIME TIME exists in darkness because light as SUNS gave time 
structure within the human senses –  but there are many SUNS but only one 
blackness of space. Since everything originated from darkness the original time 
references start in darkness. There are different time references hidden in 
darkness and with different time must come a different space and matter - A Sub-
Atomic Reality that helped and helps establish and maintain this three 
dimensional plane. The MIND has access to this domain at different levels. 
 
We will not mention anything more on this issue throughout our book series –  but 
know that our Nubun ancients related to darkness via quantum reasoning. The 
origin of most African Spiritual Sciences are the ancient original practices of 
quantum physics. The ancient rituals were the quantum equations personified in 
nature which influenced space, time and matter [as theoretically suggested 
today]. Organic types of matter are the symbols of the equation for they all 
possess elements which become vacuum at a certain frequency. Some practices 
took generations of lineages to establish. Only certain tribes, bloodlines or genes 
can achieve certain things in nature BY NATURE.


--- PAGE 286 ---
The blackness of nature is real –  SO real that it must be perceived as bad in 
every way possible to prevent those of original existence from remembering who 
they are by nature –  and living out that character in nature. To align the colour 
black with death is one of the cruellest of jokes because without the blackness of 
nature (Collective gases) NO LIFE can exist as we know it. The actual universe 
is around 60% carbon. A factual mind in science will understand this information 
but belief pioneered by lighter races has taken black in every way to the 
negative.  
 
Those Nubians bearing woolly hair who are intelligent by nature must show our 
brothers and sisters through scientific facts
 the truth about blackness. Darkness 
and light are NOT equal opposites just like NINE (9) is higher than SIX (6). One 
has to represent the beginning or the senior within ABSOLUTE NATURE. One of 
the keys to unlocking the Nubian mind is to re-introduce science to spirituality this 
(via facts) will allow our race to KNOW the real problems and solutions in this day 
and time.  
 
This PDF includes Extract 53 (Updated). Others will follow once the 
information has been abbreviated. THERE MAY BE GRAMMAR / LITERACY 
ERRORS –  apologises in advance. THIS IS STATED ON EVERY EXTRACT 
RELEASED. (1-13 pages). Four Writers contributed to this Vol.16 PDF. The 
writers of this presentation want to make clear that the inspirational writers 
mentioned at the beginning of our volumes are the sources of much we 
have stated or will provide you with the foundation of reasoning.  
 
THERE IS MUCH INFORMATION WE HAVE NOT, WILL NOT AND CAN NOT 
GIVE YOU VIA THE AFRONAUT VOLUMES –  GO TO THESE WRITERS / 
ORGANISATIONS FOR THE FINE TUNING OF YOUR BLACKNESS AS WE 
ARE ONLY GIVING YOU THE AWARENESS. THERE ARE SERIOUS HIGHER 
ISSUES YOU SHOULD KNOW ABOUT THAT WILL NOT BE MENTIONED 
THROUGHOUT THESE VOLUMES.


--- PAGE 287 ---
Extract 53 
 
Son of a Sun with Soul (Updated) 
 
You often read in much pro-black literature the saying that Caucasians don’t 
have soul. In the west they usually make comedy scenarios about this notion 
through dancing activities. Know this ! To say SOUL is also to say SOL. This 
SOL is a description of the SUN recently via Latin/Spanish but actually goes back 
to many ancient civilizations. The SUN emanates energy to create, rejuvenate 
and maintain life as a SOL.AR System –  Pro-life. This energy as sunlight in solid 
forms becomes MELANIN and the highest composition of MELANIN via mass 
cells and neuro brain cells are within the Nubun Tribes and their descendants. 
This is SUN-ENERGY in you Nubian. It’s this Sun-Energy that contributes to 
REASON –  RE-SUN. Moreover the SUN is the PRIME three-dimensional SOLID 
and LIQUID creator of the universe as the blackness of nature in SMAT is the 
prime GAS creator of the three dimensional plane. So scientifically to say that the 
Caucasian has NO SOUL is to say that the Caucasian has no SOL which is 
really to say the Caucasian has no SUN in them, be it sun-energy as melanin. 
The truth is that the Caucasian do have some melanin but at a profile not high 
enough to give them reasoning to stimulate those actions commercialised in the 
western world as being soulful. The Caucasian can obtain this notion of soul via 
racial mixing (sex) or continually having their RNA stimulated via a black 
existence (black culture) which in turn alters their DNA towards that direction. 
Many Caucasian gather soul through black music as sound frequencies also 
possess energy that stimulates human RNA. However the Nubian at this level of 
literature must know the following - The interpretation of what SOUL (BA) is has 
been greatly misused
 and misinterpreted by many people in the Nubian race. We 
recommend that the Nubian reader if possible search out a book called What is 
Soul and Spirit ? Written by the Holy Tabernacle Ministries in the 1990’s. Many 
Nubians in the west must try to understand the following: the true collective 
nature of the Caucasian race can only be witnessed fully when you live by your 
true nature but sadly the majority of our race do not bear enough knowledge 
outside the academic / social value platform given to them by the European 
mind. Many will not be able to overstand this Afronaut information. To truly 
evaluate something in its entirety you must exist outside it. However that very 
mind set will be perceived as far from normal within western ethics –  that’s how 
ERAS are controlled. Now continuing with soul we must now reason that to say 
SOUL FOOD is to say SUN FOOD therefore real soul food must be food that is 
scientifically proven to re-boost your health (pro-life), preserve your DNA 
structure and stimulate your melanin –  sun-heat genes. This is because SUNS 
are pro-life representatives by nature. This is right knowledge.  
 
Understanding the process of sun-energy contributing to reasoning must be 
known by the Nubian (refer to Vol.13 –  Extract 10 –  More Melanin) for now we 
will delve in to how the lack of melanin contributes to the universal deception of 
black as negative. The Caucasian not possessing pro-life sun-heat genes by


--- PAGE 288 ---
nature can not perceive black as possessing a greater good than light because 
they lack the higher levels of reasoning via melanin. We say higher levels of 
reasoning because ALL EXISTENCE AND ALL LIGHT originate from the 
blackness of nature within this three-dimensional plane –  THIS IS SCIENTIFIC 
FACT AND WILL REMAIN TRUE FOREVER. NOOTS WORK BEST AS 
DARKNESS AND IN DARKNESS. Therefore the multitude of Caucasians and 
other races (including Nubians) who do not bare enough natural scientific 
knowledge will always lean towards a notion of fear in blackness as religion as 
well as European and Asian languages have labelled black as negative, void and 
nothingness. The Caucasians have a dysfunctional black reasoning routed in 
their genes due to the lack of melanin (which simply means due to the lack of 
blackness actually genetically in them). However this blackness as sun-energy 
ties you to the universe and nature which is a black thing so they as a collective 
can never really posses LIVING NATURE KNOWLEDGE (the notion of living 
nature knowledge will hopefully be explained in later volumes –  its not as simple 
as it sounds). A very simple definition for now is that it means living inline with 
nature right now which means preserving nature right now and that means 
rejecting evolutionary forces –  but this can’t happen for Caucasians as they are 
indeed the highest product of evolutionary forces amongst the human species. 
They are evolutionary by nature –  they created the race race and the race track 
is in caste system order. Now since spirituality exists in reasoning (refer to Vol.13 
p7) the early Caucasian as Hittites, Aryan-Hindus and as the Phoenicians were 
given and forcibly took rites from darker races in particular the dark-skinned 
Indians and the collapsing Egyptian empires as the Hyksos Dynasty 
(Phoenicians / Caucasian tribes). It was in these eras they learnt some of the 
black sciences but because of their genetic composition by nature they could 
only gain access to certain levels of reasoning and used evolutionary forces such 
as ghosts, fire and (Luna) moonlight energy to stimulate their spirituality 6-Ether 
–  They ghostized Egypt via foreign deities such as SAIS which actually means 
SIX. Monsters, Mist, Ghosts, Reptiles, Demons (Dead Moon forces) all represent 
deformity (de-formity and de-cay) which are all forms of evolution and since the 
Caucasian is evolutionary by nature these existences are prone to being 
extracted from an evolutionary based mind be it fact or fiction. Since darkness 
has been trained to be the universal unknown these are the types of existences 
Caucasians will extract from it and in the form of light within darkness they will 
also extract the image of themselves for that still fits in to the criteria of evolution. 
They can’t see a real good in black because they do not have access to the pro-
life in blackness. To have access to the pro-life in blackness is to have access to 
nature as everything originates from blackness as GASES via SUNS. Since the 
Caucasians and Phoenician descendants are in charge of the religions which 
Nubians obey they have converted the perception of black as bad due to their 
restrictions within absolute nature. The early Caucasians due to their genes had 
no access to the higher sciences of African reasoning, which decayed via the 
Egyptian dynastic periods. The Egyptian dynastic periods could be considered a 
countdown from the children of gods as Ptah / Nubun / Nilotic to the children of 
men. As the Children of Gods (pre-dynastic) via bloodlines weakened to become


--- PAGE 289 ---
Pharaohs (dynastic) who weakened to become Kings (post dynastic) who 
weakened to become African Chiefs. Of course within this regression which took 
many thousands of years numerous falsehood titles and status where given to 
people usually based on their implementation of power, brute force, gold and 
money (moon-ey). The pyramids of Giza are pre-dynastic and are at least 10,500 
years old (a very low estimate). There are other pyramids in once Nilotic regions 
far older. As we have stressed spirituality is manifested in reasoning which then 
needs knowledge and facts to keep preserved as belief allows interpretations to 
influence reasoning. It is the quality of reasoning within our race that has heavily 
regressed. When we say that Caucasians are literal sun-worshippers (sun-
bathing) which really originates from their Egyptian Phoenician / Greek lineage’s 
and their interpretation of RA we are saying that these actions after leaving the 
Caucus mountains were really one of their attempts to get that blackness of 
nature in them via sun-energy. However because evolutionary forces via the 
Moon and Saturn have influenced their genetic make-up they can’t handle the 
potency of this Sun-energy (forever and ever Amen) contributing to other cancer 
types not just skin cancer for everything is interrelated biologically. All these 
issues you are reading would have been revealed or reasoned out decades ago 
if science and religion were unified and know that the caste system, racism and 
black mental suppression simply could not work if scientific facts were used 
through religion as this would trigger off the journey for Nubians back to their 
ancient ways. This is why we tell the Nubian reader that they can not give you 
NATURE KNOWLEDGE cross referenced through science and religion as many 
of the psychological spells they have put on darker races would collapse.  Those 
bearing woolly hair by nature worldwide must face the facts that we are all 
children of Tama-rean tribes. Furthermore these tribes where using higher Nubun 
black sciences via nature for hundreds of thousands of years before what you 
perceive as religion today and many of the religious rites today where taken from 
the African continent –  especially Upper Egypt, Ethiopia, Sudan, Uganda and 
other Nile based regions. The majority of our race can’t see cycles in nature 
because we are trapped in a 6,000 year reality spell. This 6,000 years is really 
based on the arrival of the Caucasian race in world history via Christianity as 
they teach that god created the world 6-10 thousand years ago and up until this 
very day the Caucasian race have used biblical schedules as a template to 
structure their so-called ancient history on earth. 6,000 years is not really ancient 
if African bones prove we are millions of years old. In fact realise that in the 
future this very day and time will eventually be considered ancient times. ITS ALL 
A CYCLE. The original Nubun universal forces are around today and exist in 
reasoning the doorway to spirituality. Caucasian reasoned Science extracted the 
potency of facts away from spirituality. In ancient African times science and 
religion WERE ONE and the practises that were followed by our Nubun ancients 
remained factual keeping in check with the LAWS OF NATURE. Reason this out 
–  where would science exist in the ancient past? To separate science from 
religion was to separate the black mind and allow other forces and races to 
influence reasoning.


--- PAGE 290 ---
All Nubun, Nubians, Africans, African Americans, West Indians, Nubian Euros, 
and the other pockets of our race bearing woolly hair by nature in this day and 
time –  Know this well ! To be black BY NATURE is the defining quality as to what 
blackness is. To be black BY NATURE is to agree, adhere and acknowledge 
your natural cultural lineage of reasoning in pro-life to represent the good in 
blackness. You must try to respect space, matter and time equally when defining 
order of rights in persons, places and things as the structure of order was given 
by NATURE. To simplify this –  if it is proven that your culture existed before 
6,000 years then the reasoning, practices, names and words from these earlier 
periods should bare equal share today if not more within the consciousness of 
their descendents for these are senior realities. The universal ways, customs, 
rites of earth can only be defined by those of original existence –  The Judges of 
Existence. Though their Nubun descendants have the right to adjust 
reasoning if it does not sit on par with pro-life and facts as these 
adjustments will ensure the continual existence of our race. These issues 
must be made clear in Africa. This blackness by nature is factually based 
because the reality of blackness as gases and matter constitutes to the 
origination of all existence in REAL LIFE. The west watchers of our race here in 
mainland Africa (those who submit to the lifestyles and unnecessary materialism 
based on western ideals) CAN NOT CLAIM higher African reasoning based on 
location, language, food and dress wear. For these cultural elements have not 
allowed these same Africans to reason out facts and look towards our own 
culture and spirituality as an everyday saviour instead of ideals given to you via 
Middle-Eastern Islam and European Christianity which are thousands of years 
younger than your very own bloodlines. Many of the practises of monotheistic 
religion where followed in Africa before these religions even existed. Many of the 
original Tama-rean ways have actually EVOLVED to become religious practises 
today. Black culture is defined by the FORCES OF NATURE which are 
witnessed within the LAWS OF NATURE –  These laws are structured into 
existence via SUNS and the BLACKNESS of SMAT (Space, Matter and Time) 
(Black Sun Laws). The Laws of Nature can be witnessed, followed and presented 
as SOUND RIGHT REASONING –  factually based (refer to Malachi Z York –  A 
Master Teacher in the west) - its not based on linear time. Universal facts remain 
true forever so the minds of our ancients are available to their offspring’s right 
now. There was never a mystery concerning the basic reasoning of the ancient 
ways of the black race as these ancient ways will always exist in universal facts 
and the laws of nature which by nature would have to be initially obeyed EVEN 
ON A GENETIC LEVEL by those of original existence. What we are saying here 
is that the original Nubun BY NATURE would be eating, drinking, acting, 
developing culturally to the HIGHEST of HUMAN REASONING and ABILITY 
inline with their biological requirements in nature. To say inline with nature means 
a high pro-life reasoning would be present. They did not mix, match or alter the 
99 elements for the sake of creating a new image for nature itself based on their 
own opinions. This notion (though regressed) is still followed by darker races 
even today because the blackness remains constant in existence and its 
offspring MUST preserve nature BY NATURE (our ancient African tribes won’t


--- PAGE 291 ---
industrialise because of this ancient spiritual agreement with nature forces). 
Meanwhile the racial opposite lean STRONGLY towards altering nature 
NATURALLY. The extraction of science from spirituality by evolutionary forces 
greatly contributed to the general standard of living within our African continent 
today. The initial high Nubun-human reasoning (stated above) in accordance with 
nature would peak and then regress which is of course EVOLUTION. It would be 
a similar notion to the product life-cycle known within basic economics. By nature 
everything must be grown, reach a peak and then decline. The strongest genes 
BY NATURE amongst homo-sapiens represents the peak of that cycle on earth 
BY NATURE. So KNOW that in order to readjust this gene imbalance amongst 
the races (ordered into existence by the FORCES OF NATURE represented by 
the SUN and BLACKNESS) evolutionary forces WILL always attempt to regress 
the original bloodlines, genes, soul-pull, and lineages of those bearing DARK 
SKIN with WOOLLY HAIR by nature. This scenario is a personification of the 
Laws of Opposites in practice in nature. In addition opposing forces within our 
own race will also help satisfy this desire against us. These agendas through the 
ages have been religious, political and social –  Africa MUST BE CAREFUL as 
new types of trade and economic barriers are coming disguised within 
CLIMATE CHANGE regulations. They know the sun-cycle is your cycle. You 
can not have an ice age without a sun age. These are the laws of opposites. The 
readjustment of nature is occurring right now and will FORCE mankind to respect 
nature in pro-life –  but to TRULY respect nature they must respect the original 
intentions of nature be it a Nubun race and their Reasoning. In addition 
understand that unlike a product life cycle nature can not universally die because 
energy can not universally be destroyed but merely transferred to different states. 
Therefore the original creative energies of existence have to reside in states that 
are forever present in existence –  and guess what condition is forever in 
existence and is able to preserve energy ? Space-Vacuum-Matter which visually 
is blackness. Nature can not actually die because of this blackness (as gases) 
governed into existence by SMAT (Space, Matter & Time). Therefore death 
cycles such as the Winter season have beginnings and endings and for death to 
end - life must begin as spring or summer. This means there has to be an 
upward movement for those of original existence BY NATURE thus representing 
the upward climb in a product life-cycle. CERTAIN PEOPLE IN OUR RACE ARE 
SELECTED BY NATURE TO CONTRIBUTE TO THIS UPWARD MOVEMENT 
WHICH CAN PERSONIFY AS RACIAL & CULTURAL INTELLIGENCE AND 
REASONING IN THIS DAY AND TIME. Since nature is based on cycles / circles 
this upward climb represents the movement to the north-east of space, matter 
and time viewed as a circle. [Refer to The Nine Ball Liberation Information 
Series (Amunubi Rahkaptah) and the Introduction to the Nature of Nature 
Series (Afroo Oonoo)]. One of the key issues in overstanding The Laws of 
Opposites in REAL LIFE is the fact that evolutionary forces MUST be 
represented in the LIVING –  to actually be ALIVE to contribute to the journey to 
death in nature. Absolute Nature provides the conditions for both good and bad 
to exist but the seniority of blackness means that THE JUDGES BY NATURE are 
those of original existence.


--- PAGE 292 ---
THOSE BEARING WOOLLY HAIR OR BALD BY NATURE WITH DARK SKIN 
OF NUBUN ANCESTRY. 
 
Nubian descendants must try to reason the truth behind our continent. To say 
Africa is to say Afrika. This Afrika originates from the Phoenician tongue and 
does not represent the indigenous mind of our Nubun existence –  KNOW THIS ! 
As stated before it generally means to ‘divide and separate’ however the KA is 
spirit and the AFAR is land according to Arab-Phoenicians. The Phoenicians in 
the ancient past through their Egyptian eras brought their rites and customs in to 
our continent and some Africans today even in the villages are really following 
practices and belief systems which stem from these events. Phoenician rites are 
an extraction of Hindu rites so many of the perceived ancient African ways are 
not really Tama-rean but are hybrid Hindu reasoning and practises via the 
Phoenicians (as Mid-Dynastic Egyptians) and the Cushites in pre-dynastic times. 
So eventually a conscious reader will wonder why did the ancient spiritual forces 
not help our forefathers in the past preventing our exploitation by other races. 
This is indeed is one of the many reasons –  like today many of our tribes back 
then were not following the original spiritual forces of our race but rather a 
regurgitation. Similar to Nubians today worldwide who follow a white Jesus. Our 
spiritual forces within this current cycle of nature known as evolution are Nilotic / 
Nature based (in tuned with facts). The African rites and customs today which 
can be cross referenced with the early dynastic periods and pre-dynastic eras 
are some
 of the original ways of the our race within the last 50,000 year cycle of 
this branch of homo-sapien existence. In the prestige state of our race scientific 
facts would hold reasoning within our race in line with nature. With this now 
known you should realise that the regression of our Nubun / Nubian existence 
began thousands of years ago way before slavery (kidnapping) last millennium. 
 
Religion subtly separates GOD from NATURE because if nature was perceived 
as GOD then science would take a role in reasoning and then stronger & older 
bloodlines and genes would represent the WILL OF GOD. Though in the recent 
past the Caucasian racial lineage did take the masses in this direction via white-
caste and light symbolised by the Moon or the Sun as Baal/Bel and eventually 
Bel-os (Zeus) when interpreted in the image of a Caucasian man. What’s 
interesting here is that you will find that the Caucasian man as a global saviour 
has been transferred last century to western films in particular Superman. The 
very word Superman can be broken down in to ancient Hindu Sanskrit as 
SUPAY-MANU which actually means Air-Deity-Man or
 Deity of Air Man (an adam 
type) –  do you think this is a coincidence? Though you should know by now that 
the original force of air is SHU one of the 9 ENNEADS of the original Tama-rean 
Egyptian gods headed by AMUN RE (now known as The AMEN of the bible). 
The Nubian must research this and realise that this is an example as to how 
other races regurgitate our ancient ways in disguise.  
 
SHU -> SUPAY -> SUPER 
(Black (Tama-re) to Indian (Hindu) to Caucasian (Euro) -> Evolution)


--- PAGE 293 ---
As western science developed they dropped the openly taught white-man-
heaven / dark-man hell mainstream religious notion (clearly seen in medieval 
European religious artwork). This is because ancient history and biological / 
genetic evidence began to support the opposite of their notion. They left caste 
and light symbolism within psychological trickology found in the English language 
and symbolism within religions. In fact racism and inferiority complexes through 
psychology are triggered off by actual words in English and European languages 
supported by imagery and negative black visual positioning. Groomed from 
childhood in psychological wordplay, light-white-right and caste systems its quite 
obvious where common discrimination stems from. The ancient discrimination 
goes back to cycle based events influenced by the Sun, the Moon and Saturn 
which altered existence through the ages. This influence was eventually picked 
up via reasoning based on certain human genetic profiles and later through 
Pantheism then Religion where it was supplanted in to the minds of the masses.  
 
The Nubian should reason that ISMS are evolutionary patterns of thought from 
philosophy and religion manifested in action at that time in history. Many Nubians 
will use isms and philosophies given to them from other cultures as guidelines on 
how to challenge this type of literature. What we ask of those individuals is to use 
African philosophy and spirituality if partaking on that quest. What they will 
discover is that most of those ISMS are not acknowledged in the ancient African 
ways and reasoning because our forefathers really followed scientific reasoning 
within nature knowledge which will be perceived as radical within the mind state 
of evolution. Evolution is the universal journey away from the initial intentions of 
nature which must personify or exist within universal facts in real life not just 
philosophy. This means there MUST really be types of matter that represent 
original existence, life, order etc and their MUST really be types of matter that 
represent the opposite for philosophy or religion from any era to be respected as 
a form of universal guidance. For they both acknowledge the laws of opposites –  
(+) and (-) –  directly or indirectly. [God/Devil or the existence of opposing ideas]. 
POSITIVE (protons) and NEGATIVE (neutrons) and the MIDDLE-PATH 
(electrons) are scientific acknowledged existences that can be cross referenced 
with SPIRITUAL REASONING because in the true ancient times THEY WERE 
ONE. In addition KNOW THIS WELL our Nubun forefathers had NO FEAR of 
LIGHT or DARKNESS because science and spirituality were unified. This means 
there was no belief to induce fear as everything was known –  please try to 
overstand that. The very word FEAR has EAR in it FEAR as it is usually what you 
HEAR (words, stories and sound) that actually creates that fear and BELIEF is 
the master of fear. That’s BEL-IEF on this occasion because BEL-IEF can exist is 
in Liberalism (Lib-Bel-Rul) and Religion (Bel/Baal) –  NOT COMPLETE FACTS 
which are the best REPRESENTATIVES OF NATURE. Black people worldwide 
now have a fear of blackness which is a type of RACIAL AMNESIA as the very 
Nubun ancients we speak of have their DNA in you right now. It is inevitable that 
the black race will indeed return and live by a scientific reasoning of blackness 
because everything is a cycle. The way it was in the past will eventually become 
the way it will be via REASONING. The duty for us as black writers is to create


--- PAGE 294 ---
the universal awareness of these scientific facts amongst our Nubian race. 
NEVER FORGET the universe is theorised by science to simply be a black ball 
of gigantic size with trillions of existences present within it –  if nature is 
everything then that everything is via BLACKNESS. This is the true reason why 
many in the scientific community today wish to convey the idea that LIFE ITSELF 
occurred by chance as this takes away PURPOSE in original existence and 
presents nature as not conscious. This in turn prevents you from overstanding 
THE BLACK MIND UNIVERSE. If you are conscious then nature itself is 
conscious for you are a part of nature. We must learn to get on the best side of 
nature and this must include an understanding of nature knowledge and its laws. 
We end this volume with the following statement for YOU the Nubian reader. This 
is YOUR knowledge - you own this information because it is about nature 
(manifested) and you are apart of nature. Manifested means its not theoretical 
jargon its about how universal gases convert to liquid which then convert into 
solids and how these gases would visually be seen in REAL LIFE as Blackness. 
These volumes explain the complications of this transformation within cycles and 
in relation to many facets of existences including humans.  
 
We hope you have gained a better understanding on the true identities of 
existence visually
 recorded. KNOW THIS –  Spirits would have to influence brain 
pulses within brain matter and the nerves system for human reaction via senses. 
This can only be done within sub-atomic, atomic gas states or as a liquid if the 
physical personification of a spirit is not visually seen. In addition for Spirits to 
influence humans they would have to be able to manipulate many of the 99 
elements in particular carbon, hydrogen & oxygen as these are high components 
within the human body. Furthermore Spirits would have to vibrate at the same 
frequency as the human body (or body parts) to be recorded by the nerves 
system to be picked up via brain signals to create a reaction via human senses. If 
they vibrate outside the frequency range of the average human you will not be 
able to detect them. So Nubian reader please try to understand that spirituality 
and science are inter-twined and our ancient forefathers knew this very well by 
NATURE and REASON. Fear of the unknown GREATLY REGRESSES with a 
scientific understanding of nature. Many people think these writings are PRO-
ATHEISM the answer is STRONGLY NO. The actual writer of this paragraph 
knows that the ORIGINAL GOD can only be either NATURE in its entirety itself 
(Absolute Nature –  The ALL –  The God of Gods) or exist in NATURE as the 
highest tier of GOD (for Elohim is a plural (US / WE) in Hebrew (Genesis 1:26) 
and Allahumma (Koran 39:46) is a plural in Arabic). In addition with respect for 
EQUALITY IN TIME which balances respect for space and matter this writer 
knows that the true ways and customs on earth for following the MOST HIGH 
can ONLY exist within the best reasoning of the original tribes of earth and any 
difference in practices by other races can only be due to evolutionary forces. The 
original people of earth are of NUBUN stock therefore the original words, names, 
customs, concepts and overstanding can ONLY exist with them thus possessing 
the original intentions of nature.


--- PAGE 295 ---
Some of the original names for the Senior GOD of the Torah (Old 
Testament) via OUR CULTURE and TRIBES are ANU, ANNU, AN, AMUN, 
AMEN (RE) (forever and ever Amen), ELYOWN ELYOWN EL, EL’ ELYON, 
ANO, ON, ALLAAH AL’ALIYU, and ABAANAA. These are some of the 
names for the MOST HIGH from OUR NUBIAN LINEAGES IN NATURE
 not 
via European languages which represent the European and Phoenician 
mind who actually created THE actual WORD - GOD. There are other Nubun 
colloquial names for the same God of the Torah from pre-dynastic eras as 
well which in different tones are spoken throughout the African continent. 
We must not forget that the original languages of earth (in our race) hold 
the most authentic words. Many of the village black African gods are really 
Nubun Egyptian Neter (Nature Gods) including the 9 Enneads who through 
time and age have evolved within African regions. By cross-referencing 
ancient Egyptian symbolism, languages, names, customs with your own 
traditional African culture today you will clearly find this to be fact –  
research this! The understanding of rites, customs and Egyptian know-how 
has greatly regressed due to the separation of spirituality and science 
presented as the lack of nature knowledge. This separation between 
spirituality and science has also allowed foreign deities from other races to 
thread there way in to our Nubun customs. This happened earlier with 
Phoenician and Hindu customs and much later with Christianity and Islam. 
Some parts of these customs are regurgitations of our ancient ways but 
not fully in sink with our true nature. Our ancestors changed matter (ways 
of life and existence) in line with universal cycles which are thousands of 
years in size. This in turn kept the understanding of space and time 
balanced.  That’s why nature remained the same in Africa (tama-re) for 
thousands of years –  known as Time-immemorial. Our Nubun / Nubian 
reasoning changes in cycles BY NATURE not evolutionary forces which are 
only one-side of nature. When evolutionary forces (via the nature of other 
races) and revolutionary forces (via RE-SUN (reason) & ancestral Nubun 
genes) are within the same Nubun mind it creates confusion. Belief 
systems fill these gaps and provide the so-called answers for this 
confusion. However the natural mind of the authors or governors of that 
belief system are personified within that belief and can guide believers in 
any direction. To know the fundamental facts of existence (which we are 
stressing to the reader) is to know the true personality of nature within our 
reality. This is a very simple guideline to THE NATURE OF NATURE.


--- PAGE 296 ---



--- PAGE 297 ---
Dear Nubian Reader, 
 
 
The writers below are the sources of most of the rationale that is called black 
consciousness today. You can find much literature from these writers and 
organisations online –  do not be afraid to search them out. Some of these 
books have been sent to us from the West. Now at Vol.17 the intelligent 
Nubian should be fully aware of these writers and organisations for the 
consciousness in our literature could not be given without the initial 
information base. Check these forces out. We all owe it to ourselves and our 
bloodlines to understand who we are by NATURE. 
 
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi (The Christ Series), Amunubi 
Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball - Liberation Information & The Bible 
Interpretations and Explanations), The Ancient Egyptian Order 
(A.E.O)(Egyptian Initiation), The Nuwapian Nation of The Moors, The 
Honourable Elijah Mohammed (Message to the Blackman), Clarence 
Jowars Smith (5%) (Supreme Mathematics), The Holy Tabernacle 
Ministries (Right Knowledge Series), Credo Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop 
(Civilization or Barbarism / Origin of Civilization), The Journey Home 
Group, Haru-Hotep Tar (Solar Biology / Parchments Series), Marcus 
Garvey (Journey Home), Dr Joseph Ben-Joachannan (African Origins of 
The Major Western Religions & Lecture Tapes), Dr Amos Wilson, Noble 
Drew Ali (Moorish Science), Afroo Oonoo (Moonset & Sunrise / An 
Introduction to the Nature of Nature Vol.1 & 2) and the other degrees of 
Dr Malachi Z. York (The Black Book, The Gold Book & The Holy Tablets). 
 
This PDF is a questions and answers edition. Other extracts may follow 
once the information has been abbreviated and centralised. There may 
be grammar and literacy errors –  we apologise in advance. No Endnotes 
or Index included (1-18 pages). Four writers put this volume together.  
 
We openly give permission for theses extracts to be freely downloaded to 
be put on any black conscious websites or forums whose intention is to 
improve the mental and physical conditions of our Nubian / 
Black/African race.


--- PAGE 298 ---
Question: What is the Purpose of all these Volumes? 
 
Ans: To provide access to real Nubun information through a platform 
universally used in an attempt to reach those who have no access to this 
information based on their location. This is highly focused on targeting those 
of black origin in mainland Africa. Many Africans will be able to relate to some 
of the concepts better than Nubians in the west and visa versa. KNOW THIS 
–  A Nubian who is reading this very line definitely has intelligence whether 
they agree or disagree with the issues stated.  They have decided to go to 
cyberspace to simply find information about their culture and original 
existence. Millions of Nubians are online every day wasting time searching for 
pleasures given to them by a reality based on another mans mind. We know 
that some of the issues stated in the Afronaut series may be overwhelming for 
many readers but it must remain out there as a tool to help spark the return of 
collective consciousness in REAL TIME. As stressed to the reader in the early 
volumes much of the information we are giving you originated from literature 
written over 30 years ago. This means that if you have not known about these 
issues then you are potentially 30+ years behind in reason. There are 
Nubians on earth today that are 25 –  50 years ahead in black consciousness 
(the understanding of the how’s and why’s of our race). Many are walking past 
you in the street. This means for some people it could be their grandchildren 
(in the future) who will truly use this information to upgrade our race while they 
(the grandparent today) rejected it. The LAWS OF OPPOSITES is not an 
INTERESTING READ its FOREVER REAL! The God that you follow is either 
[1] the creator of these laws, [2] is a part of these laws or [3] works within 
these laws.  The questions stimulated by these volumes should be taken to 
the organisations or writers we have mentioned at the beginning of our 
volumes –  many of them have put the reasoning in to practice slowly 
revealing our TRUE CULTURE. There are many other writers with free 
literature for Nubians out there NOT JUST THE AFRONAUTS but remember 
PRO-LIFE reasoning should be the guideline when evaluating. 
 
Question: Are the Afronauts Anti-Religion ? 
 
Ans: NO –  Any doctrine that supports love for the fellow being and pro-life 
reasoning is definitely an agreeable doctrine. However the love should be 
based on an understanding of the TRUE NATURES OF EXISTENCES which 
can be found in origins, genetics and historical and psychological data. This 
will lead to love for the fellow person knowing who they TRULY are. Hate 
evolves because the love you are giving out is not being given back but if you 
knew the true cycles of existence you couldn’t really hate anyone because 
you would understand the origins of their true nature.  You would respect 
them for who they are but within pro-life reasoning you would reject the 
negative actions they may execute (innocently or purposely) detrimental to 
your own existence. Universal positivism are the main concepts of religion but 
know that the main laws and principles given in the bible especially the old 
testament were actually a way of life in ancient Africa before monotheistic 
religion existed. This is what we are trying to explain. The original 
commandments of the bible were and are a way of life for many Nubians in 
rural Africa even today –  but they don’t call on a white Jesus. Are those


--- PAGE 299 ---
African spiritual forces negative even though core commandments from the 
Torah (Old Testament) where lived by these followers before 325 AD  - the 
release of the bible in Italy? Do you think the writings currently identified with 
Moses (an Egyptian pharaoh –  an African) did not get to Central, West and 
South Africa over a 1000 year period before the release of the Bible in Europe 
in 325 AD? Think About It! We acknowledge the truths in the bible but in the 
REAL time frame of existence and via our own culture and nature. 
 
Questions: Simplify Pro-Life ? 
 
Ans: The definition of LIFE [taken from an oxford online dictionary] 
 
Life  n. (pl. lives) [1] Capacity for growth, functional activity, and continual change 
until death. [2] living things and their activity (insect life; is there life on Mars?). [3] a 
period during which life lasts, or the period from birth to the present time or from the 
present time to death (have done it all my life; will regret it all my life). b duration of a 
thing's existence or ability to function. [4] A person's state of existence as a living 
individual (sacrificed their lives). b living person (many lives were lost). [5] a 
individual's actions or fortunes; manner of existence (start a new life). b particular 
aspect of this (private life). [6] Business and pleasures of the world (in Paris you 
really see life). [7] Energy, liveliness (full of life). [8] Biography. [9] colloq. = *life 
sentence. for dear (or one's) life as if or in order to escape death. for life for the rest 
of one's life. not on your life colloq. most certainly not. [Old English] 
 
These are the general definitions for ‘LIFE’ given by most common 
dictionaries. What you will find however within westernised definitions is the 
extraction of spirituality from science. This represents the lack of nature 
reasoning for life is most definitely a CYCLE IN NATURE. The genes of your 
ancestors can’t really die if you still exist. This is scientific fact. The real issue 
is whether you fully overstand their influence on you right now. PRO-LIFE is 
the acceptance, acknowledgment and RESPECT for the routines, actions and 
concepts which maintain, preserve and improve your SPIRITUAL LIFE, 
MENTAL LIFE, RACIAL LIFE, GENEALOGY LIFE, SOCIAL LIFE, PHYSICAL 
LIFE and CULTURAL LIFE. These are some of the key facets of LIFE itself 
via MIND and REASON. The Nubian mind MUST UNIFY these attributes 
while respecting and preserving them equally. Since we are of original 
existence evolutionary forces will always attempt to dismantle the genealogy 
life of our race which then causes an imbalance in the other types of life 
stated above. The genealogy life can be considered the governor of the 
physical life while the Spiritual life can be considered the controller of the 
mental life. Genealogy life is DNA / RNA preservation and evolution is the 
alteration of the DNA lineage. The greatest alteration of DNA within genealogy 
is via racial mixing, bad dieting and chemical consumption because the next 
generation will bear the alteration in flesh and blood. Therefore the original 
intentions of nature established within the laws of nature are not preserved. 
These are harsh words within a pro-evolutionary reasoning present today but 
the TRUTH is that race preservation was openly accepted as normal and 
logical practice for thousands of years by ALL RACES. Concerning our own 
race - racial-mixing in earlier eras occurred as settlement deals usually 
between Phoenicians / Hindu stock and Nubun factions of our race. The deals 
were usually based around agriculture, land, raw materials and even gene


--- PAGE 300 ---
upgrading (as the Nubun genes are the strongest). Much later it occurred via 
BRUTE FORCE (within the slave trades). All these scenarios have 
contributed to the weakening of Nubun genes on earth. So the Nubian today 
should realise the truth about racial mixing as historically it has always been 
based on economic and genetic issues –  never love. The Nubun genes are 
being FORCED GLOBALLY to regress to allow elitist bloodlines to take ruler 
ship within nature on earth itself. Many Nubians still don’t realise in the west 
that they have been placed there for access to their genes, blood, 
scapegoatism, economic handy-man and to satisfy the lustful requirements of 
the Caucasian race through liberalism. Since the Nubun genes are the 
highest you will also be used for body-parts. This is already happening in 
Africa disguised within casualties of civil wars, disease testing and outbreaks. 
Please do not reject this information –  research these notions. 
 
We stress to the Nubian in the western world (US/EU) that there are CLEAR 
agendas to perverse black sexuality within those regions. The seeds were 
planted in the 1960’s (sexual revolution –  indo-euro sex rites) and have 
ripened in the 1990’s. They are slowly dismantling the black man + black 
women = black child (triad) in any way possible such as racial-mixing / non-
heterosexuality / sex education from the perspective of lust not reproduction. 
These are all key liberal attributes –  beware of the trickery. The Lib-Bel-Rul 
has Bel as Baal who is a fertility (sex) god worshipped by the forefathers of 
the Greeks and Romans and subtly acknowledged via liberal value systems 
today. Liberalis (Latin) refers to sexual urges –  never forget this ! 
 
 
 
Question:  You now say there is good in black. Are you saying the white 
man is bad while the black man is good –  in Africa it is black people with 
guns and knives killing black people ? 
 
 
Ans: Let’s break this down concisely –  please take in this information. 
 
[1] We are stressing to the Nubun / Nubian reader that ALL LIGHT in fact 
ALL EXISTENCE originates from darkness as gases and matter post a 
sub-atomic existence. This scenario has been interpreted and 
misinterpreted by religion in various ways based on agendas by the 
authorities that govern religion at that time. These agendas usually have 
racial consequences.  
 
[2] With darkness (collective gases and matter) as the origination of 
everything [scientifically proven] the true origin of ALL GOOD and ALL 
BAD must stem from this existence as well. Darkness at a certain 
frequency of existence is being called LIGHT today. SUNS are actually 
jet black on their surface and emanate this frequency (energy) of 
darkness called light. These writings stress the social misconception of 
blackness and light clearly proven by science. The imbalance is in every 
facet of reality itself but most recognisable within religious ideals.


--- PAGE 301 ---
[3] Religiously the original GOOD guys of earth (children of god) and the 
original BAD guys on earth (the devils offspring) were BOTH of the black 
races in origination. The Caucasian race came along thousands of years 
later –  NOT with a greater good. Within the human-species they simply 
represent an evolutionary stage of nature utilising evolutionary forces. 
They have re-written themselves into ancient African, Sumerian and 
Hindu events and scriptures later used in religious doctrines today. This 
has altered global reasoning. 
 
[4] The purpose of most of the African civil wars, militias and coups is to 
gain ownership of land and raw materials. Eventually this will be used to 
negotiate deals with other races. These are light driven desires
. The 
same type of desires which make a Nubian reject their original 
existence. Most tribal conflicts can be traced back to the different 
spiritual forces that tribal bloodlines follow. Many tribes in Africa are 
following spiritual forces that are not indigenous to our race while many 
other tribes are following regurgitations of the forgotten Neteru gods 
sadly altered via the Phoenician / Hindu perspective. The Egyptian 
heritage of Nubun Africa is well known in rural Africa but the lack of 
scientific reasoning has allowed the potency of Egyptian teachings to 
regress. This regression has been to such a state that now the Nubian 
has actually forgotten that as Egyptian (Tama-re) they were the definers 
of universal culture, customs and spiritual forces. These issues must 
arise in Africa before real change can occur amongst our people. Many 
spiritual forces posses power but we need the right power to induce the 
RIGHT COLLECTIVE RACIAL ACTIONS. You will see bad guys in our 
race in Africa bearing arms (guns) and due to the lack of nature 
knowledge they will submit to evolutionary forces which by nature 
attacks original existence to pursue the universal journey to death. Of 
course we will add here that the possessive quest for money by Nubians 
in Africa in political and military positions is the key driver in the dis-
stabilising of our continent. However we will state that even here there 
are spiritual issues via SIN (moon) as Moon-ey (money). Sin is an 
ancient name for the Moon and Moon God. The moon represents 
evolution and those possessed by money must serve this force and give 
reverence to the representatives of evolutionary forces on earth in flesh 
and blood. Our African leaders serve evolution by fraudulently stealing 
billions from their own Nubian economies (sacrifice the wealth of their 
own people). This eventually heightens death in our race. They then give 
that money (as an offering) to western banks which trickles down and 
helps their own economies. They serve evolutionary forces be it directly 
through greed or indirectly through societies –  a light driven desire - 
remember liquidity is the blood of capitalism. You will see the practices 
of SIN in bu-SIN-ness. Many Nubians are simply here to aid evolutionary 
forces against our race and hide well in culture, customs and religion –  
They use tribes as political pawns and servants to push through 
agendas usually set up in the west. To reject the self-preservation of 
your own existence spiritually, culturally, historically and economically 
means BY DEFAULT you will contribute to forces against our race.


--- PAGE 302 ---
[5] There are agreeable people in every race including Caucasians. 
There are white people who have contributed to the improvement of our 
race –  FACT. We respect the good in nature and this good is partly in 
everything and everyone. However good exists in various degrees and 
bad does also.  Once facts are revealed about origins and agendas in 
history you will see who truly are the agreeable. The REAL good and 
bad can only be judged after the truth is revealed and TRUTH is 
universal not just held in belief (as a half-truth). It always originates from 
FACTS. 
 
Question: Black this, black that –  IT ALL MEANS NOTHING. If we were so 
intelligent we would be far more industrially developed right now. Other 
races have civilized us ? 
 
Ans: YOU NEED NATURE KNOWLEDGE ! Everything is governed in cycles. 
The Nubian race has just finished a universal death cycle in our existence a 
winter season [symbolised by light-white-right] and now WRITE as well. Write 
is included because it is religious literature and the European languages 
(especially English) that have completely DEVALUED what black is in almost 
every facet of existence. For the Nubian race to obey this reasoning has given 
our race a death mind state –  our winter season in existence. We rejected 
facts for belief. We have become more concerned with spiritual forces aiding 
our personal existence instead of our race as a collective within nature. All 
this is a type of evolution –  a regression. Therefore by Nature opposing forces 
of higher evolutionary compositions began to prosper in accordance to their 
nature. This was generally through stages of industrialisation but 
industrialisation can only commence once the original intentions of nature are 
dis-respected. This disrespect includes all facets of reality including land, sea, 
culture and darker races. Try to understand this Nubian. If the black races 
where reasoning to the highest of human ability the society that we would 
create WOULD NOT be like western society today. The Nubun Egyptians 
knew the formulas to make concrete but they were nature thinkers and 
builders. They would not put their own image all over the environment 
blocking the earth from breathing and sun rays from reaching it. The 
Caucasian believes that if another race where given control of the worlds 
resources they would create a reality just like it is today. However every race 
has a different nature and would not create this type of reality. When talking 
about the destruction of the environment you could trace most of the 
destruction back to multi-national companies last century with over 90% 
governed by western Caucasians –  FACT. Are the environmentalist ready to 
deal with this faction seriously? Are they serious about changing the world –  
to do that you would have to dismantle Greek and Roman philosophy which 
governed European economic and capitalistic strategies through 
industrialisation in recent centuries. These originate further back to the ways 
of the Phoenician Egyptian and Hindu. Are they ready to address the true 
origins of liberalism? Are they ready to address the true origins of the nature 
of capitalism? Are they really ready to change major sections of the English 
language? These issues all play a role in why the world is as it is today! In 
essence they will be very reluctant do this because it would fundamentally 
change reasoning within the Caucasian race. Within the last 500 years the


--- PAGE 303 ---
Caucasian race through industrialisation has executed more damage to the 
eco-system than all other races combined in the last 20,000 years –  FACT. 
When we say the Caucasian represents REAL evolutionary forces in nature 
please don’t think it’s just a radical statement. This is reality whether you like it 
or not and evolution is the journey to death. Witnessed and lived throughout 
your very own physical life. Evolution and revolution must play a role in the 
cycles of life itself. To be civilized at its peak is to understand the elements, 
processes and cycles of nature in relation to human existence. To reject this 
notion is to reject the forces that contribute to your very own existence. The 
common mans notion of civilization is pro-evolutionary industrialisation. 
 
Question: Simplify to be INTELLIGENT BY NATURE? 
 
Ans: Many people have misinterpreted blackness itself. A FACT IS NOT 
PRO-BLACK or pro anything a FACT is a TRUE REPRESENTATIVE OF 
NATURE. This is what many people don’t understand. Most black 
organisations and writers are cultural knowledge boosters often condensing 
hundreds of years of information in to a book, speech or class. If facts 
supporting our race were revealed and accepted by all when first discovered 
be it hundreds of years ago. It would simply be an everyday reality right now. 
If the information given is based on facts then it is a type of catch up
 
information –  that’s you catching up with nature as the truth will forever exist 
in facts. Once you have caught up with nature, you are then aligned with 
nature. To acknowledge proven facts and to live by it is DEFINITELY apart of 
the journey of racial upliftment.  We do state however that NOT ALL black 
consciousness is based on facts. If a fact contradicts a belief then those who 
are intelligent by nature will go with the facts. Those who are intelligent by 
design usually go with belief. Those who are un-intelligent by nature will go 
with belief. Those who are un-intelligent by design will go with belief. To be 
unintelligent by nature does not mean within the society you live in you have 
an inferior mind you could have a PhD and still not respect facts or self 
preservation. Intelligence by nature is beyond academic reasoning it 
incorporates all facets of knowledge from everywhere equally then distributes 
it as logical, facts based reasoning beneficial to your physical and cultural 
preservation and existence. This is because everything is apart of nature.  
 
To be intelligent by nature is to respect facts then to live by those facts 
in the positive (+) within all variations of pro-life. This includes your 
spiritual life, mental life, racial life, genealogy life, social life, physical 
life and cultural life. 
 
 
Question: Explain Time in Darkness? 
 
Ans: 
If Space, Matter and Time have always existed then a type of time must 
also exist in darkness prior to light. This time however is outside general 
human reasoning which is based on the relationship between suns, moons 
and light. In Extract 78 Vol.11 we explained that there is no universal time but 
many types of time in darkness we only relate to time via suns we know.


--- PAGE 304 ---
Sub-atomic particles and energy need a type of time to be seen or not seen. 
They exist in various dimensional time frames outside the 3rd dimension and 
would be recorded as outside time (our time) within general human reasoning. 
There is no universal time in existence. If an existence outside the 3rd 
dimension enters the 3rd dimension (often as sub-atomic) –  that existence 
enters our time according to us. This existence would have to go through a 
type of prime time in darkness –  we call it prime because it is before the 
manifestation of what we call light today. This notion of no universal time 
allows quantum processes to work in darkness blackness-matter-vacuum-
space which is eternal.  This is exploited by sub-atomic existences. A type of 
time WILL ALWAYS be in existence but not always our time as our TIME is 
based on this solar system. Our time can move to another part of the universe 
after this solar system collapses either via light through black-holes (imploded 
Suns) or by the Sun itself taking on an alternative orbit cycle. 
 
Sub-atomic particles, energy and forces don’t rely on what we call light via 
human senses. Blackness has higher purposes in existence which have been 
revealed by science but was known naturally by our ancients for Nubians by 
nature posses the most organic blackness as melanin amongst humans. Sub-
atomic forces or existences of different vibrations exist outside our time frame 
but have to step in to our time frame for the human mind to record them. This 
is really a dimensional movement acknowledged in quantum theory. Sub-
atomic energy enters the three dimensional plane from anywhere and 
anything but it is utilised and focused best in to energy as Sunlight by SUNS 
(via the SUN CORE) and BLACKNESS. SUNS can take energy as light back 
to sub-atomic or other frequencies of existence as BLACK-HOLES. The 
human mental mind continuously steps in to a variation of this quantum 
blackness in serious prayer, mediation and even just natural thought. The 
higher the natural or developed intelligence the more potency of reasoning, 
intellect and consciousness can be obtained through meditation, prayer and 
mind focus. People don’t realise that the natural occurrence of quantum 
scenarios in space could only occur or visually be seen in darkness. Energy 
itself as a facet of darkness can forever execute quantum scenarios because 
the blackness of nature is eternal –  it’s the thread of space, matter and time. 
The key thing to understand about existence is that there is UNIVERSAL 
PURPOSE IN BLACKNESS including ALL ITS VARIATIONS. Light and 
melanin are variations of blackness. These duties include the governing, 
balancing and stabilising of existences for the universe is a black ball –  a 
black mind and everything exists inside it. In our season of existence in recent 
centuries it has been twisted within the human mind in to the negative to allow 
cultural and racial agendas to manifest. The very role Black plays in existence 
is not being respected especially by lighter races due to their position within 
ABSOLUTE NATURE. They have to label blackness / darkness as BAD or 
GOOD when the reality is whatever force you perceive ANYTHING to be; that 
very force your identifying originated or entered the three dimensional plane 
from BLACKNESS. The Face of SMAT –  Space, Matter and Time.


--- PAGE 305 ---
Question: Do you really think people will take in this information? 
 
Ans: We acknowledge that the majority of people within this black generation 
will not be able to accept this information written by us or the writers we 
mention because many are not intelligent BY NATURE. They are intelligent by 
design. This means there reasoning is only a reflection of what they have 
been taught within the system they live in. To be intelligent by nature is to 
understand that through the study of nature, cycles are present and ALL 
MATTER must react to these cycles (though in different ways and in different 
times).  The human species is not above these cycles
 and with different 
stages in existence human facets will react differently to each other in 
accordance to their nature dictated by the formulas of matter within them and 
around them as solids, liquids and gases. Many are not intelligent enough to 
actually accept reality. (a) You existed in the womb and developed in 
darkness for 9 months the same scenario occurs with SUNS in vacuum 
Space / Matter [in a different time-frame]. (b) Seeds need the darkness inside 
earth (soil) (S-OIL –  black carbon / hydrogen) to personify (grow) as 
plantation. (c) Black clothes are heat absorbers –  natural heat - energy. (d) 
God was in darkness to say ‘let there be light’. The Spirit of God moves 
through darkness (Genesis 1:1-8). There are many more examples but the 
point made here is that a, b, & c are NATURE FACTS –  real, reality, can be 
proven right now. Are we ready as a race to live in reality or to remain in the 
comfort zone of belief as belief makes Nubians give up responsibility for our 
own existence. Belief is a type of fear of responsibility as you will always rely 
on God instead of your own two hands to aid your quest. Isn’t it stated that 
God helps those who help themselves –  but if you don’t know your TRUE 
SELF –  culture, genealogy, origins then how can you REALLY help your 
REAL self? There has to be black people that DO and DON’T except this type 
of knowledge given as extracts by us or in depth by the writers we mention. 
These are the Laws of Opposites. 
 
Questions: Simplify Absolute Equality? 
 
Ans: 
 Throughout the Afronaut series you will find references to this notion. 
Equality means ‘to be equal –  act in an equal manner’. We are stating that in 
absolute terms equality in reality does not actually exist between matter at the 
same place and time in existence. It is the difference that becomes the 
equality as everything has a difference. All facets are due respect for being 
different which means they have a different role in existence. If everything 
was equal nothing could exist except for only one profile of matter. The 
closest existence to equality within space, time and matter is blackness 
(darkness). Absolute equality is the understanding that everything within a 
facet by Nature will reach its peak or dominance amongst facets of the same 
group at a specific space or time. A simple example can be seen in 
SEASONS in NATURE - Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter. They all share 
in becoming a dominate season in time within a cycle though eco-system 
changes on earth may make the winter or summer have stronger potency in 
existence. The equality is that BY NATURE they will all have a turn as a 
season leader but never at the same time and at the same place –  That’s 
Absolute equality. This is a nature based equality system that all matter


--- PAGE 306 ---
abides to including humans. You can have social laws as an attempt to create 
equality in society but in absolute terms it can never work due to human will 
which is influenced by all other facets of existence. Nature knowledge can 
help manage these differences in nature. If the society you live in is based on 
the authoritive mind of another race then it will become much harder to gain 
equal treatment in that society. Absolute equality is evaluated from the 
perspective of whole cycles not from within a part of a cycle. Since the Nubian 
mind is based on a 6000 year notion of reality many will not be able to 
understand the upward and downward progress of our race and can only 
base our existence from the European based authoritive mind. NOTHING 
organic can escape from the cycles of nature within facets so you should 
reason that those of original existence BY NATURE must move upwards in 
MIND and REASON. This is known well by opposing forces that have and will 
continue to attempt to slow down this progress within many different facets of 
our lives. (Refer to Amunubi Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball - Liberation 
Information). Absolute equality can be considered NATURES COLLECTIVE 
EQUALITY SYSTEM which takes far greater than a single life time to 
complete but NOT greater than a racial, cultural or genealogy life-time. We 
today are living through a cycle change in absolute equality and our bloodline 
ancestors who lived through hardship in the past only have access to the 
future through your genes as you will through your children. You are their 
representatives in this day and time and your future generations will be yours. 
We have a question for YOU the Nubian reader: if you were told that in the 
next 100 years your blood generations in the future were to die with AIDS, 
change their African names to European names, become drug addicts, accept 
non-heterosexuality as natural, reject their own spirituality for other races, 
reject same-race mixing –  WOULD YOU APPROVE ? This has happened to 
our generation today –  BUT we have the right to change the future as it will be 
our own genes contributing to the future through our offspring. The key to 
changing our future is by installing RIGHT KNOWLEDGE in our children then 
sealing that knowledge with UNIVERSAL FACTS (NATURE KNOWLEDGE) 
which will exist forever as GUIDANCE. 
 
Question: Explain Blackness and Darkness ? 
 
Ans: The definition of BLACK [taken from an oxford online dictionary]
 
 
Black 
 — adj. 1 reflecting no light, colourless from lack of light (like coal or soot); 
completely dark. 2 (Black) of the human group with dark-coloured skin, esp. African. 
3 (of the sky etc.) heavily overcast. 4 angry; gloomy (black look, mood). 5 implying 
disgrace etc. (in his black books). 6 wicked, sinister, deadly. 7 portending trouble 
(things look black). 8 comic but sinister (black comedy). 9 (of tea or coffee) without 
milk. 10 (of industrial labour or its products) boycotted, esp. by a trade union, in a 
strike etc. — n. 1 black colour or pigment. 2 black clothes or material (dressed in 
black). 3 a (in a game) black piece, ball, etc. b player of this. 4 credit side of an 
account (in the black). 5 (Black) member of a dark-skinned race, esp. an African. — v. 
1 make black (blacked his boots). 2 declare (goods etc.) ‘black’.  black out 1 effect 
a blackout on. 2 undergo a blackout. [Old English] 
 
This is a text book definition for Black taken from the English Oxford 
dictionary. This is clearly where a spell is caste on our people. THE SPELL IS


--- PAGE 307 ---
IN TERMINOLOGY BASED ON THE MIND OF ANOTHER RACE. It is 
scientific fact that all light in combination creates blackness and that all light 
and existence originates from darkness. Therefore how can black truly be 
colorless when all colors are apart of itself. The actual reflection of light is 
within blackness itself via matter. This reality we actually exist in is really 
various frequencies of darkness as matter.  
 
It is actually within the universal darkness of absolute matter where things 
start to ‘happen’ and that ‘happening’ travels through our frequency of 
existence influencing cause and effect in nature through cycles. A variation of 
this darkness is within the human mind.  
 
Since blackness (darkness) is apart of everything in reality the Nubian must 
try to understand it in its totality this includes it’s scientific and quantum 
purpose. Did our NUBUN
 ancients –  the original definers - call black black or 
light light? Black light is the origin of ALL light. Listen to Reason –  there is 
absolutely NO WAY this dictionary definition of black would exist on earth in 
our ancient past before the existence of the Caucasian race when only darker 
races existed in the prosperity of that day and time - please overstand this! 
The reality is that since all light originates from blackness then blackness is 
the originator and grower of color –  therefore it is an actual senior type of 
color registered outside the common definition of a color. The true potential, 
values and abilities of blackness as darkness are beyond the attributes of 
color. White also bares opposing properties to the black light after TIME 
forces the responsibilities of light in to evolutionary purposes. It is quite 
obvious within the negative dictionary definition of black (above) the 
association with African descendants is present and thus THE CASTE SPELL 
IS SEALED ! Below is the definition of DARK [taken from an oxford online 
dictionary] 
 
Dark  — adj. 1 with little or no light. 2 of deep or sombre colour. 3 (of a person) with 
dark colouring. 4 gloomy, dismal. 5 evil, sinister. 6 sullen, angry. 7 secret, 
mysterious. 8 ignorant, unenlightened. — n. 1 absence of light. 2 lack of knowledge. 3 
dark area or colour, esp. in painting.  after dark after nightfall. the Dark Ages (or 
Age) 1 period of European history from the 5th– 10th c. 2 period of supposed 
unenlightenment. in the dark 1 lacking information. 2 with no light.  darkish adj. 
darkly adv. darkness n. [Old English] 
 
What we wish to establish here is the understanding that blackness and 
darkness [excluding the usual negative attributes] scientifically are the same 
existence. Darkness is the dimensional existence of blackness for they are 
both associated with light.  
 
The light they will forever define for you is really electromagnetic radiation that 
represents one frequency of darkness as energy. The Nubian MUST seriously 
overstand this fact to break the spell. Furthermore they must also KNOW that 
ANY description of light –  spiritually or scientifically MUST have atomic or 
sub-atomic properties if it is suggested that the light has influenced or 
interacted with humans in anyway. Natural electricity in the body and electrical 
pulses in the brain have to react to any influence on the human body including 
thoughts, inspirations and messages via the nerves systems.


--- PAGE 308 ---
As NATURE directly via SUNS and indirectly via mankind actions forces 
humans to respect the original intentions of nature (eco-system / environment) 
you will see a shift in definitions. They will actually try to redefine the Nubun / 
Nubian existence on earth away from blackness. We may not be known as 
the black race in the future –  maybe brown race? This will be pioneered by 
liberals and the majority of Nubians who are definitely not intelligent by nature. 
They will see this as agreeable since they already accept the negative 
definition of ‘black’ from the perspective of evolutionary minds (within other 
races). 
 
They are not intelligent enough to simply work out that a definition must be 
supported by scientific factual evidence to be valid and what light and 
darkness represents in the indo-European languages today definitely are not 
based on facts –  It’s a belief system –  the biggest one of them all. We stress 
to the Nubian that the Caucasian SERIOUSLY lives in half-truths and belief 
systems and has tricked (through definitions) the majority of the world to do 
the same. You are FORCED to reject the fundamental truths of reality itself if 
you follow the light (good) –  black (bad) notion. 
 
This once again will prevent our race from recognising the BLACKNESS OF 
NATURE and real SUN CULTURE. It will also play a psychological role in the 
phasing out of dark skin. This in turn will dampen our understanding of the 
LAWS OF NATURE. As cycles change, definitions will change but the 
Caucasian liberal mind will impose changes in definitions that will not be 
based on our NUBUN RIGHT MINDS
. Black blood will represent pro-life via 
science more effectively in a sun-cycle so they will redefine our existence to 
prevent the Nubian mind from connecting with the prime forces of nature. It is 
in our interests as a race to respect the blackness of nature as a pro-life force. 
This blackness is the collective existence of gases and chemicals simply 
visually seen as black to the naked eye –  in its conscious most creative form it 
is 9-ETHER. We are within ALL-READY but we are slow to work this out ! 
[refer to The Nature of Nature Series –  Afroo Oonoo]. 
 
 
Questions: What I believe in is a fact TO ME
 so I will live by it? 
 
Ans: 
ALL FACTS ARE GOVERNED BY ABSOLUTE NATURE NO ONE 
OWNS A FACT. There are actual lineages of facts in nature. Facts are 
allocated to mind and reason to stimulate change at a specific time based on 
cycles in nature. Read this scenario to understand what we have just stated. 
European scientists once believed the world was flat. Then later they believed 
the world was a pure circle but today in 2007 it has been proven that the world 
has oblong properties. THIS IS A FACT. This scenario shows you that even in 
science intelligence dictates what an actual fact truly is. So facts change 
based on intelligence. There are realities in science which are known as fact 
today that will be proven wrong in the future. So where is the ABSOLUTE 
TRUTH? Our answer is this: You will never know the absolute truth of 
everything in existence –  to know everything will make you everything –  
Absolute Nature –  we are just a part of it –  a part of THE ALL. We can only 
know the Truths / Facts in the form of a homo-sapien using human senses.


--- PAGE 309 ---
We have been given access to know more about space, time and matter via 
melanin, ether changes, genes and blackness in mind and reason. This 
access was given by SUNS and blackness as 9-ETHER. The Afronauts give 
out information about the blackness of nature because we know blackness is 
outside this altering of facts [seen in the flat->round->oblong earth scenario]. 
You are dealing with nature for real when you talk about blackness –  our 
ancients knew this and had no fear of it. They utilised the sciences via HIGH 
MIND FOCUS initially then thousands of years later blackness was utilised via 
customs and rituals (experiments) as evolutionary forces grew strength in 
their cycle and suppressed revolutionary forces –  pro-life in nature. The 
sciences were used for all purposes including protection against other human 
races and other forces.  
 
MELANIN as the solid form of sunlight energy possesses the same 
attributes of light at a different frequency. Light is a sub-division of 
blackness and this very blackness is eternal within the three 
dimensional plane as space (vacuum) / matter. Therefore the QUANTUM 
existence of darkness manifests itself within light in the form of NEURO 
MELANIN within brain matter. This contributes to ALL intelligence –  
MIND, REASON and SPIRITUALITY. Through melanin you have access 
to space, matter and time which personifies as thought, memory, deja-
vu, intuition, inspiration, ideas etc –  quantum reasoning. We stress that 
Nubun descendents have the highest amount of melanin amongst the 
human species BY FAR –  SCIENTIFIC FACT. Melanin helps release and 
focus light energy concisely at different frequencies in brain matter. 
These frequencies of energy (as pulses) reach different parts of the 
brain acceptable to that frequency and stimulate reaction. RE-ACTION is 
RE (sun) stimulating your ACTIONS as melanin. However this reaction 
will not be correct if the melanin is contaminated. The natural burning 
(natural electricity) within the human body heightened within the 
SOLAR-PLEX (a type of inner sun) generates heat exerting carbon 
dioxide (which humans breath-out). This performs a self-generating 
energy process which allows melanin to continually convert energy into 
Mind and Reason to stabilize and aid the body. The quality of 
REASONING in humans is not just based on knowledge received 
externally but also based on how clean your melanin is and the quality 
of your biological system. This in turn dictates the potency of mind 
power. THE NUBIAN MUST KNOW THIS INFORMATION WELL ! 
 
There is a psychological issue in knowledge itself that the Nubian must shake 
off before progress speeds up. The Nubian needs a mental portfolio of events 
to allow knowledge itself to successfully change brain matter to stimulate the 
right actions. In other words we tend to need a person of a certain status in 
our lives to give knowledge that is acceptable. Someone of the wrong 
perceived status could give you the best knowledge –  but it will be rejected. If 
someone of any status is given you proven universal facts which you are still 
rejecting then you are NOT intelligent by Nature. This means there are levels 
of knowledge which those who are intelligent by nature MUST universally 
respect. When researched the Nubian since the 1960’s has already received 
the basic knowledge to upgrade our race but they still fall for the psychological


--- PAGE 310 ---
spells that prevent physical activation of that knowledge received. Spells such 
as the caste system within European language, culture and definitions, 
inferiority complexes, mental suppression etc. These are a greater burden to 
our race than actual physical beings. Though one of the higher burdens on 
our race is the lack of nature knowledge in particular a lack of understanding 
of the SCIENCE OF THE TRUTH (refer to Vol.3 p3). The Nubian does not 
understand that western culture is SERIOUSLY based on half-truths and 
these half-truths are imposed on PURPOSE to activate a certain type of 
thinking that actually supports certain types of evolutionary spiritual forces 
which personify in humans through reasoning. The very word EUROPE 
(europa) stems from an actual Greek STORY written by HOMER –  FACT 
(research this). They have named an actual continent after a Greek author’s 
story. Many issues concerning the perception and imagery of religion and the 
isms can be traced back to Greek and Roman story writing, art and plays. 
They create and alter names, dates, customs, special days, time 
measurements, scriptures etc to FORCE evolutionary processes to manifest. 
This creates a BELIEF BASED REALITY that allows any type of agenda the 
potential to succeed because NATURES TRUTHS are not respected in 
POSITIVE (+). These include macro satanic secret society based agendas 
disguised within capitalism and globalisation. It would be very hard for 
negative forces to succeed in a facts based reality as all would know right 
from wrong in accordance to pro-life. It is actually darker races that are 
holding their alternative reality together. It is our faith in their practices that 
rejuvenates the life of their practices and lifestyles. If the Black and Latino 
races left Christianity this religion would regress to liberalism. There is an 
evolutionary spirituality rampant in the western world.  
 
To live in a lie gives the opportunity for the lie creator to play the role of God 
for the lie is based on their opinion not nature. The Nubian does not 
understand that the Caucasian establishments CAN NOT give you the higher 
truths as their strength exists in evolutionary reasoning and belief of any kind 
is a reflection of it –  RELIGION and the ISMS
. The Nubian doesn’t understand 
that the Caucasian race is VERY religious in REALITY but their practices 
under many ISMS are not within today’s interpretation of monotheistic 
religions. They really go back to Pagan rites and the alternative ways of the -> 
Romans -> Greeks -> Phoenicians and Hindu. They are now colloquial 
customs within their culture –  their majority simply don’t know this! The 
Nubian should by now know that the true origins of many of the monotheistic 
religious practices and events are actually outside the jurisdiction of the 
Caucasian genealogy (Pre-6000 years). Therefore they use belief to help re-
position their existence in reality. There are certain rites, customs, know-how 
within nature that Caucasians are restricted from fully comprehending 
because their genealogy life was restricted by space, time and matter –  
NATURE. The Hindu - Asian is the closest link for the Cauc-asian to those 
earlier eras. To simplify this –  The Caucasian as a collective will naturally find 
it hard to actually live and prosper in a reality based on TRUE CULTURE and 
FACTUAL REASONING their genealogy is of evolution which is triggered off 
by evolutionary forces usually in the form of gases. These gases historically 
are from the Moon, Saturn and Suns (in the winter quarter of Milky Way 
cycle). Therefore their collective nature must change everything that was


--- PAGE 311 ---
original. This includes the perceived identity of God, Messiahs, color 
representation, sexuality, customs, definitions, cultural identities etc. They put 
their surnames behind aspects of nature that exist eternally in nature 
surnames like Newton, Darwin, Pythagoras, and Einstein disrespecting the 
Egyptian minds that set up the platform of reasoning which they alter. Nubun 
builders of Pyramids in Egypt and Sudan were using their so-called 
discoveries before the Greeks even existed. This name attaching agenda aids 
in re-positioning them in reality and helps re-label nature in their name. 
 
Once a lie has been accepted it settles down as belief. Then living off that 
very belief satisfies evolutionary forces in nature. This forces truth and facts to 
be treated as belief within the human psyche. This scenario reflects the Laws 
of Opposites. Revolutionary change can only occur through facts (truth) 
because the FACTS / TRUTH must exist in nature before BE-LIE-F. The 
highest product of evolutionary forces in nature on earth in flesh and blood is 
the Caucasian race. You have different races for the mere fact that different 
amounts of gases and formulas in nature were involved in that racial creation. 
The very fact that different races still exist today is proof that NATURE is not 
pro-evolutionary. If nature was pro-evolutionary then there would only be one 
race present on earth today and that race would be Caucasian. This would 
mean that all matter within the facets of homo-sapien is highly evolutionary 
which clearly is not the case. All matter does evolve eventually but the closer 
you are to the blackness of nature the slower that genetic regression 
becomes as the blackness of nature is eternal within the three dimensional 
plane. Melanin stabilises genes. Racial-mixing dramatically speeds up the 
evolution of homo-sapien existence on earth. In fact darker people greatly out 
number lighter people on earth. Revolution and evolution are parts of cycles. 
For those of original existence evolutionary reasoning will become a burden to 
the TRUE development of our minds until the Nubian understands science, 
facts, right knowledge and nature and respects them all. Any universal
 fact 
represents the presence of revolutionary forces in existence because the fact 
existed in the original creation processes of the reality you acknowledge as 
real. Therefore making the human mind respect facts less and less is key in 
preserving evolutionary forces. The same type of forces that aid all 
evolutionary products. This is where religion, isms, diverse sexuality, the 
moon etc come into play. These are representatives of evolutionary forces in 
nature. Once these facets are put in check [within the human mind] through 
facts the human reasoning aiding evolutionary forces will decay. This decay 
BY NATURE will begin within the highest representatives of evolutionary 
forces on earth. Therefore they will keep belief systems of any type in 
existence as long as possible be it based on desires.  
 
The Caucasian powerbase is of evolution but sadly for humans the nature of 
evolution is to take existence to a type of death therefore they will naturally 
focus on dismantling original existence - innocently or purposely. This 
includes darker races. Evolutionary forces aid the journey from life to death 
and have been recorded through the ages within and also actually as different 
existences and practices usually under (but not always) the S and Z (Z is a 
type of S backwards) –  Sin (Zu-En), Sin (Moon), Bu-Sin
-ess, Serpent, Snake, 
Sex (Sexuality), Six, Saturn, Swastika, Sais (six), Siva, Satan, Shining light


--- PAGE 312 ---
(Lucifer), 60 seconds, 60 minutes, 6th Day (Saturday –  Saturn), 6,000 years, 
666, Zaiyn-Zaiyn-Zaiyn, Zionists, Zeus, Zoo (Animal Kingdom), Zodiac (Luna 
Astrology) etc. [essentially refer to Amunubi Rahkaptah (Nine Ball), Malachi Z 
York and the Nuwapian organisations]. The sound of leaking gases is the 
serpent-lipless Sss sound –  to leak is to be taken out of the Mass. The Mass 
then slowly decreases –  regresses –  evolution. The gases that represent the 
death journey are 6-ether. 9-ether as life in death becomes 6-Ether [Nine Ball 
Vol.1 & 2 (1970)]. Nine (9) and Six (6) are opposites by nature. 
Scientifically evolution has a purpose in nature and those of higher 
evolutionary position will naturally obey this rule. Now since (+) positive and 
negative (-) forces both originate from blackness. The same way all light 
originates from blackness. The same way all lighter races genetically originate 
from darker races both evolution and revolutionary forces are in conflict within 
Nubun genealogy (the blackness in man). This manifests as mental 
suppression, inferiority complexes, black on black crime (in the west), and the 
acceptance of foreign belief systems etc. In different cycles in nature the 
potency of these forces changes within our race. We are living through the 
slow grinding change in to a right knowledge factual understanding of reality –  
right now. Without spiritual, extraterrestrial or eco-solar system intervention 
this movement will take time far greater than a human lifetime (potentially 
centuries) for the black collective but less than a lifetime for those individuals 
bearing RIGHT KNOWLEDGE. Many black bloodlines in the western world 
(US/EU) will be mixed out of black existence this century due to the lack of 
factual knowledge accepted by Nubians TODAY. The general interpretation of 
monotheistic religion existing today will not help you in preserving your black 
existence –  KNOW THIS! Many Nubians will simply not be ready for this level 
of information. Universal facts will still be present in the future for the 
descendants of those who reject this type of knowledge today. They will be 
able to utilise this information in the future to upgrade our race but many may 
not become leaders, they will become followers. Natural leaders are groomed 
over generations of genealogy intentionally or unintentionally. The better 
knowledge passed down by generation, the better potential our future holds. 
Our current generations must not become victims of the end of this era –  a 
type of Armageddon process. Since the universal facts of blackness will 
remain constant in existence those who abide to these facts have a better 
chance in preserving the survival of their genealogy, physical, racial, cultural, 
mental and spiritual existence. We must respect our genes - the guidelines to 
our purpose in existence. We must acknowledge our ancient tribes mentioned 
throughout these Afronaut writings and initially by the writers we mention in 
our volumes.  
 
Please try to overstand this answer well ! 
 
There are many writers / activists out there revealing information beneficial to 
ALL PEOPLE in this day and time especially concerning the surveillance 
reality occurring in the west which goes back to elitist bloodlines and the New 
World Order. The Nubun / Nubian however must know the following: If these 
writers do not recognise the TRUE NATURE of original existence in flesh and 
blood as the ancient Nubun tribes (from Tama-re and beyond) and the role 
their descendants play BY NATURE –  proven through science which reveals


--- PAGE 313 ---
order and purposes in nature expressed in cycles, blood, genes and melanin 
–  Then their doctrine still represents a 6-ether interpretation of reality. They 
will tend to use the Hindu doctrines and philosophy as a representation of 
original existence. The Hindu-Asian is the closest link for the Cauc-asian to 
those earlier eras. They still do not respect the blackness of nature and you 
will still see the light (good) –  black (bad) scenario still in motion within their 
doctrines. Beware of the higher tiers of trickery found in so-called 
controversial Caucasian writers / activists in the west. Many have good 
information for all people but they must respect the reality of nature and to do 
that they must help reveal the truth of our original existence and what it 
represents.


--- PAGE 314 ---



--- PAGE 315 ---
Dear Nubian Reader, 
 
Many people within the black conscious scene have concerns about our 
literature. We would like to state the following: 
 
[1] Urban Africa needs NATURE KNOWLEDGE! The consciousness found in 
pockets of our race in the west generally established by the US 1960’s 
movements is not present in urban Africa as the opposing forces to our 
existence are not represented in the physical existence of the Caucasian race 
but rather in evolutionary forces they have pioneered. The conscious videos, 
speakers, writers, organisations and books are NOT present in Africa so 
vessels like the AFRONAUTS AND OTHERS
 must exist to correct this. 
 
[2] Much of the issues, facts and philosophies stated by the Afronauts will 
simply be over-the-heads of many readers of this information who do not 
know of the writers and organisations we mention at the beginning of our 
volumes. WE KNOW THIS! Most people will read up to Vol.3 and read about 
extra-terrestrials and then turn off. Others will go up to Vol.5-6 read about 
Blackness and turn off. Many will read up to Vol.14 and read those maths 
formulas and turn off and so on. Many won’t read these volumes more than 
once either. Many Nubians in mainland Africa do not have access to black 
reasoning from the US or Europe so many of the issues will read as very 
abstract. The Afronauts as Nubian collective writers are able to take issues 
from different global segments and try to present them as universal writings. 
Many Nubians simply will not do simple research in to our notions or read up 
on the writers we recommend. However there are Nubians who will read this 
information and realise ITS VALUE. They will be able to read between the 
lines to know what we REALLY KNOW. They can work out what has not 
been stated and why? These people will already possess cultural 
intelligence and will know how to utilise this information in our collective 
journey of racial upliftment.  
 
[3] We will only give out the generalisation of issues, problems, solutions in 
our existence. Not the direct techniques and specific know-how’s. Rarely have 
you read specific names and dates and most of the issues raised from Vol.1-5 
you could quite easily find from other black sources within cyberspace though 
the later volumes you may not.  
 
[4] Many queries you have about the notions stated in our volumes may have 
already been answered in previous or later volumes you already have. You 
may find answers to your queries by reading the volumes again (if you do not 
have access to those organisations mentioned as well as their literature). 
Many of the notions we write about originate from literature released in the 
1960’s that are almost impossible to obtain in Africa.


--- PAGE 316 ---
[5] For those Nubians who do read our writings!  
 
It would be VERY
 unwise NOT to check out the organisations and writers we 
mention as we always say - we give you extracts while they give you whole 
books. IT MUST BE STRESSED that the writers and organisations are your 
FINE-TUNERS and the Nubian reader should acknowledge our information as 
an introduction stage to nature knowledge. The recommended forces are 
written below search them out while you still have time.  
 
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi (The Christ Series), Amunubi 
Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball - Liberation Information & The Bible 
Interpretations and Explanations), The Ancient Egyptian Order 
(A.E.O)(Egyptian Initiation), The Nuwabian Nation of The Moors, The 
Honourable Elijah Mohammed (Message to the Blackman), Clarence 
Jowars Smith (5%) (Supreme Mathematics), The Holy Tabernacle 
Ministries (Right Knowledge Series), Credo Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop 
(Civilization or Barbarism / Origin of Civilization), The Journey Home 
Group, Haru-Hotep Tar (Solar Biology / Parchments Series), Marcus 
Garvey (Journey Home), Dr Joseph Ben-Joachannan (African Origins of 
The Major Western Religions & Lecture Tapes), Dr Amos Wilson, Noble 
Drew Ali (Moorish Science), Afroo Oonoo (Moonset & Sunrise / An 
Introduction to the Nature of Nature Vol.1 & 2) and the other degrees of 
Dr Malachi Z. York (The Black Book, The Gold Book & The Holy Tablets). 
 
Future events will change eras - the signs are in the times
. The hidden 
and open forces of oppression are not your saviours now and they 
won’t be your saviours in those harder times ahead. Knowledge is a tool 
needed for cultural protection and guidance so you should have 
knowledge of the writers above and their works. 
 
Our writings are a simplification of nature knowledge and were ALWAYS 
MEANT TO BE. Nubians who have read the CORE books stated above will 
recognise where our information fits within the tiers of Nubian consciousness 
(what we give is NOT the highest information but rather a stage in conscious 
development reasoning). You won’t find the higher information on cyberspace 
merely snippets. The Afronauts can be considered a spell-breaking free inter-
linking tool of mind and reason between yourself and some of the writers and 
organisations we mention. Our literature is predominantly for mainland 
Africans who have no access to black conscious literature. There is 
much reiteration in our literature because many readers will not follow 
the volume sequence therefore we try to make sure the core issues are 
always stated especially in these later editions. These writings in general 
can be taken on by Nubians and Nubun alike worldwide
. Much of what we 
have written conscious Nubians have stated in different ways for decades. We 
have combined Rural African knowledge with science and the black 
consciousness found in the west. Though African knowledge leans towards 
nature knowledge and is the senior. You will NEVER read about the higher 
levels of Nature Knowledge. There is a very strict limit as to what can be 
written about nature knowledge we will never give specifics as in the ancient 
past it was taught verbally face to face or mind to mind.


--- PAGE 317 ---
[6] Tiers of Reasoning - What the Nubian is reading in these later volumes 
will INDEED contradict some conceptual parts of reasoning found in earlier 
editions. This is because often to relate to the Nubian from the offset one 
must approach our people from a reasoning they can initially relate to. For 
example we told you in page 30 Vol.1 good and bad colours pt2 that the 
Caucasian race have played a trick with color definition but the true depth of 
the trick was not given in that volume. Most Nubians know the basic 
understanding of black-bad / white-good but these volumes will help reveal its 
true depth. Most Nubians world-over are STILL not ready to deal with 
scientific facts which reveal the blackness we speak of in these later volumes. 
Many will simply revert back to black liberalism or the religion their parents 
gave them. To study liberalism prior to the dark ages of Europe will clearly 
show you its connotations with whiteness and the freedom of lust. These 
notions were purposely broadened through industrialisation. The LIB as 
Libana (Moonlight), Libnah (white), Libni (white), Libertine (sex), Libindinal 
(sex), Libido (sex) all relate to white and lust (sexual freedom). Libnah 
specifically refers to whiteness and transparency (a whiteness you can see 
through) e.g ghostation. Biblically LIBNI (which actually means white) was one 
of the two sons of Gershon, the son of LEVI (Ex. 6:17; Num. 3:18, 21). Levi 
ties in with LEVI-TICUS (Old Testament) which breaks down biblical 
procedures concerning albino leprosy (refer to Vol.1). The Nubian must 
understand that liberals are the good cop of the Caucasian race while the 
capitalists represent the bad cop of the Caucasian race BUT BOTH are 
EVOLUTIONARY by nature and follow light, white, right as oppose to the 
cycles, orders and initial intentions of NATURE. Spiritually, mentally and 
physically Liberalism is the evolution of Caucasian customs and rites that 
alter the cultural value systems of other races to eventually allow rulership of 
reasoning in the form of the Caucasian Mind. It’s an attempt to control the 
direction of nature’s equality system –  purposely or innocently. They promote 
free-choice but include pro-death within that notion in the form of euthanasia 
(which means ‘good death’ - ancient Greek). You can see Europe, youth and 
Asia in this word which really goes back to ancient human sacrifices including 
children to those pagan gods of early Europe and Asia including their Baals. 
Later in the Greek and Roman eras it became acceptable suicide. In essence 
liberals fight to preserve the rights to kill yourself or a part of your existence - 
drug-taking, alcohol, intoxicants, euthanasia and abortion. These are subtle 
self-sacrifices (under Lib-bel/baal-Rule-ism). ITS ALL SUBTLE 
NECROMANCY. The masses simply do not fully overstand the true origins of 
liberalism and because they don’t respect facts it will continue to alter 
reasoning in any direction. Those of Nubun ancestry globally must reason 
this out. There is nothing really unnatural for a pure liberal mind except for 
the respect for the original intentions of nature. The true notion of liberalism 
is far older than the political perception given today. As stated in earlier 
volumes many people are not INTELLIGENT BY NATURE (remember this 
doesn’t mean within the society they live in they have an inferior mind). In 
essence it means their mind and reasoning are of this ERA so they may be 
more vulnerable to the Trickology of these days and times also.


--- PAGE 318 ---
There is no point in learning something which you will not use or live by. If a 
Nubian studies their culture, researches their existence and the processes of 
nature and finds it to be true or make rational sense YET still does not apply 
these notions in everyday life then this still suggests they are not intelligent 
BY NATURE. The reader should evaluate where they stand on this issue –  
right knowledge must be grown. We accept that this literature must be 
DISCRETLY acknowledged and communicated between the Nubians / 
Nubuns who are able to comprehend the notions stated and we know that this 
information will by-pass the reasoning of many minds.  In other words simple 
minds will read these volumes and get nothing out of it because their level of 
reasoning is not based on nature directly but rather on socialization within 
their chosen society. In our ancient true culture socialization and nature laws 
were initially very similar in processes. 
 
[7] For those who reject the information and philosophies within our literature 
simply ask yourself these questions: Do you think opposites DON’T exist in 
any form? Do you think there will ever be an end to what you perceive as pro-
white awareness? if not why? Do you think your ancestors would approve of 
you rejecting their ways for ideals given to you from other cultures that do not 
abide to pro-life reasoning? (refer to Vol.17 p4-5) Why do people believe 
Nubun spirituality should be just for the African village or the poor? Does 
nature or your god practice equality at the same time everywhere? Did God 
create nature? If God created nature then why does a season of decay / 
environmental death –  Winter exist? Is it better to live by a lie or a fact 
concerning your physical health? What happened to the customs and rites 
associated with the followers of the Sun Gods, Moon Gods, Earth Gods found 
in the Middle-East and West Asia prior to 325 AD? There are additional 
customs and rites found in monotheistic religion today NOT stated specifically 
in the Bible or Koran –  Where did they originate from? Why do you believe the 
ancient scriptures of the past are lies while the scriptures you follow today be 
it religion or other belief systems are factual? Why do you believe proven facts 
are negative to a real God? If biblical dates mathematically don’t add up in 
scriptures then why do you still believe the information? Why do you give 
value to belief over fact? Is there room for manipulation in belief?  Is there 
room for manipulation in fact? Where was the notion of science first practiced 
and under what circumstances? Life -> evolution -> Death –  Is this a fact 
witnessed by your own life-span? Apart from humans do other species follow 
the routine of Life -> evolution -> Death? Do the four seasons [spring, 
summer, fall and winter] EACH follow this routine? We can write on and on 
like this. Fundamentally to respect a fact is to respect reality and to 
respect reality is to respect the prime existence of change in nature. 
 
 
This PDF contains Extract 53 (Part 2), 82 and 83 (Part 1). Other extracts 
may follow once the information has been abbreviated and centralised. 
There may be grammar and literacy errors –  we apologise in advance. 
Endnotes included (1-30 pages). Six writers contributed to this volume.


--- PAGE 319 ---
We openly give permission for theses extracts to be freely downloaded to 
be put on any black conscious websites or forums whose intention is to 
help improve the mental and physical conditions of our Nubian / 
Black/African race. We strongly advise the reader NOT to misuse this 
information. These volumes are for Nubun / Nubian racial upliftment 
under nature reasoning. The upliftment is universal data (multiple 
topics) in relation to our existence. If this information is used for 
purposes other than Nubun / Nubian POSITIVE (PRO-LIFE) education. 
(refer to Vol.17 page 4-5) then consequences may arise for you. Many 
people will not be ready for many of the issues stated in these volumes. 
They may be introduced to completely new names, existences, 
descriptions, languages, sciences, history etc. What we ask is that the 
Nubian should research these notions stated and overstand that this 
information is from the perspective of original existence.  
 
Many forces do not want revolutionary change within our race –  they 
want evolutionary
 change.  A good question for the Nubian would be - 
When you think about the future generations of our Negroid race what do you 
perceive will be the common dresswear, hairstyles, laws and values –  say 50-
100 years from now? The Afronauts would suggest that sadly what many 
Nubians will perceive in the future will already exist today but within the 
cultures of other races. If you can not perceive any element of the future 
of our race that does not originate from other races. Then you need 
mental resurrection!  
 
Many Nubians simply won’t be able to grasp the depth of these writings 
we really hope YOU can. Many religious minded people will be offended 
by subject matters in many of our volumes –  all we ask of you is to 
please research our notions and check out the writers and organisations 
we mention –  please try to respect a fact
!  
 
 
REMEMBER YOUR ORIGINAL MIND AND REASON AGAIN!


--- PAGE 320 ---
Extract 53 
 
Son of a Sun with Soul –  Part 2 
 
There are many issues concerning the origins of races which the Afronauts 
admittedly have not covered in depth. We recommend that you study the 
many writers and organisations continually mentioned throughout our 
literature introduction sections. What the Afronauts will state here is that 
DEFINITELY the mainstream notion of racial creation and evolution (Darwin) 
must be recognised as a half-truth and is not much different agenda-wise than 
many aspects of religion. This is set-up by design and orchestrated well to 
conceal racial birth rights BY NATURE. The Afronauts in Vol.15-16 gave you 
an understanding of racial emergence being dictated by the collapse of the 
moon and its influence on the eco system which in turn changed eco-
development from then on while those existences prior to this event had less 
alterations by nature –  be it the Nubun as TAR DENEG –  your ancient African 
pygmies whose melanin profile and sun-heat genes remained more stable to 
preserve our original existence. It was this change in the cycle of evolution 
that allowed the future ghostation (gene-regression) processes of the races to 
work. The predominate ghostation process usually highlighted as albinoism 
which led to the Caucasian race (often today regarded as Vitiligo) was 
occurring in regions with pre-dynastic ruler ship in Africa and Asia around 6-8 
thousand years ago. The Nubians of our race that contributed to the albinoism 
were those Nubians bearing Hindu and Phoenician features from earlier 
migrations in to tama-re. The Cuthites are one of these tribes. You may have 
noticed that throughout our volumes we have given the Caucasian origination 
period generally from 6-15,000 years. This is because gene-regressions in 
races will always occur in racial pockets due to evolutionary forces. Gene 
outbreaks of albinoism (albinism) have always happened but it was perceived 
as negative by darker races until the arrival in world history of the Caucasian 
race with hereditary albinoism and leprosy. World history as we know it today 
is the HIS-STORY of moon culture on earth. The REALITY of events prior to 
6,000 years have been turned in to mythology by DEFAULT to allow the 
reasoning of the authoritive Caucasian mind in the form of Greek and Roman 
philosophy to rule. In fact ANY belief system being followed today that is NOT 
based on facts WILL DEFINETLY become mythology in the distant future. 
Evolutionary forces in nature highlighted by the Moon brought in new 
environmental changes which affected plantation, food and waters (seas) and 
their chemical reaction in humans with different melanin profiles. These 
influences were heightened even more by using plantation / raw materials as 
aphrodisiacs, sex-stimulants and medicines
 in customs and rituals. Today you 
have power plants and factories contaminating the environment contributing 
to all types of birth defects (including skin color) –  so why do you think this 
scenario could not happen in the past over many years BY NATURE? The 
Caucasian race is a by product of the most recent burst of evolutionary forces 
in nature and via experimentation symbolised by the moon and according to 
many it is the last burst of evolution in humans as we know ourselves today. 
This burst was witnessed predominantly by Tama-rean black Egyptian pre-
dynastic tribes and recorded throughout their lands of rulership at that time


--- PAGE 321 ---
which included territories considered Black Asiatic (Asia). Darker races in the 
ancient past have experimented with racial graftation and this fact undermines 
the positioning of the Caucasian race in world history. The reader shouldn’t 
really be too surprised about this information for last century Nazi regimes 
took on Aryan (white) race creation philosophies. The Nazi mentality is an off-
shoot of the Aryan Hindu mentality –  The caste system –  so do you really 
think over thousands of years other races have not experimented with 
albinoism? How do you think the early caste-based Hindu would perceive 
albinoism? In fact in another form it’s happening today as eventually people of 
mixed-race backgrounds will start to define their culture as that very existence 
under liberalism. In the ancient past prior to light-white-right philosophies 
albinoism was considered a negative existence in Africa and those bearing 
those traits were segregated to the north of Africa and Asia usually mountain 
regions. They later migrated in to what is now called Europe from the Aegean 
sea region and from the Caucus Mountains (then becoming biblically known 
as Canaanites). They came back in to North Africa as Phoenicians later. The 
Nubian should realise when your travelling down the argument of ‘Egyptians 
are they black or white?’ understand that you’re dealing with a concealing 
conspiracy which actually began within the Dynastic eras ordered by Greek / 
Phoenician Pharaohs themselves. The Phoenician dynastic branches altered 
our history to a degree hundreds of years before the Greeks and Arabs. In 
addition if you are not prepared to acknowledge Egyptian philosophy and 
Neteraat history as one of the fathers of monotheistic religion –  and live by 
that then the Egyptian race identity quest really is of no value. You will find 
that many western TV programmes on Egypt have a strong emphasis on 
finding out the physical identities of people be it the murderer, the conspirator, 
the victim or the pharaoh. Through this TV programme template they reinforce 
the Phoenician Egyptian brand –  disconnecting black minds universally from 
the Egyptian culture they founded. Though Egypt in itself is a representative 
of the dynastic Phoenician mind in North East Africa (Lower Egypt (RA)) 
POST the pre-dynastic Tama-re NUBUN MIND (Upper Egypt (RE)). The 
Phoenician descendants exist today throughout the north coast regions of 
Africa and Saudi Arabia. The REAL Tama-re (Egypt) began to fade-away as 
the Nubun / Nubian pharaoh (Aafreti) bloodlines began to mix in with lighter 
races. The dynasties are really the countdown to the end of tama-rean 
culture, the transfer from the ways of SUN CULTURE to MOON CULTURE. 
WHEN EVOLUTIONARY FORCES TOOK OVER AS THE LEADING 
MENTALITY OF REASONING WITHIN THE EQUINOX CYCLE. The human 
hosts of evolution are the Caucasian race so it is the indo-European and 
Phoenician mentality that began to enter the bloodlines of pharaohs –  thus 
ending SUN CULTURE. At this level of literature we will now state that prior to 
the last 6,000 years the moon was used as a balancer to the sun in 
reasoning. The equilibrium of (+) and (-) forces helped the ancients overstand 
nature and absolute equality. There will always be change in nature but it is 
the direction of change that is the issue. When MOON CULTURE dominates 
in its season within absolute equality SUN CULTURE almost remains still in 
relaxation. This relaxation personifies as the black mental sleep spoken about 
by many black writers. Moon culture is burning out right now and will take 
casualties with it. The stagnate influence of sun culture is scientifically 
witnessed in the regressed quality of sub-atomic energy existing in sunlight


--- PAGE 322 ---
therefore melanin could not convert the electromagnetic light energy in to 
chemicals or electrical pulses to stimulate the best mental reasoning in our 
race as a collective. Reason this out –  if you know for a fact that sunlight 
energy was the key tool in the creation of human existence in the waters of 
Africa and that our very SUN has not stopped shining ever since –  allowing 
plantation to grow –  then why do you think it has stopped giving you ENERGY 
OF CHANGE? You should have realised by now that the SUN is now 
revolving back to its prime existence –  witnessed as global warning as the sun 
rays (RE) grow in potency so will the cultural awareness of those bearing 
woolly hair by nature of Nubun ancestry. The actual quality of sunlight must 
change in universal seasons. If sunlight (electromagnetic energy) changes 
then the quality of human minds, their reasoning or even what they can 
visually see will change in accordance. How in tune you are with forces in 
nature will influence the outcome positively or negatively in accordance to 
your own nature. This represents the return of SUN CULTURE.  
 
There are MANY different events that contributed to the existence of the 
Caucasian race this is why they have such an imbalance in hair and eye 
color. Many older civilizations in the recent past knew of our senior tribes as 
the Sumerian (Anunnaqi) and pre-dynastic Egyptian ventures concerning race 
creation. This reality has been taken on as mythology today but inspired 
darker races in the past to venture in to ghostation race creation processes. 
The MACRO reason for these occurrences still remains that the Moon 
influenced the direction of evolution on earth over millions of years allowing 
changes in human species for what ever reason
 to occur successfully. The 
moon held the reason intact. Suns also influence evolution via rays and sun 
flares within evolutionary cycles and of course natural disasters can influence 
a planet. However these are events and it is the moon that is an ongoing 
influence. 
 
SATURN is another ongoing influence on earth through its gases and light 
energy. It gives off a type of light –  a warped energy that has influenced 
earths ancient eco-system which eventually warped many aspects of human 
reasoning (refer to Vol.6). They tied this influence to the notion of Satellites 
(Satur-lights / Satyr-lights) because satellites through light energy give out 
messages from TV and Media which help sustain ignorance and belief of any 
kind. Energy from Saturn was recorded by the Romans in a festival called 
Saturnalia. This pagan festival annually occurred in December what we now 
call Christmas time (with that festive spirit). They regurgitated Saturnalia into 
Santa-Claws. Santa and Saturn both tie in with Satyr and Satan. The claws in 
the notion Santa-claws represents both claws as in monster (moon-star) 
(demon –  dead-moon) and also as bu-SIN-ess. Consumer business is big in 
this annual period globally as it was within the times of the Roman Empire. As 
you should know by now Bu-SIN-ess ties in to Money –  Moon-ey and the 
Moon God was known as Sin. The Moon is more of a physical influence on 
evolution when compared to Saturn but both have influenced the eco-system 
of earth which have in turn influenced the nature of species (research all this 
data well as there is much more on this subject available out there).


--- PAGE 323 ---
The Moons influence on the eco-system of earth is spiritually perceived as the 
characteristics of the Moon as a Moon God. From this the Caucasian 
societies subtly acknowledge the moon and initially tied the moonlight to sex 
(lust) as sex creates life and later money (moon-ey) –  ‘in god we trust’ (Dollar 
Bill –  Money –  Moon-ey) –  YAHWEH was originally classified in religion as a 
Moon God (please research this for yourself). You’ll see sex and money in the 
notion of BUST which can refer to the breasts of a women as well as bu-SIN-
ess bankruptcy and Money as MOONIE (western slang) a derogatory act of 
showing your naked backside to people in public. These are the ways of the 
Romans and Greeks –  do you now see the link? If right knowledge is not 
present then Sex and money become evolutionary drivers and evolutionary 
forces go back to the moons influence on earth’s eco-system. In fact the 
moon is commercially known as a lust force even today and if the opposite to 
the moon is the sun then the sun must represent an opposing force to lust –  
The Laws of Opposites. If the Moon [1] changes orbit radius or diameter, [2] 
develops an atmosphere, [3] were to be destroyed then the whole cycle of 
evolution on earth would be dramatically altered. As we have stressed 
throughout this book series the moon god was known as SIN in its 
Mesopotamian perception, SHIVA (Sin) in Hinduism, DINA is a representation 
of the moon in Islam and also known as YAHWEH in Christianity today. An 
interesting fact is that Leviathan commercially refers to a dragon (beast) sea 
creature. It is the moon which governs all tides at sea. This subject is covered 
in more depth by organisations we have mentioned –  search them out. The 
Nubun tribes whose genetic composition is primarily based on the SUNS 
influence on the eco-system acknowledged the Sun but intelligently 
acknowledged themselves as personifications of Suns in human form. Suns 
are jet black on their surface which equates to black skin –  blue/black –  
Nubun. In Africa we have spent so much time west-watching we have 
forgotten our original existence. We told you that within the caste system 
black people (dark skinned people) are interpreted as the negative of human 
existence –  demon influenced. Demon is dead-moon –  they associate it with 
black. Therefore the opposite must be a living-moon which has to emanate 
white so the moonlight was interpreted as a type of life light –  moon culture. In 
fact the orchestraters of the modernisation of indo-euro languages made sure 
the masses would DEFINITELY see our Nubun existence as negative.  
 
 
Black / Tar –  Dead –  Negative –  Negro -> TAR DE-NEG 
 
 
Tar Deneg –  The original pre-dynastic ancient pygmy tribes. The original 
fathers of Nile culture known as personifications of the sons (suns) of nature 
in flesh and blood (Tar / Ptah / S-Tar) by the original tama-reans which later 
was taken from Nilotic (Nile based) philosophy and interpreted as the son of 
god to describe messiah types in religion (research this information well). The 
original messiah type was Har, Heru, Horus (Horizion –  Har-Rising - a 
Resurrection –  a RE-surrection)


--- PAGE 324 ---
So black people worldwide should overstand that the plan to make blackness 
negative was purposely set up in language to prevent you from connecting to 
your true cultures and value systems. This prevents other races from truly 
recognising who you are BY NATURE. Religion plays in to this agenda by 
accepting the black/darkness as the prime representation of negativity. 
 
To say personifications of suns and blackness means sunlight interacting with 
water, earth and air to produce algae made them. Sunlight gives the Algae 
consciousness for melanin to react. The Algae over hundreds of thousands of 
years grew in to reptilians then upgraded to the African pygmy. From the 
African pygmy evolved Nubuns then Nubians. This is scientifically accepted 
as the creation process of man on earth and initially occurred in Africa. Now 
sunlight is the most conscious element in this process bearing energy from 
the surface of the Sun directly dictated by the SUNS CORE. So now reason 
that the personality traits of our ancient Nubun races where initially given to 
them as melanin after the form of sunlight from the actual SUN itself. If the 
sun of this solar system actually had a human voice it would be speaking in 
the original Nubun-Tar language because it’s prime expression as to what 
human species should exist as is defined as the ancient African pygmies. So 
we hope you overstand the notion of the Tar Deneg as personifications of 
Suns (True Stars) and Suns originate from collective gases making the 
BLACKNESS OF NATURE interpreted as PTAH (TAR / S-TAR). This S-TAR 
(Star) is a black star (Ball) representing the universe (a black ball 
acknowledged in science today) or an Alpha-Nebula. Blackness is behind all 
the lights spiritually and scientifically as the surface of the sun is black –  
hence Shining-TAR –  STAR. The concentration of blackness (totality of 
gases) creates suns. Therefore SUNS of BLACKNESS -> SONS OF PTAH -> 
SONS OF GOD. The very word NUBUN means ‘before the presence of light’ 
(cuneiform). GOD said ‘let there be light’ (Genesis 1:3) so GOD existed before 
light and originates from darkness - as dark as TAR. The original African 
tribes of earth are Personifications of the Original Creator (Ptah) on earth with 
a Sun inside them a SOUL.AR PLEX. This blackness is the face of Space, 
Time and Matter –  SMAT. THE VISIBLE ETERNAL CONSTANT OF 
ABSOULTE NATURE in the third dimension so everything must go through a 
type of blackness to exist. 
 
Revolutionary change enters a culture, society or a race from pinpoints be it 
an individual mind, group, race or event but survives in our reality through 
reasoning. The change will usually start from the fringes of the society in 
question then gradually journey in to mainstream over a period of time. In this 
journey it will be sculptured in to a form acceptable by the status quo. The 
quality of the knowledge can regress drastically in this journey. It can regress 
to a stage that the potency for change once the information is revealed is no 
longer present. It is reasoning that burns out through this journey. Knowledge 
needs reasoning to heighten purpose. Knowledge reveals a variety of 
directions in nature and reasoning is needed to give you the best direction in 
accordance to your nature. What is known today as black suppression is the 
dismantling of the relationship between reasoning and knowledge in 
accordance to your nature. For anyone to live out their belief be it an ism or 
religion a framework of knowledge must be given in the form of a speech, a


--- PAGE 325 ---
book, a person or messages from trusted sources that are taken on by your 
human senses. The Afronauts have informed the reader about the origins of 
reasoning within the isms and religion. In other words the isms most people 
live for today are descendants of practices classified as alternative religious 
rites, customs and philosophies in their origination. It’s the spirituality of these 
original customs that are influencing the minds of the partakers in those isms 
today and the lineage of this spirituality is Roman, Greek, Phoenician and 
Hindu NOT Nubun / Tama-re. Though we will now add that some of their 
concepts are altered versions of teachings giving to them or observed by 
them within our tama-rean dynastic eras. Now because the Nubun bloodline is 
of original existence and originated from beings actually from the rivers and 
lakes of Africa your initial reasoning would be synonymous with nature itself. 
Nature is firm in what it does naturally –  water will not have a day off and stop 
reacting to heat –  the sun won’t have a day off and just stop shining. Since 
pygmies are from these firm nature forces our Nubun reasoning must have 
similar attributes namely our genetic composition –  the preservation of original 
existence.  The core reasoning of human species is dictated by the SUN 
because you can not have life without heat –  the sun is RE –  RE-SUN –  
RESONING -> RE-ACTION and in the very beginning the ancient Nubun 
tribes KNEW they came directly from the earths and waters of Africa guided 
by nature forces (Neteru). This is recorded by the pre-dynastic Egyptians 
themselves. They overstood that energy from the SUN(S) gave them life –  
easily witnessed by studying plantation. Therefore this knowledge they 
gathered from early earth was understood to be given to them by suns also –  
therefore we call it –  RE-SUN –  REASON - RE-SUN (SON) - SON of RE 
making your (BES)T MIND a Son of RE –  People of the Sun. Suns exist in 
darkness (collective gases) and since the Nubun bares blue/black the blue 
representing the slow darkening from green (plantation). The original creator / 
opener is recorded as PTAH representing the blackness of nature. What the 
Afronauts are stating as the original creation of man on earth is scientifically 
taught to teenagers in most schools in the western world. However they have 
purposely extracted reasoning from the data. Africa know that most Nubians 
in the west by now know the basic scientific information concerning Africa as 
the origination of man yet REASONING is still not present within their psyche 
to see through religion and act upon it. When dealing with original existences 
you are dealing with NATURES REASONING. The PRIME MIND of 
ABSOLUTE NATURE primarily expressing itself through SUNS and 
BLACKNESS. The Negroid / Nubian race when ACCEPTING REALITY and 
ORIGINAL EXISTENCE by nature have the ability BY NATURE to represent 
the mind and expressions of nature in flesh and blood within this solar system.  
 
Any macro event or change on earth dictated by any force that influences the 
Negroid race and their descendants should be judged from the perspective of 
original existence. The TRUE purpose of that event or change can only be 
judged in and over time. This means the actual time frame may be far greater 
than your own existence. This outcome may not be commercially 
acknowledged by the status quo due to the value system and intelligence of 
that era. The Negroid race representing ORIGINAL EXISTENCE is the TRUE 
JUDGE of the Laws of Polarity on earth amongst the facets of human species 
and their relationship with NATURE.


--- PAGE 326 ---
In other words you have to view events, processes and trends from the 
perspective of original existence (or the senior existence of that era) as the 
TRUE JUDGE in PRO-LIFE as to what is right or wrong within the processes 
of nature. Many norms and values from other cultures and races due to belief 
systems do not respect our original existence so they will DEVALUE the 
importance of this outcome if it affects the Negroid race. Belief systems of any 
kind block the universal respect due to the Negroid race as original existence. 
 
For ANYONE (including members of the Negroid race) to disrespect our 
original existence is to disrespect the original intentions of nature itself. These 
include woolly hair (black), dark skin, broad nose etc and our Nubun 
spirituality, languages, customs that are within PRO-LIFE criteria’s. Even 
members of the Negroid race itself will suffer consequences for disrespecting 
original existence. The forces of nature gave
 our race blackness as melanin 
which is one of the senior existences of nature itself. 
 
The orders and sequences of NATURE, a nature which does not practice 
simultaneous equality within a facet but rather absolute equality (refer to 
Vol.17 page 10-11) represents the view of nature itself at a given time and 
because BLACKNESS, SUNS and even GENES are constants a part of 
nature must remain as original existence to preserve the original intentions, 
laws and values of nature itself. The Negroid race are suppose to represent 
that original emotion in flesh and blood within the facets of human species 
within this solar system. Earth initially was based on your view of reality 
because you where here first. We represent the SOUL of the human species. 
The SUNS in human form. This can not be realised if the Nubun mind is out of 
sink with REAL TIME. A race really millions of years old has been narrowed 
down to 6-10,000 years by religion. As stated earlier because they have 
extracted reasoning from knowledge the Nubian mind when openly given 
facts can not convert right information in to right actions. Therefore you can 
only live in BE-LIE-F (passionately we may add).  
 
The good in religion is the positive (+) of that half-truth (Belief) (e.g. the 
specific
 teachings of the messiah and many are different to those of Paul).  
Until the biblical reader undertakes some real research in to biblical origins, 
languages, customs and rites measured up against PRO-LIFE they will not 
know where the positive NATURE-WISE information in religion really exists. 
 
 
 
Please refer to: 
Afroo Oonoo (Moonset & Sunrise / an Introduction to the Nature of Nature Vol.1 & 2)  
Amunubi Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball - Liberation Information Volumes) [1967-70] 
The Ancient Egyptian Order (A.E.O) 
Dr Joseph Ben-Joachannan  (African Origins of The Major Western Religions & Lecture Tapes)


--- PAGE 327 ---
Extract 82 
 
The Adam Mind  
 
To understand REAL
 African culture one must be given a basic understanding 
of the TIERS OF GODS. We will NEVER break this down on our Afronauts 
literature in depth it is for you to study for yourself via organisations and 
writers we have mentioned. Nubians outside Africa must understand that 
African culture can be witnessed at different stages within our continent due to 
genealogy, migrations, customs and rites –  all mixed together. In other words 
it’s quite common to have a village tradition which has certain parts that 
originate from over 10,500 years ago while other practices within the same 
tribe are really just a few hundred years old. Many rites and customs are 
given by the chief, king or village founder due to events that happened in their 
time of reign (be it hundreds of years ago) but have not been adjusted BY 
Nature reasoning but rather evolutionary forces within nature only. This 
means many traditions in Africa are being slowly adjusted by the reasoning of 
other races, cultures and desires –  many are evolutionary in purpose. To say 
adjustment BY NATURE means that nature was studied and used as a 
template to induce reasoning to correctly position the tradition in our culture in 
this day and time. These adjustments MUST respect PRO-LIFE reasoning. 
This extract gives the Nubian an example as to how Africa, once known as 
Ethiopia (as a collective) and Tama-re and many other names from earlier 
eras is the origin of reasoning on earth. The notion of ‘from god to man’ is 
witnessed throughout African history and we have stated many times that 
biblically even man is considered within a tier of God.  
 
In fact there are different tiers of gods including humans (different G and g) 
(John 10:34) (King James Version) states; ‘Is it Not written in your Law, I said, 
Ye Are Gods? (Psalm 82:6) supports this by stating ‘Ye Are Gods; All of You 
Are Children of the Most High’ now if man is a god then the Most High is the 
Highest of the Gods. The Prophet Moses is called a God (Exodus 7:1) ‘I have 
made thee a god to pharaoh and Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet’. The 
higher gods in the Torah based religions are described as Angels and their 
ruler is the Most High. You have the plural notion of God as elohim (Hebrew) 
in Genesis 2:26 ‘Let us make man in our image, after our likeness’. (King 
James) Refer to Vol.3 page 22. 
 
The notion of god can be biblically attached to [1] Man - Palms 82:6,  [2] 
Prophet –  Moses (Exodus 7:1) and [3] Celestial beings - Elohim (Plural) –  
Genesis 2:26. In a highly abbreviated manner we will attempt to give you a 
framework as to the ancestral understanding of this notion within real African 
culture –  not urban African culture which is slowly taking on the image of 
commercial Black America. The village god has been interpreted as 
paganistic and backwards usually because those individuals labelling it as 
such follow an interpretation of God given to them by another race. In fact 
know that all belief systems will always be perceived as negative by the status


--- PAGE 328 ---
quo if that belief changes their authority. The initial birth of Christianity and 
Islam are no exception. Today’s current status quo was given to you by 
European philosophy. WE REPEAT you must understand that there are 
different tiers of god in nature BIBLICALLY ACKNOWLEDGED. We will 
explain the village God as one of those tiers. Firstly understand that all 
villages must originate from a group of families or even an individual. The 
founder of a village in Extract 82 we will call an ADAM. Adam was biblically 
recorded to be the first man and was told to be fruitful and multiply and it is 
this characteristic which is a prime trait of the founders of African villages. 
 
Now prior to the physical presence of the Caucasian race before 500 years 
ago and the Phoenician Arab earlier the Sub-Saharan African village was 
usually named after its founder who was usually appointed by a King, Chief or 
Spiritual Master. The original lineage of Kings goes back to the dynastic 
history of Pharaohs (Upper Egypt) and goes further back to pre-dynastic 
Nilotic Nubun tribes where the original definition of gods on earth stems from - 
Psalms 82:6. At the stage of dynastic Egypt a large Nubun exodus of pre-
dynastic tama-rean occurred further in to Africa (back to the lands of earlier 
African civilizations from earlier ERAS on earth) and as different dynasties 
came in following different gods more exoduses occurred. Many Africans who 
stayed in north east Africa took on Phoenician ways based on the black 
Phoenician rulerships of Egypt. Many of the Adam types thousands of years 
ago where initiated in to ancient orders by kings and spiritual hierarchies that 
originate from pre-dynastic eras and many village customs are really from 
those PRE-DYNASTIC eras including SUMER. 
 
There is a reason we have mentioned briefly the pre-dynastic migration in to 
Sub-Sahara Africa. The founder of the African village is usually the ADAM 
type of that village with their name becoming the village title. This Adam with 
wives EVES would usually conceive multiple children to literally create a 
population all bearing his and her genes thus giving the village their MIND and 
REASON. The nature of the village would be said to be based on the 
founders mind and with pure seeds DNA and even RNA traits could 
successfully be passed down generations genetically and through hundreds 
of years via village laws which help preserve the originators MIND and 
REASON. This Adam type over centuries of passing on those original genes 
would be known as a spirit even a god and would be called upon by the 
village hierarchy as a judge, truth informer, even punisher. This will work 
because the disputing parties in the village are both bearers of the same 
genes which go back to that Adam type so spiritually the Adam mind(s) have 
access to both. Now know this well. In a village dispute when spiritually 
requested it is Neuro– melanin that takes information as light (electromagnetic 
energy) from the brain then helps the mind through quantum processes to 
send this information as a type of energy through the eternal darkness of 
absolute matter which exists in everything at a frequency outside human 
vibrations to the Adam mind then back to the spiritual hierarchies of the 
village. Certain words, tones, heat and vibrations may be needed to loosen 
sub-atomic matter to allow the quantum travel of thought as energy to reach 
its target. Infrared is a commercial example of the energies you can’t see but 
know exists. Light and gases store information which Neuro-melanin


--- PAGE 329 ---
deciphers and converts in to energy for brain matter or converts as mass cells 
in to chemicals the body needs. These formulas are executed as rituals. 
These actions are all instant in quantum reasoning. The constant of nature as 
darkness is the route energy travels in quantum processes. Many of the 
ancient words used in these processes are really quantum PASSWORDS that 
allow the CORRECT energy, thought, light (information) to actually PASS 
through this quantum blackness to the CORRECT MINDS. The DNA lineage 
to the village Adam from both parties are what give the light information - a 
quantum direction in darkness - because the DNA represents a quantum 
CONSTANT. It is the prime line that connects the past to the present –  a 
bloodline at that. The secondary line is the laws and values of the village 
which when followed by the villagers helps agitate the MIND and REASON of 
the Adam type (founder of the village) within their own genes. The collective 
mind of the village who are all descendants of the founder of the village is the 
living spirit of that Village and that Mind originates from the founding fathers 
and mothers of that village who are interpreted as the gods and judges. This 
is a VERY simplified explanation and represents ONLY one TIER OF THE 
AFRICAN GODS. This notion of ancestral genealogy influence in its MACRO 
existence is based on the Neteru, Anunnaqi, Tarites, Ancient African Pygmies 
the HIGHER TIERS of gods because they are the founding forces of our 
actual race on earth. UNIVERSALLY it is based on the MIND and REASON of 
SUNS and the BLACKNESS OF NATURE that establish the LAWS OF 
NATURE. All of these existences and processes have scientific 
representations. This is the process of the village god that you will find in 
many villages in Africa –  NOT ALL (of course) for every bloodline has different 
ways, customs and methodology by nature. Also know that even in the perfect 
village it may still not work like that because of [1] the nature and reasoning of 
the actual ADAM mind (disagreeable or agreeable when perceived in today’s 
ERA) as well as [2] the spiritual hierarchies themselves. Many spiritual guides 
are fraudulent in their claims of spiritual guidance just like the preacher in the 
church. They usually play this fraudulent character for money, status or stock. 
Also [3] the ADAM mind won’t wish to harm its generational self because it 
lives through both disputing parties. [4] They may not even be calling on the 
original Adam mind/type of that village so the blood link is not present. Many 
African village and spiritual names have been altered by purpose to block the 
potency of the ancient sciences (please read on). 
 
The actual Adam being when alive would have been initiated usually in the 
pre-dynastic ways and this Adam type when alive be it hundreds even 
thousands of years ago would be following customs or regurgitations 
associated with the Tar-RITES and Cushites who were under the Neteru 
(Neteraat), Enneads, Ogdoads and Anunnaqi from hundreds of thousands of 
years ago as sacred orders. The REAL ORIGINAL existence of the higher 
Nubun races on earth(s)
 were millions of years ago –  physically yet spiritually 
NOW in quantum reasoning. The FORCES OF NATURE –  SUNS (Senior), 
MOONS, EARTH, WATER, FIRE, WIND (AIR), LIGHT, BLOOD (DNA) and 
the BLACKNESS OF NATURE (Senior) are all CONSTANTS that link all times 
within this solar system together therefore the spirituality of our ancients will 
be quantum linked to these existences and you. These existences all 
contribute to your physical existence and to CHANGE and PURPOSE within


--- PAGE 330 ---
ABSOULTE NATURE –  all space, all matter and all time –  past, present 
and future. They help cycles to exist and the best existences of a cycle in 
nature will be from the best part of a cycle and they will be represented 
physically, spiritually and mentally. In the best part of a cycle positivity within 
all existences will be at its highest –  pro-life. This prior to 18 million years ago 
included the Moon which peaked in its negative forces around 6,000 years 
ago. The SUN represented as AMON, ON, OM, ANNU, AMEN RE and the 
BLACKNESS (Collective gases) represented as PTAH, TAR, NOTI are 
PRIME CONSTANTS in nature. Those bearing Nubun woolly hair genealogy 
by nature are synonymous with both - physically (melanin), (solar-plex / 
carbon / dark skin) and spiritually (quantum reasoning / solar biology). 
 
One of the purposes of African genocide is to corrupt the ancestral spiritual 
lineages of tribes existing in the bloodlines. You will usually see other men 
rape the women of another tribe to alter the seed lineages so in the future 
ancestral spiritual forces won’t work with that tribe. Ancient disputes between 
the Adam minds are still manifesting within their genealogy today –  the RNA 
traits of the Village or Tribal Gods –  one tier of the African Gods. Of course 
you will find that other races are often behind tribal conflicts in Africa using our 
people as pawns –  but you must ask yourself the following - Why are the 
ancient African spiritual forces NOT intervening within tribal conflicts to give 
reasoning to our people not to shed blood? (please read on). The worst 
scenario for a race is when a Nubian is following interpretations of spiritual 
forces from another race be it Hindu, Phoenician or Caucasian as they are 
from a different lineage in nature –  NOT YOURS and many Nubians 
worldwide even in the African village are really following forces giving to them 
within those dark skinned Phoenician dynastic migration periods by the 
rulership of Nile regions at that time. In recent centuries the same scenario 
can be witnessed in the west as black people now in the Caribbean and the 
US took on Christianity based on the value systems of Caucasian rulership 
through slavery. The blood link is NOT present in other racial spiritual forces 
to give the best protection and guidance against negative forces. In other 
words that spiritual force can not help you to the same degree as an individual 
of the same racial lineage –  KNOW THIS. In fact when necessary it may even 
use you as a tool to help its own lineage. Though in some respects this may 
not be a negative action by foreign spiritual forces because under the rules of 
self-preservation pro-life they could be using you to help their own and the 
Nubian may catch the bad side of it because it’s not your original spirituality 
by nature. The prime example of course is Christianity as the belief system of 
Europeans through the African slave trade.  
 
REMEMBER THIS –  it was within the Phoenician Egyptian dynastic periods 
that many Gods where grouped together as one and then given a plural 
notion resulting in Elohim (Hebrew) today. The chief Egyptian god was 
accepted as Amen (RA) –  forever and ever amen. (Research this). 
 
Many Africans in the village are still living out hybrid Hindu, Chaldean 
and Phoenician customs and just don’t know it. Many of these foreign 
alternative spiritual forces and rites have been warping our black 
African sciences for thousands of years contributing to so much death


--- PAGE 331 ---
amongst our race in the form of black or white magic (as Europeans call 
it). This so-called notion of white magic originates from druidism and is 
a hybrid of Phoenician practices. If you follow foreign spiritual forces 
you can be used very easily to destroy your own race from the inside. 
The same way many Nubians will do anything for money (African 
corruption) - in the village many Nubians will do anything for spiritual 
power and this is how they are recruited to those demonic orders. These 
forces approve the shedding of Nubun blood because they are of 
foreign genealogy and many where planted in our race many years ago 
within those ancient Upper and Lower Egypt conflicts as well as 
Chaldean / Hindu migrations in to Africa thousands of years ago and via 
the Cuthites. Not to be mistaken with the Cushites. We ask you this - 
Why would your spiritual ancestors in general wish to harm their own 
bloodlines on earth? Would you wish to harm your own children? –  
generally they wouldn’t - So reason that foreign deities are being 
followed even in the villages of Africa and their followers are influencing 
the progress of our race from the roots. So we are informing the Nubian 
reader that parts of the modern spell holding our race back can be found 
in monotheistic religions while the same spell in its more ancient form 
can be found within these Chaldean / Hindu rites that soaked their way 
in to African village culture agitating foreign spirituality contributing to 
the self destruction of our race from the roots. Similar evolutionary 
spiritual forces instigating self-destruction have personified within 
Nubians in the western world as black on black gang culture. You will 
find both these forces in the village and the west have initiations which 
usually entail some type of bloodshed even sacrifice (crime in the west). 
They both serve the same purpose which is to dismantle certain 
bloodlines in our race –  the potential future leaders and saviours of our 
race. REMEMBER change begins from the extremes of a society then 
works its way in to the collective. The black extremes of our race are the 
villages of Africa and the black ghettos found in the western world. It 
must be stated that there are many Nubians whose intelligence is based 
ONLY on this ERA and they can not reason out NATURE KNOWLEDGE. 
They will always be used as pawns by evolutionary forces. They will put 
faith in religion but will not even research its true origins or original 
languages. They will put trust in their system and media and reject real 
consciousness given to them. They sadly give this mentality to their 
children who then become victims in social and political disputes in 
Africa or a casualty of black on black crime in the western world.  
 
You see the positive (+) pro-life of blackness is not represented within 
the Nubun minds of our race. These are the forces needed to hold back 
the negative (-) because all existence (+) or (-) originates from the 
blackness of nature –  scientific fact. You must live and reason in reality 
not belief to find solutions to these African spiritual issues.  
 
After our race have worked out the trickology in religion today the black 
activists and those of general black consciousness will one day have to 
address those demonic orders in Africa instigating their moonlight
 work 
(witchcraft). Witchcraft is the definition given to our race from


--- PAGE 332 ---
Europeans so when you hear it in the village you know that the Nubian 
reasoning has been altered. These orders are a burden to the racial 
upliftment of our race physically, mentally and spiritually as they dilute 
the perception of blackness towards the constant negative. This made it 
easier for the light-white-right to take over in reasoning within our race. 
Know this –  Since life (+) must exist before death (-) the ancient black 
sciences in positive life (+) have been interpreted today by many black 
writers as VOODUM (though it had different names within different eras 
in our race). Voodum existed prior to the evolutionary cycle of straight 
haired human species and the collapse of the moon. It was a universal 
science and many Nubuns were born by nature with this know-how and 
where able to perform what is regarded as miracles. It is one of the true 
fathers of quantum science using the elements of nature and was used 
by the Nubun ancients in pre-dynastic times to communicate with other 
star constellations. It regressed when science was extracted from it 
allowing spiritual barter to arise for mid-level spiritual people. Once 
scientific know-how left BELIEF grew which distorted PRO-LIFE 
reasoning leading to the influence of evolutionary forces and other 
spirituality –  purpose in the sciences were now based on personal 
wants, needs and desires instead of nature management beneficial to all 
in cycles. It regressed to become known today as black magic VOODOO 
as evolutionary forces grew in nature and made spiritual barter become 
variations of sacrificial offerings. THERE WERE NO BLOOD 
SACRIFICES IN THE TRUE ANCIENT USAGE OF THE AFRICAN 
SCIENCES it was PURE MENTAL CONCENTRATION utilising the 
formulas (form-ulas –  form –  matter) and elements of nature just like the 
blackness of nature (collective gases and elements) concentrates 
utilising its own existence and creates SUNS from within itself. The 
original Nubun tribes were vegetarians in accordance to the true 
biological physical arrangement of the human body. They naturally lived 
by our TRUE NATURE then regressed as evolution began and with that 
so did the ancient sciences. It is the LAWS OF POLARITY that keeps 
positive and negative (according to us) in existence. However evolution 
leans towards feeding the urge to decay in exchange for pleasure or 
lust.  Many people don’t realise that the Laws of Polarity includes ANY 
notion of positive or negative within a facet because an opposite exists 
by ANY REASON. This refers to (+) protons and neutrons (-) in science 
as well as good or bad people, groups and even races. Original 
existences are the judges of polarity within facets / species in 
accordance to nature laws. The Laws of Polarity abides to any existence 
of the opposite in nature within a facet. As a race we have accepted the 
wrong knowledge of blackness. This has damaged the mental and 
positive (+) of blackness needed to offset the negative (-). We have been 
trained to perceive that (+) positive as light. Light originates from 
darkness and can only exist in a darker existence. The light if positive 
can only be a secondary positive to the primary positive of darkness.  
 
We have forgotten blackness in its Supreme Balancement in Nature.


--- PAGE 333 ---
As stated many times in the Afronaut series our race is on a slow 
grinding journey back to our true culture and many of our race have 
been convinced that we have already achieved freedom. There are 
different tiers of freedom based on the capacity of human reasoning. 
The written laws of human rights can only give you physical freedom 
and even that is questionable. With the introduction of draconian laws 
under the one world order it will regress even further. Concerning the 
mental and spiritual aspects of freedom the majority of our race are 
generations away from even overstanding what freedom REAL-LY is and 
how to achieve it. Many can not remember –  that’s RE-member a 
member of RE –  SUN PEOPLE. Please remember this information well. 
 
When dealing with the belief system called Christianity the Adam mind 
becomes the actual biblical revisers and writers because it is VERY easy to 
prove that the true origins of many of the books of the bible are from earlier 
scriptures from Sumeria i.e. Enuma Elish or Egyptian i.e. The Egyptian 
Declaration of Innocence (Biblical Ten commandments) to name a few. Since 
the common man has no knowledge of TRUE BIBLICAL ORIGINS the 
authors and overseers of the regurgitation of ancient scriptures called 
Christianity represent the Adam mind for them and they are people like King 
James of England and his writers, William Tynsdale, Greek Philosophers, The 
Nicean Council, Jewish Levite Priests, Martin Luther, the Calpumius Piso 
lineage and followers of roman aristocrats as well as the authors of all revised 
versions ever since. In other words your spiritual reasoning is partly based on 
their REASONING not the TRUE origins of the belief system called 
Christianity. For Nubians Christianity is highly ghostational because there are 
no spiritual links to the biblical authors (above) or the characters of the 
scriptures and symbols because they are altered versions which create 
BELIEF. However this will work for the Caucasian race because the 
authoritive mind of this belief system are Caucasians so their mind, reasoning 
and nature is present. It will also work for Caucasians because belief is an 
evolutionary force and the Caucasians are the hosts of evolutionary forces on 
earth. Since its not factual but rather half-truths the REAL blood links are not 
present unlike the African village scenario so the governors of Christianity 
made sure that in the church mass they have the people at the Orthodox Holy 
Communion (Eucharist) eat bread/rice bits symbolising the body of Christ or 
drink water/wine symbolising the blood of Christ. These are their renditions of 
the blood lineage link to the Adam type –  the white Jesus on this occasion (as 
witnessed in the African village scenario). However the African village has 
REAL potency because the blood link is SCIENTIFICALLY REAL –  PURE 
SEED Bloodlines and DNA links through ancestry (not through eating or 
drinking parts of a Caucasian Jesus as bread and wine?!). This method given 
to you in the church of eating the body and drinking the blood is a subtle type 
cannibalism which was actually practiced by the hierarchies of early Europe in 
REAL LIFE who actually ate the body parts of mummified Pharaohs (thinking 
they could inherit their wisdom and spiritual forces –  research this as many 
Egyptologists know these facts and it has even been stated on TV Egyptian 
documentaries). Pharaohs where also considered messiah types (Messia / 
Karast) in their era –  coincidence? You wish to inherit the spirit of the 
MESSIAH (falsely known as Jesus) through these actions in the church but


--- PAGE 334 ---
instead you are inheriting a ghostational version (Ghost-spell -> Gospel -> 
Holy Ghost) manipulated by the many authors above who also incorporated 
their own belief systems in to the scriptures, customs and rites of Christianity 
and some of the customs and rites are actually from the ways of worshipping 
alternative gods from Phoenician and Canaanite cultures as well as those 
Greek and Roman eras who also exist in the PLURAL notion of GOD (Elohim) 
found in the bible. Alternative gods can also exist within the biblical word 
LORD. The actual word ‘Lord’ is an interpretation of the word BAAL 
(Aramaic / Hebrew) –  don’t just read this information please research 
this fact for yourself. 
 
The notion of ancestral acknowledgement found throughout Africa is 
condemned by monotheistic religion yet the very books of the bible are based 
on the history of a family lineage from Jesus all the way back to Adam –  they 
are blood related. In fact you will read in the Old Testament (Torah) about 
prophets living to be 500 plus years. This is really a measurement of the 
life of the Adam mind.  An example is JARED found in Genesis 5:20 
‘and all 
the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years: and he died’ (King 
James Version)(962 years). The days of Jared refers to his mind, reason and 
spirit within his own blood generations. In Genesis chapter 5 concerning the 
prophets who lived for hundreds years you will continually read the statement 
‘he begat sons and daughters’ (King James Version) Genesis 5:4, 5:7, 5:26 
etc. This is really the hinting on the ancestral lineage of those prophets with 
the actual prophet as the Adam mind so their generational lineage was titled 
under their own name. Remember according to the Bible it is stated in 
Genesis 6:3 that man shall only live up to 120 years –  ‘My spirit shall not 
always strive with man, for that he is also flesh: yet his days shall be an 
hundred and twenty years (King James Bible). In the Good News Bible they 
changed this statement and added the words ‘from now on’ Genesis 6:3 –  
Then the Lord said ‘I will not allow people to live for ever: they are mortal. 
From now on they will live no longer than a hundred and twenty years (Good 
News Bible). They changed this statement so that the reader has an 
explanation as to why the prophets in the previous chapter (Genesis chapter 
5) were living for hundreds of years. The senior version of the bible King 
James Version (written in 1611) DOES NOT state from now on in Genesis 
6:3 therefore the 120 years life-span still applies to previous Genesis 
chapters. Adam and Eve and their descendants were regressed to a mortal 
life from Genesis 3:22. All this is subtle ancestral acknowledgement found in 
the Bible hence Gene-sis (Gene-alogy) –  bloodlines and DNA. In addition the 
Genesis 6:3 statement (Good News Bible released in 1966) it says ‘Then the 
Lord said ‘I will not allow people to live for ever’. However there is NO ONE 
prior to this statement who actually lived forever in Genesis –  all the prophets 
were already dying prior to this statement. To say this statement means 
people where not dying up until that point which is clearly not the case (refer 
to Genesis chapter 5). The King James Version seen above (Genesis 6:3) 
does not even state anything about living forever. This is an example as to 
how through biblical revisions the readers understanding of biblical issues can 
be altered to create belief helping to distort the real message.


--- PAGE 335 ---
The ancestral aspects of the bible have been watered down because it is 
generally based on BE-LIE-F (regurgitations and fact alterations) which allows 
evolutionary forces to take over and become your interpretation of spirituality 
and these forces by rights will take Nubian / Nubun descendants away from 
their original existence and reasoning. The Greeks and Romans knew that 
types of ancestral worship are throughout Africa and Asia so by condemning 
them through religion especially in the New Testament (heavily manipulated 
by the Romans prior to 325 AD) means your ancestors do not become your 
spiritual guardians. This now leaves your spirituality to be guided by the 
Greeks and Romans interpretation of Christianity it’s now their MIND and 
REASON which governs you. The way you would guide your children to do 
the right thing would reflect how your own genetically tied ancestors would do 
the same for you –  they are not your enemy –  they are your relatives and 
you’re representing them in this day and time? The Nubian should now realise 
that even the changing of your own name especially surname from African to 
a European language still helps to alter your spirituality. This was forced upon 
our brothers and sisters in the western world through the slave trade but 
Nubians in mainland Africa who follow these actions solely for the purpose of 
westernisation (the west watchers) are those who are NOT INTELLIGENT BY 
NATURE. They contribute to the lack of universal respect our race receives 
from other races because these actions prove they don’t respect their own 
existence. They usually take on Christian names which were put there by 
these roman writers who manipulated the scriptures. This is quite obvious for 
the original language of the bible books even within the commercial arena of 
thought is suppose to be Hebrew (Aramaic) –  not Latin. They help give 
confidence to other races to exploit our race because they devalue our 
ancestral existence through their own disrespect towards their own surname. 
Please take in this information.


--- PAGE 336 ---
Extract 83 
 
Living Nature Knowledge –  Part 1 
 
 
In a science lab an experiment of any kind will take place. If the end 
result is already known then this experiment whether simple or 
complicated is really a sequence of FACTS. Energy is always used in 
any action, reaction or thought process. Both building and destroying 
matter wastes or utilises energy –  energy is always moving.  Eventually 
the question will arise –  do NOOTS need energy or are they thinking-
energy? We would suggest the answer is both. Energy in the form of 
thought manifested must still be utilized to execute these sequences of 
facts to generate the effect. Therefore within cause and effect energy 
represents a constant which links the beginning to the end of 
something. In a sequence of facts you dwell in reality and reality is 
MEASURABLE TRUTH. Reason this out –  For this reality to exist a 
sequence of facts had to take place and these facts MUST be 
represented at an atomic level. You could not even perceive what any 
type of light actually is be it mentally, physically or spiritually without a 
sequence of facts because mortal human senses of today can only pick 
up atomic level substances. Sunlight is your core interpretation as to 
what light is. In other words for reality to exist the processes of cause 
and effect MUST have scientific explanations BUT some of these 
explanations may still be too advanced for the mind and reasoning of 
this present era. Therefore they become theory. Since energy is needed 
to instigate anything an energy source must be present to allow the 
sequences of facts to manifest and grow a RACE, PLANETS, SUNS even 
BLACKNESS. What we are stating here is that everything needs energy 
of some kind to exist.  
 
The sequence of facts is actually the direction energy needs within the 
three dimensional plane to have the best influence on matter to achieve 
the most potent purpose in nature at that time. POTENT PURPOSE 
refers to REALITY because without potency (strength of thought, energy 
or consciousness) often perceived in the form of light (electromagnetic 
energy) the purpose can not personify as REAL CHANGE in the third 
dimensional plane. Therefore its influence is not strong enough to 
change collective matters in REAL LIFE. The human species are apart of 
this collective matter. If energy does not travel within a sequence of 
facts its current purpose is weakened. Don’t be fooled by this scientific 
observation you live this rationale naturally –  if some one you know tells 
you three lies in the past then tells you a truth the forth time initially you 
may be reluctant to put faith in the truth they have stated. This is 
because the sequence of facts has been broken. Many of the scientific 
processes found in books are actually being lived out in everyday life by 
EVERYONE.  This should not really be a surprise since science stems 
from nature. The energy exerted that does not travel in a sequence of 
facts known to achieve the outcome needed in a science lab test (by


--- PAGE 337 ---
human or mechanical error) will create an error in the test. The size of 
this error varies greatly. In real life if energy from the individual, group, 
or race be it strength of thought or consciousness does not travel in a 
sequence of facts it will also create an error. This error can manifest 
itself within the human psyche as BELIEF, FEAR or MENTAL 
SUPRESSION and these traits don’t have the power to induce the 
correct change of collective matter in accordance to your nature. In 
other words collective matter becomes your environment, culture, 
consciousness etc these all contribute to reality. Natural Facts are Self-
Sufficient BY NATURE because they are directly established by Nature 
YOU yourself will be proof of its existence –  e.g. Life -> evolution -> 
death. Belief can only be based on specific events in time it is not 
timeless like the forces of nature which give you natural facts. The 
creation of the dot, line and the circle must be one of the prime 
purposes of the initial energy source of Absolute Nature and this event 
may have not occurred in the 3rd dimension. The Nubian hair curls in to 
a NINE NATURALLY PERSONIFIED representing that journey from the 
dot, to the line to the circle [solid]. This is CLEARLY a symbol of 
representation within nature itself. Clearly galaxies spiral to form the 
NINE [gases] when seen from above, water spirals in a hole to form the 
NINE [liquid] when seen from above and SUN FLARES curl to make this 
universal symbol of nine on the surface of the sun (Granulation). These 
are all statements from ABSOLUTE NATURE. The NINE is purposely 
found within our genealogy as Nubun 9-curl hair (the journey from the 
dot to the circle manifested) and was giving to our race through 
evolution. Circles or cycles in nature are ETERNAL as an existence. 
They have existed in ALL TIMES, SPACES and MATTERS they are 
indeed LIVING NATURE KNOWLEDGE. 
  
Religion bares the highest collective concentration of mind energy 
usage on earth. In other words the highest concentration of energy in 
minds thinking in similar ways. The variation of mind energy is 
influenced by your melanin profile. A good question would be what 
happens to the collective energy exerted by monotheistic belief? The 
answer is that because belief is not based on facts the energy exerted 
becomes residue because it needs to travel on a sequence of facts to 
create real change in reality. As stated way back in VOL.4 this energy 
has been directed to the image of a Caucasian figure called Jesus. 
However this image is NOT REAL (it’s a regurgitation) and was 
manufactured primarily by the Greeks and Romans. Therefore the 
energy (mind power and collective consciousness) of the believers can 
only be directed to the nearest physical existence of this image which is 
of course the Caucasian male (agreeable or disagreeable in nature). The 
residue of this energy becomes ghostational and has been considered 
the Holy Ghost often known as the collective consciousness of 
Christianity. It becomes ghostation because anything be it a name or 
image that has never really existed in flesh and blood can never really 
have physical life. This residue energy is picked up in the church and 
can influence brain matter creating notions like speaking tongues or 
fainting. Haven’t you ever wondered why there is so little scientific data


--- PAGE 338 ---
found concerning experiments and observations within churches when 
the preacher performs a so-called miracle? The game is the preservation 
of belief and it is the respect for belief which actually has been used to 
unite the masses when it really should be the respect for facts. Facts = 
Truth = Reality. Belief does not travel through the full sequence of facts 
to allow energy whether it be individual thought or collective 
consciousness to personify within actions to produce the most potent 
change in reality. Therefore it may remain as ghostation (residue energy 
as gases) the Holy Ghost. Ghosts scientifically and historically 
represent the residue gases and energy from a host from the past who 
has died (G-host –  host of gases –  the life of death).  Ghosts historically 
represent the dead NOT the living and this is one of the reasons why 
many parts of religion are very questionable. To say Holy Ghost is to 
refer to a holy version of the life of death. Scientifically it is your DNA 
and RNA that can keep some part of you alive through your 
descendants after you have passed away. There is spirituality in these 
ancestral notions of bloodlines known by most cultures worldwide. The 
western world devalues the importance of bloodlines to allow 
themselves easier access to the blood of darker races through blood 
donor ship, blood tests and interracial agendas. 
 
In brain matter all information received must go through an evaluation 
process before reaction manifests. When the information is proven to be 
a fact a certain combination of chemical reactions and electrical pulses 
must occur in the brain. This sequence in the brain must be similar in 
action regardless of what type of fact has been received or learnt. The 
direction or route light travels as electromagnetic energy within the 
brain must be one of the representatives of nature for the notion of 
TRUE LIGHT. The SUNS of NATURE within dark matter the brain matter 
of the universe must give off a type of energy known in this era as light in 
a factual sequence to grow existence on planets. There is a correlation 
between the true light in the brain and sunlight received on earth for 
reality to exist because the SUNS create the reality you see as life on 
earth while the light sequences in the brain registers these events as 
reality –  a FACT. Since SUNS exist in darkness you should reason that 
blackness is the STABILIZER OF REALITY. Know too that since all 
existence exists in darkness this blackness could NEVER really 
represent NOTHING because there is always something in darkness be 
it many types of lights and gases. This is why nothing in its entirety is 
even apart of ABSOLUTE MATTER. Absolute matter is one part of 
ABSOLUTE NATURE. Absolute Nature is also known as The ALL in ALL 
and is referred to as All Space, All Time and All Matter –  past, present 
and future. This in turn means that Absolute Nature is everything in 
existence simultaneously therefore everything that needs to be known 
in the past, present and future is, was and always will be known within 
the ALL. Remember this information well as it is can be used to 
distinguish the True Tiers of Gods found in religion.


--- PAGE 339 ---
To live out nature knowledge a universal respect for space, matter and 
time must be present. This is why we stress the importance of original 
existence for we respect the full depth of our time of existence 
scientifically proven to be greater than other races.  The fact that the 
Nubun race even still exists while other races have developed on earth 
later is a statement from nature alone. This means as a race we have 
survived previous eras while other existences DEFINTELY have not. 
SUNS play a key role in this. To view reality from the perspective of 
original existence is not a crime or blasphemous it is in accordance with 
the forces of nature from a senior season of existence based on our 
time. Blood, DNA and RNA are the CONSTANT vessels that link human 
life together - they are a thread, a line –  YES a bloodline. It is that line 
that is the ink that draws the cycle of human existence on earth. That 
line is the nubun bloodline. We all contribute to that bloodline by our 
very own existence as those of Nubun ancestry in this day and time but 
it is those who bear the BEST knowledge who are the pen holders. The 
line will always draw a circle and our race will go through different 
stages within that circle reacting to change and purpose given by the 
quantum constants of our solar system, galaxy, universe and 
dimension. Evolution is only one attribute of nature but if you solely put 
faith in this notion then you will have an imbalance in reasoning. As 
stated way back in VOL.7 the physical body takes on the natural journey 
of evolution but the mental does not have to. The mental is an energy 
charged quantum vessel. The energy is from sunlight, water, genes, 
quality of diets, the fitness of your biological system and of course 
knowledge and reasoning. The more evolutionary your nature becomes 
the harder it will be for you to understand the BALANCEMENT IN 
NATURE because the DUTIES OF THE LAWS AND FORCES OF NATURE 
are not evolutionary they simply remain as original existence within ALL 
ERAS –  The Constants of Nature namely: (+) and (-), SUNS, 
BLACKNESS, SPACE, MATTER and TIME, SOLID, LIQUID and GASES 
(atomic / sub-atomic), MIND & REASON and of course the CIRCLE to 
name a few. Remember the collective universe today is perceived by 
science to be a BLACK BALL (circle). These constants and elements are 
eternal existing within ABSOULTE NATURE and were acknowledged as 
Creators and Gods and some were represented by facets within Ancient 
Nubun races in different solar systems. White-light is the evolution of 
black-darkness so do not be fooled by Aryans and their creator-based 
doctrines as darkness to light is the true order of nature. They have 
distorted the value of darkness into negativity or nothing-void-worthless 
to trick you and it is a trick for everything forever will exist in darkness 
as gases. They’ll usually use the white Jesus image to spellbind people. 
Nubun factions on this planet within different tiers were originally 
recorded as living god types becoming representatives of nature 
constants in human form in this solar system. This was prior to the 
ghostation version of god given in religion today. A god in life is 
represented in the living while a god in living-death is represented as 
ghost. To say in death refers to the ending of its reign of rulership or its 
winter season if that god really represents a constant in nature. Since 
nature is eternal - death in nature forces can only really be represented


--- PAGE 340 ---
as winter or evolution within a cycle. Around 6,000 years ago the last 
phase of scientific reasoning was extracted from our Nubun spirituality 
via evolutionary forces and later by other races within the collapsing of 
the dynastic eras. This created belief which is a representative of the 
evolutionary cycle within the human mind. Then science was purposely 
turned in to an enemy of spirituality to keep the majority in belief 
systems governed by so-called authority figures from other races 
because facts (reality) will tie you back to the prime spiritual forces of 
nature unlike belief which is based on evolutionary ghost-based 
spirituality. Spirituality exists in FACTS and it is this simple statement 
they don’t want those of original existence to FULLY COMPREHEND. 
The spirituality in belief is secondary to the spirituality within facts 
because a belief to be considered valid must have aspects that originate 
from some type of fact. A fact regresses (evolves) to become belief and 
in that evolution alterations and biases can take place (that’s be-LIE-f or 
even BEL-ief). BEL ties in with the BAALS and these are some of the 
early gods of the Caucasian and Phoenician stock. Belief represents 
evolution while a fact represents revolution within the same facet of 
reasoning because a fact will always exist at the beginning. The 
Caucasian race is the highest product of evolutionary forces in human 
form. Belief in itself is actually the religion and the authors of those 
belief based doctrines be it a revised book (e.g. monotheistic religion) or 
an ism (e.g. Liberalism) can guide the masses in any direction via a half-
truth. Subtly through religious belief systems other races through the 
(more than one) plurality notion of god –  ‘Elohim’ found in religion have 
been sliding in their own historical rites and customs which go back to 
their own ancient gods. Then they tell you it’s universal. All this can only 
work if belief is respected over fact. 
 
To understand reality you will have to understand the roles the 
constants of nature play in creating purpose in nature. Purpose in itself 
is an existence that changes based on seasons within cycles. The 
change in matter is used to achieve these objectives. Matter receives or 
loses energy to induce change within cycles so a constant in nature 
must provide any type of matter with the initial energy of change. The 
prime constant is the collective gases in space (Vacuum) which 
personifies the BLACKNESS OF NATURE which in concentration 
becomes SUNS and inside this blackness is DARK ENERGY and a SUB-
ATOMIC REALITY. 
 
The blackness of nature is far more than the perceived color black. The 
actual color black is only one of its attributes for visual recognition 
within the 3
rd dimension. The Afronauts still describe black as a color 
because it’s the mother of color and exists in all colors at a certain 
frequency and time. They took black and white out of the general color 
definition because if it was left in that classification the masses would 
know that black is the senior of color while white is the peak of color 
evolution. This is personified in the universal white hair of old age in 
humans no matter what race you stem from nature will take color in that 
direction. As the physical body weakens at old age the mental and


--- PAGE 341 ---
spiritual is suppose to strengthen. They are also opposites. In fact in 
many respects the actual human body and cycles within its biological 
system is NATURE showing you its laws and cycles. The real 
relationship between black and white in color would also conflict with 
the religious positioning of black (darkness) and white (light) so they 
don’t define these as colors. The blackest-darkest existence has no 
affect on the human eye and is the best existence to be in for the natural 
healing of the eye. The white-brightest light WILL damage your eye-
retina to the degree of permanent blindness. This is the reality of 
darkness and light for humans BY NATURE. The blackness of nature 
exists in everything as all light originates from darkness and light slows 
down to create matter. This slow-down is the evolution of light from the 
evolution of darkness to become light. This light has an end while 
darkness doesn’t. The prime matter from the slow-down of natural 
sunlight is melanin which personifies black (within Nubians)(refer to 
Vol.7 p6). This cycle will always take place within the universal totality of 
blackness –  space, vacuum, carbon etc. All atomic level cycles take 
place inside the darkness of SMAT. Light gives human senses an idea of 
form / matter in existence. You should not be afraid of the dark because 
in reality everything is based and exists within that very existence. It has 
been suggested that NOOTS are sub-atomic types of energy that slow or 
speed up to influence atomic level matter within the 3rd dimension. Since 
Noots are neither macroscopic nor microscopic they must be apart of 
the sub-atomic reality and contribute to the blackness of nature and 
melanin. 
 
Reason that sub-atomic exists WITHIN atomic therefore it must 
influence our notion of reality in accordance. Since the totality of sub-
atomic is beyond what is known today as the chart of classified 
elements you should reason that the sub-atomic part of YOU actually 
exists outside scientific measurement. Often the influence of unique 
sub-atomic energy on the human body and senses has been perceived 
as SPIRITS throughout the ages by people globally.  
 
If sub-atomic existences can exist in anything atomic then this includes 
the brains, bloods and thoughts of humans. Since humans are all 
unique via DNA (unique energy as acid) a lineage of energy in matter 
becomes a person, a family and a race. Our ancestors, you today and 
your descendants all live through this lineage of energy as 
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and when acid is heated by light, heat or 
electrical pulses it becomes gaseous and unique gases as energy have 
been interpreted as spirit. Solids, liquids and gases are the same 
existence at different frequencies. It is the sub-atomic part of this energy 
that exists outside the human frequency of existence (vibrations) in the 
quantum constant known as darkness potentially allowing itself and you 
access to different stages of the lineage of energy (DNA). Sub-atomic 
existences must influence NOOTS to create atomic level change. 
NOOTS are sub-atomic thinking matter and energy that exists in all 
types of matter. They guide matter towards the direction of change 
based on their environment. In this occasion the environment for a


--- PAGE 342 ---
human refers to the right MIND STATE and REASONING perfected by an 
overstanding of your original existence. The relationship between 
science, spirituality and nature must be known again by our race for it is 
a part of our TRUE CULTURE.


--- PAGE 343 ---
Notes 
 
(i) 
 
Afroo Oonoo (Moonset & Sunrise / An Introduction to the Nature of 
Nature Vol.1 & 2)  
 
The Ancient Egyptian Order (A.E.O) 
 
Amunubi Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball - Liberation Information & The Bible 
Interpretations and Explanations) 
 
Cheikh Anta Diop (Civilization or Barbarism / Origin of Civilization)  
 
Dr Joseph Ben-Joachannan (African Origins of The Major Western 
Religions & Lecture Tapes 
(ii) 
 
Notes on Language –  Many of the settlements in Africa as villages 
(townships) have been touched by colonial rule which altered definitions and 
till this very day is regressing our ancient languages and tones (even in the 
village). European broken words and phrases have crept in to our languages 
altering authentic African pronunciation. In fact many Nubians in the west 
should now know that within colonial rule Africans and West Indians were 
introduced to an abrupt type of English diction from white European colonial 
rulers which in today’s society may be perceived as very impolite and 
inconsiderate by other segments within our own race. It generally stems from 
the disrespectful mannerisms and communication skills of the colonial military 
and rulers from recent centuries. These interpersonal skills have soaked 
themselves in to our expressions of the English language. All Nubian 
segments of our race (US / Caribbean / Euro and Africa) should know these 
facts as many of the communication issues between black groups stem from 
these events. 
 
(III) 
 
Grammar Error –  It must be stated that on some earlier volumes of the 
Afronauts series Cuthites has been stated as Cushites. Cush-ites are the 
original Ethiopians who pre-date the bible mentioned in Genesis 2:13 as 
CUSH or Ethiopia (King James Version). They are descendants of the 
ancient Tarites (Ptahites - Tar Deneg) the founders of pre-dynastic Egypt 
(Tama-re). The Original Man of Earth one of the forefathers of the 
Negroid race. However the Cuthites are predominantly culturally Hindu 
based Nubians who stem from ancient Hindu regions such as Chaldea. 
There migrations in to Africa were occurring from at least 25,000 years 
ago and have culturally and genetically influenced NUBUN TRUE 
CULTURE throughout our continent to various degrees. For FULL 
details please search out the writers we mention.


--- PAGE 344 ---



--- PAGE 345 ---
Nubian Reader, 
 
It is imperative that all previous volumes are read before commencing in to 
Vol.19. Those readers who often skim read will eventually miss reasoning that 
would potentially answer your queries about these extracts. 
 
When evaluating comments from cyberspace on our extracts it is now clear 
that those against this information do not have the full intentions of uplifting 
the Nubian. This is because they WILL NOT mention the writers we mention 
at the beginning of every volume as this is where much of the inspirational 
research and issues come from. As usual they are written below: 
 
As Savyid Issa Al Haadi Al Mahdi (The Christ Series), Amunubi 
Rahkaptah (The Nine Ball - Liberation Information & The Bible 
Interpretations and Explanations), The Ancient Egyptian Order (A.E.O 
Booklets), The Nuwabian Nation of The Moors, The Honourable Elijah 
Mohammed (Message to the Blackman), Clarence Jowars Smith (5%) 
(Supreme Mathematics), The Holy Tabernacle Ministries (Right 
Knowledge Series), Credo Mutwa, Cheikh Anta Diop (Civilization or 
Barbarism / Origin of Civilization), The Journey Home Group, Haru-
Hotep Tar (Solar Biology / Parchments Series), Marcus Garvey (Journey 
Home), Dr Joseph Ben-Joachannan (African Origins of The Major 
Western Religions & Lecture Tapes), Dr Amos Wilson, Noble Drew Ali 
(Moorish Science), Afroo Oonoo (Moonset & Sunrise / An Introduction to 
the Nature of Nature Vol.1 & 2) and the other degrees of Dr Malachi Z. 
York (The Black Book, The Gold Book & The Holy Tablets). 
 
This PDF is a questions and answers edition. There may be grammar and 
literacy errors –  we apologise in advance. Endnotes included. (1-27 pages). 
Three writers put this volume together. We openly give permission for theses 
extracts to be FREELY DOWNLOADED to be put on any black conscious 
websites or forums whose intention is to improve the mental and physical 
conditions of our Nubian / African race. Many people will not be able to live 
outside belief or even respect the notion of a fact ABOVE belief. Many may 
even encounter bad visions (dreams) based on this Afronaut 
information –  please do not fear. This is the mind cleaning house. Fear 
is a stage of belief preventing you from reaching a reality-truth-fact. 
When belief becomes synonymous with culture then you have a REAL 
problem because the authoritive mind of that belief then becomes the 
authority of that culture. If your BELIEF originated elsewhere then that 
elsewhere is governing you. When a culture is based on FACTS indigenous to 
your race then the authoritive mind becomes the consciousness of that race 
under the guidance of nature forces and its laws. LET THIS BE KNOWN. 
Please do not be offended by what you read in the Afronaut series simply 
study the writers we mention (above), or research the facts for yourself and 
simply reason the information out. Respect who you really are Nubian!


--- PAGE 346 ---
Question: Why is time such an issue within religion concerning the 
Afronauts? 
 
Ans: When the Afronauts inform the reader about the trick in time be it that 
the timeframe of monotheistic religion is based on the Caucasian existence in 
world history. We are really discussing a quantum issue. Since Time will be 
synonymous with space and matter a fixed rationale of time alters the 
perception of space and matter. This in turn alters value systems and 
philosophy and the notion of equality in reasoning. Those bearing some 
knowledge must wonder how come authorities in the west still stick to their 
notion of time when discussing issues like the discovery of America being only 
500 years ago. Anybody with common sense especially a Native American 
would tell you that these are ludicrous statements unless you are REALLY 
referring to an era in time governed by the mind and reasoning of a certain 
race. The higher issue here is that a certain TIME is related with a certain 
MIND. This mind is a reflection of a certain race or culture. Light is 
synonymous with time it is time’s measuring stick for humans and it is sunlight 
which is synonymous with Melanin profiles which defines skin color 
pigmentation. MELANIN exists in sunlight
. Sunlight are the brain waves of 
Suns. If you live and respect a certain time given by a certain race then you 
are within their cycle and nature because space and matter must move with 
time. They can not be separated. Those furthest away from the melanin 
profiles of the respected authority of time will find existing in that time the 
hardest until cycles in nature change. Black comedians have innocently 
touched on this issue throughout the world. It must be stated that the senior 
marker of time given to control reasoning is indeed the BIRTH OF CHRIST as 
the BC and AD scenario under the Gregorian calendar.  
 
The Caucasian race will not let the Christ concept dissipate regardless 
of secularization because they need this existence to justify their TIME.  
 
Furthermore this time we are living in right now is a GHOSTATIONAL ERA 
because AD in this day and time refers to life AFTER DEATH after Anno 
Domini (AD) (Latin) ‘In the year of our Lord’. To be after death
 and exist is 
ghost. This is a cycle of the living dead - dying while living is evolution. The 
living dead also refer to the mentally dead. Those who are not intelligent 
enough to make themselves free using reality = facts = truth. They would 
much rather live in be-lie-f. To say 2006 AD (Anno Domini) is to say ‘in the 
year 2006 of our lord’. This means the Lord still exists in 2006 and must be in 
SPIRIT or GHOST form since he has already died for the sins of the world.  
The preservation of the white Jesus as BC and AD is based on a 
quantum agenda and it is the belief in this timeframe originally initiated 
by Roman based philosophy that is actually helping to maintain this era.  
 
However Nature Knowledge informs the intelligent by nature that everything 
exists in cycles. Therefore a death cycle like winter must eventually end to 
allow a spring cycle to begin. So you should realise that NEW TIME FRAMES 
will eventually arise or will return and GLOBAL EVENTS will contribute to 
these new time frames. The signs are in the times. You can’t have TIME 
ETERNALLY based on GHOST (AD –  after death) or BELIEF in the form of


--- PAGE 347 ---
the life of an actual Caucasian messiah specifically called Jesus Christ Son of 
Mary who in reality never existed in the time or place given for his existence. 
This current time is based around the number SIX –  60 seconds and 60 
minutes. Without the BC / AD time marker, science in this day and time would 
have to use a time marker way beyond the existence of the Caucasian race. 
Therefore they could not represent any authority on space, matter and time. 
Space and matter could not move for them. When we say ‘space and matter 
moving for them’ we are simply saying that they could never be the authority 
on the POSTIVES AND NEGATIVES OF NATURE because all darker races 
are senior to the Caucasian race. Simply ask yourself the following: Medieval 
Europe must have known of timeframes and calendars from senior races 
within the empires they conquered. Then why did they all agree to use the AD 
and reject time references from other races which are senior and still 
accurate? It’s because the Romans and their descendents up until this very 
day must maintain this era of time in their name and the Jesus BC / AD 
concept has been used as a tool to preserve this agenda.  The agenda is 
sealed by the Crucifixion of Jesus who died on a cross (X) that’s CRUCIAL-
FIXTION for the Romans rather than non-fiction as the Gospel of Barnabus 
states a messiah was never crucified. This is one of the many Gospels the 
Nicea Council of Rome did not release with the bible in 325 AD. IT IS NOT 
STATED ANYWHERE IN THE BIBLE OR KORAN THAT UNIVERSAL TIME 
SHOULD BE BASED ON THE BIRTH OF CHRIST.  
 
There are so many issues, customs, rites, agendas, trickology, physical, 
economic and SPIRITUAL forces that have been set up surrounding this 
notion to force this BELIEF in their TIME and ERA to exist. Saturnalia is one 
of these original forces. There have been many events and REAL forgotten 
messiah types (leaders) in ancient history who have been amalgamated by 
the Romans into this white Jesus character. The white Jesus character can be 
used by any Caucasian male at any time in history to spellbind people through 
psychology, imitation, symbolism and imagery. In other words if a Caucasian 
male or any
 Aryan leader (blonde / white hair & blue eyes) type acts like a 
Jesus character then they may be treated like one by a believer. With this 
authority they can guide the human species in any direction including the 
negative (-). These leaders may look celestial or heaven sent carrying a light 
but they will not show respect towards the original existences of nature. They 
won’t explain true origins of cultures and races. That’s your guideline to test if 
they respect the full cycle of nature which represents the fullness of reality. 
They may even be set up by societies to trick you one more time. 
 
To be the authority on nature is to be the authority on space, matter and time. 
UNIVERSAL REAL TIME according to this
 EARTH would begin from the 
RIVER NILE IN CENTRAL AFRICA based on ORIGINAL EXISTENCE indeed 
the arrival of the ancient African pygmy. The human notion of time begins 
there –  PTAHTIME. Simple research will tell you that different cultures had 
different calendars. The real reason is because their melanin profiles reflect a 
different light which constitutes to a different reasoning and culture in space, 
matter and time. Light is synonymous with time and different races will create 
their own space and matter (culture) for themselves in accordance to their 
nature.


--- PAGE 348 ---
The Nubun Negroid race has forgotten that their spiritual side / sub-
atomically has the ability to exist TIMELESS forever as NOW in 
NOTHING within the eternal constant of BLACKNESS shared within 
ABSOLUTE MATTER. This gives your spiritual (sub-atomic) existence 
access to universal space, matter and time. The physical side exists in a 
fixed TIME via bloodlines but now in timeframes dictated by other races 
not allowing our full potential to manifest BY NATURE. This physical 
time is based on the notion of 6,000 years and really represents the 
latter-reign of evolutionary forces. The chief of evolution is the 
Caucasian race. The caste system (racism), light (good) black (bad), the 
white Jesus have all played a role in distorting the usage of MIND 
POWER needed to elevate your own existence in nature. The light taken 
on by the Nubian mind created confusion because all light really 
originates from darkness. Yet you have been trained to see this light as 
the eternal good guy in ALL EXISTENCES. Lucifer means light bearer, 
shining light, light bringer, morning star –  understand this –  a trick can 
be played in the light. Light can be fire (Ur) and if you play with fire you 
will get burnt. They are continually through reasoning devaluing the 
properties of blackness. The blackness of nature holds the circles and 
cycles of time and everything exists within it. They only concentrate on 
a quarter of nature. The circle divided by a cross. Therefore they won’t 
live by the circular motion of nature (from atoms to suns). This is reflected 
in many parts of liberalism. The circle or cycle as representing nature is 
a naught (O). They define the naught (zero / cipher) in their dictionaries 
as nothing, worthless & useless yet that very symbol times any number 
in existence will equal (O) zero again –  see the trick. Add the letter Y to 
naught to get ‘naughty’ defined as disobedient / badly behaved and 
indecent.  Why is the naught (O) there to represent the negative? We 
hope you can understand the deception! It may read as very simple and 
of no importance but these issues are tapping into the traits of nature 
itself. The universe is a black ball O of gases and matter and has a 
primary energy source a black light the black lights when divided create 
all other lights in existence. The totality of nature - blackness (the circle) 
gets divided (symbolised as a cross) to create other lights (reasoning) 
which don’t represent the totality of nature. They only respect evolution 
not the full circular sequence of space, time and matter. The black race 
as a collective has forgotten Nature Knowledge because nature 
knowledge exists in facts while they remain in belief. Your physical body 
is the constant reminder of nature knowledge as the FACTS of what you 
eat you WILL have to respect or you could suffer serious consequences 
that were avoidable. The respect for time is so important for the 
upliftment of our race for once this is fully overstood you will clearly see 
the problems in RELIGION and the ISMS. We are millions of years older 
than monotheistic religions though some concepts in religion are from 
nature knowledge therefore will always be relevant. We are older than 
RELIGION but younger than NATURE. This is a fact. The MOST HIGH 
CREATOR OF NATURE is ETERNAL and would exist in ANY TIME 
therefore it was present before the time given by Religion and before the 
time given by Science. The only survivor of the END OF A UNIVERSE are 
gases which in totality will forever personify BLACKNESS.


--- PAGE 349 ---
Question: Why are there different sexual preferences in society today? 
 
Ans: Before we begin with this answer lets make the following quite clear! It 
stands to reason that equality can only begin when facts and correct 
information is disclosed equally to all parties involved. The definition of 
equality must begin after all parties know their true origins, value systems, 
cultural existence and history within nature. This must be cross referenced 
with nature’s equality system. We have stressed that the individual at this 
stage of reasoning will end up with Absolute Equality an equality system 
shared over time. E.g. you are born as a child obeying the laws and values of 
your parents but in turn you will become a parent yourself establishing value 
systems for your own child. So you take turns as the leader and the follower in 
life within your bloodline BY NATURE fulfilling one of the many cycles of 
nature. This is absolute equality just like the seasons in nature within different 
times and places are given rulership in existence. This equality system will be 
the future as it was in the past. You have different races and animals existing 
in different regions of earth due to this nature equality system. However races 
(especially the Caucasian race to the highest degree) have rebelled against 
these NATURE LAWS established by the SUNS and BLACKNESS of nature. 
It is mans mis-understating of what EVOLUTION actually is that has caused 
most of the problems on earth. It is BELIEF in this type of change that triggers 
the decay in nature resulting in the scarcity of resources this world is now 
facing. The attitude in man to take on evolutionary practises is also based on 
the cycle in nature you exist in. Religion has been used as the old school tool 
to impose the cultural value systems of other races to eventually open 
markets in other global regions for trade. When we say religion it is not 
referring to the religious books themselves because the majority of Nubians 
globally have not even read the Bible / Torah or Koran in its entirety more 
than once. We are referring to the REASONING it creates which softly kills off 
the cultures and value systems of original existence while allowing mass 
exploitation to occur unopposed.  In this day and time it is liberalism which 
opens the door for capitalism which is doing the same thing. Many Nubians 
DO NOT posses enough universal knowledge of cycles, origins and values 
systems to work out the TRUE intentions of liberalism. They are using sexual 
preferences to push through agendas concerning the CONTROL OF 
REASONING. Furthermore in the west they are using these liberal ideals as a 
mascot for freedom of choice while behind the scenes the same system is 
dramatically taking away their other human rights. 
 
The ace card of liberalism as liberalis (Latin) meaning sexual urges is 
homosexuality and lesbianism which BY NATURE is the opposing force to 
heterosexuality. To say BY NATURE means it was a trait pre-destined to exist 
within the evolutionary cycle to actually represent a stage in reasoning within 
certain human species. However this writer will now shed cultural information 
on this existence. You must now understand that SEX is SIX in nature and the 
NINE is MIND in nature (Amunubi Rahkaptah) (Upper
world 9 / Underworld 6). 
Roman philosophy abides to the underworld existence as SIX is SEX in Latin. 
This SEX is Sss-EX –  the sss sound is lip-less serpent based while the EX is 
actually X the cross, the crescent, the Moon. The moon represents evolution 
in nature and evolution is the journey to death –  gravediggers are known as


--- PAGE 350 ---
SEXTONS and graves are dug SIX FEET DEEP. The moon is also known as 
a lust force even today. The circle (O) represents nature in its entirety while 
the cross (X) represents NATURE DIVIDED. This is why any number times 
zero will equal zero O. They gave the X the responsibilities of the O in 
mathematics. With regards to this subject matter you should know that the X 
as a Swastika has connotations with homosexuality. These are facts that you 
are reading as the cross is against the cycles of nature. The prime purpose of 
sex is indeed reproduction of bloodlines NOT Lust. Lust at its peak is a 
secondary position in sexuality the same way homosexuality is a secondary 
position in sexual preferences BY NATURE.  The primary purpose of sex is 
the PLANNED creation of life. They do not want the Nubian to know that the 
same way you have the Hindu Karma-Sutra informing the world about all 
kinds of sexual acts based on LUST you had ancient Nubun tablets (Min 
dynastic writings) and also ancient African rites teaching the Nubian about the 
planned preparation prior to the child’s conception which is almost as 
important as the sexual act itself. This preparation can begin three months 
before the sexual act. This knowledge upgrades bloodlines. As stated so 
many times liberalism as liberalis refers to sexual urges. The urge is lust as 
XXX films. They focus on the lust of sex instead of the primary purpose of sex 
which is reproduction because reproduction ONLY includes heterosexuality.  
 
When investigating the scientific causes of non-heterosexuality you will find a 
notion found in the west concerning genetic abnormalities which contribute to 
homosexuality in particular an imbalance in chromosomes creating the XXY. 
You will also find research leading to glands in the brain secreting the wrong 
hormonal substances into the reproductive parts of humans. Though, they will 
not tell you that certain food consumption influences endocrine glands 
secretion and that animal hormones are often present in liquids and foods that 
are consumed by humans. Furthermore hormone secretion can be 
heightened by pesticides in plantation and meats and even E-formulas. In the 
western world people should look in to these notions especially the influence 
of supermarket industrialised cow’s milk and formula milk. The Afronauts are 
stating that though the information is valid these STILL represent natural or 
FORCED DEFECTS in the human neurological system and should be known 
and treated as such for the well being of human kind in general. There is a 
reason why they will not treat these defects as a disorder in this day and time 
–  please read on. We will now explain the routes of the natural defect which 
goes back to DNA strands. In the west they openly tell the masses that there 
are genetic issues with homosexuality but they will not tell you its origin by 
culture or race. Its true origin are the bloodlines which go back to Indonesia 
and East India who followed hermaphrodite gods later taken on by the 
Phoenicians then ghostized by the Greeks. These were half-man and half 
women beings depicted in many of the religious writings within those regions.  
 
In ancient times way before 6,000 years ago people bearing hermaphrodite 
traits where considered re-incarnations of these deities in Phoenician and 
Hindu based regions. Even today in 2007 in rural parts of India children born 
disfigured with four arms or two heads joined are considered re-incarnations 
of their Hindu gods –  EVEN TODAY. People born in the ancient past with 
hermaphrodite traits were given sexual rights to populate communities as they


--- PAGE 351 ---
were perceived as descendents of gods in flesh and blood. This passed on 
the DNA trait. However darker races have higher amounts of Neuro-melanin 
which stabilises genes therefore these hermaphrodite traits in bloodlines died 
out with descendents returning back to physical heterosexual biological 
structures. This was usually within the next one or two generations but the 
gene trait is left dormant stabilised by neuro-melanin amongst other 
chemicals. The Caucasian race is a predominate extraction from the dark-
skinned Phoenician and Hindu races - Asian -> Cauc-Asian. It was the arrival 
of the Caucasian race via albinoism and experimentation around 6-8 
thousand years ago were this DNA trait remerged and you will find 
homosexuality within the rites and ways of the Canaanites and their 
descendants who out side religion became the Greeks and the Romans. The 
Canaanites followed fertility gods such as the BAALS and perverse sexuality 
of all kinds were practiced. This is common knowledge and easy to research. 
This is because many Caucasians lack the neuro-melanin in the brain needed 
to stabilise genetic preferences and brain signals which keeps them in order 
with nature. Neuro-melanin was extracted out of the Asian as they regressed 
to become albinos and Aryan (Caucasian). This genetic regression was 
counter-balanced by evolutionary forces which began to give them strength to 
survive. The Hindu caste system is one of the ancient protectors of the 
Caucasian race to allow them to represent evolution and fulfil the 
requirements of absolute equality. Darker races governed the world back then 
so for absolute equality to work the opposite must have a cycle coinciding with 
the moon cycle within the equinox. Therefore the lack of Neuro-melanin has 
allowed these hermaphrodite traits to personify in lighter races as homo-
sexuality, transvestites and bi-sexuality in western society. With some 
research you will find that the pure bloodlines of the Caucasian race have a 
higher tendency for sexual perversion. The Nazi Aryan race used the 
Swastika as a symbol which has connotations with homo-sexuality and 
Hinduism. Melanin is from the SUNS and BLACKNESS and represents 
original existence and order. The moon represents evolution and the evolution 
of heterosexuality can only be non-heterosexuality. The moon in western 
society ties in to the notion ‘moonie’ which represents the showing of your 
naked backside. It was done by the Romans and Greeks who had a serious 
culture of homosexuality and paedophilia. The highest intellects of the 
western world are considered Greek philosophers and many of them were 
openly paedophiles and thought that homo-sexuality was a divine existence. 
PLATO in his own writings believed that love between two men is superior to 
that between a man and a woman. Plato called this love "uranian" love and 
suggested this love was ruled by a different aspect of the Goddess Aphrodite. 
This is a fact –  research this. The word Aphrodite ties in to Herm-aphrodite –  
see the link. The Nubian reader should understand that these events and 
facts are all under the lineage of the Romans -> Greeks -> Phoenician -> 
Hindu. THIS IS NOT THE NUBUN (NUBIAN) LINEAGE. Its not about hatred 
to anyone –  it’s about knowing your lineage in NATURE which leads to the 
preservation of your original existence. Non-heterosexuality can be found in 
all races but it is the Caucasian race that in the past treated it as a prestigious 
rite. The Caucasian races are using liberalism to promote their consciousness 
as the senior reasoning of nature. For a Nubian race to accept these traits is 
to accept evolutionary forces as senior to revolutionary forces. There


--- PAGE 352 ---
consciousness is evolutionary based which means by nature they must 
dismantle the original intentions of nature. To say homo-phobic means a fear 
or error is based on those who oppose homo-sexuality. So the problem in 
society becomes the phobia not the sexuality. These writings are not out of 
fear these are out of reasoning via the orders and cycles of nature. In fact 
homophobia is being used by liberalism as a shield to prevent real information 
correcting non-heterosexual positioning within nature. The origin of the word 
‘gay’ is to be happy (+). The opposite is to be sad (-). The opposite of ‘gay’ is 
heterosexual so heterosexual must represent ‘sad’ by opposites. Do you see 
the trick? The word ‘Dyke’ in western slang refers to an aggressive lesbian. 
This word originates from the Greek female deity called ‘Dike’. She was 
known as the dik of Zeus representing moral-order and justice and bullied 
other deities establishing her order.  So the trick here is that moral order and 
justice is seen from the perspective of non-heterosexuality fronted by 
liberalism which goes back to the ways of the hierarchy of the Romans and 
the Greeks. They are claiming to be the judges of nature! Only those who are 
of original existence are appointed BY NATURE to be the JUDGES of a 
reality. The people behind the English language purposely have given room 
for the acceptance of these ways in western society because it has been 
routed within the hierarchy of their culture for thousands of years. It is an 
evolutionary trait which was pre-destined to arise amongst the highest 
products of evolution in flesh and blood. It represents an evolutionary stage in 
sexuality in the form of senility.  Senility is a stage in the ending of evolution. 
This is witnessed in nature more generally from people of old age with white 
hair. This reflects a type of decay in nature. People of darker races who 
submerge their reasoning within the spirituality of liberalism may have their 
RNA altered to create reasoning for these ways to develop. They will be 
psychological followers of the light-white-right or have ancient Phoenician 
DNA within them. They may also have Caucasian DNA traits in them through 
ancestral racial mixing (e.g. slavery) with damaged melanin due to their family 
lineage consumption of bad food and drink for generations. So Nubian reader 
understand that this information is not about hatred it’s about understanding 
what represents what within the cycles and orders of nature and the best 
judges are those of original existence. Homosexuality is a part of the culture 
of the early Caucasian race and will eventually be given a position of prestige 
within their society because it reflects the traits of their original rites and Gods 
who were either hermaphrodites or sexually perverse. These rites through the 
years were passed down through to the hierarchies of Europe and were used 
in initiations amongst their elite in societies and their military. 
 
So now we come back to the notion of ABSOLUTE EQUALITY as TRUE 
equality must allow the true orders, sequences and cycles of nature to 
personify. This means there must be places, cultures and rites in races that 
must be respected. In other words a liberal who does not bare any REAL 
KNOWLEDGE does not have the right to impose a value system which 
REALLY represents the values of the Romans and the Greeks who were not 
Orientals, Nubuns, Latin Americans or Native Americans. They were 
Caucasian and Phoenician via birth rights. These racial groups are all senior 
to the Caucasian race and are all qualified BY NATURE to reject those value 
systems if they conflict with the orders and cycles of nature according to that


--- PAGE 353 ---
race. For the Caucasian race non-heterosexuality is not seen as a negative 
trait as it is routed in their culture and within the genetic composition of many 
of their members.  The true percentage of non-heterosexuality globally is 
VERY small in reality but it will be continually highlighted because liberal 
segments are purposely scattered throughout the western media and 
entertainment industry to try to promote this reasoning as normality. In the 
west they use psychological positioning within TV programmes, comedies, 
films and adverts to reposition sexual preferences within the mind. This 
agenda is present heavily in western youth originated programmes. It is 
hidden within the sexualisation given to the youth. They are trying to 
submerge these ways on Nubians in the west because the Negroid race as 
original existence are the judges of races by nature. Therefore to alter our 
reasoning is to alter nature. The Nubians lost in the light-white-right will 
always remain vulnerable to these agendas. Many Nubians in the US and EU 
will be tested over he next several years as to whether they are intelligent by 
nature or by design. The liberalisation of Christianity is in progress and you 
will see which Nubians abide to the cycles of nature which religion will 
eventually abandon or liberalise their views inline with this Caucasian agenda.  
 
Homosexuality within the Caucasian race in a white governed country is at 
least 120 times higher than in any other racial segment in ratio within that 
races indigenous country. We will add here that this ratio still represents a 
small percentage within the Caucasian race in its entirety but the preservation 
of these ideals reflects their commitment to their lineage of reasoning going 
back to the Romans, Greeks and Canaanites. Many liberals believe that 
religion is why darker races do not accept this reasoning. This is wrong 
knowledge. There are many tribes in Africa, Asia and the Americas who do 
not follow monotheistic religion yet still oppose those sexual preferences. This 
is because revolutionary forces from nature itself are involved in the reasoning 
against homo-sexuality and these are forces that have existed way before 
religion or the Caucasian race. These forces MUST preserve the cycles of 
nature as a circle O. Therefore they will go against evolutionary forces within 
a facet if original existence is challenged in reasoning because original 
existences are appointed DIRECTLY BY NATURE. Heterosexuality and non-
heterosexuality are opposites within the same facet by nature. This represents 
the Laws of Opposites. It is a negative trait for Nubian races to accept these 
ideals because it does not represent the reasoning of our original existence. 
For the Caucasian race it’s not a negative trait for it represents their initial 
value systems and culture. This is absolute equality. From the perspective of 
the Nubian race with regards to gender roles, parenting and sex education 
heterosexuality must be given seniority ALWAYS. However forms of equality 
can exist within the workplace and economy regardless of sexual preferences 
if everyone respects the primary purpose of sex (reproduction). This will 
establish order in sexualisation and will help control the quantity and quality of 
birth-rates. Those under evolutionary forces will be against this notion for this 
restricts the marketing of lust needed to fulfil the liberal desires of the 
Caucasian race. Many issues concerning the treatment of non-heterosexuality 
would be rectified if the education systems openly taught that these practices 
where synonymous with the early Caucasian race and were historically a 
white thing. Furthermore it was monotheistic religion that put them back in


--- PAGE 354 ---
order to an extent through the ages –  but as TRUE monotheistic religious 
values (which were nature based) diminishes in western society the original 
ways of the Caucasian race will naturally return. This is what’s happening 
today and it began from the 1960’s. The Caucasian race won’t give you this 
knowledge because it would undermine them globally as darker races would 
judge them as a force against nature by default. It would also put a cap on the 
liberal ideals they govern. Liberalism in its entirety is not all negative its just 
millions of people simply do not understand or truly respect how nature works. 
The Afronauts are focusing on the liberal ideals which challenge cultural 
values which abide to the cycles of nature in pro-life. 
 
Black liberals who support those ideals will not do simple research in to the 
origins of liberalism –  it is simply a LIGHT BASED BEL-IEF SYSTEM. It only 
works because they have convinced the masses that everyone’s opinion is an 
equal truth. This equality notion brings forth death as well as life. This 
reasoning needs BE-LIE-F to be successful. To believe is Bel-lie-eve that’s 
Bel lying to Eve –  In religion Bel is a Baal and is often interpreted as Belial or 
Beelzebub –  The devil. That is dead-evil or decay-evil. The governors of belief 
systems be it the western media, education system or those in the 
entertainment business can guide you in any direction. Black American 
liberals within these industries have to wake up to these spells being caste on 
our people. Through Americanism these spells are influencing Nubians 
worldwide. Urban Africa must BE CAREFUL for they are now targeting our 
continent with these liberal ideals and only those who are INTELLIGENT BY 
NATURE will be able to see through this spell. The spell has already started 
in South Africa pup-petted by the west. It will work on the mentally dead who 
are lost in the light-white-right. They have been softened up by Christianity for 
decades to allow these liberal value systems to work on them. Many of our 
African Christian leaders are lost in the light-white-right and will eventually 
submit to the liberalisation of Christianity governed by the west who are not 
really Christians as you know it for their Christ is really based on Krishna while 
the Jesus is Jah-Zeus. The Nubians original notion of Christ goes back to 
KARAST (messiah types) who were indeed Egyptian (Hars). Then back to our 
ancient pre-dynastic ways. The Nubian reader should be careful when 
evaluating black entertainment especially from the west and now even on 
cyberspace. There are many Nubians and liberals of other races trying to 
convert the NUBUN NATURE BASED REASONING. They will introduce the 
core values of liberalism to newspapers, discussion forums, films, music etc. 
They would rather raise subject matters concerning non-heterosexuality than 
solutions to problems concerning our Nubian race. If the Nubian 
consciousness was focused on our racial upliftment and not side-tracked by 
liberal ideals given to you by another race progress would speed up. They are 
not here to help this race but rather BLINDLY introduce you to the reasoning 
of the Roman and Greek Philosophers –  The Chief Minds of Liberalism –  all 
under BEL-US or Z-EU-S (Zeus). Z and S are the same with the S as SIX, 
SEX etc and the Z as The Zookeepers, Zuen, Zodiac etc and the EU as EU –  
Europa - Europe. Belus is BEL / BAAL and the US. They simply don’t know 
the true origins of what they have learnt. They INNOCENTLY believe that the 
ethics given to them by the western education system and now watered down 
liberalised Christianity is ETERNALLY CORRECT KNOWLEDGE. When in


--- PAGE 355 ---
reality it is a view based on the authoritive mind of that ERA namely the 
philosophers of the Caucasian race. We must all respect facts and overstand 
that all human belief has a specific origin be it an event, an individual, a group 
or a race. If you respect facts then you should respect life therefore you can 
not treat sexual behaviour that does not contribute to life as an equal to 
behaviour that does. Remember you are a product of the actions that create 
life. The middle fence is often a trick. It’s merely an authoritive opinion - a 
belief as to what equality should be at that given time!  The Afronauts end this 
answer stating that existence in itself is a gift and that all existence has been 
approved by nature to at least exist right now. This right should be respected 
but to implement this respect means that certain types of segregation may be 
needed. The obvious truth of nature is that nature segregates as you will find 
certain animals and races allocated to certain regions of the world due to their 
composition. True equality means that integration and segregation must be 
balanced and approved by all parties based on the TRUE purposes of the 
integration. Evolutionary forces by nature will be against segregation because 
they will have no influence on what that existence can achieve. Colonisation is 
indeed integration. Slavery via the Caucasian and Arab is a type of 
integration. Religious beliefs founded by other races taken on by Nubians are 
a psychological type of integration. These are the wishes of other races 
imposed on us. The liberal ideals supporting sexual perversion are just 
another part of those evolutionary agendas and its there integration processes 
that we are trying to inform the Nubian reader about in this answer. Due to the 
Laws of Opposites the Caucasian race will NATURALLY become the most 
disobedient towards the cycles and orders of Nature. They are the highest 
product of evolutionary forces in flesh and blood. Since the Laws of Nature 
themselves remain eternally as original existence and these laws allow 
existence to exist (life) evolutionary forces must eventually go against the 
preservation of life. This is what you are seeing in many liberal ideals –  non-
heterosexuality is merely one of them. This can only work if belief is respected 
over PRO-LIFE FACTS.  
 
Question: You treat the SUN and the MOON as gods! Isn’t this just 
religion again? 
 
Ans: Before we answer this question we really do hope that the intelligent 
Nubian has made enquiries into the many authors we mention at the 
beginning of our volumes. One of the key observations you should have found 
would be that the GODS you are following today in religion are the 
evolutionary stages of GODS followed in earlier ERAS on earth. Many of 
these Ancient Gods have been centralised within the plurality notion of God 
found in monotheistic religion –  ‘Elohim’ (Hebrew for God) meaning ‘These 
beings’. THERE ARE MANY GODS IN THE BIBLE which hundreds of millions 
of people worldwide have been tricked in to thinking is just one (Refer to Afroo 
Oonoo –  The Nature of Nature). When the Afronauts write about the SUN we 
are writing about the SCIENTIFIC
 influence the sun has on earth this includes 
its influence on human beings. Its influence is via sunlight, flares and gases. 
THIS IS A FACT. A fact is not belief therefore it is not religion. Any organic 
existence that needs the suns energy as sunlight MUST also have some kind 
of reaction to any other types of light or energy. THIS IS A FACT. A fact is not


--- PAGE 356 ---
belief therefore it is not religion. Light or gases from the moon or other planets 
must have an influence on this planets eco-system. This is a reality not belief. 
Many of the scientific facts about the influence universal bodies have where 
initially regarded by mid-level ancients as the personalities of that existence. 
This eventually led to those abodes to be regarded as GODS by those who 
did not bear the best scientific knowledge. Understand that the Afronauts 
have continually stated that Moon Gods and Sun Gods are ancient 
descriptions given by tribes throughout the ages. However the reasoning of 
these notions are still present in words, phrases, customs and rites of today 
and were purposely left their by the orchestraters of languages and belief 
systems. This is simply evolution. The Nubun races in their TRUE CULTURE 
did not worship anything because they were the GODS and GODDESSES. In 
other words once you understand that you are ORIGINAL EXISTENCE then 
you will realise that you are apart of everything ALREADY (all-ready) –  
everything is nature –  THE ALL. The Sun is in you as melanin, the moon is in 
you as evolution, the Blackness of nature is in you as carbon, dark-skin, 
Nubun genes, and the QUANTUM EXISTENCE OF DARKNESS is in you as 
MIND and REASON to name a few.  All other races are missing something 
that exists in nature this is why their blood composition is not senior to 
our Nubun existence in vitality. We have more of nature in us 
genetically. THIS IS A 100% FACT.  
 
The Nubun did not worship the SUN via sun-bathing and even to this day this 
is a fact in Africa. The sun is in you already. The Nubuns respected nature in 
its entirety and suns by the orders and cycles of nature are central to this 
notion. To respect nature in its entirety is to respect blackness and suns 
- The origin of everything! The ancient Nubun used the sun to aid our 
spiritual sciences. The same way electricity is used in a science lab today as 
an essential tool of energy in machinery when executing a test. The key word 
here is science as this means it’s factually based. Religion does not want the 
masses to live by facts because facts shed TRUE LIGHT on falsehood and 
those promoting it. Facts also dismantle many parts of liberalism which 
continually tries to alter the original existences within a facet. Originally you 
respected what could be proven or make rational sense ABOVE what could 
not be proven. Belief is a psychological phase of evolution within the human 
mind but you are of original existence. An INTELLIGENT NUBIAN under the 
monotheistic religions should look in to THE ORIGINS of the actual 
words representing the name of your god. Its original name will be from 
its original language! Then cross reference this name with the sun, earth 
or moon –  you may be surprised at the outcome. 
 
The Afronauts merely have been giving the Nubian reader FACTS concerning 
the sun, moon, the earth and other planets, and the blackness etc –  THE 
CONTANTS OF NATURE and how they relate to existence. Primarily they 
influence our existence through variations of gases, light and energy within 
the LAWS OF NATURE. The Afronauts then acknowledge those processes 
which beneficially heighten your own existence so you will read much on 
blackness and Suns because it can be scientifically proven to help create, aid 
or preserve your existence. However we will state hear that in cycles there are 
positive (+) and negative (-) reactions to anything and everything. Therefore


--- PAGE 357 ---
the aid or preservation of your existence based on a constant will change 
often in cycles. A FACT is bigger than any facet of reasoning. It does not just 
belong to a science, a religion or an ism. Those forces merely use facts to 
achieve their (+) or (-) purpose at a given time. FACTS ARE GOVERNED BY 
NATURE but how we use facts changes within cycles, cultures and races.  
 
One of the BIGGEST SECRETS OF THE AGES is that belief in itself is 
actually the religion with what you know as different RELIGIONS being 
the actual sects. The ISMS are also sects because most isms are really 
evolutionary forms of customs and rites under ancient alternative belief 
systems governed by BEL / BAALS. Many exist within LIB-BEL-RULE-
ISM. There is a universal phrase known throughout the world that ‘we all 
really believe in the same god regardless of faith’ –  that god is belief. 
The original authoritive minds of religions are the Masters or Lords. The 
word Master and Lord in Hebrew (the language of the Old Testament) 
actually means BAAL and BEL. Therefore the notion of BELIEF can refer 
to these BEL / BAALS who are often interpreted as GODS within 
religious and ancient scriptures. With different Masters or Lords who are 
really BEL / BAALS you have different belief systems. Some of these 
BAAL’s are the early gods of the Phoenician and Caucasian races.  The 
early Caucasoid races had sun gods, moon gods and fertility gods etc 
as BAALS (refer to Vol.13 Extract 71). Many of the conflicting information 
found in religious scriptures stems from this issue. The GOD in 
darkness who said ‘let there be light’ Genesis 1:3 is not the LORD who 
went against the descendants of Noah and ‘mixed up their languages so 
that they could not understand one another’ (Good News Bible) in Genesis 
chapter 11. The plurality notion of Elohim (which means God in Hebrew) 
grouped all these Lords, Masters and GODS together. These forces 
where initially in different tiers of existence and positioning. Outside 
monotheistic religion it was the Phoenician dynastic pharaohs who 
grouped the GODS together. The full depths of these issues are explained 
through the works of the senior writers and organisations we recommend. 
HOWEVER those bearing woolly hair with dark skin the Nubuns as 
Nubians originate from an earlier stage of existence than the BIBLICAL 
history of this planet. Nubuns as Ptahkind are of ORIGINAL EXISTENCE 
our way of life COULD NOT BE BELIEF due to Nubuns actually being the 
first to exist –  our TRUE ways are simply the FACT. Belief is actually a 
regression in our consciousness. Some of our true culture can be found 
in the FACTS that exist in RELIGION and the ISMS but not the BELIEF. If 
the FACT is known then the belief based on that fact is DEFINITELY a 
LIE if a difference exists. We hope you understand this statement. Since 
the Negroid races are of original existence belief can only be a by-
product of evolution and evolution is decay. To live by facts becomes 
revolution representing your journey back to mental life. We have to 
drop the spirituality of belief for the spirituality in FACTS to get back to 
our TRUE CULTURE. The SPIRITUALITY IN FACTS are the FORCES OF 
NATURE utilising the laws of nature to create and maintain REALITY. 
Many of these forces in nature have scientific representatives. To create 
the best positive change for our race we have to live in facts which 
equal the truth which equals reality.


--- PAGE 358 ---
Question: Did evolution contribute to the loss of mass usage of the 
ancient African sciences? 
 
Ans: The Nubian of today doesn’t know that much of the African sciences you 
have been tricked to fear today were commonplace in our ancient history. 
Hundreds of thousands of Nubians throughout Africa knew of the sciences. It 
was known in a way similar to how we treat western science today. Different 
regions and tribes in our race where known for different abilities. These 
abilities within tribes regarded as miracles today where linked to certain 
constants in nature. The head-quarters of the sciences where the regions 
considered pre-dynastic. These were along the Nile and spread throughout 
Africa. The pre-dynastic tribes received some of the sciences via quantum 
methods from elder Nubun races from other star constellations. When the 
Nubun tama-re was supplanted by the Black Phoenician tribes the sciences 
were influenced by ancient Hindu and Chaldean rites. Many Hindu deities in 
disguise are being followed in rural Africa and they have forgotten how they 
got there. The ancient Negroid sciences of our race were based on the 
spirituality of facts in its pure state. The purest of states are at the beginning 
before evolution. This state is blackness –  space –  Vacuum where all the 
formulas of physics, science, astrology and the Laws of Nature must initially 
exist to allow creation to commence. VACUUM ties in with the ANCIENT 
NUBUN SCIENCES OF NATURE. Vacuum as blackness does not need 
anything apart from space, matter and time because everything already exists 
within it. With this FACT now known the Nubian should realise that the highest 
forces of nature do not need sacrifices. If the ancient forces are eternal and 
always needed sacrifices then who or what was sacrificed before the 
existence of animals or the human races? Sacrifices are a by-product of 
evolutionary forces heightened in moon cycles. They are NOT the higher-tiers 
of African spirituality. They are not the original ways which begin in sun-cycles 
where mind is OVER matter while matter fills space! Many Africans have 
forgotten the cycles of nature which informs you that ALL VARIANTS must 
change by nature. As evolutionary forces grew in nature so did belief in 
anything. Belief within evolutionary cycles opposes scientific facts so once the 
facts left which kept the Nubun executor of the African sciences in sink with 
nature belief took over which led to desires, wants and needs. This eventually 
led to the deterioration of the sciences. This deterioration is evolution which 
attracts evolutionary spiritual forces that need bloodshed, conflict or sacrifice 
to fulfil the journey of evolution to death. Do not be fooled Nubians in to 
thinking that this only applies to the so-called 3
rd world –  any mass 
SLAUGHTERING OF ANIMALS or HUMAN WAR can be mass sacrificial. In 
the west everyday companies slaughter thousands of animals in factories for 
MOON-ey as bu-SIN-ess practice. The colonial fathers will eventually start to 
recruit young unemployed Nubian males from African and Caribbean regions 
to their western armies to be used as SACRIFICES in their wars in the 
Middle-East and elsewhere. These wars have nothing to do with the Nubian in 
their RIGHT MIND but sadly many Nubians lost in the light-white-right and 
Moon-ey may lose their lives over these staged events governed by secret 
societies. Remember this well! Those who are INTELLIGENT BY NATURE 
will avoid the man-made stages of the Armageddon process.


--- PAGE 359 ---
Once the scientific knowledge and reasoning left our ancient Nubun ways the 
potency of the sciences left because the why’s and how’s could not be 
answered to be passed down through the Nubun blood generations. Many of 
the sciences have been kept sacred by high-level spiritual Africans to survive 
the moon cycle. In turn the mid-level spiritual Africans began to pick up 
spiritual forces from other races –  the most recent in this era is Christianity. It 
was the Black African Phoenician lineages that mixed in with the Nubuns that 
helped bring in other spiritual forces. It is also the African Black Phoenicians 
whose bloodlines contributed to the albinoism that created the Caucasian 
race. These Black Phoenician genes are spread throughout Africa in this day 
and time. While this regression occurred in the land of the SUN (Africa) in the 
land of the MOON India (who followed Luna Dynastic belief systems) the 
caste system grew. This is one of the prime Belief Systems of this era today 
disguised in racism. Evolutionary forces in nature aided the caste system 
hidden today in racism while revolutionary forces left our Nubun ancients. 
These are the balances of change in nature.  With evolution comes belief and 
that is what our race has been going through for several thousand years. 
Belief allowed us to be exploited by other races through so-called slavery. We 
believed they did not have this nature in them. Belief till this very day will 
always leave our race unable to reach our full potential. Once we forgot that 
[1] we are of original existence and what it really means [2] The Laws of 
opposites and [3] The cycles of nature we became vulnerable to exploitation. 
Belief systems to this very day block Nature Knowledge from returning to our 
consciousness. Once factual based knowledge is positioned ABOVE anything 
that can not be proven eventually the ancient sciences will naturally return to 
the bloodlines of those MENTALLY, PHYSICALLY AND SPIRITUALLY 
QUALIFIED. Those bloodlines who maintained our original existence. They 
will eventually gain access to all 100% usage of the brain unlike today which 
is estimated around 12% - 15%. These are the descendants of the survivors 
of the Armageddon process. Drugs, intoxicants and many additives put in to 
foods and drinks consumed today by Nubians prior to the conception of your 
children will regress these abilities in our future generations. The worst of 
these foods and drinks have been tested on Nubians in Africa for decades. 
The intelligent of our race should always keep an eye on the food company 
Monsanto. Monsanto literally means Moon-santo ‘Moon Holy’ or ‘Moon-Saint’. 
Remember the ancient Moon God is SIN and the sin is in many acts of bu-
SIN-ess making money (Moon-ey). They are an US agricultural biotechnology 
company who have serious agendas against the cycles of nature including the 
alteration of genealogy. They are also the parent company of Agracetus that 
is Ag-race-tus and are concerned with genetically modified foods, engineered 
crops and seeds.  
The SIX Sequence 
 
A= 6, B=12, C= 18, D= 24, E=30, F= 36, G=42, H=48, I=54, J=60, K=66, 
L=72, M=78, N=84, O=90, P=96, Q=102, R=108, S=114, T=120, U=126, 
V=132, W=138, X=144, Y=150 and Z=156 
 
Monsanto -> means ‘Moon Holy’ or ‘Moon Saint’ 
 
M =78 O =90   N =84   S =114   A =6   N =84   T =120   O =90   = 666


--- PAGE 360 ---
Africa and Nubians elsewhere please do not reject this information. We 
must not normalize genetically modified foods. The African should avoid 
alcohol, cigarettes and all fizzy drinks completely and focus on pure juices if 
they can afford them. The primary drink must be clean water at least 10 or 
more cups a day. Africa we must undertake research OURSELVES (not 
relying on other races) to find what is the best food available SPECIFICALLY 
for our UNIQUE GENEALOGY within our own specific environment and even 
the common man must have knowledge of naturally making our foods for 
ourselves. In the distant future if unnatural modified foods and drinks are 
avoided these mental sciences will return and become commonplace 
throughout the whole Nubian race. These events occur in SUN-CYCLES. 
 
There are many forces on earth and elsewhere against the return of our 
full usage of these Nubian black mind sciences. This agenda is at the very 
least 3,000 years old going back to the White Phoenicians of Lower Egypt the 
Hyksos dynasty. Then further back to the Hindu. Then later with the Greeks 
and Romans who used monotheistic religion to turn notions of blackness in to 
the negative. In this section we will highlight the Hyksos Dynasty. The Hyksos 
reign in Egyptian lasted a few hundred years yet they alerted many of the 
symbolisms of the Gods and worship. They brought through their own 
Akkadian customs and reasoning of Moon Culture from Mesopotamia in to 
Egypt which originated from the Hindu Luna belief systems as most 
Caucasian spirituality does. Moon culture are the ways under SIN 
(Akkadian / 
Mesopotamia), YAH (Dynastic-Egyptian), YAEH (Egyptian), YAHO (Babylonia / 
Phoenician), LAH (Egyptian / Ani Papyrus) for these are all interpretations of the 
MOON GOD who is known very well today under similar popular names you 
should know in Religion and elsewhere –  You should research this 
information well. The Hyksos dynasty re-arranged the positioning of the 
moon in Egyptian theology which till this very day has created confusion 
amongst Egyptologists. This notion of confusion and uncertainty concerning 
moon reasoning plays an alternative role in covering up the negative aspects 
of moon culture taken on by the Canaanites down to the Greeks and Romans 
which are hidden in general Caucasian culture today. The Hyksos believed 
the moon was the ‘brother of the earth’, ‘father of the sun’ and the ‘father of 
gods’ in its various forms. In religion Moon gods and Sun gods from these 
eras have been mixed up within the ‘more than one’ polarity notion of Elohim 
(Hebrew ‘God’ –  These Beings). Scientifically Moons can only be birthed by 
Suns or Planets. The Nubian reader must try to understand that everything 
must change by nature and that we have been living in an ERA where Moon 
culture (evolution) is naturally against the people of the sun (The Nubun race). 
In other cycles the Moon is more positive as everything alternates in cycles. 
As the SUN CYCLE commences moon culture will regress. To say SUN 
CULTURE is really to say the respect for Natures processes in PRO-LIFE as 
the JUDGE and GUIDE above the belief of mankind because the Laws of 
Nature are from the Blackness of SMAT channelled into our reality via SUNS. 
The current leaders of moon culture reasoning are the Caucasian race and 
much of their societal practices and customs even within religion originate 
from these ways. Most people of all races do not know of these issues and 
many are IGNORANT OF THE FACTS because they have been given a fake 
level of intelligence by the western education system and liberalism.


--- PAGE 361 ---
When we call all this an agenda don’t think that we are saying that it’s all 
planned as a collective NO we are saying that it’s the natural response by 
different segments of lighter races through the ages who know who we are BY 
NATURE. However that nature is 6-Ether in its gas state because everything 
in nature originates from gases. These are the gases which atomically and 
sub-atomically guide the minds of matter in a reality away from the 
preservation of originality. While all these agendas are taking place it has 
been in science that they have been studying the BLACKNESS OF NATURE 
in various forms for hundreds of years via quantum physics, astrophysics, 
biology, chemistry, neurology and so on. One of the true purposes of religion 
is to keep you in the BELIEF of Light as a MYSTERY GOD while they try to 
master the REALITY of Blackness through science to a stage where they can 
control nature –  food, water, weather, bloodlines, genealogy, quantum 
sciences etc. In our ancient times the Nubun races where using our black 
sciences to do this. The Black-Hindu Phoenicians after supplanting the pre-
dynastic Nubuns (descendants of Tar-Deneg) in those Nile regions left some 
demonic orders in Africa representing the (-) (considered disagreeable to US 
in this Era) and tried to eliminate many of the positive pro-life orders 
representing (+)(considered agreeable to US in this Era).  They were BOTH 
using the black sciences because everything originates from the blackness of 
nature –  equilibrium (+) and (-) begins in darkness. Many of the (-) African 
orders where following older versions of the same customs and rites as the 
Phoenicians and are not of our original existence.  
 
The descendants of these Black-Hindu Phoenicians are still here right now in 
Africa scattered throughout many tribes and regions unaware of their 
genealogy. They are within religions, militaries and politics and are behind 
much of the problems in Africa –  genocide, civil wars, tribal conflicts. They 
represent the (-) Cains of our race and disrespect their own blackness 
bringing harm to our pure bloodlines. Many would say they are black devils. 
They strive on corruption and are easily recruited by other races as 
puppets. Africa in this day and time is a heavily regressed mixture of both (+) 
and (-) orders. It needs to be cleaned up with POSITIVE PRO-LIFE 
CORRECT REASONING for this day and time. 
 
The Nubian should look at reality and open your eyes to the blackness 
of nature that is pro-life –  pro-existence. The Universe is Blackness - 
The totality of all existing gases expressing parts of itself to YOU within 
a certain space, time and matter using lights and energies as tools. To 
say light is really to say blackness as energy within a certain time as 
radiation. To say ‘light outside our time’ is the same as saying blackness 
as matter and energy. This is often regarded as nothing by the common 
man but can be utilized spiritually and scientifically.  
 
In the far distant future many of the mainstream belief systems people are 
living for today will be respected no less than how the whole world today 
perceives customs and rites in rural Africa –  it’s all a cycle
. To live by facts is 
to live by nature and our ancient forces exist in nature that’s in the nothing as 
well as the something because both exist within ABSOLUTE MATTER.


--- PAGE 362 ---
Question: How does Absolute Equality relate to Life and death? 
 
Ans –  From the perspective of a physical
 human being the existence of their 
life will not be longer than the existence of their death. Equilibrium can never 
exist in this comparison. Therefore the balance is found within the living 
existence. In other words the journey to death really begins from birth allowing 
you to witness death while living. This is called evolution (eve-olution). The 
notion of evolution is attached to the Biblical EVE because any change in 
human existence can only occur from the existence of birthed life which 
women govern. It also relates to Biblical EVE because her decisions in the 
garden resulted in hardship for her bloodlines. More hardship constitutes to 
more death as a collective within the human species. The notion of PRO-LIFE 
which in essence focuses on the reduction of evolutionary forces within our 
existence is one of the early drivers in the balancement of absolute equality 
between life and death within the human species cycle in nature. It is very 
important to know that the Caucasian race DO NOT want darker races to 
respect the FULL REASONING OF LIFE refer to VOL.17 Page 4-5 (Simplify 
Pro-Life). To respect the full variations of life and implement them globally will 
eventually lead to the regression of the representatives of evolutionary forces 
BY NATURE. 
 
Question: You’re writings on belief are very confusing how can belief be 
negative when I can believe in Good things that are beneficial to me 
scientifically? 
 
Ans: Firstly that’s not belief that’s factual reasoning if the science has been 
verified to fulfil the objective you which to achieve. Belief
 is a secondary 
attribute in mind power usage while to Know is primary - John 8:32 ‘ye shall 
KNOW the truth and the truth shall MAKE you free’ (King James Bible). If you 
are jumping over a fence at a height that you have completed before you will 
be more confident in success than a fence you have not tested yet. On the 
fence you have not tested you will gain doubt even fear. DOUBT and FEAR 
are variations of BELIEF and still use up MIND ENERGY that could be used 
to actually help you REALLY complete the jump successfully. Energy is 
wasted on belief. On the fence that you know you can jump the energy is 
concentrated as the brain already knows what to do. This brain concentration 
can even free-up energy to do higher things because energy is no longer 
wasted.  In religion and the many isms belief is wasting conscious energy 
within our race. KNOW THIS WELL ! There is a difference in KNOWING who 
GOD or the MESSIAH is from BELIEVING who god and the messiah is. The 
knowing is based on research and factual data –  RESPECTING The Most 
High to a level as to know that REALITY is a reflection of the MOST HIGH 
since The Most High is ETERNAL. Reality will always include scientific 
information. ABSOLUTE NATURE (all space, all matter and all time) –  The 
ALL is our definition of the Most High with various constants, cycles, 
frequencies, beings, elements, gases, matter and energy existing within it. 
Furthermore within reality itself it is Ptah (as earth or blackness), Tar, Nubun, 
Genesis 1:3-8, Melanin, the Origin of Lights, collective gases, Space, 
Vacuum, Quantum Physics, Carbon, etc that inform the INTELLIGENT that 
clearly the energy source of all existence stems from the BLACKNESS OF


--- PAGE 363 ---
NATURE and its best concentration within a region of space are SUNS. 
Monotheistic Religion, Hinduism and many other Isms have not positioned 
Blackness and all its variants including Nubian races in their correct 
positioning within nature. This positioning is easily revealed through science 
therefore they must keep you in BELIEF meanwhile regressing your existence 
culturally, genetically, spiritually and physically to the levels of other races if 
not lower. In the western world they literally have hundreds of words and 
phrases spoken in everyday life constituting to light (good) darkness (bad). 
The Nubian race have simply become a victim of an endless psychological 
play on words which goes back to the caste systems and evolutionary spiritual 
forces that exist in religions. The majority of our race in the year 2007 still 
have not been able to work out these agendas and become fearful when 
information is given to them that can be researched or reasoned out in 
seconds. Many have literally given their souls to these belief systems so when 
information comes which challenges their belief they try to hide it or try to 
deter others from receiving it. They forget that much of what you have been 
reading from the Afronauts was commonplace knowledge amongst senior 
tribes in our race and was so for hundreds of thousands of years. Especially 
concerning the blackness in Nature Knowledge. The ancients of the Nubun 
races had NO FEAR of darkness or light and this fact must be remembered 
again by their descendants in this day and time. 
 
Question: How do words and phrases in other languages have a negative 
impact of our race? 
 
Ans: The usage of Language is a key attribute towards the psychological 
positioning of our race globally. The English language in particular is the 
demon of languages with regards to trickology, hidden meanings and reverse 
psychology detrimental to the Nubian race. 
The personality of a certain 
language is one characteristic of the personality of the race it originated 
from. Endless words and phrases follow the rationale of the Hindu caste 
system - black has to be the bad (negative) while light has to be the good 
(god).  [1] Do you really think this is the eternal truth of all space, all time and 
all matter? [2] Don’t you know that all matter fills space to make blackness?  
[3] Do you really think that black races in ancient times abided to this notion 
even before lighter races existed on earth? [4] Do you really think a race that 
called themselves Nubun which means ‘before the presence of light’ 
(cuneiform) would follow this notion? The English language through its 
dictionary definitions of words represents the reasoning against the four 
statements above. It is simply against the positioning of blackness in reality 
which is NATURE and strives on belief which originates from religious factions 
within the hierarchy of the Greek and Romans. They will never correct the 
social connotations of blackness in dictionaries as this will end their 
era. There mind governs the definitions. The Caucasian races applaud the 
altering of fact in this language through writers such as William Shakespeare. 
This writer helped pioneer IRONY, SARCASM, WIT and METAPHOR 
broadening the potential of the language through entertainment. However 
what these actions really did is simply reveal the ALTERNATIVE MEANING in 
words and phrases. These alternative meanings are the GHOSTATIONAL 
EFFECTS OF GRAMMAR. They are the belief systems of language because


--- PAGE 364 ---
the FACT is the LITERAL meaning. It is this Shakespearian writing philosophy 
and reasoning that contributed to the KING JAMES BIBLE written in 1611 AD 
and in turn helped the preacher and Bible reader disregard the literal 
information of the scripture for the belief of the scripture in the form of 
metaphors and preacher speeches. The abandonment of the literal definition 
is always the potential abandonment of the FACT. This is why you have belief 
running rampant in religion to such a degree that you can show someone the 
actual facts word for word from their own bible and they still won’t accept it. 
Most Christians have never read the bible in its entirety because they rely on 
belief not reality. Till this very day within the alternative meanings within 
words, phrases and grammar in the English language disguised within the 
origins of words you will find racism, preserve reasoning and hidden agendas. 
This is the most evident when evaluating words ETYMOLOGICALLY. The 
Bible and the Koran will continually be revised to create new angles for the 
teacher, preacher or Imam to create more belief from within the alternative 
meanings of words and phrases in those scriptures.  
 
The ancient Nubun scriptures and its dialects were primarily literal writings for 
the original readers that scripture was intended for at that time. Today 
Western historians may not know the true ways so they will perceive our 
writings are fictional. However many historians and archaeologists purposely 
promote this notion to help conceal our true existence.  Since the King James 
Bible is the biggest selling book of all time it is this Shakespearian reasoning 
within the writings that has helped ghostize the facts of the scriptures in to 
belief as the correct breakdown of the metaphor becomes merely the view of 
the preacher. Many Christian preachers in Africa have NO KNOWLEGDE of 
the original languages of the bible or even the books which were written by 
people mentioned in the bible not included by the Nicea Council. Many of the 
spells holding our race back are based around language. We strongly 
recommend that a Nubian search out literature by the Holy Tabernacle 
Ministries in particular a book called the ‘The First Language’. The actual first 
language is known by the west as cuneiform but was originally spoken by the 
Tama-rean (pre-dynastic Egyptian) as a Nile-based Nubun tongue. This 
language would have initially been spoken by the ancient African pygmies as 
Ptahkind or even by older Nubun races of various forms. 
 
 
 
 
Question: What are the Afronauts concerns on the future of our race? 
 
Ans: There are many events already stated throughout this book series from 
Vol.1 to Vol.19 written in the year 2007 concerning the potential issues facing 
the black race this millennium. We would definitely highlight the one world 
order development in the west that has reached our continent in the form of 
new diseases, civil unrest, staged events to allow potential foreign occupation, 
and the continual elimination of the original tribes and bloodlines throughout 
many regions. AFRICA MUST WAKE UP TO THESE AGENDAS for these 
rural tribes are the REAL templates of the whole black race. The majority of 
Nubians worldwide FOOLISHLY do not respect the original blood lineages of


--- PAGE 365 ---
our race because of ignorance –  they lack Nature Knowledge. They are 
trapped in time and have merely been given a beginning based on the land 
they reside in within colonization and so-called slavery. Under the moon-cycle 
we took on the personality of Africa (which means divided and separated) 
BUT under the sun-cycle we are TAMA-RE (united through facts and right 
knowledge of self and kind bearing universal reasoning). The name Africa 
was given to our continent by other races –  Arabs, Phoenicians & 
Romans. To be intelligent by nature would be to define your own 
existence if you are of original existence. The name Africa is a moon cycle 
title –  it must be changed. Secondly Africa is OBVIOUSLY the 1st world not 
the 3rd world and this trickology must be recognised –  1st represents the 
beginning. This is right thinking which will slowly help put our race back in 
order with nature. This issue must be addressed on a political level. 
 
Concerning the NWO the journey of the ID card to the implanted biological 
computer chip in the human body is the key goal in their quest to control TIME 
and REASONING in the west. In other words their goal is to continue this 
ERA permanently through technology and the isms including fascism while 
the reasoning of nature changes via the Laws of Nature which stem from 
SUNS (Re) and BLACKNESS. This can not be fully implemented in Tama-re 
so they are and will continue to stimulate genocide scenarios and inflict 
disease outbreaks. The Caucasian race in the west will continue to use darker 
races in the west as the scapegoat (devil character) through their economic 
and social hardships. The scapegoat doctrine is caste based and includes 
individuals, groups, or races and even African leadership (refer to Vol.9 p16 –  
Stabiliser). The scapegoat doctrine originates from Amunubi Rahkaptah (The 
Nine Ball Series 1967-70) –  search it out while you can. 
 
For the majority of the world the Armageddon process is primarily based on 
the writings of the Book of Revelation, Book of Daniel and the Koran. 
However you should be careful
 because [1] Much of these writings were 
really taken from earlier scriptures which to this day the masses still have 
never even heard of or know to exist. [2] Scripture revisions have altered 
meanings through the ages [3] the authorities of religion be it the Caucasian 
and middle-eastern establishments have used religion to satisfy their own 
agendas through the ages so why would Armageddon not be an exception to 
the rule? [4] Do you really think those forces against the real GOD (+ to us) or 
MESSIAH (+ to us) do not know these events stated in those scriptures? [5] 
Do you know what Armageddon or Apocalypse (the words) actually mean? 
 
What we are trying to say hear is that it is VERY IMPORTANT that the 
Nubians put the FACTS of Armageddon ABOVE the BELIEF of 
Armageddon (research is necessary). Never forget nature is a circle O 
(cycle) and all eras must change BY NATURE. 
 
The facts are that global warming is a natural process in nature as a sun-cycle 
and those with the best melanin will be the least affected. The facts are that 
Nubians in Africa for millions of years did not need sun-cream (sun-block
) for 
skin-protection. The facts are that there are endless agendas taken place 
against the black race globally to disrupt the progresses of our bloodlines


--- PAGE 366 ---
through planned disease outbreaks, parts of liberalism, civil wars, racism 
(caste systems) and mental suppression to name a few. The facts are that 
black countries face economic slavery by tying their fiscal and economic vines 
with other countries through globalisation. The facts are that black owned 
property and land ownership has been on a global decline in Africa since the 
so-called slave trade. Africa must maintain control of their own lands and stop 
being blinded by the light. The facts are that the ancient gene-pull of nature 
‘woolly hair’ that curls into the Nine 9 is on a dramatic decline especially 
amongst our women globally. The facts are that the black woolly haired race 
are actually on a fast journey to extinction spread over several hundred years 
–  which is fast considering you are over 18 millions years old. If the black race 
was never given any REAL KNOWLEDGE by the writers we mention (and 
others) or the spiritual guides throughout our African continent through the 
ages and elsewhere after the collapse of Nubun Egypt our sun-heat-genes 
would have been mixed out of existence by the end of this millennium.  Why 
do you think throughout Africa you are told to only mix seeds with 
members of your own tribe or language group? These are attempts by the 
ADAM MINDS through their children to preserve the blood lineages of our 
whole race under Nature. It’s the historical methods in the preservation of 
original existence through Moon cycles to still exist to prosper in Sun-cycles.  
The average African calls it tradition but it really preserves the DNA profiles of 
our race –  They will be needed later! Globally tribes of all races who maintained 
their original existence are the tribes that are obeying key Laws in Nature. 
However it is RIGHT KNOWLEDGE that is needed to improve your lifestyle 
within those laws. Meaning your existence and quality of life is developing or 
improving within those laws of nature. This was perfected by the Nubian 
Egyptians then ghostized by the Phoenicians. Without the full grasp of the 
laws of nature you can still develop (industrialise) but BY NATURE you will 
eventually suffer the consequences of evolutionary forces. This is because 
evolutionary forces must eventually go against the prosperity of evolution 
when evolution as a cycle ends.  Since evolution is the universal journey to 
death an evolutionary cycle MUST ALSO face evolution. That’s when 
evolution becomes revolution because a revolution is the force appointed by 
nature to stop evolutionary forces (-) + (-) = (+) (positive and negative theory). 
Therefore if the Nubian race goes back and preserves their original existence, 
culture, and spirituality (reasoning) in PRO-LIFE (since the beginning as life is 
before death) evolutionary forces of ALL KINDS must regress by nature. This 
journey going back will be perceived as a MIND REVOLUTION in this day and 
time - Back to the future. The forces against our race KNOW THIS RULE. 
Nature can not work with a race that doesn’t appreciate nature enough to 
preserve their original physical existence. The Caucasian race are the 
prosperity of evolutionary forces on earth and their Greek and Roman 
philosophers knew these laws and simply set up a reality using religion, war, 
sex, words and phrases, symbols, time alteration etc to prevent reality from 
being respected higher than belief. Mankind can control belief but nature 
controls reality. These spells they have caste are still working to this very day 
but will eventually lose there potency as new eras (cycles in nature) emerge.


--- PAGE 367 ---
The Nubian should be fully aware of the global events given by the Mayans 
2012 -2015. The Mayans predicted that the outcome will be BLACK-ON-HIGH 
(research this well). In other words the SURVIVORS of the Armageddon 
process will exist in a reality where black races spiritually, mentally and 
physically qualified - in tune with nature –  facts-reality-truth will be given 
nature rights to reach their full potential regardless of reasoning against our 
race. Everything must change by nature. The caste system could never be 
an eternal reality. White (good) black (bad) could never be an eternal reality. 
All belief systems will eventually regress and the respect for all variations of 
PRO-LIFE reasoning will arise and this will include the respect for the 
blackness of nature. Rises in sea-levels and global warming are now 
obvious scenarios and will grow through this century. Astrological events such 
as meteorite showers may occur and western mainstream news have already 
stated these events potentially around 2025-2030 –  Our race must be 
prepared for these scenarios. These astrological events will eventually include 
some type of Aryan race driven extraterrestrial scenarios using technology 
held back from the masses. However many of these will be staged events 
with the Aryan movements using the new-age white Jesus profile to spellbind 
people. Meanwhile the Ancient Nubun Races of various forms (including our 
ancestors) through spiritual, physical, astrological and quantum methods will 
return to guide the TRUE-ELITE of nature in our race.  
 
Much of what you have just read are events in the Armageddon process and 
much information on these issues are available throughout cyberspace but 
not the role of the Nubian race in these ecological and astrological scenarios. 
We will state that many activists in the west are bringing in new-age light 
concepts to spirituality –  those bearers of light. They will not give you answers 
with regards to the ORIGINS OF EXISTENCES and if they do they will not be 
scientific worthy –  just more belief. To give you correct information they must 
break down light and darkness in scientific reality, the cycles O and the history 
of our ancient tribes and our genealogy –  to name a few. If you believe there 
is no purpose in original existence then you are saying there is no purpose in 
the past. However every past was once a present and was once a future. 
Therefore you are saying there is no purpose in time. However time can not 
be separated from space and matter. Therefore you are saying there is no 
purpose in existence. EVERYTHING IS OF IMPORTANCE IN NATURE. One 
of the most concealed truths of the ages is that everything exists in nothing 
and nothing is everything (refer to Vol.2 p29 point 6). The SUNS, PLANETS 
and MOONS of the universe all exist in darkness –  The BLACKNESS OF 
NATURE which you have been told is nothing yet everything will exist within it 
forever. This is one the biggest spells of the ages. The black race world wide 
are facing variations of the same problem which can only exist in things that 
are globally recognised. They are (1) Religion, (2) Racism (birthed by the 
Hindu caste system) and (3) The falsehood in the relationship between 
darkness and light (witnessed through science) and how is has been 
positioned in all belief systems –  religions and the isms. If the TRUTH-
REALITY-FACTS between darkness and light was respected in PRO-LIFE 
above BELIEF our position on earth globally will change immediately. With no 
belief there is no fear then as a race we will walk once again like our ancients.


--- PAGE 368 ---
THE ENDNOTES 
 
EVERYTHING IN EXISTENCE (+) OR (-) STEMS FROM THE BLACKNESS 
OF NATURE BE IT EXISTING GASES IN TOTALITY, SUNS, ALPHA-
NEBULAS OR BLACK HOLES. THE NUBUN / NUBIAN RACE ARE THE 
PRIME DESCENDENT OF THIS FORCE (energy) IN THIS SOLAR-SYSTEM. 
THE LAWS AND FORMULAS OF NATURE WERE USED BY OUR OWN 
SUN (dictated by THE SUNS CORE (IT’S BRAIN)) VIA THE EARTH TO 
BRING YOU INTO EXISTENCE FROM THIS BLACKNESS. ALONG THE 
BEST RIVERS IN EQUATOR AFRICA THIS SUN LIGHT AND ENERGY (the 
brain waves of suns) AND THE FORCES OF NATURE CONCENTRATED 
TO PERSONIFY UNIQUE MATTER WHICH EVENTUALLY GREW TO 
BECOME THE AFRICAN PYGMY AND LATER THE BLACK RACE. THE 
DEVELOPMENT BETWEEN PYGMY TO NUBIAN WAS AIDED BY ELDER 
NUBIAN RACES FROM EARLIER CYCLES IN NATURE (who now reside in 
other star constellations and dimensions). MANY OF THE GODS IN 
AFRICAN CULTURE ARE BASED ON THESE SENIOR NUBUN RACES 
WHO WERE OFTEN ALIGNED WITH CONSTANTS. SINCE NATURE IS A 
CIRCLE MILLIONS OF YEARS LATER THE CREATION EVENTS 
OCCURRED AGAIN BUT THE MOON WAS NOW DYING (with no 
atmosphere) DEPENDING ON THE EARTH FOR ENERGY AND PLAYED A 
BIGGER ROLE IN CREATION. MEANWHILE THE SUN WAS IN A WEAKER 
SEASON OF EXISTENCE. THIS RESULTED IN THE GROWTH OF 
STRAIGHT HAIRED RACES BEGINNING IN INDIA AND INDONESIA. DUE 
TO WEAKER GASES AND ENERGY FROM THE SUN, MOON & SATURN 
AND ENERGY FROM OTHER STAR CONSTELLATIONS INVOLVED IN 
CREATION (6 ether gases) THE MALE (+) AND FEMALE (-) COULD NOT 
BE SUCCESSFULLY EXTRACTED TO CREATE OPPOSITE GENDERS 
AMONGST EARLY STRAIGHT HAIRED RACES RESULTING IN VARIOUS 
TYPES OF HERMAPHRODITES AND SPECIES DISFIGUREMENT NOW 
RECORDED AMONGST HINDU DEITIES. EVOLUTIONARY FORCES 
PERSONIFIED.  EVENTUAL EXPERIMENTATION BY NUBUN RACES (ALL 
READY EXISTING) AS WELL AS BY FORCES FROM OTHER STAR 
CONSTELLATIONS STABILISED THEIR GENES. STRAIGHT HAIRED 
RACES REJECT THE FACTUAL ENERGY OF BLACKNESS AS ORIGINAL 
CREATIVE FORCES (represented by Nubun races, sun culture, 9-ether sun, 
black lights) FOR THE SECONDARY ENERGY IN LIGHT (Ghostational 
Forces) (represented by Hindu deities, 6-ether sun (a Baal), moon gods, luna-
light, fire). AS MELANIN DEPARTS FROM A BLOODLINE EVOLUTION 
(DECAY) COMMENCES. THE HIERARCHY OF 9 ETHER RACES AND 6 
ETHER RACES ARE BOTH RECORDED IN RELIGION WITHIN THE 
PLURALITY NOTION OF GOD (ELOHIM ‘these beings’). HOWEVER THE 
TRAITS OF RELIGION IN THIS DAY AND TIME LEAN TOWARDS THE 
REASONING OF THE 6 RATHER THAN THE 9 BECAUSE THE 
PROSPERITY OF EVOLUTION HAVE BEEN GIVEN GOVERNANCE OVER 
DOCTRINE REASONING. THEY HAVE THE WORLD FAVOURING THEIR 
CONCEPT OF GOD AND ITS REPRESENTATIVES WHO ARE THE EARLY 
GODS OF THE CAUCASIAN (Aryan) AND PHOENICIAN (Babylonian) WHO 
ORIGINATE FROM THE HINDU. KEY TO THIS DECEPTION IS ALTERING 
THE PERCEPTION IN NATURE OF CONSTANTS SUCH AS THE SUN AND


--- PAGE 369 ---
THE MOON AND THE POSITIONING OF DARKNESS AND LIGHT WITHIN 
THE HUMAN MIND IN RELATION TO REALITY AND BELIEF. REMEMBER 
THE BIGGEST DECEPTION IS THAT BAD MUST BE SEEN AS GOOD AND 
VISA VERSA –  respecting FACTS = TRUTH = REALITY is essential in MIND 
REVOLUTION. IF THE NUBIAN RACE REVEALS THE PRO-LIFE FORCES 
OF BLACKNESS (+) (The reality of things) BACK INTO REASONING 
WITHIN HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS THEN BY DEFAULT THE DEATH-
FORCES EXISTING IN LIGHT (LUCIFER –  light bringer, LUNA-CIPHER (the 
circle O under the dot and the line (underworld) - the number six (6) actually 
drawn etc be it a man, concept or belief system) MUST REGRESS. DEATH–
FORCES CAN ONLY HIDE IN BELIEF (working within EVOLUTION). FACTS 
REVEAL FALSEHOOD.  THE TRUE CULTURE OF THE NUBUN RACE 
WAS TO STRIVE TO LIVE BY FACTS WHICH EQUATES TO TRUE-LIGHT. 
SPACE, MATTER AND TIME USES A CONSTANT TO WORK THROUGH 
AND UTILISE IN THE THREE DIMENSIONAL PLANE THIS IS DARKNESS 
(Blackness) VACUUM AND PRO-LIFE (The Gift of Existence) MUST 
ALWAYS BEGIN HERE. IN ANCIENT TIMES NUBUNS USED THE 
SCIENCES OF SPACE (vacuum suction, the laws of attraction, quantum 
manipulation of light and energy etc) NATURALLY ON EARTH TO 
MANIPULATE MATTER. THESE SCIENCES HAVE BEEN MIS-
INTERPRETED AS BLACK-MAGIC PURPOSELY TO CONCEAL THE FACT 
THAT SUNS, MOONS AND PLANETS USE THE SAME PROCESSES 
NATURALLY DICTATED BY THEIR CORES. THE BLACK RACE AS THE 
CLOSEST SPECIES TO NATURE ON THIS PLANET IN OUR ORIGINAL 
EXISTENCE ARE WAY-BEYOND OTHER RACES IN THIS KNOW-HOW. IT 
WAS THROUGH FEAR AND BELIEF FROM OTHER RACES AND THE 
LESS INITIATED OF OUR OWN RACE THE BLACK SCIENCES HAVE 
BEEN PURPOSELY DISMANTLED THOUGH RELIGION AND BY FOREIGN 
RULERSHIP (Phoenician / Hindu based) IN ANCIENT AFRICA. THIS WAS 
DONE BY FOCUSING ON LUNA-LIGHT (MIST) OR FIRE PUTTING ALL 
RACES OUT OF SINK WITH THEIR ORIGINAL PURPOSE. NATURE IS 
BLACKNESS AS EVERYTHING CAME FROM THIS EXISTENCE AND WILL 
FOREVER RESIDE IN THIS EXISTENCE –  HOW COULD IT REPRESENT 
THE ULTIMATE NEGATIVE? TO ETERNALLY EXIST A PORTION OF THE 
FORCES OF NATURE (NETERU) MUST ALWAYS EXIST OUTSIDE EYE-
LIGHT BECAUSE LIGHT FOR THE HUMAN– EYE IS FIXED IN TIME 
(186,282.397 miles per second). THERE ARE LIMITS IN NATURE FOR THE 
WHITE LIGHT IT IS NOT INFINITE WHILE THE LIGHTS IN BLACKNESS 
ALWAYS EXIST BEFORE AND AFTER THE JOURNEY OF WHITE LIGHT. 
WHITE LIGHT CAN NEVER BE THE ORIGINAL LIGHT BECAUSE IT 
COMPRISES OF THREE OTHER LIGHTS IN COMBINATION (Namely Red, 
Blue & Green). THE ORIGINAL LIGHT TO MANIFEST FROM THE BLACK 
LIGHT (ENERGY) OF BLACKNESS WOULD REPRESENT LIFE WHICH IS 
GREEN. OUR ANCIENTS CAN TIMELESSLY USE LIGHT ENERGY TYPES 
WHICH ARE CONVERTED BY MELANIN IN TO BRAIN PULSES THEN IN 
TO INFORMATION TO REACH YOU - QUANTUM REASONING –  THIS 
INFORMATION IS GROWN - FROM SUB-ATOMIC TO ATOMIC OVER A  
PERIOD OF TIME. INFORMATION CAN BE STORED IN DNA TO REACT 
AT A CERTAIN TIME WITHIN A BLOODLINE VIA A CONSTANT AS AN 
ACTIVATOR (say a SUN or Unique Information). THE ALTERING OF THE


--- PAGE 370 ---
DNA THROUGH ITS BLOOD GENERATIONS CAN GREATLY DAMAGE 
THE QUALITY OF INFORMATION (REASONING) DUE TO BE ACTIVATED 
WHEN THE CYCLE IS RIGHT. TO PRESERVE THIS INFORMATION 
DIETARY MUST REMAIN HEALTHY AND SEXUAL RELATIONS 
CONTRIBUTING TO BLOODLINES MUST BE OF THE SAME KIND. THE 
AWAKENING OF RIGHT KNOWLEDGE WITHIN THE NUBIAN RACE WILL 
OCCUR AT DIFFERENT TIMES BASED ON THE INTELLIGENCE BY 
NATURE OF THE BLOODLINE IN TOTALITY OVER GENERATIONS. THE 
ELITE GAIN REAL KNOWLEDGE PRIOR TO THE SUN-CYCLE, THE 
COMMON WILL BE AFTER THE BEGINNING OF THE SUN CYCLE (by 
reason), THE MENTALLY DEAD WILL NEVER BE. THE MENTALLY DEAD 
WILL BE IN A BLINDED DARKNESS. THEY WERE BLINDED 
PERMANENTLY BY THE LIGHT. THEY WILL NOT BE ABLE TO SEE IN 
THE DARK (THE UPGRADED LIGHT) –  REASON THIS OUT. A NUBIAN 
SHOULD TRY TO SPEND AROUND 70% OF THEIR FREE TIME WITHIN 
AN ACTIVE DAY OUTSIDE RECEIVING SUN ENERGY. THE SUN IS A 
PRIME CONSTANT AND INFORMATION EXISTS IN SUNLIGHT. SO 
OPPOSING FORCES MAY HAVE TO CREATE AN ENVIRONMENT THAT 
FORCES THE MASSES TO SUN-BLOCK THAT INFORMATION. WESTERN 
SCIENCE STATES THAT SUNLIGHT CONTRIBUTES TO AGING. THIS IS 
REALLY INFORMATION WHICH STIMULATES CELLS TO REACT IN A 
CERTAIN WAY. THE SUN WILL STIMULATE CERTAIN CELLS IN CERTAIN 
SPECIES TO MUTATE BECOMING CANCEROUS OR POSITIVELY 
UPGRADE OVER TIME. IN DIFFERENT CYCLES SUNLIGHT WILL GIVE 
OUT DIFFERENT INFORMATION WITHIN FREQUENCIES OF LIGHT. THE 
INFORMATION GIVEN BY OUR BLACK GUIDES WILL ALWAYS CONFLICT 
WITH THE CAUCASIAN RACE WHO ARE IMPLEMENTING PLANS FOR 
DARKER RACES NOT TO NATURALLY UPGRADE GENETICALLY OR IN 
CONSCIOUSNESS –  BUT RATHER REGRESS GENEALOGY WITH 
PLANNED ALTERATIONS THEY CAN CONTROL (targeting the black 
population in Africa and the west with genetically modified foods & liquids, 
diseases and the cures, drugs, racial-mixing etc). LIBERALISM IS THE 
PSYCHOLOGICAL PHASE OF THIS AGENDA WHICH REALLY 
ORIGINATES FROM THE SEXUAL CUSTOMS OF THE CAUCASIAN RACE 
UNDER THEIR OWN GODS. EVERYTHING MUST CHANGE BY NATURE. 
THIS INCLUDES REASONING FROM BELIEF TO FACTUAL. IN A 
FACTUAL REALITY EQUALITY EXISTS IN CYCLES NOT AT THE SAME 
PLACE OR TIME. IN ANY QUEUE YOU WILL HEAR THE NOTION ‘ONE AT 
A TIME’. ONE FORM OF MATTER CAN ONLY FILL ONE SPACE IN 
NATURE AT A TIME. THEN AFTER PURPOSE HAS BEEN ACHIEVED FOR 
THAT MATTER ANOTHER MATTER WILL TAKE OVER ITS POSITION –  
ABSOLUTE EQUALITY. OUR TIME AS A RACE IS COMING BUT THE 
PROSPERITY WILL ONLY BE THOSE WHO ARE INTELLIGENT BY 
NATURE. THOSE BEARING RIGHT REASONING ON THE BEST SIDE OF 
NATURE –  LIVING NATURE KNOWLEDGE. EARNING THE ABILITY TO 
CHANGE A FACET OF NATURE AT A GIVEN TIME SINCE YOUR NOW 
WITH NATURE. THE QUEUE (Season, Cycle, Era) IS ONE OF THE 
PERSONALITY TRAITS OF NATURE ITSELF.  WAKE UP NUBUNS & 
NUBIANS TO YOUR ORIGINAL EXISTENCE WITHIN THE ALL –  ALL 
SPACE, ALL MATTER AND ALL TIME - ABSOLUTE NATURE

