=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: A-RBG-Guidebook-for-Reparations-Studies.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 568
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:55:44.937875
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
RBG Communiversity 
THIS DOWNLOADABLE RESOURCE IS PART OF: 
The RBG Maafa (European Holocaust of Afrikan Enslavement) and Reparations Collection 
 
Icebreaker Video


--- PAGE 2 ---
For 246 years , enslaved Afrikan (our ancestors) endured inhuman living conditions, torture and 
rape, legally enforced servit ude, and other horrendous crimes against humanity. Meanwhile, 
countless American corporations sponsored and/or benefited from the uncompensated labor and 
exploitation of these slaves.  
In 1863, “President Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation began the process of freeing ” the more 
than 4 million slaves of Afri kan descent in the United States. But while chattel slavery was 
abolished, sharecropping, "black codes", Jim Crow laws, lynching, psychic violence and socio-
structural and institutional racism perpetuated restrictions upon the “freed” Afrikans nonetheless. 
Dozens of corporations continued to this very day to benefit from unpaid labor  of our ancestors, 
allowing these companies to flourish, while unemployment sores to all time post -chattel highs as 
I write. Citing the persisting legacy of slavery, suffering and death we as descendants of these 
slaves must continue to fight for reparations and reconciliation on behalf of the approximately 35 
million living descendants of our enslaved ancestors. 
Although I personally believe that the immorality of the American system, business and culture 
of white supremacy  / racism will never see fit to give us reparations; the principles and 
documentation of our fight for such a just caused must be carried forward. At the end of the day, 
I agree 101% with Minister Malcolm X when he says “Nobody can give you freedom. Nobody 
can give you equality or justice or anything. If you're a man, you take it. ”  (From: Malcolm X 
Speaks, 1965) Thus, as we struggle against continued U.S. colonization New Afrikans must have 
a determined sense of history in regard to the New Afrikan Nation’s historical struggle, 
movement in and relationship to the United States. The work that has be en done and is being 
done towards reparations is “bread and butter knowledge ”. Without such knowledge; our 
practice will continue to be confused and chaotic, lacking the historical continuity which  serves 
to give practical guidance to our struggle and movement on the road to  full independence. It is 
with these notions in mind that I have compiled this booklet. A tremendous amount of scholarly, 
diligent and v aluable work has been done by our people over the past 30 years on the issue of 
reparations, especially by the still active  National Coalition Of Blacks for Reparations in 
America (N'COBRA). As a teacher and inspire of our youth, I believe young New Afrikan 
revolutionaries and activist must get up to speed on sequence, progress and details of this potent 
work to best “carry the torch and keep the fire burning” 
The booklet is comprised of an  interactive introduction drawn by myself, as to so -called “break 
the ice”; followed by select resources published over the past 30 years by National Coalition Of 
Blacks for Reparations in America.  
By placing this data in a single  document for download , i t is my hope and intention th at our 
young people will come into a new revelation as to the strength of our spirit to fight for what is 
right, and become energized to learn from the historical principals that have been at the center of 
the reparations movement. And for those of us that have been around a while  longer, I desire to 
resurrect fond memories and transmit a rational hope for the future as you guide in your wisdom.  
PRESCRIPT:  
And most of all, I intend to catalyze all New Afrikans to “Be Down with the Reparations Clique”. 
RBG Street Scholar/August, 2012


--- PAGE 3 ---
Gil Scott Heron asks… 
 
…Who'll pay reparations on my soul?


--- PAGE 4 ---
QUOTES REGARDING REPARATIONS 
 
N'COBRA 
http://www.ncobra.org/ 
“We must prepare African people and communities for the 
demands of the new millennium. Reparations are needed to 
repair the wrongs, injury, and damage done to us by the US 
federal and State governments, their agents, and representatives. 
These have proved that their vision for African people in 
America is joblessness, more prisons (more killer kkkops), more 
black women and men in private prisons, AIDS and violence. 
"The US Eurocentric educational system has failed to prepare 
African children for liberation, nation -building, and self -
determination. This educational system produces people who are 
anti-black; including many blacks who are self -alienated and 
anti-black. We want our resources, our inheritance, to do for 
ourselves without US Federal and State involvement."


--- PAGE 5 ---
John Hope Franklin, Historian 
 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Hope_Franklin 
"Most living Americans do have a connection with slavery. They 
have inherited the preferential advantage, if they are white, or 
the loathsome disadvantage, if they are black; and those 
positions are virtually  as alive today as they were in the 19th 
century. The pattern of housing, the discrimination in 
employment, the resistance to equal opportunity in education, 
the racial profiling, the inequities in the administration of 
justice, the low expectation of blac ks in the discharge of duties 
assigned to them, the widespread belief that blacks have 
physical prowess but little intellectual capacities and the 
widespread opposition to affirmative action, as if that had not 
been enjoyed by whites for three centuries, a ll indicate that the 
vestiges of slavery are still with us."


--- PAGE 6 ---
Joseph Anderson, Member of the National Council of 
African American Men 
 
http://www.tulsareparations.org/TulsaRiot.htm 
"The arguments for reparations aren't made on the basis of 
whether every white person directly gained from slavery. The 
arguments are made on the basis that slavery was 
institutionalized and protected by law in the United States. As 
the government is an en tity that survives generations, its debts 
and obligations survive the lifespan of any particular 
individuals... Governments make restitution to victims as a 
group or class."


--- PAGE 7 ---
Ernest Allen, Jr. and Robert Chrisman 
 
"Most blacks suffered and continue to suffer the economic 
consequences of slavery and its aftermath. As of 1998, median 
white family income in the U.S. was $49,023; median black 
family income was $29,404, just 60% of white income."


--- PAGE 8 ---
Oscar Brown Jr., Forty Acres and a Mule (Play the Video) 
 
I'm not bitter, neither am I 
cruel But ain't nobody paid 
for slavery yet I may be 
crazy, but I ain't no fool. 
About my forty acres and 
my mule... One hundred 
years of debt at ten percent 
'Per year, per forty acres and 
per mule Now add that up... 
 
 
15th Amendment, or the Darkey's millenium-40 acres of land and a mule, from Robert N. Dennis 
collection of stereoscopic views (Expand to full screen view)


--- PAGE 9 ---
Forty Acres and a Mule  refers 
to the short -lived policy, 
during the last stages of the 
American Civil War  during 
1865, of providing arable land 
to black former slaves who 
had become free as a result of 
the advance of the Union 
armies into the terr itory 
previously controlled by the 
Confederacy, particularly after 
Major General William 
Tecumseh Sherman 's " March 
to the Sea." General Sherman's Special Field Orders, No. 15, issued on January 16, 
1865, provided for the land, while some of its beneficiaries also received mules 
from the Army, for use in plowing.  
The Special Field Orders issued by Sherman were never intended to represent an 
official policy of the United States government with regards to all former slaves 
and were issued "throughout the campaign to assure the harmony of action in the 
area of operati ons." Sherman's orders specifically allocated "the islands from 
Charleston, south, the abandoned rice fields along the rivers for thirty miles back 
from the sea, and the country bordering the St. Johns River , Florida." Brigadier 
General Rufus Saxton , an abolitionist from Massachusetts, was appointed by 
Sherman to oversee the settling of the freed slaves. By June  1865, about 10,000  
freed slaves were settled on 400,000 acres (160,000 ha) in Georgia and South 
Carolina. 
After the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln , his successor, Andrew 
Johnson, revoked Sherman's Orders and returned the land to its previous white 
owners. Because of this, the phrase "40 acres and a mule"  has come to represent 
the failure of Reconstruction policies in restoring to African in American the fruits 
of their labor.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Robin D.G. Kelley, Freedom Dreams 
 
"If we think of reparations as part of a broad strategy to radically 
transform society -- redistributing wealth, creating a democratic 
and caring public culture, exposing the ways capitalism and 
slavery produced massive inequality -- then the ongoing struggle 
for reparations holds enormous promise for revitalizing 
movements for social justice."


--- PAGE 11 ---
Huey Newton, The Black Panther Party Ten-Point Program 
 
"We want an end to the robbery by the white man of our Black 
Community. We believe that this racist government has robbed 
us and now we are demanding the overdue debt of forty acres 
and two mules. Forty acres and two mules was promised 100 
years ago as restitution for slave labor and mass murder of black 
people. We will accept the payment in currency which will be 
distributed to our many communities. The Germans are now


--- PAGE 12 ---
aiding the Jews in Israel for the genocide of the Jewish people. 
The Germans murdered si x million Jews. The American racist 
has taken part in the slaughter of over fifty million black people; 
therefore, we feel that this is a modest demand that we make." 
Malcolm X 
 
"If you are the son of a man who had a wealthy estate and you 
inherit your father's estate, you have to pay off the debts that 
your father incurred before he died. The only reason that the 
present generation of white Americans are in a position of 
economic strength...is because their fathers worked our fathers 
for over 400 years with no pay...We were sold from plantation to 
plantation like you sell a horse, or a cow, or a chicken, or a 
bushel of wheat...All that money...is what gives the present 
generation of American whites the ability to walk around the 
earth with their chest out...like they have some kind of economic 
ingenuity.


--- PAGE 13 ---
"Your father isn't here to pay. My 
father isn't here to collect. But I'm here 
to collect and you're here to pay."


--- PAGE 14 ---



--- PAGE 15 ---
1 
DALLAS—A Five year Plan has 
been adopted by the nation’s princi-
ple reparations organization to bring 
the issue of black reparations before 
the people and Congress of the 
United States. 
In addition to the legal work already 
being implemented by the National 
Coalition of Blacks for Reparations 
in America (N’COBRA), new initia-
 
N’COBRA ELECTIONS 
REPORT 
 
The Annual Meeting included the 
election of two at large National 
Board Members, the National Board 
Secretary and the male National Co-
Chair.  N’COBRA members had the 
opportunity to submit nominations by 
completing forms circulated to chap-
ter chairpersons, regional representa-
tives and national board members 
prior to the annual conference.  The 
forms were also circulated during the 
conference, to ensure all interested 
members were given an opportunity 
to participate in the process 
 
The following people were elected to 
the National Board of Directors: 
 
Hannibal Afrik –  
National Board Co-Chair 
 
Ajamu Sankofa –  
             National Board Secretary 
 
Herman Ferguson –  
     National At Large Board Member 
 
Lady Claudia Nelson – National 
     At Large Board Member 
tives to build increased support for 
Congressman John Conyer’s African-
American Reparations Study Bill (H.R. 
40), the launching of Black Fridays to 
support black businesses and a 
strengthened media approach to repara-
tions will take the 
reparations movement 
to a new level, said 
Ajamu Sankofa, the 
newly elected National 
Secretary of N’CO-
BRA. 
“Now N’COBRA 
members, let’s seize 
this time and roll up 
our sleeves and get 
busy implementing 
this plan. Our plan will 
not work if we do not 
work the plan. We are 
moving to the next 
higher level of Repara-
tions activism! The 
ancestors are pushing 
us. Can you feel it?” 
he said. 
Dorothy Benton Lewis, N’COBRA’s 
national co-chair said “Now we must 
go forth and multiply.” 
Discussion and reports within the well 
attended convention seemed to indicate 
the two most significant accomplish-
ments of N’COBRA during the past 
(Continued on page 17) 
IN THIS ISSUE of Black Reparations Times   
Building The National Reparations United Front 6 
Achieving Reparations:   H.R. 40 10 
George W. Bush, Goree Island and Reparations 20 
London Festival Targets Capitol’s Slave Trade Past 29 
     Hannibal Afrik    ▲   Lady Nelson  ▲    Ajamu Sankofa  
Volume 1, Issue 2 July 25, 2003 
Black Reparations Times 
N’COBRA 14TH NATIONAL CONVENTION’COBRA 14TH NATIONAL CONVENTIO NN  
N’COBRA Holds 14th Annual Convention 
By  J.Damu


--- PAGE 16 ---
2 
N’COBRA  
Information & Media Commission  
P.O. Box 716 
Washington, DC 20044-0716 
 
Email :  InformationMedia@aol.com 
Phone:  202.466.1622 
 
 
managing editor & producer 
 
Wautella ibn Yusuf 
 
editors 
 
Kibibi Tyehimba 
Dorothy Benton Lewis 
 
Contributors  
 
J. Damu, Kibibi Tyehimba, Keslie Spotts-
ville, Lisa Davis, Al Pertilla, Rashad Drake-
ford, Antoinette “RAS ” Anderson, Melodye 
Micëre Stewart, Jahahara Amen-RA Alke-
bulan-Ma’at, Ahati N. N. Toure, Dr. Ron 
Walters, Harmony Huss ey,  Wautella ibn 
Yusuf, Leroy Pletten and others. 
 
 
MISSION 
 
The Commission will serve as the official organiza-
tional link for the dissemination and exchange of 
information on N’COBRA policies, Reparations is-
sues, strategies and actions important to winning 
Reparations for African descendants in the U.S. and 
the Diaspora; assist in educating N’COBRA mem-
bers and the general public about our just demands; 
and assist in the development of mass based  support 
for Reparations. 
 
DEPARTMENTS 
 
Publishing Team 
     Publications:  REPARATIONS NOW!             
                {Quarterly Membership Newsletter} 
                   ENCOBRA{Annual magazine/journal} 
                BLACK REPARATIONS TIMES 
                            {Quarterly publication} 
 
Internet/IT Team 
                N’COBRA Website: 
                   NCOBRA.org & OfficialNcobra.org           
                               (both .org are same) 
                Listserv – news egroup 
   Reparations_For_Africans@yahoogroups.com 
 
Public Relations Team 
We encourage public discussions, led by the injured, to determine an equita-
ble remedy for the African Holocaust of Enslavement.  All African descen-
dents have a right and responsibility to work towards defining and achieving 
Reparations.  The opinions and actions reported in Black Reparations Times 
are those of the person(s) representing them and in no way should be viewed 
as N’COBRA’s unless  clearly stated.             © 2003 all rights reserved 
Black Reparations Times  ®  
 
A Quarterly N’COBRA Publication of  the Information & Media Commission 
 
DEDICATED TO BRINGING YOU REPARATIONS INFORMATION IN ALL ITS VARIED FORMS AND APPROACHES 
Table Of Content 
Legislative Commission Workshop 
        Keslie Spottsville 
 3      
Asante Sana N’COBRA Board 
           Jahahara Amen-RA Alkebulan-Ma’at 
4 
Building The National Reparations United Front 
          Baba Hannibal Afrik 
6 
Unity In The Movement For African Reparations  
           Dr Ron Walters 
7 
Achieving Reparations:   H.R. 40 
           Kibibi Tyehimba 
10 
11 A Year of Black Presence (AYBP) Update  
         Lisa Davis  
Building The Grass Roots Movement  
            Al Pertilla 
12 
Testimony  for Reparations at the Texas State Capitol 13 
YOUTH CORNER 
       Battle For Reparations Continues! 
           Rashad  Drakeford  
       Toronto Youth Organizes for Reparations 
14   
GW Bush , Goree Island and Reparations 
           Black Legal Scholar-Activists  
20 
Reparations Movement News 25 
Ask The Editor 
          
J. Damu & Vic Nickson 
22 
Black Fridays Campaign  34 
Reparations According To: 
           Ahati N. N. Toure 
16 
Black Reparations & Restitution  Categories 
          Wautella ibn Yusuf 
21 
London Festival Targets Capitol’s Slave Past 29


--- PAGE 17 ---
3 
 
J. Damu and Milton McGriff co-chaired the workshop 
in the absence of co-chairs Nkechi Taifa and Kibibi 
Tyehimba. 
 
An overview of A Year of Black Presence (AYBP) 
was provided which addressed several challenges 
ahead for AYBP.   Milt McGriff  spoke briefly about a 
campaign being developed in Philadelphia to remem-
ber approximately 5,000 Ancestors lynched between 
1859 and the present. The Philly chapter has started 
placing their individual names on plaques. Several 
hundred paper plaques were developed for the AYBP 
visit to Capitol Hill on May 21 and presented to sev-
eral congresspersons in asking for their support for 
HR40. 
      
The participants agreed by consensus 
that there should be an action agenda 
after we return to our chapters. A 
contact list was created and Keslie 
Spottsville agreed to serve as the 
communications center for those in 
attendance.   The participants agreed 
on five points to report back to the 
plenary session: 
 
1. FUNDRAISING.   Fundraising should be a top pri-
ority for N’COBRA generally and for the AYBP effort 
specifically.   Approximately $22,000 was spent on 
AYBP in 2003 and that much more will be needed for 
2004.   A fundraising plan  will be developed by 
McGriff over the summer for Philly N’COBRA that 
will be available to all chapters, along with materials 
obtained from the Association of Fundraising Profes-
sionals.  Chapters are urged to join AFP. (Note: There 
is also an organization called the Council of Fund 
Raising Executives (CFRE) that provides essentially 
the same kind of educational information to its mem-
bers.)   Also meetings are scheduled with the National 
Center for Black Philanthropy, Inc.   As we develop a 
well-trained cadre, we may be able to train our own 
fundraisers within a few years. 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
LEGISLATIVE COMMISSION WORKSHOP  
 
Saturday, June 21, 2003 
 
Submitted by Keslie Spottsville 
 
2. DIVISE ACTIONS TO ATTRACT COMMU-
NITY SUPPORT.   Chapters should create actions in 
their community designed to get positive attention 
and garner community support. For instance, after 
meeting with a Congressional member or aide, a 
chapter may feel it beneficial to hold a demonstra-
tion, do informational picketing, or something else to 
let the community know about N’COBRA, AYBP, 
HR40, and the congressional member all at once.  
Philly N’COBRA found that creating forums with 
keynote speakers such as Rep. John Conyers, Tran-
sAfrica president Bill Fletcher and author C.J. Mun-
ford were helpful in attracting support. Any chapters 
taking this route should certainly feel free to contact 
them. 
  
3. LOCAL CONCRETE EF-
FORTS.   Increase membership. Get 
your Congressional representatives 
signed on to HR40 as a co-sponsors. 
The bill needs 218 votes, but we 
would like to end this year with be-
tween 60 and 70 co-sponsors. Sched-
ule meetings with your Representa-
tives and ask for their support. Si-
multaneously, have people in the Congress member’s 
district call and write (by fax if you’re sending it to 
the DC office; they are still having post-9/11 delivery 
problems).  A companion bill to HR40 must be intro-
duced in the Senate (which is all white).  Start devis-
ing a similar strategy to get to your senator’s sup-
port.   It’s harder to get someone to introduce a bill 
than to sign on as a co-sponsor, but it still has to get 
done. 
 
4. ORGANIZE AN AYBP COALITION IN YOUR 
CHAPTER. Appoint or vote on an AYBP coordina-
tor in your chapter (YOU are an excellent candidate!) 
and approach other organizations about joining the 
AYBP effort as we prepare for 2004.  In 2004, we 
(Continued on page 30) 
Attendees: Barbara Leonard (New Orleans), Ella Forbes (Philadelphia), Harold Hunter (DC Metro), Stephanie Patterson 
(Indianapolis), Akuyaa Addy (Houston), Keslie Spottsville (Kansas), Jamila Onyeah (Chicago), Joe Epps (Indianapolis), Al 
Pertilla (Metro NY), J. Damu (San Francisco), Obidike Kamau . 
“A companion bill to HR40 
must be introduced in the 
Senate (which is all white)”


--- PAGE 18 ---
4 
Greetings of IMANI (FAITH) Esteemed Elders, Sister and Brother Leaders, Youthful Warriors, Wrong-fully-
Imprisoned Soldiers, and Unjustly-Incarcerated Family Members: 
 
May our magnificent Mother-Father Creator Of All and In All—and beloved Ancestors from yesteryear and yes-
terday—find you and (y)our Afrikan nations in the best of spirit and health.  i feel so blessed to be with you this 
weekend in the capitalist prison state of texas, for our 14
th Annual N’COBRA Convention.  Likewise, i join with 
you in commemorating the 138 th Anniversary of Juneteenth Emancipation Day (the result of another in a series of 
crimes against our humanity by this government, which did not inform and implement for over two and a half 
years its proclamation “freeing” Afrikans from chattel enslavement). 
 
For almost a decade, i have had the opportunity to serve in the leadership of N’COBRA.  Certainly, it has been 
challenging.  WE have struggled extremely hard over the years to place Reparations deep in to the thoughts, hearts 
and daily lives and practices of Afrikan people and organizations.  So much has been accomplished by our team of 
dedicated volunteer leaders, with minimal resources and, sometimes, it seems, unlimited energies.  i am especially 
proud to have been one of several organizers and/or initiators of the N’COBRA effort in four major metropolitan 
areas: Chicago, New York, Oakland/San Francisco Bay Area, and Los Angeles; and to visit and share with mem-
bers and chapters from coast-to-coast, border-to-border.  Indeed, it has been a high honor to represent N’COBRA 
on numerous occasions throughout this confederacy called the united states (at churches, mosques, temples, hous-
ing projects, schools, universities, jails, union halls, in congress and state capitols and city halls, at mass rallies and 
town hall meetings, on street corners, in the community press and corporate media, and even while performing my 
music in front of thousands at a sold-out Madison Square Garden); as well as around our earth (in Afrika, canadian 
capitalist prison states, Europe, in so-called south america, Mexico, in the sovereign nations and current colonies 
of Puerto Rico/Vieques and Hawai’I). 
 
Of course, i am especially grateful to have had a voice and a vote on the N’COBRA Board to propose my ideas 
and actions that I felt would help advance the Reparations movement and mass awareness.  These include our 
1997-98 “Stepping It Up For Reparations” Capitol Hill lobby days in support of H.R. 40 (which is now being 
taken to a much higher and consistent level with our “A Year of Black Presence” campaign, coordinated by 
Brother Milton McGriff of N’COBRA Philadelphia); our 2001-2002 initiation of “Unity Summits of Reparations 
Organizations” (which will now be addressed through the Institute of the Black World, led by Baba Dr. Ron 
Daniels and Baba Professor James Turner); a proposal for mass marches for Reparations at the United Nations in 
New York and/or in Washington, DC on 17 August 2002, Ancestor MARCUS GARVEY’s birthday (which was 
shared with participants during the 2001 United Nations’ “World Conference Against Racism,” including the Dur-
ban 400 which was then calling for a mass mobilization in October 2002); as Co-Chair with Sister Dr. JoAnn Wat-
son of our Information & Media Commission (which has already been incredibly professionalized through the 
leadership of our dynamic Brother Wautella ibn Yusuf); and regular Board Retreats and Strategic Planning (which 
our Co-Chair Sister Aurevouche Dorothy Benton Lewis and other Board members have also long advocated for). 
 
As i prepare to leave the N’COBRA Board of Directors, i/WE once again offer our utmost appreciation to the 
many bodacious Reparationists and Self-Determinationists from the past century who have inspired us in this 
wicked land of white supremacy, including (but certainly not limited to):  ALL OF OUR ANCESTORS 
(particularly MAMA CALLIE HOUSE, REV. ISIAH DICKERSON and the extraordinary NATIONAL EX-
SLAVE MUTUAL PENSION AND BOUNTY SOCIETY; CYRIC BRIGSS and the AFRICAN BLOOD 
BROTHERHOOD;  GARVEY and the UNIVERSAL NEGRO IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION; MINISTER 
ELIJAH MUHAMMAD and the NATION OF ISLAM; WILLIAM PATTERSON, HARRY HAYWOOD, JOHN 
PITTMAN, et al and the COMMUNIST PARTY USA; QUEEN MOTHER AUDLEY MOORE; EL HAJJ 
MALIK EL SHABAZZ (BROTHER MINISTER MALCOLM X) and the ORGANIZATION OF AFRO-
AMERICAN UNITY; REV. DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.; DEACONS FOR DEFENSE; HUEY P. NEW-
ASANTE SANA N’COBRA Board, Members  
and Reparationists 
 
From Brother Jahahara Amen-RA Alkebulan-Ma’at 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 19 ---
5 
TON, FRED HAMPTON, BOBBY HUTTON, et al and the BLACK PANTHER PARTY FOR SELF-DEFENSE; 
KWAME TURE, STUDENT NON-VIOLENT COORDINATING COMMITTEE and ALL AFRICAN PEOPLES 
REVOLUTIONARY PARTY;  etc, etc.  Much love and respect as well to our many contemporary organizations 
and individuals who are offering their unique Gifts of in sightful analyses, reparations proposals, and dynamic ac-
tivism (such as the warriors of the Provisional Government of the Republic of New Afrika and National Confer-
ence of Black Lawyers, which were the two principal organizers of N’COBRA; New Afrikan People’s Organiza-
tion; African People’s Socialist Party; Baba Dr. Maulana Karenga and US; National Black United Front; December 
12
th Movement; Malcolm X Grassroots Movement; Congressman John Conyers; Minister Louis Farrakhan; Na-
tional Black Farmer’s Association; Black Agriculturalists Association; Jericho Amnesty Movement; Black Radical 
Congress; National Action Network; current Councilman and next New York City Mayor Brother Charles Barron; 
Brother Randall Robinson; my former councilperson in Chicago’s southside Third Ward, Sister Dorothy Tillman; 
and so many, many others).  When WE fully OVERstand and come together in a true spirit and power of UMOJA 
(UNITY without “uniformity”), there will be no stopping our complete victory and liberation. 
 
So, while i will no longer be serving on the N’COBRA Board, i am a lifetime member and do plan to remain active 
and closely connected to our righteous Reparations movements.  In addition to addressing some critical personal/
family issues, my intention is to focus my energies and efforts in the following ways.  First, i pledge to contribute 
and fun(d)raise a minimum of $10,000 over the next five years (at least $2,000 per year) to support our N’COBRA 
capacity-building efforts.   Second, to help expand our movements to win the long overdue release, amnesty and 
restitution for our hundreds of long-suffering political prisoners, prisoners-of-war and political exiles.  Third, to 
work with others to completely eliminate the immoral and criminal “debt” that Europe and the u.s. are using to 
continue enslaving continental and diasporan Afrikan nations; and organize for a return of a portion of the stolen 
wealth to the real owners.  Fourth, to offer some support to the efforts of our Afrikan farmers and communities in 
our just struggles to free some of our Creator’s land for us to grow, build and prosper on.  And, finally, i will  re-
issue past works and music, much of which is centered around our movements for self-determination and Repara-
tions.   
 
Elders and Sisters and Brothers, let me say from the depths of my heart, ASANTE SANA (Many, Many Thanks) to 
all of you, our brilliant and beautiful N’COBRA family.  i/WE am forever indebted to our outstanding leaders and 
workers—like our founder, Baba Imari Obadele, Sister Aurevouche, Sister Adjoa Aiyetoro, Baba Hannibal Afrik, 
Baba Kolonji Olusegun, Sister Kupenda “A Love Supreme” Olusegun, Mama Erline Arikpo, Sister Johnita Scott, 
Baba Chowke Lumumba, General Rashid, Sister Nkechi Taifa, General Mwesi Chui, Sister Njere Alghanee, Baba 
Omowale Satterwhite, Ancestors DR. JOHNNY YOUNG, CHARSHEE MACINTYRE, and COLONEL H.L. 
MAXWELL, Brother Alvin Brown, Brother Carlton “Bashiri” White, Sister JoAnn Watson, Elder Raymond 
“Reparations Ray” Jenkins, Brother Khalif Khalifah, Brother Cicero Love, Brother Onjae Mu’id, and so many oth-
ers—for their inspiration and tremendous contributions to this mighty cause.  And, BIG, BIG UPS and great appre-
ciation to our new generation of N’COBRA Board leadership that is already advancing us to new and greater 
heights, including Brothers Wautella, James Rodgers III, Ajamu Sankofa, Kamau Jywanza and Sisters Lady C. 
Nelson, Mashiriki Jywanza, Taiwo Kugichagulia-Seitu, Kibibi Tyehimba… and the list is growing and growing.  It 
has been a pleasure to be one of, and one with, you. 
 
Allow me to close by simply saying: i’ll see you on the battlefields for truth, justice, self-determination and healing 
for Afrikan people… through Reparations.  With our Creator and Ancestors on our side, Victory is certain.  Ase`.  
Amen. 
 
Hetep (Peace, Love and Continued Blessings), 
 
Brother Jahahara Amen-RA Alkebulan-Ma’at 
Outgoing N’COBRA National Co-Chair and Lifetime Member 
Juneteenth Emancipation Day:  19 June 6243 (2003) 
 
c/o Foundations For Our Nu Afrikan Millennium (FONAMI) 
P.O. Box 10963 
Oakland, CA 94610             Phone:  510.839.6250          Email:  nuafrikan777@msn.com 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 20 ---
6 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
 
    In the spirit of the Honorable Marcus Garvey, 
Queen Mother Moore and the Honorable Elijah Mu-
hammad, a historic meeting was convened in Chi-
cago, IL on July 26, 2003.  At the request of Dr. Con-
rad Worrill, Chair, National Black United Front, a 
call was sent by Nation of Islam leader, Minister 
Louis Farrakhan to Reparations group leaders and 
activists.  The meeting was held at the Salaam Res-
taurant. 
 
    N’COBRA’s leadership was well represented by 
National Co-chairs Dorothy Benton-Lewis and Baba 
Hannibal Afrik, National Secretary Ajamu Sankofa, 
Esq., Board members, Dr. Imari Obadele and Mother 
Erline Arikpo, Congress of Economic Development 
Commissioner Rev. Albert Sampson, and Dr. 
Worrill, of the Chicago Chapter. 
 
    A diverse group of scholars, religious figures, 
elected officials, youth leaders, legal strategists, 
grass-roots and national organizational representa-
tives dialogued freely about the viability and broad, 
comprehensive scope of the current Reparations 
Movement for social and economic justice. 
 
    Dr. Ronald Walters submitted a profound proposal 
on Operational Unity which established the founda-
tion for a national, coordinated mobilization of the 
descendants of enslaved Africans in America. 
 
    The success of this meeting is characterized by the 
collective decision to regroup and participate in a na-
tional work session and public Town Hall Rally on Oc-
tober 4, 2003 in Jackson, MS.  This event will be hosted 
by the Mississippi Reparations Committee and sup-
ported by the newly-forming Jackson Chapter 
of N’COBRA. 
 
    Minister Farrakhan also committed to devote a spe-
cial section in each issue of the Final Call newspaper to 
provide an update on the progress of the Reparations 
Movement.  This provides a weekly forum for critical 
information on scholarly research, projects and direct-
action programs across the country.  It will also serve as 
a communications network and clearinghouse for the 
international Reparations Movement, on the continent 
and throughout the diaspora. 
 
    This historic gathering of collective wisdom and 
commitment has introduced a new chapter of accom-
plishment in building a National Reparations United 
Front.  In the name of our sacred ancestors, let us go 
forward with renewed vitality and spiritual direction to 
achieve Reparations, in our lifetime! 
 
PAMOJA TUTASHINDE (Together, we will win) 
 
July 27, 2003 
BUILDING THE NATIONAL REPARATIONS UNITED FRONT 
 
Baba Hannibal Afrik, 
National Co-chair, N’COBRA 
The Reparations  
Movement is Growing 
 WHEN— the media reports 80% of 
Blacks support Reparations  
 WHEN– Brooklyn NY has a billboard 
using the word Reparations at one of 
the busiest intersections 
 WHEN— the UN confirms our ances-
tors’ enslavement was a “crime 
against humanity” 
 WHEN– Bush admits “slavery was 
one of the greatest crimes in history”


--- PAGE 21 ---
7 
UNITY IN THE MOVEMENT FOR AFRICAN REPARATIONS 
IN AMERICA 
 
Preamble 
 
African Unity 
Unity is defined as a state of being one, being one in spirit, the quality or fact of being a totality or whole, espe-
cially a complex that is a union of its parts. 
 
This is an objective definition, but unity is more often set in a context of one culture or another, defining what a 
group of people are trying to achieve by forging a situation in which they pool their resources.   
 
Our unity is old: before Europe and before America were born. The foundation of our political systems was rooted 
in the concept of consensus.  For example, when important issues were called for in the Ashanti culture, the chief 
called a meeting known as the asetena kese , which means “the big sitting-down.”  In South Africa, among the 
Nguni, the practice is known as the “Indaba.”  
 
The principle of consensus was strongest when it was voluntary.  When it was coerced by the use of violent author-
ity, it often promoted alienation, counter-violence or breakaway tribal formations.  So, for the consensus to be 
strong, it had to serve the broadest needs.  
 
Our historical project of attempting to use our unity begins, as Kwame Nkrumah said:  beyond the fact that we 
have been divided by the oppressive force of European imperialism, or that we have a common purpose, “it is 
something that goes far deeper.  I can best describe it as a oneness, in that we are all Africans.” So, in spite of our 
differences, he said:  “I am convinced that the forces making for unity far outweigh those that divide us.” It is the 
basis of what we call Pan Africanism.  
 
In the revolutionary period of African history, Samora Machel said that the achievement of unity followed three 
phases, unity - criticism - unity, which would lead to a higher stage of solidarity.  He felt that inasmuch as the goal 
of the revolution was to liberate the masses, that the objective of unity was to defend the interests of the masses.  
Then he said: “Unity is then, not something static, a supernatural, an absolute value that we place on a pedestal to 
worship. [Rather] in the process of struggling for unity we have always said: we must know with whom we are 
uniting and why.” 
 
Therefore, in the situation of attempting to achieve Reparations, we have the responsibility to search for the correct 
principles of consensus rooted in the history and culture of our people as the key to unity.  And in this situation,  
“operational unity” is a necessary precondition, but political unity on key issues when necessary is the strongest 
posture that we can attain to reach this goal. 
 
Unity in the Movement for Reparations 
The quest for African Reparations is a sacred undertaking that began with the demands of our ancestors as a cry for 
justice from the pain and exploitation of their enslavement in America.  Those of us who carry this sacred burden 
have moved from the stage of the demand of Callie House, Queen Mother Moore and N’COBRA labored without 
notice, often to criticism from our own people, to a period in history where the demand has taken on a shout in a 
strong new voice, that now includes and invites millions of peoples and hundreds of organizations into a new 
movement.  As participants and therefore, stewards of this new movement, we should carry the sacred burden as a 
gift and a covenant of the past which has the power to transform us into a new people.  This requires profoundly 
that in the search for dignity with the weapon of Reparations that we honor the dignity of those who passed this 
mandate on to us.   
 
The task of maintaining the dignity and purpose of our movement for African Reparations in America must recog-
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 22 ---
8 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
nize that any movement of peoples for justice is chaotic in that the cause that motivates them often does not allow 
for invitation, but conjures up an uncontrollable spirit that stirs emotion which acts as a catalyst to act.   This fea-
ture of the movement has brought many into the pursuit of Reparations and we who are the carriers of the sacred 
trust of those who were enslaved should be accepting and wise in the leadership of this project.   To this end, we 
create some principles of unity that may guide our quest for Reparations in this era of history. 
 
1.  Mutual Respect
 
 
We must begin with a mutual respect for the organizations and individuals who lend themselves to this movement 
and refrain from public criticism of the tactics of various organizations, recognizing that our strategies and goals 
are the same.  Although there were often internal problems, that kind of civility was the core of the way in which 
other movement organizations behaved that were involved in successful movements such as the 1943 March on 
Washington, the 1960s Civil Rights movement and others.   Civility is important not only because it dignifies the 
movement and gives to others the perspective that the participants believe that it is a serious cause.  It is also im-
portant because it is the key to the mobilization of people and organizations who want to be associated with some-
thing positive, an act which enhances the potential to develop movement resources necessary to achieve the even-
tual goal.  
 
2.  Law Suits
   
Law suits have become a major spear of the movement for Reparations and it is important that we recognize the 
different venues in which various groups are working and adopt an attitude that what may be gained in one suit 
may advance the cause of Reparations in another.  There should not be any pressure to combine efforts because of 
the distinct clients, approaches and other elements that different organizations pursue.  But there should be an ethic 
which suggests that rejection of the demand or the acceptance of the demand for Reparations in one legal venue 
may have an impact on the entire legal project.  Thus, the sharing of briefs and even prior consultation where nec-
essary should be encouraged. 
 
3. Popular Mobilization
  
There are many other avenues where the movement for African Reparations has become important and where ac-
tivity is germinated on a consistent basis and where the movement could benefit from the sharing of effort in such 
areas as:  
 
-  public programs 
-  political actions – lobbying legislative bodies, etc. 
-  media events 
-  research and information 
              
These are some of the fields of action where interaction among segments of the movement across the borders of 
organization or ideology could advance the entire project.  Thus, if a program is envisioned, selecting individuals 
from different organizations to participate is an act of unity; calling upon all organizations to support big events 
that are planned by one organization or another is an act of  unity; referring people from different organizations to 
be guest on various media events is an act of unity, and sharing either old or newly breaking research and informa-
tion widely through available media of dissemination is an act of unity.  All are acts of unity and unity in any 
movement is important in the success of achieving the goals to which all of us aspire. 
 
If political unity can be used at times: on the same project, with the same tactics, and strategies with the same re-
sources, that is the most powerful form.   But wisdom must decide when operational unity or political unity is best.  
This is the  reason for an occasional Summit, Ndaba, or a Great Sitting Down.
 
 
Dr. Ronald Walters 
Distinguished Leadership Scholar 
University of Maryland Note:  Submitted by Dr. Walters, a veteran Board member of N’COBRA, to the Chicago 
Reparations Summit hosted  by Minister Louis Farrakhan on July 26, 2003.


--- PAGE 23 ---
9 
NNational Coalition Of Black for Reparations in Americaational Coalition Of Black for Reparations in America  
 
P RINCIPLES  OF  U NITY  
 
As a collective of various organizations and philosophies, we will respect each other’s autonomy in organization 
and philosophy.   The central principles we unify and agree upon are: 
 
       1.  Our primary goal is to achieve Reparations for Africans in America; 
       2.  The so-called Trans-Atlantic "slave trade" was not trade but was in fact a Holocaust of Enslavement.  It  
            was morally wrong and a crime against humanity;   
       3.  We define Reparations as a process of repairing, healing and restoring our people; therefore we continue     
           our ancestors efforts to liberate us by focusing on repairing, healing and restoring the personal, family, and 
           community damages that we suffered during the Holocaust of African Enslavement;  
       4.  Africans in America are due Restitution for the Holocaust of African Enslavement and its vestiges; and 
       5.  We support and work for the passage of HR-40, sponsored by Congressman John Conyers and other state 
            and local legislative initiatives.  
 
Reparations United Front  
 
       1.  Functioning as a "Reparations United Front," is critical to maintaining a unified public posture.  Members  
           of the Collective (organizations and individuals) agree not to attack each other, especially regarding  
           Reparations.  
       2.  In instances where there may be differences of opinion, members will emphasize their commitment to 
            Reparations, to minimize attempts to divide and neutralize the effectiveness of the Collective.    
       3.  The Collective may elect not to recognize those who fail to abide by the aforementioned principles of 
            unity. Everyone is encouraged to support the work of the Collective in ways most suitable for them, 
            whether inside or outside the Collective. 
 
We Believe 
 
We believe the Reparations Movement can empower African Americans to continue our task of gaining social, 
economic, and cultural parity and liberation for individuals, families and communities.  The movement provides an 
opportunity to address all issues impacting the Black Community by: 
 
1. Creating a path for self, family and community development and liberation; 
2. Providing a cause strong enough to unite Black People across socio-economic, and education barriers; 
3. Recognizing and assisting with  restoring the dignity of over 100 million Africans lost and sacrificed dur-
ing the Holocaust of Enslavement and one hundred years of lynching that followed; 
4. Providing an opportunity to expose the perpetrator of the Holocaust and educate the victims by creating 
dialogue locally and nationally that thoroughly examines our collective oppression (and mistakes), and ex-
poses the perpetrator’s responsibility in creating our past and current social condition;  
5. Providing compensation for Black People locally and nationally; 
6. We believe our people are ultimately responsible for our collective achievement of social, economic, and 
cultural parity and liberation.  Restitution will only assist in our recovery and building process.  The strug-
gle for Reparations is a sacred responsibility that must be assumed by African descendants in the Ameri-
cas; and 
7. We believe there can be no Reparations without mass participation.  Mass participation is essential to 
achieving Reparations (repairing, healing and restoring Black People) and Restitution (receiving compen-
sation for the Holocaust and its vestiges).   
 
Issued by N”COBRA National Office June 29, 2002 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 24 ---
10 
bill.  An important strategy at the State and local level 
is the adoption of resolutions and bills that endorse the 
passage of H.R. 40 and/or that directly support the Af-
rican Descendant demand for Reparations.       
To date three states have already adopted Reparations 
resolutions---Louisiana, Florida, and California; and 
three other State resolutions are pending in Texas, 
New York and New Jersey.  In addition, there are 21 
cities that have adopted resolutions (Atlanta, Georgia; 
Baltimore, Maryland; Burlington, Vermont; Camden, 
Patterson, and New-
ark New Jer-
sey;  Philadelphia, 
PA; The District of 
Columbia; Chicago 
and Evanston,  Illi-
nois; Cleveland, 
Ohio; Dallas, Texas; 
Detroit, Michigan; 
Alameda County, 
Berkeley, Compton, 
Inglewood, Los An-
geles, Oakland, Palo 
Alto, and San Fran-
cisco, California.  
 
We must bear in 
mind some important history---it 
took 12 years to get the MLK Holiday bill passed, and 
following the introduction of the first anti-apartheid 
bill by Berkley Congressman Ron Dellums, it took 19 
years before Nelson Mandella was released from 
prison, and elections took place in South Africa.  No 
one said it was going to be easy getting H.R. 40 or any 
other Reparations legislation passed.  A tremendous 
amount of time, energy, and resources have been sac-
rificed over the past 13 years to bring about the pas-
sage of H.R. 40.  It is absolutely critical that we see 
this battle through to its fruition.  
 
Our immediate focus must be on the Congressional 
Black Caucus Representatives who still have not 
signed on to H.R. 40.  They are: 
 
1.  Rep. Julia Carson Indiana (D) - 10th Congressional 
District(Indianapolis) 
2.  Del. Donna Christian-ChristensenVirgin Islands 
(D) 
(Continued on page 23) 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
N’COBRA’s work to bring about the passage of H.
R.40 is an important organizing tool as this bill pro-
vides "a least common denominator", that can be used 
to educate, organize, and mobilize African descen-
dants without getting bogged down in specifics about 
what should or should not be included in an equitable 
remedy, before we are able to first convince our peo-
ple that we suffered a holocaust that the U.S. govern-
ment supported and participated in for 265 years. H.
R. 40 only seeks to establish a commission to study 
the era of enslave-
ment.  Once the Com-
mission is established it 
is incumbent upon all of 
us to ensure that the is-
sues are sufficiently ad-
dressed and no "penny-
anny" settlement is of-
fered or accepted, in light 
of the destruction that 
our people have suffered 
in this country.  
 
The legislative approach 
to achieving Reparations 
is critical as it focuses on 
the U.S. government and 
forces a national public dialog 
about this country’s past and present injustices 
against African people; it forces the government to 
admit to its citizens and the world that it condoned 
and committed crimes against humanity, and de-
mands an apology; it forces the country to publicly 
acknowledge this era of enslavement and the tremen-
dous contributions of African people through the de-
velopment of truthful, thorough school curricula, na-
tional monuments, and museums;  it forces the gov-
ernment to compensate the descendants of formerly 
enslaved Africans in order to restore, and repair our 
people; and finally it forces changes to present day 
systems and institutions that supported slavery in the 
past, and that are engaged in the exploitation of other 
peoples, even today, in ways that could encourage the 
enslavement of our people and other peoples around 
the world.  
 
Bringing about the passage of H.R. 40 will be deter-
mined by how effectively we lobby our Congres-
sional Representatives for their support of the 
ACHIEVING REPARATIONS:  The Significance of H.R. 40 
                             By Kibibi Tyehimba, Co-Chair NCOBRA Legislative Commission 
Dr. Ron Walters & Kibibi Tyehimba on Captiol Hill


--- PAGE 25 ---
11 
On May 21st, 2003, The People's Organization for 
Progress of New Jersey  (P.O.P.) joined the NY Metro, 
Philadelphia, and DC chapters of the National Coali-
tion of Blacks for Reparations in America 
(N'COBRA), the Philadelphia Coalition for Repara-
tions, and Patterson, New Jersey Reparations activists, 
to lobby Congress to support the passage of the Con-
gressman John Conyers HR 40 Reparations Bill.  
 
One of the major objectives of the day was to target 
those members of the Congressional Black Caucus that 
had not yet signed on as co-sponsors of H.R. 40 and to 
target the office of Congressman F. James Sensenbren-
ner of Wisconsin, the Chair of the House Judiciary 
Committee.  According to Milton McGriff, creator of 
AYBP, and member of the Philadelphia Chapter of 
N'COBRA, Sensenbrenner steadfastly refuses to sup-
port Reparations and will not allow the bill to be 
brought up before the Judiciary Committee for a hear-
ing.  (The bill must first be voted out of this committee 
before it can go to the full House for a vote).  On May 
21, 2003 Sensenbrenner's legislative counsel, Chrystal 
Roberts, confirmed that Sensenbrenner does not sup-
port H.R. 40 and that he does not 
have to offer any reasons why.       
 
Of the 38 Congressional Black 
Caucus members, there are 9 
members that have yet to endorse 
the Reparations legislation.  
While it will ultimately be neces-
sary to convince a majority of the 
House and the Senate to award 
Reparations for African Ameri-
cans, it is even more important 
for African American elected 
representatives to be the most 
fervent supporters of the legisla-
tion.  Their road to Congress was 
not paved with  "freedom and op-
portunity," but rather with the 
blood and sweat of a people with 
an indomitable spirit determined to overcome the spe-
cious hands of oppression.  African Americans are still 
confronted with that fight today, and if Black elected 
officials are not ready to fight for Black America, then 
they should not be in office.  
 
Overall, May 21st was most eventful as it began with 
an assembly in which 250 lobbyists heard from many 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
speakers offering their support for Reparations.    
Speakers included Nation of Islam East Coast Repre-
sentative, Minister Khadir Mohammad, NAACP 
Washington Bureau chief, Mr. Hilary Shelton, N'CO-
BRA Co-Chair Ms. Dorothy Benton-Lewis, Mr. Law-
rence Hamm of P.O.P., Dr. Ron Walters who is also a 
N’COBRA Board member and Congressman John 
Conyers.   And while all spoke magnificently, the 
most riveting speech came from Congressman Con-
yers himself.   Many in his generation are the grand-
children of people who were born in captivity.  He 
passionately spoke of how his generation has paid 
their dues and how they are entitled to see Reparations 
in their lifetime!  The audience responded with thun-
derous applause and a standing ovation.   
 
Another touching highlight of the assembly was the 
call for African Americans organizing for Reparations 
to adopt an ancestor.  P.O.P. and northeast region 
chapters of N'COBRA have begun the task of memo-
rializing the documented cases of those whose lives 
were stolen by the brutality of racism.  “In Memor-
iam” certificates were distributed for each African de-
scendant victim documented in the 
book, "100 Years of Lynchings" by 
Ralph Ginzburg.   As each African 
American accepted a certificate, 
they promised to reconnect to their 
past, and made a vow to recommit 
to the struggle on behalf of each an-
cestor so that their lives would not 
have been sacrificed in vain. 
 
While supporting the overall agenda 
that morning, the People's Organiza-
tion for Progress did have the 
chance to target some of the NJ 
Representatives.   POP visited Con-
gressman Donald Payne's office to 
thank him for co-sponsoring the Bill 
and to get some tips for rallying ad-
ditional congressional support.   
POP was also able to have an impromptu meeting 
with Senator Lautenburg as he unexpectedly encoun-
tered our members outside his office.    He was most 
cordial and instructed us to meet with his legislative 
counsel, an African American by the name of Rudy 
Brioche.   We left extensive information as to why the 
(Continued on page 15) 
A Year of Black Presence (AYBP) Update   
 
by Sister Lisa Davis of New Jersey People’s Organization for Progress


--- PAGE 26 ---
12 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
many seemingly informed and intelligent brothers and 
sisters within our communities who, for whatever mis-
guided and ill-informed reasons, will put forth spurious 
arguments against Reparations.   There is no need to 
cite and document who these poor souls are but we 
know that they exist and that there will be more of them 
as our movement progresses.   
 
How do we go about building a broad-based mass 
movement for Reparations?  We must first look back at 
our history and examine successful mass movements 
from the past—(SANKOFA).  One of our strongest ex-
amples took place during the so called struggle for 
Civil Rights in the 60’s.  There are many practical and 
ideological connections between that struggle and the 
one that we must wage in the short term to achieve 
Reparations.   No, we will not and must not attempt to 
resurrect and re-create the civil rights movement but we 
must examine that important period and its relevance to 
our present conditions and objectives. 
 
At the top of the list must be the idea that one major 
contributor to the Civil Rights movement was the de-
finitive “big tent” philosophy operating within the 
movement, under which, most of the issues that we 
faced could be addressed.  Yes, there were many or-
ganizations, much internal tension and, sometimes hos-
tile disagreements within the loosely defined Civil 
Rights movement, but there were also strong unifying 
themes and objectives that held the struggle together in 
a spiritual sense.  While we may not have agreed on all 
of the specific objectives, tactics, and strategies, we did 
agree to allow individuals and organizations the right 
and privilege of struggling within their own arenas, and 
based on their unique circumstances and understanding 
in order to push the movement forward. 
 
We must now inject that sense of operational unity 
within the Reparations movement.   In order to succeed 
we must broaden the base of involvement and under-
(Continued on page 24) 
The African American struggle for Reparations has 
reached a critical juncture.   As the Reparations move-
ment grows nationally and internationally, the question 
looming overhead is ‘where do we go from here?’ 
 
Most observers would agree that up to the present time 
the struggle for Reparations has been relegated essen-
tially to the Black nationalists within our communities. 
However, several recent developments changed that 
dynamic. The proliferation of various Reparations re-
lated law suits emphasizing the historical antecedents 
of the struggle, and the publication and popularity of 
Randall Robinson’s book “The Debt” along with other 
significant publications all served to give the move-
ment for Reparations new visibility. 
 
Since January 2003, N’COBRA has accel-
erated its efforts to secure the passage of 
HR 40 (the Reparations study bill intro-
duced in Congress by Rep. John Conyers 
of Michigan) through its new legislative 
initiative, “A Year of Black Presence 
(AYBP).   AYBP mobilizes Reparations 
supporters at the city, state and federal lev-
els to lobby for the passage of resolutions and bills in 
support of Reparations.   While there may be some de-
bate as to the relative merit of HR 40, the reality is that 
passage of HR40 would represent a significant mile-
stone on the road to securing reparations. 
 
Since no single piece of legislation, lawsuit or any sin-
gular event or occurrence will guarantee that African 
descendants achieve Reparations, we must wage a 
fierce and intense struggle that encompasses the legal, 
the legislative, and the most important element of all, 
the development of a strong grass roots movement.    
At this juncture, educating our own communities is of 
utmost importance before we venture out to persuade 
the rest of America. 
 
We must create and activate an apparatus within Afri-
can American communities that informs and endows 
them with the understanding and commitment to strug-
gle for Reparations.   We must dispel the myths, mis-
conceptions, falsehoods and misunderstandings about 
Reparations.  We must challenge the apologists within 
our communities who would challenge the legitimacy 
of Reparations for African Americans, on behalf of our 
oppressors.  And we must face the reality that there are 
BUILDING THE GRASS ROOTS MOVEMENT:  OPERATIONAL UNITY  
 
By Al Pertilla, Legislative Affairs Coordinator for NYC Chapter of  N’COBRA 
“We must now inject that sense of 
operational unity within the Reparations 
movement”


--- PAGE 27 ---
13 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
 Nine-year-old Talib Sterling Lands (Greater Calvary 
Baptist Church -Austin, Texas) received a loud round 
of applause in the State Affairs Committee hearing 
room after he testified, "I am nine years old, I don't 
want to have to come back when I am ninety still fight-
ing for reparations".   The hearing, which took place at 
the Texas State 
Capitol in Austin, 
Texas on Monday, 
March 31, 2003, 
was conducted to 
take testimony on 
the Ft. Worth State Representative Glenn Lewis HCR-
28 Reparations resolution.  Little Talib was flanked 
before and after his testimony with representatives 
from Houston, Dallas, Austin, San Antonio, Fort 
Worth and Tyler numbering approximately fifteen who 
all testified in favor of HCR-28. Thomas Muhammad 
(Africans and African-Americans for Enslavement 
Reparations - Dallas, Texas) a key organizer of state-
wide reparations actions remarked, "I think with the 
variety of testimony coming from across the state we 
covered all bases on the demand for Reparations". 
 
  The nine-person committee was riveted by blown up 
graphic depictions of the African MAAFA A.K.A. The 
Transatlantic Slave Trade A.K.A. the worst crime 
against humanity known to the world.  The laminated 
posters were displayed throughout the hearing cham-
bers illustrating: life in Africa before the MAAFA, the 
Elmina Slave Dungeon, the Slave Ship named 
"SUFFER" and drawings of slave ships with Africans 
stacked and packed in every conceivable space. With 
the precision of a lawyer, the documentation of a 
scholar and the fire of a freedom fighter Kofi Taharka 
(National Black United Front - Houston Chapter and 
the Local Action Committee for Reparations (LAC)) 
started his testimony by reading the names of over 
twenty organizations, which comprise the LAC.  He 
proceeded to make the demand for full and complete 
reparations with reference books, quotations, handouts 
of lynchings and the Associated Press story document-
ing the fact that the Capitol in Washington was built 
with enslaved African labor.  "Putting this resolution 
on the floor of the Texas Legislature is the least you 
can do given the millions of our Holy African Ances-
tors who have died" he said. 
 
  Sister Mukumtagara Jendayi (All African Peoples 
Revolutionary Party, Ft. Worth) made the point "any 
gains made by Africans in America have come with  
bloodshed, end of chattel slavery bloodshed, repeal 
of Jim Crowism bloodshed, right to vote bloodshed, 
the committee can take a step to possibly avert that 
reality with the passage of this resolution".  Youth 
Director for Greater Calvery Baptist Church Richard 
Lands told the committee "God's 
Judgment on this country will have a 
lot to do with its treatment of en-
slaved Africans".  Brother Omowale 
Manu a native of Tyler, Texas laid 
out what he called "Continuity and 
Connectivity".  He submitted his re-
search, which documents the State of Texas govern-
mental and industry ties to slavery and white privi-
lege, which began with Stephen F. Austin, continued 
through the Imperial Sugar Company and the Prison 
Lease System, which the state contracted with to 
build the Texas State Capitol in the late 1800's.  The 
prison population then, coming directly out of chat-
tel slavery was used as a labor force and was pre-
dominantly made up of Black people.  Others testi-
fying included: Oscar Vicks (San Antonio Repara-
tions Committee), Lee Alcorn (Dallas Activist), and 
Members Greater Calvary Baptist Church.  Letters 
of support were submitted to the committee from 
various organizations across the state.  One person 
signed up to oppose the resolution but was a no 
show when the time came to speak.   Throughout the 
presentations speakers made reference to the con-
tinuing vestiges of the enslavement including: racial 
profiling, police brutality, education, housing, prison 
system and health care.  
 
  The resolution HCR-28, which must be voted out 
of the committee in order to make it's way to the 
House  
floor dur-
ing this 
session is 
not the 
only  
Repara-
tions leg-
islation in the Texas House. Representative Ron 
Wilson of Houston is the sponsor of HJR-25 a con-
stitutional amendment that seeks redress for Afri-
can-Americans and other parties that have been vic-
tims of historic injustices from the State of 
(Continued on page 31) 
Dramatic Testimony  for Reparations at the Texas State Capitol 
"I am nine years old, I don't want to 
have to come back when I am ninety 
still fighting for reparations" 
"God's Judgment on this 
country will have a lot to do 
with its treatment of enslaved 
Africans"


--- PAGE 28 ---
14 
THE BATTLE FOR REPARATIONS  
CONTINUES! 
 
BY: Rashad  Drakeford a 16 year old, high school 
sophomore from Queens, New York 
 
This year is the Year of Black Presence (AYBP)
, the 
year that we as a people take a big step in the battle for 
reparations.  The fight for reparations started a long 
time ago and on Wednesday, April 9th it contin-
ued.  New York Metro Area Chapter N’COBRA 
(National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in Amer-
ica) and the Corona East Elmhurst Branch of the 
NAACP Youth Council, two of the many groups par-
ticipating in AYBP, left for Washington, D.C. at 3 a.m. 
in the morning. 
 
Our goals were to go down to 
Washington D.C. and talk to our 
nation’s representatives; tell 
them about the bill proposed by 
Rep. John Conyers; find out 
where they stand on the issue of 
African Americans getting repa-
rations; and to get them to co-
sponsor the bill.  The bill that 
Rep. Conyers has proposed since 
1989 is called H.R. 40, named 
after the government’s promise 
of 40 acres and a mule to freed 
slaves.  The bill seeks to accom-
plish four things: 
 
o Acknowledge the fundamental injustice and inhuman-
ity of slavery. 
 
o Establish a commission to study slavery, its subse-
quent racial and economic discrimination against freed 
slaves. 
(Continued on page 25) 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
              YOUTH CORNER:  
                                 Working for Reparations  
Toronto Youth  
Organizes for Reparations 
 
This past Black history month, young sister Harmony 
Hussey and a group of  "enlightened" students of To-
ronto Canada conducted a petition drive in support of 
Reparations.  Despite reluctance from school adminis-
trators and teachers, the students persevered, and al-
though the Principal was not supportive in the begin-
ning, she was eventually persuaded by the students' per-
sistence.  For the last week of Black History month, the 
students staffed a table during lunch at the front of the 
school.  The students distributed several hundred flyers 
with information about Reparations--what it is, who its 
for, why its necessary, how it should be paid. 
 
 
Harmony reports that they encountered extreme apathy 
on the part of students.   Most students weren't even in-
terested enough to find out what Reparations was all 
about.  Although the project was somewhat depressing, 
Harmony arrived at some very important realizations: 
 
1.  Members of her generation are far to apolitical, espe-
cially in western societies. 
2.  Any Reparations literature developed to capture the 
attention of members of her generation must be short, 
catchy, and to the point.  Maybe there can be two ver-
sions of a document, one short version and one that pro-
vides a lot more detail.   
(Continued on page 25) 
“we as young people need to take 
the lead in this battle for 
reparations”   
Harmony (seated in the middle) with other Toronto students


--- PAGE 29 ---
15 
1921 TULSA MASSACRE WORKSHOP 
N’COBRA 14TH CONVENTION 
 
by Adjoa A Aiyetoro, Chair,  
Legal Strategies Commission 
 
Laquita Cooper, N’COBRA member from Tulsa, Okla-
homa and Adjoa A. Aiyetoro, Chair, Legal Strategies 
Commission, led the workshop.  A summary of the 
1921 massacre that resulted in the destruction of the 
Greenwood District in Tulsa, commonly known as 
Black Wall Street, was presented.  The massacre was 
preceded by a never proven allegation that a young 
Black man had “attempted to assault” a white woman 
in an elevator.  Prominent Black male leaders of the 
Greenwood District went to the jail to protect this 
young Black male from the fate of lynching.  Between 
1911 and 1921, 11 men had 
been lynched in Oklahoma, 
and only one of them was 
white.  A white mob of 
mostly drunken men gath-
ered before the jail.  A 
white man, apparently asso-
ciated with the police, be-
gan to disarm the Black 
men and not the white men.  When one Black man re-
fused to be disarmed a struggle ensued resulting in the 
death of a Black man.  The Black men then were forced 
to retreat to Greenwood District – being pursued by the 
police, and a the white mob, many of whom had been 
deputized.  The National Guard was called in and in-
stead of protecting Greenwood residents’ homes and 
businesses, many of them joined the white mob and 
local police in the destruction. 
 
On February 24, 2003, the Reparations Coordinating 
Committee (RCC), co-chaired by N’COBRA Legal 
Strategies Commission Chair Adjoa Aiyetoro, Charles 
Ogletree and Randall Robinson, filed a lawsuit for 
reparations on behalf of the survivors and the descen-
dants of the Tulsa massacre.  The lawsuit seeks to es-
tablish an education fund for the African American 
residents of Greenwood District. 
 
The workshop participants agreed that N’COBRA 
members should publicize N’COBRA’s role in this liti-
gation so that the masses will know that the grassroots 
organizers for reparations are involved, not simply fa-
mous attorneys such as Charles Ogletree and Johnny 
Cochran.  This lawsuit was seen as important because 
it focuses on a vestige of slavery and talks about the 
massacre as a vestige of slavery. 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
AYBP Update (Continued from page 11) 
Senator should support this issue, in addition to asking 
him to sponsor a Senate version of the Bill.   And 
while we were not able to meet with Senator Corzine 
or one of his counsels, contact was made with his of-
fice and he has been put on notice that Reparations is 
an issue that he will have to deal with.    P.O.P will be 
following up with letters requesting to meet with both 
Senators to discuss the issue further.   We will also be 
focusing on approaching other NJ Congressional rep-
resentatives that have not yet endorsed the legislation.  
 
The fight to pass H.R. 40 is a very revealing and scath-
ing commentary of the depths of the racist pathology 
that continues to engulf this country.  Of 435 members 
of the House, only 37 have 
endorsed this bill.   Con-
gressman John Conyers has 
been urging Congress to 
pass this bill for over 12 
years, but to no avail!   And 
yet the United States has 
passed many pieces of pro-
reparations legislation for 
other groups.  Legislation was enacted in 1999 to set 
up a commission to study the harmful effects of WWII 
on Italian Americans.   The US was instrumental in 
helping to negotiate billions of dollars in reparations 
for victims of the Nazi Holocaust and set up the Presi-
dential Advisory Commission on Holocaust Assets 
which is dedicated to historical research and restitu-
tion.  In 1998 Congress authorized this country to do-
nate $30,000,000 to the Holocaust Relief Fund.  The 
Civil Liberties Act of 1988 was passed officially 
apologizing to the Japanese Americans and paying 
them reparations for internment during WWII.  Addi-
tionally, nominal concessions have even been offered 
to Native Americans in the form of land grants, mon-
ies, etc.  These are just a few of the many ways the US 
has supported and paid reparations on behalf of others.    
 
 Slavery and its subsequent Jim Crow racism were 
some of the worst crimes ever committed against hu-
manity.  Long after slavery was officially over, this 
country embarked upon an anti-black agenda that was 
legislated in the courts and in the Congress to deny 
Blacks political, social and economic opportunities.   
And African Americans continue to suffer the effects 
of America's racist legacy.     African Americans are 
entitled to Reparations and the time for Reparations is 
now! 
The fight to pass H.R. 40 is a very 
revealing and scathing commentary of the 
depths of the racist pathology that 
continues to engulf this country.


--- PAGE 30 ---
16 
must be recognized under law our inalienable right to 
resettle and become assimilated as nationals of the 
countries in which we will be resettling. I am not advo-
cating a compromise to the sovereignty and integrity of 
the state, but a process by which Afrikans returning can 
be re-assimilated into Afrikan society without penalty 
to either side. We want to avoid the madness of Liberia 
and Sierra Leone and the Anglo-Afrikan chauvinism, a 
consequence of the Afrikan internalization of white su-
premacy, that caused such tragic disruption in the 19th 
and 20th centuries, and that continue to reverberate to-
day in these countries. At the same time, we do not 
want to be subjected to state persecution by the security 
apparatus of the states to which we will be returning. 
These things must be negotiated and worked out in ad-
vance. 
 
Since Afrikan presence (of those Afrikans not volun-
tary immigrants) in the United States is illegal and in-
voluntary, and is the consequence of a protracted crime 
against humanity, the Americans must also pay for re-
settlement of those Afrikans who want to go to some 
society (whether Afrikan or not) other than Afrika. 
That is, they must pay for Afrikans to receive political 
asylum from persecution in the United States. 
 
Further, reparations must en tail some negotiations re-
garding the release, resettlement, and rehabilitation of 
Afrikan political prisoners currently in US prisons. 
 
All of this presupposes that Afrikans in the United 
States, so-called Black or African Americans, have the 
cultural, historical, and political consciousness to un-
derstand and find these proposals reasonable elements 
in a comprehensive reparations package. My own sus-
picion is that most Afrikans in the United States be-
lieve they are Americans and believe the European set-
tlers are susceptible to some sensitivity to moral sua-
sion based on their alleged heritage surrounding princi-
ples of democracy, justice, freedom, etc. despite centu-
ries of experience to the contrary. As long as we live 
under this illusion, our thinking, actions, and strategies 
will remain sentimental and unrealistic as to the true 
nature of what will be necessary to achieve human lib-
eration. 
 
In short, it is my view that the key to reparations is 
power. Unless Afrikans move toward a change in 
power arrangements, all else will remain idle talk. 
For Afrikans who want to remain in the United States as 
American citizens, there has to be a negotiated change 
in the power arrangements of the state.  Without a 
change in the power arrangements, Afrikans will remain 
victims of the European settlers. They have to become a 
controlling and ruling element in a new form of the 
state. In this new arrangement there must be certain pro-
tections of Afrikan rights in the area of cultural, social, 
political, and economic rights, according to the interna-
tional human rights standards expressed in various UN 
conventions, and consistent with arrangements made in 
multi-ethnic European states like Canada (French and 
English), Belgium, etc. These rights must be explicitly 
guaranteed to Afrikans as a group, an explicit constitu-
tional recognition of group rights peculiar to Afrikans 
as a group, and provide a certain portion of representa-
tion in various levels of government, control of govern-
ment schools, etc. Of course, reparations, except in the 
most insignificant form, cannot be expected from the 
European settlers, absent a significant shift in power 
arrangements between Afrikans and Europeans in both 
the United States and the world. 
 
The major problem with some proposals for reparations 
is that they do not contemplate an alteration in the 
power arrangements between Afrikans and the Euro-
pean settlers in the United States. This must be seen as 
fundamental to any meaningful discussion, understand-
ing, and approach to reparations. 
 
Second, for Afrikans who want to return to Afrika, it 
must be recognized that the United States illegally in-
corporated us into the European settler republic and, 
therefore, stole our nationality in Afrika with the pas-
sage of its constitutional amendments after the Civil 
War. Thus, part of the reparations must be a declaration 
of Afrikan nationality as a continuing right for all Afri-
kans forcibly exiled from their homeland. The Ameri-
cans must pay for our resettlement in countries of 
choice in Afrika, and they must also pay an indemnity 
to the Afrikan countries to which we will be settling un-
der conditions that must be controlled by us in a negoti-
ated settlement between us, the European settlers 
(Americans), and the officials of the countries in which 
we will be resettling. My concern is that we will ensure 
a smooth transition and assimilation into Afrikan soci-
ety, and some protection of our rights from persecution 
by Afrikan governments. As part of this negotiation, it 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Reparations According To: 
Ahati N. N. Toure 
Houston, Texas


--- PAGE 31 ---
17 
have written the bill off as too mild. N’COBRA and 
some others take a different tact. 
“Because H.R. 40 is so weak,” said Milton McGriff, 
national coordinator for the AYBP Coalition, “it is at 
the bottom of the reparations food chain, so to speak. It 
is the point where we can engage the most number of 
people.”   
McGriff went on to say the reparations movement is 
dealing with a Congress that cares little or nothing 
about black people.  He said N’COBRA needs to edu-
cate people that reparations are not only long overdue 
but necessary in order for the black community to 
grow and prosper. 
“We intend to get 100 percent of the Congressional 
Black Caucus to sign onto this bill before the end of 
the year,” McGriff said.  “It’s sad that those CBC 
members who have not signed on come from southern 
states where our ancestors suffered much of the horror 
of life in America,” he said. 
The other new initiative that generated excitement and 
enthusiasm among the audience was the proposal to 
promote a campaign to support black businesses that 
support reparations.  
Black Fridays would educate the black owned and op-
erated business community to understand the funda-
mental necessity of winning reparations if black people 
are ever to gain control of the economy of the Black 
community. Sankofa said that Black businesses would 
be encouraged to display the Black Friday poster, hand 
out cards promoting reparations and to work together 
to promote the benefits to the black community. 
Beyond the issues of current litigation, building politi-
cal support for H.R. 40, and Black Fridays other ques-
tions attracted intensive discussion at the convention.   
(Continued on page 24) 
(Continued from page 1) 
year were the filing of the Tulsa, Ok, lawsuit for dam-
ages from the 1921 white terrorism against blacks and 
the highly visible and successful A Year of Black Pres-
ence support campaign for H.R. 40 on Capitol hill. 
 
Adjoa Aiyetoro, Co-Chair of the national Reparations 
Coordinating Committee and N’COBRA’s leading at-
torney reported that the Tulsa lawsuit was filed in Feb-
ruary.  
“The media tries to marginalize us,” Aiyetoro said and 
“we need to be more aggressive in uplifting our role so 
that others know we are active.”  Aiyetoro 
said the media likes to focus on estab-
lished personalities like Johnny Cochran, 
and Ogletree because they have had ex-
tensive media exposure in the past. By 
trying to marginalize N’COBRA, she 
said, the media tries to isolate the repara-
tions lawsuits from grassroots move-
ments. 
The other new development in the reparations move-
ment was the support campaign, A Year of Black Pres-
ence. This campaign, hugely successful by all accounts, 
was designed to put N’COBRA members in the face of 
Congress members all year long, arguing, cajoling and 
pressuring them to sign on to H.R. 40.  
The Reparations Study Bill, first introduced into Con-
gress in 1989 has never even been voted out of sub-
committee. Some within the reparations movement 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
       N’COBRA Holds 14th Annual Convention 
“The media tries to marginalize us, we need to 
be more aggressive in uplifting our role so that 
others know we are active.” 
Alvin Brown, Midwest Region Rep


--- PAGE 32 ---
18 
Dorothy Benton Lewis 
Barbara  and David Leonard received a Reparations Service Award 
Seestah Imahkus & Kalonji Olusegun 
Jahahara Amen-RA Alkebulan-Ma’at 
Elder Vincent Roots Wilson and Seestah Imahkus  
in step with the Reparations Movement 
N’COBRA 14TH NATIONAL CONVENTION’COBRA 14TH NATIONAL CONVENTIO NN 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Johnita and Dr. Imari Obadele


--- PAGE 33 ---
19 
D. Kimble, I. Alkebulan & Erline Arikpo 
Black Legionary Security 
Diane Ragsdale, Bobby Scott, Imahkus & Baba Afrik 
Omowale Satterwhite 
International Caucus:  Cikih Thomas, Canda; Mashariki Jywanza, US; 
Seestah Imahkus, Ghana; Imhotep Alkebulan, US; Ester Stanford, 
UK; Kalonji Olusegun, US; Baba Hannibal Afrik, US and others 
Erline Arikpo & Njere Alghanee 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
N’COBRA 14TH NATIONAL CONVENTION’COBRA 14TH NATIONAL CONVENTIO NN 
Rashieda Smith


--- PAGE 34 ---
20 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
We are lawyers and scholars who recognize the state-
ment made by George W. Bush on July 8th at Goree 
Island as a factual and accurate acknowledgment of the 
legal basis for the US to pay reparations to the descen-
dants of the Transatlantic slave trade, when he admit-
ted that, "slavery was one of the greatest crimes in his-
tory", and also admitted that it was enslaved, unpaid 
labor that created the "prosperity" of the United States. 
Ironically, it was the US government's refusal to ac-
knowledge this very fact that led the US delegation to 
walk out of the UN World Conference Against Racism 
(WCAR) in Durban, South Africa in 2001. 
 
Reparations and the Importance of the Interna-
tional Arena 
 
Over the past several years a combination of events - 
the grassroots movement, scholarly contributions, law-
suits, legislative resolutions, international meetings 
and resolutions - have forced the issue of reparations 
for the descendants of enslaved Africans into the main-
stream political agenda of the United States. But, of all 
these factors, those in the international arena have been 
key. It is in international fora, rather than in the do-
mestic arena, where the US has chosen to to wage its 
struggle opposing reparations. 
 
In 1998, the US delegation successfully defeated an 
attempt by the African Group to have the UN Commis-
sion on Human Rights adopt a resolution declaring 
"The Transatlantic Slave Trade and Slavery A Crime 
Against Humanity." 
 
In 2000, President Clinton, to avoid addressing the is-
sues of slavery and reparations, refused to convene a 
national US conference to prepare for the 2001 UN 
World Conference against Racism. 
 
In 2001, the US withdrew from the World Conference 
Against Racism rather than be associated with any fi-
nal document that recognized slavery as a crime 
against humanity. The World Conference adopted the 
Durban Declaration and Program of Action which rec-
ognized that the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade and Slav-
ery were crimes against humanity.  The Durban Decla-
ration was a tremendous victory for African people 
worldwide in the struggle for reparations. In 2003, at 
Goree Island, Mr. Bush finally uttered the truth. No 
matter how he phrased it, history is "human" history 
and thus a "greatest crime in history" is a crime against 
humanity. He quoted President John Adams who re-
ferred to slavery as "an evil of colossal magnitude." Fur-
thermore Mr. Bush admitted that it was enslaved, unpaid 
labor that created the "prosperity" of the United States. 
 
George W. Bush's Goree admission firmly places the 
United States within the ambit of international law on 
the issue of reparations.  Crimes against Humanity have 
no statute of limitations. Victims of such crimes are un-
deniably due compensation. The history of Black  
existence, oppression and resistance since the end of the 
Civil War should have taught US society this lesson - i.e. 
that there can be no real racial reconciliation without res-
titution: (i) for the damage done and wealth stolen during 
slavery and (ii) for the enforced disadvantage that the 
"vestiges of slavery" have continued to place on the de-
scendants of the original victims. In its recent decision in 
Lawrence v. Texas, the US Supreme Court looks to the 
law of the European Court of Human Rights, thereby ac-
knowledging that, in a globalized world, the US must 
recognize a role for international law within US domes-
tic law. 
 
Mr. Bush's pronouncements will mean nothing if they do 
not spur us to increased work in all spheres of activity - 
the legal, the legislative, the academic and the grass-
roots – in the movement for reparations. 
 
List in Formation: 
* Wendy Brown, Esq. Professor of Law at Tulane Law School 
* Margaret Burnham, Associate Professor of Law, Northeast-
ern University School of Law (for identification only)  
* Joan Gibbs, Esq., Chief Counse l, Center for Law and Social 
Justice of Medgar Evers College, CUNY  
* Lennox S Hinds, Esq., Vice-President; Permanent United 
Nations Representative; International Assciation of Democ-
ratic Lawyers, Professor Rutgers University  
* Lionel Jean Baptiste, Esq., Jean-Baptiste and Associates, 
Illinois 
 * Gerald Lemelle, Esq., Deputy Executive Director, Advo-
cacy, Amnesty International USA (for identification only)  
* Hope Lewis, Esq., Professor of Law, Northeastern Univer-
sity school of Law (for identification only) 
* National Conference of Black Lawyers  
* Ron Walters, Professor University of Maryland  
* Roger S. Wareham, Esq., International General Secretary 
International Association Against Torture;   
Partner in Thomas, Wareham & Richards, LLP  
* Robert Westley, Esq., Professor Tulane Law School  
* Jeanne Woods, Esq., Professor, Loyola University School of 
Law, NOLA (for identification only) 
GEORGE W. BUSH, GOREE ISLAND AND REPARATIONS 
Black Legal Scholar-Activists


--- PAGE 35 ---
21 
Note:  Wautella 2.21.02  - The first three (victim, collaborator and perpetrator) are raised by Dr.  
            Maulana Karenga,  "The Ethics of Reparations:  Engaging the Holocaust of Enslavement" 
 Holocaust Period 
1551-1865 
Post Holocaust Period 
1865-present 
Entitlement &  
Responsibility 
 
 
Victims 
Enslaved Africans: 10 to 100 
million enslaved, murdered, 
raped, robbed of their home-
land, culture, language, fam-
ily life, labor; endured  de-
humanizing enslavement for 
more than 300 years 
Enslaved African descen-
dants in the Diaspora:  
over 3000 lynched, jim 
crow-segregation, denied 
education, jobs, equal jus-
tice in court, access to 
housing, healthcare, etc 
Entitlement:  full and com-
plete Reparations, i.e. equi-
table remedy for the inju-
ries suffered in order to   
repair and heal ourselves 
 
 
Collaborators 
Some Africans amongst the 
victims, who betrayed and 
soldout their own people.  
All groups of people have 
sellouts and traitors. Afri-
cans had (and have) theirs 
also.  Collaboration can be 
brought on by outside force 
and/or an immediate concern 
for one’s own survival  
Descendants of collabo-
rating African families, 
ethnic groups & states 
that were in a position of 
power during era of en-
slavement;   did not bene-
fit from the enslavement 
of other Africans as did 
Europeans as evidenced 
by the level of poverty in 
Africa today 
Responsibility :  must 
amend for betraying their 
own people.   However this 
is a family problem that 
must be addressed inter-
nally by the African Family 
and not influenced by out-
siders 
 
 
 
Perpetrators 
European enslavers, slave 
companies,  slave ship build-
ers, European governments, 
the Church, etc.  Those who 
initiated, controlled, sus-
tained and truly benefited 
from the Trans-Atlantic en-
slavement of Africans.  
Those who actually carried 
out the holocaust. 
The enslavers' descen-
dants: individuals, fami-
lies, companies, US gov-
ernment, the Church, etc  
Those who inherited the 
wealth and power derived 
from the holocaust, e.g. 
Aetna, FleetBoston, CSX,  
Thomas Jefferson Estate, 
George. Washington Es-
tate, etc 
Responsibility:  make com-
plete amends and pay full 
compensation as deter-
mined by the victim’s de-
scendants.  Change the so-
cial and economic structure 
to ensure permanent parity 
for all Black People. 
 
Beneficiaries 
Slavery investors, Europe-
ans, colonial governments & 
their citizens, that allowed 
and encouraged perpetrators 
with their tax money and 
votes. 
All people living in the 
U.S. and benefiting from 
profits from the holocaust, 
whether they were born 
here or not- they access 
wealth and benefits. 
Responsibility:  acknowl-
edge the Holocaust of Afri-
can Enslavement, the bene-
fits received and their obli-
gation to support Restitu-
tion. 
BLACK REPARATIONS & BLACK REPARATIONS & RESTITUTIONRESTITUTION   
in America 
 
CATEGORIES OF INVOLVEMENT CHART  
 
By Wautella ibn Yusuf 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 36 ---
22 
Ask The Editor 
 
"BLACK REPARATIONS 
TIMES" 
 
 
In response to the growing momentum of the 
Reparations movement, the Information and 
Media Commission is committed to 
disseminating timely information on issues 
related to our struggle for Reparations. Our 
new publication, "BLACK REPARATIONS 
TIMES" © 2003 will report news and 
information not only about N’COBRA’s work, 
but also the efforts of other Reparations 
advocates, nationally and internationally.  Your 
comments and  suggestions are always 
welcome.  
 
You can also help by:   
 
1) providing items for possible publication 
such as articles, photos, etc; 2) volunteering 
professional skills (graphic arts, managing 
subscriptions & distribution, fundraising, 
etc.); 3) donating generously to this project, 
and 4)  identifying potential sponsors. 
 
Subscription 
rates are $20 (U.S.) per year payable to 
N’COBRA –IMC 
 
Information and Media Commission 
P.O. Box 716 
Washington, DC 20044-0716 
 
Email: InformationMedia@aol.com 
Phone: 202.466.1622 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
“Ask The Editor” column  was a suggestion from a 
young reader with questions.  The questions below 
are from her list.  Thanks for the good idea Harmony! 
 
Is it true that America’s laws disqualify Blacks for 
reparations?  My teacher said, “Legally, repara-
tions is only granted if the issue meets two criteria.     
One: there are people alive who suffered / are suf-
fering the injustice.    Two: the injustice was illegal 
at the time it was committed.” 
 
This is not true on either count. Native American/
Indian nations (First Nations) still participate in re-
parative processes even though the original victims 
have long been dead. I think you mean even though 
the injustice was "legal" at the time it was committed. 
If so, the Nuremburg precedent stated that even 
though Nazism was legal during the Third Reich, in-
ternational law, outlawing Nazism, was made retroac-
tive in order to prosecute leading Nazi Party mem-
bers. 
  
 
 Slavery ended so long ago--all the victims are 
dead, do African Americans have a chance of win-
ning reparations? 
 
Yes, the victims are dead but the perpetrators and the 
victim’s descendants are still alive: corporations are 
deemed to be living bodies and the U.S. in particular, 
has the same government that not only condoned and 
facilitated slavery but condones and facilitates the 
legacy of slavery. Repairing the legacy of slavery is 
the most compelling aspect of the Reparations move-
ment, in my opinion. 
 
 
There's reverse racism today so how are Blacks 
any different than Whites? 
 
Reverse racism is a hollow meaningless term.  For 
example, a white businessman who owns a 10,000 
employee company can say, "I will not hire any black 
people."  That is real racism as the businessman’s de-
cision impacts the lives of real black peo-
ple.  Whereas, a black person in idle chat standing 
around saying "I hate white people," while clearly an 
expression of prejudice, does not have the same affect 
because the black person does not have the means to 
affect the lives of white people.  Prejudice cannot 
possibly be compared to the racism of the white busi-
nessman. 
 
 
 
{Answers provided by J. Damu and Vic Nickson} 
 
Send your questions to:  InformationMedia@aol.com   
or  N’COBRA Information & Media Commission, P.O. 
Box 716, Washington, DC 20044-0716


--- PAGE 37 ---
23 
ACHIEVING REPARATIONS:  The Significance of H.R. 40 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
(Continued from page 10) 
3.  Rep. Frank Ballance  North Carolina (D)1st Con-
gressional District 
4.  Rep. James Clyburn South Carolina (D) - 6th 
Congressional District (Columbia, Charleston, 
Orangeburg, Sumter) 
5. Rep Artur Davis Alabama (D) 7th District 
6. Rep. Denise Majette Georgia 9D) 4th District 
7.  Rep David Scott Georgia (D) 13th District 
8.  Rep. Robert Scott Virginia (D) - 3rd Congres-
sional  District(Richmond, Newport News) 
9.  Rep. Melvin Watt North Carolina (D) -- 12th Con. 
District(Charlotte, Greensboro) 
 
The Progressive, and Hispanic Caucus members 
must also be challenged.  The following are members 
of those caucuses and their districts: 
 
Rep. Dennis Kucinich (Ohio-10);  Rep. Lynn Wool-
sey (California-06) Rep. Peter DeFazio (Oregon-
04);  Rep. Bernie Sanders (Vermont); Rep. Hilda 
Solis (California-31);  Rep. Neil Abercrombie 
(HawaiiI-01) Rep. Tammy Baldwin (Wisconsin-02); 
Rep. Xavier Becerra California-30)Rep. Sherrod 
Brown (Ohio-13);  Rep. Michael Capuano 
(Massachusetts-08); Rep. Rosa DeLauro 
(Connecticut-03); Rep.  Lane Evans (Illinois-17); 
Rep. Eni Faleomavaega (American Samoa); Rep. 
Sam Farr (California-17) Rep. Bob Filner California-
50);  Rep. Barney Frank (Massachusetts-04); Rep. 
Raul Grijalva (Arizona-07);  Rep. Luis Gutierrez 
(Illinois-04) Rep. Maurice Hinchey  (New York-
26);  Rep. Marcy Kaptur Ohio-09); Rep. Tom Lantos 
(California-02);  Rep. James P. McGovern 
(Massachusetts-03); Rep. George Miller (California-
07);   Rep. Ed Pastor (Arizona-02); Rep. Nancy Pe-
losi (California-08);  Rep. Jose Serrano (New York-
16); Rep. Pete Stark (California-13);  Rep. John Tier-
ney (Massachusetts-06); Rep. Tom Udall  (New 
Mexico-03); Rep. Nydia Velazquez (New York-12); 
Rep. Henry Waxman (California-29)   
 
August begins the month long recess for Congress, 
and it is also the time that Congressmen and Con-
gresswomen return to their state offices to make 
themselves more accessible to their constituents.   
This is an opportune time to pay them a visit to lobby 
for their support of H.R. 40.  If you have taken the 
time to get members of your communities to write 
letters asking for their support, now is the time to 
take the letters to them in person.  If you want to get 
a large group together to pay them a friendly visit to 
discuss the issues surrounding the Reparations debate, 
now is the time to do so.  When discussing the issues, 
remind them that the causes they profess to support for 
the poor and dispossessed are all elements that would 
be thoroughly addressed by The Reparations Study 
commission, once H.R. 40 is passed, in order to deter-
mine possible remedies to correct the injustices against 
African Descendants.  If they say they are more inter-
ested in providing healthcare, education, housing, eco-
nomic development, the right to vote, an end to dispa-
rate treatment under the justice system, changes to 
school curriculum to truthfully reflect the American era 
of enslavement and African descendants' contribution to 
the development of this country, and monuments that 
memorialize people and events in African Descendants' 
history, then they ought to be interested in the passage 
of H.R. 40, because the demand for Reparations in-
cludes all these issues.  Congress and ultimately Amer-
ica must understand that the demand for Reparations is 
not, nor has it ever been about only a check to individu-
als.  Remember now is a great time to visit your Con-
gressman or Congresswoman's State office.  Make your 
appointment early.  Don't settle for just an aide.   Don't 
Give up till you get what you want.  Don't scare them! 
Persuade them!  And don't ever forget they are in office 
to serve you.  
 
Finally, in the words of Reparations Advocate Brother 
David L. Horne of California, "We should take a brief 
moment to smile, and then get right back to the unre-
lenting work ahead."  We are on the right track Brothers 
and Sisters.  Close your eyes and see the victory! 
 
For lobbying information or assistance with State and 
local resolutions contact the Legislative Commission at 
202.466.1622 or Legicom@aol.com 
“Remember now is a great time to 
visit your Congressman or 
Congresswoman's State office. ”


--- PAGE 38 ---
24 
OPERATIONAL UNITY   (Continued from page 12) 
standing of what Reparations is all about to encourage 
cooperation and opportunities for collective work and 
unity. We must put aside our petty, parochial differ-
ences and recognize that there is more that unites us in 
struggle than divides us.    
 
We must conduct a broad based outreach and dialogue 
within our communities if we are to reach a consensus 
and basic understanding of what our struggle is about 
and what we must do in order to achieve our goal.   The 
principle block to our achieving that goal is internal and 
thus we must focus on and engage all elements of our 
communities in a serious dialogue, discussion and de-
bate in order to arrive at a common point of understand-
ing and commitment to moving this struggle forward. 
 
Specifically we must focus on building a broad coali-
tion with specific actions around getting HR40 passed 
in the House and also place some emphasis on getting a 
companion Senate bill introduced.   The year 2004 is a 
national presidential year.  Therefore, we have an op-
portunity to put Reparations at the top of the agenda and 
debate for both of the ‘major ‘ political parties.  We 
must not allow the issue of reparations to be obscured 
and relegated to the back burner.  Even within a context 
of heightened awareness and focus on “national security 
and the fight against terrorism” we must not allow 
Reparations to be placed on the back burner. 
 
We must not lose sight of the fact that historically we as 
a people have been called upon to de-emphasize our de-
mands in times 
of crisis and 
rally around 
the flag.   We 
must not allow 
ourselves to 
become so 
draped in the 
American flag that we lose sight of what our ultimate 
goal is and will always be until Reparations is achieved. 
We must be diligent and become militant in our just de-
mand for Reparations. 
 
We cannot be sidetracked by the ill informed arguments 
and positions revolving around extreme misunderstand-
ings such as “the civil rights movement accomplished 
all that needed to be done to achieve freedom and jus-
tice for our communities” and that “there is little need 
for any special focus or emphasis on the problems and 
issues within our communities.”  Despite the fact that 
the “token achievers “ and collaborators will put forth 
the argument that we have been taken care of, the real-
ity of conditions in our communities should keep us 
focused and steadfast in our efforts to achieve true em-
powerment, liberation and justice, and to honor the 
spirit and legacy of our ancestors.  We must struggle 
on behalf of our ancestors with a focus on leaving a 
different legacy for our future generations. 
 
The passage of HR 40 will be a milestone in achieving 
those goals and we must not be sidetracked or hood-
winked into thinking that this is not a noble and worthy 
objective upon which to focus our attention at this 
time. Yes we realize very clearly that HR 40 is not the 
penultimate but we do remain steadfast in our belief 
that it is one of the most critical accomplishments that 
we can achieve within the present context. 
 
The “legal” front is in pretty good hands.  The missing 
element in this struggle is the building of the mass 
movement in support of Reparations, which is critical 
to achieving our goal.  The struggle for passage of HR 
40 represents a concrete tactical and strategic point 
around which we can and should rally. 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
“ We must not allow the issue 
of reparations to be obscured 
and relegated to the back 
burner.”   
N’COBRA CONVENTION  
(Continued from page 17) 
The issue of land was an issue of intense interest and 
importance. Dr. Imari Obadele and Baba Hannibal Af-
rik, the newly elected national co-chair of N’COBRA, 
both venerable leaders and founders of the Republic 
of New Afrika spoke of their more than thirty year 
quest to promote a black state within the U.S. 
Afrik spoke at length on how he thought such a state 
could be effectively administered. Obadele continued 
by giving background information on legal tactics he 
had devised over the years to challenge the U.S. on 
the issue.  
Obadele also outlined his vision of how land owned, 
controlled and administered by blacks could be used 
to rehabilitate blacks who are currently incarcerated 
and victims of alcohol and drug abuse. Echoing the 
Cuban revolutionary hero Che Guevarra, Obadele 
said, “A new Afrikan personality can be created 
within our own land,”   
“If a place of peace and security can be fixed,” he 
said, “people coming out of prison can be transformed 
(Continued on page 31)


--- PAGE 39 ---
25 
BATTLE FOR REPARATONS  (Continued from page 14) 
 
o Study the impact of those forces on today’s living Afri-
can Americans. 
 
o After the study, make recommendations to Congress on 
appropriate remedies to redress the harm inflicted on liv-
ing African Americans. 
 
"Congress studies everything else on earth, yet they say 
that we don’t even want to study reparations for African 
Americans," said Rep. Conyers at a Reparations Forum at 
Penn Valley Community College. "When we gave the 
Japanese reparations there was a case study done.  Now 
when you suggest a reparations case study for the group 
of people, who built America with no compensation, then 
there’s a problem," he continued.  I saw that with my own 
eyes.  At every Congress man and woman’s office that 
my group visited, the Congress men and women were ei-
ther on the House floor, on a conference call, busy, in a 
session and a whole bunch of other excuses, but we still 
made sure we were heard. 
 
I was in Group B, and my group was responsible for vis-
iting Rep. Crowley’s office; Rep. Hinchey’s office; and 
Rep. Clyburn’s office.  My group had approximately 15 
to 20 people in it, so when we went into every congress-
man’s office, we filled their meeting area from front to 
back and side to side.  We spoke to each of their Legisla-
tive Assistants and Directors, and every 
time they came out of their office they 
all said "Wow!" During the meetings 
with each individual staff member we all 
voiced our opinions and asked questions 
on reparations and what is being done 
a b o u t  i t  i n  C o n g r e s s .   T h e n  w e  g a v e  
their assistants a reparations package, 
which consisted of the H.R. 40 bill pro-
posed by Rep. John Conyers and N’CO-
BRA’s reparations information.  At the 
end of each meeting the assistant said they would defi-
nitely tell their bosses that we came by and they would 
give them the reparations packet. 
 
During our morning orientation at the Cannon Building, 
we were addressed by Rep. Conyers’ Judiciary Counsel, 
Mr. Keenan Keller.  Mr Keller brought up a very impor-
tant point.  He said, "We as African Americans are 
known for our sprinting skills, but if we are going to win 
this battle for reparations we are going to have to be long 
distance runners."  That is why we as young people need 
to really be involved in this A Year of Black Presence 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
initiative, because this is going to be a long uphill bat-
tle.  Most of our leaders are up in age and have been in 
the Civil Rights fight for a long time and we as young 
people need to take the lead in this battle for reparations  
and get what African Americans deserve, JUSTICE!!  
 
Toronto Youth Organizes  (Continued from page 14) 
All total the students collected 254 signatures for the 
following Petition:   
 
REPARATIONS NOW!  STOP  
THE INJUSTICE! 
 
WHEREAS, the descendants of African slaves and 
also indigenous people of colour have seen their cul-
tures, and resources plundered and their development  
inhibited by the criminal origins of the capitalist sys-
tem, and  
 
WHEREAS,  the demand for Reparations is a legiti-
mate demand for justice for crimes against humanity,  
 
WE the undersigned  pledge our support to the orga-
nizing of a truly international campaign for Reparations 
with the ultimate objective of redressing the historical 
injustices perpetrated against Africans and other in-
digenous people of colour, and  
 
WE the undersigned  
also pledge our support 
for the demand for 
"payment for Repara-
tions" to the descendants 
of African slaves and in-
digenous people so as  
to rebuild humane com-
munities that meet the 
real needs of all people 
 
Harmony has also made a number of suggestions to the 
N’COBRA Information and Media Commission, which 
have been incorporated in the Black Reparations 
Times.  She has submitted artwork  for the Youth 
Reparations Art project, and is visualizing the produc-
tion of feature films that teach the public about this  
important cause.  We believe we can expect great 
things from Sister Harmony in the future.  The Repara-
tions Movement is strengthened by her enthusiasm. 
Harmony has also made a number of 
suggestions to the N’COBRA Information 
and Media Commission, which have been 
incorporated in the Black Reparations 
Times.


--- PAGE 40 ---
26 
Reparations for the Holocaust  of Enslavement 
and Its Vestiges 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
NANNY --- a woman who knows the rightful treatment and dignity of women in Africa,  
                          was alarmed of the abuse African women on slavery plantations get —  
 
 
NANNY --- a woman who knows the rightful honour of men in Africa was alarmed of   
                          the brutality African men receives on slavery plantations — 
 
NANNY --- a trained warrior from West Africa now Ghana – as expected brought   
                           outrage on the enemies. She was a force to be reckon with between 1720 to 1739 — 
 
NANNY --- a woman who sees to it that the British got their fair share of defeat in the hills   
                           those days – by her famous special version of ~~~  
             GORILLA ATTACK TECHNIQUE 
 
                            She was SOMEONE the rest of the slaves could look forward to — 
 
NANNY --- a woman who knows that she, her fellow brothers and sisters should not be   
                           forced into slavery in the first place allows no time to waste as she along with    
                           other   warriors “ram sacks” the place – especially at nights, by setting cane   
                           fields ON FIRE~ 
 
“OOOH” NANNY? 
                          A woman of fathomless leadership qualities ~~~ 
                                                         Jamaica’s first and only recognized heroine to this day - 
 
 
                    WRITTEN: Antoinette “RAS” Anderson   
                        (1997) 
NANNY  
Of The  
MAROONS


--- PAGE 41 ---
27 
REPARATIONS STUDY PROJECT  
FUND (RSPF) 
 
The Drammeh Institute has recently announced the 
development of a Reparations Study Project Fund 
(RSPF), established to assist grassroots organizers 
seeking legislative passage and promotion of bills in-
volving an official study of reparations at the national 
or local levels.   These modest grants aim to meet 
challenges experienced in mobilization efforts.  
There is no application form available to date. 
 
For more information write to: 
The Drammeh Institute, Inc. 
Attention: RSPF 
P.O. Box 558 
Bronx, New York 10475 
 
 
DURBAN 400 DOCUMENTARY 
 
The "Durban 400" documentary is now screening in 
US and South African cities, and will be available for 
distribution by early fall, 2003. Shot in cinema-verte 
style by filmmaker Alfred Santana, the feature follows 
a nearly 400 member delegation (of the same name) of 
grassroots Black political activists who were mobi-
lized by the December 12th Movement and the Na-
tional Black United Front as they participate at the UN 
World Conference Against Racism, in Durban, South 
Africa, August-September 2001. 
 
"Durban 400" also incorporates sound bites, and inter-
views with N'COBRA members and other activists 
pointing to the shared frustration and anger around the 
West’s refusal to have key language included in the 
final document of the World Conference, declaring 
the Trans-Atlantic slave trade, and colonialism as 
“crimes against humanity”. 
 
The documentary captures the cumulative work of 
grassroots activists keeping the pressure on govern-
ments, including countries that were directly involved 
in the slave trade, ensuring that someday soon repara-
tions would be a reality. It also offers an historical 
snapshot of a significant turning point in history that 
took the issue of reparations to the international stage. 
 
DIRECTED BY: Alfred Santana 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Some News from Around Our Reparations Movement 
PRODUCERS:  Iman Drammeh and Alfred Santana 
 
CONTENT:  human rights, political, pan-Afrikan 
 
SUGGESTED AUDIENCE: Those who aim to further 
their insights into current debates in the humanities and 
social sciences about reparations. Viewers should have 
some basic understanding of these issues. A supplemen-
tal publication accompanies this documentary for use in 
academic settings. 
 
LENGTH: 57 minutes 
 
SOME VIEWS: 
“It was wonderful to see in the Durban 400 video that 
people’s hearts are never on the ground, no matter how 
long it takes to win justice!” 
     National Center for Human Rights Education 
 
“A rare and educational chronicle of Black history.” 
             Black View Collective 
 
To purchase video for educational, grassroots and home 
use write to:     The Drammeh Institute, Inc. 
                          Attention: Durban 400 
                          P.O. Box 558 
                          Bronx, New York 10475 
By email:   durban400doc@hotmail.com 
 
 
 
REPARATIONS WORK IN  
PATERSON, NEW JERSEY 
 
In 2001, New Jersey created the Amistad Commission to 
monitor educational and other programs to insure the 
history and contributions of African Americans are ade-
quately reflected in its curriculum and textbooks. 
 
The Paterson, New Jersey  Board of Education is now 
(Continued on page 28) 
“Durban 400 also incorporates sound 
bites, and interviews with N'COBRA 
members and other activists”


--- PAGE 42 ---
28 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
 (Continued from page 27) 
moving full speed ahead with the creation of  the Amis-
tad Commission on the local level.  Elder Ron Gross, 
long time proponent of Reparations, and active sup-
porter of the "A Year of Black Presence" lobbying ini-
tiative, is serving on that commission.  His first meet-
ing was July 8th.  We look forward to periodic updates 
from Elder Gross on this important work.    
 
 
REPARATIONS SUNDAY 
MARCH 21, 2004  
 
Justice & Witness Ministries 
United Church of Christ 
 
The Justice & Witness Ministries of the United Church 
of Christ is making a great contribution to the Repara-
tions Movement.  We are aware of three very important 
developments.  1.  Reparations Resolution (developed 
from 2000 reparations discussion during their 23rd 
General Synod and the General Assembly of the Chris-
tian Church in Kansas City.  2.  Designated March 21, 
2004 as Reparations Sunday, and 3.  Produced a pro-
fessional and excellent faith base reparations resource 
entitled, “REPARATIONS:  A Process For Repairing 
The Breach” subtitled, A Study and Discussion Guide 
For Local Congregations, Associations And Confer-
ences.  Anyone doing outreach to Christians should 
have this book.  It is available for $8.00 at:  Justice & 
Witness Ministries, Racial Justice Team, 700 Prospect 
Ave—9th floor, Cleveland, OH  44115 or phone 
216.736.3700 
  
 
N’COBRA 
 AT-LARGE BOARD MEMBER ELECTED  
TO DETROIT CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sister Joann Watson recently captured 52 percent of the 
vote topping veteran Councilman Gil Hill, for a seat on 
the Detroit City Council. Councilwoman Watson used 
a grassroots outreach campaign to bring the issues to 
the people. We congratulate her and wish her much 
success in serving the people of Detroit. 
 
Councilwoman Watson, is currently serving in an At-
Large position on the N’COBRA Board of Directors, 
and is a member of the Information and Media Com-
mission. She has served as Co-Chair of the Detroit 
Chapter of N’COBRA, and has played an instrumental 
role along with Reparations Ray Jenkins, in raising the 
most money for the N’COBRA Legal Commission. 
Councilwoman Watson has been an outspoken advo-
cate for Reparations. We are certain she will continue 
to raise her voice in support of this noble cause 
 
MISSISIPPI MFR COALITION  
MOBILIZES THE FAITH COMMUNITY 
 
The Mississippi Chapter of the Millions for Repa-
rations Mobilization Movement (MFR) has insti-
tuted the Faith in Our Struggle Campaign to mobi-
lize the Faith Community to commit themselves 
to a unified demand for economic justice for the 
atrocities perpetrated ag ainst African Descendant. 
The Faith in Our Struggle Campaign will eventu-
ally cover the entire state of Mississippi, and will 
recruit two thousand Black Churches and civic or-
ganizations to adopt Resolutions in support of 
Reparations. For more information or to set-up 
town hall meetings on Re parations, contact Baba 
Hannibal Afrik at (601) 535-7551 or Brother  
Lukata (601) 957-2969.  
Some News Updates  
Education, Reparations and Bermuda 
A Report From the Field 
 
By Melodye Micëre Stewart 
 
            Free the Mind!  As an Africalogist, I am 
blessed to have my ideology and my livelihood inter-
sect.  For fifteen years, I conducted Black History 
Workshops for Children , exposing thousands of chil-
dren to the lessons of empowerment that emanate from 
global African history and culture.  
 
From the beginning of my involvement with 
N’COBRA, I have advocated for African-centered edu-
cation as a necessary, critical, part of the equation in 
our pursuit for Reparations.  In fact, my first exposure 
to N’COBRA and reparations came by meeting Johnita 
Scott Obedele on the Philadelphia stage of the Million 
Woman March  in 1997.  We were advocating -
reparations and heritage education.  A year later, I 
wrote and presented “A Reparations Mission State-
(Continued on page 33)


--- PAGE 43 ---
29 
The 23 August marks UNCESCO’s International Day 
for the Remembrance of the Slave Trade and its Aboli-
tion. Anti-Slavery International, the world’s oldest in-
ternational human rights organisation, in partnership 
with African heritage community groups, is organising 
a four day programme of events in remembrance of 
Britain’s role in the Transatlantic Slave Trade. 
 
The Rendezvous of Victory will be held from 21-24 
August in Greenwich and Brixton, areas of London 
connected with the slave trade and associated with 
freedom fighting and justice. Events for people of all 
ages, will take place at the National Maritime Mu-
seum, the University of Greenwich, Cutty Sark Gar-
dens and on the Cutty Sark. 
 
“The Transatlantic Slave Trade changed the fabric of 
societies worldwide. Enslavement and abolitionist re-
sistance remain at the root not only of negative acts of 
racism, discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance, 
but also of positive action for human rights. The Ren-
dezvous of Victory is an opportunity for Londoners to 
acknowledge and understand this rich legacy,” Mary 
Cunneen Director of Anti-Slavery International says. 
 
Organised in partnership with local community 
groups, the programme includes: 
 
 Rendezvous of Victory Convention, University of 
Greenwich (21-22 August) 
 
Vigil of Remembrance, Cutty Sark Gardens, Green-
wich (22 August) 
 
Special screenings of international films, Ritzy Cin-
ema, Brixton (21 & 24 August) 
 
Talks, previews of National Maritime Museum’s Afri-
can Enslavement Collection and workshops at the Na-
tional Maritime Museum, Greenwich (23 August) 
 
 Heritage and historical walks around Greenwich and 
Brixton (23 & 24 August) 
 
 Interfaith Ceremony, St Matthew’s Church, Brixton 
(24 August) 
 
The event culminates on the day the Notting Hill Car-
nival begins. The Caribbean Carnival dates back to the 
abolition of slavery when enslaved Africans took to 
the streets. The Carnival is the UK’s (and one of 
Europe’s) largest multicultural event, and a powerful 
celebration of people’s determination, against all odds, 
to keep their cultural heritage alive. 
 
To arrange an interview or for further information con-
tact Beth Herzfeld, Anti-Slavery International’s Press 
Officer, on 020 7501 8934; b.herzfeld@antislavery.org 
or Martine Miel on 020 7501 8935; m.iel@antislavery.
org 
 
The Rendezvous of Victory is organised in connection 
with the initiative of the Forum of Africans and African 
Descendants Against Racism (FAADAR), by the 
Breaking the Silence Community Advisory Board of 
UNESCO’s ASPnet Transatlantic Slave Trade Educa-
tion Project, with the support of Anti-Slavery Interna-
tional, the Churches Commission for Racial Justice, the 
National Maritime Museum - Greenwich, Greenwich 
Council, the Pathbreakers International Network (PIN), 
Greenwich Racial Equality Council, the SIMBA/Mama 
Afrika Partnership, the Forum of African Human Rights 
Defenders in Europe (FAHRDE), the National Union of 
Students - Black Students Campaign (NUS-BSC), the 
Black United Front, a number of partners in Greenwich 
and many others 
 
Background: 
 
The Transatlantic Slave Trade, probably the largest 
forced migration in human history, ripped communities 
apart, stripping Africa of tens of millions of its young 
and healthy work force. It forcibly grouped vastly dif-
ferent peoples together, creating new communities, 
identities and languages, changing the course of history 
forever. 
 
By the end of the 18th century, Britain was the largest 
slaving nation in the world. Fortunes made by merchant 
families in London, Bristol and Liverpool brought im-
mense wealth, largely fuelling the Industrial Revolu-
tion. The profits of enslavement transformed the lives 
of people living in Britain, changing their landscape as 
money was poured into building new houses, schools 
(Continued on page 31) 
LONDON FESTIV AL TARGETS CAPITOL’S SLA VE TRADE PAST 
By the end of the 18th century, Britain 
was the largest slaving nation in the world 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 44 ---
30 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
LEGISLATIVE WORKSHOP (Continued 
from page 3) 
would like to have a national effort active for A Year 
of Black Presence. It will be a powerful statement for 
N’COBRA if simultaneous demonstrations are being 
held in Indianapolis or Chicago or Kansas City or Los 
Angeles or San Francisco at the same time New York 
or Philly or Newark or DC Metro are taking large 
numbers to Capitol Hill.  We are also planning some 
kind of action for the Congressional Black Caucus’ 
Annual Legislative Weekend September 25-28 in 
Washington D.C. If chapters outside the Northeast 
Region could send even a small delegation, it will 
make a statement to the CBC that this is a national 
effort.   Information kits are available.  Duplicate it to 
suit your needs. (The black and gold folders can be 
obtained from Khepera Ausar, the N’COBRA graph-
ics genius, when you’re ready. He can be contacted at 
khepera@datatone.com
)   Ask churches, student 
groups, labor groups, community groups, fraternities, 
sororities "anyone you can get interested" and find 
ways to work together to gain support for HR40. 
 
5. NATIONAL N’COBRA SHOULD INVESTI-
GATE THE ORGANIZING OF A POLITICAL AC-
TION COMMITTEE (PAC). Damu suggested that 
we, as a national organization, should know what’s 
involved in organizing a PAC. The Board of directors 
could then determine if we should move to create a 
PAC. 
 
After the workshop, Damu made suggestions for the 
Remembrance of Lynched Ancestors campaign. He 
recalled the NAACP’s placement of a banner outside 
their national office in the 1940s as part of their anti-
lynching campaign. They would place on the banner 
the name of a lynched Ancestor and the date as infor-
mation became available. Damu suggested that we 
create a similar "On this day" banner as near Capitol 
Hill as possible and display the names of those 
on  our list and the date and place they were 
lynched.  Or instead of a banner, we could use a 
plaque large enough to be read by passing vehicles. 
The name, date and place would be replaceable (Velcro 
strips, or bars, or electronically, depending on cost and 
creativity). It may well be possible to get a person or 
persons to underwrite this. 
 
Milt McGriff committed to a) communicating with the 
group through Keslie Spottsville at least once a month., 
or calls to individuals as needed.    (The Legislative 
Commission will also communicate with its members 
on a regular basis).; b) developing a full fundraising 
proposal by the end of summer to be shared with other 
N’COBRA chapters.  We must prosper collectively if 
we’re going to win this war   
; and c) meeting with chapters to help organize AYBP 
if chapters are willing to cover expenses. He will assist 
other organizations "churches, campus or community 
groups, if they will provide expenses and an agreed 
upon honorarium to AYBP.  We will not get repara-
tions, or even a reparations commission, from Congress 
because they suddenly get religion. We must demon-
strate power to them, power that says they may not get 
elected if they don’t respond to us. 
 
Milt McGriff can be reached at 215.465.4635, fax 
215.465.4636, cell 215.370.9955, e-mail 
scribemcg@aol.com
 (place AYBP in the subject line)  “We are also planning some kind of 
action for the Congressional Black 
Caucus’ Annual Legislative Weekend 
September 25-28 in Washington D.C.”  
James Rodgers III, Southwest Region Rep give an award 
to Elder Irene “Nanny” Moorehead  - at convention


--- PAGE 45 ---
31 
LONDON (Continued from page 29) 
and universities, museums, libraries, etc. Sugar be-
came more accessible as it flooded in from slave 
colonies in the West Indies. Banks grew rich from the 
profits made by some of Britain’s most notorious 
slave traders, insuring and loaning them money to be 
ploughed into their investment in Africans. 
  
The trade in enslaved Africans also gave rise to a new 
form of thought, which defined Africans as inferior 
beings, leading to Afriphobia and Apartheid. Racism 
in the form it is known today grew out of justifying 
the enslavement of African people for the benefit of 
Europe. 
  
International Day for the Remembrance of the Slave 
Trade and its Abolition, 23 August, commemorates 
the world’s first successful uprising by enslaved Afri-
cans in Haiti (then St Domingue) which began on 22-
23 August 1791. The revolt led to the establishment 
of the first black-led state in the Caribbean. 
 
For more about the Transatlantic Slave Trade see 
Breaking the Silence at <www.antislavery.org/
breakingthesilence> 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Testimony  for Reparations (Continued from page 13) 
Texas.  Representative Wilson has submitted this legisla-
tion for a number of years. The LAC acknowledges the 
difference between the two, however has no contradic-
tion in supporting them both.  One sends a message to 
Washington, the other addresses it's concerns directly to 
the State of Texas.  From our vantage point it is not ei-
ther or but and, and both.  Reparations activists from 
around the state have held protest at the capitol and gov-
ernor’s mansion and a well attended forum during the 
state legislative Black caucus weekend.  Representative 
Lewis closed out the ninety minute session recounting 
"My grandfather was lynched in Texas, the time is now 
to bring this open and frank discussion on the  
floor of the Texas legislature". 
 
Noted references during the hearing: Books - Repara-
tions Yes!; The Forty Acres and Mule Document; A 
Time of Terror; Should America Pay; The Debt; Chaos 
or Community; Handbook of Texas; History of the Im-
perial Sugar Company; Articles- Slave Labor Built Capi-
tol, Lynching in Waco Texas, Psychological impact of 
enslavement work by Francess Cress-Welsing, Naim 
Akbar, Bobby Wright, and Wade Nobles.LAC: National 
Black United Front, New Black Panther Party, Sankofa 
Pan Afrikan Student Organization, S.H.A.P.E. Commu-
nity Center, National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations 
In America, Saint Saviour Church, Grace Ministries, Na-
tion of Islam Muhammad Mosque #45, Citizens for Bet-
ter Media, Brothers Healing Brothers, Afrikans United 
For Sanity Now, S.H.A.P.E. Center Harambee Council 
of Elders, Mt Ararat Baptist Church, Black United Fund 
of Texas, Progressive Amateur Boxing Association, Se-
hah Youth Inc., Akoramante Society, Allen Parkway 
Village Residents Council In Exile, Fair Housing Coali-
tion, Black Out Collective, Afrikans Committed to Lib-
eration, Black Power Transformation Study Circle. 
N’COBRA CONVENTION  
 
(Continued from page 24) 
in to people of consciousness who desire to lead pro-
gressive lives and make contributions for the general 
good. People would be able to transform themselves 
into positive people, proud of their ancestors and 
themselves,” he told the audience. 
Other participants at the convention, held at Dallas’s 
black Paul Quinn College, included Deadria Farmer-
Paellman, of the Reparations Study Group, former 
Massachusetts State Senator Bill Owens, Dr. Mau-
lana Karenga of the Organization Us, Esther Stanford 
and Cikiah Thomas, respectively of England and 
Canada of the Global Afrikan Congress and Dr. Con-
rad Worrill of the National Black United Front who 
said the key to building the reparations movement 
was to “Grassroots organize! Grassroots organize! 
Grassroots organize!”  
Mark you Calendar now! 
 
JUNE 2004 
 
N’COBRA’s 15TH  
 
CONFERENCE  
WASHINGTON, DC 
 
You won’t want to miss this one!


--- PAGE 46 ---
32 
MARCH ON WASHINGTON  
40TH ANNIVERSAY  
&  
REPARATIONS  
 
On Saturday, August 23, 2003, the Southern Christian 
Leadership Conference and Martin Luther King III, and 
a coalition which includes the NAACP, the Urban 
League, the National Council of Negro Women, NOW, 
the Arab-American Institute, the AFL-CIO, and United 
for Peace and Justice,  will host the 40th anniversary 
celebration of the "March on Washington (MOW) for 
Jobs and Freedom."  The theme is "Return, Repair and 
Renew", and the site is the grounds of the Lincoln Me-
morial.  N’COBRA member, Brother Mark Thompson 
(Matsimela Mapfumo) has played a significant role in 
the planning of the event.  Early on, Thompson sought 
to have the coalition adopt Reparations as the over 
arching theme for the event.  However, for some, the 
issue of Reparations still appears too scary to raise up 
in "mixed" company.   There was eventually agreement 
to identify Reparations  and H.R. 40 as Social Action 
and Legislative issues for which, 
event participants are encour-
aged to lobby and support.  Al-
though, it is too early to make 
predictions about how many 
people will attend, Reparations 
advocates should plan to partici-
pate, and use the event as an op-
portunity to distribute Reparations literature, register 
new voters who support Reparations, and engage par-
ticipants in substantive discussions around the Issue.  If 
you plan to attend, make a strong N’COBRA presence 
by wearing  N’COBRA T-shirts and buttons, and carry-
ing N’COBRA banners.  For more information, contact 
the MOW coalition at 202.544.8026; 404.522.1420.  
Slavery Was Unconstitutional 
  
Leroy Pletten of Sterling Heights, Michigan hopes to 
educate the public, via Internet, on the little-known 
abolitionist view that slavery was ALWAYS unconsti-
tutional, and for constitutional violations, the victims 
are entitled to damages.  Pletten researches pertinent 
abolitionist legal writings that are readily available on 
the internet such as 
 
Frederick Douglass, http://medicolegal.tripod.com/
douglassuos.htm 
Benjamin Shaw, http://medicolegal.tripod.com/
shawuos.htm 
Alvan Stewart, http://medicolegal.tripod.com/
stewartuos.htm 
Joel Tiffany, http://medicolegal.tripod.com/tiffanyuos.
htm 
Edward Rogers, http://medicolegal.tripod.com/
rogersuos.htm 
Lysander Spooner, http://medicolegal.tripod.com/uos.
htm 
Abraham Lincoln, http:// medicolegal.tripod.com/
lincolnpeoriauos.htm 
George Mellen, http://medicolegal.tripod.com/
mellenuos.htm 
 
The major English Supreme Court decision by 
Judge Mansfield at  http://medicolegal.tripod.
com/somersetvstewart.htm declares slavery was 
not allowed under English common law and the 
"rights of Englishmen."   English law was the ba-
sis of law in America, and was not changed by the 
1776 Revolution, which fought FOR the"rights of Eng-
lishmen." 
 
To expose the outrageous contrary view of Roger 
Taney, in the Dred Scott case, Pletten has written a 
short summary of the abolitionist position, and exposes 
Taney's personal situation which lead to his grossly er-
roneous view.at http://medicolegal.tripod.com/
mellenuos.htm   By educating on the little known 
"slavery is unconstitutional" abolitionist viewpoint, 
Pletten hopes that Reparations Advocates can over-
come the bias that ASSUMES that slavery was always 
constitutional, which obstructs our efforts.  Since most 
people have only heard the contrary view, education is 
critical  to our efforts.  We encourage Leroy Pletten to 
continue his research.  And to all Reparations support-
ers, remember: 
 
EDUCATING, ORGANIZING AND MOBILIZING is 
the path that leads to Reparations.
 
“slavery was 
ALWAYS 
unconstitutional” 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
 
True Reparations Demands 
 
 Mass Participation


--- PAGE 47 ---
33 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
(Continued from page 28) 
ment” while attending my first N’COBRA confer-
ence in 1998.  As the piece indicates, there are many 
things we must learn, internalize and act upon for our 
ultimate success.    
 
My work has taken me many places.  From 
2001 to 2002, I served as an Education Officer/
Consultant for Social Studies for the Ministry of 
Education for the government of Bermuda.  In that 
capacity, I was responsible for the history, geography 
and civics/ethics curriculum for grades K-12.  As a 
British Colony, the history that is taught in Ber-
muda’s schools is British, even as the majority of the 
people are of African descent.  I spent the year insert-
ing African people throughout the curriculum, but 
particularly focused on the high school level.   
 
Feeling passionately about who African peo-
ple are – our history, culture, struggles and achieve-
ments – it is my life’s work to perpetuate, extend and 
disseminate that knowledge through the lessons of 
empowerment.  To that end, I created a number of 
teacher resource projects to provide information to 
teachers, including Introduction to African Philoso-
phy and Religion  teacher supplement and a teaching 
video and guide, When Voices Rise… , which tells the 
story of Civil Rights in Bermuda.  In the introduction 
to one of the teacher supplements, I wrote, 
 
“I am proud to offer you the binder that you 
are now holding.  It is filled with information 
regarding what I believe is one of the most 
pressing issues facing the African world in 
the ongoing struggle for complete liberation 
in the 21
st century – Reparations.” 
 
I was privileged for the opportunity to add 
the issue of reparations to the social studies curricu-
lum in five courses:  American History, Twentieth 
Century in Revolution, The African American Ex-
perience, World History and Comparative Religion 
and Ethics.  I also conducted teacher training on the 
reparations teacher supplement for all middle and 
high school social studies teachers. 
 
A Reparations Reader  is a compilation of 
numerous newspaper articles, position papers, essays 
and documentation that discusses, advocates and pro-
vides justification for reparations.  It is divided into 
five categories - Background, The United States, 
United Kingdom (England), Related Articles and Addi-
tional Resources - and includes study questions, discus-
sion questions, vocabulary words and activities de-
signed to fully engage  students in the global discussion 
of reparations.  
 
The Background section includes recommenda-
tions forwarded by Bermuda’s own Dr. Pauulo Kamara-
kafego (Roosevelt Browns) that he presented to and 
were accepted by The United Nations.  The section enti-
tled, “Reparations in the United States” begins with in-
formation on N’COBRA followed by an article from 
chair emeritus, Dr. Imari Obedele. 
 
             My work in Bermuda has given me the unique 
opportunity to stay involved and connected to N’CO-
BRA and Reparations’ righteous struggle.   My recent 
participation in “A Year Of Black Presence” lobbying 
trip from Philadelphia to Washington, DC in May, 
brought back warm memories.  It was a packed house 
with delegations from Philadelphia, New Jersey, New 
York and Washington, DC.  For the Philadelphia con-
tingent, the camaraderie led by Milt (McGriff) and Rob 
(Bell) set the tone for an empowering day.  I was 
blessed for the privilege of giving the opening libation.  
Of course, hearing the great Dean, Congressman John 
Conyers, speak is always inspiring.  Reconnecting in 
sisterhood with Dorothy (Benton-Lewis), Kupenda 
(Olusegun) and Nkechi (Taifa), all in attendance, was 
also energizing – indeed, generating this article!   
 
So, I am pleased to offer my report.  We are in-
deed going forward in a righteous cause to a victorious 
end.  Free the Mind!  Reparations Now!  
Education, Reparations and Bermuda  -  A Report From the Field 
“Reparations is a process and 
movement to: 
1. Secure justice for a people; 
2. Achieve accountability from 
the oppressors; and 
3. Establish a model of the moral 
treatment of grievously in-
jured peoples for the world” 
                            Dr. Maulana Karenga


--- PAGE 48 ---
34 
CONGRATULATIONS to the TRAIL BLAZERS 
 
HATS OFF to the forward thinking businesses that 
were the first to register with N'COBRA’s   
commitment to support the black community, justice, 
and the Reparations movement.  These are the first 
group of members supporting the BLACK FRIDAY 
MOVEMENT.  Be sure to buy from them. Join the 
BUY BLACK on FRIDAY campaign.  Get your Black 
Friday Palm Cards from one of these businesses and 
buy black every day. 
 
FLORIDA 
 
The African Violet,  Inc. 
P.O. Box  12627 
Gainesville, FL   32604 
Contact:   Delphine Jackson 
Ph.   352/ 335. 6161 
Fax.  352/ 335. 3737 
 
NEW YORK 
  
Southern Comforts 
483 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Nettie Paisley 
 
Zawadi Gift Shop 
519 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Lora Brown 
 
R & W Facility Care systems, Inc. 
485 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, New York 11217 
Wayne Miles
 
 
Indigo Cafe and Books 
672 Fulton St. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Tel: 718-488-5934
 
    
Lewis Gallery 
525 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Gwen Lewis 
  
Doe's Antiques 
442 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
718-858-6903 
4W Circle of Art & Enterprise 
794 Fulton Street 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Contact:   Selma Jackson 
Ph.  718/ 875. 6500 
Selma4W@Searthlink.net 
 
Big Deal Books 
973 Fulton St. 
Brooklyn, NY 11238 
Phone# 718-622-4420 
Owner: David D. Mcleod
 
 
Harriets Alter Ego 
191 Flatbush Avenue 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
 
WASHINGTON DC METRO 
 
YAWA Books & Gifts 
2206 - 18th Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20009-1813 
Contact:   Jacqueline Hawkins 
Ph.  202/ 483. 6805 
 
Dar Es Salaam 
4000 - 34th Street 
Mt. Ranier, MD  20712 
Contact:   Hodari Abdul-Ali 
Ph.  301/ 209. 0010 
Hodari2@Juno.com 
www.desbooks.com 
 
Heavenly Stitches 
512 - 24th Street, NE 
Washington, DC  20002 
Contact:   Tanya D. Claggett 
Ph.  202/ 390. 8806 
HeavenlyStitch3@aol.com 
 
N’COBRA, the National Coalition of Blacks for Repa-
rations in America, has launched a nationwide campaign 
based on the Kwanzaa principle of “cooperative eco-
nomics.” N'COBRA's goal is to be a key mover in the 
powerful process of enabling the Black community to 
gain more economic control of our community. 
 
Contact:  BuyBlack4Friday@aol.com 
 
               202.291.8400 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
BLACK FRIDAYS CAMPAIGN


--- PAGE 49 ---
35 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
“REPARATIONS AIN’T FREE” 
N’COBRA’s National Donation Drive 
  
 
FROM:  Dorothy Benton Lewis/Oravouche, National Co-Chair and  
                N’COBRA National Fund Development Committee 
 
TO:         All People Supporting Justice and Reparations 
 
 
An Urgent Call for Support  
 
The Reparations Movement needs you and your financial support.  “Reparations Ain’t Free.”  Our ancestors 
paid the ultimate price of suffering through 265 years of slavery, and now those who have benefited from 
their sacrifices must pay us reparations. We, the descendants of enslaved Africans, MUST now sacrifice our 
time, talent and money for the work that must be done to get complete and full Reparations for ourselves 
and future generations.  
 
This year, at our 14
th Annual Conference, the National Coalitions of Blacks for Reparations in America 
(N’COBRA)  unveil its 5-Year Action Plan, which outlines the various programs that have been imple-
mented to achieve Reparations.  We need your help with executing this Plan.  There are so many critical re-
quirements that must be funded:  printing, postage, regular conference calls, travel, vehicle rental, advertis-
ing, Website development and expansion, e-group support, supplies and equipment, just to name a few.  
  
N’COBRA also has a number of commissions that are tackling critical issues in each of the following areas: 
Legislative (HR 40 Lobbying, Reparations Resolution Campaign); Legal (legal injury research, filing briefs) 
International (WCAR, Global African Congress, UN Lobbying); Economic Development  (Black Friday 
Buying Campaign, Congress of Economic Development); Information & Media  (“Black Reparations 
Times,” “ENCOBRA magazine,” NCOBRA.org website, “REPARATIONS NOW!”; Grassroots Organiz-
ing (Town Hall Meetings, Direct Action, National Membership Drive), etc.  Each of these areas supports 
the other.  All are necessary to achieve Reparations, and all require people and money to make them work.  
 
For the past 14 years, N’COBRA has been an organization of vol unteers, who have funded the m ovement 
with their own resources, in order to supplement annual membership dues, which fall short of the Coali-
tion’s actual needs.   It is now time to take the Reparations movement to another level.  It is now time for all 
of us to pool our resources, creativity, and our genius.   
 
Please contribute generously to N’COBRA.  The form on the next  page establishes a number of different 
patron participation levels.  Each level acknowledges Africans and African Descendants who have played an 
important role in our struggle for civil and human rights.   While you’re selecting the patron level that’s 
most appropriate for you, be sure to tell us which commissions you’d most like to support.  And remember, 
no amount is too great or too small! 
 
The Reparations movement is not for N’COBRA members alone—it is for all African Descendants and our 
allies.  Encourage your church, sorority, fraternity, family reunion, and other community based 
organizations to send a donation to N’COBRA to supp ort this very spiritual work that we are doing in 
honor of the sacrifices of all our Ancestors.   
 
In Unity,


--- PAGE 50 ---
36 
I want my donation to support: 
(please check mark one or more areas of N’COBRA work listed below) 
 
Grassroots Organizing  ____    Membership & Organizational Development Commission   ___    Legislative Commission   ___     
 
Information & Media Commission  __   Economic Development Commission  ____    Legal Strategies Commission  ____     
 
National Office & Administrative  _____      International Commission   ____     Human Resources Commission  ____   
 
Youth Commission   ____    Education Commission  ____ 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
National Coalition Of Blacks for Reparations in America 
 
 
Please send your contributions (check/money order only) payable to: 
 
            N’COBRA 
        P.O. Box 90604 
                                                                        Washington, DC  20090 
Yes!  I pledge my support for the Reparations Movement  
struggle for Justice, Restitution and Reparations for the Afri-
can Holocaust of Enslavement and Its Vestiges. 
 
NAME________________________________________ 
 
ADDRESS_____________________________________  
 
CITY_________________________________________ 
 
STATE________________________________________ 
 
ZIP CODE _____________________________________ 
 
PHONE _______________________________________ 
 
Enclosed is my check or money order for $__________ 
             I PLEDGE: 
 
    $25    ___ 
    $50    ___ 
    $75    ___ 
    $100  ___ 
    Other Amount $______ 
 
Patron Participation Levels   
1. L’Ouverture         $5000  ___ 
2. Walker                  $3000  ___ 
3. Tubman                $1000  ___ 
4. Garvey                    $700  ___ 
5. DuBois                    $500  ___ 
6. King                        $300  ___ 
7. Moore                     $200  ___ 
 
Payment Cycle 
 
Weekly    ___         Monthly   ___ 
Quarterly  ___        Annually  ___ 
PATRON PARTICIPATION LEVELS  
 
Become a Reparations Patron today and have your (or your group) name added to N’COBRA’s National Donation Drive.  An 
ongoing list of patrons will be updated and published.    
 
1.    $5000.00              Toussaint L’Ouverture                  {1743 - 1803} 
2.    $3000.00              David Walker                                 {1796 - 1830} 
3.    $1000.00              Harriet Tubman                             {1819 - 1913} 
4.      $700.00              Marcus Garvey                              {1887 - 1940} 
5.      $500.00              W.E.B. DuBois                               {1868 - 1963} 
6.      $300.00              Martin Luther King, Jr.                {1929 - 1968} 
7.      $200.00              Queen Mother Moore                    {1898 - 1997} 
 
          These noble ancestors contributions to our liberation and development are priceless.   
         We lift up their names in chronological order to honor them.


--- PAGE 51 ---
37 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America 
N ‘COBRAN ‘COBRA  
 
MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION 
 
PURPOSE 
We believe that the descendants of Africans, who w ere captured, taken from our homeland (Africa), en-
slaved, colonized and held captive for hundreds of years in the Americas and throughout the diaspora, be-
lieve that we should be compensated for the injustices, cruelties, brutalities, inhumanities and exploitations of 
racism, white supremacy, economic di scrimination and oppression imposed upon our people past and pre-
sent. 
DEFINITION 
REPARATIONS: Payment for a debt owed; the act of repairing a wrong or injury; to atone for wrongdo-
ings; to make amends; to make one whole again; the payment of damages to repair a nation; compensation in 
money, land, or materials for damages. In the Ancient African, Kemetic sense, Reparations means to rise up. 
Repair and restore the ruined and damaged, develop the underdeveloped, and create a just society. 
 
INVITATION 
Please help continue the organizing and expansion efforts of N’COBRA in building our National & Interna-
tional Movements for Reparations. Reparations are obta inable in our lifetime. A committed people with a 
righteous cause is a force that cannot be denied. 
 
Mail this bottom portion to the National Office N’COBRA, 
P.O. Box 90604, Washington, DC 20090-0604 
Tel: 202. 291. 8400 * Fax: 202. 291. 4600 * Website: http://www.ncobra.org 
----------------------------------------------------------Tear off---------------------------------------------------------- 
N’COBRA National (Annual) Membership Application 
Select appropriate categories.  Make check/money order payable to NCOBRA. 
 
There may be additional fees for local membership 
 
Individual:___ $10-one year;___ $20-two years; ___ $30- three-years; $___for ___years; or  __ $500.00 Life  
 
Membership (can be made in two $250 payments);  ___$25 Local Org; ___ 50 National Org. and 
 
I would like to support the Commissions (check one or more and enter $ amount): 
____Economic Development;____Education ____Human Resources; ____Information & Media; 
____International; Legal; ____Legislative; _____Youth 
 
Total Amount Enclosed $ _______________ 
 
Name ________________________________ Chpt/Org/Bus ____________________________
                                     (Please Print) 
 
Street Address__________________________________________________________________ 
                                                                                      (Please Print) 
City/State/Zip Code_____________________________________________________________ 
 
Home Phone (      ) ________________________ Chapter/Org/Bus (       ) _________________ 
 
E-Mail _________________________________ FAX (    ) ______________________________ 
 
Collected by (NCOBRA Member Name) ____________________________________________ 
 
Chapter Name/Location __________________________________________________________


--- PAGE 52 ---
38 
N’COBRA’s Board of Directors 
 
Dorothy Aurevouche Benton Lewis, Co-Chair 
(Rockville, Maryland) 
 
Baba Hannibal Afrik, Co-Chair 
(Port Gibson, Mississippi)  
 
Kupenda Olusegun, Treasurer 
(Washington, DC) 
 
Ajamu Sankofa, Secretary and 
Northeast Region Rep (Brooklyn, New York) 
 
Dr. Imari Obadele, Emeritus and Ex-Officio 
(Baton Rouge, Louisiana) 
 
Frank Omowale Satterwhite, Western Region   
Representative (East Palo Alto, CA)   
 
J. Damu, Western Region  
Asst.  Representative (San Francisco, California) 
 
Njere Alghanee, Southeast Region Rep 
(Atlanta, Georgia) 
 
James Rodgers III, Southwest Region  
Representative (Dallas, TX) 
 
Alvin Brown, Midwest Region Rep 
(St. Louis, Missouri) 
 
Lady Claudia Nelson, At-Large 
(Dallas, Texas)  
 
Kalonji Tor Olusegun, At-Large 
(Washington, DC) 
 
Herman Ferguson, At-Large 
(Queens, NY) 
 
JoAnn Watson, At-Large 
(Detroit, Michigan) 
 
N’COBRA’s Elder Advisory Board and Commissions also 
have representation on our Board of Directors. 
 
Elder Advisory Board 
 
Erline Arikpo, Elder Advisor 
(Chicago, Illinois) 
 
Raymond “Reparations Ray” Jenkins, Elder Advisor 
(Detroit, Michigan 
 
 
General Ali X.  Rashid, Elder Advisor 
(Miami, Florida) 
 
General Mwesi Chui, Elder Advisor 
(Dayton, Ohio) 
 
Nia Kuumba, Elder Advisor 
(Washington, DC) 
 
Dr. Ron Walters, Elder Advisor 
(College Park, Maryland) 
 
N’COBRA’s Commission Leaders 
 
Economic Development 
               Alvin Brown (St. Louis, MO) 
               Taiwo Kugichagulia (Oakland, CA) 
               Baba Dr. Imari Obadele (BR, LA) 
Education 
               Dr. Mary Hoover (Washington, DC) 
Human Resources 
               Njere Alghanee (Atlanta, GA) 
               H. Khalif Khalifah (Dreweryville, VA) 
Information and Media 
               JoAnn Watson (Detroit, MI)  
               Wautella ibn Yusuf (Washington, DC) 
               Jahahara Alkebulan-Ma’at(Oakland, CA) 
International 
               Mashariki Jywanza (Indianapolis, IN) 
               Sababu Shabaka, Baltimore, MD  
Legal Strategies 
               Adjoa Aiyetoro (Washington, DC) 
Legislative 
               Nkechi Taifa (Washington, DC) 
               Kibibi Tyehimba (Washington, DC) 
               Milton McGriff (Philadelphia, PA) 
Membershi/Organizational Development 
Kupenda Olusegun (Washington, DC) 
Johnita Scott (Baton Rouge, LA) 
Frank Omowale Satterwhite (E. PA, CA)   
Youth 
               Shereeta Lacy (Indianapolis, IN) 
               Nuri Madina, (Chicago, IL)              
                
 
Your Expertise and Participation Are Needed. 
 
Join An N’COBRA Commission! 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
N’COBRN’COBR AA  
National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America 
P.O. Box 90604  Washington, DC 20090-0604 
PHONE: 202.291.8400   FAX:  202.291.4600 
EMAIL: NationalNCOBRA@aol.com   WEBSITE: www.ncobra.org 
DISCUSSION: http://groups.yahoo.com/group/Reparations_For_Africans


--- PAGE 53 ---
39 
 
 
FACT:  The Reparations Movement cannot be advanced without the  
               support of African (Black) People. 
 
FACT:   African (Black) People cannot and should not expect anyone  
               other than ourselves to provide the resources needed to win our  
               Reparations. 
 
FACT:   If you do not keep your membership up to date you will no longer 
               receive N’COBRA membership mailings. 
 
Do your part to move us closer to achieving Reparations. Contribute 
generously to N’COBRA. Renew Your N’COBRA membership each 
year.  Encourage other Reparations su pporters to join N’COBRA. Host 
fundraisers for N’COBRA and contribut e the funds to N’COBRA projects 
that you feel passionately about. And remember the Power to Win 
Reparations is In our Hands!   Reparations: Conceive It...Achieve It! 
ATTENTION REPARATIONS ADVOCATES 
N’COBRA 
National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America 
P.O. Box 90604 
  Washington, DC 20090-0604 
In This Issue... 
 
 
Address 
 
N’COBRA’S 14th NATIONAL ANNUAL CONVENTION &  
BLACK FRIDAY CAMPAIGN  
We are especially 
grateful to founding 
member Baba Kalonji 
Tor Olusegun for 
designing the N’COBRA 
logo (above).  It consists 
of three sacred Andinkra 
symbols: NKON-
SONKONSON (link or 
chain); OWA FOR A 
ADOBE (snake climbing 
the palm tree); and, 
BIRIBI-WO-SORO (a 
symbol of Hope denoting 
there is something in the 
Heavens).  Together, 
these symbols express 
our links in this, and the 
next life; that We share a 
common blood relation 
which will never break 
apart; and that We can 
perform the impossible.


--- PAGE 54 ---
Vol. XII 
No.      I 
NATIONAL FIVE YEAR STRATEGIC PLAN 
Building N’COBRA and the Reparations Movement 
2003 - 2008 
N’COBRA National Board Meeting & Retreat 
Princeville, North Carolina 
ENCOBRAENCOBRA  
National Coalition Of Blacks for Reparations in America 
14th National Conference    Dallas, Texas    Juneteenth  
Summer 
2003 
Special Fundraising Edition


--- PAGE 55 ---
“ENCOBRA” is an information magazine for the Reparations Movement.  N’COBRA published the first issue in 1992.  
This edition is produced by N’COBRA’s Information and Media Commission.   © 2003 all rights reserved 
ENCOBRAENCOBRA®® 
N’COBRA   
Information & Media Commission  
P.O. Box 716 
Washington, DC 20044-0716 
 
Email :  InformationMedia@aol.com 
Phone:  202.466.1622 
 
 
managing editor & producer 
 
Wautella ibn Yusuf 
 
editors 
 
Kibibi Tyehimba 
Dorothy Benton Lewis 
 
printer 
 
Kuumba Kollectible 
 
 
 
MISSION 
 
The Commission will serve as the official 
organizational link for the dissemination 
and exchange of information on N’CO-
BRA policies, Reparations issues, strate-
gies and actions important to winning 
Reparations for African descendants in the 
U.S. and the Diaspora; assist in educating 
N’COBRA members and the general pub-
lic about our just demands; and assist in the 
development of mass based  support for 
Reparations. 
 
DEPARTMENTS 
 
Publishing Team 
     Publications:  REPARATIONS NOW!             
                {Quarterly Membership Newsletter) 
                  ENCOBRA{Annual magazine/journal} 
                BLACK REPARATIONS TIMES 
                            {Quarterly public newspaper} 
 
Internet/IT Team 
                N’COBRA Website: 
                   NCOBRA.org & OfficialNcobra.org           
                               (both .org are same) 
                Listserv – news egroup 
   Reparations_For_Africans@yahoogroups.com 
 
Public Relations Team 
Table of Content 
Message From N’COBRA National Co Chair 
               Dorothy Benton Lewis  
4 
National Five Year Strategic Plan 
              N’COBRA National Board 
7 
On The Move 
              Ajamu Sankofa 
8 
BLACK FRIDAYS 
              Ajamu Sankofa 
9 
Walk together Children, Don’t You Get Weary 
              Imari Abuakari Obadele 
10 
2003: A Year Of Black Presence In Washington 
              Milton McGriff 
12 
Thank You N'COBRA /AYBP 
              Dorothy Benton Lewis & Jahahara Ma’at  
14 
Organizing and the Future of the Reparations Move-
ment 
              Dr. Conrad W. Worrill, Baba Hannibal Afrik, 
              and Dorothy Benton Lewis  
18 
The Reparations Suits of Our Era 
              Imari Abuakari Obadele 
31 
Austin TX State Capitol Reparations Meeting 
              James Rogers III 
33 
34 N’COBRA Information Sheet 
Litigation Update 
              Adjoa A. Aiyetoro 
17 
Reparations Ain’t Free 
             Dorothy Lewis & Fund Development Committee 
24 
Life Membership 26 
Rob Penny  1940—2003 28 
Princeville Retreat & Board Meeting 6


--- PAGE 56 ---
Page 4 
Dorothy Benton Lewis  
National Co-Chair, N’COBRA 
N’COBRA Family! 
 
It has been another spectacular year!!! Everyday, the reparations movement is picking up more and more steam as a result of you r 
hard work, creativity, and genius.  Inside this movement, we are discovering our talents and putting them to great use.  We are  
discovering our personal power and using it in service of our community. And we are finding great fulfillment in doing so. 
 
This year, we got our house in order.  We completed the first ed ition of our Policies and Procedures Manual!  No more guess work 
or reinventing the wheel.  We have a 5-year Action Plan, with goals, objectives, timetables, and a budget!  Yes, each Commissio n 
has a budget! No money, of course! But we kn ow exactly how much we have to raise, to carry out our programs.  We have a stel-
lar Fund Development Committee with some great projects planned to generate the funds. Even with few funds, most of our Com-
missions are fully functioning!  Just like our ancestors, we make a way out of no way.  We have projects that we are excited about. 
Unlike our ancestors, Callie House, Isaiah  Dickerson, Irving B. Davis, Queen Mother Moore, and so many others, we can now 
clearly see the fruits of our labor.  We stand on their shoulder s and the work of organizations that came before us, such as th e 
Self-Determination Committee, Black Reparations Commission, Afri can People’s Socialist Party, African National Reparations Or-
ganization, and the Republic of New Afrika, to name a few.  We must always acknowledge those that paved the way.  It does not 
diminish us in anyway to acknow ledge the organizations that came before us, for they are we, and we are they.  We form coali-
tions with other organizations to get the work done. A Year of Black Presence is an excellent example of coalition work. 
 
This movement belongs to all of us, as does N’COBRA.  We each have a stake in N’COBRA’s success.  In N’COBRA, we strive to 
create a culture of leadership where those with a passion for reparations step up to the plate and assert their leadership and talents 
by participating in the work of a commission, or in developing a commission that needs strengthening, or making a case for a pr o-
ject or initiative that we don’t already have.  N’COBRA has a place for anyone who wants to work or take on the responsibility for 
a project that will forward the movement.  No good idea will be turned down, especially if the person with the idea takes the l ead-
ership for it.  If the idea excites you, you are probably the be st one to make it real.  For example, Randall Robinson had a go od 
idea, “a year of Black presence in the halls of Congress,” which he expressed in his book, The Debt.  It inspired Milton McGrif f 
who persuaded us that it was doable. In th e beginning, we didn’t really see how we could do it, but we weren’t about to suppres s 
his enthusiasm and energy. So, we got out of Milton’s way and supported him in bringing forth the vision that excited him. Our 
Movement is the richer for it. 
  
The Dynamic Duo, Kibibi Tyehimba and Wautella ibn Yusuf, who individually are brilliant, but together make magic.  They con-
sistently come up with ideas that they take on and bring into fruition, such as Black Reparations Times, and education specific  
Town Hall Meetings on different aspects of the reparations deba te.  Baba Imari and Johnita Sco tt Obadele consistently use their  
brilliance in the service of N’COBRA: Encobra Magazine, Survey s, Economic Development Commissi oner elections.  Reparations 
Ray Jenkins has been the soul of fund raising for the Litigation Commission and its excellent work.  Sister JoAnn Watson and 
Nkechi Taifa have been our Legislative gurus.  I could go on for pages because every member of N’COBRA is special in what each 
brings to the movement.  We congratulate N’COBRA Board member, JoAnn Watson for her election as Councilwoman in Detroit, 
Michigan.  N’COBRA is fertile soil for growing ideas and growing people.  I know that I have grown in confidence, in leadership  
and people skills. My greatest gift to the organization is my ability to see God in people.  It is easy for me to get out of th e way 
and let God do her/his work through the people that come into N’COBRA. 
 
This year begins my last year as National Co-Chair of N’COBRA.  There are two new projects that I plan to take on in my last 
year: Willie Lynch and Love.  In Willie Lynch, I want to create opportunities for us to look at behaviors that are the lingering sur-
vival strategies that served us during slavery, but work against us now.  In terms of love, I want to create opportunities for us to 
fall in love with the magnificence of Black people through self-discovery.  When Black people see the magnificence in self (not  as 
ego), we can see the same magnificence in other Black people.  The work we do in the reparations movement will transform the 
toxic society in which we live.  We must also transform the toxic effects this society has on us.  I hope that each of you will  find 
your place and a place for your vision in N’COBRA  
 
For the ancestors and the future, 
 
Dorothy Benton Lewis 
National Co-Chair, N’COBRA
 
ENCOBRA


--- PAGE 57 ---
In attendance (sign-in sheet) 
Ajamu Sankofa, Adjoa A. Aiyetoro, Khalif Khali-
fah, Alvin Brown, Kamau Jywanza, Mashariki 
Jywanza, Njere Alghanee, Wautella ibn Yusuf, 
Kibibi Tyehimba, Kupenda Olusegun, Baba Han-
nibal Afrik, Omowale Satterwhite, James Rod-
gers III, Imari Obadele, Kalonji Olusegun, Jaha-
hara Alkebulan, Johnita Obadele, Dorothy Lewis, 
Ukali Mwendo and Milton Bullock 
PRINCEVILLE RETREAT & BOARD MEETING 
N’COBRA’s Leaders Retreat to Make Plans to Advance 
Milton Bullock (center), local N’COBRA 
organizer and retreat host 
ENCOBRA 
Page 6 
Dorothy Lewis, National Co Chair lead discussion  in the Black 
historic (137 years old) St. Paul Missionary Baptist Church  
Princeville was established by ex-enslaved Africans following the 
Civil War on the east bank of the Tar River.  It was the perfect 
place to retreat, get close to the land, and walk the river banks - 
sensing the spiritual presence of those in whose names we fight and 
speak.  In this sacred space our leaders thought deeply about N’CO-
BRA’s internal and external struggles, and how best to live up to 
N’COBRA’s founding mission:  JUSTICE AND REPARATIONS 
for Black People. 
N’COBRA’S MISSION 
After reviewing the mission as articulated in the founding documents 
and the proposed policies and procedures manual, N’COBRA’s 
Board of Directors adopted the following mission for N’COBRA: 
The mission of the National Coalition of blacks for Reparations in 
America (N’COBRA) is to win full Reparations for Black African 
Descendants residing in the United States and its territories for the 
genocidal war against Africa that created the TransAtlantic Slave 
“Trade,” Chattel Slavery, Jim Crow and Chattel Slavery’s continu-
ing vestiges (the Maafa). To that end, N’COBRA shall organize 
and mobilize all strata of these Black communities into an effective 
mass- based reparations movement. N’COBRA shall also serve as 
a coordinating body for the reparations effort in the United States. 
Further, through its leadership role in the reparations movement 
within the United States and its territories, N’COBRA recognizes 
reparations is a just demand for all African peoples and shall join 
with others in building the international reparations movement. 
Imari Obadele, Adjoa Aiyetoro, Ukali Mwendo and 
Mashariki Jywanza


--- PAGE 58 ---
United Front Required To Win Reparations 
 
By Ron  Daniels  
TBWT Contributor  
Article Dated 4/16/2002 
 
                   
        Reparations to repair the physical, cultural, psychological and  
spiritual damages done to Africans in America during the holocaust of  
enslavement is an idea whose time has come. Momentum is building, and though  
the struggle will still be long and difficult, the prospect of victory is at  
least now conceivable.  
 
        My major caution and concern is that the various forces who have  
contributed to the extraordinary potential of this moment not squander this  
opportunity because of internal tensions, bickering, individual and  
organization egoism and political immaturity. In my considered judgment, 
what is required at this moment is operational unity and a united front to  
coordinate a massive multifaceted campaign to win reparations.  
 
        The surging momentum developing around the idea of reparations is the  
result of decades of dedicated struggle by a broad range of leaders,  
organizations and movements. Many veteran social and political activists like  
myself were first exposed to the idea of reparations by the great African  
freedom fighter Queen Mother Audley Moore. I recounted 
in a recent article how Queen Mother stood in the corridors of the Gary Black  
Political Convention in 1972, passing out literature and exhorting the  
participants not to forget 
“your reparations.”  
 
        Queen Mother educated hundreds of activists about the definition,  
rationale and meaning of reparations. President Imari Obadele and The  
Republic of New Africa have also been relentless in the call for reparations.  
Los Angeles based activist Robert Brock is another crusader who has  
cris-crossed the country preaching and teaching about the necessity for  
compensation for former enslaved Africans. The Nation of Islam has also been  
a consistent voice in support of reparations. Indeed, by and large, the  
Nationalist/Pan-Africanist forces have been at the center of the demand for  
reparations for decades.  
 
    One of the most important developments in the last quarter of the 20th  
century, however, was the creation of a united front type umbrella  
organization called the National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in  
America (N’COBRA). The creation of N’COBRA marked the coming together of a  
number of organizations and individuals to coordinate the work of pressing  
for reparations. One thinks of people like “Reparations Ray,” Dorothy Benton  
Lewis, Imari and Jonetta Obadele, Chokwe Lumumba, Adjoa Aiyetoro, Nchechi  
Taifa, Hannibal Afrik, Kalonji and Kupenda Olusugun, Efia Mwanganza, Dr.  
James Turner, Ron Walters as among the stalwarts within the leadership and  
membership of the umbrella formation which more than any other kept the flame  
of reparations alive and burning when the issue was no where near as popular  
as it is today. It was the dedicated work of the core of activists and  
advocates that gathered around N’COBRA that set the stage for the current  
popularity of the concept of reparations. Among other things, N’COBRA  
methodically persuaded scores of national organizations and city councils to  
pass resolutions supporting reparations.  
 
        On the legislative front, Congressman John Conyers’ introduction of  
HR- 40 in Congress, the Reparations Study Bill that would create a  
Presidential Commission to examine the impact of slavery on Africans in  
America and recommend remedies, has certainly had a galvanizing impact in


--- PAGE 59 ---
terms of provoking debate and discussion about the idea of compensation.  
 
        Massachusetts State Senator Bill Owens also created a national stir  
when he introduced a bill in the legislature demanding reparations for that  
state’s complicity in sanctioning and profiting from slavery. And, as  
referenced above, scores of city councils across the country passed  
resolutions supporting the Conyer’s bill or reparations in general. In  
addition, civil rights/human rights leaders like Rev. Jesse L. Jackson have  
periodically incorporated 
reparations into their public policy agendas.  
 
        The National Black United Front (NBUF), under the leadership of Dr.  
Conrad Worrill, launched a “We Charge Genocide Campaign,” which with the  
support of the New York based December 12th Movement (D-12), significantly  
contributed to the popular education of Africans in America about the  
underlying causes and rationale for reparations. NBUF and D-12 collected  
thousands of signatures on petitions and presented them to the United  
Nations. Minister Silas Muhammad and his followers also gathered signatures  
and took them to the United Nations. In the most recent period, Deadria  
Farmer-Paellmann broke new 
ground with her pioneering research on the role of U.S. corporations in  
perpetuating and/or profiting from slavery (Ms. Paellmann recently sued Fleet  
Bank, Aetna Insurance Company and CSX Corp. for reparations).  
 
        Randall Robinson’s powerful book The Debt has had an enormous impact  
in popularizing reparations and creating a comfort level with the idea among  
African Americans. The Black Radical Congress has adopted reparations as a  
major part of its program and sponsored a national conference on the subject  
last year. Chicago Alderwoman Dorothy Tillman also convened a national  
conference to build support for reparations in 2001. And, newly elected New  
York Councilman Charles Barron has opened up a whole new front by introducing  
a Queen Mother Moore Reparations Bill that would examine the City of New York’ 
s role in sanctioning and benefiting/profiting from slavery. In addition,  
Charles Ogeltree and Randall Robinson have assembled a high profile legal  
dream team that includes Johnnie Cochran and Willie Gary to pursue legal  
strategies to attain reparations.  
 
        Reparations are an idea whose time has come. A recent edition of USA  
Today devoted three full pages to the issue of reparations and the lawsuit  
that was filed by Ms. Paellmann received major attention in the media. NBUF  
and D-12 are spearheading a Millions for Reparations Mobilization scheduled  
for Washington, D.C. August 17, the birthday of Marcus Garvey. The moment is  
ripe with possibilities. My plea is that a major effort be undertaken to  
bring all of the forces together to forge a united front to hammer out  
principles of unity and a coordinated strategy to wage the struggle for  
reparations in the courtroom, the legislative arena and in the streets. It  
may be now or never!


--- PAGE 60 ---
1
Reparations: A straight Line From Slavery 
 
Dr. Ronald Walters 
Distinguished Leadership Scholar 
University of Maryland 
 
 
The Contribution of Slavery to American Development
 
We are in a period of history where mora lity and ethics are emphasized as the primary 
ingredients civil virtue.  However, one of the most immoral acts in the development of 
the United States of America was the enslavement of the African, compounded by the 
failure to acknowledge that the grandeur of th is country was based, in substantial part, 
upon the monumental resources made possible by unpaid African labor and the refusal 
to reward Reparations for this crime.   What occurred is known by the legal concept of 
“unjust enrichment.”  Yet, most Americans have rejected the strength of America’s slave 
heritage and as such, devalue the contribution of  African slavery to the formation the 
nation’s economic strength.    
Contrast this modern flight from responsibility to the words of William Pitt the 
Younger, Head of State, at the moment in 1807, when the English Parliament was 
passing legislation prohibiting the slave trade: 
“I therefore congratulate this House, the country and the world that this great point is 
gained: that we may now consider this trade as having received its condemnation; that 
its sentence is sealed; that this curse of mankind is seen by the House in its true light; 
and that the greatest stigma on our national character which ever yet existed is about 
to be removed.  And sir, (which is still more important) that mankind, I trust, in general, 
are now likely to be delivered from the greatest practical evil that ever has afflicted the 
human race--from the severest and most extensive calamity recorded in the history of 
the world!”


--- PAGE 61 ---
2
William Pitt the Younger did not temporize about the depth of the crime of slavery as is 
generally the case in so many quarters today.  
And yet, America was a slave state.  Elliiot Carirnes in his 1862 analysis, he 
titled “The Slave Power,” described in one chapter the economic inequalities fostered 
by large plantation owners, who bought up land, expanded slavery and drove their 
poorer whites neighbors out, reducing many of them, nearly to the poverty of blacks.  
The consequence, Cairnes said, was that: “The tendency of things, therefore, in slave 
countries is to a very unequal distribution of wealth.”
i
   He went on: 
The poor whites have as has been shown, are the natural growth of the slave 
system; their existence and character flowing necessarily from two facts– 
the slaves, who render the capitalists  independent of their services, and the  
wilderness, the constant feature of slave countries, which enables them to exist 
without engaging in regular work.  There is no capital to support them as hired 
laborers, and they have the means of subsisting in semi-savage condition,  
without it.
ii
 
 
Tannenbaum gave an even more expansive view of the impact of slavery:  
The Negro by his presence changed the form of the state, the nature of pro- 
perty, the system of law, the organization of labor, the role of the church as  
well as in its character, the notions of ju stice, ethhics, ideas of right and wrong. 
Slavlery influenced the architecture, the cl othing, the cooking, the politics, the  
lilteraturte, the morals of the entire gr oup–white and black, men and women, 
old and young. Nothing escaped,   noting and no one.
iii
 
 
 An example is that the factory system emerged as an outgrowth of slavery, when in 
1790 Samuel Slater, an English immigrant who knew the secrets of the English textile 
machinery built a cotton-spinning mill at Pawtucket, R. I., for a merchant, named Moses 
Brown.  It was the first successful American factory and contained 72 spindles.   By the 
end of the War of 1812, hundreds of factories were in operation, the number of


--- PAGE 62 ---
3
spindles was estimated at 130,000 and by 1840 there were 2 million.   Enslaved 
Africans in the South picked the cotton which fed these spindles and fueled the growth 
of the textile industry in New England.   
This led to the genesis of a larger and more sophisticated manufacturing system, 
the American corporation, when in 1865,  at the end of the Civil War, a group of 
businessmen formed what came to be known as the Boston Associates, that included 
Frances Cabot Lowell, Nathan Appleton, Patrick Tracy Jackson who formed the Boston 
Manufacturing company in Waltham, Mass.  This was the first integrated factory in 
textiles, that performed every operation.  In 1920 they shifted their operations to Lowell, 
Massachusetts and became the Merrick Manufacturing company and in the 1920s and 
1930s they bought companies in Massachusetts and New Hampshire, making the 
manufacturing corporation an entrenched institution in America. 
So, slavery was a national enterprise, uniting the labor of Africans in the South 
to the industries of the North, in the process creating commerce in America and 
markets for American cotton abroad.     
 
The Linkage of Slavery to Modern Conditions
 
It is also currently fashionable to disc onnect slavery from the modern patterns of 
disadvantage experienced by black Americans and to assert that they are due to the 
lack of “individual responsibility.”   Nevertheless, black people entered the role as 
citizens as an impoverished class.   The distinguished black American intellectual, Dr. 
W. E. B. Dubois noted, in his study, The Philadelphia Negro
, (1897) that, “everywhere


--- PAGE 63 ---
4
slavery was accompanied by pauperization,” that this condition of black poverty 
prevented blacks from establishing a black middle class, when wave upon wave of poor 
migrants from the South overwhelmed the fledgling black elite and defined poverty as 
the basic condition of the black urban ghetto.    Du Bois, Professors Kenneth Clark, 
William Wilson and others have established a clear link between the “pauperization” of 
blacks and such social conditions as: high crime rates, lack of wealth, poor health, 
educational gaps, family social disorganization, high unemployment rates, poor 
neighborhoods and substandard housi ng and other structures. 
The reasons for these conditions, which mark the characteristics of the black 
urban ghetto and the institutions within it even today have been mystified, but slavery is 
responsible for having robbed black people of  the economic resources necessary to 
have acquired the cultural tools and institutions of the dominant group.   These 
economic resources would have made possible the construction of schools and 
colleges that would have long ago closed any cultural gap in test scores and produced 
a large middle class blacks that would have developed companies the equal of AT&T, 
IBM or Morgan Stanley.   This would have institutionalized a private economy which 
would have provide a substantial source  of independence for the black community.  
The dimensions of this debt has attracted individuals such as Nobel Prize winning Yale 
Economist, Boris Bittker, to analyze this problem in his book The Case For Black 
Reparations, as early as 1973. 
The Longevity of slavery
 
One reason given for denying Reparations to African descendants and according them


--- PAGE 64 ---
5
to Asian Americans and Jews is that the events which constituted a basis occurred 
more recently during World War II.  However, it is one of the myths of American history 
and its historians that slavery ended in 1865.  In fact, although legal slavery ended, in 
many places, especially in the South, the pr actice continued well into the 20th Century. 
   The National Archives contains files of the NAACP with letters written in the 1920, 
1930s and 1940s, sent to the organization by blacks who were st ill held in slavery 
conditions on plantations in the South, st ill being forced to work, still brutalized and  not 
paid or paid symbolic wages.  Then, debt slavery was common where the share 
cropping system held many former slaves in legal bondage, enforced by the law, 
forcing them to work to pay mythical debts to land owners.  Finally, the prison system 
was expanded in the South and utilized to administer the convict-lease system, where 
blacks were convicted on petty or nonexistent crimes and leased-out to work for 
merchants and plantation owners in slavery condi tions.  These variations were in many 
cases merely other forms of slavery, often worse that the original kind.    
The length of this system carried well into the 20th Century as records of the 
Justice Department show.   In a June 16, 1996 Washington Post article by Len Cooper, 
“Slavery Did Not End With The Civil War: One Man’s Odyssey Into A Nation’s Secret 
Shame.”  Cooper also cites a newspaper story that described a Justice Department 
prosecution for African slavery in 1954, invo lving the Dial brothers in Sumpter County, 
Alabama, who had held blacks in involuntary servitude.   This means that the Civil 
Rights movement was the force that broke the final link to 19th Century African slavery. 
  The fact that some blacks were held in slavery until after World War II and that cases


--- PAGE 65 ---
6
of lynching also extended to that period, refutes any proposition that slavery ended in 
1865, establishing a modern basis for Reparat ions for the descendants of Africans as 
legitimate as that of any other group.  
Government Responsibility
 
We also live in an era when there is much public dialogue about “individual  
responsibility,” rather the responsibility of government.  Yet, in this case, there is both a 
rejection of individual responsib ility for slavery on the basis of l ongevity, recency of 
immigration, or other factors, as well as, a reluctance to acknowledge the culpab ility of 
the state in administering the past slave st atus of African Americans.  These have 
combined into the feeling that since neither individual nor government responsib ility 
was possible, the pursuit of such a public policy was “unrealistic” and used ultimately, 
by both blacks and whites, to successfully evade an American dialogue about this 
issue.   Real Reparations, however, have been given to other groups.  Slavery and the 
extermination of the Native American are the only truly American Holocausts, but 
whereas the Native Americans have been given land and a system of government, 
however flawed, black Americans have not been compensated for slavery and certainly 
have not enjoyed benefits beyond those availabl e to other American citizens.   And 
while Reparations have been informally refused blacks, descendants of Japanese 
American internees during World War II now receive them.  In fact, it is possible to 
argue that the past attempts made to make amelioration for slavery have been 
dismantled before they could be implemented, or changed to advantage the majority, 
whether in the case of Reconstruction, or civil rights, or even Affirmative Action.


--- PAGE 66 ---
7
I refer to the responsibility of government as the main authority figure in 
arranging recompense for slavery because at every stage, individual Americans were 
permitted to practice slavery by writ of law, by the each of the Colonial territories even 
before there was a United States of America, but certainly by the Constitutional 
Congress, by successive acts of the Supreme Court, the Congress and the state 
governments.  So, as much as individuals are sensitive to the demand for Reparations 
out of their own moral culpability for slavery, it is a basic res ponsibility of government.  
Similarly, the U. S. Government has paid Japanese Reparations, not the individual 
soldier who guarded the gates of the prison compounds nor those civ ilians who lived in 
their confiscated homes.  
Conclusion
 
There is a deep sensitivity among African descendants in America today that a 
substantial part of the social distance between them and white America was created by 
the process of enslavement.  Despite the rampant economic growth, the structural 
distance in economic resources has been maintained in that, blacks st ill have only one-
tenth the wealth of whites, more than twice the poverty rate and double the 
unemployment rate of whites.   This means that the failure to replace appropriated 
black economic resources as an “unrealistic” public policy, is one of the powerful 
factors which results in the inability of both bla cks and whites to “get beyond race” 
because the reluctant pace of resolving the inequality continues to place an emphasis 
on the fact that blacks in America are the only group expected to come all the way up 
the rough side of the mountain - in the most economically competitive society in the


--- PAGE 67 ---
8
world - without the requisite resources to do so.  The other factor, of course, is the 
persistence of racism in nearly every sector of American life, a fact which continues to 
transfer resources to whites, buttressed by the attempt to attribute the subordinate 
status of blacks to the lack of effort, or their natural inferiority, as rendered in such 
works as The Bell Curve, by Murray and Herrenstein.   
So, it is obvious that the past is prologue to the project of racial reconc iliation in 
America, just as it is in South Africa, Australia or wherever people have been 
dispossessed of their resources.   In order to address this problem in this country, it 
must become an American dialogue which truly gives national legitimacy to the identity 
of black people as African Americans, an identity with equal force vested in both terms. 
 At the height of the attempt to pass civil rights laws in the 1960s, those opposed 
argued that the key to full black participation in American life is not the passage of 
laws, but social acceptance.   The other side of this equation is that acceptance must 
also come from blacks and its most pristine foundation begins with the  
acknowledgment of the role of the dominant culture in the crime of slavery, the equal 
crime of pretending that the gap between African and others is a natural condition, 
rather than a product of his and her enslavement and to make material recompense for 
the unpaid labor of those enslaved. 
In the picture of that famous night in 1776 which shows General George 
Washington crossing the Deleware River, there is also pictured a black man in the boat 
at the oars.  His name was Prince Whipple, the son of an African King from West 
Africa, who sent to the Americas for education, but enslaved by W illiam Whipple, one


--- PAGE 68 ---
9
of the signatories to the Declaration of Independence, who seconded Prince to be 
George Washington’s aide when Whipple went to war.   As William Whipple was 
leaving to join the fight for American independence as an officer, Prince Whipple was 
recorded to have said: “You are going to fight for your liberty, but I have none to fight 
for.”  Resolving the debt of slavery through Reparations will help to combine what has 
been two different historical struggles for “freedom” into one. 
 
                                           
 
i.  John Elliott Cairnes, The Slave Power, New York: Harper Torchbooks/Harper and  
     Row, 1969, p. 76. 
ii.  Ibid, p. 144. 
iii.  Frank Tannenbaum, Slave and Citizen
, Boston: Beacon Press, 1992, p. 117-118.


--- PAGE 69 ---



--- PAGE 70 ---



--- PAGE 71 ---



--- PAGE 72 ---



--- PAGE 73 ---



--- PAGE 74 ---



--- PAGE 75 ---



--- PAGE 76 ---



--- PAGE 77 ---



--- PAGE 78 ---



--- PAGE 79 ---



--- PAGE 80 ---



--- PAGE 81 ---



--- PAGE 82 ---



--- PAGE 83 ---



--- PAGE 84 ---



--- PAGE 85 ---



--- PAGE 86 ---



--- PAGE 87 ---



--- PAGE 88 ---



--- PAGE 89 ---



--- PAGE 90 ---



--- PAGE 91 ---



--- PAGE 92 ---



--- PAGE 93 ---



--- PAGE 94 ---



--- PAGE 95 ---



--- PAGE 96 ---



--- PAGE 97 ---



--- PAGE 98 ---



--- PAGE 99 ---



--- PAGE 100 ---



--- PAGE 101 ---



--- PAGE 102 ---



--- PAGE 103 ---



--- PAGE 104 ---



--- PAGE 105 ---



--- PAGE 106 ---



--- PAGE 107 ---



--- PAGE 108 ---



--- PAGE 109 ---



--- PAGE 110 ---



--- PAGE 111 ---



--- PAGE 112 ---



--- PAGE 113 ---



--- PAGE 114 ---



--- PAGE 115 ---



--- PAGE 116 ---



--- PAGE 117 ---



--- PAGE 118 ---



--- PAGE 119 ---



--- PAGE 120 ---



--- PAGE 121 ---



--- PAGE 122 ---



--- PAGE 123 ---



--- PAGE 124 ---



--- PAGE 125 ---



--- PAGE 126 ---



--- PAGE 127 ---



--- PAGE 128 ---



--- PAGE 129 ---



--- PAGE 130 ---



--- PAGE 131 ---



--- PAGE 132 ---



--- PAGE 133 ---



--- PAGE 134 ---



--- PAGE 135 ---



--- PAGE 136 ---



--- PAGE 137 ---



--- PAGE 138 ---



--- PAGE 139 ---



--- PAGE 140 ---



--- PAGE 141 ---



--- PAGE 142 ---



--- PAGE 143 ---



--- PAGE 144 ---



--- PAGE 145 ---



--- PAGE 146 ---



--- PAGE 147 ---



--- PAGE 148 ---



--- PAGE 149 ---



--- PAGE 150 ---



--- PAGE 151 ---



--- PAGE 152 ---



--- PAGE 153 ---



--- PAGE 154 ---



--- PAGE 155 ---



--- PAGE 156 ---



--- PAGE 157 ---



--- PAGE 158 ---



--- PAGE 159 ---



--- PAGE 160 ---



--- PAGE 161 ---



--- PAGE 162 ---



--- PAGE 163 ---



--- PAGE 164 ---



--- PAGE 165 ---



--- PAGE 166 ---



--- PAGE 167 ---



--- PAGE 168 ---



--- PAGE 169 ---



--- PAGE 170 ---



--- PAGE 171 ---



--- PAGE 172 ---



--- PAGE 173 ---



--- PAGE 174 ---



--- PAGE 175 ---



--- PAGE 176 ---



--- PAGE 177 ---



--- PAGE 178 ---



--- PAGE 179 ---



--- PAGE 180 ---



--- PAGE 181 ---



--- PAGE 182 ---



--- PAGE 183 ---



--- PAGE 184 ---



--- PAGE 185 ---



--- PAGE 186 ---



--- PAGE 187 ---



--- PAGE 188 ---



--- PAGE 189 ---



--- PAGE 190 ---



--- PAGE 191 ---



--- PAGE 192 ---



--- PAGE 193 ---



--- PAGE 194 ---



--- PAGE 195 ---



--- PAGE 196 ---



--- PAGE 197 ---



--- PAGE 198 ---



--- PAGE 199 ---



--- PAGE 200 ---



--- PAGE 201 ---



--- PAGE 202 ---



--- PAGE 203 ---



--- PAGE 204 ---



--- PAGE 205 ---



--- PAGE 206 ---



--- PAGE 207 ---



--- PAGE 208 ---



--- PAGE 209 ---



--- PAGE 210 ---



--- PAGE 211 ---



--- PAGE 212 ---



--- PAGE 213 ---



--- PAGE 214 ---



--- PAGE 215 ---



--- PAGE 216 ---



--- PAGE 217 ---



--- PAGE 218 ---



--- PAGE 219 ---



--- PAGE 220 ---



--- PAGE 221 ---



--- PAGE 222 ---



--- PAGE 223 ---



--- PAGE 224 ---



--- PAGE 225 ---



--- PAGE 226 ---



--- PAGE 227 ---



--- PAGE 228 ---



--- PAGE 229 ---



--- PAGE 230 ---



--- PAGE 231 ---



--- PAGE 232 ---



--- PAGE 233 ---



--- PAGE 234 ---



--- PAGE 235 ---



--- PAGE 236 ---



--- PAGE 237 ---



--- PAGE 238 ---



--- PAGE 239 ---



--- PAGE 240 ---



--- PAGE 241 ---



--- PAGE 242 ---



--- PAGE 243 ---



--- PAGE 244 ---



--- PAGE 245 ---



--- PAGE 246 ---



--- PAGE 247 ---



--- PAGE 248 ---



--- PAGE 249 ---



--- PAGE 250 ---



--- PAGE 251 ---



--- PAGE 252 ---



--- PAGE 253 ---



--- PAGE 254 ---



--- PAGE 255 ---



--- PAGE 256 ---



--- PAGE 257 ---



--- PAGE 258 ---



--- PAGE 259 ---



--- PAGE 260 ---



--- PAGE 261 ---



--- PAGE 262 ---



--- PAGE 263 ---



--- PAGE 264 ---



--- PAGE 265 ---



--- PAGE 266 ---



--- PAGE 267 ---



--- PAGE 268 ---



--- PAGE 269 ---



--- PAGE 270 ---



--- PAGE 271 ---



--- PAGE 272 ---



--- PAGE 273 ---



--- PAGE 274 ---



--- PAGE 275 ---



--- PAGE 276 ---



--- PAGE 277 ---



--- PAGE 278 ---



--- PAGE 279 ---



--- PAGE 280 ---



--- PAGE 281 ---



--- PAGE 282 ---



--- PAGE 283 ---



--- PAGE 284 ---



--- PAGE 285 ---



--- PAGE 286 ---



--- PAGE 287 ---



--- PAGE 288 ---



--- PAGE 289 ---



--- PAGE 290 ---



--- PAGE 291 ---



--- PAGE 292 ---



--- PAGE 293 ---



--- PAGE 294 ---



--- PAGE 295 ---



--- PAGE 296 ---
The Greenwood Plan: 
Reparations for the Greenwood Holocaust 
 
 
 
 
By: 
 
Damario Solomon Simmons 
 
 
Note: 
I use a capital ‘B’ when referring to Black people. The word black is a descriptive w ord describing a color. It is 
also viewed as a political and cultural term describing my people’s heritage and ethnicity. 
In spelling Afrikan I use a ‘k’ rather than a ‘c’ because the ‘k’ represents an acknowledgment that ‘Africa’ is not 
the original or true name of the motherland. Thu s, when I s peak of Afrika, I’m bringing an Afrikan-centered view to m y 
meaning. 
Introduction 
 1


--- PAGE 297 ---
It is commonly known the  history of African Americans is one of  
tremendous pain and unbelievable resilience; Afrikan-Americans toiled 310 years 
under chattel slavery, 1555-1865, the deadliest and inhumane period in the 
Common Era.1   In addition, the subsequent 138 years since escaping the chains 
of slavery, the almost equally oppr essive shackles of Black Codes,  
Sharecropping, Peonage Far ming, Jim Crowism , Lynching, Poll t axes, 
Grandfather Clauses, Police Brutality, Red Lining and other oppressive schemes  
greatly impeded the development of the Afrikan-American community. 2  Thus,  
today the Black com munity still suffers from numerous ills, evidenced by the 
tragedy of more Black  men in prison than in college 3, the continued proliferation 
of police brutality and racial prof iling4, fierce  attacks on moderately succes sful 
affirmative actions program s, character assassinations  of outspoken African-
American leaders 5, and the numerous governmental social-economic statistics 
chronicling the hardship of Black America.6  
                                                 
1 See J ohn Henrik Clar k, Christopher Columbus & the Afrikan Holocaust , at 23-
30 (2002). 
2 Stenson Kennedy, After Appomattox: How The South Won The War, (1995). 
3 See Janet Poe, Attracting BMOC --- black men on campus, The Atlanta Journal 
and Constitution, Fri, Oct.  22, 2002 
4 See Obie Patterson, Before lifting moratorium , end disparity , The Baltimo re 
Sun, Dec. 12, 2002. 
 2
5  For example, the Center for Indivi dual Rights (“CIR”) in 1996 successfully  
argued for the Fifth Circuit Court of A ppeals to eliminate the use of racial 
preferences by state funded institutions of higher edu cation.  See Ho pwood v . 
Texas, 95 F.3d 53 (1996).  Moreover, In accordance with t heir systematic 
attempt to dismantle t he moderate gains w on by Blac ks, in the fall of 1997,  the 
Center for Individual Rights filed two cases (“CIR”) Grutter v. Bollinger and Gratz 
v. Bollinger — challenging race-based admissions at the University of Michigan's 
Law School and Colle ge of Literature, Science, and t he Arts respectively.  CIR 
website highlighted Time Magazine’s article “dubbed ‘Affirmative Action's Alamo’, 
The two cases reflect the national debate ov er racial preferences in university 
admissions. The oft-repeated prediction that the future of ra ce-based admissions 
will rise or fall on  the outcome of these cas es has become reality now that t he


--- PAGE 298 ---
However, it is un deniable that Afrikan-Americ ans have overcome many 
hurdles, shattered numerous barriers, and set countless precedents on the way  
to freedom, justice, and equality here in t he United States.  Yet, under current  
conditions will Afrikan-Amer icans ever be able to create modern, prosperous, 
successful communities---models that Af rikan people throughout the world look 
to with pride and admiration---with first-ra te Black medical doctors and surgeons 
practicing in state-of-the art Black ow ned hospitals; wealthy  Black attorneys  
working tirelessly to fight for Afrikan descendants’ civil and human rights; great 
Black educators and other role-models  providing our children first-class  
instruction; daily Blac k newspapers unc ompromisingly providing news from a 
Black perspective; Black banks  with ass et levels c omparable t o their W hite 
counterparts; 5 star hotels rivaling the m ost popular  hotels in the country; 
average families living comfortably in modern houses with all available amenities; 
the dollar circulating 30-65 times befor e leaving the community; and popular  
venues at which entertainers must perform before claiming stardom.   
Only time will tell if s uch a “dream land” can emerge out of the current 
crisis in Black America.  Meanwhile mo st are completely unaware that not l ong 
ago, such a model did exist in Tulsa,  Oklahoma.  What would Black  Tuls a 
Oklahoma be today if it had been allowed to flourish?  Just imagine ads in 
today’s newspapers about the extravagant Black owned Stradford hotel:  
                                                                                                                                                 
Supreme Court will decide Gratz and Grutter in the spring of 2003.  See 
http://www.cir-usa.org/recent_cases/michigan.html (last visited Mar. 31, 2003). 
 3
6 According to Dr. Claud Anderson Afrikan-Americans occupy the lowest pos ition 
in Americ a in ever y politic al, social , and economical statistical cate gory. 
Anderson explains himself further when he states “the masses  of Black people 
are either under employed, unemploy ed, or underpaid.” See Claud Ander son, 
Black Labor, White Wealth, at 189 (1994).


--- PAGE 299 ---
The Stradford Hotel, the large st Black own ed hotel chain in the worl d, invites all former  
and cu rrent resi dents of Tulsa, Okl ahoma to com e celebrate 80 years of high cla ss 
lodging at o ne of ou r 5 50 locations world wide an d re ceive a free nig ht in one of o ur 
luxurious suites.  Since ou r humble b eginnings as th e “finest” hotel in Tulsa, O klahoma, 
we have delivered the best in  hotel  lo dging, dining, and  ho spitality.  No w we wa nt to  
share our success with the residents of the city that made it all possible by supporting the 
very first Stradford whi ch is still locat ed at 1212 North Greenwood in the histori c 
Greenwood business of Tulsa.    
 
 Unfortunately, before the plus h St radford Hotel c ould reac h its full 
potential, it and hundr eds of other bustling business es in the Black Greenwood 
District of north Tulsa, were burned to  the ground during the worst acts of 
domestic terrorism in United States  his tory—the little known Greenwood 
Holocaust.  This inhuman act of terror,  wrongly  termed a “race riot” un justly 
robbed thousands of Afrikan-Americans of  their rightful inheritance and the 
potential for a prosperous future by destroying the wealthiest and most organized 
African American community in the 20 th century.  This m onstrous crime also 
thwarted the re-creation of  another economically v iable community.   
“Greenwood” or “Black Wall Street” flourished from the early 1900s until June 1,  
1921.7  On that infamous day, eighty two ye ars ago, the Black citizens of north 
Tulsa experienced an event comparable to  the Sept ember 11, 2001 tragedies.   
Yet, unlik e the tremendous  worldwide ou trage and  commitment to help the 
victims of September 11, 2001, the innocent victims of  the so-called “Tulsa Race 
Riot” have only  recently receiv ed any  ac knowledgement of this crime against  
humanity, and have never received one penny  to compensate them for their 
losses.8  
                                                 
7 See Scott Ells worth, Death in a Promise Land: The Tulsa Race Riot of 1921  at 
14-16 (1992). 
 4
8 Instead the state government has only awarded each survivor a gold-plated 
medal bearing the state seal. Yet, imagi ne the outrage if the c urrent


--- PAGE 300 ---
Imagine walking out of your front  door and seein g 1,500 homes and 
businesses burning; your neighbors’ bodies  littering the streets;  airplanes flying 
above shooting at you; and to add insult to injury, angry white gangs cloak ed in 
police and army uniforms committing these ac ts of violence against you.  This is  
what the residents of Black Wall Stree t, (the name fittingly given to the most 
affluent all-Black community in the history of the Un ited States), encountered on 
June 1, 1921. 9 On that terrible day, mobs of  angry, envious, Wh ites under the 
protection of city and state law pillaged and destroyed the all-Black community. 10  
Furthermore, after committing these awful acts, the city  and state officials, who 
condoned this violence, inst ituted a shameful cover-up so suc cessful that the 
horrors of the Greenwood Holocaust were effectively blotted out of history.  11   
Yet, thanks to a few dedicated historians, politicians, and community activists, 
the long overdue story of how Black Wa ll Street was unjustly destroyed has 
recently received the attention it is due. 12  Howev er, although t he story was  
                                                                                                                                                 
administration only offered the victims and survivors of  September 11 medals of  
valor.  This type of patronage begs the ques tion “what is Black life, property, and 
suffering worth in this country ?” See Thomas J. Sugrue, Terror in the Streets , 
Wash. Post, Mar. 10, 2002, at T05.   
9 See Ellsworth, supra note 7. 
10 See Alfred L. Brophy, Reconstructing the Dreamland: The Tulsa Riot of 1921 
at 55-60 (2002). 
11 See John Hope Frank lin & Sc ott Ellswor th, Final Report of the Oklahoma 
Commission to Study the Tulsa Race Riot of 1921, History Knows No Fences: An 
Overview, at http://www.tulsareparations.org/Historynofences.htm (last v isited 
Feb. 14, 2003). 
 5
12 Special tribute to but certainly not limited to: 1) North Tulsa/Greenwood State 
Rep. Don Ross for continuous ly pushing t o have the Greenwood Holoc aust 
examined by the stat e, 2) Educator/Author/Comm unity Activist, and Greenwood 
native Dorothy Moses Dewitty for her book Tulsa: Tale of T wo Cities , 3) La w 
Professor/Author Al Brophy for writing Reconstructing the Dreamland: The Tulsa 
Riot of 1921, 4) Historian/Author Scott Ellsworth for his book Death in a Promise 
Land: The Tulsa Race Riot of 1921 , 5) ‘America’s Historian’ and Greenwood 
native Dr. John Hope Frankli n, 6) Historian and Gr eenwood native Eddie Faye


--- PAGE 301 ---
unearthed there are  still v ast amounts of important information ab out the 
Greenwood community and the events that destroyed it that must be told.  
This pap er will acco mplish the  followi ng: 1) prove that describing the 
Greenwood massacre, as a “race riot” is erroneous; becaus e the White c itizens 
of Tulsa plotted to destroy the Bla ck community of Greenwood, and through 
unprecedented urban warfare, White Tulsans, accomplished their mission.  As a 
result, it is more accurate to refer to this incident, not as the “Tulsa Race Riot” but 
as the “Greenwood Holocaust”, because thousands of guilty Whites intentionally  
executed an unprecedented war on the Black citizens of Greenwood that led to 
the total destruction of the community; 2) to present a comprehensive reparations 
plan to compensate the victims and thei r descendents for the destruction to 
Greenwood and its Black citiz ens; and 3) t o present a strategy for adopting this 
reparations plan for the victims of this horrible crime.   
To support these three main points this article will: 1) br iefly re-create the 
history of Black Oklahoma and describe why the unique circumstances of Black 
Oklahoma produced a Black pa radise; 2) briefly des cribe the demographics of  
Greenwood at its heyday and the community ’s potential had its future not been 
thwarted; 3) present a compelling case fo r real an d substantive reparations for 
the horrendous and lasting harm done to  the innocent vi ctims of north 
Tulsa/Greenwood; 4) demonstrate the ca ll for reparations does not and cannot  
                                                                                                                                                 
 6
Gates and her book Tulsa Riot, 7) Attorney/Author Hanni bal B. Johnson and his 
book Black Wallstreet, 8) Author/Filmmaker and Gr eenwood native Ron Wallace 
and his book and Educator R.  Halliburton, Jr. and his book The Tulsa Race War 
of 1921. Of course there are many, many ot hers who valiantly kept the memory 
of the Greenwood Holocaust alive. Wit hout question, t hose unsung heroes als o 
deserve great appreciation and thanks.


--- PAGE 302 ---
7
equate an impartial dollar am ount for the loss of lif e and property, but that it 
should encourage social responsibility for the injustice that occurred; and 5) show 
that there are strong precedent s for reparations for criminal acts similar to t hose 
committed against the citizens of Greenwood.


--- PAGE 303 ---
I. Historical Background 
A. The African’s Fight for True Freedom in America 
It is undeniable that for the greater part of this country’s history the view 
that  “the Black Man has no rights that a white man has to respect” was not only 
an opinion held by most whites, it was the basis for a United States Supreme 
Court decision.13  Thus, since their illegal k idnapping and forced “immigration” to 
this country, Afrikan-Americans  have had  to struggle mightily  just for basic  
human rights and the necessities of life. 14  Thus, it is imperative that a brief  
description is provided of the historic al conditions  that created the atmosphere 
and circumstances under which the affluent Greenwood district was created and, 
sadly, eventually destroyed.  
After President Lincoln, portrayed as  a great  humanitarian and 
emancipator, signed the Em ancipation Proclamation 15, the chains of physical 
                                                 
13 Supreme Court Chief Justice Roger Taney declared that under the Declaration 
of Independence and the United States Constitution a black man "has no rights 
which the w hite man w as bound to respect. " See Dred Scott v. Sandford, 60 
U.S. 393, 407,  (1857).   
14 See Kenneth M. Stamp, The Peculiar Institution: Slavery in the Ante-Bellu m 
South, (1956).  
 8
15 Many believe that Lincoln receives fa r too much recognition as a humanitarian 
because he readily c onveyed indifference about Africans.   For examp le, Lincoln 
is quoted as saying “I am not, nor ever have been in f avor of bringing about the 
social and political equality of white and black races…that I am not nor ever have 
been in favor of making voters or jurors of Negroes.”  So, although it is irrefutable 
that through Lincoln’s Em ancipation Proclamation Af rikan pe ople received 
“freedom”, it is inaccurate to portray a m an not in  “favor of bringing about social 
and political equality of white and black rac es” as a humanitarian.  See James 
Loewen, Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everythi ng Your American History Textbook  
Got Wrong at 155 and 181 (1996).


--- PAGE 304 ---
slavery were outlawed in the United St ates.  With the full force of the 
Emancipation Proclamation and later enactments of the 13, 14, & 15 
amendments (the three so-called “Bla ck Amendments”) Afri kan-Americans 
struggled t o obtain s ome form of physical freedom. 16 Howev er, after the 1876 
presidential compromise, the moderatel y successful Freedman’s Bureau and the 
“Reconstruction” era prematurely ended. 17  A new sys tem of oppression was 
institutionalized shortly t hereafter, through Blac k codes 18, lynchings 19, 
sharecropping20, and other oppressive laws that continually impeded the 
progress of Afrikan people in  America.  Afrikans qui ckly understood that “paper 
freedom” would not deliver true freedom— political autonomy, real economic  
development, unfettered cultural expression, and germane spiritual expression—
that they longed for while toiling under the brutal yo ke of the Anglo-American 
                                                 
16 Although t he physical chains were remo ved, there was still  bondage with t he 
advent of sharecropping, peonage farming,  and other restrictive and oppress ive 
tactics employed by t hose in opposition to Afrikan freedom. The restrictions and 
frustrations that accompanied c hattel slavery basically just changed forms, and 
remained a sad reality for the masses of  Afrikan-Americans.  See John Hope 
Franklin & Alfred A. Moss, From Slav ery to Freedom : A History of African 
Americans, (1994 7th edition).   
17 See Dr. W.E.B. Dubois, Black Reconstruction An Essay Toward a Histor y of 
the Part Which Black Folk Played in t he Attem pt to Reconstruct Dem ocracy in 
America, 1860-1880, at 602-612 (1935). 
18Black Codes were laws that categoric ally denied the rights of Afrikan-
Americans during the early years after the formal ending of chattel slavery. See 
Kwame Anthony Appiah & Henry Louis, Jr. Gates, Africana: The Encyclopedia of 
the African and African American Experience, at 249 (1999). 
19 Lynchings were illegal  and often gruesome mob executions, usually  by  
hanging. Often the Black victim was tort ured and mutilated before death See  Id 
at 1211.   
 9
20 Sharecropping was when Blac k “workers” lived and worked on the land of a 
White landowner, often their former master , using the tools and other necessities 
provided on credit by the landowner.   In  return the worker was required to pay 
the landowner a portion of the crop produced “at year’s end, however, records 
would be produced purporting to show th at the cropper had li ttle or nothing 
coming to him.” See Kennedy, supra note 2, at 41.


--- PAGE 305 ---
White man. 21   For example, in 1865 when quizzed by the famous General 
William Sh erman about the prospects of  Afrikan p rogress in  the midst of 
blistering White Supremacy 22 and oppression, without  hes itation, a prominent 
group of Black leaders unanimously expre ssed their unwavering belief that only  
in separat e enclaves  could Afrikans achi eve their proper educ ational, political,  
social, economical, mental, spiritual, and emotional potential as free Afrikans with 
a very dist inct and unique culture. 23  Moreover, General Carl Sc hurz, special 
investigator for President Andrew Johnso n, provided the reasoning for the Blac k 
leader’s feelings when Schurz reported in 1868: 
Some planters held ba ck their form er slaves on their plantations b y brute force.   
Armed bands of white men patrolled th e country ro ads to drive back Neg roes 
wandering th e high ways and by-way s.  Grue some rep orts ca me from th e 
hospitals—re ports of colo red men  and women wh ose arm s had  been cut off, 
whose skulls had been b roken by blo ws, whose b odies ha d be en sl ashed by 
knives or lacerated with scourges.  A number of such cases I ha d occasioned to 
examine myself.  A reign of terror prevailed in many parts of the South.24 
  
 The thirst for “true freedom” drove Afrikans to frantically search for a safe 
environment; an environment conducive to pr oducing whole, sane, healthy, and 
prosperous people with unabridged oppor tunities to grow and develop into 
productive human beings.  To be truly liberated, Afrikans in America realized they 
needed their own land.  They became pa infully aware that “the German and 
English and French Serf, t he Italian and Russian Serf, were, at emancipation,  
given definite rights to the land.  Yet the American Negro Slave was emancipated 
                                                 
21 See Plessey v Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537 (1896). In this case the majority upheld 
state-imposed racial segregation.  
22 A doctrine based on a belief in t he inherent superiority of the White race ove r 
the Black race and the correlative necessi ty for the subordination of blacks to 
whites in all relationships. See http://www.webster.com/cgi-bin/dictionary (last  
visited Feb 15, 2003). 
23 See Hannibal Johnson, Acres of Aspirations, at 14 (2002). 
 10
24 See Id. at 16.


--- PAGE 306 ---
without the same rights and in the end this  spelled f or him the continuation of 
slavery.”25  This noble quest, for a land to li ve free in nam e and in fact, spanned 
the entire nation…inde ed the entire world.26 
B. The Dream of a Black State. Was Oklahoma the “Promise Land”? 
The new “Americans” suffered the brunt of so much hostility tha t it is no t 
surprising that, “Black folk were always on the move, throwing off oppression like 
stifling clothes and inhabiting new lands with old hopes of freedom.”27  Therefore, 
Afrikans in America vehem ently searched and even lobbied the United St ates 
government for a place to live their liv es away from the hell of oppression. 28  
These efforts went on for many years. 29  The search took Afrikans to Kans as, 
Canada, Mexico, and even  back home t o Afrika. 30  Howev er, many freedom 
thirsty Afrikans viewed Oklahoma, then kn own as Indian Territory, as the perfect 
and most sensible place for Afrik an people to start their new lives.31  To this end, 
many Afrikans touting Oklahoma as t he “promise land,” and indiv idual and 
organizational movem ents spra ng up all ov er the country. 32  For instance, the 
                                                 
25 See Dubois, supra note 17, at 602, 611. 
26 See Martin Delan ey, Emigration of the Colored People of the United Stat es, 
http://www.libraries.wvu.edu/delany/emigrate.htm (last visited Feb. 15, 2003). 
27 See Michael Eric Dyson, Introduction to Acres of Aspirations,  Hannibal 
Johnson, at vi (2002).  
28 See Johnson, supra note 23, at 28. 
29 Indeed this effort is still ongoing. Many Blacks feel this country will never treat 
its former slaves equally and without restraint. There is a substantial movement 
for repatriation to Afrika or the creation of a homeland. Those advocates point to 
Israel as precedent. See Republic of New Afrika Philosophy, 
http://www.asetbooks.com/Us/Nationhood/RNA/Philosophy.html (last visited Feb. 
15, 2003). 
30 See Franklin & Mos s, supra note 16, at 235, 278-79, 384-385, 340-41,105-
111. 
31 See Johnson, supra note 23, at 38.  
 11
32 See Id. at 29.


--- PAGE 307 ---
Freedman’s Oklahoma Immigration Association was formed on March 15, 1881 
with for the sole purpose of re-settling Afrikans in Oklahoma. 33  One propone nt, 
the Honorable Edward P. McCabe, widely c onsidered the father of America’s all-
Black town movement, even traveled to Wa shington D.C. to m eet with President 
Benjamin Harrison to lobby for Oklahom a to be admitted as a “Black State.”34  In 
addition, those ambitious Afri kans calling f or a “Black state” even inspired New 
Hampshire Senator Henry W. Blair to introduce a bill favoring Oklahoma’s 
admission to the Union as a Black State.35  
Clearly the Black State aspirants were soundly defeated.36  Yet, Oklahoma 
became an d still is h ome to the most a ll-Black towns  in this nation’s h istory.37 
This comes as no surprise when one und erstands the thinking of the Afrikans 
                                                 
33 See Id. at 38. 
34 Perhaps the strongest supporter of Okl ahoma as a Black St ate, McCabe also 
founded the all-Black  town of Langst on, Oklahoma and all-Black Langston 
University. Langston University is the only all-Black college in Oklahoma and only 
Black College west of the Mississippi.   See Id. at 29. 
35 See Id. at  29. 
36 The United States promised Native Americans “the lands [Oklahoma] set aside 
for them w ould in no future time without  t heir consent, be included within the 
territorial limits or ju risdiction of any State or Territory." See Treaty with the 
Cherokee, Dec. 29, 1835, U.S.-Cherokee, art. 5, 7 Stat. 478, 481.  
 12
37 Between 1865 and 1915, approximately 60 Bl ack T owns were settled in the 
United States, with more than one-third settling in Okl ahoma which by far led all 
other states. See http://www.tulsalibrary.com/collections/aarc/towns.htm (last 
visited Feb. 22,2003). “In t hese towns African Americans lived free from the 
prejudices and brutality found in other racially mixed communities of the Midwest 
and the South. African Americ ans in Ok lahoma and Indian T erritories woul d 
create their own c ommunities for many r easons. Escape from dis crimination and 
abuse would be an important driving fact or. All-Black  settlements offered the 
advantage of being able to depend on neighbors for financial assistance and 
access markets for crops. Arthur Tolson,  a pioneer ing historian of Black s in 
Oklahoma, asserts that many Afric an Americans  turned to ‘ideologies of  
economic advancement, self-help, and racial solidarity’.” See also, http://www.ok-
history.mus.ok.us/enc/allblack.htm (Last visited February 23, 2003).


--- PAGE 308 ---
who came to Oklaho ma. William H. Twin e, writing in 1905 as the editor of the 
Muskogee Cimeter, best sums up the attitudes of those courageous Afrikans: 
Some of us have made our last move and we propose to stand our ground where 
we have our homes and our investments until hell freezes over and then fight the 
devils on i ce… the Indian Territory is the last sta nd the Negro o f America can 
make as pioneer and we p ropose to let it go down in  history that the stan d was 
made here.38   
 
Thus, the success of the record number of all-Black towns that s prang up 
all over Oklahoma and their continuing ex istence is a testam ent to the freedom 
chasing spirit of those mighty Afrikans like Twine. 39   This freedom loving spirit 
and willingness to fight to achieve it pr oduced a number of Black pioneers from 
Oklahoma such as: 1) Ada Lois Sipuel Fi sher who in 1948 succes sfully sued the 
University of Oklahoma to adm it her into their law sc hool;40 2) Ralph Ellison who 
so profoundly detailed the agony of being a Black m an in America in his novel , 
“Invisible Man. ;" that purportedly "no…Am erican writer has rec eived as much 
critical acclaim and as many honors for such a small body of work" 41; 3)  Cow 
Tom a former Creek slave who became t he first full-blooded Afrikan to become 
chief of a Native American nation (Creek),42 and while serving as chief negotiated 
                                                 
38 See Jonathan Greenberg, Staking a Claim: Jake Simmons, Jr and the Mak ing 
of An African-American Oil Empire, at 61 (1990). 
39  An exam ple of the resilience of these special people is the all-Black town of 
Boley.  Although far from its heyday of 1914 w hen the all-Black c itizens of Boley 
possessed a $150,000 high school, cement sidewalks , beautiful residences,  an 
electric power plant and water works, a bank, telephone system, th ree cotto n 
gins, and eighty oth er busines s ventures. Boley is  still a s ource of pride to  
Afrikans in Oklahoma. For instance, t he world famous Boley Rodeo started in 
1904, draws thousands to descend on t he town and rehas h memories from  
generations past.   See Appiah &  Gates, supra note 10, at 550. 
40 See Sipuel v. Board of Regents, 332 U.S. 631 (1947). 
41 Donald B. Gibson, Ra lph Waldo Ellison, Encyclopedia of American Biography, 
331, 332 (John A. Garraty ed., 1974). 
 13
42 John K. Mahon, History of the Second Seminole War, at 91 (1967).


--- PAGE 309 ---
the Creek Treaty of 1866 which ended slavery for Afrikans held as Creek laves;43 
4) Jake Simmons, Jr. (Cow Tom’s great-grandson) the most important Black man 
in the history of  the Oil Industry; 44 5) Honorable Rosc oe Dunjee who in 19 58 
contrary to popular  belief “conducted the nation's first sit-in [boycott]” in 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. 45; and 6) Langston Univ ersity, geographically t he 
western-most historically B lack Colle ge or Unive rsity (HBCU), which  has 
educated thousands of Black students. 46  Indeed the s mall of state of Oklahoma 
has produced some heavyweight cont ributors to the Afri kan American 
community. 
C. Oklahoma…A Dream  Deferred 
Sadly and cruelly the State’s first legi slative convention sought t o quickly 
and decisively dispel any thought of Okl ahoma offering special opportunities or 
                                                 
43 The legislation ending Creek slavery read as follows “As there are among the 
Creeks many persons of African descent, who have no interest in the soil, it is 
stipulated that hereafter these persons…and their descendants…s hall have and 
enjoy all the rights and privileges of native citizens, including an equal interest in 
soil and national funds.” See 
http://digital.library.okstate.edu/kappler/Vol2/treaties/cre0931.htm#slavery_nor 
 (last visited Feb. 15, 2003). 
44 Simmons “believed in capitalism and the opportunities of the American system, 
and was determined to make those opportuni ties exist for himself and thos e of 
his race.” Credited with single- handedly helping newly freed Afrikan nations  
exploit their own resources for the good of  their people, Simmons “was a frenetic 
intermediary, setting up huge deals betwe en huge multinationa ls like Phillips  
Petroleum, Texaco, and Signal, and top government official from Nigeria, Ghana, 
Liberia, and the Ivory Coast. He work ed for big oil and he worked for big 
government, but he let everyone know that in the end he worked for Jake 
Simmons.”  See Greenberg, supra note 38, at 9-10. 
45 Through his newspaper , The Black Dispatch, Dunjee was also integral in the  
passing t he Dyer  Anti-Lynching Bill that passed the U.S. House of 
Representatives, and set up the first N AACP chapter west of Mississippi in 
Oklahoma City.  See Currie Ballard, Moral Giants Among Midgets , The Daily  
Oklahoman, Aug. 31, 2001. 
 14
46 See Zelia J. Black Patterson, Langston University: A History, (1979).


--- PAGE 310 ---
freedoms for Afrikans.   For example, t he chairman of Oklahoma’s Constit ution 
Convention, William H. Murrah argued, “w e must provide the  means for the 
advancement of the Negro rac e, and acc ept him as  God gave him to us …he 
must be taught in line of his  own sphere, as porters, boot-blacks, and barbers…it  
is an entirely false not ion that the Negro can rise to the equal of a  white man in 
professions or become an equal citi zen to grapple with public  questions .”47  
Therefore, the convention overwhelmingly voted to copy and implement many  
racist and oppressive “Jim Crow” Laws.  Moreover, upon achieving statehood in 
1907, the very first order of business for Oklahoma’s newly elected senate was to 
make segregation the law of the state.48   
Unfortunately, Oklahoma not only failed to come into the union as a Black  
State, but it also succ umbed to the disease of racism and Wh ite supremacy that 
ravaged the rest of the country.  Nonetheless, the foundation for Afrikan success, 
empowerment, and self-determination alre ady well-laid and entrenched due to 
the thousands of freedom-seeking Afrikans  who settled in Oklahoma for the sole 
purpose of escaping the prohibitions of white racism in order to build a better life.  
Accordingly, it should not have come to  anyone’s surprise that the “Mecca” of 
Black success, wealth, and excellence would be born in Oklahoma—Greenwood,  
Oklahoma 
                                                 
47 See Johnson, supra note 23, at 63. 
 15
48 See Id. at 18.


--- PAGE 311 ---
II. Black Wall Street 
A. The Magnificence of Greenwood 
 Contemporary social commentary provided by Dr. W.E.B . Dubois  
described the community known as Black Wall Street thusly “I have never seen a 
colored community so highly  organized as  that of Tulsa. The colored people of  
Tulsa hav e accumulated property, have established stores and bus iness 
organizations and have made money in oil.” 49  Although Greenwood was  not  
officially a sovereign state or even its ow n municipality, for all pr actical purposes 
it functioned just like an independent community .  The racist laws in the state o f 
Oklahoma prevented Greenwood residents from  parti cipating in the Tulsa city  
government.  So, the residents of Greenwood basically ran their part of town as a 
separate entity, and when asked, many identified their hometown as Greenwood, 
not Tulsa.  Becaus e all of life’s necessities for Greenwood residents were within 
the geographic boundaries of  their comm unity, i t is reported that most 
“Greenwood residents did not have any r eason to leave the community for 
anything but shoes.”50  
So what was Greenwood lik e? Long time Greenwood historian Scott  
Ellsworth describing what Greenwood’s business district and neighborhoods was 
like before the massacre wrote: 
The Black population had grown to almost 11,000 and the community counted 
two Bla ck schools, Du nbar an d Boo ker T. Wa shington51, one Black Hospital 52, 
                                                 
49 See The Daily Oklahoman, June 2, 1921,  
50 See Interview with Keith Jemison, Li brarian, Freddie Mart in Rudisil Regional 
Library, in North Tulsa, OK. (Dec. 22, 2002). 
 16
51 My beloved alma mater had a curriculum in 1921 that would standout even by  
today’s standards for best high s chools in the nation.  Fres hman Class—Latin, 
English, Algebra, Drawing,  Domestic Science and Art, Manual Training, Anc ient 
History, Vocal Music. Sophomore Class— Latin, English, Geometry Solid,


--- PAGE 312 ---
and two Bla ck ne wspapers, The T ulsa Star  a nd t he Oklahoma Su n.  Blac k 
Tulsa[Greenwood] at th e time h ad some thirte en churches and three f raternal 
lodges—M asonic, Knig hts of Pythias, and I.O.O.F.—plu s two  Black [m ovie] 
theaters53 and a Black public library…t wo and three-story brick buildings lined the 
avenue, housing a variety of comme rcial establishments, including a dry goods 
store, groceries, confectionaries, restaurants, and billiard halls… offices of Tulsa’s 
unusually l arge num ber of Bla ck l awyers, docto rs, and oth er 
professionals…alon g Det roit Avenue a nd ce rtain other stre ets were the neat, 
sturdy h omes of som e o f those Black Tul san who own ed bu sinesses lini ng 
Greenwood avenue, a ugmented by the hou ses of the city’s Black professional 
class. Within this elite gro up, some were rumored to have asset s in exce ss of 
$100,000.54 
 
Greenwood was so economic ally self -sufficient; purportedly the dollar 
circulated around fifty times sometimes ta king a year for currency to leav e the 
community.55   So, it is  not hard t o see wh y “the Greenwood dist rict, drew an 
array of nationally prominent Afric an-Americans to Tulsa…entertainers, 
dignitaries, and notables throughout the country visited frequently…such as Mary  
McCloud Bethune-Cookman 56, Dr. George Washington Carv er57, Marion 
                                                                                                                                                 
Drawing, Medieval and Modern History, Economics, Music, Domestic Science,  
and Manual Training. Junior Class—Eng lish, Algebr a, Commercial Arithmetic, 
Drawing, Manual Training, Bu siness Spelling, Chemistry, English History, Civics, 
Domestic Art, Domestic Scie nce, Vocal Mu sic.  Senior  Class— English, Physics, 
Geometry Solid, Typewriti ng, Vocal Music , Domestic Science, Manuel Tr aining, 
American History, Psychology,  Trigonometry  Plain, Book Keeping, Drawing,  
Domestic Art, and Shorthand.  In addition,  all classes had to par ticipate in some 
form of athletics. See Johnson, supra note 21, at 63. 
52 Currently there are no hospitals to serve the majority Black residents of North 
Tulsa/Greenwood; while there are 6 conveniently located hospitals to serve the 
majority White residents of South Tulsa. See 
http://www.tulsa.com/localinfo/aroundtown/hospitals.asp (last visited Feb. 15, 
2003). 
53 Currently, there are no theaters in North Tulsa/Greenwood while there are 15 
conveniently located theaters to serv e the predominately White residents of  
South Tulsa.    See http://www.tulsa.com/localinfo/aroundtown/theaters.asp (last 
visited Feb 15, 2003). 
54 See Ellsworth, supra note 8, at 14-16. 
55 See Ron Wallace, Black Wallstreet, 
http://www.daveyd.com/blackwallpolitic.html. (last visited Feb. 15, 2003).     
 17
56 Mary Jane McLeod Bethune became the first Black woman in the United 
States to establis h a school that became Bethune-Cook man, a four-year 
accredited college.  See Appiah & Gates, supra note 10, at 229.


--- PAGE 313 ---
Anderson58, and Dr. W.E.B. Dubois.” 59  Truly, for these and other famous and 
successful African Americans, a sojourn to this “promise land” was like a Muslim 
pilgrimage to Mecca… a must! 60  
 
 
Greenwood District prior to the riot 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 
57 Dr. George Washington Ca rver (1864–1943), was a worl d-renowned scientist 
who saved the southern econom y by developing hundreds of pr oducts that were 
made from peanuts, s weet potatoes, and soybeans. See Appiah & Gates, supra 
note 10, at 389. 
58 Anderson is considered by many as the greatest African- American (if not just  
the greatest) opera singer of all-time.  See Appiah & Gates, supra note 18 at 101. 
59 W.E.B. D ubois was a famous politic al and human rights activist who was the 
first African-American to receive a Ph.D. from Harvard in 189 5, and cons idered 
by many as the leading intellectual of his time.   See Appiah & Gates, supra note 
18, at 635. 
 18
60 See Hannibal Johnson, Black Wall Street: From Riot to Renaissance in Tulsa’s 
Historic Greenwood District, at 18 (1998).


--- PAGE 314 ---
III. Riot…What Riot? 
A. The Power of Phraseology.  
The use of specialty words and phrases to define reality has become both an 
art form and big bus iness in Am erica.  Th is art form, called Phraseology  “is the 
choice of words and the way  in which they are used.”; it has become both an art 
form and big business  in world61  For example, if nation A is violently fighting for 
a “liberation” from Nation B, and they take their case to the United Nations for a  
decision to settle their dispute.  Nation A will invariable phase the nature of their  
actions as that of “freedom fighters” who are engaged in a military or paramilitary 
liberation war which is just  for the (re)-es tablishment of traditional moral, cultural 
and religious values.”62 Nation B will invariably l abel Groups A as  “…terrorists  
who kill and main innocent men, woman, and children.” 63  The United Nations 
and world opinion will sway towards t he nation b est able to persuade the 
observer that their phraseology  is the co rrect way to interpret the disputed 
actions.  The nation that wins the phraseology war will receive the blessing of the 
world which just might be the weapon needed to crush the other side.   
B. What does this have to do with Greenwood? 
That is why it is of the utmost i mportance that we are mindful of how May 
31/June 1, 1921 is recorded in  history; the characteri zation o f the historical 
events of those infamous hours ultimately determines the level of recognition and 
understanding the so-called Tuls a Race Ri ot receives.  For without the proper 
                                                 
61 See Roget’s II: The New Thesaurus, 1190 (3rd ed. 1995). 
62 See Patrick Marshall, The Extradition Treaties Built Danger , Chicago Tribune, 
July 24th 1986. 
 19
63  See Id.


--- PAGE 315 ---
phraseology, the full extent of  what  happened in Tulsa could be for ever 
minimized. In addition, (and most impor tant to this discussion) the proper 
characterization of the catastrophic events of June 1 st, 1921 will have a direct 
impact on the outcome of the reparations  movement as it relates to the 
Greenwood holocaust.  
The gener al pub lic a nd those controllin g the “purse strings” must clearly  
understand the severity of what happened that dreadful day in 1921, now neatly 
termed “The Tulsa Race Riot.”  A race riot  is “caused by racial dissens ions or 
hatreds.”64  Without a doubt, throughout the hist ory of the Unit ed States, anti-
Black attitudes have c aused numerous inc idents that led to the total destruction 
of entire Black towns or sections of cities.  In fact, in 1919, so-called “race riots” 
and the shedding of Black blood were so  rampant that history dubbed  that 
summer the “Red Summer of 1919.”65  Unquestionably , the extreme hatred and 
envy of white Tulsans  towards the succe ssful inhabitants of  Greenwood led to 
the costly destruction of Black Wallstree t.  Thus, calling the ev ents of June 1 st, 
1921, “The Tulsa Race Riot,” seems to be  appropriate.  However, what if the 
same events occurred in today’s post- September 11, 2001 world ?  Would the 
“riot” actually be seen as an act of terrorism?  What about an act of genocide? At 
any rate, terming the events of  June 1, 1921 a “riot ” wrongfully conjures up 
images of two opposing groups spontan eously attacking eac h other for an 
intensive, but short time. However , this is not what happened in Tulsa.  In Tuls a, 
                                                 
64 See Merriam-Webste r, http://www.webster.com/cgi-bin/dictionary, (last visited 
February 16th, 2003). 
 20
65 See Robert J. Booker, The Heat of a Red Summer: Race Mixing, Race Riot in 
1919, (2001).


--- PAGE 316 ---
one group of people ( Whites) conspired to destroy an other group (Blacks), and 
then used a flimsy excuse to carry out their evil plan.66  
Consequently, “race riot” does not adequately convey what really happene d 
to Greenwood.  For example, then Tulsa M ayor, T.D. Evans expressed my exact 
sentiments while disc ussing the “riot” two weeks later when he said, “all regret 
the wrongs that fell upon the innocent Negroes and they should receive help as  
we can give them if within our power.  It, however, is true of any warfare 
(emphasis mine) that the fortunes of wa r fall upon the innocent …this is true of 
any conflic t, invasion, or uprising.  Think  what would have happ ened had the 
Allies marched to Berlin.”67  Therefore, dropping the riot designation and rightly  
describing the horrendous events of 1921 as a war or invasion against the 
citizens of Greenwood draws us  closer to what really  happened. Yet, even the 
war definition does not completely portray the whole story.   The White citizens of 
Tulsa pla nned and e xecuted a  military styl e invasio n of Greenwood.  As a 
consequence of losing the unparalleled,  unprovoked war, the victims of 
Greenwood suffered a holocaust.  
                                                 
66 Many survivors such as Juanita Delore s Burnett Arnold reco llect: “trouble had 
been brewing in Tuls a before the riot brok e out the ni ght of May 31, 1921. We 
children noticed grownups, frowns on thei r faces, talk ing in whis pers about bad 
race relations in the c ity and about rumo rs of a showdown coming. In fact, the 
day before the riot there was an incident right in front  of our hou se. A group of 
angry whit e men were roaming up and down our street. They were so full of 
anger, jealousy, and rage. They were using the "N" word in every sentence they  
spoke. It as "Nigger this," and "Nigger that!” See Eddie Faye Gates, Oral History 
Accounts of the Tulsa Race Riot  of 1921 by Black Survivors, 
http://www.tulsareparations.org/JArnold.htm (last visited Feb. 15, 2003). 
 21
67See 6-14-21 Riot Commission Report.


--- PAGE 317 ---
A holocaust is defined as “great or total destruction by fire.”68  Surely what 
happened to Greenwood and it s citizens fits th is definition as thirty-five city 
blocks were burnt to t he ground by lawless  thugs.69  Moreover, just like  Jewish 
victims of Nazi Germany, the citizens  of Greenwood suffered their holocaust 
because of their ethnicity /race and their prosperity. 70  Just like the Jews the 
residents of Greenwood unjustly had thei r property pillaged,  stolen, and 
destroyed.71  Just like the Jews, the Bl ack residents of Greenwood had their  
families separated from one ano ther.72 Just like the Jews, the Black residents of 
Greenwood were forced into concentration camps.73 Just like the Jews, the Black 
residents of Greenwood were made to suffer the indignity of pass cards.74   
So, notwit hstanding the tremendous dis parity of  actual human and 
property damage bet ween the J ewish Holocaust and t he Greenwood massacre, 
essentially there are no tangible di fferences between what happened to the 
citizens of Greenwood and the victims of the Nazis reign of terror.  Surely there is 
not much difference to the individuals and communities affected.  As a result, the 
Greenwood Holocaust victims should rec eive the same type of recognition, 
understanding, and reparations, as the victims of Nazi Germany.   
 
 
                                                 
68See The American Heritage Dictionary (3rd ed. 1994).  
69See Scott Ellsworth, The Tulsa Riot, available at  
http://www.tulsareparations.org/TulsaRiot.html. (last visited at Feb. 15, 2003). 
70 See Id.   
71 See Id.  
72 See Id.   
73 See Id.   
 22
74 See Id.


--- PAGE 318 ---
Greenwood Holocaust victim  
 
 
VI. The Deadliest Act of Domestic Terrorism in United 
States History 
A. What Sparked the Greenwood Holocaust? 
In late May  1921 19-y ear-old Dick Rowland, a Black  man while, entering 
an elevator slipped; and as he tried to br eak his fall, he accidentally touc hed a 
young White woman who o perated the elevator. 75  The White woman claim ed 
that Rowland assault ed her and he was pr omptly arrested and put in the Tuls a 
jail.  By that evening, t he racist Tulsa Tribune reported that a savage Black man 
had attacked a White woman and that t he perpetrator was going to be lynched. 76  
Thus, as was common during that bloody er a of United States history, a large 
crowd of nearly 2,000 bl oodthirsty Whites gathered outside of the courthouse 
calling for the brutal murder of a Black man.77   
                                                 
75 See Ralph Ginzburg, 100 Years of Lynching, (1997). 
76 See Ellsworth, supra note 69.  
 23
77 See Id.


--- PAGE 319 ---
However, unlik e many other parts of  the country at that time, the 
courageous Black men of Greenwood were  not going to allow one of their 
brothers to be vic iously lynched.78  Approxim ately 60-armed Black  men went  to 
the courthouse to help protect Rowland. 79  Surely, startled by the sight of armed 
Blackmen with guns who bel ieved that “when the govern ment failed to pr otect, 
Greenwood had the right—sometimes they  even spoke about it as a duty—to 
take action,”80 the Whit e residents of Tulsa we re bewildered.  The atmosphere 
quickly became electric, tempers ran high, and shots were fired after the Whites  
tried to dis arm the valiant Black men. 81  Greatly outnumbered, the Greenwo od 
residents retreated to what they  thought was the saf ety of their community. 82   
However, it was too late; the city of Tu lsa seized this  opportunit y to teach the 
“uppity Negroes” a lesson.83 Tulsa deputized hundreds  of whites, supplied them 
with guns, and unleas hed the de adliest domestic terrorist attack ever on United 
States citizens.84  
 
                                                 
78 See Id.   
79 See Id.   
80 See Brophy, supra note 10, at 93. 
81 Many of the men were WWI veterans  who strongly believ ed in the America 
right to life, liberty, & the pursuit of  happiness and the right to bear arms to 
protect oneself, property, and com munity. See Id. See also,   
http://www.tulsareparations.org/TulsaRiot1Of3.htm 
82 See Appiah & Gates, supra note 1893, at 155. 
83 See Gates, supra note 65. 
 24
84 I know for many in the wake of 9-11 this is hard to believe. Howev er, th e 
Greenwood Holocaust is eas ily distinguis hable from the September 11 terrorist 
attacks b ecause the September 11 attackers w ere foreigners attacking 
Americans.  Yet, In t he Greenwood Ho locaust you had Americans attacking 
Americans!


--- PAGE 320 ---
B. “Little Africa” on Fire…Am erica’s Holocaust 
 
White rioters setting homes on fire 
 
The ruthless mercenaries instituted a scorched earth policy, and virtually  
burnt every home and busine ss in the Greenwood community. 85   Moreover, the 
savagery of the thugs equale d some of  the most heinous acts of barbarism  
known to man. For example, many su rrendering Greenwood residents were shot 
and thrown into burning structures.86   As one contemporary   account chronicled, 
“in times of war, when an allied solid er dropped his weapons  and raised his  
hands as a sign of surrender, the ‘barbarous ’ Germans spared his life. In Tulsa, 
Oklahoma, however, defenseless men, women and children were murdered 
without a chance for  their lives .”87  Another account argues  “civilization brok e 
down in Tulsa…things  happened that were on footing with what the Germans did 
in Belgium, what the Turks did in Arme nia, [and] what the Bo lshevists d id in 
Russia.”88  Maybe the most outstanding per sonal account comes from long-time 
NAACP of ficial ironically named Walt er White, who wh ile on assignment  
investigated an earlier lynching in Oklahoma, passed for White and was swor n in 
as one of the emergency deputies.  White writes:  
                                                 
85 See Appiah & Gates, supra note 18, at 1893.  
86 See Id.  
 25
87 See Chicago Defender 8, June 18, 1921.


--- PAGE 321 ---
It was even easier to do this than I had expected.  That evening in the City Hall I 
had to a nswer only th ree que stions— name, ag e, and a ddress.  I might ha ve 
been a thug, a murderer, an escaped convict, a member of the mo b itself which 
had laid waste a la rger area of the city—non e of th ese mattered; my skin was 
apparently white, and that was enough. After we— some fifty or sixty of us— had 
been sworn in…a villain ous-looking man next to me turne d and rema rked 
causally, even with a note  of happine ss in his voi ce: “Now you can go out a nd 
shoot any nigger you see and the law’ll be behind you.89  
 
After the initial may hem had abated,  the Oklahoma National Guard 
unconstitutionally rounded up roughly half  of the Black popul ation of Greenwood 
and placed them in Nazi styled c oncentration camps.90   Lastly, the city of Tulsa  
issued demeaning passes that only allowed Blacks to leave the detention c amps 
if a White person signed t hem out and agreed to be  personally responsible for 
them.91 
Only the efforts of many dedicat ed and det ermined activists and scholars 
have kept alive the story of the Greenwood Holocaust.  These efforts secured the 
1921 Tuls a Race Riot Commission, es tablished in 1997 with House Joint  
Resolution 1035. 92  After four years of meticul ous research, in February 2001, 
the Tulsa Race Riot Commission issued it s report and called for reparations to 
survivors.93 On June 1, 2001, Oklahoma Gov. Frank Keating s igned the 1921 
Tulsa Rac e Riot Re conciliation Act.  Ho wever, many saw the bill as “largely  
symbolic: It did recognize the terrible co sts in lives and property and race 
relations that resulted from the holocau st, but avoided the i ssue of reparations  
altogether. The state gover nment instead awarded e ach survivor a gold-plated 
                                                                                                                                                 
88See Brophy, supra note 10, at 69. 
89 See V.F. Calverton, Anthology of American Negro Literature, at 401 (1929). 
90 See Appiah & Gates, supra note 18, at 1893. 
91 See Id.  
 26
92 See Danney Global, Final Report of the Oklaho ma Commission to S tudy The 
Tulsa Rac e Riot , http://www.tulsareparations.org/FinalReport.htm (last visited 
Feb. 15, 2003).


--- PAGE 322 ---
medal bearing the state seal.” 94  Yet, the Commission’s final  and official report 
has been invaluable in doc umenting t he Greenwood Holocaust even th ough 
some accusations by eyewitnesses dispute certain aspects of the report.  At any  
rate, it is of the utmost importance to in clude the following excerpts from the final 
report:  
a. on May 31st, the Tulsa Tribune ran a story covering the arrest of a young Black man 
jailed for assaulting a Whi te elevator operator based on accusations that were later 
recanted 
b. the Tribune edition also contained an in flammatory editorial that not only sugge sted 
but in cited th at there  woul d be  a lyn ching. Follo wing rel ease of the pa per, f renzy 
spread across the White Tulsa community in anticipation of a lynching and across the 
Black Tulsa community in defense of one 
c. in the p resence of approximately 2,000 White Tulsans, 75 African Americans, some 
of them World War I veterans, met the Sheriff at the Courthouse, offering to assist in 
protecting the prisoner 
d. a struggle ensued between a White Tul san seeking to disarm one of these vet erans 
and rioting began as a result of the gun being fired. 
e. the City of T ulsa Poli ce Department deputi zed 50 0 White Tul sans, many of  which 
were larg ely resp onsible for the damage suffered by the African Ame rican 
Greenwood business and residential community 
f. the State of  Okl ahoma mobilized a unit of the  Oklahoma National Guard that 
subsequently received a machine gun from the Cit y police that was mounted on a 
flatbed truck and used against the men, women and children of Greenwood. 
g. through the night, fires were set and fighting continued as Greenwood's war veterans 
and citizens defended the ir co mmunity from the White attackers, inclu sive of  men 
dressed in State National Guard uniforms, City of T ulsa Police uniforms and under 
the specially deputized authority of the Tulsa Police Department. 
h. at daybrea k, Gre enwood faced an ove rwhelming a ssault a nd m assacre by 5,000-
10,000 White Tulsans covered by a second machine gun, airborne gunfire and/or the 
dropping of incendiary devices, whom prominent and youth members of the Ku Klu x 
Klan probably helped to mobilize. 
i. the organized Whites emptied homes, detained residents, m urdered those resisting 
or found to be armed, looted homes and businesses and set them ablaze; and 
j. around three hundred deaths, according to the Red Cross official report, accounts of 
credible witnesses, eyewitness accounts of "bodies of blacks stacked like cordwood 
on Tulsa streets, black bodies piled on trucks, and on trains" and with circumstantial 
                                                                                                                                                 
93 See Id. 
 27
94 See Thomas J. Sugrue, Terror in the Streets, The Washington Post, Sun. Mar. 
10, 2002.


--- PAGE 323 ---
evidence from renowned physical anthropologist, Dr. Clyde Snow, a member of the 
Commission to Study the Tulsa Race Riot that points to the existence of mass graves 
k. 40 square blocks of 1,26 5 homes looted and then burned to the ground, including 
hospitals, schools, and churches owned primarily by African Americans 
l. 150 b usinesses levele d also by fire and, in some insta nces, ince ndiary devices 
thrown from the air in the Greenwood district now popularly referred to as the "Black 
Wall Street" of America 
m. 6,000 Black Tulsans invol untarily arrested, detained  and rele ased only upon being 
vouched for by a White employer and/or citizen 
n. 9,000 homeless and living in tents well into the Winter of 1921  
o. An entire g eneration's inheritance robbed of a peo ple who dared to "lift themselves 
up by their b ootstraps" a nd live the Am erican d ream, only to have it rende red an 
eternal nightmare. 
In addition, The 1921 Tulsa Race Ri ot Commission accomplished the 
following: 
a. identified, contacted, and registered 126 surviving Greenwood community residents from 
that time p eriod; real and su bstantial action redressing  the  Holoca ust i s a matter of 
utmost humanitarian and moral urgency because the then 126 survivors of the 1921 Riot 
are elderly and dying;  
b. the Greenwood community survivors of the events of May 31/June 1st  1921, experienced 
tremendous personal and  prope rty loss as t he result of the event s of those  days and  
those losses have never been properly compensated or recognized;   
c. the North Tulsa, Greenwood business and residential district never fully recovered  from 
the riotous assault upon their persons and property on May 31 - June 1, 1921;   
d. reparations f or violation s of huma n right s i s fully  sup ported under the In ternational 
Declaration of Human Rights of the United Nations and the Oklahoma State Commission 
to Study the Tulsa Race Riot of 1921 made their beliefs clear: "There is no way but by 
government to represent the colle ctive, and th ere is no way but by reparations to m ake 
real the responsibility . . . Reparations are the right thing to do" and 
e. there is clear culpability for the environ ment and sustenance of the Tul sa race riot, wa r 
and ma ssacre of 1921 fro m both the State of Ok lahoma and, in particular, the City of 
Tulsa 
f. the African American citi zens in the City of Tulsa  and the State of Oklah oma we re 
deprived of their right to due process under the law as well as life, liberty and the pursuit 
of happiness as outlined in the Constitution of the United States of America 
 
C. The Damage 
 28
By sun-up June 1, 1921, the once prosperous 35-Block business district in 
north Tuls a lay utterly destroyed.   Scor es of successful businesses wer e lost.


--- PAGE 324 ---
Among these were 21 churches, 21 rest aurants, 30 grocery stores and two 
movie theaters, a hospital, a bank, a post office, libraries, schools, law offices, a 
half dozen private airplanes  and even a bus  system. The to tal value of property  
damage is not known.   However, most esti mate the property value at the time at 
around $3, 000,000, which is $ 16 million today.  Yet, no Black resident ever 
received one dime for their losses. 95  Eyewitnesses and survivors put the death 
total around 3,000 after the night’s carnage.96  Yet, sadly, it may never be known 
the exact number of lives lost as many survivors discussed the unaccounted 
members of their community in the following  fashion, “I don’t know if they died.   
Maybe they left, but some in m y class di dn’t finish school with us.  Never  saw 
them after the riot.  Maybe they left.  Maybe they dead. Just gone.”97  
Unfortunately bec ause of the blitzkrieg nature of the attack and the 
massive cover-up by the responsible state and loc al governments the exact  
number of dead and injured may forever be disputed.  However, thanks to the 
American Red Cross , a more precise li st of casualties does exist and the 
numbers are staggering.  Overnight 2, 480 families or  10,000 in nocent vict ims 
were hom eless and in need as over 1,000 homes and businesses  were 
completely destroyed.98   Describing the war the next day, the Tulsa World wrote:  
Personal belongings and household goods had been removed from many homes 
and piled in the streets. On the steps of the few houses that remained sat feeble 
and gray Negro men and women and occasionally a small child. The look in their 
eyes was one of dejection and supplication. Judging from their attitude, it was not 
of material consequence to them w hether they  lived or died. Harmle ss 
themselves, they apparently could not conceive the brutality and fiendishness of 
                                                 
95 See Larry O’Dell, Riot Property Loss,  
http://www.tulsareparations.org/Property.htm (last Visited Feb. 20, 2003). 
96 See Clyde Snow, Confirmed Deaths A Preliminary Report, 
http://www.tulsareparations.org/Death.htm (last visited Feb. 15, 2003). 
97 See Gates, supra note 65. 
 29
98 See Ellsworth, supra note 1, at 69.


--- PAGE 325 ---
men who would deliberately set fire to the home s of their friends and neighbors 
and just as deliberately shoot them down in their tracks.99  
 
So, in little less than 12 hours, Gr eenwood, a peaceful, hardworking , 
model community, along with its incredi ble African-Americ an economy was  
destroyed.   
D. The Aftermath 
If the city of Tulsa’s shameful ro le in a llowing an d encouraging the 
destruction of Greenwood were not egregious enough, shortly after the massacre 
on June 7 th, 1921, t he city z oning board enacted an ordinance that “made 
rebuilding r esidences in the area prohibitiv ely expens ive” because the city had 
plans to “convert Greenwood in to an industrial dist rict.”100  In addition, the 
culpable Tulsa Tribune  openly affirmed, “niggertown must never be allowed in 
Tulsa again.”101  Indeed there were some Whit e city leaders who recognized the 
error of their brethren and expr essed a willingness and respons ibility to rebuild 
the district. In fact the Tulsa gov ernment citing their m oral obligat ion to rebuild 
Greenwood even discouraged outside assistance in t he rebuilding effort. 102  
However, the city reneged and their delay forced over 1000 Greenwood 
residents to spend the winter in hastily made tents.103    
 
                                                 
99 See Tulsa Daily World, June 2, 1921. 
100See Brophy, supra, note 10, at 93. 
101See Eddie Faye Gates, They Cam e Searching: How Blacks Sought the 
Promised Land in Tulsa, at 138 (1997). 
102 See Appiah & Gates, supra note 18, at 1893. 
 30
103 See Id.


--- PAGE 326 ---
Greenwood Holocaust victims being arrested  
 
 
                                                
V. Answering Questions about Reparations 
A. Overview of Reparations     
What are reparations ?  Reparations are a well-e stablished, long-standing 
principle of  international law. 104  It is payment for a debt owed, or f or a wrong  
committed. Reparations essentially c onstitute four elements: 1) the formal 
acknowledgement of wrongs; 2) the recognition of continuing injury; 3) the 
commitment to redress said injuries; and 4) actual compensation or restitution for 
the injuries. 105  Dinah Shelton argues “reparat ions must wipe out all t he 
consequences of the illeg al ac t… the compensation must be adequate and 
 
104 See Dinah L. Shelton & Thordis Ingadottir The International Crim inal Cou rt 
Reparations to Victims of Crimes (Article  75 of the Rom e Statute) and the Trust 
Fund (Article 79) Recommendations fo r the Court Rules of Procedure and 
Evidence, http://www.nyu.edu/pages/cic/pubs/ReparVictimsNewPrint.html (last 
visited Feb. 15, 2003). 
 31
105 See National Coalition of Bla ck fo r Reparations in America  (N’COBRA) 
available at www.ncobra.org (last visited Feb. 18, 2003).


--- PAGE 327 ---
balance as near as may be the injury suffered (emphasis mine).106   Shelton goes 
on to further state “the prim ary goal of r eparations s hould be rectification or 
restitution rather than compensation. [Because] when rights are violated the 
ability of the victim to pursue self-determination is impaired.”107  
Throughout history there have been ma ny instances where s tronger 
entities sa crificed to improv e the plight of weake r citizens of a particular  
community.  The stronger ent ity sacrifices with the ho pe of helping the weaker 
entity and ultimately strengthening the whol e.   The most famous and successful 
example of this is T he Marshall Plan (which we will addr ess later in this  
discussion) instituted to re- build war-torn Europe.  Moreover, this same policy  
permeates the entire United States society in many different forms.108  
B.  Who may claim Reparations 
 The argument constant ly plaguing the much la rger Black struggle for 
reparations, for the inhumane and horrendous  atrocities of s lavery and its 
vestiges, is that there is  no liv ing s lave or a direct descendant of a s lave. 
                                                 
106 See Shelton & Ingadottir, supra note 104.  
107 See Id.  
 32
108 One such form, that is ev ident eac h y ear nations” s cheme to redress the 
weaknesses of the lesser t eams from the previous y ear.  The scheme involves 
giving the weaker teams, regardless of why they faile d to perform, higher draft 
picks in the sports d raft.  Conversely, this automatically penalizes successful 
teams by dropping their draft status. This intentionally reduces the chances of the 
top teams obtaining the “best resources”…the most skilled p layers. However, the 
sports leagues understand that this “reparations” scheme is necessary to ensure 
that “top teams” do not continually dominate the lesser teams.  Thus, guarantying 
the competitiveness of t he league, and sec uring an interesting and marketable 
product for the league to promote. As a result, there is more m oney for every 
team involved.  Indeed, in the National Football League (“NFL”) compensation for 
weaknesses is so important that not only do weaker t eams receive the top draft 
picks; the weaker teams al so receive easier schedul es during the upcoming 
years. This same line of thinking is exactly what underlies  the call for a


--- PAGE 328 ---
However, although remainin g Greenwood Holocaust surv ivors are dying of old 
age there are, at least, dozens of surviv ors.  Moreover, courts have upheld 
reparations for “victims as including not on ly the direct victim  or victims of the 
alleged violation, but also any person who would indirectly suffer prejudice as a 
result of such violation or  who would hav e a valid pers onal interest in securing 
the cessation of such violation.”109  Thus, not only do the living survivors have a 
valid claim for reparations, the entire Greenwood community is e ligible for 
restitution for the holoc aust suffered.  The Greenw ood Holocaust sev erely 
retarded, and in many ways, destroyed the growth and development of the entire 
community, evidenced by the lack of re covery by “the north Tulsa, Greenwood 
business and residential dist rict [which] never fully re covered from the riotous 
assault upon their persons and pr operty on May 31 - June 1, 1921.” 110  T his 
negatively affected everyone within the community and denied thousands of their 
rightful birthright to success.    
C. Are Governments Liable to Pay Reparations? 
 Reparations law holds violations by state actors are more egregious  
because “human rights violations committed by state officials are qualita tively 
different from private i njury because of the motives and nature of the conduct as 
well as the identity of the wrongdoer.  Individuals [like the residents  of 
Greenwood] expect protection from the St ate; [because] one of its fundamental 
purposes is to secure the safety and well-being of thos e within its power.” 111  
                                                                                                                                                 
comprehensive reparations program—to equal  out and improve the “playing field” 
for those handicapped by for past deficiencies.    
109 See Shelton & Ingadottir, supra, note 104. 
110 See Global, supra, note 92. 
 33
111 See Shelton & Ingadottir, supra, note 104.


--- PAGE 329 ---
However, the law abiding taxpayers of  Greenwood witnessed their families, 
friends, and most prized possessions deci mated by those whos e very salaries  
they paid— officials of the city, county, and state governments!  
D. Who is Culpable for the Greenwood Holocaust? 
The facts clearly show “the African American citizens in the City of Tulsa and 
the State of Oklahoma were deprived of their right to due process  under the law 
as well as life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness as outlined in the Constitution 
of the Unit ed States of America.”112  Therefore, “there is clear culpability for the 
environment and sus tenance of the Tuls a race riot, war and massacre of 1921 
from both the State of Oklahoma and, in particula r, the City of Tulsa.” 113 In 
addition, the false and inflammatory story,  printed by the owners of the Tulsa 
World newspaper (parent Company  of the Tulsa Tribune) that started the 
Greenwood Holocaust, and called for the city  to never allow “nigger town to 
rebuild”, also bears great responsibility for what happened.114  
                                                 
112See Tulsa Reparations Coalition, Statement of Endorsement,       
http://www.tulsareparations.org/endorseTRC.htm (last visited Feb. 15, 2003). 
113 See Id. 
 34
114 See Gates, supra note 101, at 138.


--- PAGE 330 ---
Black Wall Street utterly destroyed!  
 
VI. Notable U.S. Reparations Precedents in the Last 50 years 
A. Rosewood, Florida 
In 1994, for the first time in the hist ory of the United St ates, an American 
government acknowledged its  responsibil ity for an act of  racial violence 
committed against African-Americans w hen the Florida st ate legislature 
acknowledged an "equitable obligation" to compensate for the total destruction of 
the town of Rosewood Florida in 1923. 115  This small but highly successful all-
Black town of Rosewood, Florida wa s attacked and destroyed when the area's  
white citizens believed that  a black escaped prisoner  had sexually  assaulted a 
white woman (more on Rosewood later in this paper) .116 Passed May 4, 1994,  
the Rosewood Compensation Act  offi cially: 1) acknowledged the state's 
                                                 
 35
115 See C. Jeanne Bassett, Comments: House Bill 591: Flori da Com pensates 
Rosewood Victims and Their Families for a Seventy-One-Year-Old Injury  22 Fla. 
St. U.L. Rev. 503-521.


--- PAGE 331 ---
responsibility for failing to prevent t he village's d estruction; 2) monetarily  
compensated victims and families for their property loss;  3) establis hed 
scholarships for minority students, with pr eference g iven to Rosewood family 
members; and 4) ins tituted a c riminal inv estigation and continuing academic 
research into the senseless act.117 
B. Japanese Internees 
In 1942, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt issu ed Executive Order  
9,066, which sanctioned the Secretary of War to establish camps and remove all 
persons of Japanese descent from  the western United States. 118 Japanese -
American citizens were held in  camps for the nex t few years. 119 This 
“unconstitutional”120 act altered, and in many cases completely destroyed, the 
lives of United States “citizens” of Japanese descent.  
The Japanese-Americans reparations  movement gained widespread 
public support during the 1980s, th rough greater awarenes s of what had 
happened and increased rec ognition of Japanese-American soldiers'  
contributions during World War II.121  Public hearings held by the Commission on 
Wartime Reloc ation and Interment of  Civilians, created in 1980, and a 
Smithsonian exhibit in 1987 was particu larly crucial in educating the publi c.122  
                                                                                                                                                 
116 See Id. at 506.  
117 See Id. at 521.  
118 See Eric K. Yamamoto, et al, Race, Rights and Reparations: Law and the 
Japanese American Internment, at 39 (2001). 
119 Id. 
120 The Supr eme Court ruled that the interm ent was in fact constitutional ev en 
though many Japanese interment victims were born in the Unit ed States and 
even served in WWI for the U.S.  See Korematau v. United States,  323 U.S. 214 
(1944). 
121 See Yamamoto, et al, supra note 118, at 403. 
 36
122 See Id.


--- PAGE 332 ---
The Com mission's support of reparat ions was a tremendous help to the 
movement.123   Finally, in September of 1988 the House passed a reparations bill 
and the Senate pas sed its version in April 1988. 124  On August 10, 1988, 
President Ronald Reagan signe d the Civil Liberties Act  of 1988. 125  Within tw o 
years surviving inter nees received $2 0,000 and their descen dants sec ured 
$10,000.126 
Some argue the Japanese-American cl aims succeeded because they fit 
neatly within the individual rights paradigm of the law: 1) the claims were brought 
by people who had been personally and direct ly harmed; 2) the link between the 
harm and the internment was clear; and 3) reparations settled the matter.127   If it 
is true that this line of reasoning promoted the granting of reparations, then there 
is no reason why the living surviv ors of the Greenwood Holo caust should not be 
compensated for their tremendous suffering because: 1) they too were personally 
and directly harmed; 2) t he link between the harm and holocaus t is clear; and 3) 
                                                 
123 Likewise, the Tulsa Race Riot Commissi on’s support for reparations should 
be a tremendous asset to Greenwood reparations advocates 
124 See Yamamoto, et al, supra note 118, at 406  
125 See Id.  
126 See Id.  
 37
127 See Mitchell T. Maki et al., Achieving the Impossible Dream: How Japanese-
Americans Obtained Redress (1999).


--- PAGE 333 ---
adequate and comprehensiv e reparati ons would settle the matter. 128  
 
Hell on Earth...Greenwood burns  
 
VII. Adjudicating Reparations Legal Claims 
A. Can You Get Into Court after 80 years…and Win? 
Framing a winning legal ar gument for a court to favorably  rule for 
Greenwood victims and mandating a repara tions judgment wil l be an extremely  
difficult task. Indeed, to be forced to lit igate the wrongs committed against you in 
the very legal system  controlled the perpetrators is inhe rently flawed.  Moreover, 
it is argued that “…only through the politic al st ruggle to win reparations-
[including] in the cour troom, in the media;  [and] at the grassroots level will the 
                                                 
 38
128  Monetary compens ation for those li ving survivors and their descendents 
would be short-sighted as the entire Greenwood community must be restored to 
make up for all that was lost.


--- PAGE 334 ---
specific ref orms and measures fo r implementation take shape.” 129 To totally 
exhaust every conceivable av enue avail able demands the filing of lawsuits;  
reparation advocates must be prepared to file the laws uits despite tremendous  
obstacles, because the desired outcome must be vehemently pursued with the 
high hope that justice can prevail, despite the passa ge of more than 80 years  
after the commission of the crimes. 130  Reparations advocates must be prepared 
to challenge the courts to do the “right  thing” and grant total and com plete 
redress in order to rectify the heinous acts committed from May 31 to June 1,  
1921, when the city of Tulsa, Tuls a County, and the St ate of Oklahom a 
completely violated the constitution. 
As stated at the outset of  this document, this article will: 1) prove that 
describing the Greenwood incident as a “Race Riot” is erroneous because it was 
                                                 
129 See Manning Marble, In Defense of Reparations, 
http://www.zmag.org/sustainers/content/2002-10/30marable.cfm (last visited Feb. 
15, 2003). 
 39
130 Moreover, it must be noted that su rvivors and v ictims have tried many  
different avenues and theories  that all proved unsuccessful. “Greenwood 
residents and proper ty owners (both blac k and whit e), filed more than one-
hundred s uits agains t their insurance companies, the city of Tulsa, and even 
Sinclair Oil Company, t hat allegedly provided airpl anes that were used in 
attacking Greenwood. Not one of those su its was  successful. One, filed by 
William Re dfearn, a whit e man  who own ed a hotel and a movie theater in 
Greenwood, went to trial and then on appeal to th e Oklahoma Supreme Court. 
Redfearn's insurance company denied liabilit y, citing a riot exclus ion clause. The 
clause exempted the insurance company fr om liability  for loss due to riot. The 
Oklahoma Supreme Court interpreted the damage as due to riot-an 
understandable c onclusion, and thereby i mmunized insurance companies  from 
liability. Following the failure of Mr. Redfearn's suit, no others went to trial. That is 
not surprising. It is difficult to see how anyone could have prev ailed in the wake 
of the Redfearn opinion. They lay fallow f or y ears a nd then were dismis sed in 
1937. See http://www.tulsareparations.org/Culpability.htm Thus, any of the 
preceding theories viewed as the legal impetus for securing reparations will likely 
encounter similar hardships to recover.  Nevertheless , a wide variety of legal 
arguments need to be fully examined, explored, and pr esented for the potent ial


--- PAGE 335 ---
in fact an unprovoked war that led to a holocaust; 2) pres ent a comprehensive 
reparations plan to com pensate for the dest ruction committed against the c ity of 
Greenwood and its Black citizens; and 3) outline what it will take for a reparations 
plan to be adopted.  Thus, the examinati on of legal theories pertinent to the 
adjudication of the Greenwood Holoc aust victims’ claims for reparations will be 
very brief.   
B. International Law 
It is reasonable to assume the U.S.  legal system will serve as  a major  
impediment to an equitable out come fo r the victims and desc endents of the 
Greenwood Holocaust.  Many of the origi nal lawsuits filed in response to the 
holocaust were dismissed for various reas ons.    With this in mind, Greenwood 
reparations advocates must develop strat egies to move the reparations demand 
beyond the confines of local, state and national  laws and into inte rnational law, if 
they are to realize their quest for reparations. 131  A major source of international 
law is Cus tomary International Law. 132  In the case of Cu stomary Internationa l 
Law,  “it is well settled that the law of nations [customary international law] is part 
of Federal Common Law, and many argue that federal common law is superior to 
                                                                                                                                                 
victory in winning not just the legal battle, but also the public battle which as been 
going on for over 80 years.   See also Brophy, supra note 10, at 66.  
131  The great assassinated Blac k Nati onalist Leader Malcolm X repeatedly  
taught that “our claims are bigger than some civil right, our claims are for Human 
Rights and we need to look to the world for help.” See Malcolm X, By Any Means 
Necessary, 55 (1965). 
 40
132 Customary Internati onal Law is formed general and consistent practices of  
states accepted it as law in  the world com munity. It consists of two elements: 1) 
state practice, whic h provides  evidenc e of custom; and 2) the attitudinal  
requirement of opinio juris, which is the general acceptance of a norm as a legal 
obligation by the world communi ty. See J. Patrick Kelly, The Twilight of 
Customary International Law 40 Va. J. Int'l L. 449, 483 (2000).


--- PAGE 336 ---
state law due to the supremacy clause.”133 Assuming that federal common law is  
considered superior to any State law and Customary International Law is  
theoretically, automatically incorporated into the U.S. legal system; we must ask  
what customary international law says about the “redressability” for crimes 
committed by a collec tive group of individuals on behalf of  the city of Tulsa, and 
state of Oklahoma.   
For this analysis, reparations advocat es should seriously cons ider the 
following two important developments in in ternational law: 1)  the 1948 Univ ersal 
Declaration of Human Rights which many agree evolved into customary 
international law134; and 2) the ground-breaking judgments of the Nuremberg and 
Tokyo trials following WWII. 
First, the Universal Decl aration of Human Rights,  adopted in 1948, was  
initially completely non-binding on the states of the wo rld; however, over the past 
50 years some argue the Universal Declar ation of Human Rights  has become 
binding through the theory of c ustomary international law.   Second, during the 
Nuremberg & Tokyo Trials the world defined: 1) crimes against humanity 135, 2) 
                                                 
133 See In Re Estate of Ferdinand E.  Marcos  Human Rights Litigation , 25 F3 d 
1467, 1475 (1994). 
134  See The Honorable Edward D. Re, General Issue: The Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights and Domestic Courts, 14 St. Thomas L. Rev. 665 (2002). 
 41
135  War Crimes are “violations of the laws or customs of war which include, but  
are not limited to, murder, ill- treatment or deportation  to  slave-labor or for any  
other purpose of civilian popu lation of or in occup ied territory, murder or ill-
treatment of prisoners of war, of persons on the seas, killing of hostages, plunder 
of public or private property, wanton destruc tion of cities, towns, or villag es, or 
devastation not justified by military necessity .” See Principles of the Nuremberg 
Tribunal, Report of the International La w Commis sion Covering its Second 
Session, 5 June-29 Duly 1950 , Document A/1316, at 11-14. available at 
http://www.deoxy.org/wc/wc-nurem.htm (last visited Feb. 16th, 2003).


--- PAGE 337 ---
crimes against peace 136; and 3) war crimes 137, and proclaimed those acts are 
redressable even ex post facto .138  Without a doubt, one can demonstrate the 
crimes against the residents of Greenwood meet all thr ee criteria.   Next, the 
tribunals at Nurember g & Tokyo held “that  international law imposes duties and 
liabilities upon individuals as well as States.”139 In the Greenwood Holocaust, the 
individual(s) or “person(s)” liable for the acts were acti ng on behalf of the city  of 
Tulsa.   Accordingly, the Oklahoma stat ute prohibiting state and/or city liability, 
theoretically should not apply because ot her heinous crimes similar to those 
perpetrated against the innocent  citiz ens of Greenwood, have been redressed 
despite the amount of time elapsed, the pl ace, or juri sdiction.   Although this  
argument seems promising we must reme mber that the United St ates’ domestic 
policy and legal system is not  totally  accepting of  international law. 140  A s 
experienced grassroots reparations activi st Wautella G raham writes “Some may 
                                                 
136 Crimes against Humanity are “murder, extermination, enslavement,  
deportation and other inhuman acts done against any civilian population, or  
persecutions on political, racial or relig ious grounds, when such acts are done or  
such persecutions are carried on in execut ion of or in connec tion with any c rime 
against peace or any war crime.” See Id.  
137 Crimes against peace are “planning, preparation, initiation or waging of a war 
of aggression or a war in violation of international treaties, agreements or 
assurances; Participation in a co mmon plan or conspiracy for the 
accomplishment of any of the acts mentioned under.” See Id.  
138 See Id. 
139 See Id.  
 42
140 This is evidenced by the United States current unilateral war against Iraq that 
many argue is “violating the UN charter with their det ermination to invade Iraq…  
the feelings of many at t he UN that past resolutions  on Iraq were specifically  
focused on disarming Iraq, not on removi ng its President, and that the go alposts 
had been moved, by Washingt on in parti cular. Not one of these decis ions 
authorizes the right to use force agains t Iraq outside the UN charter…not one 
authorizes the violent  overth row of the leadership of a sovereign state."  See 
David Us borne, The Iraq Conflict; UN Oppositi on; Warmongers  Must Bear the 
Cost of an Illegal Conflict, Council Member Warn, Thurs., Mar 20, 2003.


--- PAGE 338 ---
think…‘Let’s take our case to the United Nations or the World Court; a third party 
will give us  justice,’ they say.  [H owever] There is no ‘third party,’…what power  
(real power—not paper power) does the United Nations or  the World Court have 
to force the U.S.[Oklahoma] to comply with a favorable ruling in our favor?”141   
B. Moral Legal Claims 
Although a moral claim is not considered sufficient legal justification to recover 
in a court of law, there are pre cedents in  the U. S. legal syst em that allow a 
“wrong” to be “righted” even when no tradi tional legal theory s upports it.  For 
instance, in 1946, following the re commendation of the Merriam Repor t,142 
Congress passed a broad system to resolve ancient Native American grievances 
called the Indian Claims Commission Act (“ICCA”)143 Until 194 6, Native Natio ns 
were prohibited from pursuing c laims agai nst the United States without special 
permission granted by Congress. 144  However, the ICCA granted Native Nations  
access to the Court of Claims, including property claims.145  The Act also created 
a commission to investigate and settle any  and all c laims brought forward by  
tribes, for crimes committed before 1946 “based  upon fair  and honorable 
dealings that are not recognized by any existing rule of law or equity.” 146  
Although many argue that the ICCA has “failed to meet the expectations of nearly 
everyone involved in its creation,” it did create an avenue for “moral wrongs to be 
                                                 
141 See Wautella Graham, Black Reparations: American Slavery & It’s Vestiges A 
Crime Against Humanity at 240 (December 1, 2002) (unpublished manuscript, on 
file with National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America).   
142 See Indian Claims Commission Act of 1946, 25 U.S.C.A. 70k . The Court of 
Claims is now the Court of  Federal Claims, and it continues to hold this  
jurisdiction. 28 U.S.C.A. 1505 (West 1996). 
143 See Id.  
144 See Id.  
 43
145 See Id.


--- PAGE 339 ---
heard” regardless of whether  some underly ing legal prin ciple does or do es not 
exist or has been estopped for a variety of reasons.147  
In fact, duri ng the pas sage of the ac t, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
argued that the claims court was needed because “a consider able number of  
claims and grievances do not grow out of legal facts but essentially out of moral 
parts of the record.  [Without a doubt] ther e are a great many valid claims, valid 
humanely and morally, but suc h as have no basis  in law.” 148  Certainly  the 
Greenwood Holocaust created “a co nsiderable number of claims and 
grievances”, and if they have no such basis in law, the governments of Tulsa and 
the State of Oklahoma shoul d follow the lead of the U. S. government, and allo w 
the claims to proceed, thus paving the way for finality and justice to prevail.  
C.  51 O.S. 155 Governmental Torts Claims Act 
Oklahoma could easily submit to t he claims of the Greenwood Holocaust 
victims by invoking 51 O.S. 155, and following the lead  of another state 
responsible for a hol ocaust against a Bla ck community.  As noted earlier, in 
1923, (under strikingly similar circumstances to the 1921 Greenwood Ho locaust), 
the all-Black and highly successful town of Rosewood, Florida, was completely 
burnt to the ground by an unruly mob of whites. 149  As i n Greenwood, the tota l 
destruction of Rosewood was s upposedly in defense of a white woman, and 
governmental officials participated in the m elee.150  Als o, like the Greenwood 
                                                                                                                                                 
146 See Id.  
147 See Nell Jessup Ne wton, Compensation, Reparations, & Restitution: Indian 
Property Claims in the United States, Ga. L. Rev. 453, 469 (1994).  
148 See Otoe and Miss oura Tribes of  Indians v. United States , 131 Ct. Cl. 593, 
612 (1955). 
149 See Bassett, supra note, 115 at 505. 
 44
150 See Id. at 506.


--- PAGE 340 ---
Holocaust, the entire incident was effect ively erased from history, due to a 
massive cover-up orchestrated by the guilty parties. 151   In 1994, the Florida 
Legislature under the authority of Fla. Stat. sec. 768.28  passed House Bill 591,  
which sought to compensat e the families of Rosewood,  Florida for property and 
other damages.152  F lorida allowed the sev enty year-old claim to  overcome the 
challenges that have hindered the clai ms for the Greenwood Holoc aust and 
enable compensation of the victims and their descendants.153    
So, the Rosewood Holocaust and the Greenwood Holocaust parallel each 
other in terms of the underlying c auses, scope of destruction, subsequent co ver-
up, and the undue lapse of time before the tragedy was redressed.  The 
Oklahoma Legislature, acting under the state of Oklahoma’s version of claims bill 
51 O. S. sec. 155 154 should, therefore, mirror its Florida counter-part and 
introduce a claims bill that would al low for an equitable remedy for the 
Greenwood Holocaust victims.    
                                                 
151 See Id.  
152 See Id. at 511. 
153 See Id. at 412. 
 45
154 See 51 O. S. sec. 155.


--- PAGE 341 ---
Ruins of a Rosewood house shortly after the Rosewood Massacre 
 
 
Ruins of a Greenwood neighborhood shortly after the Greenwood Holocaust 
 
VIII. Others Theories Under Which to Recover 
B.  Tulsa’s Promise to Pay for the Destruction 
 46
Oklahoma should definitely allow moral claims since many wh ite citizens 
of Tulsa, shortly after the Greenwood Ho locaust, believed morality required them


--- PAGE 342 ---
“to formulate a plan of r eparations in order to r ebuild homes and rehabilitate 
families.”155  Without a doubt that sentim ent also existed among many  
contemporary Blacks who felt:  
The white citizens of Tulsa are in debt to the Negroes [Afrikan-Americans] whose 
property they burned and the lives th ey wantonly destroyed, and we believe that 
there are those who will make some effort  to repair the losses that they have 
caused.  They cannot forget it, they admit that it was wrong and feel deep down in 
their hearts that they should repay. It will always be a debt until paid156  
 
Hopefully the current leadership of Oklahoma believes “great Nations, like 
great men ought to keep their word” 157 and keep the promise made by Tuls a 
citizens to the victims of Greenwood. 
C. Spiritual Claims 
Irrespective of the Establishment Clause of the United States Constitution, the 
United States of America has always  been clos ely aligned to Judeo-Christian 
traditions and values. 158  The laws of this nation cl osely parallel the laws of the  
King James Version of the Bible. 159  Accordingly, devout churchgoers should 
easily understand the justice in com pensating Greenwood Holoc aust victims for 
the harm c ommitted because the “sins of t he father will be revisited upon the 
                                                 
155 See John Sibley Butler, Entrepreneurship and Se lf-Help Among Blac k 
Americans— A Reconsideration of Race and Economics, 217 (1995).  
156 See The Black Dispatch, Mar. 15, 1923. 
157 See FPC v. Tuscarora Indian Nation, 362 U.S. 99, 142 (1960). The often cited 
words of Justice Black as he consistently tried to convince the Supreme Court to 
mandate that the United Stat es adhere to its treaties with Native Americans.  
Unfortunately oftentimes Justice Black’s efforts went UN-rewarded, as one after 
another treaties with Native Americ an wer e abrogated at will. See also United 
States v. Kagama, 118 U.S. 375 (1886).  
 47
158 “Although it is  no longer uncommon to hear lawyers cite the Bible as  legal 
authority in court, except perhaps when playing to the jury, the influ ence of 
biblical law continues in American jurisp rudence well into the tw entieth century.”  
See John W. Welch, Biblical Law in America.”   See John W. Welch, Biblical Law 
in America: Historical Perspective and Potentials for Reform , B.Y.U.L. Rev. 611, 
635 (2002).


--- PAGE 343 ---
son.”160 Furthermore, regardless of one’s reli gious affiliations, many religion s 
include the concept of atonement, which us ually involves trying to right a wrong 
committed by making a genuine effort to do so.  
                                                                                                                                                 
159 See Id.   
 48
160 See Exodus 51:15.


--- PAGE 344 ---
IX. Detailing Greenwoods’ Comprehensive Reparations Plan 
A.  Answering the Call for Reparations 
After four years of official, meticulous, and painstaking research, the Tulsa 
Race Riot Commission recommended “that restitution to the historic Greenwood 
Community, in real and tangible f orm, would be good public policy  and do m uch 
to repair the emotional and physical sc ars of this most terrible incident in our  
shared past.”161  To heal the substantial and festering wounds the Commission 
recommended: 
1) Direct payment of reparations to survivors of the Tulsa Race Riot. 
2) Direct payment of reparations to descendants of the survivors of the Tulsa Race Riot. 
3) A scholarship fund available to students affected by the Tulsa Race Riot. 
4) Establishment of an e conomic development enterprise zone in the historic area of the 
Greenwood District.  
5) A memo rial for the reb urial of any h uman remains found in th e search for unmarked 
graves of riot victims. 
  The reparations struggle to compensat e for the disastrous events of June 
1, 1921 has been an eighty-year-old fi ght. Unquestionably the struggle was  
immensely aided by  the strong endorse ment by the st ate sponsored Riot 
Commission.162 Howev er, many commentators of the growin g reparations  
movement, such as USA Today’s columnist DeWay ne Wickham, contend that 
reparations activists refuse to address the "Achilles' heel" of the movement, “how 
                                                 
161 See Global, supra note, 91. 
162 As Frederick Douglass said “power concedes nothing without  a demand, it 
never did and it never will,” and although the Riot Commission’s recommendation 
can not be termed a demand, the recommendation should greatly aid the fight for 
redress much like the boost given to the Japanese-American struggle by the 
commission to study the internment. See Frederick Do uglass, Speech Before the 
West Indian Emancipation Society (Aug. 4, 1857),  The Life and Writings of 
Frederick Douglass (Philip S. Foner ed., 1950)  437. 
 49


--- PAGE 345 ---
the payout should be paid.” 163  In many respects, just raising the question is  a 
tremendous victory for the reparations move ment, considering the fact that many 
do not even wonder about “how the payout  should be made”, because they do 
not plan to pay any thing!  Yet, obser vations like Wickham’s  must be taken 
seriously and convincingly addressed.  Therefore, any reparations advocate must 
be prepared to articulate exactly what they want and how it  will adequately and 
effectively fulfill all the cited goals of reparations.164   
B. What should Reparations Accomplish for Greenwood? 
Reparations must be provided to  compensate the victims and the 
descendants for the destruction of Greenw ood.  The remedy must successfully  
eradicate the negative impact of racism, which prompted the deadly holocaust in 
the first place. Otherwise, the reparations  plan will be an em pty victory, because 
a one-time payment without t he elimination of the fa r-reaching effects of the 
Greenwood Holocaust will not materially er adicate the current grave standa rd of 
living for today’s north Tulsa/Greenwood community.  Furthe rmore, it must be 
clearly understood that the racism t hat fueled the Greenw ood Holocaust and 
continues to keep Blacks oppressed, in Tulsa,  is “structural in character, an d is 
largely grounded in instituti onal processes rather than by indiv iduals' behavior. 
Racial prejudice [in T ulsa] is reproduc ed by institutions-economic, educational, 
social, and political-of our societ y.”165  Thus, many reparations adv ocates argue 
                                                 
163 See Dewayne Wickham, Reparations Pay ment Under mines Support, 
http://www.usatoday.com/news/opinion/columnist/wickham/2002-08-19-
opcom_x.htm. 
164 See Shelton & Ingadottir, supra note 104. 
 50
165 See Manning, supra note 129.


--- PAGE 346 ---
that “any kind of financial reparations  has to go to some public ly cha rtered 
institution that set up to eradicat e the two most persistent problems black folks 
face: education and economic development." 166  Howev er, an essential element  
of the Greenwood reparations  plan must also be money for the survivors and 
their descendants in order to ease the excruciating pain of losing their sacred 
family heirlooms, fami ly pictures, personal  and real property, security of family 
and friends, aspirations, and inheritances.167   
B. The Marshall Plan 
Any reparations plan f or the Greenwood Holocaust must include: 1) cash 
payments to survivors; 2) land that the community could control to spur economic 
development; 3) monies for capital improv ement and infrastructure repair; and 4)  
educational programs to heal the psyc hological damage done, much like the 
Marshall Plan. Instituted in 1948, the Mars hall Plan’s primary focus was the total 
revival of war torn Europe, which had been depleted of almost everything 
including it s most prec ious resource—people. 168  The Marshall Plan eventually  
spent over  $13 billion dolla rs ( $88 billion dollars in present d ay dollars) and 
                                                 
166 See Wickham, supra note 163. 
167 This pain has been greatly exacerbated because survivors mostly have had to 
suffer in silence even with the knowledge of  the “person” responsible—the cit y of 
Tulsa 
 51
168 There were many pr actical reasons why the United States interest to re-build 
Europe converged with the interests of  Europeans desire  to be r ebuilt, 
specifically the fact t hat the U.S. and capitalis m were already in sharp 
competition with the U.S. S.R. and communism, and “the U.S. economy als o 
benefited from the Marshall Pl an as the U.S.  preserved and improved its trading 
relationship with Europe. By sti mulating European productivity and accepting a 
greater volume of imports, the U.S. saw its own exports increas e several-fold in 
the decades that followed.”  See, Fact Sheet Prepared by the Office of Policy and


--- PAGE 347 ---
effectively funded capital impr ovement projects for infras tructure repairs such as 
burnt-out buildings, roads, bridges, hos pitals, and communication facilities.169  In 
addition, t he Marshall Plan p rovided fo od subsidies, military training  and 
protection, educational programs, and a host of other much needed programs. 170  
Moreover, using the Marshall Plan as  t he guide for future comprehensive 
rebuilding schemes is not ju st my idea, it is also an approach the U.S. State 
Department strongly endorses because:  
The M arshall Plan has m ore than  sy mbolic valu e. It also offers some p ractical 
guides to th e current and future generations; after al l, much of what the M arshall 
Plan a ccomplished came at little co st to  the Ame rican t axpayer. The techni cal 
assistance program, which absorbed only a fraction of American aid, nonetheless 
put America n techni cal, engin eering, manufacturing, and marketing kn ow-how 
behind the revitalization of the European economies. Similar programs could bring 
comparable benefits to the developing world today, and their prospects for success 
would only increase if they embodied the same spirit of cooperation that infused so 
much of th e Marshall Plan. Virtually e very part of t he Marshall Plan stressed the 
principle of European self-help and involved Europeans and Americans as partners 
in the jo b of reconstruction. No r was coope ration li mited to p olitical l eaders and 
government officials. It was part of the genius of the Marshall Plan that cooperation 
at the government level went h and-in-hand with a private, tran s-European an d 
transatlantic pattern of co llaboration th at involved leade rs from business, lab or, 
agriculture, a nd the a cademy. This kin d of coo peration not only  unde rgirded the  
recovery program in Eu rope, b ut al so a ccounted for its success in  the United 
States, whe re the same combination of  private group s help ed to educate the 
American people to th e n eed fo r Euro pean stabilization an d won su pport for the 
Marshall Plan on Capitol Hill.171  
Likewise, a reparations plan for the Greenwood Holoc aust must honestly  
seek to provide all the necessary tools and support needed for Greenwood/North 
Tulsa to r ecover and once again bec ome self-determining. Accordingly,  the 
Greenwood Plan must be comprehensive a nd far-reaching like the Marshall Plan 
                                                                                                                                                 
Public Affairs, Bureau for European and Canadia n Affairs, May 12, 1997  
http://www.state.gov/www/regions/eur/marshall.html (last visited Feb. 16, 2003). 
169 See Id.  
170 See Id.  
 52
171 See Michael J. Hogan, Blue Print for Recovery, 
http://www.usembassy.de/usa/etexts/marshall/pam-blu.htm (last visited Feb 16, 
2003).


--- PAGE 348 ---
if it is to emulate the tremendous success of the Marshall Plan with respect to the 
rebuilding of Europe.  
X. The Greenwood Plan 
A.  Payment of Cash amount to Survivors & their Descendants 
In 1990, the U.S. government alloca ted $1.25 Billion dollar s to pay 
Japanese-Americans unjustly detained in concentration camps during WWII. 172 
Therefore, a cash paym ent to the survivors mu st be an uncompromising 
component of the entire Greenwood Plan.   For, just as innocent Japanese 
Americans suffered because of  their ethnicity, the same holds true for the 
survivors of the Greenwood Holocaust.173  The U.S. government, very quickly  
provided monetary relief for those vict ims and families affected by the tragic  
terrorist actions of September 11, 2001. 174  Yet, the Black citizens of Greenwood 
have never received any monetary compens ation or relief for their tremendous  
                                                 
172 See Civil Liberties Act of 1988 Aleutian a nd Pribilof Islands Restitution Ac t, 
http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery (last visited Feb. 16th, 2003). 
173 At the tim e the gov ernment provided ma ny rationales for the unconstitutional 
detainment of U.S. citizens, however the Japanese-Americans were put in camps 
because “real” U.S. citizens could not or did not trust their loyalty.   
174 Shortly after the Septem ber 11, 2001 terrorist attacks,  President George W. 
Bush signed the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund of 2001 into law as  
Title IV of Public Law 107-42 ("Air Transportation Safety and System Stabilization 
Act"), the Act authorizes compensation to any indi vidual (or the personal 
representative of a deceased in dividual) that was physically injured or killed as a 
result of the terrorist-related ai rcraft crashes on that day. See September 11th 
Victim Compensat ion Fund of 2001  http://www.usdoj.gov/victimcompensation/ 
(last visited February 16 th, 2003).  In addition, legis lation has been introduced  to 
compensate the victims of the terrible Oklahoma City bombing that took the lives  
of 163 innocent vic tims based on the same reasoning used to su pport 
compensation to victims of the terrorist-related aircraft crashes on September 11, 
2001.  See Oklahoma Cit y Victim s Co mpensation Ac t H. R. 363 3 
http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery (last visited Feb. 16th, 2003). 
 53


--- PAGE 349 ---
losses. There is a tremendous disparity between this society’s ability to 
acknowledge and address the problems of other peoples compared to its historic 
treatment of Black Americans.    Are the c auses for this disparit y blatant racism 
and disrespect for Black life and property?  
Any survivor or descendant of the hol ocaust, who can prove that they or 
their ances tors suffered at the hands of un ruly mobs employed by the city of 
Tulsa, should receive cash payments. 175  Once the eligible recipients ar e 
identified, the next concern should be t he method for calculating the payments?  
The Greenwood Plan should follow the s ame or a similar formula used in 
calculating the monies paid to the victims of the S eptember 11 tragedies. 176  
Each living survivor or his/her descendant  should be exempt from state inc ome 
taxes for t he next 25 years. T his ma y s eem lik e a long-ti me to a llow the 
abatement of taxes; however, in light of the amount of time that has elapsed 
while the victims and t heir descendants await justice, this abatement from taxes  
is clearly c onstitutional, as § 5 of Arti cle 10 of the Oklahoma State Constitution 
allows the state legislature to pass laws permitting abatement of taxes if:    
1. Collection of the tax with intere st and penalties would cause the taxpayer t o 
declare bankruptcy; 2. The tax is not col lectible because, for reasons beyond his 
control, the taxpayer i s insolvent; 3. Ot her similar factors beyond the taxpayer’s 
control caused the tax not to be collectible; 4. The ta x resulted from actions of a 
person other than the taxpayer.  Moreo ver, it must be unfair to ho ld the taxpayer 
responsible; or 5. The tax is a trust fund tax that the taxpayer did not collect from 
                                                 
175 This should not be to diffi cult to prove.  The ances tor or the descendant must 
prove 1) that they once lived in Tulsa, ow ned property in Tulsa, or were in Tulsa 
on May 31/June 1 st, 1921; and)  2) that the person or  persons were Black .  If 
these criteria are met we kn ow that the person is elig ible because every Black in 
Tulsa was under attack during the Greenwood Holocaust.   
 54
176 See September 11th Victim Compensation Fund of 2001, supra note 174.


--- PAGE 350 ---
this customer.  Additionally, the taxpayer must have believed in good faith that he 
did not have to collect the tax.177  
Clearly, the Greenwood Holocaust and af termath were “factors beyond the 
taxpayer’s [Greenwood victims] control.” Therefore, it is appropriate to suspend 
the payment of taxes  for the Greenwood victims.  Why shoul d the victims be 
obligated to pay taxes to t he same entity that viciousl y and unremorsefully burnt 
everything they owned to the ground, and killed and terrorized their friends and 
family should have been suspended.  Mor eover, if U.S. le gislation ca n be 
enacted for the victim s and/or the descendants of the Jewish ho locaust, which 
did not even take plac e on thes e shores, then surely  the same c an be done for 
actual citiz ens of this country. 178   “Not exempting this income fr om taxation is 
tantamount to the Federal government ‘profiting’ fr om restitution payments 
intended to compensate Holocaust surviv ors and their families for their pain and 
suffering.”179  In addition, the victims of September 11, 2001 and the Oklahoma 
City bombing receiv ed protected favor from the federal government when 
“President Bush signed the Victims of Terrorism Tax Relief  Act —bipartisan 
legislation that provides significant income and estate tax re lief to the familie s of 
victims of terrorism. T his legislation wil l help the victims of  September 11, the 
Oklahoma City bombing, and the recent anthrax attacks.” 180 
 
                                                 
177 See Okla. Const. Art. X, § 5  Oklahoma Constitution. 
178 See Hayworth Wants Permanent Adoption Tax Credit, No Income Tax on 
Holocaust Victims’ Restitution, http://www.gop.gov/item-
news.asp?N=20020606111017 (last visited Feb. 16, 2003). 
179 See Id.  
 55
180 See Fact Sheet: Victims of Terrorism Tax Relief Act, 
http://usinfo.state.gov/topical/pol/terror/02012310.htm (Last visited Feb. 16th, 
2003).


--- PAGE 351 ---
A. De-Annexation of the North side of Tulsa and naming it Greenwood 
 
While no one can say with certainty what “Black Wallstreet” would look like 
today, it is  reasonable to assume the to wn would have continued to pr osper in 
light of the wealth that had been amassed prior to June 1, 1921.  We do know for  
sure that Tulsa, Oklahoma is almost as segregated t oday as it was 82 years 
ago.181  The only difference today is that the Black population of the north side of 
Tulsa (Greenwood) now relies exclusively on the mostly white businesses on the 
south side of Tuls a.182  Black  Tulsans obtain the vast  majority of their goods,  
services, and even their most basic needs fr om White businesses, as the former 
Greenwood community is now void of v ibrant bus inesses, riddled with old 
abandoned buildings, hampered  by under funded schools, overflowing with 
drugs, and grossly neglected by the city and county government of Tulsa in every 
way.183  
  Therefore, the north side of Tu lsa should be allowed  to de-annex.  The 
“de-annexed” section of Tulsa should be renamed Greenwood, and declared a 
historical s ite. At first glance, allo wing such a depres sed and deprived ar ea as 
north Tulsa to become its own m unicipality hardly seems prudent. Howev er, de-
annexing from Tulsa would allow Greenw ood to accomplish the following: 1)  
                                                 
181 The Afrikan-American population of Tulsa composes only about 14.1 percent 
of the city’s population. Yet, about 58 percent of all Afrikan-Americans live in 
North Tulsa/Greenwood.  See Hammer, Siler, George Associates, North Tulsa 
Urban Economic Development Plan, at 18 (Jan. 15, 1998) (unpublished 
manuscript, on file with the Tulsa Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce). 
182 “North Tulsa is experiencing a f orm of suppressed demand, a demand wh ich 
goes unmet because of the disappearance of ‘supply’ within the neighborhood. A 
market for higher quality goods  and servic es remains, but local resident s is  
forced to go south Tulsa in order to obtain quality goods and services.” See Id. 
 56
183 See Id.


--- PAGE 352 ---
provide the community’s citizens with a land base to control and call their own, 
which is extremely important, not just  because the land was lost during the 
Greenwood Holocaust, but because control of land is a basic ingredient for social 
and economic development;184 2) pave the way for substantial renovation and re-
creation of a portion of the famous areas of the old Greenwood Business District.  
This initiative could c reate a very viable tourist attraction.  This re-creation of  
“Black Wallstreet” will bring much nee ded revenue and jobs  to the new 
community;185 3) create a central governing c ommittee to oversee 
implementation of the Greenwood Plan .  This central committee would be the 
                                                 
184 Native Americans are an excellenc e example of how contro l of a land base 
allows a depressed area and people to pull thems elves out of the doldrums.  
Native American nations hav e made their  most signific ant economic adva nces 
over the past half-century because of a land base t hat enjoys  “certain unique 
advantages…for example, they are not entities subject to  federal income taxes.” 
Moreover, unlik e the numerous “signific ant barriers confronting Indian county 
development which include: rem oteness of many reservations from major urban 
and regional market center s and transportation networks;  a lack of public and 
private infrastructure and capital investment; and an oftentimes under trained and 
underutilized work force.” See Robert J. Miller, Economic Development in Indian 
Country: Will Capita lism or Socia lism Succeed? 80 Or. L. Rev. 757,757-760.  If 
implemented correctly, the Greenwood Plan would overcome those obstacles 
because: 1) Greenwood is not in a remote location, but in the heart of Tulsa. The 
citizens of Greenwood would have easy access to an airport, highways,  and 
waterways; 2) money for capital investm ent and infrastructure would be prov ided 
by the culpable governments, cor porations moving into the economic  
empowerment zone, and other citizens moving back into  the community; 3) the 
scholarship and leadership program would produce a hi ghly skilled workforce, 
and the businesses t aking advantage of the tax credits would also help train a 
skillful workforce.  As a result, if the city of Greenwood were allowed to de-annex 
and receive similar tax treatm ent that Native American counties receive from the 
federal and state govern ment, Greenwood would once  again become home to 
healthy, prosperous, and productive African-American citizens. 
 57
185 This means a portion of the new munici pality would be completely refurbished 
into its original condition much like the tourist  towns in the Northeastern Unite d 
States set-up in colonial style for t he preservations and commemoration of the 
early history of the U nited States. See http://www.history.org/noflash.cfm (l ast 
visited Apr. 25, 2003).


--- PAGE 353 ---
municipality of Greenwood its elf; 4) allow the c ommunity through its own 
governing body to cr eate and attract business to an economic  empower ment 
zone for the benefit of the community.  Greenwood would be  free to decide 
where, when and how different  businesses would be allowed to come into the 
community, thus providing an opportunity fo r its citizens to play a major role in 
the revitalization effort; and 5) allow the co mmunity to reach the ultimate goal of  
the Greenwood Plan, which is to become a self-sufficient, thriving community. 
 
B. Education Program  
For many years, the Afrikan-American mantra has been “education is the key 
to advancement and success”. 186  Without a doubt, this is true, providing the 
educational model is  geared toward im provement of the community. The 
educational component of t he Greenwood Plan is  practi cal, simple and is  
designed solely for the ben efit and improvement of  the Greenwood community,  
and not just the individual in the plan. 
1. Scholarship Program  
Any surviv or or descendant of a su rvivor of the Greenwood Holocaust 
should be able to go to any one of Ok lahoma’s publicly supported universities 
free of charge.187 For the next 20 years any student  from north Tulsa/Greenwood 
should als o be eligible for a full tuition scholarship at  state supported schools. 
                                                 
186 The curric ulum must be designed to trul y enlighten and inspire the recipient s 
receiving it to work to create and implem ent solutions in the Black community.   
See Dr. Carter G. Woodson, Mis-Education of the Negro, (1933). 
 58
187 The scholarship program could be funded by a comb ination of the Oklahom a 
state lottery funds, private business grants, and institutional scholarships.


--- PAGE 354 ---
The scholarship would be renewed annually for as long as the student remains in 
good standing at the universit y.  The scholarship woul d pay tuition all the way  
through graduate, law, or m edical school.  In addition , the program would have 
an extensive internship program, wher e young adult s tudents would be required 
to return to Greenwood each  summer to work in t heir field with a n existing 
community organization, business, or governmental entity.  During these summer 
months, students would receive additional leader ship training. 188  These 
provisions guarantee that each year, students with fres h ideas would ener gize 
Greenwood’s businesses, organizati ons, and governmental agenc ies. 
Greenwood would be kept abreast of the latest ideas, technology, and other 
innovations, thereby increasing Greenwoo d’s productivity and enhanc ing the 
quality of the lives of its citizens.  On ce a student finishes the program, he/she 
should be automatically  eligible for low-interest loans and/or business grants to 
be used as  seed money to establish bus inesses in the economic  empowerment 
zone of Greenwood.189  Lastly, because this scholarship is to compensate for the 
terrorist acts committed agai nst Greenwood and to help in  the r e-building of the 
community, a safeguard must be inserted to insure that matriculating indiv iduals 
benefiting from these scholarships must co mmit to remaining in Greenwood for a 
minimum of three years afte r receiving their degree(s). 190 This program will 
produce tremendous  tangible benef its within five years, as an army of young , 
                                                 
188 See part two of Greenwood Education Program  
189 The businesses of survivors and descendents will also be totally exempt from  
state and county taxes. 
 59
190 This is v ery similar  to a highly in debted law student taking a job at a 
governmental entity for X am ount of years in exchange of hav ing governmental 
loans forgiven. In addition, if a student does  not want to complete their obligation


--- PAGE 355 ---
skilled, and educated individuals would be leading Greenwood bac k to 
prosperity. This aspect of the Gr eenwood Plan has to be implemented with 
precision to maximize the benefits to students and the community.   
2. Leadership Program  
Each summer, scholarship partici pants should go through additiona l 
leadership training at a newly-created inst itute of leadership that I suggest be 
called the J.B. Stradford Institute of Afrikan-American Lead ership191. The 
leadership program should be  housed at Langston Univ ersity’s Tulsa branch.192 
The goals of J.B. Stradford Institute of African-American Leadership would be:  
1) To create, th rough interactive teaching,  activities, and readings, a pool of skille d young 
Afrikan-American me n a nd wome n capable of a ssuming lead ership roles within thei r 
families, the Greenwood community, the State of Oklahoma, the nation, and the world.  
2) To create young people who are Afrikan centered and well grounded in a worldview that 
embraces Afrikan culture as a way-of-life. 
3) To create young pe ople who are d edicated to achi eving the total political, so cial, 
economic, and spiritual empowerment of Greenwood and its residents. 
4) To create yo ung people who are sensitive to the complexities of Black culture, racism, 
oppression, and po ssess the skills to identify and implem ent creative solutions to th e 
myriad of problems ravaging Black communities the world-over. 
 
The leadership program, in session duri ng the summer months of  June and 
July, would inc lude a he avy reading requirement, 193 supplemented with 
                                                                                                                                                 
to the community, the student can opt out  at anytime, if he/she pays all the 
money back, including the tuition for the college and the leadership program.  
191 Stradford, the son of freed Kentucky slaves, came to  Greenwood to make a 
better life. The World War I veteran di d achieve his  goal by becoming one of 
Greenwood’s most successful businessm an and advocates of racial pride and 
equal justice.  Truly it was men like St radford that spurred Greenwood to achieve 
a level never duplicated en mass by Afrikans in America.  
192 Langston University is the only all-Black University in the state of Oklahoma,  
and this branch sits at 700 North Greenwoo d Tulsa, Ok, 74106, which is right in 
the heart of old Greenwood. Thus, it is only fi tting that it plays an integral rule in 
the revitalization of  new Greenwood. See Langston University,  
http://www.lunet.edu/ (last visited Feb. 16th, 2003). 
 60
193  The reading list would inc lude but not be limited to these works of the 
following in their entirety or parts: Dr. Ca rter G. Woodson-Mis-Education of the


--- PAGE 356 ---
workshops to address crucial lif e skills ne eded to be become a well-roun ded 
leader.  Topics addressed in the leadersh ip program would include but not be 
limited to: Parental Skills; Marriage Skills; Self Knowledge (African History, Black 
History), Entrepreneur Skills; Sexual Responsibility and protection; Standard First 
Aid; Financial Planning & Investment ; Personal/Family Health; Politics; and How 
to discern and overcome Racism/Sexism .  Professionals from the various  
disciplines should teach the workshops.194  Lastly, the leadership program should 
include a travel component that encourag es the future leaders to obser ve 
different state, national, and international cultures and systems, and nurture well-
rounded and experienced young people c apable of c ompleting the huge task of 
rebuilding Greenwood. 
C. Economic Empowerment 
The cornerstone of pre-holoc aust Greenwood was its outstanding 
economy. Thus, if Greenwood and its re sidents are to grow, develop, and 
                                                                                                                                                 
 61
Negro; Dr. W.E.B. Dubois- Souls of Black Folk ; Dr. Molief Asante-Afrocentricty; 
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr, Malcol m X-The Autobiography of Malcolm X; Dr . 
Chancellor Williams Destruction of Black Civilization;  Dr. Claud Anderson- Black 
Labor, White Wealth;  Dr. H aki Madhubuti-Black Men Single, Obsolete,  
Dangerous? The Afrikan-American Family in Transition; Dr. Na’im Akbar-Visions 
for Black Men and Chains and Im ages of Psychological Slav ery; Dr. Derek  
Hopson & Dr. Darlene Hopson- Friends, Lovers, & Soul Mates ; Dr. James Reed,  
Dr. Niel Shuluman, & Char les Shucker-The Black Man’s Guide to Good Health ; 
Kevin Boston- Smart Money Moves for African American ; Dr. Oba T’ Shakes- 
Return to the African Mother Prin ciple of Male & Female Equality , The Art of 
Leadership 1&2 ; Dr. George G.M. James-Stolen Legacy; Dr. Jawanzaa 
Kunjufufu- Black College Student Surviv al Guide ; Dr. Booby  E. Wright-The 
Psychopathic Racial Personality and Other Essay s; Dr. Maluna Karenga- 
Selection From the Husia: Sacred Wisdom of Ancient Egypt; Rev. Albert Cleage-
Black Christian Nationalism; Rev. James Cone-Black Theology and Black Power; 
Dr. ben-Jochannan Yosef A.A.- African, Mother of West ern Civilization ; Walter 
Rodney-How Europe Undeveloped Africa; Elijah Muhammad-How to Eat to Live


--- PAGE 357 ---
prosper in the future, the community mu st have a strong economic base. This  
can be accomplished through the following:  
1) Business Grants 
Drawing heavily from the program s employed in the wa ke of the 
September 11 attacks, citizens of Greenwood who desire to own a business  
should be eligible for business grants or low interest loans. 195 Truly the words  
and reasoning of Mas sachusetts Senator J ohn Kerry on why  the senate passed 
the American Small Business Emergency Relief and Recovery Act  following the 
September 11 terrorist attacks should provi de the impetus for si milar legislation 
for Greenwood to be passed:  
We are o ne step  cl oser to delive ring real economic reli ef to bu sinesses 
devastated b y the econo mic fall-o ut of t he September 1 1th terrori st attacks. 
Small businesses are starving for the loans and credit to keep them on their feet 
during these tough times, and we ne ed to deliver for them so the  engine of the 
American economy does not become the latest collateral damage of the attacks 
on our nation196 
 
Money should be available to al l survivors and their descendants  under  
the following conditions: 1) they must be or be willing to bec ome a citiz en o f 
                                                                                                                                                 
194 This would greatly r einforce the le ssons taught in the readings  because the 
young people would have the opportunity to  see exactly how the information 
relates and applies to real world situations. 
195 The purpose of this A ct is to stre ngthen the loan and invest ment programs of 
the Small Business Administration, to a llow loan rec ipients: 1) to meet their  
existing obligations, 2) finance their businesses, and 3) maintain and create jobs, 
and thereby provide stability to the National economy. Without a doubt, bec ause 
of the Greenwood Holocaust and subs equent denial of help the prosperous 
businesses on Black Wallstreet were not able to accomplish a ny of the four 
enumerated goals of the H.R.  3073.  As a result, the Greenwood economy is  
next to non-existent a nd definitely unstable. See H.R. 3073 The American Small 
Business Em ergency Relief and Recovery Act , available at  
http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery (last visited Feb. 16th, 2003). 
 62
196 See, Kerry Emergency Relief for Small Businesses Passes Senate; Victory for 
Small Businesses Devastated by Sept. 11 Attacks, Recession


--- PAGE 358 ---
Greenwood; and 2) they must be a participant in the schol arship program; or 3) 
they must complete a business/entr epreneurial program s pecially created and 
tailored to those who meet the other criteria for eligibility.197  In addition, the Black 
business owner should be eligible for the property tax exemption and state 
income tax credit. This will h elp businesses get off the ground, while eve ntually 
increasing the amount of revenue to the state once the exemption period is up.  
2) Economic Empowerment Zone(s) 
 
New York burning after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks 
Policy and lawmakers wanting to re-v italize the area destroyed in the 
September, 11, 2001 attacks cl early underst ood that special pr ovisions would 
have to be put in place to again attrac t businesses to that  once bustling area. 
Therefore, congress passed The Job Creation and W orker Assistance Act of 
2002.198 “The act contains various tax inc entives designed to stimulate the 
economy and aid rec overy from the impac t of the September 11, 2001 terrorist 
                                                                                                                                                 
http://www.usnewswire.com/topnews/first/0322-124.html (last visited Feb. 16th, 
2003).  
197 This ensures that thos e assuming the r isks of business have as much 
knowledge and experience needed to open, foster, and grow a viable business.  
 63
198 See HR 3090 available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/legislative/sap/107-
1/HR3090-h.html (last visited Feb. 20 2003).


--- PAGE 359 ---
attacks, including these provisions for the area of lower Manhattan designated as 
the New York Liberty Zone.” The New York Liberty Tax Zone incentives include:  
1) Expansion of the Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC) 
A new targeted group has been added to the original eight targeted groups eligible for the WOTC. 
This new targeted group includes individuals who perform substantially all th eir services in the 
New York Liberty Zone (NYLZ), as well as individuals who perform substantially all their services 
in New York City for a business that relocated from the NYLZ to elsewhere within New York City 
due to the physical destruction or damage of their workplaces within the NYLZ by the September 
11, 2001, terrorist attack. Unlike other targeted categories, members of the NYLZ group do not 
need to b e certified. Smal l businesses may claim this credit fo r wages paid or incurred for both 
new hires and existing  e mployees for wo rk performed afte r Decem ber 31,  2001, and before 
January 1, 2004. 
2) Special Depreciation Allowance for Certain Property 
The law allows an additional first-year depreciation deduction equal to 30 percent of the adjusted  
basis of q ualified NYLZ  property. Thi s additional de duction is allowed for both re gular tax and  
alternative minimum tax purposes. In general, this provision applies to real property not eligible 
for additional first-year depreciation under the "general" additional first year depreciation rules. 
3) Increase in Expensing Treatment for Business Property Used in the NYLZ 
The law increased the amount a taxp ayer may d educt under Section 179 (Election to Ex pense 
Certain Depreciable Bu siness A ssets) for qualifying p roperty u sed in t he NYLZ. Qualifying 
property in the NYLZ is property that is used to  conduct a trade or business, and its o riginal use 
began after September 1 1, 200 1. The  maximum dollar amount that may b e de ducted under 
Section 179 is increased by the lesser of (1) $35,000 or (2) the cost of qualifying property placed 
in service after September 10, 2001, and before January 1, 2007. 
4) Treatment of Qualified Leasehold Improvement Property 
For pu rposes of the depreciatio n rule s under Se ction 168, 5-ye ar pro perty inclu des quali fied 
NYLZ leasehold improvement property placed in  service after Se ptember 10, 2001, and before 
January 1, 2 007. To qu alify, property must not  hav e been subject to a bindi ng co ntract a s of 
September 10, 2001. 
5) Extension of Replacement Period 
This A ct extend s the Se ction 1 033 two-ye ar period for a tax-free replacement of invol untarily 
converted property to five years for NYLZ property converted as a re sult of the Septemb er 11 
terrorist attack. 
6) Tax-Exempt Private Activity Bonds for Rebuilding in the NYLZ 
During calendar years 2002, 2003 and 2004, up to $8 billion of tax-exempt private activity bonds 
may be issued to finance t he construction and rehabilitation of nonresidential and residential real 
property in the NYLZ. These bonds are limited to project s approved by the Ma yor of Ne w York 
City or the Governor of New York Stat e, eac h of whom may designat e up to $4 billion of  the 
bonds authorized under the Act. 
7) Additional Advance Refunding for Certain Previously Refunded Bonds 
Certain bonds for facilities in New York City may be advan ce refunded one additional time. This 
applies only to bonds for which all present-law advances refunding authority was exhausted prior 
to September 12, 2001, and with respect to which the advance refunding bonds were outstanding 
on September 11, 2001. Eligible advance bonds must be designated as such by the Mayor of 
New York City or the Governor of New York State, each of whom may designate up to $4.5 billion 
of bonds. To be eligible for the additional advance refunding, at least 90% of the refunded bonds 
must have been used to finance facilities located in New York City.”199 
                                                 
http://www.irs.gov/newsroom/article/0,,id=101475,00.html
 64
199 See The New York Liberty Tax Incentives, 
 (last visited Mar. 30, 2003).


--- PAGE 360 ---
Figure 1 Greenwood burning after the May 31/June 1st terrorist attacks 
  Greenwood must receive the same type of “New York Liberty Zone” 
incentives to attract and encourage large and small businesses, to train and hire 
Greenwood residents.  Because of the “gangrene” like effect from eighty-two 
years of wanton neglect by those re sponsible for r edressing the Greenwood 
Holocaust, there must be addi tional incentives to acco mplish the goal of put ting 
the community back to where it was before being destroyed; such as: 
 65
 a).  The Oklahoma Legis lature could pas s a law allowing bus inesses to move 
into the Greenwood Economic Em powerment Zone  without a Tulsa c ounty 
property tax requirem ent for up to a negotiated number of years. 200  T his same 
legislation should grant the city of Greenwood the au thority to negotiate its own 
terms for business property assessments and receive the negotiated tax instead 
of the county.  Businesses should be payin g less than what they normally would 
under the county property ta x scheme. Next, the U.S.  government should allo w 
special credits for businesses in t he Greenwood Economic Empowerment Zone 
that: (1) develop decent affordable housing; 2) hire and train Greenwood 
residents; and 3) provi de other critical infrastructure  improvements for the city of


--- PAGE 361 ---
Greenwood.201  Lastly, the Oklahoma State Legislatur e should p ass a law to 
suspend the state income tax requirement for the economic zone for a limited 
number of years. Much like the property  tax sc heme, the Ok lahoma Legislature 
should grant Greenwood author ity to assess its own income tax rate within the 
empowerment zone.     
Thus, a m odified “New York Libert y Zone” incentive package s hould be 
implemented to settle in Greenwood.  T he Greenwood version of the New York 
Liberty Zone should include the abatemen t of county property taxes, acce ss to 
other federal tax credits, and temporary suspension of Oklahoma State income 
tax, should entice companies  to settle in Greenwoo d. With its new author ity to 
negotiate f avorable agreements with c ompanies, the entire city  of Greenwood 
and its residents would benefit from a healthy economy. 
                                                                                                                                                 
200 The Oklahoma State Constitution allows  some businesses t o have an 
exemption from property taxes for up to five years. See Okla. Const. Art. X, § 5.   
 66
201 The U.S. government curr ently allows a number of  non-refundable tax credits 
to encourage businesses to provide critical good and s ervices to the nation. See 
Internal Revenue Code Section 38: Volume 1 (2002).


--- PAGE 362 ---
C. Erect a Real Memorial at least Comparable to the Oklahoma Bombing 
Memorial 
 
Figure 2 $28 million dollar Oklahoma City Bombing Memorial 
 
 67
In 1998, five years after the horrendous  terrorist bombing of the Alfred P. 
Murrah building in Do wntown OKC, which took the lives of 168 innocent vic tims, 
the state of Oklahoma rightfully  erect ed the Oklahoma City National Memoria l 
and Memorial Ce nter Museum, a twenty-eight million do llar memorial, to  
commemorate the victims of that terrible event. 202  No one should ev er minimize 
the loss of  lives or the pain and suffering of  friends and families of the victims.  
However, the fact remains that the dr eadful Oklahoma City bombing pales in 
comparison to the horrors of the Greenwood Holoc aust in ter ms of the sheer 
numbers of lives and property destroyed.  Yet, while the Oklahoma City Memorial 
almost takes up a city block, the curr ent Greenwood Memorial is an appallingly  
small block  of granite. The dis parity bet ween the two memorials gives one the 
impression that the Afri can American liv es ruined in  the Greenwood Ho locaust


--- PAGE 363 ---
are of significantly less importance than the mostly White Americans ruined in the 
Oklahoma City bombing.   To rectify this disparity, a new memorial needs to be 
built, and it must be at least comparable in scope and grandeur  to the Oklahoma 
City Bombing memorial.  Moreover, t he Greenwood Holoc aust Memorial should 
be located within the newly restored “old Greenwood” section of town, and be a 
centerpiece for attracting and educating visitors and tourists.  
E.  State holiday with appropriate ceremonies each year 
 The state should declare June 1st a state holiday, and set aside the day for 
remembrance each year. This holiday’s primary goals would be: 1) to ensure that 
the state always recognizes and remembers what happened on that dreadful day 
in 1921; 2) to honor those who endured the horrors of the Greenwood Holocaust;  
3) to encourage proper reflection by all of Oklahoma; 4) to properly honor and 
respect those whose lives wer e so dras tically altered; and 5) to encourage 
ongoing assessment of the state of race relations in Oklahoma. 
 F.  Oklahoma Black History Part of School Curriculum 
Everyone would agree that  the September 11, 2001 attacks would never be 
withheld from this nation’s history books.   Yet, the Tulsa Public  school sy stem 
does not include for mal instructions about the Greenwood Holocaust in its  
curriculum. The educational system’s omission of the Greenwood Holocaust from 
textbooks and school’s curriculum is a travesty of epic proportion. Therefore, the 
Greenwood Plan should mandat e Oklahoma school districts devote a minimum 
of two entire class periods per y ear to t he Holocaust.  In fact, ideally, the time 
spent studying the Greenwood Holoc aust should be comparable to the t ime 
                                                                                                                                                 
 68
202 See Oklahoma City National Memorial and Memorial Center Museum,


--- PAGE 364 ---
spent studying the J ewish Holocaust, espec ially s ince the later incident took  
place in Oklahoma and not thousands of miles away.   The focus and goals of 
studying the Greenwood Holocaust would be to provide the program the 
recognition it deserves, and ens ure that Oklahoma c itizens (the students and 
their parents) understand why G reenwood/north Tuls a residents  are entitled to 
the various “special” provisions granted by the state of Oklahoma. 
 
XI. What will make the White Power Structure Grant 
Reparations? 
 
A. Must Combine the Interests of all Parties Involved  
Most white Americans readily acknowledge  that the quality of life for Blacks  
severely lags behind Whites.203  Yet, most of these same  Whites are unwilling to 
support any effective remedies, especially  reparations , aimed at improving the 
lives of African-Americans. 204  The chance that the White dominated Oklahoma  
power structure will v oluntarily “do the right thing” is highly unlikely, especially in 
light of the severe opposition continually leveled against the most articulate and 
persuasive legal arguments offered on beh alf of the Greenwood victims.  As a 
result, It is quite poss ible that an unden iable moral cla im will still not  be enough 
to convince the state of Oklahoma to own up to its responsibility and redres s the 
terrible acts committed.   
So what would force the White power structure to “do the right thing” and  
grant reparations?  The answer has been offered by  Professor Derrick Bell, who 
                                                                                                                                                 
http://www.oklahomacitynationalmemorial.org/ (last Feb. 16th, 2003). 
 69
203 See Paul Sniderman & Michael Gray Hagen, Race and Inequality: A study in 
American Values, 555 (1985).


--- PAGE 365 ---
contends, “whites [en mass] will support an d tolerate gains for blacks only  when 
these [gains] also benefit them.” Unfortunately, and hist orically, this appears to 
be the most accurate response to this poignant question. 205  Bell adds “even if  
there is a fool-proof legal  theory for Black reparations  litigation, few judges or 
legislators would be moved in the absence of some dram atic event, major crisis, 
or tragic circumstance that conveyed t he necess ity or at least the clear  
advantage of adopting a reparations scheme to grant reparations.”206   As stated 
earlier, many have argued that  one of the key factors c ontributing to Japanes e 
Americans’ successfully securing reparati ons for the unconstitutional acts that  
the U.S. government perpetrated against them was because an unwillingnes s to 
do so may have created insurmountable barriers to maintain ing eco nomic 
relations between Japan and the United States. 207  For many in government, 
prior to the Japanese securing reparati ons, thought that trade with Japan was 
suffering because there was  “lingering  ani mosity over the ill-treatment of 
Japanese-Americans during World War II.”208  Consequently, extending a formal 
apology, and reparations, was  an attempt to improve relations with the 
economically powerful nation of Japan and to prevent an economic backlash 
tantamount to a major crisis, or tragic circ umstance.  That possibility of economic 
                                                                                                                                                 
204 See, Bush Vows to Fight Quotas Michigan Admissions Policy Is Flawed, Says 
President, Chicago Tribune, Jan. 17, 2003. 
205 See Derrick Bell, Comment, Brown v. Bo ard of Education and the Interest-
Convergence Dilemma, 93 HARV. L. REV. 518, 518-19 (1980). 
206 See Derrick A. Bell, Jr., Dissection of a Drea m, 9 Harv. C.R.-Cl.L. Rev. 15 6, 
158 (1974). 
207 See Rhonda V. Magee The Master’s Tools, From the Bottom Up:  Responses 
to African-American Reparations Theory in Mainstream and Outsider Re medies 
Discourse 79 Va. L. Rev 863,909. 
 70
208 See Magee, supra note 207, at 909.


--- PAGE 366 ---
backlash conveyed the necessity , or at least the clear advantage,  of adopting a 
reparations scheme.209 
A. Historical Exam ples of White and Bl ack Interest Converging to Produce 
Gains for Blacks   
 
It is erroneously believed that Presi dent Abraham Lincoln engaged in the 
Civil War to free Africans held in bondage by  the South.  Many believe Lincoln 
was morally more enlightened than any other  U.S. president and took a personal 
interest in setting them free.  Howe ver, slave holding President Thomas 
Jefferson wrote “I wish most sincerely ther e was not a slave in the province; it 
always appeared a most iniquitous scheme to  me to fi ght ourselves for what we 
are daily robbing and plundering from those who have as good a right to freedom 
as we hav e.”210 Thus, it is clear from this c ountry’s inception that its leader s 
understood the ev il and morally  bankrupt nat ure of slav ery.  So, Lincoln was  no 
more enlightened than the many president s who came before him.  However , 
because freeing enslaved Afric ans “helped to save the union,” Lincoln’s d esire 
(White interest) to save the union converged with  African’s desire (Black interest) 
to escape bondage as articu lated by Lincoln himself on August 22, 1862:  “If I 
could save the union without freeing any slave, I would do it…what I do about 
slavery and the colored race I do because I believe it helps to save the union.”211 
The result was the Emancipation Proclamation,  which greatly helped the Union 
win the war. 
                                                 
209 See Id.  
 71
210 For although Jefferson insisted he was st rongly anti-slavery, his “hatred”  
toward the institution never motivated him freeing his slaves or use his enormous 
prestige to oppose s lavery unequivoca lly. See A. Leon Higginbotham, In the


--- PAGE 367 ---
One should study the Civ il Rights movement of the 1 950’s and 1960’s for 
a more modern example of the interests of Black people “conver ging” with the 
practical needs of the White power st ructure.  Unquestionably, the tremendous  
sacrifice of money, ti me, blood, sweat, and tears made by valiant civil rights  
soldiers once again s ecured legislation to “guarantee” the “inalienable rights” of 
Blacks.212   Surely the bloody, inhuman, brut al scenes of violence being leveled 
against peaceful protesters, coming live into the living rooms of millions of people 
across the world, m ade it harder for the U.S. to present itself as the great 
humanitarian world police. This imagery put tremendous pressure on the power 
structure to grant s ome of the deman ds of the  Civ il Rig hts Movement.    
However, there is no denying t hat the Civil Rights Movement’s efforts were 
greatly aided by the unrest of young whites over the wa r in Vietnam, the red hot  
“Cold War ” that threatened to erupt in to nuclear war with Cuba, and the 
assassination of President Kennedy.  As  a consequenc e, the power structure, 
much to the chagrin of many, had to ma ke real concessions and “give” Blac k 
citizens c ivil rights. These conc essions were necess ary to prevent the United 
States from losing creditabi lity around the world, but more  importantly it kept the 
Federal Government from losing control within its own borders. 
                                                                                                                                                 
Matter of Color: Rac e and the Am erican Legal Process: The Colonial Period, at 
380 (1978).  
211 See Loewen, supra note 15, at 181. 
 72
212 This highly charged era in United States history produced countless legal 
protests, boycotts, marches, sit-ins, and freedom rides.  In addition, it is ironic 
that the rights that Afrikan people achieved during the 60’s civil rights movement 
were about the same as those achieved after the passage of the Civil Rights Acts 
of the 1860’s. See Juan Williams, Eyes on the Prize: The American Civil Rights 
Movements, 1955-1960 (1988).


--- PAGE 368 ---
So, what will provide t hat “major crisis” to spur the granting of reparations 
for the Greenwood Holocaust v ictims?  Ce rtainly the very viable lega l or m oral 
theories discussed and others not mentioned in this piece could possibly be used 
to frame a winning argument and induce t he power structure to “do the right 
thing.” However, seldom has the legal sys tem worked in the favor of Africans in 
America, unless persuaded by t remendous political pressure.   Maybe the moral  
responsibility espoused by a few  Tulsa ci vic leaders shortly after the ho locaust 
could be the impetus needed to “right the wrong.” Howev er, the Greenwood 
community has been waiting patiently fo r over 80 y ears, for Tulsa to keep its  
promise to rebuild it.   Maybe the power structure’s religious commitment will lead 
to the just act of granting reparations to  the Greenwood victims.  Howev er, it is 
doubtful that religious  convictions alone will  conv ince the city of Tulsa, or the 
state of Oklahoma to redress the destructive acts of the Greenwood holocaust.   
Anyone s eeking reparations for the  Greenwood Holocaust victims must 
convince the white dominated power structure that it is in their best interest to  
grant a comprehensive reparations plan.   This process may be accomplished by: 
1) highlight ing the po sitives that r eparations for the Greenwoo d Holoca ust will 
produce and how the White power st ructure will benefit; 2) creating an 
atmosphere that absolutely makes it imposs ible for the power structure to ignore 
the demands of reparations advocates; or 3) some combination of the first two 
strategies.  
C. How Granting Reparations Will Benefit the White Power Structure 
 73
Unfortunately since many areas in Tulsa and the entire State of Oklahoma 
are still suffering from the effects of what I call the “deadly trinity” of hatred, envy,


--- PAGE 369 ---
and White Supremacy, the Ok lahoma power structure mu st be convinced that 
implementing the Greenwood Plan would: 1) allow the state to shed its image as  
a haven for racists and become a shining ex ample to the world of  how to atone 
for past mi stakes.  This would enhance th e state’s and the city’s attractiveness 
for conventions, conferences, and other national and regional meetings, thus,  
generating much needed revenues for the state of Oklahoma and the city of  
Tulsa; 2) create a nationa l historical tourist attr action by refurbishing the 
Greenwood District. This will ult imately stimulate the entire ec onomy for the city  
of Tulsa and the State of  Oklahoma by putting more money in the pockets of  
Oklahoma restaurants, hotels, malls, an d toll-boot hs; 3) provide a point of  
reference for all Americans as well as  foreign travelers about the tremendous  
history of Afrikan-Americans and Okl ahoma and 4) r epair the African-American 
community and provide a moral backdrop t hat the city of Tulsa or State of 
Oklahoma can use to foster true reconc iliation between the races; 5) create a 
healthy, educated, safe, and self-suffici ent community that can adequ ately 
address the needs of its citizens, and eventually reduce North Tulsa dependence 
on city and state funds and programs;  6)  re-create an  econom ically successful 
community that will allow more Oklahomans to find gainful employment, increase 
earnings and dispos able in come, increase city and state tax revenues, and 
charitable giving; 7) increas e educational and ec onomical opportunities that  will, 
in turn, reduce poverty and crime in Greenwood and reduce monies spent for law 
enforcement and maintenan ce of prisons; 8) increase educational and 
economical opportunities t hat will address “the age-old issue of brain drain” 213 
                                                 
 74
213 See Jay Copper, Lottery: Not A Savior, Tulsa World, Nov. 24, 2002.


--- PAGE 370 ---
and encourage younger, educated, and skilled people to remain  in the state, as  
acknowledged by  Governor Brad Henry who said  “that's what we need to do in 
Oklahoma."214  Indeed a better educated wor kforce will make Oklahoma more  
attractive to corporations seeking to re locate their operatio ns to the area, and 
create more jobs and revenues for the entire state.   
 
D. If Showing All the Positiv es of t he Greenwood Plan Does Not Work, What 
Must Reparations Advocates do to Convin ce the Power Structure That Its in 
Their Best Interest To Grant Reparations?  
 
Sadly, it is a strong possibility t hat demonstrating the benefits of the 
Greenwood Plan may not be enough to c onvince the white power structure that 
the gains for Tulsa’s Black community will also benefit Whites enough to justify  
granting the appropriate remedies. So, Greenwood reparations supporters must 
not only be ready for a long, grueling, and expensive legal fight, but must also be 
prepared to return to “in your fac e” civil rights style activism to create the “crisis” 
that will fa cilitate cha nging t he politic al will of those in charge.   This means  
reparation advocates must be prepared to implement such  strategies and tactics 
as: 
 1) Launching an intensive media campai gn aimed at embarrassing T ulsa and 
the State of Oklahoma befor e the entire world.  The advocates must show the 
hypocrisy of America to call for reforms  around the world while not implementing 
proper reforms at home. 
 
2) Initiating strategic boycotts against spec ific industries, to force the Oklahoma 
business community to compel the political players to come to the table and work 
out a reparations plan.   
 
3) Disrupting major events suc h as f ootball and basketball games, concerts, 
plays, conventions and other events in Oklahoma by peacefully, lawfully  
protesting and demonstrating during these events. This would be done to raise 
                                                 
 75
214 See Id.


--- PAGE 371 ---
the awareness that an injustice has been w oefully ignored for over eighty years 
and that it is time that it is righted.  
 
4) Advocat ing for organizations  that support reparations for the Greenwood 
Holocaust to refrain from convening any regional or national meetings,  
conferences, convention, or any other events in Tulsa and/or Oklahoma period.  
 
5) Staging massive radio cam paigns, di stributing flyers on a weekly b asis; 
organizing monthly street rallies, etc. until the issue is adequately addressed. 
 
 
215  
 76


--- PAGE 372 ---
77
 
Conclusion 
 
If adhered to the Greenwood Pl an would: 1) compensate  the victims for the 
terrible acts of May 31/June 1 st, 1921; and 2) rebuild Greenwood, restoring it 
back to a proud, prosperous, and succe ssful community. Just as the 
controversial Marshall Plan overcame tremendous obstacles on ce those in key 
positions obtained the political will to r ebuild the lives and communities shattered 
by WWII and the Nazis Holoca ust, if the White power structure of Tulsa can 
obtain the political will to implem ent the Greenwood Plan the lives and 
community shattered by the Tulsa Ra ce War and the Greenwood Holocaust will 
be rebuilt. 
Lastly, regardless of the ev entual academic treatment of this document, if the 
average person with no prior reparations or Greenwood knowledge, understands: 
1) why describing the Greenw ood massacre, as a “race riot” is erroneous and 
misleading; 2) why a comprehensive repar ations plan to com pensate the victims 
and their descendants for the annihilation of  Greenwood and its Black citizens is 
needed and long over due; 3)  why support of some strategy ensuring the 
adoption of the Greenwood Plan is necessary; 4) why the Greenwood Plan would 
be the best reparations model  to  compensate  and  rebuild the Greenwood 
community back to a self-determined,  prosperous, and successful community; 
and 5) why reparations advocates commit themselves to acting decisively to see 
that all of the above is accomplished,  then the victims of the Greenwood 
Holocaust might finally receive justice and retribution for their suffering, and this 
endeavor is a success!


--- PAGE 373 ---
1 
Volume 1, Issue 3 October  25, 2003 
Black Reparations Times 
By Nkechi Taifa, Esq. 
Co-Chair Legislative 
Commission N’COBRA 
 
          Undisputably, the 21
st cen-
tury brings renewed vigor to the 
forward thrust for reparations for 
African Americans on many 
fronts – litigative, legislative, and 
grassroots.  This brief history will 
focus on activities surrounding the 
legislative thrust for reparations, of 
which, to date, the National Coali-
tion of Blacks for Reparations in 
America has been in the forefront 
of shaping and molding.  
 
The struggle for reparations 
for African descendants in the 
United States has proliferated since 
Rep. John Conyers’ initial introduc-
tion on November 20, 1989 of 
House Resolution 3374, the 
“Commission to Study Reparation 
Proposals for African Americans 
Act.”  N’COBRA, founded earlier, 
was instrumental in the drafting of 
this legislation, working very closely with then Conyers’ staffer Gregory Moore in fashioning the bill.  It was stra-
tegically decided that the bill would closely follow the model of the Japanese American Redress Act in calling for 
the creation of a federally chartered commission to study the impact of slavery and post-slavery discrimination and 
make recommendations to Congress on its findings and, if appropriate, redress.  Despite some differences of opin-
ion as to the efficacy of this more conservative methodology of calling first for a study commission, N’COBRA 
rallied its human resources in support of HR 40, as opposed to a demand for actual reparations. 
 
In the first Congress of the legisla-
tion’s introduction, the co-signers 
in order of signing, were:  Rep. 
Dellums; Rep. Fauntroy; Rep. 
Mfume; Rep. Wheat; Rep. Sav-
age; Rep. Matsui; Rep. Torres; 
(Continued on page 18) 
IN THIS ISSUE of Black Reparations Times   
Reparations United Front of Southern California  8 
A Trail of Blood:  The Church and Reparations 12 
Sunni Muslims Hold Reparations Conference 24 
Min. Farrakhan Offers His Life To Reparations Movement 30 
REPARATIONS: 
A HISTORY OF  N’COBRA’S LEGISLATIVE FRONT 
Dorothy Lewis, Quincy Jones, Kibibi Tyehimba, and Min. Abdul Khadir  
Muhammad - May 21, 2003 following  AYBP Lobbying for HR-40 on Capitol Hill


--- PAGE 374 ---
2 
N’COBRA  
Information & Media Commission  
P.O. Box 716 
Washington, DC 20044-0716 
 
Email :  InformationMedia@aol.com 
Phone:  202.466.1622 
 
 
managing editor & producer 
 
Wautella ibn Yusuf 
 
editors 
 
Kibibi Tyehimba 
Dorothy Benton Lewis 
 
Contributors  
 
Kibibi Tyehimba, Ajamu Sankofa,  Nkechi Taifa, Njere 
Alghanee, Johnita Scott Obadele, Hodari Abdul-Ali, 
Shereeta Lacy, Naphese Mugabe II, Damario Solomon-
Simmons, Hannibal Afrik, Dorothy Benton Lewis, Dr. Iva 
E. Carruthers, Jahahara Amen-RA Alkebulan-Ma’at, 
Araceli Jacobs, Kristena Witherspoon, Sam Anderson, 
David Horne, Vic Nickson,   Makeda Blake Hannah, Sabelo 
Sibanda, Cikiah Thomas, Bobo Greg, Mambolo, Zumbi 
Soweto and others. 
 
 
MISSION 
 
The Commission will serve as the official organ-
izational link for the dissemination and exchange 
of information on N’COBRA policies, Reparations 
issues, strategies and actions important to winning 
Reparations for African descendants in the U.S. 
and the Diaspora; assist in educating N’COBRA 
members and the general public about our just 
demands; and assist in the development of mass 
based  support for Reparations. 
 
DEPARTMENTS 
 
Publishing Team 
     Publications:  REPARATIONS NOW!             
                {Quarterly Membership Newsletter} 
                   ENCOBRA{Annual magazine/journal} 
                BLACK REPARATIONS TIMES 
                            {Quarterly news publication} 
 
Internet/IT Team 
                N’COBRA Website: 
                   NCOBRA.org & OfficialNcobra.org           
                               (both .org are same) 
                Listserv – news egroup 
   Reparations_For_Africans@yahoogroups.com 
 
Public Relations Team 
We encourage public discussions, led by the injured, to determine an equita-
ble remedy for the African Holocaust of Enslavement.  All African descen-
dents have a right and responsibility to work towards defining and achieving 
Reparations.  The opinions and actions reported in Black Reparations 
Times are those of the person(s) representing them and in no way should 
be viewed as N’COBRA’s unless  clearly stated.  © 2003 all rights reserved 
Black Reparations Times  ®  
 
A Quarterly N’COBRA Publication of  the Information & Media Commission 
 
DEDICATED TO BRINGING YOU REPARATIONS INFORMATION IN ALL ITS VARIED FORMS AND APPROACHES 
Table Of Content 
We Want More Than Jobs 
        Dorothy Benton Lewis 
 3      
Reparations Town Hall Rally 
           
Hannibal Afrik 
4 
Reparations United Front of Southern California 
          David L. Horne 
8 
NAACP:  Reparations and Peace 
          Araceli Jacobs & Kristena Witherspoon 
10 
A Trail of Blood:  The Church and Reparations  
           Dr. Iva E. Carruthers 
12 
NCBL:  Attorneys Discuss Reparations 
         Ajamu Sankofa 
11 
Formation of the National Reparations Congress 
        Sam Anderson & David Horne 
16 
Legislative Commission Update 
           Kibibi Tyehimba 
22 
Sunni Muslims Hold Reparations Conference 
         
Hodari Abdul-Ali 
24  
YOUTH CORNER 
       N’COBRA Youth Commission Report 
           Shereeta Lacy & Naphese Mugabe II  
       Reparations Now:  Getting That 40 Acres & a Mule! 
           Damario Solomon-Simmons 
26 
Ask The Editor 
          Vic Nickson & J. Damu 
28 
12th World Tribunal on Reparations for Africans in US 
          Uhuru Movement 
31 
West Coast Community Organizing Continues 
          
Jahahara Amen-RA Alkebulan-Ma’at 
34 
INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENT 
     Jubilee South Africa:  Statement On Reparations 
      Jamaica Reparations Movement 
      Zimbabwe:  Land and Reparations 
      Global Afrikan Congress:  Resolutions & Euro Region Meets 
      South Africa’s Civil Society Decisions on Reparations 
      Ras Tafari Global Reasoning 2003: Reparations & Repatriation 
36


--- PAGE 375 ---
3 
of the world for giving their lives to continue the vision 
of our ancestors for a future worthy of their and our suf-
fering. 
 
N’COBRA also has a vision for 
a new and better world. 
 
We know that every issue that 
we speak of today can and must 
be part of our demand for repa-
rations. Housing, Health Care, 
Land, Education, Child Wel-
fare, Family Stability, Eco-
nomic Development and equal 
treatment under our justice sys-
tem.  You name it, comes under 
the banner of reparations.  Be-
cause Reparations is more than 
a check, more than a job;  265 
years of slavery was a job.  And 
if the jobs today continue to pay 
Black people 60 cents on a dol-
lar while Whites earn the whole 
dollar, we will remain wage-
earning slaves. 
 
We must face it, while we have 
been marching for jobs, jobs 
have been marching out of this 
country in search of new slaves 
in foreign countries.  Jobs are 
marching into prisons where 
they can legally work 2 million 
racially profiled Black men and 
women to death again without pay. 
 
In honor of Dr. King, we are the generation to de-
mand that America make good on the check that has 
always been marked insufficient funds when it comes to 
Black/African people.  We want more than jobs.  We 
(Continued on page 23) 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
WWEE   WANTWANT   MOREMORE   THANTHAN   JOBSJOBS !!  
  
On August 23, 2003, at Lincoln Memorial in Washington, DC, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference,  Martin Luther 
King III, and a coalition which included the NAACP, the Urban League, the National Council of Negro Women, NOW, the 
Arab-American Institute, the AFL-CIO, and United for Peace and Justice, hosted the 40th anniversary celebration of the 
"March on Washington (MOW) for Jobs and Freedom."  Th e theme was "Return, Repair and Renew."  NCOBRA member, 
Brother Mark Thompson (Matsimela Mapfum o) played a significant role in the pl anning of the event. Ms. Dorothy Benton-
Lewis spoke on behalf of N’COBRA and the Reparations Movement.  Ms. Lewis shared  the podium with Congressman John 
Lewis of Georgia, presidential candidate Rev. Al Sharpton, R ev. Jesse Jackson of Rainbow/Push Coalition, Ms. Coretta King, 
Mr. Martin L. King III of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), former Congressman Walter Fauntroy, and 
national spokesperson for the Nation of Islam,  Sister Minister Ava Muhammad.     
“Greetings from the National Coalition of Blacks for 
Reparations in America (N’COBRA) We are a diverse 
coalition of organizations and individuals organized for 
the sole purpose of obtaining reparations for descen-
dants of enslaved Africans. 
 
Brothers and Sisters If we 
are serious about returning, 
repairing and renewing the 
Dream, we must admit that 
there is a serious debt, a seri-
ous injustice looming over-
head that happened long be-
fore 1963. 
 
We must acknowledge the 
200 Million Africans lost in 
the Holocaust of Enslave-
ment from Africa, Europe, 
the Americas and the Carib-
bean...for whom there has 
been no day of mourning, no 
apology, no atonement or 
reparations for their survi-
vors. 
 
We must acknowledge the 
uncounted hundreds of mil-
lions of Africans who en-
dured a life of suffering, tor-
ture, humiliation, and daily 
terror in hopes that future 
generations could have a life 
free of terror, oppression, 
and any form of enslave-
ment.  Without them, life would 
not be as we know it today. 
 
We must acknowledge the Dr. Kings, Malcolm Xs, 
John Browns, Ida B. Wells, and Queen Mother Moores 
Ms. Dorothy Benton-Lewis, 
N’COBRA National Co-Chair 
Photo by Wautella


--- PAGE 376 ---
4 
During the afternoon, a Youth Leadership Forum was 
conducted at JSU Liberal Arts Building sponsored by 
the Pierian Literary Society.  College students from 
the JSU Student Government Association and Touga-
loo College were joined with collegians from Georgia 
State University, Clark-Atlanta and Savannah State 
College, GA. They dialogued with several national 
veteran Reparations scholars and activists. Planning 
has begun to organize campus Reparations study 
groups and N’COBRA stu-
dent chapters. 
 
In many cities and states, 
resolutions have been passed 
in support of HR-40, a bill 
introduced in Congress by 
Representative John Conyers 
(D-MI) every year since 
1989. Patterned after the 
Japanese-American Repara-
tions Act, Conyers’ bill calls 
for a congressional study 
commission to conduct hear-
ings across the country to en-
sure maximum community 
interaction.  Councilman 
Kenneth Stokes was success-
ful in sponsoring a Jackson 
City Council Resolution en-
dorsing Reparations at the 
municipal level. Also, in 
2003, Councilman Stokes 
sponsored a resolution de-
claring February as Repara-
tions Awareness Month. 
Lobbying efforts have been 
initiated to now support a 
Mississippi state resolution 
for Reparations.  All elected 
officials and candidates are 
being challenged to declare their position on Repara-
tions for descendants of enslaved African people in 
Mississippi. 
 
Furthermore, the Jackson, MS N’COBRA chapter is 
scheduling a series of community events to provide 
update information on current Reparations lawsuits 
against national corporations. Additionally, there will 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Reparations Town Hall Rally  
By Hannibal Afrik,  
National Co-Chair, N’COBRA 
A major Reparations Town Hall Rally was held Octo-
ber 4, 2003 at Tougaloo College Health & Wellness 
Center.   Co-sponsored by the Mississippi Reparations 
Committee; Jackson, MS, N’COBRA chapter and the 
Tougaloo College Pre-Law Society, this event attracted 
veteran Reparations activists from across the country. 
 
Earlier that day, the NDABA: The Great Sit-Down II 
met at Jackson State University Liberal Arts Building 
to analyze critical issues in 
eight work sessions, namely: 
Youth Organizing, Legislative 
Initiatives, Black Church, Le-
gal Strategies, Research & 
Scholarship, Strategies for Or-
ganizational Collaboration, In-
ternal Healing and Education 
as each relates to the Repara-
tions Movement. 
 
On July 26, 2003, Dr. Conrad 
Worrill, Chair, NBUF and 
Minister Louis Farrakhan, Na-
tion of Islam convened the first 
NDABA meeting in Chicago, 
IL. Based on the volume of 
noteworthy work currently in 
progress, the conveners an-
nounced a follow-up meeting 
in Jackson, MS, which has a 
painful history of racial hostil-
ity and economic injustice 
against Black people. The Call 
for a Reparations Town Hall 
Rally attracted over 1,000 peo-
ple, who eagerly responded to 
the electrified keynote address 
by Minister Louis Farrakhan. 
 
The purpose of the NDABA 
work sessions is to create strategies for a mass-based 
mobilization campaign. This will become a National 
Reparations United Front that can educate and motivate 
all descendants of enslaved Africans in this country.  
Ultimately, every family, organization and individual 
person has a voice in determining the outcome of the 
inevitable Reparations settlement from the U.S. gov-
ernment. 
Baba Hannibal Afrik 
Pouring libation for the Ancestors 
Photo by Ma’at


--- PAGE 377 ---
5 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Black Reparations Times 
 
 
In response to the growing momentum of the 
Reparations movement, the Information and Media 
Commission is committed to disseminating timely 
information on issues related to our struggle for 
Reparations. Our new publication, "BLACK 
REPARATIONS TIMES" © 2003 will report 
news and information not only about N’COBRA’s 
work, but also the efforts of other Reparations 
advocates, nationally and internationally.  Your 
comments and  suggestions are always welcome.  
 
You can also help by:   
 
1) providing items for possible publication such as 
articles, photos, etc; 2) volunteering professional 
skills (graphic arts, managing subscriptions & 
distribution, fundraising, etc.); 3) donating 
generously to this project, and 4)  identifying 
potential sponsors. 
 
Email: InformationMedia@aol.com 
Phone: 202.466.1622 
N’COBRA Representatives in Attendance 
 
1. Baba Hannibal Afrik, N’COBRA National Co-
chair 
2. Ajamu Sankofa:  National Secretary and Northeast 
Region Representative 
3. Johnita Scott-Obadele, Co-chair, Membership & 
Organizational Development 
4. Dr. Imari Obadele, Advisor, Economic Develop-
ment Commission 
5. Alvin Brown, Co-chair, Economic Development 
Commission; Co-chair of Midwest Region; Co-
chair, St. Louis chapter 
6. Sheereta Lacy, Co-chair, Youth Commission and 
Co-chair, Indianapolis Chapter 
7. Nuri Medina, Co-chair, Youth Commission 
8. Njere Alghanee, Co-chair, Human Resource Com-
mission and Southeast Region Representative 
9. Wautella Ibn Yusuf, Co-chair, Information & Me-
dia Commission and Co-chair, Washington, DC 
chapter 
10. General Kuratibsha X Ali Rashid, Elder Advisory 
Board  
11. Lukata Chikuyu, Co-chair, Jackson, MS Area 
Chapter 
12. Vallena Greer; Co-chair, Jackson, MS Area Chap-
ter 
13. Atty. Imhotep Alkebulan; Secretary, Jackson, MS 
Area Chapter 
14. Anana Nyaumu-wi; Treasurer,  
 
       along with several chapter members 
be forums to address voter education, college student 
and youth leadership projects, the criminal justice sys-
tem and economic development. Future events include 
the February 2004 state-wide Reparations Forum and 
organizing a chartered busload to the March 2004 
NDABA III in Houston, TX. 
 
There is a definite active role for Mississippians to 
play in promoting the Reparations Movement until it 
becomes a household word. Then, with our righteous 
demand for economic and social justice, the federal 
government must acknowledge this “crime against hu-
manity” and make restitution a reality ‘with all deliber-
ate speed.’ 
 
For additional information, Contact Baba Hannibal Af-
rik, 601.535.7551, or Brother Lukata Chikuyu, 
601.957.2969. Reparations, Now!!! 
Black Reparations Times 
 
Subscription 
Annual rates are $20 (U.S.) payable to 
N’COBRA –IMC 
 
Send your check/money order to:   
 
Information and Media Commission 
P.O. Box 716 
Washington, DC 20044-0716 
 
Date_______________ 
 
Name_________________________________ 
 
Address_______________________________ 
 
City/State/Zip___________________________ 
 
Phone/Email____________________________


--- PAGE 378 ---
6 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
NDABA II 
Jackson, Mississippi 
Photo by Wautella 
Photo by Wautella 
Photo by Ma’at 
Photo by Wautella Dr. Conrad Worrill 
Minister Louis Farrakhan (standing - right)  
& 
Baba Hannibal Afrik (seated right) 
Chokwe Lumumba, Esq. 
Vallena Greer, Co-chair, 
Jackson, MS Area Chapter


--- PAGE 379 ---
7 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
NDABA II 
Jackson, Mississippi 
Photo by Ma’at Photo by Ma’at 
Photo by Ma’at 
Dr. Imari Obadele 
The Republic of New Afrika  
Delegation  
The New Black Panther Party 
Delegation  
Ukali Mwendo, 
President, Republic of New Afrika 
Photo by Ma’at 
Photo by Ma’at Dr. Raymond A. Winbush 
Johnita Scott-Obadele 
Pushes N’COBRA AYBP program from the floor  
Photo by Ma’at


--- PAGE 380 ---
8 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
The Reparations United Front in Los Angeles is an or-
ganization based on four discernible items: the success 
of N'COBRA and the National Black United Front 
across the country, a written agreement to jointly recog-
nize a common definition and purpose for the repara-
tions project that was signed by seven L.A. organiza-
tions in July, 2002 in connection with representation for 
the August 17, 2002 reparations rally in Washington, D.
C.; the need for more focus and conceptual unity for 
reparations activities in Southern California; and the col-
lected experience of a number of Black activists who 
had seen the success and failure of numerous organiza-
tions in the region.  
 
In light of the above, in November, 2002, a group of or-
ganizational representatives, individual activists, and 
those looking for an effective outlet for their Black Na-
tionalist interests, met at the Los Angeles Thomas Brad-
ley Family and Youth Center to consider the formation 
of a new reparations activist organization that could 
push the movement forward in this region. For those 
who had paid attention to our recent history of quick 
start-quick death organizations in Southern California, it 
was clear that in order to spark and sustain the interest of 
the very substantial Black Nationalist community in 
Southern California, and to be effective in educating the 
public and increasing the momentum towards accom-
plishing the great goals of the national/international 
Reparations Movement, any new reparations organiza-
tion would have to clearly demonstrate the lessons 
learned from previous attempts in Southern California, 
including the N'COBRA chapter in Los Angeles from 
1997-1999. A new organization would also have to be 
able to transcend the currently debilitating and ego-
driven schisms that were consistently producing the 
wildly disparate activities going on in Los Angeles in 
the name of reparations and that were creating a pattern 
of confusion and marginalization for reparations efforts 
i n  g e n e r a l .  B l a c k  f o l k  i n  L . A . w e r e  s i m p l y  u n u s e d  t o  
winning the hearts and minds of the Black community 
regarding the reparations struggle. In fact in L.A. and 
Southern California, the fight for reparations had essen-
tially become one of simply raising hell and making 
noise--a rally mentality--fed by the 'drum major' syn-
drome of grabbing the microphone and seeking out 
every available photo opportunity for personal glory, 
while a critical mass of Black folk were not getting the 
real messages of the reparations struggle in this area, 
this country and this planet.    
 
As such, when David L. Horne convened a group of 
fifty-odd activists in November, there were four founda-
tional principles defined and discussed as the only basis 
upon which such a new reparations group could and 
should organize.  
 
First, the group would have to be a coalition of organi-
zations and individuals, which would not threaten or 
interfere with the existing autonomy and tactics of cur-
rently existing reparations groups.  
 
Second, the group would have to be grounded on the 
principle and practice of mutual respect. No group 
member would be allowed to disrespect another or an-
other's organization during meetings, and no one in the 
group would be allowed to publicly 'dis' another repara-
tions group. This did not mean no criticism/self criti-
cism.  Clearly, without constructive criticism, little sus-
tainable progress can be made in groups, while a bar-
rage of negative criticism--a skill we had mastered--just 
as surely stopped any serious work and fractured most 
attempts at maintaining organizations. The principle 
here meant that all group members would practice dis-
cussion and debate--with all the usual passion and in-
tensity we bring to such get-to-gathers-- without engag-
ing in the personality destructiveness that had become 
characteristic of too many previous Black organizations 
in the area.  
 
Third, the group would be held together by work--that 
is, there would be a list of commonly agreed upon repa-
rations tasks that had to be accomplished. Once the 
tasks had been listed and approved, the group meetings 
would be about discussing strategy, tactics and re-
sources necessary for getting each task done in the order 
listed, including when to call in large numbers from the 
community for support, and about reports on the pro-
gress of each work project once focused effort had be-
gun on it.  
 
The fourth principle was that each group member was 
there to get work accomplished--once it was assigned 
and accepted, there was a great group expectation that 
there would be follow-through and the work would get 
done. For those who only or mainly wanted to talk and 
debate, this would not be the organization for them. To 
The Reparations United Front of Southern California 
Brief History of A Reparations Activist Group 
 
By David L. Horne, Los Angeles


--- PAGE 381 ---
9 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
be a member of the Reparations United Front, one had 
to commit oneself to labor in honor and veneration of 
Black ancestors and the current Black community.  
          
RUF TASKS ASSIGNED/TASKS ACCOMPLISHED 
2002-2003 
 
I.  Based on the slavery business ordinance initiated 
by Chicago's Dorothy Tillman and passed by the 
Chicago City Council, the RUF sought out L.A. 
Councilman Nate Holden and convinced him to 
make a motion in the L.A. City Council for a simi-
lar slave business ordinance.  Essentially, that ordi-
nance would require businesses contracting with the 
city  to sign an affidavit that they had searched their 
archives and those of their predecessor companies to 
determine whether they or those previous companies 
profited from the slave trade or American slavery. 
 
PROGRESS: L.A. motion made in April, approved by 
L.A. City Council in June-July, signed by Mayor in 
August and became effective law October 16, 2003. 
 
SUCCESSFUL STRATEGIES UTILIZED: Strategic 
mobilization of the Black community to attend city 
council hearings; intense negotiations over language 
for the ordinance (working with the councilman's 
staff), engaging the mass media (radio coverage, local 
Black newspapers, L.A. Times, etc.) and relentlessness. 
 
FOLLOW-THROUGH ACTIVITIES: Establishment 
of an Oversight Committee within RUF to monitor 
compliance with the ordinance and to set up a research 
activity regarding those companies that sign the affida-
vit. Establishment of a Legislative/Political Action 
Committee within RUF to push the slavery business 
ordinance in two other Southern California cities, and 
to contact other state and national cities about the pos-
sibilities of such an ordinance in their area. 
 
2.  Working with the Political Action arm of the lo-
cal NAACP branches to produce mass-based Town 
Hall meetings on reparations. The Black middle 
class and the old school portions of the community 
must be involved in order to move forward. 
 
PROGRESS: In April, 2003, the Political Action Com-
mittee of the Los Angeles branch of the NAACP held 
the first Town Hall Meeting on reparations in its his-
tory, and the first for the NAACP west of the Missis-
sippi River. Over 200 participants attended and the dis-
cussion was lively, including a political celebrity panel. 
A  su c c e s s f u l  e v e n t  w a s  h e l d  a t  W a r d  A . M . E .  C h u r c h .   
In September, the Political Action Committee of the 
Hollywood/Beverley Hills branch of the NAACP held 
the second NAACP Reparations Town Hall in the Los 
Angeles Convention Center as part of the annual Black 
Business Expo.  Board Chairman Julian Bond was the 
keynote speaker. Over 350 participants took part, and 
helped to spread the word of reparations to a much 
broader audience.     
                        
SUCCESSFUL STRATEGIES UTILIZED: Members 
of RUF became part of the NAACP organizing and 
planning committees for both of the Town Halls. Work-
ing cooperatively with, rather than dictating to, well es-
tablished community and civil rights groups is easily 
the best way to get work effectively done. Included 
were policy decisions, work on the program itinerary, 
panel presentations, attracting the media to the events, 
etc. 
 
FOLLOW-THROUGH ACTIVITIES: Encouraging the 
NAACP to continue its reparations efforts--RUF mem-
bers attended the recent state NAACP convention in 
San Mateo (Northern California). There will be more 
NAACP reparations Town Halls in 2004. The NAACP 
Political Action Committee will help plan the National 
Reparations Congress for May, 2004. 
 
3.  Getting the Black Church seriously involved in the 
Reparations Movement. This is a very critical aspect of 
a winning strategy.   
  
PROGRESS: In February, 2003, RUF members started 
meeting with Rev. Cecil Murray, pastor of First A.M.E. 
Church, the first Black Church in Los Angeles, and one 
of the largest and most politically active in Southern 
California. He allowed the formation of a joint RUF/
FAME coordinating committee to put on the first major 
Black Church Symposium on Reparations (The Role of 
the Black Faith Community in the Reparations Move-
ment) in L.A.'s history. Held on May 31, 2003 at First 
A.M.E., it brought together pastors from the Baptist 
church, the Nation of Islam, the C.M.E., the Church of 
God in Christ, and over 400 members of the Southern 
California public. It was an outstanding success. 
 
SUCCESSFUL STRATEGIES UTLIZED:  Again, 
working collaboratively with organizations rather than 
dictating to them is an effective method for getting 
quality work done. RUF members attended all meetings 
called by Rev. Murray, handled the program itinerary, 
helped to get the mass media involved (radio, newspa-
pers, etc.), coordinated video coverage, maintained the 
(Continued on page 25)


--- PAGE 382 ---
10 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Reparations and Peace 
NAACP's First Annual Conference 
 
By Araceli Jacobs & Kristena Witherspoon  
On October 3, 2003, the SU (Syracuse University) 
chapter of the National Association for the Advance-
ment of Colored People (NAACP) hosted its first an-
nual conference entitled, "Reparations and Peace Move-
ment." The program, co-sponsored by the Office of 
Multicultural Affairs, featured several workshops on the 
debates pertaining to national and international repara-
tions for African peoples.   
 
       The topic of reparations is controversial and there-
fore an imperative issue to explore. Many students on 
campus were uncertain about the facets of the move-
ment.  "I didn't know much about reparations. Now I 
realize how reparations extends globally," said Thor 
Ritz, sophomore geography major. 
 
       The conference was held in Schine Student Center 
from 10:00am to 5:30pm. The conference featured 
seven workshops, each divided into time segments. 
Each workshop was facilitated by NAACP members 
and a key presenter. The presenters were Dr. Raymond 
Winbush, Professor S.E. Anderson, Dr. William 
Wiecek and Professor Arthur Flowers. 
 
       The first workshop, "Introduction to Reparations 
101: Everything You Wanted to Know," was presented 
by Dr. Raymond Winbush, the director of Urban Affairs 
at Morgan State University. Winbush's latest work, 
"Should America Pay? Slavery and The Raging Debate 
on Reparations," is a detailed account of the histori-
cal facts and figures which support the reparations 
movement for African peoples internationally. Ac-
cording to Dr. Winbush, there can be no reconcilia-
tion without compensation.   
 
      "America wants us to reconcile, but reconcilia-
tion implies there was once a loving relationship be-
tween Blacks and whites," professed Win-
bush. He presented four steps to true recon-
ciliation: an apology, investigation and ac-
counting, compensation for the victims of 
the crimes and prosecution of the wrongdo-
ers." 
 
       Winbush also led the "Restitution for 
Slavery: Making Tainted Corporations 
Pay" workshop. In his presentation, Win-
bush elucidated the fact that the low eco-
nomic status of Black communities is from 
lasting effects of slavery and racism. He 
drew upon the pending 2002 Slavery Repa-
rations Class-Action Lawsuit brought by 
lawyer and reparations activist, Deidra Farmer-
Paellmann to make the case that many American cor-
porations played a critical role in the Trans-Atlantic 
Slave Trade. 
 
      Oppositions to reparations are frequent across 
racial lines. The oppositional arguments have con-
cluded that monetary reparations should not be a 
compensation for the systemic disempowerment of 
the Black people. In the "No reparations" workshop, 
Professor Arthur Flowers, author of "De Mojo 
Blues," shares such beliefs. He deems reparations un-
necessary for empowerment. As Black people, Flow-
ers believes the most effective strategy should be fo-
cusing on our own community; not on what the white 
man can give us. He sees reparations as a way of 
making us "better beggars." He believes that we 
should be self-determining and not let others deter-
mine our destiny. 
 
          During the workshop entitled, "Reparations for 
the Masses: The New Black Student Movement," 
professor S.E. Anderson, author of "Black Holocaust 
Dr. Raymond Winbush 
Facing center


--- PAGE 383 ---
11 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
for Beginners," discussed the need for the reparation 
movement to be a political force, rooted in the com-
munity and driven by the spirit of young Black schol-
ars. Anderson asserts that, among other things, the 
reparations movement is about repair, when stating 
that,  "apart of the repair is to reconnect young people 
to the revolution. The reparations movement has to 
be rooted in the community." 
 
       Anderson spoke on the need for reparations to be 
executed in the correct matte r. "There is no compro-
mise in reparations," said Anderson. Reparations, ac-
cording to Anderson, would be put towards the health 
crisis in Africa and Latin America, the building of 
Black communities in the United States and to ap-
proach other issues created by the racist actions of 
international policies. Anderson discussed the repara-
tions movement in an international context. In a na-
tional context, Anderson discussed educational geno-
cide, the oppressive nature of the United States eco-
nomic system and the need for young people to enter 
the movement.  
 
       Professor William Wiecek, presented a workshop 
focusing on "The Legitimacy of the Slave-Trade in 
and to the United States, 1770-1830." This presenta-
tion discussed the legality of slavery based on written 
law. Wiecek concluded in the workshop that slavery 
was illegal and therefore the reparations should be 
produced for sufferers of the system. 
 
          The issues coming out of the reparations are 
extremely important in the struggle for restoring, re-
pairing and healing African peoples. This is something 
that cannot be repaired by writing out a check and put-
ting it in the mail. Whatever is done has to have a long-
term effect, such as a free college education or paying 
fewer taxes. The reparations movement works towards 
empowering, offering hope and forcing America to ac-
knowledge that slavery was indeed a crime against hu-
manity. The U.S. has officially said that it will never 
apologize for slavery. This makes absolutely no sense 
considering that the United States has given reparations 
to other groups. In 1990, Japanese-Americans who were 
interred during World War II were given $1.2 billion 
and received an apology from Reagan. In 1985, the La-
kota Indians of South Dakota were given $105 million. 
In 1971, Alaskan Natives were given $1 billion and four 
million acres of land. Thus, the issue of reparations is 
not the United States' reluctance to give up monetary 
funds, but rather the United States refusal to acknowl-
edge its history. 
 
Copyright  
(c) 2003, The Black Voice, Syracuse, New York, 
13244. 
 
The Black Voice 
Syracuse University 
303 University Place 
Schine Student Center 126E 
Syracuse, New York 13244 
Phone: 315.443.4688 
Fax: 315.443.5458 
Website: students.syr.edu/blackvoice 
Professor Sam Anderson with two students


--- PAGE 384 ---
12 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
The 19 th century leader and scholar, Rev. Francis J. 
Grimke’s 1898 sermon proclaimed: 
 
If justice sleeps in this land, let it not be because we 
have helped to lull it to sleep by our silence, our indif-
ference; let it not be from lack of effort on our part to 
arouse it from its slumbers….Justice in this land may 
go on slumbering, but let us see to it that it is due to no 
fault of ours….God gave Balaam’s ass and (us) the 
power to cry out, endowed (us) miraculously with 
speech in which to voice our protest.   
 
 
  The Trans At-
lantic Slave Trade was 
clearly a crime co-
sponsored by the Church 
and the State.    Scripture 
was used and church 
doctrine was mandated to 
justify it.  Laws were in-
stituted and economies 
and arms were organized 
to effect it.  Both the 
Church and the State 
benefited.   
 
The Catholic Pa-
pacy condoned and sanc-
tified the slave trade.  It 
was the Pope’s orders – 
the papal bulls - that substantially framed 
the origins, evolution and sanctions of 
the early Trans Atlantic Slave Trade.  In 1442, 
Pope Eugenius IV approved the bull Illius Qui that 
granted Portugal and Prince Henry’s expeditions ex-
clusive rights over their African discoveries.  Pope 
Calixtus III established the Order of Christ in 1456 as 
the knightly association over Portuguese interest and 
dominions.  The association,  led by Prince Henry the 
Navigator, had oversight for the slave trade.  In 1488, 
Pope Innocent VIII accepted the gift of 100 slaves 
from Ferdinand of Spain and distributed the slaves to 
the cardinals and nobles  throughout the Christian 
world.  By the time Christopher Columbus sat sail in 
1492, the Catholic Church had over a century of Blood 
on their hands relative to the establishment of the 
Trans Atlantic Slave Trade.  In 1637, the Portuguese 
surrendered their African headquarters, Elmina Castle 
and Fort in Cape Coast, Ghana, West Africa to the 
Dutch.  The top floor of the west wing was trans-
formed into a Dutch Reformed Church.   Engraved 
above the entrance to the cleric’s door was Psalm 
132.13  
 
For the Lord has chosen Zion, 
He has desired it for his dwelling. 
 
Over 2500 ships have been documented to 
have made repeated trips across the Atlantic.   In a 
survey of 93 Portuguese 
and Brazilian ships, 81 had 
religious names; many 
named after saints or vir-
gins.   Jesus,  Grace of God 
and Bom Jesus  are just 
three of the names of slave 
ships that demonstrate how 
this evil system was carried 
out under the name of God.    
 
The Christian churches and 
denominations managed 
and dominated the daily 
operations of the slave 
ports throughout the trian-
gle including Anglican, 
Catholics, Huguenots, Cal-
vinists and Quakers. 
   
In the early 17
th c e n t u r y   P h i l i p  I I I ,  K i n g  o f  
Spain, ordered that all slave ships carry a priest on 
board.    A catechism and ritual performed by the 
priest for such a baptism was:  
 
“Consider that you are now children of Christ.  
You are going to set off for Portuguese territory, 
where you will learn matters of the Faith.  Never think 
any more of your place of origin.  Do not eat dogs, nor 
rats, nor horses.  Be content.” 
 
Then the “saved” would be given a Christian name, 
salt sprinkled on the tongue and a blessing by holy 
water. 
(Continued on page 13) 
A Trail of Blood:  The Church and Reparations 
  
by Dr. Iva E. Carruthers 
Dr. Iva E. Carruthers 
Photo by Wautella


--- PAGE 385 ---
13 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Church And Reparations 
(Continued from page 12) 
The Church’s silence, old and new must be broken! 
 
What Churches Can Do……..   
 
Activities 
 
1.          Engage in a congregational wide exploration 
of how members’ personal or family saga substantiate 
some link to the Maafa or this breach of God’s way, 
either as an  indirect beneficiary or victim.   Gather 
some evidences of the ways in which the breach is re-
vealed in family histories, artifacts; still carried on by 
ideas, images or current events. 
 
2.          Initiate a church wide study of slavery or 
reparations by using a book review process, small 
group classes, outside lecturers etc.  
 
3.          Do research and create a Knowledge Board 
on life as a slave and on plantation  
 
Congregational Actions 
 
1.          Host a community awareness event on HR. 
40 and the current activities being undertaken on be-
half of African American reparations. 
 
2.          E-Mail congressional representatives on be-
half of HR 40 and encourage others to do the same.   
 
Using the radio airways is one way that Southeast Re-
gional Representative, Sister Njeri Alghanee gets the 
word out about Reparations, and in Atlanta WAOK- 
AM, Talk Back Atlanta with Chris Askew, is one re-
source that she has carefully cultivated.  As a result, 
Chris Askew is a supporter of N’COBRA and the 
Reparations movement.  But nothing can ever take the 
place of getting out in the trenches and taking the word 
about Reparations to where 
the people are.  That is why 
the Southeast Region is ac-
tively taking the message of 
Reparations for the African 
Holocaust of American En-
slavement off the beaten 
path. Through the region’s 
efforts, unions representing 
the National Culinary Art-
ists, Black hospitality work-
ers, chauffeurs, maids, but-
lers, cooks and master chefs, 
throughout the U. S., are get-
ting on board the train that is 
carrying us all to victory. 
 
N’COBRA’s work is being 
taken to meetings with Rastas from the African Dias-
pora, including and not limited to the WI islands, and 
Southeast Region Leaves No Stone Uuturned! 
Reported by 
Njere Alghanee,  
 
Southeast Region Representative 
there is strong acknowledgment of the interconnect-
edness of our struggles.  Literature about Reparations 
is being taken to new and potentially fertile arenas 
such as the Southern International Working Women’s 
Conference hosted by the Black Workers For Justice 
Union.  Relationships with long time allies, such as 
the All African Revolutionary Peoples Party are also 
being strengthened as evidenced by the region’s 
strong participation in the 
Party’s recent tribute to Se-
kou Toure and Kwame 
Nkrumah. And when oppor-
tunities arise such as the 
Black African Holocaust 
Conference held at Clark 
Atlanta University, you can 
rest assured that Sister Njeri 
Algany will be there ac-
tively engaged in the discus-
sion about Reparations.  If 
you live in the Southeast 
region which includes North 
Carolina, South Carolina, 
Georgia, Florida, Alabama, 
Mississippi, Virginia and 
West Virginia and you want 
to get involved in this important effort contact Sister 
Njere Alghanee at 404.696.8139. 
                                Njere Alghanee Photo by Ma’at


--- PAGE 386 ---
14 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
The National Conference of Black Law-
yers (NCBL) held its 35 th annual con-
ference in Washington, DC, October 10, 
11, and 12, 2003. The theme was 
“Recommitting To Purpose.”   
 
During the annual meeting segment of 
the Conference, a broad formal discus-
sion was held on the current litigation 
strategies that are helping to build the 
movement to win reparations. The pre-
senters represented the cutting edge le-
gal work that has been mounted by 
Black lawyers to advocate for repara-
tions in the courts of the United States: 
 
Imhotep Alkebulan, Esq., male co-chair of NCBL and 
plaintiffs’ counsel in  Imari Obadele and Kurattibisha 
X Ali Rashid v. US , popularly known as the equal pro-
tection case, gave an update on this case that had been 
on application for a writ of certiorari before the United 
States Supreme Court. Roger Wareham, Esq., of the 
December 12
th Movement and of NCBL and plaintiffs’ 
counsel in the well known corporation reparations law-
suit in which Deadria Farmer-Paellmann is among the 
named plaintiffs; gave an update on this important 
case.  
 
Adjoa A. Aiyetoro, Esq., chair of N’COBRA’s Legal 
Strategies (LS) Commission, former national director 
of NCBL,  and N’COBRA’s representative on the 
Reparations Coordinating Committee (RCC),  is plain-
tiffs’ counsel in Alexander et al v. The Governor, State 
of Oklahoma et al.  She gave an update on this case in 
which N’COBRA and the RCC represent the survivors 
of the 1921 Tulsa, Oklahoma massacre. She also gave 
an update on N’COBRA’s other litigation work that 
included the filing of an amicus curiae brief before the 
United States Supreme Court on behalf of the Univer-
sity of Michigan in the recently decided affirmative 
action case. She further explained N’COBRA’s enor-
mous step forward shown by the recent creation of the 
N’COBRA Legal, Education, Research and Defense 
Fund and the LS Commission’s exploration of single 
plaintiff cases that involve land loss, racial profiling 
and possibly other single issues. Finally, she provided 
the status of N’COBRA’s progress towards the filing 
of N’COBRA’s series of mammoth class action law-
suits for reparations against the United 
States of America. 
 
All of the speakers provided very in-
formative presentations and each in-
spired great interest in this cutting edge 
legal work to win reparations for Black 
people. Each speaker spoke in the 
spirit of operational unity as discussed 
in Dr. Ron Walters' excellent essay on 
the subject as it pertains to the devel-
opment of litigation strategies to win 
reparations. 
 
A particular high point was the pres-
ence of so many NCBL legal warriors 
in the room who are also members of 
N’COBRA and who have been hard at work develop-
ing N’COBRA’s litigation strategy that continues to 
originate uniquely from the enormous depths of the 
grassroots’ movement of Black people for Repara-
tions.  
 
Among those present were Chokwe Lumumba, a 
member of N’COBRA’s LS Commission and for-
merly co-chair of the criminal punishment sub-
committee of the LS Commission; Gilda Sherrod-Ali, 
the newly elected female co-chair of NCBL and mem-
ber of the LS Commission and formerly, female co-
chair of the criminal punishment sub-committee of the 
LS Commission; Nkechi Taifa, a member of the LS 
Commission; Mark Fancher, former male co-chair of 
NCBL and current chair of the education sub-
committee of the LS Commission; Ajamu Sankofa, 
male co-chair of the criminal punishment sub-
committee of the LS Commission; and Efia Wangaza 
chair of the wealth and poverty sub-committee of the 
LS Commission.  
 
It is certainly not a surprise that N’COBRA was in the 
house. NCBL was a founding organizational member 
of N’COBRA when N’COBRA was organized in late 
1987 and early 1988 and, as such, continues its legacy 
since 1968 as the legal arm of the Black Liberation 
movement. NCBL’s 35
th “recommitting to purpose” 
conference magnificently displayed NCBL’s total and 
effective commitment to win reparations for Black 
people. 
Attorneys Discuss Reparations  
                 at the 35th Annual Conference of the National  Conference of  Black Lawyers       
 
                      By Ajamu Sankofa, esq. 
Photo by Ma’at


--- PAGE 387 ---
15 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Leadership is a skill and a talent that can be taught but 
that only improves with practice. Leadership must 
have both an individual and group aspect. Hence, Af-
rican leadership is the capacity of an African to guide 
other Africans consciously and purposefully from a 
lowly state to an elevated state. African leadership 
also is the capacity of African people as a group to or-
ganize the power of African people such that we as a 
people actually move accordingly to that preconceived 
elevated state.  
 
There has been a continuous crisis in the leadership of 
African people residing in this territory that we refer 
to as the United States for a long time. African schol-
ars are showing us the features of this crisis in leader-
ship as it arose out of our kidnapping from our Moth-
erland, Africa. 
 
One sign of the crises of leadership among our people 
today who reside in the US has still been that too 
many of our so-called “leaders” make decisions over 
the survival of Black people only after first seeking 
approval for that decision from white people. 
 
If we wish to exercise effective leadership that ele-
vates African people we must be prepared to exercise 
the spiritual, emotional, intellectual, and physical in-
dependence of thought and action such that we are not 
disoriented by white supremacy’s shell games. We 
must end forever seeking validation from white peo-
ple. Further, it matters not whether that white person 
calls him/herself a liberal, progressive, socialist, 
Marxist, revolutionary,…or in some cases your 
friend….etc. 
 
This is a very significant and large issue. This ten-
dency itself is a profound vestige of chattel slavery: 
Many terms are used to describe aspects of it:  “slave 
mentality,” post traumatic slavery syndrome, and 
many others. 
 
So the first foundational African rule of African lead-
ership is that we exercise full freedom and independ-
ence of thought and action in the interest of the full 
freedom of African people from all systems of power 
that act or seek to act to restrict or destroy our free-
dom.   
 
The color Black is very important in this discussion as 
well.  
 
It is precisely through the all pervasive symbolic con-
tent of color, propagandistically conveyed by white 
supremacists power centers, that creates and perpetu-
ates negative and self-destructive images of African 
people that, in addition to sheer physical oppression, 
disorient us mentally.  So the tendency to be deferen-
tial to white people shows up in our willingness to al-
low white people (or whiteness) to define what we 
fight for and how we fight for it. This is very often just 
below our conscious awareness but runs as deep as our 
most personal image of God. 
 
I have three examples, of the effect of our present day 
injury of this deference to white people. It occurs in 
spite of an internal conflict of our people not to be that 
way. As leaders, we will face this challenge daily and 
our task is to overcome it daily: 
 
1. Far too many of our people who, despite knowing 
that white racism has caused our present condition, 
do not understand that African people are due 
reparations, now. They do  not understand this be-
cause they still do not experience their own human 
worthiness sufficiently to demand reparations 
Now. This effects all classes of our people.  
  
2. Far too many of our people do not believe that we 
can actually win Reparations. This is a crisis of 
confidence! 
 
3. And very sadly, far too many of our people are so 
       consumed with fear and rage caused by the experi 
       ence of their circumstances that they are more 
       willing to destroy their brothers and their sisters 
       rather than their real enemy.   
 
Our specific deep leadership challenge as leaders in 
the reparations movement  is to transform more and 
more of these folks (just described above)  into coura-
geous, self-confident, self-educated, and effective ac-
tivists who then start building the reparations move-
ment at their highest level of capacity; in that process 
we as leaders are transforming ourselves as well.  
By going after this bottom layer of consciousness in 
(Continued on page 32) 
Rules On African Leadership 
 In The Movement To Win Reparations 
 
By Ajamu K. Sankofa, N’COBRA National Secretary


--- PAGE 388 ---
16 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
The Northeast Regional Working Group's first meet-
ing was held on Sunday Sept 14, 2003. The overall 
sentiment was that it was a very good and productive 
meeting with full realization that we have a long way 
to go. The meeting was chaired by Sam Anderson. 
 
The meeting began with a brief discussion of the 
state of the US Reparations Movement and the 
newly  formed Global Afrikan Congress. Emphasis 
was placed on the need for coordinated actions on all 
Reparations fronts. The National Reparations Con-
gress would be that body that would help in coordi-
nating efforts around all the legal work, bills, peti-
tions, resolutions, law suits, and mass education 
work. The Congress would be a complement to –not 
a replacement of- one organization. 
 
The first National Prepcom meeting was held in New 
York in May 2003 and regions were created in the 
Northeast, MidWest, South and West.  On October 
18, 2003 at Kent State University, there will be a 
MidWest Regional PrepCom. October 31, 2003,  the 
Southern Regional PrepCom meeting will be held in 
Birmingham, Ala-
bama.  On December 
20, 2003 the second 
National PrepCom 
Meeting will be held 
in Atlanta, Geor-
gia.   Regional meet-
ings are to be held leading up to the NRC.  A Na-
tional Reparations Conference is planned, possibly 
during Memorial Day Weekend, but this may be a 
bad time because of holiday traveling 2004 in either 
Atlanta or Compton, California.  Organizers in 
Compton have already offered free space for all 
those attending the conference.  There is a strong 
support network in Compton and having the confer-
ence there would be a good idea.   However, in the 
past, having conferences in California has led to lo-
gistical issues. Traveling to the West Coast and then 
moving around once there has proven to be problem-
atic.  It was mentioned that the highest concentration 
of Afrikan-Americans are in the Northeast and sur-
rounding areas.  The possibility of delaying the con-
ference to August of 2004, thus allowing more time 
for mobilization was also raised. Chicago, Philadel-
phia and Newark were also mentioned as potential 
locations. A proposal is being developed for a New 
York-based Conference to be held in August 2004.  A 
New York Conference would assist the Charles Bar-
ron Mayoral Campaign.  There is also consideration 
for an August 2004 Conference in New York 
City.  The securing of a venue seemed feasible and 
scheduling was not seen as a problem. 
 
Who Are We Organizing? 
 
We are going to focus our attention on those already 
organized but not forsake the inclusion of the masses 
that must be informed and included.  We do not want 
people to lose energy and/or focus.  We are often a 
crisis-oriented people who respond to the crunch of 
deadlines.  If we stress the need for immediate action 
our people will respond.  It was suggested that we fol-
low the steps of those proposals developed prior to 
and at the 2001 Durban World Conference Against 
Racism. 
 
For the US Reparations Movement to move forward 
effectively militancy must be re-injected into it.  There 
was a consensus that we needed to 
move beyond radical lawyers and 
professors and take our struggle to a 
higher level of street/grassroots orga-
nizing.  The concept of having the 
conference during the Republican 
National Convention in August of 
2004 (to be held in NYC) was raised.  This would 
sharply expose the contradictions between what the 
Republicans and the right in general represent and our 
Reparations Movement.  We would hopefully revital-
ize the lost militancy and momentum of our struggle.   
A lot of energy has been given to the present anti-war 
movement in which we have participated. We have 
always had our issues put on the back burner for 
America’s wars.  We can no longer suppress our 
Reparations Movement to accommodate their imperial 
and racist wars. 
 
Popularizing the Reparations Movement 
 
We must make Reparations a household term and con-
cept.  The National Bar Association has taken into 
their Resolution the recent Goree Island statements of 
President Bush.  The utilization of economic boycott 
must again be used as a tactic. The NRC must create 
Formation of the National Reparations Congress 
 
By Sam Anderson & David Horne 
“For the US Reparations Movement to 
move forward effectively militancy must 
be re-injected into it.”


--- PAGE 389 ---
17 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
an infrastructure, which brings together groups across 
the country that are focused on Reparations.  We must 
initiate an education campaign. 
 
The West Coast National Reparations Congress 
PrepCom was held 9/13/03 at the L.A. Convention 
Center at 10:00 am.  The welcome and invocation 
were given by Dr. David L. Horne.  The group further 
clarified the focus of the NRC as follows: 
 
1.  Serve as a clearinghouse of Reparations materials 
and analysis 
2. Coordinate information about Reparations activities 
3.  Develop mass education material regarding Repa-
rations 
4.  Support the development of the international tribu-
nal on Reparations 
5. Encourage a comprehensive discussion about the 
possible forms that Reparations will take for African 
Americans. 
 
Further Clarification of Who Will Be Invited / Who 
Will Attend the NRC     
 
You must be Black (Afrikan or Black Afrikan De-
scendant).  You must be able to demonstrate that you 
are doing work aimed at achieving reparations for Af-
rican Americans (or Africans in the diaspora in order 
to come as observers). There was persistent discussion 
by two attendees from the Nigretians, who demanded 
to be called and to allow us all to be called Niggas, as 
a reportedly original name.   They were eventually 
told to bring their argument, with substantial support-
ing data, and make their case, as long as the aim of the 
Nigretians (which was not self-evident) was to 
achieve reparations for Black folk, by whatever name 
they wanted to use. 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
Shabaka Heru requested, for purposes of clarity in the 
movement, a Mission and Declaration of three reason-
able objectives at the NRC that communities could 
then work on diligently.  Warren Williams has submit-
ted a replacement Bill for HR40 to Rep. John Con-
yers.   There was a recommendation that future plan-
ning meetings be limited to discussion relevant to 
planning and that we stay on point (They were not at 
all sure that the Nigretians belonged in this planning 
session--the Nigretians made their identification point 
clear, but Ernie and Alex said they heard nothing from 
those advocates about supporting reparations for Afri-
can Americans). 
 
 
 
Avenge the Ancestors 
  
No more burning 
camphor to protect our flesh 
from the blinding dark 
of all these years 
pounding  
our fists against the nothingness 
of a debt they refuse to pay. 
Our tears are without form 
because the ocean carried us, 
and the fields we worked sustained 
us. 
Our hands built empires 
they did not lead, 
but at night the moon showered 
us 
with kindnesses so we stole away. 
Now the darkness we light  
with the rich ore of our veins 
speaks: 
“Now, our Reparations now”. 
We have given too much 
not to take what is ours. 
  
 
by 
Zumbi Soweto


--- PAGE 390 ---
18 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
History of N’COBRA’s Legislative Front 
(Continued from page 1) 
Rep. Dymally; Rep. Ford, H.; Rep. Rangel; Rep. 
Collins; Rep. Bates; Rep. Crockett; Rep. Hayes C.; 
Rep. Owens M.; Rep. Towns; Rep. Dixon; Rep. Espy; 
Rep. Hawkins; Rep. Lewis, John; Rep. Jacobs; Rep. 
Mineta; Rep. Stokes; Rep. Payne, D.  Since that origi-
nal filing, in each Congress the bill has been reintro-
duced, and submitted to the House Committee on the 
Judiciary.  Starting with its introduction on January 5, 
1993, the bill has consistently carried the historically 
symbolic numeral, “HR 40,” in remembrance of the 
“40 acres” of confiscated confederate land legisla-
tively-passed (albeit by a slim margin) by both Houses 
of Congress in 1886, but executorially-vetoed by An-
drew Johnson.      
 
Rep. Conyers has stated that he receives more 
mail in support of his Reparations Commission Bill 
(HR 40), than just about any other legislative issue.  
Since the 1990’s, the Congressman has insured a na-
tional legislative focus on the issue of reparations by 
convening a workshop, panel or braintrust on the issue 
of reparations each year at the Congressional Black 
Caucus’ annual Legislative Weekend.    At the Septem-
ber 16, 1993 Congressional Black Caucus panel on 
reparations, this author presented remarks entitled, “A 
Scientific Approach for a Preliminary Legislative Strat-
egy in Support of HR 40.”    The challenge the remarks 
strove to answer was how to scientifically link the 
growing, positive grassroots sentiment in support of 
reparations to concrete legislative action in support of 
HR 40.   The strategic approach outlined in the presen-
tation was threefold:  First, the gathering of legislative 
intelligence compiling the voting record of Members in 
the House and Senate with respect to the Japanese-
American reparations legislation, and the compilation 
of a comprehensive list of organizations who supported 
that legislation.  Second, using the legislative intelli-
gence gathered, lobby each of the Members still in 
Congress who once co-sponsor of HR 40; encourage 
those Members who were not in Congress at the time 
of the Japanese-American bill to co-sponsor and vote in 
favor of HR 40; encourage the Judiciary Committee’s 
Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights to 
schedule a formal hearing on HR 40; encourage spe-
cific Caucuses to endorse HR 40; and seek the intro-
duction of a companion bill in the Senate.  The third 
prong of the strategy was to provide model pieces of 
legislation and generate state, local and organizational 
resolutions supporting HR 40, particularly amongst 
groups which previously supported the Japanese-
American reparations.   
Since then, throughout the Congresses (103 rd, 
104th, 105 th, 106 th , and now 107 th), the above strate-
gies have been part and parcel of the activities of 
N’COBRA’s Legislative Commission.  The requisite 
voting records, long since compiled, are now relatively 
obsolete, due to the transient nature of Congress.  It 
may be instructive, however, to currently note the 
names of the organizations who supported the Civil 
Liberties Act Amendments of 1992, which represent 
the most recent action related to the issue of the Japa-
nese-American internment. 
  
They are, as reported by the Japanese-
American Citizens League, as follows:  A. Philip 
Randolph Institute; American Baptist Church, USA; 
American Federation of Labor – Congress of Industrial 
Organizations; American Friends Service Committee; 
American Jewish Committee; American Jewish Con-
gress; Americans for Democratic Action; Asian 
American Legal defense and Education Fund; Asian 
Americans for Equality; Asian Pacific American Labor 
Alliance; Anti-Defamation League; Arab-American 
Anti-Discrimination Committee; B’nai B’rith Women; 
Center for Women Policy Studies; Chinese American 
Citizens Alliance; Church of the Brethren Washington 
Office; Friends Committee on National Legislation; 
International Ladies’ Garment Workers Union; Japa-
nese American Citizens League; Leadership Confer-
ence on Civil Rights; Mexican American Legal De-
fense and Educational Fund; National Asian Pacific 
American Bar Association; National Committee 
Against Repressive Legislation; National Congress of 
American Indians; National Council of Churches; Na-
tional Council of Jewish Women; National Council of 
La Raza; National Education Association; Organiza-
tion of Chinese Americans; Presbyterian Church USA; 
Project Equality; Service Employees International Un-
ion; Unitarian Universalist Association of Congrega-
tions; United Church of Christ – Office for Church in 
Society; United Methodist Church, General Board of 
Church and Society; Women’s International League 
for Peace and Freedom. 
 
The Legislative Commission of N’COBRA 
has sought endorsement for HR 40 and the general 
concept of reparations for African descendants in the 
United States from a wide variety of national organiza-
tions, ranging from social action and professional 
groups to religious and labor organizations.  Some of 
these endorsements emanated specifically from direct 
appeals by N’COBRA members; some through the 
groups’ own volition; and others as the result of the


--- PAGE 391 ---
19 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
growing preeminence of The Reparations Movement 
across the country.  A sampling of these groups in-
clude:  NAACP, National Baptist Convention, Delta 
Sigma Theta Sorority, Sigma Gamma Rho Sorority, 
Association of Black Psychologists, Women’s Interna-
tional League for Peace and Freedom, National Con-
ference of Black Political Scientists, National Confer-
ence of Black Lawyers, National Bar Association, In-
ternational Association of Black Firefighters, Ameri-
can Civil Liberties Union, Southern Christian Leader-
ship Conference, AFL-CIO, National Association of 
Real Estate Brokers, National Political Congress of 
Black Women, Inc., Council of Independent Black In-
stitutions, National Black United Front, Black Radical 
Congress, Universal Negro Improvement Association, 
TransAfrica Forum, among many others. 
 
In addition to the ever-increasing organizational en-
dorsements, state and local resolutions have also pro-
liferated.  Again, it is hard to distinguish and isolate 
how much of this mobilization is the product of N’CO-
BRA’s lobbying and educational efforts or the sponta-
neous result of socially conscious legislators and their 
staff.  Suffice it to say, however, that each of these ef-
forts have combined to result in growing numbers of 
state and local legislatures formally adopting resolu-
tions in support of HR 40 or other reparations-type 
legislative initiatives.  These jurisdictions include the 
states of Louisiana, Florida and California; and the city 
councils of Atlanta, Georgia; Baltimore, Maryland; 
Burlington, Vermont; Jackson, Mississippi; Camden, 
Patterson, and Newark, New Jersey; Chicago, Illinois; 
Cleveland, Ohio; Dallas, Texas; Detroit, Michigan; 
Evanston, Illinois; Alameda County, Berkeley, Comp-
ton, Inglewood, Los Angeles, Oakland, Palo Alto, and 
San Francisco, California; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 
and Washington, DC.  It is important to note that com-
prehensive reparations legislation is pending in the 
states of New Jersey, New York, and Texas.   
 
Since its inception until the beginning of this 
century, the Legislative Commission was chaired by 
this author and subsumed under the auspices of N’CO-
BRA’s Legal Strategies Commission, chaired by Ad-
joa Aiyetoro.  The beginning years were successful in 
rallying behind a concrete legislative target, elucidat-
ing a strategic blueprint to maximize success, and oth-
erwise laying the groundwork which resulted in scores 
of municipalities passing supportive pieces of legisla-
tion.  As a significant amount of the Legal Strategies 
Commission’s attention became increasingly focused 
on the litigative front, the Legislative Committee was 
authorized as an independent Commission of N’CO-
BRA during the June 2000 N’COBRA National Con-
vention in Washington, D.C.     
 
Following that reorganization the Legislative 
Commission focused on the development of a core Mis-
sion statement; concrete objectives, and a specific plan 
of action for each Congress.  The Commission’s articu-
lated mission is to “achieve passage of H.R. 40, The 
Commission to Study Reparation Proposals for African 
Americans Act, introduced each year since 1989 by 
Congressman John Conyers, or passage of comparable 
federal legislation which leads to a comprehensive 
award of reparations for African Americans based on 
slavery and post-slavery discrimination.  The Legisla-
tive Commission will also actively support reparations 
initiatives at the state and local levels.”  The Commis-
sion was formally structured to 1) maximize communi-
cation and coordination with all the different and rap-
idly growing segments of the national N’COBRA, 2) 
compile all the federal, state, local and organization 
resolutions in a centralized repository; and 3) formulate 
and distribute legislative packets for N’COBRA mem-
bers and other interested parties to assist in lobbying 
Congress, and other activities.   
 
The June 2000 N’COBRA Convention, held in 
Washington, D.C., can be heralded as a model for so-
phisticated lobby training and scientifically structured 
lobby visits.  Conducted in the Rayburn House Office 
Building on the Wednesday preceding and Monday fol-
lowing the annual Convention, the training consisted of 
simulation, role play, and questions and answers on the 
lobbying tips discussed, accompanied with spirited dia-
logue.  Targeted lobbying visits during that National 
Lobby Day resulted in the successful co-sponsorship of 
five of the targeted nine previously recalcitrant Con-
gresspersons. 
 
In 2002, Kibibi Tyehimba, co-chair of the DC 
Chapter of N’COBRA, brought her expertise to the 
Legislative Commission as co-chair, joining this author 
in seeking to move the legislative thrust for reparations 
forward.  2002 was also the inception of the Legislative 
Commission’s first flagship project, “A Year of Black 
Presence,” under the leadership of Milton McGriff of 
the N’COBRA Philadelphia Chapter.  McGriff’s vision, 
inspired by the words of Randall Robinson in his piv-
otal book, “The Debt – What America Owes to Blacks,” 
has soared the work of the Legislative Commission to a 
heightened new level, putting into action the strategy 
first articulated ten years ago of how to link positive, 
grassroots activism to concrete legislative support for 
(Continued on page 35)


--- PAGE 392 ---
20 
A B 
C 
E D F 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Reparations Forum 2003:  “Honoring The Debt” 
Congressional Black Caucus Legislative Conference 
A. Congressman John Conyers, Jr., Detroit, Michigan 
 
B.   Senator (Retired) Bill Owens of Boston, Massachusetts  
 
C. Councilman Charles Barron of Brooklyn, New York 
 
D.  Ms. Sallome Halima, Youth4Reparations Activists 
 
E.  Ms. Rasheida Smith , New York NCOBRA Youth Activist  
 
F.  Mr. Kahlil Almustafa, Youth4Reparations Activists 
 
All Photos by Wautella


--- PAGE 393 ---
21 
C 
E D 
B 
A 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Reparations Forum 2003:  “Honoring The Debt” 
Congressional Black Caucus Legislative Conference 
A. Ms. Faye Rose Sanders, Esq., Reparations Coordinating 
Committee 
 
B. Alderwoman Dorothy Tillman of Chicago, Illinois 
 
C. Dr. Imari Obadele, Min. of Foreign Affairs, Republic of 
New Afrika  
 
D. Mr. Ken Fealing, Director of Civil and Human Rights for the 
United Methodist Church 
 
E. Dr. Iva Carruthers and Ms. DeBorah White, United 
Church of Christ (UCC) 
All Photos by Wautella


--- PAGE 394 ---
22 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
developed an excellent study guide that provides sound 
arguments for Reparations from a religious perspective.   
Mr. Ken Fealing, Director of Civil and Human Rights 
for the United Methodist Church also provided an 
overview of his congregation’s commitment to Repara-
tions.  The United Methodist Church membership to-
tals approximately 8 Million.  Both the United Method-
ist Church and the United Church of Christ are national 
and international church communities with predomi-
nantly white congregations, an indi-
cation that support for the Repara-
tions movement is growing.  Ms. 
Faye Rose Sanders, Esq., an attor-
ney with the Reparations Coordi-
nating Committee, provided an up-
date on the recently filed class ac-
tion lawsuit on behalf of the survi-
vors and descendants of the Tulsa 
Oklahoma Massacre of the Black 
township of Greenwood.  Dr. Imari 
Obadele, Min. of Foreign Affairs, 
Republic of New Afrika was in-
vited by Congressman Conyers to 
present background information on 
his “Equal Protection Reparations 
Law suit, which had recently, been 
submitted to the Supreme Court for 
a hearing.    In addition, Youth4Re-
parations Activists, Mr. Kahlil Al-
mustafa and Ms. Sallome Halima 
discussed their involvement in the 
Reparations Movement and their 
efforts to sensitize their communi-
ties to the connection between the Movement, and the 
various social, political, and economic issues they face.  
 
         In addition to the Reparations Forum, N’COBRA, 
Legislative Commission Co-Chair, Ms. Kibibi Tye-
himba, and New York NCOBRA Youth Activist Ms. 
Rasheida Smith conducted an organizing workshop on 
Friday September 26.  Workshop participation was 
good and even included a high school class of about 20 
students.  The exchange between all the participants 
was very rewarding.  
 
N’COBRA Reparations Activists from New 
York, New Jersey, Washington, DC and Baltimore 
seized every opportunity to raise the issue of Repara-
On September 25, 2003 Congressman John 
Conyers, Jr., hosted his annual Reparations Forum, 
during the recent Congressional Black Caucus Legis-
lative Conference.  This year the Legislative Commis-
sion played a significant role in the development of 
the forum, entitled “Honoring the Debt.”  The forum 
highlighted several elected officials who have been 
instrumental in introducing resolutions and bills in 
their municipalities, in support of H.R. 40 and Repa-
rations, several Faith Community 
Activists, and two Reparations 
Activists fighting the battle on 
the legal front.   Alderwoman 
Dorothy Tillman of Chicago, Illi-
nois, Councilman Charles Barron 
of Brooklyn, New York, and 
Senator (Retired) Bill Owens of 
Boston, Massachusetts provided 
an overview of the resolutions 
and bills introduced in their ar-
eas, and why they committed 
themselves to the cause for Repa-
rations for African Americans.  
Both the Massachusetts and New 
York bills are still pending.  
However, the Chicago Illinois 
Reparations Ordinance was 
adopted in April, 2000.    Alder-
woman Tillman provided exten-
sive detail about her commu-
nity’s approach to the Chicago 
Reparations hearings, which in-
cluded the testimony of re-
nowned African American historians and social scien-
tists, and personal testimony from the community.   
By the end of the testimony there was no doubt about 
the validity of the African American quest for Repa-
rations.  The success of the Chicago model is cer-
tainly one that should be duplicated in other cities and 
states seeking to adopt legislation in support of this 
important issue.    
 
           Dr. Iva Carruthers and Ms. DeBorah White 
represented the United Church of Christ (UCC), 
which has 1.4 Million members.  They outlined their 
congregation’s commitment to atoning and correcting 
the injustices committed against Africans and their 
descendants in the past and present.  The UCC has 
Legislative Commission Update 
 
By  Kibibi Tyehimba, Co-Chair 
N'COBRA Legislative Commission 
                  Kibibi Tyehimba 
 Photo by Wautella


--- PAGE 395 ---
23 
tions in many of the other Issue Forums, and encour-
aged Congressional Black Caucus Representatives, 
who had not already done so, to co-sponsor H.R. 40.   
It is due to the efforts of these Reparations Activists 
that two additional CBC members have signed on to H.
R. 40, bringing the total number of co-sponsors to 39.  
Congressman Melvin Watt of North Carolina is one of 
the two most recent co-sponsors.  He had not signed on 
to H.R. 40 since the 105
th Congress in 1997.   Delegate 
Donna Christian-Christensen of the Virgin Islands also 
agreed to co-sponsor H.R. 40.   Special thanks go out 
to Brother Ahmad Daniels of North Carolina, who had 
previously lobbied Congressman Watt on behalf of the 
Bill, and Brother Livingston Cummings who person-
ally escorted Congressman Watt over to Congressman 
Conyers during the Thursday night Jazz concert to have 
a "little talk" about the bill.  Thanks to Brother Milt 
McGriff and Brother Rob Bell, who helped to remind 
Delegate Christensen during her forum that she had 
signed on to the bill in the past.  She admitted to the 
oversight and promised to rectify the error.   Both of 
these cases are examples of the impact that even one or 
two people can make with a little persistence. 
 
         We encourage all Reparations Activists to follow 
the example of these brothers and take time to visit 
your Congressmen and Congresswomen at their state 
offices or at their offices here in Washington, DC to 
lobby on behalf of H.R. 40.    There are now seven re-
maining CBC representative who have yet to sign on to 
the bill.  Organize your community and call them up, 
harass them, send them letters and faxes. Write articles 
for your local newspapers and let your community 
know that they are not representing their interests. In-
clude some history of your state's participation in the 
era of enslavement. Tell how many Black men and 
women were lynched in your state during the Jim Crow 
era. And if you happen to live in a state that was im-
pacted by the riots and massacres during the Red Sum-
mer of 1919, remind your community of that. And of 
course tie all these facts to present day--- Racial profil-
ing, disparate treatment under the so-called Justice sys-
tem, lack of access to quality education, health care, 
and housing.  And then ask your community if it is un-
informed enough to believe that Affirmative Action, in 
just 30 years with no government appropriations to 
back it up, could ever erase the effects of 246 years of 
slavery and another 138 years of Jim Crow and sys-
temic racism. Here are the members of the CBC that 
you should target:   
Rep. Julia Carson Indiana (D) - 10th Congres-
sional District(Indianapolis)Committees: Financial Ser-
vices, Veterans' Affairs 1339 Longworth House Office 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Building Washington, DC 20515 202-225-4011 
 
Rep. James Clyburn, South Carolina (D) - 6th Congres-
sional District (Columbia, Charleston, Orangeburg, 
Sumter) Committees: Appropriations 319 Cannon 
House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 202-
225-3315 
 
Rep. Artur Davis, Alabama (D) - 7th District, 
208 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 
20515 202-225-2665 
 
Rep. Denise Majette, Georgia 9D) - 4th District, 
1517 Longworth House Office Building Washington, 
DC 20515 202-225-1605 
 
Rep. David Scott, Georgia (D) 13th District 
417 Cannon House Office Building Washington, DC 
20515 202-225-2939 
 
Rep. Robert Scott, Virginia (D) - 3rd Congressional 
District (Richmond, Newport News), Committees: Judi-
ciary, Education and the Workforce 2464 Rayburn 
House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 202-
225-8351 
 
Contact the N’COBRA Legislative Commission if you 
need help in your lobbying efforts at 202.466.1622 or 
LegiCom@AOL.com 
 
Remember the power to win Reparations is in our 
hands! 
 
More Than Jobs 
(Continued from page 3)   
want to own and control our own lives and livelihood. 
 
We want Justice, a world of justice.  We want freedom, 
including freedom of the mind and spirit, and we want 
equality between all peoples, and between men and 
women.  We want the wealth that our ancestors 
built.  We want the human rights that our fore parents 
fought and died for.  We want power over our own 
lives.  We want the Freedom to choose a new and better 
future than the one that looms before us, and we want 
Reparations NOW to make that future real.”


--- PAGE 396 ---
24 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
our just quest for material compensation. 
 
      The audience was also encouraged to organize 
more programs in the masjids they attend, and to get 
more involved in the Reparations Movement by joining 
N’COBRA and other organizations fighting for the just 
demands of people of African descent who have suf-
fered from the Trans-Atlantic slave trade and its after-
math. 
 
      Panelists such as Imam Muhammad Shareef, foun-
der of the Sankore Institute of Islamic-African Studies 
in Pittsburgh, and historian Amir Muhammad, founder 
of Collections & Stories of American Muslims mu-
seum, spoke authoritatively on the Islamic heritage of 
West Africa and African-
Americans. 
 
     The other panelists at this his-
toric conference, which is already 
inspiring similar efforts, were 
“Black Reparations Times” Editor, 
Wautella ibn Yusuf; author and 
publisher H. Khalif Khalifah of 
Virginia; Imam Abdul-Alim Musa 
of Masjid Al-Islam in Washington, D.C.; Imam Aiyub 
Abdul-Baqi of the Tauhid Center in Queens, N.Y.; and 
this writer. 
 
      On December 13th 2003, there will be another 
“Muslims for Reparations From A Muslim Perspec-
tive” at the Masjidu-Nur's Islamic Learning Center in 
Camden, N.J., from 11am-6pm.   It is our intention to 
pack our house.   The media and other Non-Muslim 
groups and leaders will be invited.     
 
Copies of the Washington, DC “Muslims for Repara-
tions” conference are available on videotape for $25 
plus $3 s/h from Dar Es Salaam Books, 4000 34
th St., 
Mt. Rainier, Md. 20712. For more information call 
301-728-8949 or 301-209-0010.  
 
Hodari Abdul-Ali is the Convener of Muslim Voices 
for Justice & Peace, and a member of the D.C. chapter 
of N’COBRA. He can be reached at 
mvjp_dc@hotmail.com 
 
     Let there be no doubt that the Reparations Move-
ment is alive and growing and expanding to all seg-
ments of our community. Further evidence was offered 
Sunday, September 28, 2003 at Howard University in 
Washington, D.C., when a special daylong conference 
entitled “Muslims For Reparations” was held. 
 
     While Muslims under the leadership of Minister 
Louis Farrakhan and Minister Silis Muhammad have 
long been active in the Reparations Movement, not as 
much has been heard from the Sunni or “orthodox” 
members of the African-American Muslim commu-
nity. Some readers may be unaware of the fact that, the 
overwhelming majority of African-American Muslims 
are not affiliated with the Nation of Islam. So this con-
ference was the first of its kind 
to get more of the general Mus-
lim community involved in this 
crucial issue. 
 
     “Muslims for Reparations” 
was organized by Muslim 
Voices for Justice & Peace, a 
Washington, D.C. area coali-
tion of activists and Imams that 
came together in April 2003 to oppose the U.S. inva-
sion of Iraq. The co-sponsor was the Islamic Propaga-
tion Project headed by Imam Abdur-Rahman Muham-
mad. 
 
     In addition to educating the Muslim community and 
others about reparations, the conference also sought to 
facilitate greater interaction between it and reparation 
activists, and provide more information about Islam. 
Most attendees felt that these goals were accom-
plished, although more time was needed for comments, 
questions and answers. 
  
     Moderator Zarinah Shakir and eight panelists spoke 
to an audience of over 100 people in two sessions that 
covered topics such as the Islamic view of reparations, 
social justice, slavery, and the legacy of Muslims ac-
tively fighting for the liberation of our people. Several 
speakers emphasized the fact that Islam is fundamen-
tally about justice, and that it is essential to the restora-
tion of the soul of the human being, even more so than 
Sunni Muslims Hold Reparations Conference 
 
By Hodari Abdul-Ali 
Muslims under the leadership of 
Minister Louis Farrakhan and 
Minister Silis Muhammad have 
long been active in the 
Reparations Movement


--- PAGE 397 ---
25 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Since I first embraced the Reparations Move-
ment in 1989, I have tried to take advantage 
of every appropriate situation to advance the 
work.  So I welcomed the opportunity to par-
ticipate in the bus tour sponsored by Missis-
sippi Congressman, Bennie Thompson.  This 
tour through his state was one of his get-out-
the-vote initiatives to encourage maximum 
turnout for the approaching fall statewide 
elections.  This opportunity arose when my husband, 
Dr. Imari Obadele, having helped out in past Missis-
sippi campaign work, was invited to come along for 
some neighborly support. 
 
This trip turned out to be very interesting and inspiring 
for me in several ways.  We boarded the bus in Bolton, 
Mississippi with some of the Congressman’s aides and 
other out of state visitors that included the Reverend 
Doctor Joseph E. Lowery.  Being in the prolonged pres-
ence of and having informal, captive access to this icon 
of the struggle, was an uplifting experience.  This 
eighty-year-old man kept us conversely thoughtful and 
entertained on the bus and he electrified the gathering at 
every stop, which included Yazoo City, Rolling Fork, 
Belzoni, Greenville, and Tunica.  He is a master of 
quick wit and humor that worked to perfection on this 
whirlwind tour. 
 
This trip was full of possibilities.  I passed out the 
N’COBRA information sheet and membership forms to 
the audience at each stop and I successfully solicited 
membership payments among those on the bus.  I 
waited patiently for “the feeling” that it was a good 
time to attempt to engage Rev. Lowery in a Reparations 
discussion.   
 
As we headed towards Tunica, Mississippi our final 
stop, I joined others in the back of the bus where Rev. 
Lowery sat in a comfortable captain’s chair.  I asked 
him for his thoughts on the issue and the movement.  
He jokingly said, “Don’t you and your husband ever 
give it a rest?”  I did not know that Imari had already 
held a conversation on the subject with him.  I told him 
that he knew that we could not rest until victory.  Turn-
ing serious, he said that it was obvious that we are due 
reparations and he believes that pursuing reparations is 
a worthy endeavor.  He went on to say that he had no 
specific suggestions about best strategies or what all 
reparations should include, but he encouraged those 
who have taken on this work to press for-
ward.  Others present, some that had just 
taken an N’COBRA membership, joined 
the discussion with questions and opin-
ions.  Dr. Lowery later wrote a letter to 
the Solicitor General on behalf of the law-
suit filed by Dr. Obadele and Gen. Ali 
Rashid.   
 
The meeting in Tunica centered on orga-
nizing efforts aimed at Hollywood Casino lower level 
employees.   Here I had the opportunity of collecting 
the membership renewal fee from Attorney Jaribu 
Hill.  Atty. Hill devotes her law practice in Greenville, 
MS to workers’ rights.  The cases that she handles are 
some of the most vivid examples of continuing atroci-
ties against our people. 
 
I submitted this article in the hope that it will inspire 
increased vigilance in seizing every opportunity given 
by the Creator to teach and to learn about this great 
issue of our day. 
Reflections From A 2003 Mississippi Bus Ride 
 
By Johnita Scott Obadele 
Front of Southern California 
(Continued from page 9) 
consistency necessary to impress the church leader-
ship that this was a serious endeavor, made sure the 
invited guests like Congresswoman Maxine Waters 
participated, etc. RUF members did everything neces-
sary to insure the success of this event. The overall 
strategy was to stay on it, follow-through, cross check 
all assignments, and make sure things got done. 
 
FOLLOW-THROUGH ACTIVITIES: After the suc-
cess of the May 31st event (one of the few times that 
no one had anything negative to say about an  L.A. 
event. Everyone left seemingly happy and satisfied 
that they had participated, over 400 people stayed 
through  a 3-hour presentation, we started and ended 
on time, etc.), the ad hoc committee that had pulled it 
off decided to become the more permanent Repara-
tions Faith Community Coordinating Committee as 
another organizational affiliate of the RUF. A strategy 
was accepted by the RFCCC to produce and conduct 
workshops at over 25 Southern California churches of 
various sizes in order to inspire the congregations of 
those churches to spread the word of reparations as an 
obligation of Black Christians. These workshops are 
being scheduled and conducted currently.  
Photo by Ma’at


--- PAGE 398 ---
26 
              YOUTH CORNER:  
                   Working for Reparations  
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
N’COBRA Youth Commission Report  
 
by N’COBRA Youth Commission, Co-Chair Sister 
Shereeta Lacy and Brother Naphese Mugabe II 
 
The Youth Commission is definitely on the move!  
We are two days away from our first meeting since 
Dallas.  We will meet and develop ideas to form a 
strategic two-fold plan that organizes on a collegiate 
level and a community grass roots level.  The first be-
ing to develop a work plan that fulfills the N’COBRA 
National Agenda to achieve reparations and the sec-
ond to develop an action plan for the agenda of the 
Youth Commission to educate the Youth using what-
ever tools and strategies we feel will serve as a cata-
lyst to organize Young people to achieve reparations.   
 
Recently, Nuri and I, as co-chairs of the Youth Com-
mission, attended the NDABA II in Jackson Missis-
sippi hosted by the Jackson Mississippi Chapter of 
NCOBRA, and sponsored by the illustrious Baba 
Hannibal Afrik and the Millions for Reparations Coa-
lition.  We were part of the Youth working group.  It 
was a powerful group of Young People that do stu-
dent organizing at their respective college campuses.  
We provided models and examples of each other’s 
work and developed ways to collaborate our efforts to 
organize the masses of youth to support the repara-
tions movement.  Our focus will be on the following:   
 
 Enhancing communication through the use of the 
Internet and regular conference calls to provide up-
dates and keep abreast of the progress of the group.   
 Working with other student organizations at the 
collegiate level, including the SGA to encourage 
greater participation and influence at different cam-
puses.   
 Using strategic planning of events and programs to 
maximize participation and success. This would 
include utilizing all resources and personnel avail-
able, youth as well as elders, for information distri-
bution, promotion and execution.  
 Examining methods for encouraging and insuring 
accountability of those responsible for tasks with-
out discouraging participation. 
 
We also had a major discussion on the importance of a 
counter culture to fight the negative, self-destructive 
elements that exist in the culture of our people and par-
ticularly the culture of the youth. Another major ele-
ment discussed is how to encourage more youth par-
ticipation in conscious events and programs involving 
the issue of reparations. On a collegiate level one sug-
gestion was the establishment and support of college 
societies that are based on African principles and con-
sciousness.  Many of our youth get bored with the tra-
ditional format and structure of our organizations, and 
meetings. We must take on the challenge of not only 
properly politically indoctrinating our youth with 
proper proactive concepts, but also keeping their atten-
tion, and encouraging participation. Student societies 
must sponsor events and functions that all students can 
participate in, that are initiated by a core group who 
(Continued on page 35) 
Shereeta Lacy  
Giving Youth Report at Ndaba II 
Abini Elamin, 
N’COBRA Youth Commission, Atlanta 
Photo by Wautella 
Photo by Wautella


--- PAGE 399 ---
27 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Reparations Now: 
Finally Getting That 40 Acres & a Mule! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Damario Solomon-Simmons 
National Reparations Director 
National Black Law Student Association 
 
 
"If you are the son of a man who had a wealthy estate 
and you inherit your father's estate, you have to pay off 
the debts that your father incurred before he died. The 
only reason that the present generation of white Ameri-
cans are in a position of economic strength...is because 
their fathers worked our fathers for over 400 years with 
no pay...We were sold from plantation to plantation 
like you sell a horse, or a cow, or a chicken, or a bushel 
of wheat...All that money...is what gives the present 
generation of American whites the ability to walk 
around the earth with their chest out...like they have 
some kind of economic ingenuity. Your father isn't 
here to pay. My father isn't here to collect. But I'm here 
to collect and you're here to pay." Malcolm X 
 
October 14, 2003 
RE: Reparations & Black Law Students…An Update 
 
Dear Fellow Reparations Advocates, 
            As you know, the Reparations movement is 
quickly gaining momentum nationally and internation-
ally, and it is my pleasure to serve National Black Law 
Student Association (NBLSA) as the National Repara-
tions Director for the 2003-04 academic year.    Make 
no mistake about it, NBLSA is committed to facilitat-
ing programs that will prompt emerging African-
American attorneys to clearly understand and take our 
role in defining and fighting the noble legal battle to 
get Reparations.  NBLSA recognizes that our members 
must lead because we are the so-called talented tenth 
that Dr. W.E.B. Dubois so passionately and articulately 
described.  NBLSA understands it is OUR responsibil-
ity to provide leadership to the masses of our people 
and fight for reparations.   
             NBLSA understands that we must fight for 
Reparations with the same passion that Frederick 
Douglass fought against slavery.  NBLSA understands 
that we must fight for Reparations with the same com-
mitment that compelled Charles Hamilton Houston, 
Thurgood Marshall, and many other African-American 
attorneys to fight to secure the most basic civil rights of 
our people through judicial advocacy. NBLSA under-
stands we must fight for Reparations with the same 
dedication that Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and El Hajj 
Malik El-Shabazz fought for our basic human rights.   
             NBLSA clearly understands that we must fight 
to make Black Reparations a household word.  We 
clearly understand that we must learn to spell, define, 
and defend reparations.  We clearly understand that we 
must raise the issue every time someone talks about Af-
firmative Action, Welfare Reform, Jobs, Education, 
Housing, Health Care, the Growing Prison Industrial 
Complex, Police Brutality, and all of the other pertinent 
issues threatening the survival and empowerment of our 
communities because they all fall under the banner of 
Reparations.  Lastly, we clearly understand that we 
must do more than talk about Reparations. That is why I 
am proud to announce the following recent accomplish-
ments and future events of NBLSA in support of the 
Reparations movement: 
 
1) Asking our members to join the National Coalition of 
Blacks for Reparations in America (N’COBRA), which 
we feel, is the pre-eminent organization actively work-
ing on securing Reparations for our people.  Organizing 
town hall meetings, workshops, and conferences at your 
schools about Reparations 
2) Asking our NBLSA chapters at every school to invite 
Reparations advocates and speakers to present at your 
school, or to have regional seminars about Reparations.  
For example, the Rocky Mountain Region of NBLSA 
Regional Conference is Feb. 19-22, 2004, and there will 
be an entire session devoted exclusively to Reparations. 
3) Encouraging our members to read at least one book 
or article about Reparations a semester. 
4) Establishing and encouraging our members to visit 
the Reparations page on the NBLSA website at http://
www.nblsa.org/programs/reparations/ weekly for new 
information concerning the Reparations movement. 
5) Publicly supporting H.R. 40 and asking all of our 
members to call or write their respective U.S. Senator 
or Congressman asking them to support H.R. 40. 
6) Planning a Reparations Symposium at the NBLSA 
National Conference to be held in Boston, Mass on 
March 19th, 2003 from 10:00am to 12:00pm.  
7) Encouraging the Ada Lois Sipuel Fisher Black Law 
Student Chapter at the University of Oklahoma to file 
an amicus brief in support of the case to get Reparations 
for the 1921 so-called Tulsa Race Riot.   
(Continued on page 34)


--- PAGE 400 ---
28 
Ask The Editor 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
How would you respond to comments by Whites 
and Blacks, who believe that Black people perpetu-
ate their own poverty, oppression, etc. through vio-
lence, drugs, etc.? 
 
This is the most common of all misperceptions. The 
truth, however, is that violence and drugs are the direct 
result of the destruction of the economic base of the 
Black community.   Industrial jobs in basic manufac-
turing industries such as steel production, auto manu-
facturing, etc. began moving overseas in the early 
1960's and they continue to do so today.   These indus-
trial jobs were by and large what encouraged many 
Blacks to migrate out of the South to the North (at least 
those who weren't run out by the Klan.)   In addition, 
immigrants from Latin America and Asia have dis-
placed Blacks in areas of traditional service sector 
work. These combined factors have resulted in massive 
unemployment among Black youth, leading to poverty,  
drugs and violence. 
 
Many believe that Blacks are already getting special 
privileges, yet are demanding equality.  Is there 
proof that Blacks have received special privileges?  
 
If you believe Blacks are getting special privileges, 
then you should be willing to trade places with Blacks 
in the ghetto, in order to get those special privileges, 
right?  Here are the real statistics on White special 
privileges: 
 
1.  Whites receive preferential treatment and affirma-
tive action everyday.  According to Census data (1998), 
"The median income for Blacks in 1998 was $25,351, 
but for non-Hispanic Whites it was $42,439."  There-
fore, more of America's wealth flows back to White 
hands.  Score one for white privilege. 
 
2.  According to the Commerce Department (1997), 
Whites, 69.1%, own their homes, while only $44.1% of 
Blacks own their homes; a difference of 25%.  There-
fore, more of the money from the home mortgage inter-
est deduction, the largest welfare program ever in-
vented goes back into White hands.  Score two for 
white affirmative action 
 
3.  According to that same study, it costs Blacks more 
money, $3,199, to go to college than Whites, 
$2,922.  Therefore, with respect to college, whites get a 
chance to retain more of their money than 
Blacks.  Score three for White privilege. 
4.  Whites get more money, $3,449, than Blacks, 
$2,863, from college aid, again, according to that De-
partment of Commerce study.  Therefore, Whites, with 
respect to college aid, get more help than Blacks, which 
allows them to save more of their own money, and ac-
cumulate wealth faster.  Score four for White affirma-
tive action. 
 
5.  According to the Department of Agriculture (2000), 
White headed-households, 3,624,000, or 43.9% of the 
8.2 million households total, were getting food stamps 
in FY98.  Black headed-households, 2,770,000, or 
33.6%, were getting food stamps that same year, ac-
cording to that same study.  Therefore, with respect to 
food stamps, more public money goes back into White 
hands, than Black hands.  Score five for White preferen-
tial treatment. 
 
6.  According to the USDA (2000) Women's Infants and 
Children's (WIC) program, there were 8,042,758, par-
ticipants in the WIC program in 1998.  Of those WIC 
participants, 3,155,604, or 39.2% were non-Hispanic 
Whites, and 1,842,107, or 22.9% were Blacks.   
Therefore, with respect to WIC, more public money 
goes back into White hands, than Black hands.  Score 
six for White preferential treatment. 
 
7.  According to the Social Security Administration 
(SSA) (2000), there were 44,598,890 recipients of Old 
Age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance, 
(OASDI), otherwise known as Social Security, as of 
December 1999.  Of those 38,237,240, or 86% were 
White, and 4,538,570, or 10% were Black.  The average 
monthly benefit for Whites was $753.20 and the aver-
age monthly benefit for Blacks was $604.30.  Therefore, 
with respect to Social Security, more money goes back 
into White hands, than Black hands.  Score seven for 
White privilege. 
 
Again, according to the SSA, (1998), Aide For Depend-
ant Children, AFDC, is now called TANF, Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families.  There were 2,631,142 
adults who received TANF as of September 1998.  Of 
those, 35.6% were White and 37.1% were Black. 
 
Statisticians call that 1.5% difference within the margin 
of error, and a statistical tie, therefore, with respect to 
TANF, nearly, just as much money goes back into 
White hands as Black hands. 
 
Answers provided by J. Damu and Vic Nickson 
Send your questions to:  InformationMedia@aol.com or 
N’COBRA-IMC, P.O. Box 716, Washington, DC 20044-0716


--- PAGE 401 ---
29 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
N’COBRA 
National Coalition Of Blacks for Reparations in America 
 
Invites your organization and you to the 
 
 
N’COBRA 15th ANNUAL CONVENTION 
2004 
Washington DC 
Junteenth 2004 (June 17th - 20th) 
 
“COALITION BUILDING AND OPERATIONAL UNITY” 
 
Help Create the 2004-2005 National Agenda for the Reparations Movement  
 
The Largest and Most informative Annual Gathering of National Organizations,  
Leaders and Supporters for Reparations 
Workshops led by National Reparations Leaders and Educators; Great networking opportunities; 
Uplifting Cultural Entertainment:  Music, Poetry, Black Arts Exhibit; Commemoration of 
Our Ancestors; Black Business Marketplace, and much more! 
 
Make Your Plans Now! 
 
 
MAIN EVENTS 
  
Thursday Thursday -- 17th  17th                 Lobbying for Reparations on Capitol HillLobbying for Reparations on Capitol Hill  
                                                                        LegisLegislative Award Banquet/Fundraiserlative Award Banquet/Fundraiser  
  
Friday      Friday      -- 18th 18th                  N’COBRA Organizations Leadership RoundtableN’COBRA Organizations Leadership Roundtable  
                                                                        N’COBRA Youth Commission’s “YN’COBRA Youth Commission’s “Youth Summit”outh Summit”  
                                                                        National Reparations Unity ForumNational Reparations Unity Forum  
  
Saturday Saturday --  19th  19th                  Reparations Run (5K):  “Keepin’ Up The Pace”Reparations Run (5K):  “Keepin’ Up The Pace”  
                                                                        Reparations WReparations Workshopsorkshops  
                                                                        Cultural Entertainment (Poetry Slam, Music & Dance Extravaganza)Cultural Entertainment (Poetry Slam, Music & Dance Extravaganza)  
  
Sunday    Sunday    --  20th  20th                  Sunrise Spiritual ServiceSunrise Spiritual Service  
                                                                        ConConference Closing Activitiesference Closing Activities  
  
  
National Coalition Of Blacks for Reparations in America 
P.O. Box 90604, Washington, DC 20090-0604 
 
Phone 202-291-8400  Fax 202-291-4600     Email:  NationalNCOBRA@aol.com 
Online Information:  www.NCOBRA.org   or  http://groups.yahoo.com/group/Reparations_For_Africans


--- PAGE 402 ---
30 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Dorothy Benton Lewis, N’COBRA National Co-Chair 
N’COBRA National Unity Forum,  
Washington, DC  8.16.02 
 
“I am excited about Minister Farrakhan because when 
I was with the Black Repara-
tion Commission, when I was 
with the African National 
Reparations Organization we 
couldn’t get anybody with the 
microphone to say the word 
“Reparations.”  He was the 
only man who stepped up to 
the plate and became our 
voice, the only national repre-
sentative and I love him for 
that!”   
 
The Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan, 
N’COBRA National Unity Forum, Washington, DC  
8.16.02 
 
“We must always lift the Cause above ourselves, now, 
if we are Cause oriented more than personality ori-
ented then we will submerge our personalities for the 
good of the Cause.  The Cause for which we are gath-
ered here tonight and tomorrow is bigger than all of us 
who are gathered.  And therefore it is incumbent upon 
us to submerge our personalities even our differing 
methodologies, religious persuasions, or the lack 
thereof for the Cause that is bigger than us all.  We are 
here tonight not because of ourselves.  We are here to-
night because of those went before us, to pave the way 
for us and we must not be untrue to them, and to those 
who struggled to make life what it is to us.  Nor should 
we relegate what we can do 
today for our children to do 
tomorrow.  We should com-
plete our assignment today so 
that our children may work 
on the next phase of that as-
signment.”   
 
“We must not betray the Ancestors in our negotiation 
for what we feel is just and justly due to the children of 
the slaves.  It’s not about money; it is about what is 
requisite to repair the damage.”    
“(T)he founders of this rally, tomorrow and tonight, 
who met in Durban and decided that there must be 
‘Millions For Reparations’ they were not just talking, 
but there was a Spirit moving them, the Spirit of those 
who have gone on, who are not able to be here tonight 
but produced us that we might 
make an accounting of our-
selves and our time period.  
This is our time period and (we) 
have to make an account for 
ourselves as to how we func-
tioned in our time.”   
 
“Liberation is not a one day 
journey; neither is Reparations, 
for Reparations and Liberation 
really are synonymous.  You 
won’t be free without the dam-
age being repaired.  And in or-
der to repair the damage you must 
make a proper assessment of the damage.” 
 
The Honorable Minister Louis Farrakhan 
NDABA II, Jackson, MS 10.4.03 
 
“I have reached the age of 70, by the Grace of God.” 
 
“I still have some youth left, and some juice left.  I 
think I am going to offer my life to this Movement for 
Reparations, national and internationally.  I think we 
can design a national tour and just as we spoke in cit-
ies and had 10’s of 1,000’s of people come out that 
culminated into the Million Man March.  I think we 
can do it again on the principle of Reparations.  I think 
we can do it again on the international scene as well.  
Africa is in need of Reparations, 
the indigenous people of the 
South Pacific, Australia, the Abo-
rigines, the Maori, the Ainu Peo-
ple – all are in need of Repara-
tions.  And out of the valiance of 
those of us struggling inside 
America we can send up a light to all our people all 
over the world from this, the capitol of Neo-
colonialism and slavery and create an International 
Movement that puts pressure on the enemy.  We can 
unite the Hip Hop Nation around this thing and let 
everybody talk about “add it up” what you owe.” 
Minister Louis Farrakhan 
 
Offers His Life To The Reparations Movement  
“I am going to offer my life to 
this Movement for Reparations, 
national and internationally” 
Photo by Ma’at


--- PAGE 403 ---
31 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
On Tuesday, October 7th, at 10:00am, the International 
People's Democratic Uhuru Movement held a press 
conference across from the United Nations to an-
nounce the upcoming 12th Session of the International 
Tribunal on Reparations for African People in the U.
S..  Organizers of and participants in the Reparations 
Tribunal were available to talk to the press.  As the U.
S. comes under increasing international criticism for 
it's invasion and occupation of Iraq, African people in 
the U.S. are escalating pressure for acknowledgement 
and compensation for slavery and other violations of 
international law. 
 
On November 15th and 16th, 2003, the 12th Session of 
the International Tribunal on Reparations for African 
People in the U.S. will convene in Philadelphia. In 
1982, Black people, denied recourse through domestic 
courts, put the U.S. government on trial for violating 
international law in its treatment of the African com-
munity. An international panel of judges found the U.
S. guilty and owing $4.1 trillion dollars in stolen labor 
alone, with damages yet to be set for pain and suffer-
ing. 
 
Subsequent sessions of the Tribunal have compiled 
further testimony and evidence that has been entered 
into the growing body of documentation supporting 
the demand of African people for reparations. 
 
The 2003 Tribunal session takes place in the context of 
a growing movement for reparations for Black people. 
11 sessions of this Tribunal, held in various cities since 
1982, have popularized the reparations demand in 
Black communities throughout the U.S.  In 1989, 
Michigan Congressman John Conyers introduce H.
R.40, a bill that he has submitted every year since, in 
an effort to establish a "Commission to Study Repara-
tion Proposals for African Americans".  Beginning 
with Aetna in 2000, Deadria Farmer-Paellmann initi-
ated lawsuits against numerous U.S. corporations de-
manding reparations for profits gained from slavery.  
 
At the 2001 United Nations-sponsored World Confer-
ence Against Racism the great majority of the world's 
countries gave their support for the reparations de-
mand, declaring the enslavement and colonization of 
African people by Europe and America was a crime 
against humanity. 
 
The International Tribunal on Reparations for African 
People in the U.S. is based upon international laws 
including the U.N. Human Rights Charter and the 
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the 
Crime of Genocide. 
 
Chimurenga Waller is President of the International 
People's Democratic Uhuru Movement, and sponsor 
of the upcoming Tribunal. He says "400 years is too 
long to owe anybody anything! African people de-
mand our human rights to self-determination and repa-
rations under international law." 
 
This year's session in Philadelphia will focus on the 
issues of police brutality and the prison and education 
systems. Scheduled witnesses include: 
 
Dr. Leonard Jeffries, City College of New York, on 
the slave trade 
 
Councilman Charles Barron, Brooklyn, New York   
 
Attorney Michael Coard, Philadelphia lawyer on po-
lice brutality and unjust imprisonment 
 
Ms. Bonnie Kerness, American Friends Service Com-
mittee, on the torture of African children in prisons 
 
Ms. Pam Africa, on the case of African political pris-
oner Mumia Abu Jamal 
 
Lawrence Hamm, People's Organization for Progress, 
on police brutality in New Jersey 
 
Professor Ella Forbes, Temple University African His-
tory  whose son Erin was killed by Lower Merion, PA 
Police 
 
Ms. Barbara Vance, whose nephew Kenneth Griffin 
was killed by Pennsylvania parole officers 
 
Ms. Ramona Africa, survivor of the 1985 bombing of 
the MOVE house in Philadelphia 
 
Mr. Leodus Jones, on the use of African prisoners in 
medical experiments 
 
Ms. Ingrid Crew, whose brother, Stanton Crew was 
(Continued on page 33) 
International People's Democratic Uhuru Movement 
12th World Tribunal on Reparations for African People in the U.S


--- PAGE 404 ---
32 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
African Leadership 
(Continued from page 15) 
our people, we automatically accelerate the move-
ment of our people who are already more conscious. 
 
Keep in mind that our people who have these injuries 
aspects may or may not have locked hair; may or may 
not have adopted an African name; may or may not 
wear kente cloth. Do not be fooled by appearance. 
And do not fail always to look for those same injuries 
in thyself. “Our most ancient people taught the world 
that the ultimate instruction for human growth and 
transformation was: ‘Man, know thyself.’” (Akbar 
1998) 
 
We will not survive as leaders; and we certainly will 
not be effective leaders if we are not consciously and 
permanently doing this transformative organizing 
work with our people and ourselves on a daily basis. 
As leaders in the reparation’s movement, we must 
face this dynamic within our own mental make-up, 
conscious and unconscious, and rip it out  in the proc-
ess of doing this work. Otherwise, we will never gain 
the capacity to be movers of our people to Repara-
tions. This is continuos work.  It does not matter how 
long we have been in the struggle. This work is easier 
spoken about than practiced. I believe that it is a pro-
found love of our people that will ultimately sustain 
us in this process of doing the actual work. 
 
The above is a foundational perspective on the work. 
We must be thorough with this foundation; otherwise, 
we will be frustrated and unable to apply successfully 
the following seven African leadership rules in our 
reparations work: 
 
SEVEN AFRICAN LEADERSHIP RULES 
 
One:  
 
African reparations leaders must always seek to know 
and see the world as it is in its full reality and in the 
absolute interest of African people. We must vision 
African liberation from that perspective and always 
know the world through the eyes of white supremacy 
but never see the world through the eyes of white su-
premacy. 
 
Two: 
 
African reparations leaders must continually study the 
worldwide experiences of African freedom fighters 
and African freedom movements of the past 500 years; 
study the history of the Reparations movement within 
the United States; and study current local events and 
worldwide current events. This must be part of lifelong 
work 
 
Three:  
 
African reparations leaders must strategically join and 
embrace local community struggles around housing, 
health care, education…etc. of the African community 
and combine the resolution of that specific struggle 
with the reparations demand.  
 
This is very difficult and very essential work. It takes 
great skill and integrity of leadership, requiring the 
combination of tactics. It is not putting, for example, 
the housing or health crises ahead of the Reparations 
demand. Rather it is making reparations concrete and 
the essential part of addressing all of the ills of our 
community caused by chattel slavery and systemic ra-
cism/white supremacy. Hence our community’s fight 
for adequate schools, heath care, education is the fight 
for reparations.  
 
But not all “community struggles” are reparations 
struggles. It really takes preparation to do this grass-
roots work. We must never use an authentic commu-
nity struggle to push any organization or any issue out-
side of that authentic community struggle itself.  We 
only get involved if a reparations’ issue (however the 
community describes it) is a central issue of the com-
munity struggle itself. We may have to connect the 
dots for the community. One of the vestiges of chattel 
slavery is our inability to see clearly the full responsi-
bility for and connection of our present day condition 
to the acts of the US and state governments to slavery. 
Our job as reparations leaders in our communities is to 
help our people to see the connection clearly. When 
this is accomplished, enormous opportunities arise to 
build the reparations movement in the local area and to 
strengthen the capacity of the community to make 
gains in its particular community struggle as well. They 
are mutually reinforcing. It is real movement forward. 
 
Four: 
 
African reparations leaders must work passionately for 
their perspective of what form(s) they think reparations 
should take. But we must always practice operational 
unity and political unity when appropriate around the 
following options of the possible forms reparations 
may take, placing full emphasis on building the capac-


--- PAGE 405 ---
33 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
ity of our people to design, articulate, and win the full 
range of options as we as a people design and desire 
them:  
 
“...The material forms of reparations includes cash 
payments, land, economic development, and repa-
triation resources particularly to those who are 
descendants of enslaved Africans. Other forms of 
reparations for Black people of African descent 
include: funds for scholarships and community de-
velopment; creation of multi-media depictions of 
the history of Black people of African descent and 
textbooks for educational institutions that tell the 
story from the African descendants’ perspective; 
development of historical monuments and muse-
ums; the return of artifacts and art to appropriate 
people or institutions; exoneration of political pris-
oners; and, the elimination of laws and practices 
that maintain dual systems in the major areas of 
life including the punishment system, health, edu-
cation, and the financial/economic system. The 
forms of reparations received should improve the 
lives of African descendents in the United States 
for future generations to come; foster complete 
economic, social, and political parity; and allow 
for the full rights of self-determination.” 
 
(N’COBRA, An Information Sheet, 
p.2, 2002) 
 
Five: 
 
African reparations leaders must consciously build 
leadership in other people. Appreciate the value of a 
charismatic leader but do not build the cult of the 
leader; rather build the capacity of African people as 
a whole to lead each other to victory. 
 
Six: 
 
African reparations leaders must on a consistent basis 
hold town hall meetings or community teach-ins 
where the community can come to learn what repara-
tions is and why and how to build the movement for 
Reparations. It is also a place where a larger group of 
reparations leaders participate in teaching a larger 
number of community people at the same time. This 
is a place where we connect the dots between our pre-
sent day circumstances and the necessity for the 
Reparations remedy to a mass audience. 
 
Seven: 
 
African reparations leaders must actively work to build 
consensus and to ensure a meaningful level of democ-
ratic and non-sexist decision making in all of the Repa-
rations movement building work. 
 
Conclusion: 
 
The above seven rules are not written in any particular 
order because they are meant to be thought of holisti-
cally, each one fertilizing each and every other one at 
the same time as all are implemented together. 
 
Also, the above seven rules must be applied within the 
context of an organization that exists or that is in forma-
tion and that has Reparations as a focus and that also 
has a viable structure and a capacity to stand on its own 
financial feet. If any of you are not a part of such an or-
ganization join one and/or start one. We encourage you 
to include N’COBRA among the organizations that you 
join.   © 2003 
12th World Tribunal 
(Continued from page 31) 
killed by New Jersey police 
Family of Edward Shawn Pickens, killed by Philadel-
phia police 
 
The International panel of judges listed below will hear 
the testimony and enter it into the record. 
 
Thami Kaa Plaatjie, Pan Africanist Congress of Azania 
(South Africa) 
 
Dorothy Lewis, National Coalition of Blacks for Repa-
rations in America (N’COBRA) 
 
Luwezi Kinshasa, African Socialist International, Lon-
don 
 
Mohammad Chehab, Arab activist 
 
Judy De Los Santos, Union Del Barrio, (Mexican na-
tional liberation organization) 
 
Penny Hess, African People's Solidarity Committee 
 
For more information, contact the International People's 
Democratic Uhuru Movement at (727) 502-0575.


--- PAGE 406 ---
34 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
On Saturday, November 1, 2003 the Oakland/Berkley 
community hosted a Reparations forum entitled: "NO 
LONGER CAN AFRICAN PEOPLE WAIT: A Critical 
Dialogue for Actions on Reparations," at the beautiful 
Black Repertory Group Theater (on the Oakland/
Berkeley border).  The event was co-sponsored by the 
African Initiative of the American Friends Service 
Committee and Foundations For Our Nu Alkebulan/
Afrikan Millennium (FONAMI).   
 
The goals throughout this continuing process are to 
deepen the outreach and discussions on Reparations 
among isolated Afrikan family members and support-
ers; to encourage a sharing of our varying perspectives 
and paths of direction; and to look at unique ways that 
our groups can unite and collaborate for necessary ac-
tion. 
 
The event has been described as superb!, with magnifi-
cent panelists representing a rich diversity of spiritual, 
grassroots and scholarly leadership and experiences 
from around our Afrikan Diaspora, and a rich response 
from the community at large.  The presenters and the 
community should be applauded for offering their com-
ments in a respectful and loving manner even when 
there were significant disagreements on strategies and 
priorities in building our movement.   There are many 
roads to Kujichagulia (self-determination), and all are 
worthy of honor and respect. Unity 
does not mean uniformity in every as-
pect of our lives, thinking, or struggle.   
 
What’s up next? In the California Bay 
Area   
 
• "Critical Dialogue for Action on Reparations," fea-
turing California Central Valley groups and activ-
ists, at Wo’se Community Church of the Way, Sac-
ramento, today, Sunday, 2 November, 3 pm 
 
• "Walk, Run, Bike, Skate, Handstand… for Repara-
tions (#1)" around Oakland’s Lake Merritt, a fun(d)
raiser for N’COBRA and our Global Afrikan Con-
gress, on Saturday, 22 November.   
 
• African Initiative of AFSC kicks-off regional "LIFE 
over "debt" and death" campaign calling for uncon-
ditional cancellation of the criminal "debt" on Af-
rica, and Reparations in many other forms, on Inter-
national Human Rights Day, Wednesday, 10 De-
cember, at birthplace of United Nations in down-
town San Francisco.   
 
• "wRiters, Rhymers, Rappers, Radio/tv Personali-
ties, Re-Creators… for Reparations" performances 
and fun(d)raiser for N’COBRA, GAC and others, 
on Saturday, 13 December. 
 
• Celebration of Our Day of IMANI (FAITH) and 
200th Anniversary of Afrikan-Haitian Revolution, 
1 January 2004. 
 
• National African Initiative of AFSC kicks-off U.S. 
"LIFE over debt" campaign on Capitol Hill in 
Washington, DC, on birthday of Ancestor Rev. Dr. 
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR., Thursday, 15 
January 2004.   
 
• "Critical Dialogue for Action on Reparations" at 
San Francisco Public Library, in March 2004.   
 
For information contact Brother Jahahara Amen-RA 
Alkebulan-Ma’at, African Initiative Coordinator, 
AFSC Pacific Mountain Region; nuafrikan777@msn.
com  or jalkebulan@afsc.org; 415.867.7120 
 
West Coast Community Organizing Continues 
 by Jahahara Amen-RA Alkebulan-Ma’at 
Reparations Now! 
(Continued from page 27) 
8) Encouraging our members to not get discouraged 
with the Reparations movement, but to remember the 
immortal words of Frederick Douglass that “If there is 
no struggle there is no progress. Those who profess to 
favor freedom and yet depreciate agitation…want crops 
without plowing up the ground, they want rain without 
thunder and lightening. They want the ocean without 
the awful roar of its many waters…. Power concedes 
nothing without a demand. It never did and it never 
will."  
Unity does not mean uniformity in every aspect 
of our lives, thinking, or struggle.


--- PAGE 407 ---
35 
History of N’COBRA’s Legislative Front 
(Continued from page 19) 
HR 40.  McGriff, through “A Year of Black Presence 
(AYBP),” is successfully providing a bridge for per-
sons who wish a consistent structure through which 
they can come to Washington and, as constituents, 
lobby their Members to support this legislation.   
 
On January 30, 2003, over 250 Reparations 
supporters from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania converged 
on Capitol Hill for the AYBP kickoff event.  This event 
took place in Room 2237 of the Rayburn Building, 
which is the very room where the House Judiciary 
Committee will eventually determine whether H.R. 40 
will be forwarded for debate on the House floor.   In 
response to the efforts of Milton McGriff, Reparations 
lobbyists are now coming each month to lobby on be-
half of H.R. 40.  Lobbyists have included Mr. Hilary 
S h e l t o n ,  D i r e c t o r  o f  t h e  W a s h i n g t o n  B u r e a u  o f  t h e  
NAACP,  Mr. Ken Fealing, Director of Civil and Hu-
man Rights for the United Methodist Church, Ms. 
DeBorah Gilbert White, Minister of Anti-Racism and 
Conflict Resolution for the United Church of Christ, 
Minister Khadir Abdul Muhammad, East Coast Repre-
sentative for Nation of Islam Leader, Honorable Minis-
ter Louis Farrakhan, and renowned scholar and politi-
cal analyst, Dr. Ron Walters.   Mr. Keenan Kellar, Ju-
diciary Counsel to Congressman John Conyers, has 
worked closely with the AYBP initiative, providing 
invaluable support and counsel to more than 800 Repa-
rations lobbyists who’ve come to the Hill in support of 
this effort.   At AYBP’s inception, there were 20 co-
sponsors of the bill.  To date, there are 39 co-sponsors, 
and while this is a far cry from the total number of 
votes needed to pass H.R. 40, the efforts of AYBP lob-
byists are clearly bearing fruit.  
 
In sum, just as the 21
st century brings renewed 
vigor to N’COBRA’s forward thrust for reparations on 
the legislative and other fronts, it also represents the 
solidification of what can only be characterized as the 
beginnings of a true reparations MOVEMENT.  
Thanks to the painstaking groundwork laid by repara-
tions pioneers of the late 1980’s and 1990’s, repara-
tions in this millennium is an idea whose time has 
come. We must all find our place within this Move-
ment and work to make it a reality.  If you feel your 
place is as part of the Legislative Front, you are invited 
to join the Legislative Commission and become an ac-
tive part of achieving “Reparations in Our Lifetime.” 
Youth Commission 
(Continued from page 26) 
have chosen to make their participation in the society 
and struggle, a life long endeavor. These societies need 
to be the vehicle through which our youth can be prop-
erly educated, since we cannot depend on the public 
educational system to consistently and completely edu-
cate our youth about themselves. Since many college 
students are attracted to the allure of “greek” organiza-
tions, we can utilize our societies to reclaim our youth 
and return them back to the path of the African based 
consciousness, which is healthier for the black psyche. 
We should incorporate African principles, ceremonies, 
values,  and Rights of Passage.  We agreed we must 
not neglect any and every opportunity to organize and 
promote joint events between all organizations that 
represent our people. 
 
             If you would like to join that list serve please 
visit the msn.com website and go to groups.  Look for 
the NDABA Youth Group and follow the steps to join.  
Look to hear from us with a strategic plan within the 
next month. If you have any suggestions or would like 
more information please contact 317-329-3552, 
madina@fwo360.com, or slacy@scarabys.com 
 
Avenge the Ancestors II 
   
Where are our bayonets, 
our martial arts, 
where are our Priests 
who chant into the night the old rituals, 
where are the ceremonial drummers 
who know the ancient rhythms 
that strike the call  
to arms, to gather our minds, our hearts, our souls 
to the greater oneness of our ancestors? 
Where are the shrines we must certainly carry 
to win the victory our people deserve, 
that sets a new sun ablaze in the heavens 
that ignites the hell they will live in forever? 
Where are the millions 
to stand for the millions 
who stood for the millions 
who died by the millions? 
Avenge the Ancestors 
 
 
 by  Zumbi Soweto 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 408 ---
36 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Jubilee South Africa  
Statement On Reparations  
                    Issue date: 2003-07-24 
Statement from reparations gathering of 18 and 19 
July 
Reparations Yes! Reparations Yes! Reparations Yes! 
 
This gathering of Jubilee South Africa, together with 
partners of the popular movements and other organi-
sations of civil society, meeting at Technikon SA 
from 18 to 19 July 2003, believes that the issue of 
reparations is rooted in the oppression, exploitation 
and systematic dispossession of our people. The TRC, 
because of its limited terms of reference, was not able 
to consider the nature and scope of reparations in a 
systematic and comprehensive way. It was thus un-
able to redress the legacy of Apartheid and racial op-
pression. 
The TRC has unfinished business, especially in rela-
tion to big business, both foreign and national. We 
reaffirm the right and legitimacy of oppressed com-
munities and their organisations to implement a range 
of initiatives to ensure more far-reaching forms of 
reparations, including legal claims in foreign and 
South African courts. In this respect, this gathering 
gives support to the current court cases being under-
taken in the United States courts. 
In order to secure reparations at a level able to redress 
the damage of Apartheid and racial oppression in all 
its manifestations, for all those affected, Jubilee, to-
gether with its partners in the popular movement, will 
initiate hearings where communities can express and 
define the scale and nature of reparations that satis-
factorily address the past. 
This process will culminate in a People's Tribunal that 
will determine the people, institutions and businesses 
that must make reparations and the forms that these 
should take. 
In order to pressure big business into meeting their 
responsibility to make reparations, Jubilee, with its 
partners, will undertake a name and shame campaign 
against the monopolies that were fundamental to the 
apartheid system. 
In addition, we will identify specific companies and 
products that symbolise the role these corporations 
played in facilitating the development of apartheid, 
which will be targeted in a consumer boycott. 
 
The broader conference that has been called for later 
this year by the churches amongst others, must be based 
on clear principles, including the need for reparations to 
comprehensively address the damage done and the right 
of those struggling for reparations to use the courts of 
law to this end. 
We see this conference as a step in the process towards 
a popular tribunal and the intensification of campaign-
ing activity towards the realisation of reparations. 
We believe that it is important that the demand for repa-
rations must be integrated into the ongoing struggles 
and campaigns within popular civil society that will 
give the issue of reparations the necessary weight and 
importance and locate reparations within the increasing 
challenge to neoliberal policies. 
Furthermore, we recognise that our struggle for repara-
tions is part of a broader struggle of the people of 
Southern Africa for reparations for Apartheid destabili-
sation and other forms of racial and neoliberal damage. 
We stand fully in support of these struggles and de-
mands. 
The gathering included participants from the following 
organisations: 
 
Alternative Information and Development Centre  
Anti-Privatisation Forum  
Ceasefire  
Concerned Citizens Forum  
Earthlife Africa Ethikwini  
Ecopeace  
Environmental Justice Networking Forum  
Fairshare  
Freedom of _Expression Institute  
Green Network  
Inanda Dam affected communities  
SACBC - Justice and Peace  
Khanya College  
Landless People's Movement  
LCLT  
PACSA  
Popcru  
RDSN  
INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENT


--- PAGE 409 ---
37 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Samancor Retrenched Workers Crisis Committee  
Sangoco 
Soweto Electricity Crisis Committee  
Young Christian Workers  
Youth for Work 
For further details, contact Jubilee Chairperson MP  
Giyose 082 350 0361/011 403 7624, or Jubilee 
General Secretary George Dor 011 648 7000  
 
Jamaica Reparations Movement 
Greetings and Blessings! 
 
The Jamaica Reparations Movement (JaRM) sends 
its felicitations and congratulations to the Millions 
For Reparations movement, on the occasion of its 
upcoming National Rally in New York, September 
13, 2003. 
 
Though our enslavers in Jamaica were English, not 
American, our history of exploitation, brutality, ra-
cism and impoverishment is the same and our need 
for Reparations identical and equally justified. 
 
The JaRM has been in existence following the Dur-
ban WCAR and has recently completed a Jamaica 
Reparations Document that can be viewed at our 
website (http://www.geocities.com/i_makeda) out-
lining our Proposals and Plan of Action for the 
award of Reparations to the Jamaican descendants 
of enslaved Africans. 
 
The JaRM is inspired by the strong and brave lead-
ership of the USA Reparations Movement, ac-
knowledging that our African-American Brothers 
and Sisters can, by their numbers and multiple 
sources of communication and litigation, give in-
spiration and guidance to I&I in Jamaica and the 
rest of the African Diaspora. 
 
Though I cannot be physically present in New 
York, I and all members of the JaRM send you our 
extremely positive prayers and Blessings for a suc-
cessful event that will focus more international at-
tention on our fight for Justice and Human Rights. 
 
May the spirits of our African Ancestors protect and 
guide you all! 
 
ONE LOVE! 
Makeda Blake Hannah 
Co-Ordinating Secretary 
Jamaica Reparations Movement. 
 
 
      
The Situation in Zimbabwe: 
                             Land and Reparations 
 
                    
         
                                By  Sabelo Sibanda 
 
Zimbabwe, at the present, is going through one of the 
most challenging periods since the time of our inde-
pendence.  The thrust of our concerns is mainly related 
to self- determination with a focus on reparations and 
the goal of righting the wrongs of the past. We are re-
claiming what is rightfully ours.  What has progres-
sively presented itself as a challenge is how we, as Afri-
can people, deal with the situation without the interfer-
ence of outsiders. As the indigenous people of Zim-
babwe our position is, that this is part of our collective 
responsibility to ourselves, and to our ancestors. How-
ever, Westerners are intent on getting involved in what 
is essentially a domestic issue of a sovereign nation.  
Patriotism is very much under threat as many Zimbab-
weans weigh the prospects of the difficult work of 
bringing stability to the nation or just jumping ship and 
going to another man’s land where life appears easier.  
To a great extent some of us view ourselves as neces-
sary players in the development of our country and will 
INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENT


--- PAGE 410 ---
38 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
do all it takes to procure a better future for African peo-
ple, whereas there are some who are ready to abdicate 
their responsibility to others. 
 
One of the major challenges is whether to go through 
with the process we have engaged upon relating to our 
reparations based on the land reform policies of the pre-
sent government or to give in under the onslaught of 
international criticism that we are currently facing.  The 
voices and opinions differ but the essential issue is that 
we as African people, both at home and in the Diaspora 
seem to be failing to dialogue with one another and to 
put a structure in place that will prevent all of us from 
being used by those who want to keep us all in bondage. 
 
This is the summary on Zimbabwe that will be dis-
cussed in more depth in a public address or interview. 
You will note that politically, I do not take any party 
position,  as I do not subscribe to party politics. I simply 
work on an agenda that is in keeping with the future 
well being of our people.  The School of African 
Awareness is apolitical.  
 
 
 
Global Afrikan Congress  
Haiti Resolution  
Cap Haitian August 21, 2003. 
 
Reparations for the Nation State and People of Haiti  
 
Whereas, for a period of almost 300 years, the people of 
Haiti were victims of the most extreme crime against 
humanity- the trade in enslaved Africans and the associ-
ated system of racialized chattel slavery-  which was 
inflicted upon them by the nation of France and various 
other European powers; 
 
And whereas the people of Haiti fought and won the 
only successful revolutionary war waged against the 
system of chattel slavery by the enslaved victims of that 
system; 
 
And whereas the Haitian Revolution and the military 
defeats inflicted on the slavery sustaining regimes of 
France, Spain and England by the Haitian revolutionar-
ies constituted a major blow to the entire European sys-
tem of racialized chattel slavery, and proved to be an 
invaluable source of inspiration to all enslaved African 
people struggling for their freedom; 
And whereas these major victories won by the Haitian 
people for themselves and all other African people 
were accomplished at the expense of tremendous hu-
man and material sacrifice on the part of the nation 
and people of Haiti; 
 
And whereas in the years after the Revolution power-
ful and vindictive regimes in Europe and North Amer-
ica, including the governments of France and the 
United States, made every effort to inflict punitive 
damage on the nation and people of Haiti by imposing 
on Haiti a so-called compensation payment of 150 
million gold francs to France, and by carrying out a 
number of blockades, embargoes, invasions and occu-
pation of Haiti; 
 
And whereas these long years of criminality and 
unlawful victimization have resulted in continuing and 
currently existing underdevelopment, poverty, human 
suffering and economic, social and cultural damage to 
the nation and people of Haiti; 
 
And whereas, as a matter of international law and mo-
rality, the nation and people of Haiti are entitled to the 
payment of reparations and the implementation of re-
parative measures and programmes, to repair the dam-
age that they have suffered and continue to suffer; 
 
And whereas, at the African and African Descendants 
World Conference Against Racism which was held in 
Barbados in October 2002, the newly established 
Global Afrikan Congress committed itself and called 
upon African and Caribbean people and governments 
to make the achievement of reparations for Haiti one 
of the priority objectives of the international Repara-
tions movement; 
 
This 3rd Assembly of Caribbean People hereby re-
solves:- 
 
To immediately launch a Caribbean and a wider inter-
national campaign, in collaboration with progressive 
forces in Haiti and in the Haitian Diaspora, to ad-
vance, demand and achieve reparation payments and 
reparative measures and programmes for the nation 
and people of Haiti, and in so doing, to identify and 
target the government of France as one of the major 
guilty parties from which reparations are due and ow-
ing; and 
 
INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENT


--- PAGE 411 ---
39 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
To observe and celebrate every 23rd of August as an 
international day in support of reparations for the na-
tion and people of Haiti. 
 
CARRIED: By Majority of Delegates  
          Dated August 24/2003, Cap Haitian, Haiti. 
 
Representing the Global Afrikan Congress at the 3
rd 
Assembly of Caribbean People in Cap Haitian, Haiti 
Are: 
 
Cikiah Thomas; GAC Chairperson (Canada) 
David Comissiong; Director of the Commission For 
Pan-African Affairs (Barbados) 
Attorney Bobby Clarke; (Barbados) 
 
Nekesha Holdipp; York University Toronto (Canada)  
Akins Vidale, University of West Indies, (Trinidad & 
Tobago)  
 
 
Global Afrikan Congress  
European Regional Meeting 
 
On Friday October 3 RD, 2003 the Global Afrikan Con-
gress Europe (GAC) commenced its first regional fam-
ily gathering. This historical event, the first of this kind 
in Europe, was a three-day intensive multi-pronged 
critical analysis of the diverse challenges faced by Afri-
kans and Afrikan descendants in Europe to improve 
their fortunes and present social conditions. The gather-
ing achieved its aims and objectives to increase the lev-
els of organisation, and implement decisions reached in 
gatherings held in Durban (2001) and Bridgetown 
(Barbados) (2002). Another accomplishment was the 
fulfilment of the aim to devise new, and improve exist-
ing strategies, as well as deepen the commitment of 
GAC members and delegates.  
                        
Held in Rotterdam (Netherlands), the conference was 
well attended with over 100 attendees.  The organisers 
were very pleased with the overall turnout and support 
received, especially with the significant youth pres-
ence. There were representatives from GAC chapters, 
regions and country delegates from Europe, specifi-
cally Belgium, Norway, France, Netherlands and the 
United Kingdom.  There were representatives from 
GAC structures in Canada, United States of America, 
Barbados, Bermuda, St. Eustatius, St. Kitts & Nevis, 
Jamaica, St. Maarten, Guyana, Surinam, (Dutch) Antil-
les, Uganda, Angola, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Somalia, 
Southern Africa, Ghana, Kenya, Congo and Nigeria.  
With the focus of the Global Afrikan Congress on the 
discourse on Reparations, plenaries explored the history 
of GAC and the importance of the European region in 
this discourse.  Whilst numerous resolutions presented 
helped shape the future of the GAC Europe region, the 
Haitian resolution (recently accepted at the assembly of 
Caribbean people in Haiti) was revisited. Several work-
ing groups ran concurrently to deal with a number of 
historical and contemporary themes within the Afrikan 
& Afrikan descendants’ community: the effects of en-
slavement and colonisation, youth development, re-
search methodology and documentation, education. 
The delegates actively participate in all aspects of the 
event.  From resolutions proposed to continuous up-
dates and debates within working groups and during re-
port back sessions, delegates were instrumental in the 
success achieved in this event. 
 
The gathering was truly a community event that sur-
passed expectations. Having organised committees, 
yielded action plans and fostered a sense of renewal,   
empowerment and cultural dignity, these results speak 
to the success achieved and the promise held by the 
GAC, especially the European region. 
 
Please join us at the official GAC international website:  
www.globalafrikancongress.com  
GAC-European Website:  
www.globalafrikancongress.europanet.nl. 
 
Look out for future events. 
For further information contact: 0031 618213802 
 
BARRYL A. BIEKMAN, GAC Europe 
ESTHER STANFORD, GAC Europe 
CIKIAH THOMAS, GAC International Chair 
RESOLUTION: (DUTCH) ANTILLES & SURINAM 
CAUCUS LINKED TO GAC EUROPE 
 
Organisations in the (Dutch) Antilles and Surinam are 
already working to give body to an Antillean and Suri-
nam caucus.  It is realistic and logical that this caucus 
be a part of the Caribbean region, but also natural, from 
an historical perspective that  an  Antillean and Surinam 
caucus be linked to GAC Europe, due to the triangular 
and forced relationship between the Antillean islands, 
the Netherlands and Surinam. 
INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENT


--- PAGE 412 ---
40 
Therefore, be it resolved that the GAC Europe accept 
that it is good and beneficial to implement an official 
caucus of GAC in the Antilles, the Netherlands, and 
Surinam. 
 
RESOLUTION: 
GAC-NETHERLANDS, GAC-BELGIUM & GAC-
FRANCE 
 
With the persistently false, negative and racist misrep-
resentation of Afrikan people in the European con-
trolled media, (mis) education system, and all other 
European and European controlled institutions,  
 
With a consistent European programme that presents a 
false and misleading history that is ethnically cleansed 
of all Afrikan content, 
 
Further, that such unjust acts are oppressive and injuri-
ous to the spiritual, social, psychological and economic 
health and well-being of all Afrikan people, and consti-
tute affronts to human dignity and crimes against hu-
manity, 
 
Considering the vast number of examples demonstrat-
ing unjust practices i.e. ZWARTE PETE in Netherlands, 
PER
È FOUETTARD  in France and the exhibition of 
Afrikans in Belgium animal parks, 
 
Be it resolved that the GAC recognize such practices as 
a basis for Reparations, 
 
Be it further resolved that the GAC calls upon the 
United Nations to investigate these past and continuing 
human right infringements,  
 
Be it further resolved that the GAC call for the immedi-
ate cessation of all such practices, with a forth coming 
recognition of the wrongdoing in the form of a written 
apology from the offending parties, 
 
And be it further resolved that the GAC institutes 
measures to monitor and report the incidence of these, 
and similar, practices in these named countries and 
those around the world.  
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
RESOLUTION: 
GAC-UNITED KINGDOM 
 
(1) Be it resolved that the term “SLAVE TRADE” be 
discarded as an unacceptable term to describe Our 
history of enslavement and genocide, from Conti-
nental invasion to (present) globalisation, at the 
hands of the Arab and European Nations alike, and 
replaced with the Afrikan terms “MAAFA and 
MAANGAMIZI”.  
(2)  Whereas all Afrikans are workers and We recog-
nise that all Afrikan workers must be organised, 
We strongly urge that all organised Afrikan work-
ers must work towards the liberation of Afrikan 
workers world-wide. To this end, the Global Afri-
kan Congress must work towards building an 
(independent) “Afrikan Trade Union” (movement).  
 
(3)  Whereas, We recognise that as Afrikan people We 
have and continue to suffer from European and 
Arab terrorism as a direct result of the events that 
transpired in the “TRANS-ATLANTIC” and pre-
sent-day “SUB-SAHARAN” ENSLAVEMENT” 
of Afrikan people, and that this (historical) terror-
ism has not ended, for wherever Afrikan people are 
found We are still subject to the devastating effects 
of this “Global Terrorism”, 
 
Be it resolved that the GAC take a firm stance to 
oppose the attempt by the governments of the 
United States and United Kingdom, in the after-
math of September 11, 2001, the war on Afghani-
stan, Iraq, and the so-called war on terror, to label 
Afrikan people and the Afrikan continent as terror-
ists or terrorist states.  
 
Be it further resolved that the GAC takes an op-
positional stance against the internal and external, 
national and international anti-terrorist legislation 
and, or laws designed to be used to target the conti-
nent of Afrika and Afrikans in the Diaspora. 
 
Be it further resolved that the GAC call upon all 
Afrikan governments and political forces on the 
Afrikan continent and in the Diaspora to cease and 
desist from the overt and covert support of the 
white supremacist, imperialist war of aggression 
masquerading as a war against terrorism.  
 
INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENT  
▲              ▲              ▲


--- PAGE 413 ---
41 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
South Africa's Civil Society  
Conference Decisions on Reparations 
 
From: george@sn.apc.org 
 
The civil society reparations conference, “Opening 
Civil Society Dialogue on Reparations”, was held in 
Randburg on 27 and 28 August 2003.  It was attended 
by some 50 organizations -- including those of na-
tional and more localized characters -- and ranging 
from organizations directly interested in reparations 
'per se' to others actively bringing together people 
around reparations-related issues. 
 
The conference had its origins in the South African 
Government’s response to the Truth and Reconcilia-
tion Commission (TRC) in April this year, to which 
Jubilee and Khulumani responded by announcing a 
call to South Africans to come together to develop an-
other position on reparations that would serve as an 
alternative to that announced by the Government.  The 
South African Council of Churches (SACC) had also 
indicated an intention to hold a conference, and thus 
efforts were made to work towards a single 'civil soci-
ety' event. 
 
These efforts were hampered by tensions, leading to a 
meeting convened by Archbishop Ndungane resulting 
in the establishment of a steering committee to organ-
ize the conference.  A Jubilee preparatory event, in-
cluding 35 organizations, was held on the dates origi-
nally scheduled for the conference, namely 18 and 19 
July 2003. 
 
The steering committee was comprised of the Anti-
Privatization Forum (APF), the Congress of South Af-
rican Trade Unions (COSATU), the Environmental 
Justice Networking Forum (EJNF), Jubilee South Af-
rica, the Khulumani Support Group, the National Con-
gress of Trade Unions (NACTU), the National Land 
Committee (NLC), the National Religious Leaders Fo-
rum (NRLF), the SACC, the South African National 
Civic Organization (SANCO), the South African NGO 
Coalition (SANGOCO) and the Womens' National 
Coalition (WNC). 
 
The conference was opened by Archbishop Njon-
gonkulu Ndungane.  The Minister of Justice, Penuell 
Maduna, presented Government’s position on repara-
tions, and Advocate Dumisa Ntsebeza and Father Mi-
chael Lapsley critiqued the TRC and Government’s 
response to the TRC, in addition speaking to the topic 
of the lawsuits filed in the United States. 
 
Khulumani presented their critique of Government’s 
response to the TRC.  Jubilee and the Apartheid 
Claims Taskforce described the process towards and 
developments in relation to the lawsuits.  COSATU, 
the Landless Peoples Movement (LPM), EJNF, the 
APF and SANCO talked to reparations and the work-
place, land, the environment and the community. 
 
The final sessions of the conference identified areas of 
agreement amongst the participating organizations.  In 
the first instance, organizations reached a common un-
derstanding on who the “victims” are, what constitutes 
reparations, and who should pay.  Then the conference 
reached decisions in relation to responses to the TRC, 
the lawsuits and a reparations movement. 
 
Who are the “victims”? 
 
The negative connotation of the word “victims” was 
raised, and alternative terms such as those affected or 
survivors were suggested as being more appropriate. 
 
The following were described as affected people: 
 
~ People directly affected by Apartheid violence, in-
cluding police and military brutality; 
~ All other South Africans more “indirectly” affected 
by Apartheid; 
~ People dispossessed of their land; 
~ People removed to make way for dams; 
~ People forced to move for plantations; 
~ People dispossessed of their land before 1913; 
~ Workers suffering low wages and appalling working 
conditions; 
~ People in the townships; 
~ People affected by mining pollution, including those 
suffering ill health as a result; 
~ Workers and communities affected by industrial pol-
lution; 
~ Fisherfolk; 
~ People victimized in the post-1994 period; and 
~ Affected people throughout the Southern African 
region. 
 
The structural, psychological and physical aspects of 
INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENT


--- PAGE 414 ---
42 
damage were also raised, and this was not seen as a 
definitive or an exhaustive definition of those af-
fected. 
 
What constitutes reparations? 
 
It was agreed that reparations has a monetary compo-
nent that is both legitimate and necessary. 
 
Other forms of reparations were mentioned, includ-
ing: 
 
~ Individual and collective reparations; 
~ 'Targeted' reparations vs reparations for the whole 
society; 
~ Debt cancellation as a form of resources for repara-
tions; 
~ Exhumation and reburial; 
~ Memorials; 
~ Those forms of reparations identified in Volume 5 
of the TRC report; 
~ Uncovering the truth; 
~ Historical documentation; 
~ Rewriting our history; 
~ Education; 
~ Reparations as an element of change to a more eq-
uitable society. 
 
Development was seen as a form of repairing histori-
cal inequities, but it was stressed that general govern-
ment policies and development activities are not a 
substitute for other forms of reparations. 
 
Who should pay and who should effect reparations? 
 
It was agreed that the money 'is there', and that all 
those who benefited from Apartheid should 
pay.  More specifically, business, local and foreign, 
should pay. 
 
Government has a major responsibility, and needs to 
identify mechanisms to increase income from busi-
ness. 
 
Foreign governments that supported Apartheid and 
business activity in contravention of sanctions also 
have an obligation to make reparations. 
 
It was also noted that reparations is a complex issue, 
but that this should not deter us from addressing the 
complexities.  On the contrary, it is important to lo-
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
cate individual struggles for reparations within the 
broader context and for people, communities and or-
ganizations, and to support each other’s struggles as 
part of the broader struggle for reparations. 
 
Responses to the TRC: 
 
The conference agreed that the Government’s re-
sponse to the TRC recommendations is inadequate. 
The amount of 30,000 South African Rand is less than 
a quarter of the amount recommended by the TRC as 
long ago as 1998.  The announcement that 19,000 
people are due to be receive this amount fails to ad-
dress the vast numbers of people affected.  The TRC 
recommendations themselves are absolutely minimal -
- representing less than one half a percent of the na-
tional budget -- and fall well short of what could be 
provided. 
 
Khulumani made various proposals for structures and 
services to meet the needs of those affected, including 
the establishment of a reparations desk at the highest 
level, better resourcing of the National Prosecuting 
Authority, and the inclusion of victim representatives 
in all memorialization projects. 
 
The conference endorsed the spirit of these and other 
proposals made during the conference.  Due to time 
considerations, the conference could not consider the 
proposals in detail.  The consolidated proposals were 
circulated in written form, and all organizations 
agreed to forward detailed comments on the specific 
proposals. 
 
Lawsuits: 
 
The conference stressed the right of all affected South 
Africans to legal action in any court that best repre-
sents their interests anywhere in the world. 
 
The conference recognized that lawyers have to take 
their mandate from their plaintiffs, and that the confer-
ence had no powers in this regard.  The conference 
encouraged lawyers to work together in the best inter-
ests of all affected. 
 
Participants expressed their openness to dialogue, me-
diation and settlement, and encouraged Archbishop 
Ndungane to take the lead in dialogue. 
 
INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENT


--- PAGE 415 ---
43 
However, the conference also noted the antagonistic 
approach of business.  It condemned business for its 
failure to respond positively to the invitation to ad-
dress the conference, and identified this as a 'slap in 
the face'.  The conference also noted that Government 
is taking the side of business, as evidenced by its affi-
davit to the US court calling for the dismissal of the 
lawsuits. 
 
The conference expressed support for the litigation in 
the United States against Apartheid-supporting for-
eign companies.  The spokesperson for the SACC in-
dicated that the SACC can’t pronounce on the specific 
lawsuits before the US courts. 
 
It was stressed that those affected in South Africa 
must lead the legal process, that organization 'on the 
ground' in support of the lawsuits must be strength-
ened, that the lawsuits must be located within a broad 
view of reparations, and that they must be embedded 
in a reparations movement. 
 
It was noted that current litigation is only the begin-
ning and that those that aided and abetted Apartheid, 
both foreign and local, must make reparations. 
 
It was noted that dialogue or mediation requires a fun-
damental change of approach by business and govern-
ment.  This includes full disclosure by business of 
their activities.  It was stressed that any mediation or 
settlement on a specific claim should not close the 
door on other potential claimants’ rights to pursue the 
legal route.  The need to elaborate upon what exactly 
is meant by mediation was identified. 
 
The conference demanded that the South African 
Government withdraws its affidavit to the US 
court.  It agreed to look into the constitutionality of 
the Government’s approach in making the affidavit, 
and into the possibility of a civil society affidavit to 
the court. 
 
The conference agreed on the need for more dialogue 
and increased levels of cooperation amongst the par-
ticipating organizations.  It agreed on the need for 
more education around -- and pamphlets on -- the law-
suits.  Participants agreed to deepen grassroots support 
for the lawsuits and work towards maximum unity. 
 
A Reparations Movement 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
The conference agreed to work towards building a 
reparations movement.  It was agreed that this move-
ment should include different organizations, should en-
hance communication and relationships between the 
organizations, and create circumstances where they can 
support one anothers' struggles. 
 
The conference agreed that the Apartheid Debt and 
Reparations Task Team should act as a point of coordi-
nation for the movement, and that it should be ex-
panded to include organizations not currently part of 
the task team.  Partners of the Interfaith Mission in 
Southern Africa and the South African Reparations 
Movement indicated an interest in participating. The 
Freedom of Expression Institute highlighted the need to 
address the role of the media under Apartheid, and the 
conference agreed upon the need to avoid confusion 
between the reparations movement and the South Afri-
can Reparations Movement. 
 
It was agreed that the task team should carry forward 
work in progress and tasks arising from the conference. 
 
The conference was informed of the call by the Presi-
dent’s Office for a list of participants to the conference, 
and expressed its condemnation of this approach as an 
invasion of participants’ rights.  
 
 
Reparations, Repatriation  
and the threat to Africa’s survival 
  
Ras Tafari Global Reasoning 2003 Conference 
University of West Indes, Mona, Jamaica 
  July 16th – 24th  
 
           by Bobo Greg (bobo_greg@yahoo.co.uk) 
     
 Greetings in the Name of the Most High, Emperor 
 Haile Sellassie I, JAH RASTAFARI! 
    
 The subject Reparations, Repatriation and the threat to 
Africa’s survival, has become the most imperative 
topic of the 21st Century. We Africans have reached 
the point for decisions that will alter our fate and shape 
our destinies for the survival of our race. 
     
 In summary, we are to decide whether to :- 
(i). Integrate into trade groups/zones for our survival.   
But in the words of H.I.M. Emperor Haile Sellassie I; 
INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENT


--- PAGE 416 ---
44 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
by turning to one or another major power groups we 
risk engorgement; that gradual process of assimilation 
which destroys our personality and identity. And this 
assimilating process is known today as GLOBALISA-
TION!; 
  
 (ii). Agitate for reparations for the atrocities of colonial 
slavery and with it comes a structural plan;  socially, 
politically, and economically in order to exist in the 
midst of these same oppressive colonial infrastructures; 
or 
  
 (iii). To continue the struggle for total emancipation 
from every slave ground for the redemption of our race; 
a struggle which now demands reparations for resettle-
ment and for crimes against humanity. These I believe 
are now the main choices for the Black Race’s survival. 
Since these decisions are being contemplated because 
of the consequences of colonialism, I strongly believe 
that the real answer for our race survival lies within the 
course of struggle for our emancipation from slavery. It 
becomes our duty to set the records straight so that in 
the course of seeking redress the succeeding genera-
tions will have the benefit of history to acquire success 
if we had failed in our lifetime to gain the victory for 
the justice of REPATRIATION and REPARATION. 
  
 We begin at August 1st 1834/8, the date that the British 
slavers were given £20,000,000.00 to emancipate Afri-
cans within the British Empire. To this date this sum for 
reparations was never used to repatriate us back to Af-
rica! This became the decisive division for the African 
diaspora: those who insist on working for their masters, 
‘the good slaves’, who do not see the necessity to return 
to Africa wanting instead to emulate their masters in the 
quest for power and dominance; and those that strug-
gled to be truly free someday; the rebelling Souls! 
     
 Fifty years later the Prophet Marcus Mossiah Garvey 
was born, the champion instigator for the  Back-to-
Africa movement. He didn’t demand reparations for ob-
vious reasons but instead roused the consciousness of 
the black peoples and instilled great hope and pride 
with the visions of an African Empire. The legacy he 
left behind should send a clear message to all black peo-
ple in the diaspora that we cannot become an economic 
power outside of Africa but will always be 
mere  hedges in the white-men yard! The Black Star 
Liner was to be, for start, a major trading, shipping en-
terprise between the diaspora and home for where your 
economic strength lies, there you shall be! 
  
 In March 1958, the ‘good slaves’ reached the heights 
of their emulation by wanting a Federal Caribbean in-
stead of British rule, utterly refusing Garveyism to this 
day, calling it the final freedom from colonialism. But 
the rebelling Souls began chanting down this act of be-
trayal under a gathering of over 3,000 Rastafari chil-
dren(surpassed only by the Emperor’s visit) because 
the full course for emancipation was never material-
ized. The month March 1958 saw the rise of the NYA-
HBINGHI Priest-hood Order in the leadership of 
Prince Emmanuel(Bongo Eddie) whose settlement
(Back-a-Wall) was then destroyed by the police before 
he was dragged to court. Aided by barrister Evans who 
defended the Mau Mau uprising in Kenya, he defeated 
the ‘good slaves’ and Elizabeth’s councils which was 
seen as a great victory for InI Rastafari Movement. 
Why is this very significant historic NYAHBINGHI 
Gathering only enshrined in the founding Principles of 
the E.A.B.I.C. and not taught no where else amongst 
the  Rastafari Movement InI would really love to 
know? 
     
 It was because of the developments that followed that 
the ‘good slaves government’ was forced to send a 
delegation to Africa as I quote:(Star, April 14th 1961) 
Mr. Elliston Wakeland(J.L.P., northern Trelawny) re-
m a r k e d  w h i l e  s p e a k i n g  o n  t h e  B u d g e t  t h a t  i f  h e  w a s  
Premier, and his head was at stake, he would likewise 
have provided £12,000.00 to send the mission to Af-
rica. 
  
Did you know: that this delegation had proposed to the 
queen £300m. for reparations for the resettlement of 
the entire diaspora; that the Queen declared a provision 
of £140m. to resettle Jamaica’s rebelling Souls if Af-
rica wanted us; that independence granted to Jamaica 
was geared towards crushing the repatriation demands 
and by thus the resettlement payments for they had 
hoped that Africa would have done it instead. And this 
can also be confirmed by Jamaica’s refusal of member-
ship state in the O.A.U. in 1966; that the Rastafari 
Movement was severely persecuted afterwards which 
are strong grounds for reparations demands.(eg. Coral 
Gardens, Back-a Wall, Hero’s Circle etc.). 
  
 Did you know that the dual economic process of Pri-
vatization and Liberalization orchestrated by the World 
Bank and implemented by the Jamaican governments 
INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENT


--- PAGE 417 ---
45 
Young Women of Harar, Ethiopia 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
that imported Transnational Corporations into the is-
land, is in fact neo-colonialism and will develop into 
GLOBALISATION by the year 2005 as dictated by 
the W.T.O. with the aid of the computer age; that 
Transnational Corporations(TNC) have almost total 
control over the process of Globalisation with the ten 
largest TNC having a total income greater than that of 
a 100 of the world’s poorest countries; that CARI-
COM, the new federation, is now being organized to 
counter this new threat for survival, yet is being 
warned by the African Union President that Globalisa-
tion will further widen the gap between the richer and 
poorer nations. The A.U. has offered to CARICOM 
closer economic ties but no racial ones like was previ-
ously presented by the O.A.U. under H.I.M. Haile Sel-
lassie I; a very great disappointment! This new federa-
tion now promotes freedom from poverty and underde-
velopment. 
   
Economically, it is impossible for poorer countries to 
compete against the richer ones without being impov-
erished into starvation. Morally, it defies the Divine 
Laws of the Universe…..This is GENOCIDE! The 
white supremist doctrine of GLOBAL 2000! And we 
know the truth about A.I.D.S. We remember William 
Lynch, the instigator of a slave plan to control the 
mental space of the African slaves. 
  
 Let us not deceive ourselves. The diaspora is now 
faced with the decisive decision to develop either the 
E.U., the F.T.A.A., CARICOM, or the A.U. for our 
survival! What has Europe, or the Americas, or the 
Caribbean have to offer to Africans for the mainte-
nance of our identity and cultural development? Where 
is the bridge to Africa? We are being revisited with the 
times of 1838 and 1958. Must we sell out our birth-
right disgracefully to these economic systems of servi-
tude to integrate into Babylon? The African Union 
must receive several strong messages from her exiled 
children. As Rastafari, InI choose to work with and in 
the A.U. for an African Empire. InI choose to be in Af-
rica! 
   
 Were we ever warned about this? Yes we were. 
(Speech  by Hon. Marcus M. Garvey). 
     
 The World Conference Against Racism of 2001 at 
Durban, South Africa has rekindled new strength in 
the diaspora. After 40 years in the wilderness like unto 
the Israelites, we now possess real power to bring the 
case against slavery into the U.N. Law Courts as N.G.
O.s  for justice sake equaling to one case in 1952 when 
Fed. Rep. of Germany paid Israel $822m. for the reset-
tling of a half million Jews who fled Nazi countries. InI 
strongly support this process as the Jamaica Reparation 
Movement has proposed. As the new generation in the 
struggle for emancipation we must rekindle the Spirit of 
1958 to invoke the presence of the Most high to guide 
and protect InI in our stance towards the redemption of 
our race; Back to Africa! The conclusion is this: So 
long as there remain a deafening silence throughout the 
diaspora for the demands for repatriation and repara-
tions, will mean that the integration process is very 
alive! If they captured InI from Africa, then they must 
begin to free  InI there. Justice must be served! Every-
thing else becomes secondary….. 
     
Give Thanks and Praises; 
Holy Emmanuel I, Sellassie I, JAH RASTAFARI!    
 
Presented at:  Ras Tafari Global Reasoning 2003 Con-
ference University of West Indes, Mona, Jamaica     
July 16th – 24th
  
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENT  
Photo by Wautella


--- PAGE 418 ---
46 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
National Coalition Of Blacks for Reparations in America 
 
 
 
PRINCIPLES OF UNITY 
 
As a collective of various organizations and philosophies, we will respect each other’s autonomy in organization 
and philosophy.   The central principles we unify and agree upon are: 
 
       1.  Our primary goal is to achieve Reparations for Africans in America; 
       2.  The so-called Trans-Atlantic "slave trade" was not trade but was in fact a Holocaust of Enslavement.  It  
             was morally wrong and a crime against humanity;   
       3.  We define Reparations as a process of repairing, healing and restoring our people; therefore we continue    
             our ancestors efforts to liberate us by focusing on repairing, healing and restoring the personal, family, and 
             community damages that we suffered during the Holocaust of African Enslavement;  
        4.  Africans in America are due Restitution for the Holocaust of African Enslavement and its vestiges; and 
        5.  We support and work for the passage of HR-40, sponsored by Congressman John Conyers and other state 
             and local legislative initiatives.  
 
Reparations United Front  
 
        1.  Functioning as a "Reparations United Front," is critical to maintaining a unified public posture.  Members  
             of the Collective (organizations and individuals) agree not to attack each other, especially regarding  
              Reparations.  
        2.  In instances where there may be differences of opinion, members will emphasize their commitment to 
             Reparations, to minimize attempts to divide and neutralize the effectiveness of the Collective.    
        3.  The Collective may elect not to recognize those who fail to abide by the aforementioned principles of 
             unity. Everyone is encouraged to support the work of the Collective in ways most suitable for them, 
             whether inside or outside the Collective. 
 
We Believe 
 
We believe the Reparations Movement can empower African Americans to continue our task of gaining social, 
economic, and cultural parity and liberation for individuals, families and communities.  The movement provides an 
opportunity to address all issues impacting the Black Community by: 
 
        1.  Creating a path for self, family and community development and liberation; 
        2.  Providing a cause strong enough to unite Black People across socio-economic, and education barriers; 
        3.  Recognizing and assisting with  restoring the dignity of over 100 million Africans lost and sacrificed dur- 
             ing the Holocaust of Enslavement and one hundred years of lynching that followed; 
        4.  Providing an opportunity to expose the perpetrator of the Holocaust and educate the victims by creating  
             dialogue locally and nationally that thoroughly examines our collective oppression (and mistakes), and ex- 
             poses the perpetrator’s responsibility in creating our past and current social condition;  
        5.  Providing compensation for Black People locally and nationally; 
        6.  We believe our people are ultimately responsible for our collective achievement of social, economic, and  
             cultural parity and liberation.  Restitution will only assist in our recovery and building process.  The strug- 
             gle for Reparations is a sacred responsibility that must be assumed by African descendants in the Ameri- 
             cas; and 
        7.  We believe there can be no Reparations without mass participation.  Mass participation is essential to  
             achieving Reparations (repairing, healing and restoring Black People) and Restitution (receiving compen- 
             sation for the Holocaust and its vestiges).   
 
Issued by N”COBRA National Office June 29, 2002


--- PAGE 419 ---
47 
CONGRATULATIONS to the TRAIL BLAZERS 
 
HATS OFF to the forward thinking businesses that 
were the first to register with N'COBRA’s   
commitment to support the black community, justice, 
and the Reparations movement.  These are the first 
group of members supporting the BLACK FRIDAY 
MOVEMENT.  Be sure to buy from them. Join the 
BUY BLACK on FRIDAY campaign.  Get your Black 
Friday Palm Cards from one of these businesses and 
buy black every day. 
 
FLORIDA 
 
The African Violet,  Inc. 
P.O. Box  12627 
Gainesville, FL   32604 
Contact:   Delphine Jackson 
Ph.   352/ 335. 6161 
Fax.  352/ 335. 3737 
 
NEW YORK 
  
Southern Comforts 
483 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Nettie Paisley 
 
Zawadi Gift Shop 
519 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Lora Brown 
 
R & W Facility Care systems, Inc. 
485 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, New York 11217 
Wayne Miles
 
 
Indigo Cafe and Books 
672 Fulton St. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Tel: 718-488-5934
 
    
Lewis Gallery 
525 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Gwen Lewis 
  
Doe's Antiques 
442 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
718-858-6903 
4W Circle of Art & Enterprise 
794 Fulton Street 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Contact:   Selma Jackson 
Ph.  718/ 875. 6500 
Selma4W@Searthlink.net 
 
Big Deal Books 
973 Fulton St. 
Brooklyn, NY 11238 
Phone# 718-622-4420 
Owner: David D. Mcleod
 
 
Harriets Alter Ego 
191 Flatbush Avenue 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
 
WASHINGTON DC METRO 
 
YAWA Books & Gifts 
2206 - 18th Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20009-1813 
Contact:   Jacqueline Hawkins 
Ph.  202/ 483. 6805 
 
Dar Es Salaam 
4000 - 34th Street 
Mt. Ranier, MD  20712 
Contact:   Hodari Abdul-Ali 
Ph.  301/ 209. 0010 
Hodari2@Juno.com 
www.desbooks.com 
 
Heavenly Stitches 
512 - 24th Street, NE 
Washington, DC  20002 
Contact:   Tanya D. Claggett 
Ph.  202/ 390. 8806 
HeavenlyStitch3@aol.com 
 
N’COBRA, the National Coalition of Blacks for Repa-
rations in America, has launched a nationwide campaign 
based on the Kwanzaa principle of “cooperative eco-
nomics.” N'COBRA's goal is to be a key mover in the 
powerful process of enabling the Black community to 
gain more economic control of our community. 
 
Contact:  BuyBlack4Friday@aol.com 
 
               202.291.8400 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
BLACK FRIDAYS CAMPAIGN


--- PAGE 420 ---
48 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
“REPARATIONS AIN’T FREE” 
N’COBRA’s National Donation Drive 
  
 
FROM:  Dorothy Benton Lewis/Oravouche, National Co-Chair and  
                N’COBRA National Fund Development Committee 
 
TO:         All People Supporting Justice and Reparations 
 
 
An Urgent Call for Support  
 
The Reparations Movement needs you and your financial support.  “Reparations Ain’t Free.”  Our ancestors 
paid the ultimate price of suffering through 265 years of slavery, and now those who have benefited from 
their sacrifices must pay us reparations. We, the descendants of enslaved Africans, MUST now sacrifice our 
time, talent and money for the work that must be done to get complete and full Reparations for ourselves 
and future generations.  
 
This year, at our 14
th Annual Conference, the National Coalitions of Blacks for Reparations in America 
(N’COBRA)  unveil its 5-Year Action Plan, which outlines the various programs that have been imple-
mented to achieve Reparations.  We need your help with executing this Plan.  There are so many critical re-
quirements that must be funded:  printing, postage, regular conference calls, travel, vehicle rental, advertis-
ing, Website development and expansion, e-group support, supplies and equipment, just to name a few.  
  
N’COBRA also has a number of commissions that are tackling critical issues in each of the following areas: 
Legislative (HR 40 Lobbying, Reparations Resolution Campaign); Legal (legal injury research, filing briefs) 
International (WCAR, Global African Congress, UN Lobbying); Economic Development  (Black Friday 
Buying Campaign, Congress of Economic Development); Information & Media  (“Black Reparations 
Times,” “ENCOBRA magazine,” NCOBRA.org website, “REPARATIONS NOW!”; Grassroots Organiz-
ing (Town Hall Meetings, Direct Action, National Membership Drive), etc.  Each of these areas supports 
the other.  All are necessary to achieve Reparations, and all require people and money to make them work.  
 
For the past 14 years, N’COBRA has been an organization of vol unteers, who have funded the m ovement 
with their own resources, in order to supplement annual membership dues, which fall short of the Coali-
tion’s actual needs.   It is now time to take the Reparations movement to another level.  It is now time for all 
of us to pool our resources, creativity, and our genius.   
 
Please contribute generously to N’COBRA.  The form on the next  page establishes a number of different 
patron participation levels.  Each level acknowledges Africans and African Descendants who have played an 
important role in our struggle for civil and human rights.   While you’re selecting the patron level that’s 
most appropriate for you, be sure to tell us which commissions you’d most like to support.  And remember, 
no amount is too great or too small! 
 
The Reparations movement is not for N’COBRA members alone—it is for all African Descendants and our 
allies.  Encourage your church, sorority, fraternity, family reunion, and other community based 
organizations to send a donation to N’COBRA to supp ort this very spiritual work that we are doing in 
honor of the sacrifices of all our Ancestors.   
 
In Unity,


--- PAGE 421 ---
49 
I want my donation to support: 
(please check mark one or more areas of N’COBRA work listed below) 
 
Grassroots Organizing  ____    Membership & Organizational Development Commission   ___    Legislative Commission   ___     
 
Information & Media Commission  __   Economic Development Commission  ____    Legal Strategies Commission  ____     
 
National Office & Administrative  _____      International Commission   ____     Human Resources Commission  ____   
 
Youth Commission   ____    Education Commission  ____ 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
National Coalition Of Blacks for Reparations in America 
 
 
Please send your contributions (check/money order only) payable to: 
 
            N’COBRA 
        P.O. Box 90604 
                                                                        Washington, DC  20090 
Yes!  I pledge my support for the Reparations Movement  
struggle for Justice, Restitution and Reparations for the Afri-
can Holocaust of Enslavement and Its Vestiges. 
 
NAME________________________________________ 
 
ADDRESS_____________________________________  
 
CITY_________________________________________ 
 
STATE________________________________________ 
 
ZIP CODE _____________________________________ 
 
PHONE _______________________________________ 
 
Enclosed is my check or money order for $__________ 
             I PLEDGE: 
 
    $25    ___ 
    $50    ___ 
    $75    ___ 
    $100  ___ 
    Other Amount $______ 
 
Patron Participation Levels   
1. L’Ouverture         $5000  ___ 
2. Walker                  $3000  ___ 
3. Tubman                $1000  ___ 
4. Garvey                    $700  ___ 
5. DuBois                    $500  ___ 
6. King                        $300  ___ 
7. Moore                     $200  ___ 
 
Payment Cycle 
 
Weekly    ___         Monthly   ___ 
Quarterly  ___        Annually  ___ 
PATRON PARTICIPATION LEVELS  
 
Become a Reparations Patron today and have your (or your group) name added to N’COBRA’s National Donation Drive.  An 
ongoing list of patrons will be updated and published.    
 
1.    $5000.00              Toussaint L’Ouverture                  {1743 - 1803} 
2.    $3000.00              David Walker                                 {1796 - 1830} 
3.    $1000.00              Harriet Tubman                             {1819 - 1913} 
4.      $700.00              Marcus Garvey                              {1887 - 1940} 
5.      $500.00              W.E.B. DuBois                               {1868 - 1963} 
6.      $300.00              Martin Luther King, Jr.                {1929 - 1968} 
7.      $200.00              Queen Mother Moore                    {1898 - 1997} 
 
          These noble ancestors contributions to our liberation and development are priceless.   
         We lift up their names in chronological order to honor them.


--- PAGE 422 ---
50 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America 
N ‘COBRAN ‘COBRA  
 
MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION 
 
PURPOSE 
We believe that the descendants of Africans, who w ere captured, taken from our homeland (Africa), en-
slaved, colonized and held captive for hundreds of years in the Americas and throughout the diaspora, be-
lieve that we should be compensated for the injustices, cruelties, brutalities, inhumanities and exploitations of 
racism, white supremacy, economic di scrimination and oppression imposed upon our people past and pre-
sent. 
DEFINITION 
REPARATIONS: Payment for a debt owed; the act of repairing a wrong or injury; to atone for wrongdo-
ings; to make amends; to make one whole again; the payment of damages to repair a nation; compensation in 
money, land, or materials for damages. In the Ancient African, Kemetic sense, Reparations means to rise up. 
Repair and restore the ruined and damaged, develop the underdeveloped, and create a just society. 
 
INVITATION 
Please help continue the organizing and expansion efforts of N’COBRA in building our National & Interna-
tional Movements for Reparations. Reparations are obta inable in our lifetime. A committed people with a 
righteous cause is a force that cannot be denied. 
 
Mail this bottom portion to the National Office N’COBRA, 
P.O. Box 90604, Washington, DC 20090-0604 
Tel: 202. 291. 8400 * Fax: 202. 291. 4600 * Website: http://www.ncobra.org 
----------------------------------------------------------Tear off---------------------------------------------------------- 
N’COBRA National (Annual) Membership Application 
Select appropriate categories.  Make check/money order payable to NCOBRA. 
 
There may be additional fees for local membership 
 
Individual:___ $10-one year;___ $20-two years; ___ $30- three-years; $___for ___years; or  __ $500.00 Life  
 
Membership (can be made in two $250 payments);  ___$25 Local Org; ___ 50 National Org. and 
 
I would like to support the Commissions (check one or more and enter $ amount): 
____Economic Development;____Education ____Human Resources; ____Information & Media; 
____International; Legal; ____Legislative; _____Youth 
 
Total Amount Enclosed $ _______________ 
 
Name ________________________________ Chpt/Org/Bus ____________________________
                                     (Please Print) 
 
Street Address__________________________________________________________________ 
                                                                                      (Please Print) 
City/State/Zip Code_____________________________________________________________ 
 
Home Phone (      ) ________________________ Chapter/Org/Bus (       ) _________________ 
 
E-Mail _________________________________ FAX (    ) ______________________________ 
 
Collected by (NCOBRA Member Name) ____________________________________________ 
 
Chapter Name/Location __________________________________________________________


--- PAGE 423 ---
51 
N’COBRA’s Board of Directors 
 
Dorothy Aurevouche Benton Lewis, Co-Chair 
(Rockville, Maryland) 
 
Baba Hannibal Afrik, Co-Chair 
(Port Gibson, Mississippi)  
 
Kupenda Olusegun, Treasurer 
(Washington, DC) 
 
Ajamu Sankofa, Secretary and 
Northeast Region Rep (Brooklyn, New York) 
 
Dr. Imari Obadele, Emeritus and Ex-Officio 
(Baton Rouge, Louisiana) 
 
Frank Omowale Satterwhite, Western Region   
Representative (East Palo Alto, CA)   
 
J. Damu, Western Region  
Asst.  Representative (San Francisco, California) 
 
Njere Alghanee, Southeast Region Rep 
(Atlanta, Georgia) 
 
James Rodgers III, Southwest Region  
Representative (Dallas, TX) 
 
Alvin Brown, Midwest Region Rep 
(St. Louis, Missouri) 
 
Lady Claudia Nelson, At-Large 
(Dallas, Texas)  
 
Kalonji Tor Olusegun, At-Large 
(Washington, DC) 
 
Herman Ferguson, At-Large 
(Queens, NY) 
 
JoAnn Watson, At-Large 
(Detroit, Michigan) 
 
N’COBRA’s Elder Advisory Board and Commissions also 
have representation on our Board of Directors. 
 
Elder Advisory Board 
 
Erline Arikpo, Elder Advisor 
(Chicago, Illinois) 
 
Raymond “Reparations Ray” Jenkins, Elder Advisor 
(Detroit, Michigan 
 
 
General Ali X.  Rashid, Elder Advisor 
(Miami, Florida) 
 
General Mwesi Chui, Elder Advisor 
(Dayton, Ohio) 
 
Nia Kuumba, Elder Advisor 
(Washington, DC) 
 
Dr. Ron Walters, Elder Advisor 
(College Park, Maryland) 
 
N’COBRA’s Commission Leaders 
 
Economic Development 
               Alvin Brown (St. Louis, MO) 
               Taiwo Kugichagulia (Oakland, CA) 
               Baba Dr. Imari Obadele (BR, LA) 
Education 
               Dr. Mary Hoover (Washington, DC) 
Human Resources 
               Njere Alghanee (Atlanta, GA)          
Information and Media 
               JoAnn Watson (Detroit, MI)  
               Wautella ibn Yusuf (Washington, DC) 
               Jahahara Alkebulan-Ma’at(Oakland, CA) 
International 
               Mashariki Jywanza (Indianapolis, IN) 
               Sababu Shabaka, Baltimore, MD  
Legal Strategies 
               Adjoa Aiyetoro (Washington, DC) 
Legislative 
               Nkechi Taifa (Washington, DC) 
               Kibibi Tyehimba (Washington, DC) 
               Milton McGriff (Philadelphia, PA) 
Membershi/Organizational Development 
Kupenda Olusegun (Washington, DC) 
Johnita Scott (Baton Rouge, LA) 
Frank Omowale Satterwhite (E. PA, CA)   
Youth 
               Shereeta Lacy (Indianapolis, IN) 
               Nuri Madina, (Chicago, IL)              
                
 
Your Expertise and Participation Are Needed. 
 
Join An N’COBRA Commission! 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
N’COBRN’COBR AA  
National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America 
P.O. Box 90604  Washington, DC 20090-0604 
PHONE: 202.291.8400   FAX:  202.291.4600 
EMAIL: NationalNCOBRA@aol.com   WEBSITE: www.ncobra.org 
DISCUSSION: http://groups.yahoo.com/group/Reparations_For_Africans


--- PAGE 424 ---
52 
 
 
FACT:  The Reparations Movement cannot be advanced without the  
               support of African (Black) People. 
 
FACT:   African (Black) People cannot and should not expect anyone  
               other than ourselves to provide the resources needed to win our  
               Reparations. 
 
FACT:   If you do not keep your membership up to date you will no longer 
               receive N’COBRA membership mailings. 
 
Do your part to move us closer to achieving Reparations. Contribute 
generously to N’COBRA. Renew Your N’COBRA membership each 
year.  Encourage other Reparations su pporters to join N’COBRA. Host 
fundraisers for N’COBRA and contribute the funds to N’COBRA projects 
that you feel passionately about. And remember the Power to Win 
Reparations is In our Hands!   Reparations: Conceive It...Achieve It! 
ATTENTION REPARATIONS ADVOCATES 
N’COBRA 
National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America 
P.O. Box 90604 
  Washington, DC 20090-0604 
In This Issue... 
 
 
 
 
MINISTER LOUIS FARRAKHAN 
Offers His Life To The Reparations Movement  
We are especially 
grateful to founding 
member Baba Kalonji 
Tor Olusegun for 
designing the N’COBRA 
logo (above).  It consists 
of three sacred Andinkra 
symbols: NKON-
SONKONSON (link or 
chain); OWA FOR A 
ADOBE (snake climbing 
the palm tree); and, 
BIRIBI-WO-SORO (a 
symbol of Hope denoting 
there is something in the 
Heavens).  Together, 
these symbols express 
our links in this, and the 
next life; that We share a 
common blood relation 
which will never break 
apart; and that We can 
perform the impossible.


--- PAGE 425 ---
1 
On January 30, 
2003, 250  
members of the 
Philadelphia  
Reparations  
Coalition  
converged on 
the nation’s 
capitol for the 
Kickoff of the 
National  
Coalition of 
Blacks for  
Reparations in 
America  
(N’COBRA)  
Year of Black 
Presence  
(AYBP)  
Lobbying initiative. This 
initiative, spearheaded by 
Philadelphia NCOBRA member and National 
AYBP Coordinator, Mr. Milton McGriff, will 
mobilize  
Reparations  
Advocates across 
the country to 
actively work 
toward the  
passage of  
Reparations  
Study Bill, H.R. 
40. 
 
              T h e 
January 30
th  
kickoff event 
took place in 
Room 2237 of 
the Rayburn 
Building in the 
very room where 
the House Judiciary 
Committee will eventually 
determine whether H.R. 40 will be forwarded for 
(Continued on page 5) 
REPARATIONS LOBBYISTS ON  
CAPITOL HILL! 
By Kibibi Tyehimba, Co-Chair, N’COBRA Legislative Commission 
N’COBRA embarked upon a litigation strategy in 1997, when the Board of Directors approved the 
formation of the Reparations Litigation Committee.  This committee is composed of reparations 
activists, social scientists and lawyers.  Of course, some of the social scientists and lawyers are 
reparations activists.  Many N’COBRA members have gotten dismayed because it is now 2003 and 
N’COBRA has not filed the lawsuit that people have been looking for:  one that raises the demand 
for reparations for slavery and the vestiges of slav ery for African descendants in the United States.  
(Continued on page 2) 
Black Reparations Times © 2003  
Anti-War and Pro-Reparations 2 
National  Reparations Weekend 7 
N'COBRA  National Five Year Strategic Plan 16 
Japanese Americans for Black Reparations 17 
N’COBRA’S LITIGATION WORK 
by Adjoa A. Aiyetoro, Chair, Legal Strategies Commission 
On to Dallas 
Juneteenth 03 
 
Save the dates, 19-22 
June 2003, Sisters and 
Brothers.  N’COBRA’s 
14
th  Annual  
Convention is heading 
to the birthplace of 
Juneteenth—the state 
of Texas, and the city 
of Dallas. 
 
Relying on the past 
experiences of other 
chapters, our very 
active N’COBRA 
Dallas chapter,  
supported by leaders 
throughout the  
southwest region, are 
collectively working 
out details for this 
enormous undertaking.  
Official registration 
forms and calls for 
participation were sent 
out early in 2003.   
Contact our N’COBRA 
National Office or 
DallasNCOBRA@hot
mail.com to offer your 
support and  
recommendations.   
Ase`. 
Volume 1, Issue 1 March 7, 2003 
Black Reparations Times 
Reparations for 
the Holocaust  of 
Enslavement and 
Its Vestiges 
Ms Dororty Lewis, N’COBRA National  
Co Chair & Congressman John Conyers


--- PAGE 426 ---
2 
 
 
The National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America (NCOBRA) opposes the immoral United States 
war against Iraq, and this country's unprovoked aggression against other Peoples around the world. We do not 
support people of African descent going off to fight and die in disproportionate numbers in yet another war, 
for a country that refuses to admit to the 500 years of terrorism it has perpetrated against African descendants, 
and that refuses to admit that it has a debt that must be paid to the descendants of formerly enslaved Africans. 
 
The U.S. war against Iraq transfers wealth from African descendant communities and other communities of 
color that are ravaged daily by systems and institutions that benefit from our exploitation and our restricted 
access to wealth and power. This transfer of the nation's wealth only exacerbates our condition and lessens our 
ability to respond to the needs of the most vulnerable members of our communities.  The resources that will 
be allocated for the war must be transferred to African descendant communities to right one of the most 
grievous crimes against humanity-the Trans-Atlantic Enslavement of African People.  
 
African descendants are painfully aware that white supremacy, globalization, unbridled exploitation of other 
nations' land and resources, and the violation of other nations' right to be self-determining can ultimately lead 
to a recurrence of the horrors that our people suffered during the American Holocaust of African 
Enslavement. Therefore, we have an obligation to speak in opposition to the war against Iraq and any actions 
that deny People of other nations, the human rights that Americans take for granted.  
 
January 15, 2003 
 
{approved and distributed by N’COBRA’s Board of Directors - January 2003 Board Meeting, Dallas, TX} 
Black Reparations Times 
(Continued from page 1) 
Some have gotten downright angry – accusing the Legal 
Strategies Commission and its Reparations Litigation 
Committee of misleading th e community concerning 
the development of the litigation.  Some have asked 
why we have not developed litigation since others have 
filed litigation in the past few years while we continue 
to prepare.   
 
We understand the frustration of the 
community since we put out there that 
N’COBRA was developing reparations 
litigation.  It was a mistake to put a 
time frame on the filing of a lawsuit.  
Many of you rightfully wanted to hold 
us to the projected date; however, the 
difficulties encount ered in putting a 
lawsuit together against the 
government have resulted in significant 
time delays.  We no longer give a date for the filing, 
because of this.   
 
Legal Commission Work 
Anti-War and Pro-Reparations 
There are a lot of legal obstacles to filing a lawsuit for 
reparations and we are figuring out how to get around those 
obstacles.  We don’t want to file something that may make 
you feel good, like we are doing something, only to end up 
spending lots of time and mone y on a losing case – one that 
we knew or should have known when we filed it would not 
be successful.  We want to develop a lawsuit that we feel has 
a good chance of succeeding. 
 
There is another issue that perhaps has 
confused many of our members and 
supporters.  N’COBRA voted in June 2001 at 
the Baton Rouge conference to have Adjoa A. 
Aiyetoro serve as co-chair of the Reparations 
Coordinating Committee (RCC).  The RCC 
was formed in August 2000 by Randall 
Robinson and Charles Ogletree. Adjoa was 
asked to participate, representing N’COBRA 
and later Dorothy Benton Lewis participated representing 
N’COBRA as well.  The confusion is that many of our people 
don’t want to see this as N’COBRA litigation work when in  
(Continued on page 4) 
 
“It was a mistake to 
put a time frame on  
the filing  
of a lawsuit”


--- PAGE 427 ---
3 
Black Reparations Times 
Many, many thanks and sincere appreciation to the members of 
N’COBRA’s dynamic Detroit, Michigan Chapter for their 
expert organizing of N’COBRA’s 13th Annual Convention. 
 
Held this past June at the b eautiful, elegant and 100 percent 
African-American owned St. Regis Hotel, the Convention 
focused on the very appropriate theme “REPARATIONS, 
NOW: A United Stand Against Over  500 Years of Terrorism.”  
Addressing hundreds of participants with their great wisdom 
were keynoters, such as the ad mitted “hoodlum-to-judge” Greg 
Mathis and Congressman John Conyers, (both natives of 
MoTown), President Ukali Mwendo of the Republic of New 
Afrika (one of the groups that founded N’COBRA), the 
founder of KWANZAA Dr. Maulana Karenga, Dr. Ron Daniels 
of the new Institute of the Black World, and Dr. Conrad Worrill 
of the National Black United Fr ont. International  presenters 
included our great Ancestor FRANTZ FANON’s daughter 
Muriel Fanon from France; Attorney Esther Stanford, a leading 
activist for Reparations in England; and the dynamic legal 
scholar, Leonard Hinds.  
 
Among our many cultural events were a sunrise spiritual 
gathering on Belle Isle, where ma ny of our enslaved Ancestors 
Asante Sana N’COBRA Detroit 
By Jahahara Alkebulan-Ma'at 
Greetings N'COBRA Family! 
 
Peace and Blessings for a Happy, Healthy, Prosperous New Year!  
 
Yea though we walk through the valley of wars and rumors of wars, we stay the course. We yield to no 
distractions. We do our job, Satan does his. We know we will be the victor. 
 
We give thanks to You, the Ancestors, and the Great Spirit for another outstanding year of accomplishments 
through work, faith, and love.  May we all be energized by our love for the God within us, love for our families, 
for each other, and the vision we hold for our children and our future. Let us continue to step out on faith 
knowing that the path of our divine mission will be lighted with each step. Let us take time to look with 
amazement at the miracles we create from nothing. Let us marvel at our brilliance, but only for a moment for we 
have yet another mountain to climb.  
 
For some of us, mountain climbing is a struggle, for others it is good exercise, but many of us see mountain 
climbing as a spiritual journey. Along the way, we face our demons; some find God, some find ourselves, some 
find each other. So, let us keep moving toward the mark, knowing that there is value in the journey whether we 
are in the valley, on the plateau, or at the mountain's peak from where we see the next mountain. For, it is all 
God's work and we graciously surrender to the work, knowing that our on-the-job training is divinely guided and 
inspired.  
 
Much love and appreciation for all that you do.  
From National Co-Chairs  
Aurevouche Dorothy Benton Lewis & Jahahara Alkebulan-Ma'at 
launched their escape from the U.S. to Canada; a special 
acknowledgement and call for immediate release and 
amnesty for hundreds of our long-suffering political 
prisoners and exiles (former POW Baba Herman Ferguson, 
founder of our N’COBRA Rochdale Village Queens, NY 
was introduced); a fabulous tour of African-centered and 
other important landmarks in 
the Detroit area; inspirational 
dancing from local youth, and  music by a former member 
of the mighty Impressions.  Helping the N’COBRA Detroit 
chapter tie it altogether we re our dedicated founders, 
members of the Board of Dir ectors, Commission co-chairs, 
and regional and chapter leaders from around the U.S. 
 
During the convention the Gene ral membership elected to 
not only participate in the 17 August 2002 Reparations 
March (called by the December 12
th Movement and 
NBUF); but to use the occasion to host an inclusive, 
democratic, African-centered  N’COBRA sponsored event 
on 16 August to highlight “Black Friday”, and to maintain a 
visible  N’COBRA presence during the march the following 
day.   
Other Convention decisions focused on expanding our 
(Continued on page 6)


--- PAGE 428 ---
4 
Black Reparations Times 
Legal  Commission Work  (Continued from page 2) 
 
fact it is.  We joined the RCC to advance the reparations 
litigation work.  Although we understand that people are 
wowed by the star factor of a Johnny Cochran or Randall 
Robinson, our leadership ro le in the RCC has been 
misunderstood by many and dismissed by others.  Yet, we 
have a significant role in the RCC and through our 
participation, litigation development has been advanced.   
 
The RCC filed the first of what will be a series of lawsuits 
in the federal district court in Tulsa, Oklahoma on February 
24, 2003.  Of course, this case is not about all African 
descendants in the United States, although since it speaks to 
the vulnerability of African descendants to mob violence, 
particularly in the 
early 20th Century, 
it is.  This case is not 
about slavery, 
although since it 
describes conditions 
of violence,  
detention and forced 
servitude that are 
reminiscent of  
slavery, it is.  This 
case is not about the 
vestiges of slavery, 
although since the 
African descendants 
in the Greenwood 
district were  
subjected to the 
presumption of the 
validity of white 
supremacy that was a 
hallmark of slavery, it is.  
N’COBRA’s website, www.
ncobra.org, has the complete Tulsa Complaint for your 
review.    
 
So, this first reparations lawsuit filed by the RCC, is 
N’COBRA’s first reparations lawsuit as well.  As a viable 
member of the RCC, we have chosen to work in coalition 
with Charles Ogletree, Randall Robinson and the other 
members of  the RCC, some of whom are also N’COBRA 
members such as Ron Walters, a member of our elder 
advisory board, and Rose Sande rs.  Charles Ogletree is also 
a member of N’COBRA.  This suit is consistent with 
N’COBRA’s mission, to obtain reparations for not only 
chattel slavery, but the vestiges of slavery.  Its focus on 
Tulsa is at the same time a focus on all our communities 
that have suffered white mob violence.  Its focus on the 
demand that the city and state pay reparations and 
restitution to the survivors and descendants for their role in 
the destruction of African descendants homes and 
businesses and  brutalization of their families is a demand 
for justice for all of us.   
 
Tulsa is not the end of our litigation work.  Nor is it the 
beginning.    N’COBRA and the National Conference of 
Black Lawyers filed an amicus brief in the United States 
Supreme Court on February 14, 2003, supporting the 
University of Michigan’s affirmative action and diversity 
programs.  The amicus brief makes a strong argument that 
the University of Michigan’s affirmative action and diversity 
programs are required as reparations to African descendants.  
This brief can also be seen by going to N’COBRA’s website:  
www.ncobra.org. 
 
It is important that we see N’COBRA’s litigation work in a 
broad context:  
coalition work with 
other groups that 
have a similar vision 
is not only  
appropriate but 
essential since 
N’COBRA is itself 
a coalition.  At the 
same time,  
N’COBRA’s Legal 
Strategies  
Commission and 
Litigation  
Committee are  
continuing to  
develop litigation 
that may not be 
joined by other 
groups.  It is also 
important to see that 
every piece of 
litigation that is filed may not be 
litigation that N’COBRA will 
join because, among other reasons, N’COBRA’s human and 
financial resources do not allow it to become part of every 
litigation effort.  Finally, there may be differences among 
N’COBRA and other groups concerning the approach to 
take.  These differences may result in N’COBRA not being a 
part of some litigation efforts.  Despite the differences, we 
hold the good thought that other individuals and groups are 
as sincere in their efforts to obtain reparations as is 
N’COBRA.  The combined energy  of all our efforts will 
result in obtaining reparations for African descendants in the 
United States.  It also will combine with efforts 
internationally to obtain repa rations for African and African 
descendants worldwide. 
Atty Aiyetoro brings the crowd to their feet as 
 Min. Farrakhan smilingly looks on 
 
REPARATIONS NOW! 
 
IN OUR LIFE TIME


--- PAGE 429 ---
5 
moral justification for our quest for 
Reparations, and highlighted the 
significance of  AYBP in achieving that 
goal.   N’COBRA Legislative 
Commission Co-Chair, Ms. Nkechi Taifa 
spoke to the growing synergy in the 
Reparations Movement, and Mr. Keenan 
Keller, Judiciary Counsel to Congressman 
John Conyers Jr., brought greetings and 
words of encouragement from the Congressman who was 
unable to attend.   N’COBRA National Co-Chair Ms. 
Dorothy Lewis congratulated the Philadelphia Reparations 
Coalition for their tremendous  turnout, and also reminded 
us of the sacredness of our quest for Reparations.  The 
group was inspired by the poetry of four strong sister 
warriors who are part of the group “In the Company of 
Poets”.  And if the purpose of music is to prepare the 
people to move then we must extend our greatest 
appreciation to “The Trane St op Institute” for bringing 
forth the rhythm of the drum, and giving us the energy to 
take on the formidable task ahead.  
 
The Philadelphia Coalitio n, made up of the 
Philadelphia Chapter of N’COBRA, the African American 
Freedom and Reconstruction League, House of the Lord 
Pentecostal Church, Trane St op Resource Institute, the 
Philadelphia Branch of the NAACP, Mother Bethel AME 
Church, the Philadelphia Chapter of the UNIA, 
Philadelphia Black Radical Congress, and the Lost Found 
Nation of Islam separated into groups, which then moved 
out to engage members of the Congressional Black 
Caucus (CBC), and their State Representatives in both the 
Black Reparations Times 
House and the Senate, on the issue of Reparations.  
Pennsylvania’s CBC members ha ve all endorsed H.R. 40, 
but there’s still work to be done with their remaining 
members of Congress. In addition to lobbying Pennsylvania 
representatives, a small group set out to meet with 
Congressman F. James Sensenbrenner of Wisconsin, 
chairman of the Judiciary Committee who has stated that H.
R. 40 will never receive a hearing.  All future lobbying 
sessions must include a visit to Congressman 
Sensenbrenner’s office until he is able to see the light.   
 
While the lobbying continued at the Rayburn 
Building, the smaller group of lobbyists ventured into the 
Hart Building to address Pennsylvania Senators.  Luckily, 
Mr. Keenan Keller was able to escort us through the 
underground corridors.  We decided to board the 
Congressional underground train to hasten our journey.  As 
the train moved along, we all took note 
of something that is surely a very 
powerful sign from the Creator.  We sat 
with smiles on our faces as the train 
passed Senators Trent Lott and Orin 
Hatch who were walking together, no 
doubt hatching some plan to move this 
country back to the days of open 
segregation.  We all believe in our 
hearts that the message was clear-- that 
we will be victorious, and we will leave 
behind the likes of Trent Lott and Orin 
Hatch and any others, who attempt to 
deny the African descendants’ demand 
for Reparations.   
               
The group had a full day of lobbying.  
Although there were no new  
Representatives persuaded to endorse H.R. 40, the event 
was an excellent opportunity to hone our lobbying skills, 
and commit to staying the course.   
 
On February 25, in commemoration of Reparations 
Awareness Day, the DC Metropolitan Chapter of 
N’COBRA and other Reparations Advocates gathered at the 
nation's capitol for another day of lobbying for the passage 
of Reparations Study Bill H.R. 40.  It is more and more 
apparent that the Reparations momentum is mounting as 
evidenced by the presence of an d participation in the day’s 
lobbying effort by leaders from organizations with 
significant national and international constituencies.  Mr. 
Ken Fealing, Director of Ci vil and Human Rights for the 
United Methodist Church re presented the faith-based 
organization with membership totaling approximately 9 
Million.  This predominantly white international 
organization has already passed  a Reparations Resolution, 
and has commissioned a task force to study this and other 
issues which impact African Americans.  Mr. Hilary 
Shelton, Director of the Washington Bureau of the NAACP, 
whose internationally based membership totals 
(Continued on page 12) 
AYBP  (Continued from page 1) 
debate on the House floor.  To pave the road, Mama Nia 
Kuumba, a founding member of N’COBRA, member of  
N’COBRA’s Elders Council, and member of the DC 
Chapter of N’COBRA, started the event by pouring a 
powerful libation to call forth the energies of our 
ancestors for whom we demand Reparations.  She called 
on all the freedom fighters, known and unknown, all the 
countless and nameless men, women, and children, whose 
lives were sacrificed building this country, and she asked 
for the blessings of the Creat or, as we continue on our 
sacred path to victory.  Prayers were also offered by 
Reverend Chaney of Philadelphia’s House of the Lord 
Pentecostal Church, and from the Islamic tradition by Mr. 
Wesley Wilson Bey of the Moorish Unification Council of 
America.  This powerful beginning demonstrated our 
commitment to moving beyond religion 
and other barriers created by our sojourn 
in this country, and achieving Reparations 
in our lifetime.  
 
Brief statements were provided 
by AYBP National Coordinator, Mr. Milt 
McGriff, and Philadelphia Co-Chair Mr. 
Rob Bell, which laid out the historical and


--- PAGE 430 ---
6 
Black Reparations Times 
“Organize, organize, organize”  was a clarion call to action 
taught to us by our esteemed ancestor, Kwame Toure. Brother 
Toure brilliantly popularized not only the term “Black Power” 
but he also nurtured  the experience of African empowerment 
and beauty by actively organizing our people. 
 
The N’COBRA Northeast Regional Meeting, held on October 
19, 2002 in NYC chose “organize, organize, organize” as its 
theme and purpose because that work is still our work. Over 
seventy-five people attended. 
 
The meeting held two powerful workshops. Lively 
constructive dialog among all attendees characterized both 
workshops.  
 
The first workshop posed the question, “How Does the African 
Community Organize for Reparations in the Belly of the 
Beast?” The panelist were multigenerational veteran organizers 
that included Herman Ferguson, co-chair of the N’COBRA 
Queens Rochdale Chapter; Rosa Clemente, Malcolm X 
Grassroots Movement; Monifa Ba ndele, National co-chair of 
Malcolm X Grassroots Movement; Duane Andre, leader in the 
Haitian Coalition for Justice; Kibibi Tyehimba, co-chair of 
N’COBRA DC Chapter; and Khalil Amusthafa, poetry editor 
of The Paper and co-founder of  Youth for Reparations.  This 
workshop was moderated by Linda Roots, female co-chair of 
the New York Metro Area N'COBRA Chapter and Wautella 
ibn Yusuf, male co-chair of the DC N'COBRA Chapter. 
 
This workshop produced a list of specific recommendations for 
organizing our community.  
 
The recommendations included: 
1.Develop joint activities among organizational N’COBRA 
members that directly build th e capacities for all organizations 
to win Reparations;  
2.Do bottom up organizing. For example, before going to the 
church pastor, first organize a few of the church members who 
then go to the church pastor;  
3.Translate Reparations materials into Spanish and Creole;  
4.Physically go into the streets and engage our people using 
the voter registration model;  
5.Always keep a grassroots and inclusive focus;  
6.Strategically plan activities; 
7.Actively include the arts in all of our organizing work; 
8.Take a long view, do not expect microwave results, and 
remain consistent and persistent with our eyes on the prize of 
Reparations. 
   
Attendees, many of whom were community activists who had 
(Continued on page 8) 
“ORGANIZE, ORGANIZE,  
ORGANIZE” 
By Ajamu Sankofa,  
N’COBRA Northeast Regional Representative 
 N’COBRA DETROIT     (Continued from page 3) 
collective efforts to educate and involve our people in  
Reparations’ solutions by strengthening our chapter-
building strategies  and the work of the Economic 
Development commission; to intensify our pressure on 
political candidates running for public office to urge their 
support of H.R. 40 during this year’s elections; to send a 
delegation to the African Descendants Caucus’ follow-up 
conference to the United Nations’ “World Conference 
Against Racism,” that will take place in Barbados; to raise 
the necessary funds to file and sustain our class-action 
lawsuit against the U.S. government. 
 
We  are especially grateful to the team of leaders in the 
Detroit area for their commitment, hospitality and 
perseverance.   Special Sa lutes to Dr. JoAnn Watson, 
Stanley Bragg, Lillian Brown, Raymond “Reparations Ray” 
Jenkins, Sherylynn Robinson, Ben Looney, Billie Parrish, 
Cicero Love, Maya Watson, Dr. Robert Bland, Mary Ann 
Hinds, Mary Ruffin-Williams, Minister Malik Shabazz… 
and so many other wonderful members, such as 
N’COBRA’s Midwest Region Representative Alvin Brown, 
our national co-chairs, and Board members. 
 
Congratulations Detroit N’COBRA for a job well done.   
ASANTE  SANA (many, many thanks) .  WE  Love You 
All! 
The New Orleans Chapter hosted the Southwest Regional 
Conference on Saturday, March 15th, 2003 at the Andrew 
Bell Middle School in New Orleans, LA. The conference 
was attended by chapter members from Dallas, Texas, New 
Orleans, Baton Rouge, and Lafayette, Louisiana. The theme 
of the conference was “Educate, Organize, and Mobilize”. 
Workshops were conducted concurrently during the am and 
pm sessions on Chapter Building for Reparations, 
Reparations 101, Reparations: A Global Perspective, and 
Coalition Building and Recruitment. There was also a 
timely, and informative examination of the history of 
African American participat ion in the military in a 
workshop entitled  “No H.R. 40 No Draft”.  Chapters were 
encouraged to consider the importance of marketing 
Reparations information to African descendants in ways that 
are easily understood and identified  
(Continued on page 14) 
SOUTHWEST REGIONAL  
CONFERENCE  
 
Submitted by: 
 Bobby R. Scott, Dallas N’COBRA Chapter & 
 Lady Claudia Nelson, N’COBRA National Secretary


--- PAGE 431 ---
7 
Kibibi Tyehimba, 
Co-Chair DC Metro Chapter of N'COBRA 
 
In the not too distant future, August 16-17 2002 will be 
marked as one of the major milestones in the growing 
Reparations movement. This past weekend, Tens of 
thousands of African Americans converged on the nation's 
capitol to demonstrate their demand for Reparations in our 
lifetime. It was the first mass Reparations mobilization 
effort in this century, and the enthusiasm oozing from all 
the participants 
clearly  
demonstrated it 
won't be the last.  
 
The Millions for 
Reparations  
demonstration,  
which also  
commemorated the 
115th birthday of 
the honorable  
Marcus Mosiah 
Garvey, was in 
response to a call to 
action issued by the 
Durban 400  
following the World 
Conference Against 
Racism in Durban 
South Africa. Although the National Coalition of Blacks 
for Reparations in America (NCOBRA) did not issue the 
call, the Coalition supported it and encourage its members 
to participate because of its commitment to supporting any 
genuine efforts to further the cause for Reparations.  
 
The weekend began with a "Black Friday" observance 
organized by NCOBRA. African Americans and their allies 
were encouraged to only spend 
their dollars with Black owned 
businesses for the entire day to 
increase the circulation of 
money within the Black 
Community.  Although "Buy 
Black" campaigns have been 
instituted in the past, it is hoped 
that the Reparations movement 
will motivate a long range commitment to this effort.  
 
On Friday evening N'COBRA hosted a Pre-Demonstration 
National Reparations Rally and Forum, at Plymouth 
Congregational Church in Northwest DC. Reverend Haglar 
Black Reparations Times 
and Plymouth Congregational Church should be 
commended for allowing access to a standing room only 
and overflowing crowd, particularly since far too few 
leaders in the African American Faith Community have 
come out to publicly support Reparations, with the notable 
exception of Rev. Willie Wilson, pastor of Union Temple 
Baptist church, and recently declared candidate for mayor 
of Washington, DC. The Rally will certainly be 
remembered by all those in at tendance, as an event that 
rivaled some of the most important milestones during the 
Civil Rights movement. The 
speakers ranged from the 
conservative to what is 
perceived to be the most 
radical. Nation of Islam 
leader, Minister Louis 
Farrakhan, keynote speaker 
for the evening, spoke at 
length about the moral 
justification for the 
Reparations movement, the 
Nation of Islam's history of 
support for the issue, te 
importance of land as part of 
the demand for Reparations, 
and a call for unity and the 
formation of a united 
Reparations Front resonated 
throughout. Minister  
Farrakhan spoke of the Reparations movement as a prime 
opportunity to unite, heal and repair African families and 
communities.  
 
Other speakers for the evening included Dr. Imari Obadele, 
founder of NCOBRA; male and female co-chairs, Ms. 
Dorothy Benton-Lewis and Mr. Jahahara Alkebulan Ma'at; 
Ms. Adjoa Aiyetoro, Esq., Co-Chair of the NCOBRA Legal 
Commission; Mr. Charles 
Ogletree, Esq., Professor of Law 
at Harvard School of Law and Co-
Chair of the Reparations 
Coordinating Council, which will 
file a class action Reparations law 
suit in the fall of 2002; Dr. 
Maulana Karenga, Chair of US 
Organization and creator of 
Kwanzaa; Dr. Conrad Worrill, 
founder and chairman of the National Black United Front; 
Dr. Ron Daniels, founder and CEO of the Institute of the 
Black World, and candidate for the presidency of the U.S in 
the 1992 election; Ms. Harriet Frost of the Rosewood Idella 
(Continued on page 9) 
NATIONAL REPARATIONS WEEKEND:  
A Movement in the Making! 
Minister Louis Farrakhan, keynote speaker 
 
Minister Louis Farrakhan greeted 
the crowd with a message for unity 
and increased  commitment to 
making Reparations a reality.


--- PAGE 432 ---
8 
“Organize, Organize, Organize”   (Continued from page 6) 
just heard of the meeting, came forward to give examples of 
their best practices. 
 
The second workshop demonstr ated the unbroken chain of 
destruction that leads directly  from chattel enslavement of 
African people in this north american territory to present-day 
non-education and miss-education  of African people in this 
same territory. The expert panelists included: Malik Lewis, 
editor of the Black student newspaper called “The Paper”; 
Basir Mchawi, African-centered educator, activist, and host 
of WBAI radio talk show “Education at the Crosswords”; Dr. 
Mary Hoover, Professor of literacy and reading, Howard 
Univ. School of Education and chair of N’COBRA 
Education Commission and student advisor to the N’COBRA 
Howard University student chapter; Dr. Sam Anderson, 
community activist, Prof. of Mathematics Medgar Evers 
College, and founder of Reparations Mobilization 
Committee; Bertha Lewis, comm unity activist and Director 
of Education, ACORN; Gilda Sherrod-Ali, Esq., former 
public school teacher and me mber of the Education Sub-
Committee of N’COBRA’s Legal Commission; Iyaluua 
Ferguson, veteran educator and retired NYC Public High 
School Teacher; and Bruce Ellis and Ayo Harrington, 
grassroots advocates for edu cation. This three- hour 
workshop was moderated by New York State Assemblymen, 
Roger Green who last year intr oduced a Reparations Bill in 
the NY State Assembly. 
 
The workshop buttressed the wo rking alliance between NYS 
Assemblymen Roger Green and grassroots community 
leaders for the struggle to pass the state Reparations 
legislation that he has introduced. 
 
Five NCOBRA Chapters from NYC, Wash. DC., and 
Philadelphia presented reports of their very extensive 
organizing work. National Board member Kalonji Olusegun 
reported on N’COBRA’s National Black Fridays campaign 
which is designed to keep Black dollars in the Black 
community while building firm support among the Black 
business community for Reparations. Milt McGriff, 
N'COBRA’s National Coordinator of A Year Black Presence 
(AYBP), gave a report on the strategies and tactics of AYBP, 
the powerful effort to gain passage of US Congressmen’s 
John Conyers Reparations study Bill, HR 40. Lastly, Gilda 
Sherrod-Ali reported on N’COBRA’s litigation strategy. 
 
Veteran actor Clebert Ford performed Langston Hughes, “ 
I’ve Known Rivers,” while Kahlil Mustafa slammed some 
knowledge on us with his original poetry. 
 
The meeting was video and audio taped by the NYC based 
Sound Gatherers. 
 
The results of the meeting strengthened the reparations 
movement because African grassroots activists, progressive 
intellectuals and cultural workers mixed it up for Reparations 
Black Reparations Times 
such that organizational and individual membership in 
N’COBRA grew, solid friendships began, and most 
importantly an effective process for organizing our 
community was demonstrated. 
 
It was a long day but all of our ancestors who had worked 
tirelessly to organize our people for freedom would have 
been proud. Indeed they were present. 
March 5, 2003 UPDATE 
  
Reparations supporters, write letters, call, and/or FAX your 
disappointment and your intentions of voting non-
Reparations supporters out of office if they do not support 
our cause. Remember letters and faxes cannot be just a 
form letter. They must be personalized to demonstrate they 
are in fact the opinions of individual voters. Organize large 
numbers of callers to flood Representatives’ State office 
phone lines during designated time periods.   Reparations 
supporters in several states can coordinate mass phone 
campaigns to tie up the phone lines of several 
Representatives’ Capitol Hill offices.  Take this BULL by 
the horns, and know that the ba ttle is already won, once the 
heart believes in victory. The power to win Reparations is 
in our hands.  
 
The following are the co-sponso rs of H.R.40 presented to 
the 108th Congress as of March 5, 2003:                       
 
Mr. CONYERS (for himself), Mr. SANFORD BISHOP of 
Georgia, Mr. BRADY of Pennsylvania, Mr. CUMMINGS, 
Mr. DAVIS of Illinois, Mr. FATTAH, Mr. JACKSON of 
Illinois, Mr. JEFFERSON, Ms. EDDIE BERNICE 
JOHNSON of Texas, Ms. KILPATRICK, Ms. BARBARA 
LEE of California, Ms. MCCARTHY of Missouri, Mr. 
MCDERMOTT, Mr. Kendrick MEEK of Florida, Mr. 
MEEKS of New York, Ms. MILLENDER-MCDONALD, 
Ms. NORTON, Mr. JOHN OLVER, Mr. OWENS, Mr. 
RANGEL, Mr. RUSH, Ms. SCHAKOWSKY, Mr. 
THOMPSON of Mississippi, Mr. TOWNS, Ms. WATERS, 
Ms. WATSON, and Mr. WYNN)                                 
  
The following Representatives committed to co-sponsor H.
R.40 during recent NCOBRA "A Year of Black  
Presence" Lobbying days: 
 
 
(Continued on page 13) 
CAMPAIGN FOR 100%  
CONGRESSIONAL BLACK  
CAUCUS SUPPORT FOR H.R.40!!! 
 
Kibibi Tyehimba,  
Co-Chair N’COBRA Legislative Commission


--- PAGE 433 ---
9 
Mosiah Garvey, a strong advocate of Reparations and 
Repatriation in the early part of the 20 th century. Under the 
leadership of the Honorable Marcus Mosiah Garvey, the 
UNIA boasted 1100 branches in more than 40 countries 
around the world.  Garvey's "Race First" message awakened 
the consciousness of black people, and advocated racial pride 
and dignity among blacks around the world. Later that 
morning the crowd of Reparations supporters marched  
down East Capitol behind the "Red, Black and Green" Flag 
designed by the Honorable 
Marcus Mosiah Garvey, and the 
NCOBRA Banner towards the 
demonstration site in front of the 
Capitol building.  
By noon the grounds immediately 
in front of the Capitol building 
were beginning to fill up. Despite 
the oppressive August heat and 
humidity, thousands of  
Reparations supporters were out 
in full force with banners, t-shirts 
with an array of Reparations 
slogans, and their voices raised in 
support of the issue. No, there 
were not a million people in 
attendance as the name of the 
march implies. But one thing is 
clear, the support for this issue is 
growing by leaps and bounds, and 
considering that a demonstration 
of this magnitude or smaller 
would have been virtually 
impossible 30 years ago, the 
organizers of the demonstration 
and all those who worked 
tirelessly to make it happen 
should be congratulated. No one 
ever knows what event in history 
will be the one to thrust a 
movement forward. Surely in 
1955 Rosa Parks had no way of knowing 
that her refusal to give up her seat to a 
white man would be the catalyst for the 
Civil Rights Movement. Eventually, history will reveal the 
significance of August 17, 2002.  
 
Minister Louis Farrakhan greeted the crowd with a message 
for unity and increased commitment to making Reparations a 
reality. Congressman John Conyers Jr. of Detroit Michigan, 
and champion for the H.R. 40 Reparations Bill, submitted to 
Congress every year since 1989,  also raised his voice in 
support of the issue. Counci lman Charles Barron of New 
York, who recently introduced one of the most extensive 
Reparations Bills also addressed the crowd. There were few 
of the notables that one would expect to see and hear at an 
event such as this. The organizers of the demonstration, very 
early on, expressed a desire to give the masses center stage,  
(Continued on page 11) 
Black Reparations Times 
(Continued from page 7) 
Carrier Foundation, which is the only group of African 
Americans to receive reparations  to date; Mr. Gary Grant of 
the Black Farmers Association currently embroiled in a 
confrontation with the United States Department of 
Agriculture for its documented discrimination against Black 
Farmers' who have sought farm subsidies throughout the 
20th century; Mr. Hilary Shelton, director of the 
Washington, DC Branch of the NAACP; Mr. Damu Smith, 
director of the National Black 
Environmental Justice Network; 
Mr. Malik Zulu Shabazz, Esq. of 
the New Black Panther Party; Mr. 
Senghor Baye of the Universal 
Negro Improvement Association 
(UNIA); and Mr. Omali 
Yeshitela of the African People's 
Socialist Party. All the speakers 
were able to show a clear 
connection between their 
organization's primary mission 
and the Reparations movement. 
Of course no event of this caliber 
would be complete without some 
form of artistic expression. The 
night ended with a reading of a 
poem written by Washington's 
own Ms. Laini Mataka, and a 
very energizing song by Baba 
Doc entitled "I Want My 
Money". 
 
Saturday morning, August 17, 
2002, Reparations supporters 
gathered at Lincoln Park in 
Southeast DC to participate in a 
Spiritual Gathering to  
commemorate the sacrifices of 
African Ancestors during the 
American era of enslavement. 
The African Diaspora Ancestral 
Commemoration Institute (ADACI) 
orchestrated the building of a beautiful 
altar in front of the Mary McCloud Bethune statue. Ms. 
Tendai Johnson, Mwangaza Michael-Bandele, Paula Jones, 
and Eureka Huggins and all the members of the community 
who assisted, should be commended for their superb work. 
Participants in the event pl aced pictures and tiny placards 
with the names of their ancestors around the altar. The altar 
even incorporated several of the emotionally charged 
illustrations from the book "Middle Passage" by Mr. Tom 
Feelings, who voluntarily brought them all the way from 
South Carolina. Mr. Feelings indicated that he initially 
created the book to assist the descendents of formerly 
enslaved Africans with the healin g and repair process that is 
so important in the Reparations movement. The local 
chapter of the UNIA, under the leadership of Minister 
Ahmed Assalaam, honored the life and legacy of Marcus 
National Weekend 
Mr. Omali Yeshitela, 
 African People's Socialist Party


--- PAGE 434 ---
10 
Keeping in mind the struggle for African American 
reparations in the United States will be long and protracted 
and that the reparation process will probably take place over 
the course of several generations we offer the following 
comments. 
 
California in general is a good place to develop political 
strategies in the fight for reparations because the state and 
political bodies within the state are not directly tied to 
slavery. The state is also a good place to develop political 
strategies because of its bell-weather role on the American 
political scene. To date the California legislature is one of 
only two such bodies that have endorsed H.R. 40 and the only 
one, as far as I know that mandated its university system to 
hold two colloquiums (eventually three were held) on slavery 
and its legacy. And California is the only state that has a 
slavery insurance index that is available on the internet for all 
interested in genealogy or filing lawsuits. Finally the current 
California governor, Grey Davis has publicly stated he thinks 
reparations “is a good idea.” 
 
Despite these favorable conditions the reality of the matter is 
generally political organizations that have focused on 
reparations have not taken advantage of these pluses. In the 
San Francisco-Bay Area we have, for the past 18 months 
begun to lay the basis for what we project as a strong 
reparations movement headed by N’COBRA and the 
California Coalition for H.R. 40. 
 
Why two organizations?
  Those of us who first began the 
N’COBRA work in San Francisco have as our political base 
the trade union movement. We are from the longshore and 
hotel workers unions. When we first began to appear before 
our union’s executive bodies to ask for support and 
endorsements we found great er success and acceptance 
addressing larger numbers of people, many of them non-
black, on the issue of African American reparations, by 
focusing on H.R. 40. Soon we came to the conclusion there 
needed to be an organization, mo re or less in lock step with 
N’COBRA, focused specifically on H.R. 40. There is much 
more to this issue but that is it in a nutshell. 
 
Our primary long range task is to get as many of the 
California Congressional Delegation as possible to sign on to 
H.R. 40. Nancy Pelosi, San Francisco’s congressional 
delegate and Democratic Minority Whip is our number one 
target but we have not aimed at her yet. First we want the San 
Francisco Board of Supervisors to endorse H.R. 40, then 
possibly the city and state Democratic parties. We think, we 
hope, we are close to getting that resolution passed. 
 
We have begun to lay the basis of this by meeting with labor 
unions, churches and community based organizations getting 
Black Reparations Times 
endorsements and support.  (I will include an attachment with 
our local supporters and endorsers.) 
 
We learn as we go.
 We have started some projects that did 
not pan out.  Other times the literature we gave out was 
inappropriate. For instance Monday at noon I’m speaking at a 
brown bag lunch meeting with 20 kids from the Tower 
Projects in S.F. on reparations. I faxed the co-coordinator a 
four page article on reparations to prepare them. She called 
back saying “keep it simple. Four pages is way too much.”  I 
will prepare a one page han dout explaining how to “say” 
reparations and then some bullets about what reparations is. 
 
What we have in motion and upcoming engagements
 
 
1.    A Juneteenth event in conjunction with the San 
Francisco Dept. of public Health “Black Health 
and Reparations” featuring Vernellia Randall 
and Jewel Crawford. 
2.    An appearance before the San Leandro city 
council on H.R. 40. They won’t endorse it but 
we’re doing it for informational purposes. 
3.    An appearance before the Rotary Club in 
Oakland. 
4.    A meeting with BAPAC. The Black American 
Political Action Committee, chaired by Percy 
Pinckney, Senator Dianne Feinstein’s chief 
political consultant, ahs 60,000 members in 
California. George McCutcheon a lifetime 
member of NCOBRA and special assistant to 
Percy Pinckney is the facilitator. 
5.    Creating a high school curriculum on 
reparations with Daphne Muse. 
6.    Designing a multi-colored postcard sized 
handout for young people on reparations- like 
handouts hip-hoppers make for concerts. 
7.    WE are in the initial  stages of planning a large 
meeting on reparations utilizing Adjoa , to 
capitalize on the Black health and Reparations 
conference to build regional, possibly statewide 
support for reparations. We have been 
projecting such a conference since we began 
this work 18 months ago but we are now getting 
closer to the time it may become possible. 
We are building a website. 
 
These are some of the things we have developed over the 
recent period of time. There are many, many weaknesses and 
problems. But we’ve found that just by staying focused and 
continuing to show up things get better and finally 
accomplished. But N’COBRA wrote the book on staying 
focused and continuing to show up. 
A Brief Description of the Reparations Work and  
Political  Conditions in Northern California 
by Mr. Jean Damu, Co-Chair San Francisco N’COBRA Chapter


--- PAGE 435 ---
11 
Remembering Baba  
       KENNETH BRIDGES 
by Jahahara Amen-RA Alkebulan-Ma’at,  
                                        National Co-Chair 
frican people around the U.S. and Diaspora are 
honoring the life and work of Brother KEN 
BRIDGES, one of several victims in the sniper 
killings in the Washington, DC metro area this past October. 
 
Brother Bridges and his beloved wife, Sister Jocelyn 
English-Bridges, were been blessed with six children—Aya, 
April, Justin, Joshua, Alona, and Alyssa—to carry on their 
family legacy.  
 
For the past quarter century, Brother Bridges had been in the 
forefront of our very necessary Black economic 
development, self-sufficiency, and internal Reparations 
efforts.  With colleague Al  Wellington, he co-founded 
several important programs, including: P.O.W.E.R. (People 
Organized and Working for Economic Rebirth) 
collaboration on product distribution collaboration with 
others, like the George Johnson’s Products Company and 
Minister Louis Farrakhan, in the 1980s; Correction 
Connection, Inc., distributor of Dick Gregory’s “Bahamian 
Diet”; and All America Film & Videos. Based on mass 
surveys conducted at the 1995 Million Man March, Bridges 
and Wellington created the MATAH Network, which now 
has nearly 300 items in its catalog.  N’COBRA is extremely 
proud that Brother Bridges chose to be a paid member of our 
alliance.  He was patiently teaching our constituency the 
importance of economic self-reliance as an integral part of 
Reparations. Most recently, he  participated in N’COBRA’s 
13
th Convention in Detroit, this past June; and during the 
Black Friday and Reparations March in Washington, in 
August 2002.    
 
N’COBRA members and support ers are encouraged to 
continue building on the great work of our new Ancestor.   
Show your family’s and organization’s support by 
contributing to the Ken Bridges Memorial Fund, c/o 
Milligan & Co., CPAs, 105 North 22
nd Street, 2 nd Floor, 
Philadelphia, PA 19103. To contact the MATAH Network, 
call 1.800.977.MATAH or visit www.matah.com   Amen.  
Black Reparations Times 
(Continued from page 9) 
 
so that it would be clear how they view the Reparations 
Movement. The presenters and participants during the course 
of the day, did not include sufficient representation from 
African American and other pr ogressive organizations who's 
large constituencies will be critical to the success of the 
Reparations Movement. But then, this was the first mass 
mobilization effort. As the movement continues to grow, 
there's no
 doubt t he people will demand that all Reparations 
initiatives be more inclusive.  
 
Saturday evening was rounded out with a "Rappin' for 
Reparations" poetry slam hosted by the Howard University 
student chapter of NCOBRA, under the leadership of Ms. 
Fahima Seck and Mr. Julius Je fferson, and advisor and long 
time N'COBRA member Dr. Mary Hoover. The energy was 
high, and the poetry and songs were powerful. Historically, 
artists have played a very important role in African American 
human rights struggles. It was good to see that the tradition is 
still alive and well. And of course it is heartening to see the 
young people rising up, and ready to receive the baton from 
their elders. And everyone knows, once you capture the 
imagination of the youth, victory is inevitable. 
A 
Ancestor 
Kenneth 
Bridges 
 
1949-2002 
National Reparations Weekend 
"BLACK REPARATIONS TIMES" 
 
In response to the growing momentum of the Reparations 
movement, the Information and Media Commission is 
committed to disseminating timely information on issues 
related to our struggle for Reparations. Our new publication, 
"BLACK REPARATIONS TIMES" © 2003 is a step up from 
the N’COBRA membership newsletter "REPARATIONS 
NOW!", and will report news and information not only about 
N’COBRA’s work, but also the efforts of other Reparations 
advocates, nationally and internationally.  Please let us know 
what you think of our first edition of "BLACK REPARA-
TIONS TIMES". Your suggestions are always welcome. You 
can also help out by:  1) providing items for possible 
publication such as articles, photos, etc; 2) volunteering 
professional skills (graphic arts, managing subscriptions & 
distribution, fundraising, etc.); 3) donating generously to this 
project, and 4)  identifying potential sponsors. 
 
Contact information: 
 
Information and Media Commission 
P.O. Box 716 
Washington, DC 200440-0716 
 
Email: InformationMedia@aol.com 
Phone: 202.466.1622


--- PAGE 436 ---
12 
AYBP  (Continued from page 5) 
approximately a half million, reported the NAACP's 
commitment to the passage of H.R. 40 as part of its core 
legislative agenda for the 108
th Congress.   Mr. Shelton also 
lent his energy to the lobbying effort.  Nation of Islam 
Minister Khadir Abdul Muhammad, East Coast 
Representative for Minister Louis Farrakhan, was present to 
remind Reparations Advocates of the Nation of Islam’s 40-
year history of support for Reparations, and its consistent call 
for land for African Americans, here and abroad.  Also 
present were representatives from the United Church of 
Christ, another predominantly white faith based organization 
with 6000 churches and over 1.4 Million members. 
 
The day’s focus was on CBC members who have 
not endorsed H.R. 40, although one group chose to visit CBC 
members who had already endorsed the bill to thank them for 
their support. Of the eight members of the CBC visited, five 
committed to endorse H.R. 40—Congressmans Major Owens 
of New York, John Lewis of Georgia, Alcee Hastings and 
Kendrick Meek of Florida, and Congresswoman Sheila 
Jackson Lee of Texas.  Congressman Melvin Watts declined 
to commit until voters from his state of North Carolina made 
it plain that they wanted him to endorse the bill.  
Congressman Clyburn of South Carolina refuses to endorse 
the bill for the same reason.  (We urge registered voters in 
these two states who are also Reparations Advocates to 
contact these two Congressmen and urge their support of this 
important issue.)  The Legislative Assistant for Congressman 
Donald Payne of New Jersey indicated the Congressman had 
problems with the bill, so a future visit is in order to clarify 
his concerns. The Legislativ e Assistant for Congressman 
Robert Scott of Virginia stated the Congressman does not 
currently support the bill becau se he believes there are not 
sufficient funds available to pay Reparations and he believes 
this administration’s Faith-based initiative is the place to 
focus his energies.   In addition to the five CBC members 
who agreed to endorse H.R.40, Congressman James Moran 
of northern Virginia also agreed to endorse the bill.  
 
A group of Maryland residents met with the 
Legislative assistant for Congressman Steny Hoyer, who is 
the Democratic Whip, and a member of the Appropriations 
committee. The Democratic Wh ip is the second highest-
ranking position amongst House Democrats.  The assistant 
expressed concerns about the use of the term “Reparations” 
in the H.R. 40 Bill and felt that consideration should be 
given to deleting it in order to move to the next level.  He 
suggested that once the word “Reparations” is deleted there 
might be more willingness to take a serious look at the Bill.  
Future lobbying efforts will also include visits to 
Congressman Hoyer to discuss this matter further.   
 
A small group also began a preliminary search for a 
Senator or Senators who might be persuaded to co-introduce 
a bill in the Senate.  
Although it is premature at 
this time to identify the 
names of the Senators that 
were approached, it is safe 
to report that the 
discussions were fruitful, 
and future meetings are 
planned to provide 
additional information.   
 
In addition to a full day of 
lobbying, to commemorate 
Reparations Awareness 
Day, the Library of 
Congress hosted its first 
Reparations forum. We 
extend our sincere 
appreciation to Ms. Marita 
Harper for her organizing efforts and for having the 
foresight to make it happen.  DC NCOBRA Co-
Chairs Mr. Wautella ib n Yusuf and Ms. Kibibi 
Tyehimba participated in the panel discussion along with 
Mr. Keenan Keller, Judiciary Counsel to Congressman 
Conyers, and Ms. Janis Hazel, formerly a member of 
Congressman Conyers’ staff, in 1989, and part of the team 
of writers of the Reparations Study Bill H.R. 40.  Ms. Hazel 
is currently a producer at Ho ward University’s television 
station WHUT, and has expressed an interest in creating 
opportunities for broadcasting Reparations Forum in order 
to reach a broader audience.   
 
February 25, 2003 was definitely a good use of 
time and energy.  Hopefully future lobbying sessions will 
produce similar results.  DC NCOBRA Chapter and the 
Philadelphia Coalition will return to the Hill on March 26.  
New York will mobilize their coalition for a day of lobbying 
on April 9.  On May 20, in commemoration of Malcolm X’s 
birthday, the District of Columbia, Maryland, New Jersey, 
Black Reparations Times 
Strategy meeting in Con. Conyers’ (9th from left) office: Mr. Keenan 
Keller (5th),  Mr. Milt McGriff (6th), Ms. Kibibi Tyehimba (7th), Ms. 
Dorothy Lewis (8th), Ms. Nkechi Taifa (10th), Mr. Hilary Shelton


--- PAGE 437 ---
13 
CAMPAIGN FOR 100%  (Continued from page 8)  
                             
                             Rep. Sheila Jackson-Lee, Texas (D) 
                            Rep. Alcee Hastings, Florida (D) 
                            Rep. John Lewis, Georgia (D) - 
                            Rep. Major Owens, New York (D) 
                            Rep. Jim Moran, Virginia (D) 
 
Below is the contact information for the Congressional Black 
Caucus members who have not co-sponsored the bill to date. 
Exercise your rights as a tax paying, hopefully registered 
voters. Mobilize voting Reparations supporters in the 
districts of the CBC members who have not endorsed the 
bill, and let them know you exp ect their support for H.R. 40.  
 
Rep. Denise Majette Georgia (4th District :DeKalb aqnd 
Gwinett Counties) Committees:  Budget, Small Business, 
Education  and the Workforce, 1517 Longworth House Of-
fice Building Washington, DC 20515     Phone: 202-225-
1605 
 
Rep David Scott Georgia(13th District:Butts, Clayton, 
Dekalb, Fulton, Gwinnett, Henry, Newton, Rockdale,
Spaudling, Walton Counties) 417 Cannon House Office 
Building , Washington, DC 20515     phone: (202) 225-2939 
 
Rep. Corrine Brown, Florida (D) - 3rd Congressional District
(Jacksonville, Orlando, Daytona Beach)Committees: 
Transportation and Infrastructure, Veterans' Affairs 2444 
Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 
202-225-0123  
 
Rep. Julia Carson, Indiana (D) - 10th Congressional District
(Indianapolis)Committees: Financial Services, Veterans' 
Affairs 1339 Longworth House Office Building Washington, 
DC 20515   202-225-4011 
(Continued on page 14) 
AYBP  (Continued from page 12) 
New York, and Pennsylvania will join forces to “Turn Up 
the Volume” a little higher.   
 
The Northeast region is on the move, in large part 
because of the dedication an d persistence of Mr. Milt 
McGriff who was inspired almost two years ago by the 
words of Mr. Randall Robinson, in his book “The Debt”.  
Robinson called for a thousand African descendants to 
walk the halls of Congress every day until the issue of 
Reparations is addressed.  Although we’re a ways away 
from a 1000 per day, we are off to a good start, and there’s 
hope that “A Year of Black Presence” will make a 
tremendous impact on the Reparations Movement.  In the 
words of Mr. Milt McGriff: 
 
“We must make the nation see, that Reparations 
for people of African descent is a matter of justice, that it 
is a moral issue before it is an economic or political issue. 
Many, possibly the majority of Americans, say we should 
not be talking about Reparations now, that the wrongs 
committed against Black people are ancient history. But 
we must force Congress to discuss Reparations now 
because, in the past, our government has been too overtly 
racist to do what was right. The impact of Jim Crow and 
the Holocaust of captivity and enslavement is still felt 
today. The government professes to have moved beyond 
Black Reparations Times 
the racist thinking of the past. We call on them to prove it 
by passing HR40 and having a long overdue discussion 
about repairing the damage done by the crimes of the past.” 
 
The N’COBRA Legislative Commission urges 
Reparations advocates in other states to pick up the baton and 
keep the momentum going.   Work to build coalitions in your 
area. Organize to get your cities and states to adopt 
Reparations Resolutions and Bills, and provide 
documentation once resolutions an d bills are adopted so that 
N’COBRA can add your information to its database.  
Contact the N’COBRA Legislative Commission at 
202.466.1622 or by email at LegiCom@AOL.com for a 
sample resolution and Lobbying Packets to ensure 
consistency in our lobbying efforts.  Mobilize your 
communities to visit the home offices of your Congressmen 
and Congresswomen.  Organize groups to come to the 
nation’s Capitol to continue lobbying and to demonstrate to 
the country that we will not rest until Reparations is won.  
Remember, “The Power to Win Reparations is in Our 
Hands.” 
Mr. Milton McGriff, 
 National AYBP Coordinator


--- PAGE 438 ---
14 
Southwest Regional    (Continued from page 6) 
with.  During a leadership track there were important 
discussions about the importance of developing leadership in 
our chapters, and the importance of performing all tasks as 
efficiently as possible. Some participants went on a brief tour  
Baton Rouge, Louisiania 
             Elder William Jones and Dr. Imari A. Obadele 
 
Chicago, Illinois 
             Cecelia Butler 
              Melvin Cosey 
              Rev. Albert Sampson 
              Dr. Robert Starks 
              Dr. Conrad Worrill 
 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
             Dr. Stanley Broadnax 
 
Dallas, Texas 
Diana Kimble and Helene Reese 
 
Detroit, Michigan 
             Kwame Atta 
Dr. Robert Bland 
Mother Lillian Brown 
Adwoa Faune Carter 
Mary Hines 
              Raymond “Reparations Ray” Jenkins 
              Kwame Kenyatta 
              Queen Mother Nefertiti 
              Dr. JoAnn Watson 
 
Houston/Prairie View, Texas 
             Robin J. Anderson, Doris Cleveland and 
              Simon Wiltz 
 
Indianapolis, Indiana 
             Kamau Jywanza, Achebe Turner and 
              Mauguiro Sadiki Yisael 
 
Miami/Dade, Florida 
             Violet Barry 
              Dr. Mae Christian 
              Leroy Jones 
              General Ali K.X. Rashid 
 
St. Louis, Missouri 
              Alvin Brown,  
Richard Dockett  
              Alphonso Lumpkins 
Black Reparations Times 
CAMPAIGN FOR 100%  (Continued from page 13) 
 
Del. Donna Christian-Christensen, Virgin Islands (D)
Committees: Resources, Small Business 1510 Longworth 
House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 202-225-
1790 
 
Rep. William "Lacy" Clay, Jr., Missouri (D) - 1st 
Congressional District(St. Louis)Committees: Financial 
Services, Government Reform 415 Cannon House Office 
Building Washington, DC 20515    202-225-2406 
 
Rep. Eva Clayton, North Carolina (D) - 1st Congressional 
District (Greenville, No rth Carolina) Committees: 
Agriculture, Budget 2440 Rayburn House Office Building 
Washington, DC 20515              202-225-3101 
 
Rep. James Clyburn, South Carolina (D) - 6th 
Congressional District(Columbia, Charleston, Orangeburg, 
Sumter)Committees: Appropriations 319 Cannon House 
Office Building Washington, DC 20515     202-225-3315 
 
Rep. Harold Ford, Jr., Tennessee (D) - 9th Congressional 
District(Memphis)Committees: Financial Services, 
Education and the Workforce 325 Cannon House Office 
Building Washington, DC 20515            202-225-3265 
 
Rep Artur Davis Alabama (7 th District, Montgomery 
208 Cannon House Office Building, Washington, DC 
20515  phone: 202-225-2665 
 
Rep. Stephanie Tubbs Jones, Ohio (D) - 11th 
Congressional District (Cleveland) Committees: Financial 
Services, Small Business 1516 Longworth House Office 
Building Washington, DC 20515               202-225-7032 
 
Rep. Donald Payne, New Jersey (D) - 10th Congressional 
District(Newark,  Elizabeth)Committees: Education and the 
Workforce, International Relations 2209 Rayburn House 
Office Building Washington, DC 20515 202-225-3436 
 
Rep. Robert Scott, Virginia (D) - 3rd Congressional 
District (Richmond, Newport News)Committees: Judiciary, 
Education and the Workforce 2464 Rayburn House Office 
Building Washington, DC 20515     202-225-8351 
 
Rep. Melvin Watt, North Carolina (D) - 12th Con. District
(Charlotte, Greensboro)Committees: Judiciary, Financial 
Services 2236 Rayburn House Office Building 
Washington, DC 20515               202-225-1510 
National Congress of 
Economic Development Commissioners 
of the  African American Museum. There was also a panel 
discussion entitled “Perspectives on Reparations” which 
examined the importance of genealogy and documentation, 
and the legal and legislative approaches to Reparations.


--- PAGE 439 ---
15 
             MISSISSIPPIANS FOR REPARATIONS 
 
Thinking back to the organizing struggles of Sister Fannie 
Lou Hamer, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating 
Committee (SNCC), and the Mississippi Freedom 
Democratic Party, one can only wonder about the 
challenges facing anyone audacious enough to carry the 
baton for the Reparations Movement in the state that was 
once considered the most hos tile during the Civil Right 
Movement.  For the likes of Mississippi State Coordinator, 
Baba Hannibal Afrik and the Mississippians for Reparations 
(MFR) Coalition, the knowledge of that history seems only 
to have made them more determined.  The MFR is made up 
of the National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in 
America (NCOBRA), the Republic of New Afrika  (RNA), 
and the Millions for Reparations Coalition.  The MFR 
coalition conducts town hall meetings throughout the state 
of Mississippi to bring critical information about the 
Reparations movement to the people, and give them an 
opportunity to discuss the truth that has been suppressed for 
far too long.  Like the vicious muder of 14-year old Emmett 
Till, whose murderers remain u npunished to this day.  The 
MFR is on the front line circulating post card petitions, 
which demand the State Attorney General re-open the 
investigation.  The coalition is also urging the Mississippi 
Faith community to become the moral vanguard and lead 
the way in declaring the Holo caust of African Enslavement 
morally wrong and worthy of Reparations.  
 
The efforts of the MFR coali tion are not going unnoticed.  
The city of Jackson, Mississippi adopted a resolutions 
sponsored by Councilman Kenneth Stokes, designating 
February National Reparations Month, and another 
honoring Baba Hannibal Afrik for outstanding citizenship, 
and proclaiming him an honorary citizen of the city.  
 
Baba Hannibal Afrik, MS State Coordinator 
Phone:   601.535.7551 
 
Mississippians For Reparations 
P. O. Box 225 
Port Gibson, MS  39150 
 
 
N’COBRA Retreat Held in North Carolina 
 
Our Board of Directors, Chap ter leaders and Commission 
workers met recently in historic  Princeville, North Carolina 
for the first-ever N’COBRA Retreat.  Hosted by Brother 
Milton Bullock, and facilitated  by N’COBRA members, 
Kenneth Young and Catherine Copper of The Real One, 
LLC., the Retreat provided leaders a chance to access 
N’COBRA’s history  and evaluate the work that had been 
done over the years. A Strategic Planning Committee was 
established to develop a long-term plan of action to improve 
Black Reparations Time 
N’COBRA’s effectiveness.  A ll attendees agreed, that the 
retreat  was time very well spent. 
 
 
Global Afrikan Congress 
 
N’COBRA was well represented at the African/ African 
Descendants follow-up conference to the U.N. World 
Conference Against Racism.  At tending the special gathering 
in the African-Caribbean nation of Barbados this past October 
were National Co-Chair Dorothy Aurevouche Benton Lewis, 
International Commission Co-Chair Kamau and Mashriki 
Jywanza, the new Information Co-Chair Wautella ibn Yusuf, 
DC Chapter Co-Chair Kibbibi Tyehimba, and other members. 
 
This significant meeting resulted in the formation of the 
Global Afrikan Congress.  Sister Aurevouche was elected as 
one of two Steering Committee Representatives for North 
America (the other resides in Canada). Regional (continental) 
conferences are being planned—including a December 
planning meeting in Toronto, and another major gathering of 
Africans in the Diaspora in 2004.  
 
 
Reparations Awareness Day 
 
For nearly a decade N’COBRA chapters across the U.S. have 
organized special “Reparations  Awareness Day” events on 
February 25 th or during the last weekend of that month.  
Please inform us of your plan s so they can be shared with 
others.   
 
 
 
N’COBRA Sends Condolences To… 
 
The family of N’COBRA member CLEVELAND LEE 
ARMSTRONG, SR ., who became an Ancestor in September 
2002.  Baba Cleveland was the beloved husband of member 
Elizabeth Armstrong, grandfather of Chioke Bakari, and 
father of Jahahara Alkebulan-Ma’at.  
 
The family of Viola Plummer of the December 12t
h 
Movement on the passing of her husband, Baba JIMMY 
PLUMMER 
 
{The  following excerpts taken from “NewAfrika@aol.com” 
message posted to N’COBRA’s website “Reparations for 
Africans”} 
 
With sadness, we announce that BROTHER ROB PENNY , 
at age 62, passed away Sunday night, March 16, 2003, in 
Pittsburgh, PA.  Rob Penny and his Beautiful Wife Timamu 
Betty were foremost in leading the struggle for Reparations, 
Unity and Upliftment.  
(Continued on page 16) 
Some News from Around Our Reparations Movement


--- PAGE 440 ---
16 
" We cannot continue so. For a refusal to change direction, 
for the abandonment of the way, for such perverse 
persistence there are no reasons, only hollow, unconvincing 
lies." 
      Ayi Kwei Armah from two thousand seasons    
 
 
On January 18, 2003, N'COBRA launched its powerful 
National Five year Strategic Plan. The Plan crystallizes 
N'COBRA's fifteen years of valuable experience in creating 
the contemporary Reparations movement within the United 
States into a roadmap with guid eposts that leads inexorably 
to the destination of winning full Reparations for Black 
African decedents residing wi thin the United States of 
A m e r i c a  a n d  i t s  t e r r i t o r i e s                          .  
 
N'COBRA's sharp perspective is sown into the kente cloth 
fabric of the strategic pl an's mission statement: 
 
" The mission of the National Coalition of Blacks for 
Reparations in America (N'COBRA) is to win full 
Reparations for Black African descendents residing in the 
United States and its territories for the genocidal war 
against Africa that created the TransAtlantic Slave 
"Trade," "Chattel Slavery," Jim Crow and Chattel 
Slavery's continuing vestiges (the Maafa). To that end, 
N'COBRA shall organize and mobilize all strata of these 
Black communities into an effective mass-based 
reparations movement. N'COBRA shall also serve as a 
coordinating body for the repa rations effort in the United 
States. Further, through its leadership role in the 
reparations movement within the United states and its 
territories, N'COBRA recognizes  that reparations is a just 
demand for all African peoples and shall join with others 
in building the international reparationsmovement.” .                           
 
This mission statement tells us what is to be done. The 
Black Reparations Times 
balance of the strategic plan tells us how we are to get it 
done. The completion of the strategic plan was a high 
point, a profound example of N'COBRA expressing 
collective work and responsibility (UJIMA) and 
demonstrating the limitless power of African unity in 
action.  
 
Among the highlights of the strategic plan are: assurances 
that N'COBRA will have an expanded national office with 
a paid staff with the state of the art equipment that will 
ensure communications capaci ties that connect N'COBRA 
directly and immediately to African people throughout the 
United States, Africa, and the African Diaspora; the 
development of more efficient and responsive internal 
administrative and management systems; establishment of 
the highest standards of prof essionalism; and the creation 
of the capacity to sustain and ex pand ever stronger national 
grassroots organizing campaigns such as Reparations 
Awareness Day, election of Economic Development 
Commissioners, A Year of Black Presence (AYBP), 
BLACK FRIDAYS, and Mobilizing for Reparations 
National Campaign: Reparations in Action . 
 
The Reparations movement is a world historical movement 
that accelerates at the speed of spirit, the awakening of 
African consciousness. N'COBRA is both the result of and 
a contributor to this powerful awakening of the African 
mind. N'COBRA's Five Year Strategic Plan is now another 
essential tool to further unlock our consciousness and take 
African people to the next higher level to win this sacred 
struggle of winning full Reparations for African people in 
our lifetime.  
 
Ashe to N'COBRA's Strategic Planning Committee and 
N'COBRA's National Board for brilliantly taking the 
strategic plan from concept to completion! 
N'COBRA  NATIONAL FIVE YEAR STRATEGIC PLAN 
By Ajamu Sankofa, Northeast Region Representative 
BROTHER ROB PENNY  (Continued from page 15) 
 
Pan African Rob Penny N'COBRA Rob Penny Reparations Rob Penny was a member of N’COBRA for 7 years.  As the  
unifying force behind the Pittsburgh Chapter of NCOBRA, Rob Penny gave unselfishly of his time and resources.  During the 
2001 Northeast Regional Conference hosted by the Pittsburgh Chapter he even used hi s own funds to pay for the meals for all 
the Northeast Region participants. He frequently purchased large quantities of books and other cultural materials during 
N’COBRA’s annual conferences to take back to his community as gifts.   Rob Penny utilized the DC N’COBRA Chapter’s 
book “Black Reparations” during classes that he taught at the University of Pittsburgh.    He was always willing to do 
whatever he could to move us closer to achieving Reparations.  
 
Black Arts Movement Rob Penny Kuntu Writers Workshop Ro b Penny Black Horizons Poet Rob Penny Rob Penny Black 
Radical Congress Rob Penny Black Community Rob Penny Play wright Rob Penny Children and Youth Rob Penny Beginning 
with Books Rob Penny Historian Rob Penny On the Hill Rob Penny Afrikan.  Rob Penny, Professor/Playwright/Poet was an 
award winning writer and historian. Born in  Opelika, Alabama, raised in the Hill Di strict of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where 
he always called "Home", Rob Penny was an Afrocentric poet, playwright, Chair of the Department of Africana Studies at the


--- PAGE 441 ---
17 
As members of the Japanese American community, we 
offer our support for Black Reparations. Our community 
undertook a decades-long struggle to achieved the Civil 
Liberties Act of 1988, which granted an apology and 
monetary compensation to survivors who endured racist and 
unconstitutional detention and incarceration during World 
War II. Our struggle for redress was born in part out of the 
Black Civil Rights Movement and the support of African 
Americans was essential to our success. 
 
Today, we take a long overdue step by calling for complete 
justice and standing in full support of reparations for 250 
years of slavery and the subseq uent institutionalized racism 
and disenfranchisement of Blacks in America. Today, we 
offer our presence, our experience as Japanese American 
recipients of reparations, and our commitment to education 
and advocacy for Black Reparations as determined by 
African Americans. 
 
Toward this end we call for support by Japanese Americans, 
and indeed all Americans, fo r H.R. 40, Commission to 
Study Reparation Proposals for African Americans Act, as 
introduced by Congressman Conyers to Congress every 
year since 1989. We further call for support for other legal 
actions that seek 
reparations. We are committed to the continuing education 
about the history of slavery and its legacy, and we pledge 
support for all struggles that lead us toward social and 
economic justice for Blacks in America. 
 
Signed by: 
 
Yuri Kochiyama, Kenji Liu, Mari Matsuda, Dale Minami ,  
Janice Mirikitani, Susan Serrano, Dina Shek, Rev. Lloyd 
Wake, Eric Yamamoto and Rev. Michael Yoshii 
 
 
Black Reparations Times 
Principles 
 
We, as Japanese American community members who have 
seen redress from our government for unconstitutional 
abuses for during World War II, believe in the righteousness 
of the struggle for Black Reparations and call upon the U.S. 
government to make significant amends for the history of 
slavery and its legacy. 
 
We believe in the need for mu lti-racial support for Black 
Reparations and we recognize that participating in this 
struggle is essential to the healing of the nation as a whole.  
 
We believe that African Americans are the only ones who 
can determine the means and objectives of reparations, and 
we pledge our support for the proposals put forth by the 
African American community. 
 
We believe that reparations begins with each of us. As such, 
we will make monetary contributions to local and national 
efforts in support of racial justice in America. 
 
Commitments 
 
We stand in support of H.R. 40 and will advocate for its 
passage. 
 
We offer our experiences in the Japanese American redress 
movement and will establish a website with articles, 
resources and statements of support from the JA community. 
 
We offer financial contributions to legal efforts for 
reparations and community initiatives that work to repair the 
damage done by slavery in America. 
 
For more information, please contact Dian Shek at:   
dina@asianimprov.com. 
 
JAPANESE AMERICANS FOR BLACK REPARATIONS 
Japanese Americans Black Reparartions  
Support Statement 
Japanese Americans for Black Reparations 
Principles and Commitments 
BROTHER ROB PENNY  (Continued from page 16) 
 
University of Pittsburgh from 1978 -1984, and a professor since 1969. Rob Penny was Playwright in Residence for Kuntu 
Repertory Theatre. In 1976 Rob Penny and August Wilson Co-founded the Kuntu Writers Workshop, the 2nd oldest Black  
 
Writers Workshop that is still in existence today.   He co-founded the Black Horizon Theatre with August Wilson in 1968. 
Rob Penny brought life, love and passion for life to his family, his friendships and throughout the Black Community.   A 
beautiful Black Man, Loving Husband and Father, Grandfather. Fantastic Friend. Phenomenal Man. Writer of Expressions of 
Pride, Heritage, History, Celebration, Unity, Movement of and for our Precious People. We love you always, Rob Penny!


--- PAGE 442 ---
18 
What is Reparations? 
 
Reparations is a process of repairing, healing and 
restoring a people injured because of their group 
identity and in violation of their fundamental human 
rights by governments or corporations. Those groups 
that have been injured have the right to obtain from 
the government or corporation responsible for the 
injuries that which they need to repair and heal 
themselves. In addition to being a demand for justice, 
it is a principle of international human rights law. As 
a remedy, it is similar to the remedy for damages in 
national law that holds a person responsible for 
injuries suffered by another when the infliction of the 
injury violates domestic law. Examples of groups that 
have obtained reparations include Jewish victims of 
the Nazi Holocaust, Japanese Americans interned in 
concentration camps in the 
United States during WWII, 
Alaska Natives for land, labor, 
and resources taken, victims of 
the massacre in Rosewood, 
Florida and their descendants, 
Native Americans as a remedy 
for violations of treaty rights, an 
political dissenters in Argentina 
and their descendants.  
 
What is N'COBRA? 
 
The National Coalition of Blacks 
for Reparations in America is a mass-based coalition 
organized for the sole purpose of obtaining 
reparations for African descendants in the United 
States. It was organized in late 1987 and early 1988, 
to broaden the base of support for the long-standing 
reparations movement. Organizational founders of 
N'COBRA include the New Afrikan Peoples 
Organization, the National Conference of Black 
Lawyers and the Republic of New Afrika. It has 
individual members and organizational affiliates, a 
few of which include the National Association of 
Black Social Workers, Sigma Gamma Rho Sorority, 
National Black United Front, Black Reparations 
Commission, and the International Peoples' 
Democratic Uhuru Movement. N'COBRA has 
chapters throughout the U. S. and in Ghana and 
London. It is directed nationally by a board of 
Black Reparations Times 
Why are African Descendants entitled to  
Reparations? 
 
The Trans-Atlantic Slave "Trade" and chattel slavery, 
more appropriately called the Holocaust of 
Enslavement or Maafa , was a crime against 
humanity. Millions of Africans were brutalized, 
murdered, raped and tortured. They were torn from 
their families in Africa, kidnapped and lost family and 
community associations. African peoples in the 
United States and the prior colonies, were denied the 
right to maintain their language, spiritual practices 
and even normal family relations, always under the 
threat of being torn from newly created families at the 
whim of the "slave owner." This form of 
dehumanization, chattel slavery, lasted officially from 
1619 to 1865. This was followed by 100 years of 
virtual re-enslavement through a 
series of laws and practices such as 
Black Codes, convict lease, 
sharecropping, peonage, and Jim 
Crow practices of separate and 
unequal accommodations. African 
descendants continue to be denied 
rights of self-determination, 
inheritance, and full participation in 
the United States government and 
society. The laws and practices in 
the United States continue to treat 
African peoples in a manner similar 
to slavery - maintaining dual 
systems in virtually every area of life including 
punishment, health care, education and wealth, 
maintaining the fiction of White superiority and 
African and African descendants inferiority.  
 
Is an apology necessary? 
 
A necessary requirement of all forms of reparations is 
an acknowledgment by the government or corporation 
that it committed acts that violated the human rights 
of those making the claim for reparations. Some 
groups may want an explicit apology, however, 
neither the acknowledgement nor apology is 
sufficient - there must be material forms of 
reparations that accompany the acknowledgment or 
apology. 
               {to be continued in next issue} 
N’COBRA’S  Information Sheet 
 
Those groups that have 
been injured have the right 
to obtain from the 
government or corporation 
responsible for the injuries 
that which they need to 
repair and heal themselves.


--- PAGE 443 ---
19 
General Ali X.  Rashid, Elder Advisor 
(Miami, Florida) 
 
General Mwesi Chui, Elder Advisor 
(Dayton, Ohio) 
 
Nia Kuumba, Elder Advisor 
(Washington, DC) 
 
Dr. Ron Walters, Elder Advisor 
(College Park, Maryland) 
 
N’COBRA’s Commissions also have representation 
on our Board of Directors. 
 
N’COBRA’s Commission Leaders 
 
Economic Development 
              Alvin Brown (St. Louis, MO) 
              Taiwo Kugichagulia (Oakland, CA) 
              Baba Dr. Imari Obadele (BR, LA) 
Education 
              Dr. Mary Hoover (Washington, DC) 
Human Resources 
              Njere Alghanee (Atlanta, GA) 
              H. Khalif Khalifah (Dreweryville, VA) 
Information and Media 
              JoAnn Watson (Detroit, MI)  
              Wautella ibn Yusuf (Washington, DC) 
              Jahahara Alkebulan-Ma’at(Oakland, CA) 
International 
              Mashariki Jywanza (Indianapolis, IN)  
Legal Strategies 
              Adjoa Aiyetoro (Washington, DC) 
Legislative 
              Nkechi Taifa (Washington, DC) 
              Kibibi Tyehimba (Washington, DC) 
              Milton McGriff (Philadelphia, PA) 
Membershi/Organizational Development 
Kupenda Olusegun (Washington, DC) 
Johnita Scott (Baton Rouge, LA) 
Frank Omowale Satterwhite (E. PA, CA)   
Youth 
              Maya Watson (Detroit, MI) 
 
Your Expertise and Participation Are Needed. 
 
Join An N’COBRA Commission! 
Black Reparations Time 
N’COBRA’s Board of Directors 
 
Dorothy Aurevouche Benton Lewis, Co-Chair 
(Rockville, Maryland) 
 
Jahahara Amen-RA Alkebulan-Ma’at, Co-Chair 
(Oakland, California) 
 
Kupenda Olusegun, Treasurer 
(Washington, DC) 
 
Lady Claudia Nelson, Secretary 
(Dallas, Texas) 
 
Dr. Imari Obadele, Emeritus and Ex-Officio 
(Baton Rouge, Louisiana) 
 
Dr. Frank Omowale Satterwhite, Western Region  
Representative (East Palo Alto, California) 
 
Njere Alghanee, Southeast Region Rep 
(Atlanta, Georgia) 
 
James Rodgers III, Southwest Region  
Representative (Dallas, TX) 
 
Alvin Brown, Midwest Region Rep 
(St. Louis, Missouri) 
 
Ajamu Sankofa, Northeast Region Rep 
(Brooklyn, New York) 
 
Baba Hannibal Afrik, At-Large 
(Port Gibson, Mississippi) 
 
Kalonji Tor Olusegun, At-Large 
(Washington, DC) 
 
H. Khalif Khalifah, At-Large 
(Dreweryville, Virginia) 
 
JoAnn Watson, At-Large 
(Detroit, Michigan) 
 
Erline Arikpo, Elder Advisor 
(Chicago, Illinois) 
 
Raymond “Reparations Ray” Jenkins, Elder Advisor 
(Detroit, Michigan) 
N’COBRA 
National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America 
P.O. Box 90604  Washington, DC 20090-0604 
PHONE: 202.291.8400   FAX:  202.291.4600 
EMAIL: NationalNCOBRA@aol.com   WEBSITE: www.ncobra.org 
DISCUSSION: http://groups.yahoo.com/group/Reparations_For_Africans


--- PAGE 444 ---
20 
 
 
FACT:  The Reparations Movement cannot be advanced without the  
               support of African (Black) People. 
 
FACT:   African (Black) People cannot and should not expect anyone  
               other than ourselves to provide the resources needed to win our  
               Reparations. 
 
FACT:   If you do not keep your membership up to date, you will no longer  
               receive the invaluable information found in this newsletter. 
 
Do your part to move us closer to achieving Reparations. Contribute 
generously to NCOBRA. Renew Your NCOBRA membership each 
year.  Encourage other Reparations supporters to join NCOBRA. Host 
fundraisers for NCOBRA and contribute the funds to NCOBRA projects 
that you feel passionately about. And remember the Power to Win 
Reparations is In our Hands!   Reparations: Conceive It...Achieve It! 
ATTENTION REPARATIONS ADVOCATES 
N’COBRA 
National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America 
P.O. Box 90604 
  Washington, DC 20090-0604 
In This Issue... 
 
 
Address 
 
N’COBRA’S LITIGATION WORK &  
REPARATIONS LOBBYISTS ON CAPITOL HILL!  
We are especially 
grateful to founding 
member Baba Kalonji 
Tor Olusegun for 
designing the N’COBRA 
logo (above).  It consists 
of three sacred Andinkra 
symbols: NKON-
SONKONSON (link or 
chain); OWA FOR A 
ADOBE (snake climbing 
the palm tree); and, 
BIRIBI-WO-SORO (a 
symbol of Hope denoting 
there is something in the 
Heavens).  Together, 
these symbols express 
our links in this, and the 
next life; that We share a 
common blood relation 
which will never break 
apart; and that We can 
perform the impossible.


--- PAGE 445 ---
Deadria Farmer-Paellman, Dr. Carol Swain, Johnnie Cochran, Dorothy B. Lewis, and Armstrong Williams 
 “Slavery Reparations Town Hall meeting” premiere in January on TV One (a new national cable network) 
SSPECIALPECIAL C CONFERENCEONFERENCE E EDITIONDITION  
N’COBRA 15N’COBRA 15THTH  ANNUALANNUAL C CONFERENCEONFERENCE 2004 2004  
HHOWARDOWARD U UNIVERSITYNIVERSITY  -- W WASHINGTONASHINGTON DC DC  
Black Reparations Times 
Volume 2, Issue 2  April  2004 
IN THIS ISSUE of Black Reparations Times   
      Unjust Laws: Another Reparations Issue 5 
      Reparations And Restitution:  Broadening the Discussion, Self Transformation & Compensation 10 
      Uhuru Tribunal on Reparations 19 
 Haiti Makes Its Case for Reparations  33 
Photo by Greg Blakey


--- PAGE 446 ---
2


--- PAGE 447 ---
3


--- PAGE 448 ---
4 
  
N’COBRA  
Information & Media Commission  
P.O. Box 716 
Washington, DC 20044-0716 
 
Email :  InformationMedia@aol.com 
Phone:  202.466.1622 
 
 
managing editor & producer 
 
Wautella ibn Yusuf 
 
editors 
 
Kibibi Tyehimba 
Dorothy Benton Lewis 
 
Contributors  
 
Jihad Abdul-Mumit, Hannibal Afrik, Kahlil Almustafa, 
Malik Al-Arkam, Bob Brown, Chinosole, J. Damu, 
Kwaku Duren, Deadria Farmer-Paellman, Garadina 
Gamba, Warren Green, Diana Kimble,  Bonnie Kerness, 
Dorothy Benton Lewis, Vic Nickson, James Rodgers III, 
Ajamu Sankofa, Kofi Taharka Turban A. Shabazz, 
Damario Solomon-Simmons Ras Tyehimba and others. 
 
 
MISSION 
 
The Commission will serve as the official organ-
izational link for the dissemination and exchange 
of information on N’COBRA policies, Reparations 
issues, strategies and actions important to winning 
Reparations for African descendants in the U.S. 
and the Diaspora; assist in educating N’COBRA 
members and the general public about our just 
demands; and assist in the development of mass 
based  support for Reparations. 
 
DEPARTMENTS 
 
Publishing Team 
     Publications:  REPARATIONS NOW!             
 {Quarterly Membership Newsletter} 
               BLACK REPARATIONS TIMES 
                            {Quarterly news publication} 
 
Internet/IT Team 
 N’COBRA Website: 
       NCOBRA.org & OfficialNcobra.org           
                (both .org are same) 
 Listserv – news egroup 
   Reparations_For_Africans@yahoogroups.com 
 
Public Relations Team 
We encourage public discussions, led by the injured, to determine an equitable 
remedy for the African Holocaust of En slavement.  All African descendents 
have a right and responsibility to work towards defining and achieving Repa-
rations.  The opinions and actions reported in Black Reparations Times are 
those of the person(s) representing them and in no way should be viewed as 
N’COBRA’s unless  clearly stated.  © 2003 all rights reserved 
Black Reparations Times  ®  
 
A Quarterly N’COBRA Publication of  the Information & Media Commission 
 
DEDICATED TO BRINGING YOU REPARATIONS INFORMATION IN ALL ITS VARIED FORMS AND APPROACHES 
 
Table Of Content 
Unjust Laws: Another Reparations Issue 
        Dorothy Benton Lewis 
5 
Reparations And Restitution 
        Wautella ibn Yusuf 
10 
A Nationalist Libation Ritual 
        Baba Hannibal Afrik 
12 
N’COBRA Northeast Region Honors Rob Penny 
          Ajamu Sankofa 
16 
N’COBRA Southwest Region On The Move 
         James Rodgers III 
17 
Uhuru Tribunal On Reparations 
        Bonnie Kerness  
19 
Pharoah Bush Enchanters Block Reparations For Blacks  
        Malik Al-Arkam 
21 
The Question Of A Black Plebiscite 
         Kwaku Duren   
22 
Voices From The Past:  Support For Reparations   23  
News From Around The Reparations Movement 
        Atlanta N’COBRA new officers & open house   
         Black Law Students files brief:  Tulsa Reparations Lawsuit 
         Bob Brown file Reparations Lawsuit 
         Commemoration for Colfax Massacre Victims 
         Richmond VA:  Reparations & Empowerment 
         Corporation Reparations Lawsuit Dismissed 
         The National Reparations Congress
 
28 
Caucasians United for Reparations and Emancipation 
         Rachel Naba 
31 
INTERNATIONAL AFRICAN REPARATIONS MOVEMENT 
        Haiti Makes Its Case for Reparations 
         Reparations In Repairing The Damage 
         Do We Have The Right To Dual Citizenship In Ghana?     
33


--- PAGE 449 ---
5 
 
 
How do agreements crafted by criminals and for the 
sole benefit of criminals get accepted, codified, and 
defended as “the law?” 
 
This question weighed heavily on my mind during my 
recent trip to Brussels, Belgium, and the Netherlands, 
also known as Holland, the land of the Dutch people. I 
visited historical sites on the slave route, and a number 
of museums. For I knew that along with the gold, dia-
monds, rubber, etc., many of Africa’s artifacts had 
been looted by European colonizers and could be 
found in museums throughout Europe.   Whether in 
the US or some other country, I use my travels to find 
other pieces of the puzzle, called my story (still a mys-
tery) and his story (history). 
 
Two other areas of interest for me are the issues of 
drugs and AIDS.  While in Amsterdam, I visited the 
red light district in the hear t of the city.  I wanted to 
see for myself how legalized drugs, prostitution, and 
porn were actually integrated into the city and the cul-
ture. 
 
I saw, for example a MacDonalds (which I associate 
with children and adolescents) right next door to a 
store with a huge sign on it that said “SEXSHOP,” 
next door to a souvenir shop, around the corner from 
live sex shows on stage, next to a shop with MJ plants 
displayed in the window, near an alley where nearly 
naked women stand in windows and market them-
selves as merchandise for hire.  It seemed to me like 
ancient Babylon, and prompted me to reflect on the 
nature and purpose of Laws.  While non-prescription 
drugs, including marijuana, and prostitution are illegal 
in the US, it would be rather unseemly for agents of 
the US government to fly seven hours, thousands of 
miles, overseas to impose US laws on the citizens of 
Amsterdam, rounding up men and women in the red 
light district and hauling them off to prison, night after 
night.  It would be equally unseemly for agents of the 
Netherlands government to tr avel thousands of miles 
to overthrow the US government for rounding up and 
enslaving millions of its own citizens for doing what is 
perfectly legal in Amsterdam, by their LAW. 
  
Under normal circumstances, most of us would agree 
that each Tribe has its own laws to govern its own citi-
zens.  The laws of the Netherlands’s Tribe are for the 
citizens of the Netherlands.  Similarly, the Tribes of 
Britain, France, Belgium, Spain, Portugal, etc. each 
have laws to govern their citizens.  Such laws are 
deemed legitimate, if the people make the laws in the 
best interest of the people who must abide by them.   
 
It is one thing for Tribes to make laws for themselves. 
It is quite another when they impose their laws upon 
others, outside of their territory.  It is likely that citi-
zens of the USA traveling to the Netherlands could get 
away with behaviors there that would be illegal here.  
If the citizens of the Netherlands visited the USA, they 
had best leave certain aspects of their culture at home 
because it would cause them a lot of grief here. 
  
It isn’t unusual for Tribes to impose their laws and 
customs on each other; it is just unacceptable, as re-
flected in the number of Tribal wars we have had from 
antiquity to the present.  Not only have Tribes sought 
to dominate each other; they have warred with each 
other while vying to assert their dominance over other 
Tribes’ land, labor, and resources. You might call it 
highly organized crime committed by individual entre-
preneurs and corporations (backed by their govern-
ment’s military force), vying for riches, recognition, 
and superior status. 
 
We see the European Trib es throughout the world 
each stealing from and selling to the other what be-
longed to neither; and taking by force or fraud coun-
tries, continents, people and resources…leaving a 
bloody trail of death, destruction, and misery from one 
continent to another.   
 
Some Tribes even signed agreements with each other 
to minimize the fighting over territory and people tar-
geted for stealing.  One early agreement came in 1494 
between Spain and Portugal.  The Kingpins there de-
cided that they were not going to war with each other 
over the new Real estate that Columbus had staked out 
for the taking; so they drew up an agreement called 
the Treaty of Tordesillas.  The deal was that Spain 
would take one half and Po rtugal would take the other 
half.  Even though the agreement was inspired and 
blessed by the Catholic Pope, it only lasted a while. 
Other European Tribes moved in and warred with 
each other, at different times, over various countries in 
the world that was new to them.   
 
(Continued on page 6) 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Unjust Laws: Another Reparations Issue 
Dorothy Benton Lewis, 
N’COBRA National Co-Chair 
North American Representative, Global Afrikan Congress


--- PAGE 450 ---
6 
  
 
In effect, the world we live in  today, and for the past sev-
eral centuries, has been shaped  by organized crime, inter-
national gangs of highly organized, highly paid criminals, 
superior thugs, supported and protected by governments 
that invade countries under noble pretexts, committing 
murder and mayhem, destroying everything in their path 
for glory and greed.  Their te rror tactics to control, sub-
due, and hold in bondage their prey, would shame a na-
tion of demons, not to mention one that purports to be 
civilized, Christian, and democratic. 
 
It is interesting to note that after the United Nations 
World Conference against Racism, the world was pretty 
much denied the information that slavery, especially the 
transatlantic slave trade was finally declared a crime 
against humanity, and should always have been so.  It was 
surreal.  Imagine criminals bein g able to vote on whether 
or not their raping, plundering, genocidal deeds were in 
fact crimes against humanity. 
 
Again, I ask: How do agreements crafted by and for the 
sole benefit of criminals get accepted, codified, and de-
fended as “the law?” 
 
Imagine our local thugs, gang-bangers, traffickers in peo-
ple, rapist, drug pushers, pedophiles, dead beat dads, mak-
ing agreements among themselves, for the benefit of 
themselves and have the recipients of their criminal be-
havior, and other people, ostensibly without such criminal 
tendencies, abide by those agreements and accept them as 
legitimate, as “the law?” 
 
Such laws as: 
 
 “Whatever I do is right and acceptable, I am God.”  Sov-
ereignty 
 
 “Even if I am wrong, I know I’m wrong and you know 
I’m wrong, and the whole world knows that I am wrong, 
you can’t sue me unless I allow you to sue me.”  Sover-
eign Immunity 
 
 “If I am forced by public or world opinion, or some other 
compelling interest, you may sue me in my court, with 
judges I appoint, under rules that I make, and you must do 
it in a certain amount of time. I will decide what amount 
of time is sufficient.”   Statute of Limitations    
 
Even so, this isn’t done even handedly.  We also know 
that law in the hands of criminals, either in domestic or 
international law, will attempt to twist it to meet their pur-
pose. 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
If Indigenous Tribes succeeded in repelling the invaders, 
another European Tribe would take up where the other 
had left off.  Like a chain of international gang-bangers, 
pimps, and drug pushers, they fought for control over 
land, people, and resources belonging to African, North 
American, South American, Central American, Asian, 
and Australian Tribes who had their own laws, customs, 
language, culture, and worldview. 
 
We see European Tribes in North America slaughtering 
indigenous peoples, warring with each other over the 
stolen land, cutting deals to minimize the warring, tak-
ing, then selling land in the name of the King, Queen, or 
Pope who had absolutely no rights that they could claim 
or laws that they could legitimately impose on others.   
 
We see the Dutch, Portuguese, and Spanish Tribes in 
Brazil; the British, Dutch, and French in South Africa. 
The Tribes of France, Spain, and Britain in North Amer-
ica and the Caribbean; Spain in the Dominican, Cuba, 
Puerto Rico; France in Haiti and Vietnam;  Britain in 
India, China, Australia; the USA in Mexico, Hawaii, and 
Vietnam; Russia selling Alaska to the USA.   
 
After four centuries of raping and plundering the world 
and Africa of its human and material wealth, all but a 
few European Tribes united long enough to attend a con-
ference in Berlin, Germany in  1894 (just 29 years after 
chattel slavery had ended in the USA).  The purpose of 
the meeting was to develop an agreement on how they 
would divide African continent (with the African Tribes 
still on it) among themselves without fighting each other 
over it.  Not a single African was invited to that Berlin 
conference. 
 
It should be clear that neither slavery nor colonialism are 
domestic issues.  When you have Tribes from one conti-
nent, kidnapping Tribal members from a second conti-
nent to transport them to a third, stolen, continent, we 
have international crimes of the highest order: 1) geno-
cide, 2) war crimes, and 3) crimes against humanity. 
 
Sponsors of a criminal enterprise usually mark their sto-
len goods with their Tribal names: Dutch Guyana, Dutch 
Antilles. French Guyana, French Surinam, British Guy-
ana.  The Belgium Congo, French Morocco, French 
Canada, British Canada, British West Indies, British 
West Africa, British East Africa, Francophone Africa.  
Some Tribes have come and gone, but have left incrimi-
nating evidence, such Tribal markings as their language, 
mixed-tribe offspring, and in most cases, a puppet or 
proxy government to serve their financial interests.  
(Continued from page 5)


--- PAGE 451 ---
7 
 
 
We have moved from plantation slavery to prison and 
wage slavery. 
 
We have moved from colonia lism to neo-colonialism: A 
black face to carry out the will of the colonial masters 
who occupy the stolen land and maintain a death grip on 
the resources, while still grabbing for more. 
 
We have moved from can’t read to can’t think: The text-
books are full of lies. Scientists, researchers, academics 
for hire serve the colonial masters in their attempt to 
cover-up and promote lies to hide the truth. 
 
We have moved from White Criminal Supremacy with-
out the sheets to White Criminal Supremacy all dressed 
up in three-piece suits, black robes, and governmental 
uniforms, with a license to kill. 
 
In the name of Democracy and Manifest Destiny, we 
have moved from genocide and an agricultural slaveoc-
racy to genocide and a military and prison slaveocracy:  
Our husbands, wives, daughters, and sons still give their 
lives to liberate countries and resources for corporate 
(Continued on page 9) 
 
For example, when it comes to  the issue of “time” for 
African people 138 years is too long ago.  However, 
when it comes to European people, 2500 years ago is a 
reparational issue.  The Bible is dragged in to justify the 
disparate treatment. 
 
 But, we wouldn’t stop there, we would build huge 
monuments with our tax dollars, write about these crimi-
nals in glowing terms in our text books, make up inter-
esting stories to tell our children about them, create holi-
days and even induce our ch ildren to admire and cele-
brate them. 
 
So today, we continue to struggle out from under the 
burden of White Criminal Supremacy, of which slavery 
and colonialism reflect only two its many tentacles.  The 
Reparations demand is just one step in our effort to take 
control of our lives, of our future and our sanity.  As we 
try to make sense out of the insane, we find that the more 
things look like they have changed the more they are 
really the same: 
 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Deadria Farmer-Paellman, Dr. Carol Swain, Johnnie Cochran, Dorothy B. Lewis, and Armstrong Williams 
TV One’s Town Hall meeting on Slavery Reparations, at the George Washington University's Jack Morton  
Auditorium in Washington, DC  
Photo by Greg Blakey


--- PAGE 452 ---
8 
  
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 453 ---
9 
 
 
gain under the pretext of liberating people.   
These Transnational corporations move millions of jobs 
out of this country in search of new slaves. They have no 
allegiance to any flag until they need the services of our 
youthful military to assist them in an international hi-
jacking of another nation for slaves, markets, and re-
sources.  It is a wonder that our child soldiers don’t de-
mand their fair share of the loot directly from the corpo-
rations.  Instead, we subsidize the robbery with our tax 
dollars and the lives of our loved ones, in the name of 
freedom and democracy that we don’t enjoy. 
 
In the name of Freedom, we have given up the Freedoms 
we said we had, even though a good number of us were 
afraid to exercise those freedoms in the first place, be-
fore the Patriot Act. 
 
Some often say that we are a nation of Laws not men.  I 
say that a nation built on injustice and inhumanity, and a 
foundation of agreements made by criminals to regulate 
their criminal behavior.  Some of what we call “laws,” 
are a legacy of our Holocaust of Enslavement and re-
main tools of oppression and the continuing war against 
us.  These tools/”laws” must join the long list of harms 
and damage in need of repair. 
 
We live with a White Criminal Supremacy mind-set that 
project onto others, its own criminal tendencies:  The 
stolen are projected as the th ieves.  The terrorized are 
projected as the terrorist.  The survivors are projected as 
the murders and must be jailed and/or killed.  The re-
source rich countries are projected as the impoverished 
as their gold, diamonds, oil, rubber, and other wealth are 
airlifted to pad the coffers of European countries.  These 
thieves are projected as the saviors. 
 
The criminal attempts to justify slavery and the inhuman 
treatment of African people, have left us a legacy of lies 
and omissions in our textbooks that still render the ma-
jority of Americans ignorant of US history. 
 
We have a US congress that has for the past 138 years 
suppressed an honest discussion on America’s history 
and the impact of slavery on subsequent generations.  
This too is a criminal cover up and a legacy of slavery. 
 
Not only is it time for reparations, it is time to end the 
African Holocaust, the Maafa.  We know the war isn’t 
over, that we are still in danger because the criminals’ 
descendants still have a criminal mind-set.  They don’t 
want to confess, apologize, or repair the damage.  They 
seem to want to pretend that It Never Happened. We 
know that reparations alone, isn’t the issue because repa-
(Continued from page 7) rations have been paid to and demanded for others. 
 
What do criminals, who pretend to be paragons of virtue, 
do with prisoners of unjust wars, and laws made, by 
criminals for criminals?  What do criminals do with, kid-
nap victims, people held in bondage? 
 
Do they try to kill them off,  and institute laws to silence 
them until they die off? Do  they convince the captives 
that they are now a part of the family and entitled to all 
of the responsibilities of family members, but none of the 
wealth?  Ask not what your family can do for you, but 
what you can do for your family/country. 
 
Do they teach them the same  lies that they have taught 
their own Tribal members when they were trying to con-
vince the Tribe that the captiv e Africans were inferior, 
less than human and had no human rights that the White 
Tribe was bound to respect? 
 
When the gig is up, why don’ t they just come clean, tell 
the truth, pay reparations, and move on?  Why do they 
continue to lie, make excuses, blame the victim, try to 
convince them that they did them a favor, their captivity 
was really a rescue mission, forgive and forget, let by-
gones be bygones, while they continue to shackle, re-
enslave, and destroy them in so many other ways? 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 454 ---
10 
  
How do we, the victims of human history’s most 
diabolic tragedy, shap e the discussion about 
Black Reparations and Restitution in a way that 
captures the hearts and minds of African peoples 
at home and abroad?   First and foremost there 
must be an understanding and acceptance that our 
demand for Reparations is a sacred and moral is-
sue, and the African Holocaust of Enslavement 
was a crime against Africans, humanity and God.  
Many sacred texts teach us that the human person 
is sacred, therefore to injure or murder one human 
being is a violation of the sacred.  We should not 
forget, nor should we let ot hers forget that ten to 
one hundred million innocent souls were tortured 
and destroyed during the Trans-Atlantic enslave-
ment of Africans. Our que st to gain Reparations 
must be viewed as a duty
, placed upon us by the 
Creator, our Ancestors, our children and ourselves, to 
repair, heal and restore our People (minds, culture, 
history, families, communities, nationhood, etc.).  
 
Our approach to the issue of "Reparations" should 
never be viewed as something "White folks" must 
"do" for us, or "approve" for us.  Rather, it is our de-
mand for justice, and what is rightfully ours, and a 
necessary step to acquire the resources necessary to 
heal, repair and restore us as a people.  Ultimately 
Reparations is a process that only "Black folks" can 
and must do for ourselves.  Only we can address the 
spiritual and psychological effects of 300 years of 
slavery, 100 years of lynching and segregation, and 
more than 35 years of racism and discrimination that 
is clearly evident in our families and communities.  
 
As activists and liberation theorists speaking on behalf 
of our people's needs, we must struggle to use lan-
guage and a system of logic that enables us to reach all 
our people in a manner that encourages their involve-
ment in the healing and repair process whether they 
acknowledge it or not.  If we can help our people to 
see that the crimes that we’ve suffered and the dura-
tion of those crimes are unlike any experiences of 
other peoples, then they will understand our approach 
to the issue of Reparations must also be different from 
those of other peoples.   The way that "reparations" is 
understood in national and international law does not 
and cannot carry the same weight for us.  Malcolm X. 
REPARATIONS AND RESTITUTION 
Broadening the Discussion, Self Transformation And Compensation  
 
By Wautella ibn Yusuf 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
taught us that the language and logic of the oppressor 
cannot be the language and logic of the oppressed.  
Lawyers, politicians, and international representa-
tives may feel obligated to use the definitions that are 
commonly accepted in the arenas in which they fight, 
but the Reparations activists  must never be confined 
to those narrow parameters.  It is our job to name and 
define our reality and cause others to accept our defi-
nitions.  This is an expression of power and self-
determination.  
 
The Reparations Movement has the potential to ad-
dress all our problems, if we define it as a movement 
to develop and liberate African people, rather than a 
quest to receive a paycheck.  Today the issue of resti-
tution (compensation) raises the most questions for 
African descendants and European descendants (the 
perpetrators).  However, considering the scope of the 
damages, perhaps the issue of reparations should re-
ceive more of our attention rather than restitution at 
this time.  African People must first clearly define the 
injury, and then understand and accept that there is a 
need for healing, repairing and restoring our people 
before getting bogged down in discussions about who 
should pay (individuals, companies, churches, or 
governments); what we want (money, land, health-
care, education, political power, repatriation, etc); 
how much and how long various forms of compensa-
tion should be provided; who should receive it 
(individuals, organizations or governments acting in 
our behalf), and how the compensation should be 
used. This is required for at least two reasons:  a) we 
can’t change (repair) our condition if we don’t under-
stand the cause (injury) and b) if our people don’t 
fully comprehend the full extent of the injuries they 
can be tricked into settling for token reparations.   
 
Every Black person is a potential member of the 
growing International African Reparations Move-
ment. We must create and sustain a mass Reparations 
Movement that enable the worldwide struggles of 
African peoples to be linked in ways not witnessed 
since the era of Marcus Garvey's Universal Negro 
Improvement Association. 
 
S
TRATEGIES FOR WINNING REPARATIONS 
 
Grassroots and Popular Support :


--- PAGE 455 ---
11 
 
 
 Methods – creating and distributing bro-
chures, flyers, and books; public forums e.g. 
town hall meetings, conference and conven-
tions; accessing popular media with our mes-
sage; marches, demonstrations and boycotts.   
Rationale - Winning the hearts and minds of 
the people is most important and makes the 
other three fronts possible.  There is cross-
fertilization between all four, but educating 
the people to support the movement is the 
corner stone of the movement.  
 
Legislative Strategies:   
 Methods – lobbying and passing Reparations 
proclamations, resolutions, bills and laws on 
all levels (organizations, city, county, state, 
US Congress, etc.).   
 Rationale –  legislative actions elevate the 
discussion and create a national dialog that 
educates African descendants (and others) 
about their injury and rights to redress, and 
broadens the discussion and support base.  
When all is said and done, it will be the US 
Government (US Congress) and other Euro-
pean governments that will pass laws to sup-
port an equitable Reparation remedy.  
 
Legal Strategies:   
 Methods – filing Reparations lawsuits of all 
types for the African Holocaust of Enslave-
ment and its vestiges, e.g. filing against indi-
viduals, families, corporations, US and other 
governments, etc    
 Rationale – lawsuits from the bottom up help 
to create the domino effect that leads to gov-
ernments’ acknowledging their responsibility 
and liability for the Holocaust of Enslave-
ment. Also testimonies during court hearings 
educate the public and build support.  The 
injured party is strengthened by confronting 
the criminal face to face and forcing him to 
answer for the crime regardless of the out-
come.  
   
International Strategies:   
 Methods  – lobbying and petitioning interna-
tional governing bodies (United Nations, 
World Court, African Union, etc.) for sup-
port and redress; keep the issue on the 
agenda of international conferences and con-
ventions; create and sustain international 
boycotts for Reparations; and link up with 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
other African and African descendants 
Reparations organizations and allies for 
support ( e.g. the International Front of 
Afrikans for Reparations [IFAR] formed 
during the Afrikan and Afrikan Descen-
dants Conference in Barbados)   
 Rationale  – Reparations for Africans is a 
global issue for Africans and African de-
scendants that must be pursued locally and 
internationally. Duri ng forum such as The 
World Conference Against Racism which 
declared the “Trans-Atlantic Slavery 
Trade” was a crime against humanity.  In 
light of the U.S. dominance over countries 
around the world, African descendants in 
America are in a position to give voice and 
support to the International African Repa-
rations Movement.  Therefore African de-
scendants residing in the U.S. must not 
betray our duty to our ancestors and peo-
ple. 
 
F
OUR M AJOR S TAGES OF W INNING R EPARATIONS 
FOR AFRICAN DESCENDANTS IN AMERICA 
 
Reparations Organization : Recruit and retain 
a committed, capable, well informed and 
disciplined core membership, i.e. N'CO-
BRA and other community based organiza-
tions. 
 
Mass Black Support : If Reparations are due 
for slavery and present day injustices 
against Black People, Africans in America, 
and around the world should first recognize 
the injustices, the worthiness of our de-
mand for Reparations, and be willing to 
give our support before expecting others to. 
 
Gain Significant National and Global Sup-
port: America is concerned with maintain-
ing its false, noble international image; we 
should challenge it, e.g. Civil Rights 
Movement. We should create and sustain 
strategic alliances. 
 
      Win Reparations!:  Through the application of 
massive internal and external pressure, fol-
lowed by well-planned attacks using litiga-
tion, legislation, and international pressure, 
we will win Reparations.


--- PAGE 456 ---
12 
  
A NATIONALIST LIBATION RITUAL 
 
Submitted by 
BABA HANNIBAL AFRIK 
(Originally recited in February 1972, 
 SHULE TA WATOTO) 
 
Opening:  
 
“Because we are an Afrikan people, whenever we come together on no matter how large or small the occasion, it 
is imperative that we ask our Ancestors for their blessings. For our Ancestors are a fundamental part of every-
thing that we do. They are in this room, in the air, in the earth and we believe that if we call upon them and ask 
for their blessings, they will hear our request and grant us success.  
 
A libation is a liquid poured into the earth as the name of the Ancestor is called. We would ask you to acknowl-
edge this request in your own personal way. The libation will be spoken in Kiswahili and English”  
 
TAMBIKO (Libation)  
 
 SIFA OTE INA MUUMBA WEUSI (All praises due to our Afrikan Creator  
 SIFA OTE INA MABABA WEUSI (All praises due to our Afrikan Ancestors)  
 SIFA OTE INA WOTE WEUSI (All praises due to Afrikan people)  
 SIFA OTE INA MAISHA WEUSI (All praises due to Afrikan life)  
 
  To the spiritual memory of the Honorable Marcus Mosiah Garvey, who    
   taught us ‘One God, One Aim and On e Destiny’ and who believed that we  
  are Afrikans, ‘those at home and those abroad’;  
   —We say and pour Libation.  
 
  To the spiritual memory of Queen Nzingha, who led our people in Angola   
   and never allowed the Portugese to dominate us;  
   —We say and pour Libation.  
 
  To the spiritual memory of the H onorable Elijah Muhammad, who gave us 
   an example of economic self-determination;  
   —We say and pour Libation.  
 
  To the spiritual memory of Sister Harriet Tubman, who led our people 
   towards the North Star and never lost a passenger on the Underground    
   Railroad;  
   —We say and pour Libation.  
 
  To the spiritual memory of Brother Minister Malcolm X. El Hajj Malik, 
  our Black Shining Prince, for his example of manhood, husbandhood,  
  fatherhood and servant to our people;  
   —We say and pour Libation.  
 
  To the spiritual memory of Queen Mother Moore, who gave nearly one    
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 457 ---
13 
 
 
THE AYARE’SA SOCIETY 
(THE HEALING) 
 GIVES THANKS FOR N’COBRA’S DEDICATION TO THE 
 AFRICAN COMMUNITY 
REMEMER TO BE AFRICAN IN EVERTHING THAT YOU DO 
TO SCHEDULE A HEALING CIRCLE CALL  IVY SHADIAH HYLTON 
301-702-0940 
   hundred years of her life to the cause of sovereignty, Reparations,    
   independence and empowerment for our people;  
   —We say and pour Libation.  
 
  To the spiritual memory of the five hundred million Afrikans taken from     
  the continent during the four hundred  years of the European Trans-    
  Atlantic slave trade and the fifty million and more who were casualties     
  and perished during the Middle Passage and whose bones lie at the bottom    
  of the Atlantic Ocean and whose blood fertilized the soil, in the      
  plantations of North, Central and Sout h America. To all who suffered,     
  bled and died in our MAAFA, Afrikan Holocaust of Enslavement;  
   —We say and pour Libation.  
 
  To the spiritual memory of the Ancestors of all of us here assembled, our    
  great grandparents, grandparents, fathers, mothers, husbands, wives,  
  sisters, brothers, aunts, uncles, ni eces, nephews, cousins, those whose     
  names we can call, those whose shoulders we now stand on, those who     
  have built the bridge over which we are crossing today;  
   —We say and pour Libation.  
 
  And to the spiritual memory of those not yet born, those who will come     
  behind us, those who will inherit our le gacy of struggle, those who will     
  ensure our goal of sovereignty, self-governance, prosperity and peace;  
   —We say and pour Libation.  
 
 SIFA OTE INA MUUMBA WEUSI (All praises due to our Afrikan Creator)  
 SIFA OTE INA MABABA WEUSI (All praises due to our Afrikan Ancestors)  
 SIFA OTE INA WOTE WEUSI (All praises due to Afrikan people)  
 SIFA OTE INA MAISHA WEUSI (All praises due to Afrikan life)  
 
 And so, if we are serious in believing with our heart that our Ancestors are right here with 
 us today, then they will have heard our request , they will give us their blessings for a successful 
 occasion.  And we will go forward from this day as New Afrikan men, New  Afrikan women,  
 New Afrikan children, ‘for as long as the sun shines and the water flows.’  HOTEP!”  
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 458 ---
14 
  
pro-action 
Cotton/is it that they think that we’ve forgotten, 
living up in this country that’s rotten, 
I stay/fighting for my mule, for my plot, 
they want to start/let ‘em start off with the cotton. 
 
There ain’t no more hot fields, 
no more chains, no whips, 
but my people, we still walk crooked 
from this ordeal, we still feel, 
we still hurtin’. 
Some try to raise the Blk nation 
but it seems like it ain’t working. 
They portray us like we hate working, 
we built this right here. 
That flag full with our blood, our sweat, our tears, 
it’s they crime 
that got us acting outta order, 
Blk men, decorating the street corner. 
The U.S. worries about the welfare of the Israel state, 
while Afrikans here in America in a welfare state 
and a welfare state of mind, 
blinded by BET and the news, 
all my little ghetto children confused. 
We don’t want a check sent to the projects, 
but if we left it to them,  
they wouldn’t check the projects. 
Check this project, 
we need less housing 
and more building 
like more building our people up. 
They try to fix the ghetto 
so they open up a Starbuck?!! 
Yo!  What about our bucks?!! 
Chips, clams, shells, cheddar, whatever, 
we take it mils or dirty, one dollar bills. 
Reparations is Justice 
for the problems they brought to us, 
we ain’t bring these problems to you. 
You brought us here for the nation building 
and the same situation we still in, 
the Blk nation is still feeling 
the pain from they campaign. 
Let me make it quite plain, 
them sorrys don’t mean a damn thang, 
we seen Martin, seen Malcolm, 
and everythang seem the damn same, 
so get up off them damn thangs 
and maybe we could see some damn change. 
 
Cotton/is it that they think that we’ve forgotten, 
living up in this country that’s rotten, 
I stay/fighting for my mule, for my plot, 
they want to start/let ‘em start off with the cotton. 
 
I’m talking ‘bout  
cotton shirts & cotton socks, 
cotton pants & cotton cots, 
cotton bandanas, 
cotton swabs & cotton Q-Tips, 
cotton hats & cotton to lace ya’ shoes 
with. 
Everything, cotton drawers to cotton panties, 
all the cotton in this world, 
even cotton candy. 
Half off on cotton-polyester blends, 
my people,  
we should never have to pay for cotton again. 
We need more than reactions, 
 
them affirmative actions a distraction. 
We need pro-action. 
We need better interaction 
between Blk women and the Blk men. 
We need community. 
We need stability. 
Keep the apologies. 
We’ll take the property. 
Your propaganda 
don’t bother me. 
Cause we’ve seen 
enough tokens, 
enough hopin’, enough prayin’, enough singin’, 
enough beggin’ you for our freedom, 
seen enough Assatas, enough Mumias, 
 
enough marchin’, 
enough arrests and protests 
without the progress, 
enough strugglin’, 
we’ve had enough hustlin’ crack, 
enough of you saying this, but doing that. 
We’ve had enough racial attacks. 
It’s time for them to give back. 
It’s time for us to take Black. 
Cotton 
 
By Kahlil Almustafa  
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Keep the apologies. 
   We’ll take the property.


--- PAGE 459 ---
15 
 
 
demand that this nation redress their crime against 
humanity would require eliminating national holidays, re-
naming landmarks, bankrupting institutions, and revealing 
the so-called “founding fathers” and their successors to be 
tyrants and worse. 
 
Reparations is not:  A check in the mail.  Based on black & 
white.  An extension of welfare or affirmative action.  An 
attempt by lawyers to make money.   An impossible no-
tion.  
 
If you would like to get materials from Youth4Reparations, 
please e-mail us at youth4reparations@yahoo.com, write at 
Post Office Box 569, Jamaica, NY, 1411, or call 917-517-
9006.  
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
If you feelin’ this, if you with this 
pump them Blk fists, 
clinched tight like cousins sleeping on a mattress, 
we don’t ask for this, we demand it. 
But if they don’t give us our cheddar, 
we still gotta come together, 
grow better, make our own cheddar, 
show the world what could have been 
of this America. 
 
Cotton/is it that they think that we’ve forgotten, 
living up in this country that’s rotten, 
I stay/fighting for my mule, for my plot, 
they want to start/let ‘em start off with the cotton. 
 
Performed at the Millions for Reparations Rally at the 
United Nations in September 2003.  kahlil almustafa is 
a founding member of Youth4Reparations and the 
2002 Nuyorican Grand Slam Chapion and a Repara-
tions activist in Queens, New York.  He is the author of 
two collections of poems, "Grandma's Soup," and "I'm 
Crying Everyone's Tears."
 
 
Free the land!  Free the people!  Free all politi-
cal prisoners!  Reparations Now!  
 
Youth4Reparations (YFR) 
 
<youth4reparations@yahoo.com> -is an 
organization that seeks to educate young people about 
Reparations and to engender the future leaders of the 
Reparations movement. 
 
YFR believes Reparations offers a unique and timely 
response to the multitude of challenges facing our com-
munities, including:  bridging the divide between 
groups of Afrikan people internationally, lack of infra-
structure, criminalization of our youth, prison industrial 
complex, assassination of our leaders, poorly funded 
public education, gentrification, inadequate healthcare 
and housing, AIDS, unemployment, etc. It is a youth 
organization that trains young people in community 
organizing and advocacy, and creates tangible Repara-
tions solutions.  
 
Youth4Reparations understands that the question of 
Reparations for Blacks in America short-circuits this 
system. Since it was the black bodies of our ancestors 
that served as the start-up capital in this capitalistic sys-
tem, and the maintenance of that system has depended 
heavily on the continued oppression of our people, to 
(Continued from page 14) 
Now Available  
 
14th National N’COBRA Convention 
Dallas, Texas 
VHS tape set (3) for $40.00 
DVD set (3) for $55.00 
 
Johnita Scott Obadele 
Addressing The Texas State Legislators 
VHS tape for $20.00 
DVD for $24.95 
 
Minister Robert Muhammad - Nation 
Of Islam 
Minister Jeffrey Muhammad - Nation 
Of Islam 
Speaks Before The Texas Legislative Summit 
VHS tape for $20.00 
DVD for $24.95


--- PAGE 460 ---
16 
  
THE N’COBRA NE REGION HONORS ROB PENNY 
 
By Ajamu Sankofa 
N’COBRA NE Regional Representative 
its administrative responsibilities such as chapter re-
certification, quarterly budget reports, and annual finan-
cial pledges; 3. Each chapter must maintain a visible po-
litical presence in the Black community and place repa-
rations community education efforts as a central thrust in 
all of its work; 4. The Region recommends that each 
chapter creates a 3-year calendar that will chart its pro-
grammatic target dates and administrative task target 
dates and commits to keeping these dates; and 5. The 
Region committed to a plan of action to assist the N’CO-
BRA Rochdale Village Chapter to bounce back from the 
demoralization that set in due to its inability to attend the 
historic Reparations Rally of 2002 in Washington, DC. 
 
Nellie Hester Bailey, N’COBRA member and Executive 
Director of the Harlem Tenant’s Council (HTC), led a 
spirited interactive discussion on the art and practice of 
grassroots organizing and coalition building to expand 
the reparations movement. She used the example of the 
HTC joining the N’COBRA Metro Area Chapter in a 
coalition building effort that put on a successful  commu-
nity Teach-in that explained the housing crisis in the 
Black community as a vestige of chattel slavery. Sister 
Bailey stressed the need of reparations activists not to be 
(Continued on page 40) 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
On November 25, 2003, the N’COBRA NE Region held 
its winter meeting. The ambitious focus of the meeting 
was not only to celebrate the life and work of our es-
teemed ancestor and seven y ear active member of the 
N’COBRA Pittsburgh Chapter, the poet, novelist, play-
wright, scholar, and African liberation activist, Rob 
Penny; but also to strengthen the N’COBRA chapters 
and their organizing strategies such that Brother Penny’s 
bright ancestral light would shine throughout our delib-
erations, giving us guidance for the reparations road that 
lies ahead. We met the challenge. 
 
The N’COBRA NE Regional meeting was co-sponsored 
by the Black students of the University of Pittsburgh 
Africana Studies Department a nd held in an impressive 
room at the University of Pittsburgh. Over 40 people 
registered for the meeting and throughout the day over 
70 people participated in the rich organizing sessions. 
 
Adjoa Aiyetoro, chair of N’COBRA’s Legal Strategies 
Commission, moderated a solid workshop on sustaining 
and growing N’COBRA chapters through enhanced pro-
grammatic and administrative activities and procedures. 
Six NE region chapters were  represented as panelists on 
this very needed workshop. Among the key recommen-
dations were, 1. Chapters must recognize that the timely 
completion of chapter level administrative tasks is abso-
lutely vital to ensuring the in stitutional integrity of both 
the local chapter and the national organization; 2. The 
region recommends that the national office develop a 
system of reminders to ensure chapter compliance with 
Gilda Sherrod-Ali and Mama Timamu Penny 
Ajamu Sankofa, N’COBRA NE Regional Representative


--- PAGE 461 ---
17 
 
 
TEXAS REPARATIONS LEADERS SPEAK 
ON CHURCH RESOLUTION  
 
By Omowale <exodusn@hotpop.com>  
 
“Slavery Reparation activists call for more than an 
apology to heal Texas past” 
 
On Wednesday, January 14, 2004 @ 10:30 am at 
Greater St. Stephen First Church located at 3728 E. 
Berry Street. A statewide coalition of black reparation 
activists will host a press conference to respond to the 
Texas Baptist Association’s call of an apology for 
Texas role in black slavery. Over 50 members of the 
Baptist group unanimously approved the apology reso-
lution at a meeting held recently in Fort Worth. The      
group requested State Representative Glenn O. Lewis 
(Continued on page 39) 
N’COBRA SOUTHWEST REGION ON THE MOVE 
 
By James Rodgers III 
N’COBRA Southwest Regional Representative 
litical prisoners. 
 
January 4, 2004 chapter member meet at the home of 
queen mother Irene Moorhead  for the weekly political 
education session host by former member of the Black 
Panther Party member and chapter treasurer Bro. Od-
inga Kambui. 
 
January 5, 2004 chapter co- chairs Bro. Cranston Alke-
bulan and Diana Kimble meet with the Dallas Chapter 
of the NOI, and others community activist to plan the 
Saviors Day event for NOI, and the Reparations 
Awareness Day event for the chapter. 
. 
January 7, 2004 the chapter youth commission held a 
planning meeting for hosting a conference and rally, to 
be held in March 2004; aimed at bringing more youth 
into the movement for reparations, and in observance 
of March 21, 2004, the U N International Day Against 
Racism 
 
January 7, 2004 the Regional Rep. Bro. James Rodgers 
III, meet with regional conference coordinator Sis. 
Helene Reese of the Dallas Chapter to begin the dis-
semination of a notice to the region of the upcoming 
SWR regional conference to be held on May 29-30 
2004 in Tulsa, OK. For more information contact SWR 
Rep. James Rodgers III at 972 231 9114 or  
e-mail brorodgers3@ ev1.net.  
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Here is a synopsis of the recent activities of the Dal-
las Chapter of NCOBRA.  
 
Starting with the events of Kwanzaa: 
 
December 26, 2003 elder chapter member Irene 
Moorhead (NANA) and Bro James Rodgers III 
(SWR REP) participated in the annual community 
Kwanzaa parade and rally.  During the parade Bro 
James drove his truck while queen Mother Moor-
head, from the window, passed out NCOBRA mem-
bership applications and other community news arti-
cles. During the rally, separately they addressed the 
rally on the principle of umoja, reparations, and the 
mission of NCOBRA. 
 
December 29, 2003 the chapter hosted an open public 
discussion on the principle of ujamma, and Repara-
tions vs. Pan Africanism at the Pan African Connec-
tion Books and Resource Center in Dallas (Oak 
Cliff), TX. Bro James Rodgers III (SWR REP. NCO-
BRA) and Bro. Tige of the United States of Africa 
group spoke on the merits of each approach to libera-
tion for Africa and the Africans. We also discussed 
the need for Africans to gain self - determination and 
control of economic resources. The Dallas Chapter 
presented the NCOBRA campaign of Black Friday, 
which is based on the principle of ujamma. 
 
January 1, 2004 chapter co chair Diana Kimble pre-
sented the demand for reparations and the mission of 
NCOBRA in a PUBLIC discussion, covered by the 
local media, at the Pan African Connection Books 
and Resources Center. The subject of the discussion 
was the Kwanzaa principle of IMAMI (Faith).  
  
January 3, 2004 Brother Od inga Kambui represented 
NCOBRA, in a rally for reparations, in Fort Worth, 
Texas hosted by the local Nation of Islam (NOI). 
Brother Odinga was one of many politician and com-
munity activist/speakers rallying the cities African 
America. Community. The rally was held in support 
of a state resolution in troduced .by Representative 
Glenn Lewis of Forth Worth, TX, in support U. S 
Congress bill - HR 40. Bro. Odinga talked about the 
mission of NCOBRA and its leadership role in the 
movement for a legal remedy to reparations. He also 
so spoke on the status of political prisoners and the 
need for support of legal action for release of all po-


--- PAGE 462 ---
18 
  
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 463 ---
19 
 
 
Uhuru Tribunal on Reparations 
 
November 14-15, 2003 Testimony  
by Bonnie Kerness 
pressed nationalities, including the fact that slavery is 
mandated in prisons by the 13 th Amendment of the US 
constitution.  Prison slavery in the form of involuntary 
labor is real. Any discussion of reparations has to include 
revision of that Amendment. 
 
I’d like to share with you some of the voices that I hear 
during my day. The first two are from youngsters who 
have spent time in juvenile detention. These babies de-
scribe a system in which parents have no say so over 
what happens to their children and a system which pre-
pares them for a future of imprisonment. 
  
“I went in when I was 14. They have what they call an 
MCU there, and it’s like the “hole” in a regular prison. 
Kids that fight go in there. If you refuse they come and 
get you. You get a shower once a week and they even 
bring the food to you. It was so cold. “ 
 
“I heard people scream, yell and holler. I saw boys get 
strung out on meds. The food is mostly Sloppy Joe’s and 
one cup of water. They make you take sleeping stuff in 
the needles. They used pepper spray on this girl who was 
fighting one time. They sprayed her directly in her 
mouth and she couldn’t breathe . They kept hitting her. 
We kept telling them that she had asthma, but they 
wouldn’t listen”.  
 
On Mothers Day in Elizabeth, NJ, Eddie Sinclair, Jr. 
hung himself in the Union County Youth detention facil-
ity; Eddie was 17 and had stolen a bicycle. He had 
missed an appointment with his parole officer, was 
picked up and locked in isolation. It is not irrelevant that 
Eddie’s father is African and his mother is Puerto  
Rican.  
 
The treatment of imprisoned juveniles in this country 
violates international human rights law. The US has been 
cited by the World Organization Against Torture as vio-
lating UN Convention on the Elimination of Racial Dis-
crimination and the UN Convention Against Torture. 
Any discussion of reparations has to include the reversal 
of youth being tried and punished as adults. We must 
also reverse “zero tolerance” policies where children are 
concerned. Children often learn by making mistakes. If 
their mistakes are punished with permanent sanctions – 
no room is left for them to  change or grow. We can’t 
escape the similarities with chattel slavery here as well. 
Not only are these children taken from their families, 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
 Since 1975, I have been a human rights advocate on 
behalf of prisoners throughout  the country. I coordinate 
the Prison Watch Project for the American Friends Ser-
vice Committee. Having been an activist, community 
organizer and  human rights advocate for over 40 years, 
I see a glaring connection between the broken promise 
of reparations and prison cag es filled to bursting with 
young oppressed people who are denied the kind of start 
in life that youngsters of other nationalities have.  
 
I work with Black and Puerto Rican youth in Newark 
who tell me that the police feel like an occupation army 
as if inner cities were militarized zones. They speak 
about the school system being the feeder to filter young 
people of oppressed nationalities into youth detention, 
jails and prisons where those bodies are suddenly worth 
a fortune. People say that the criminal justice system 
doesn’t work. I’ve come to believe exactly the opposite 
– that it works perfectly, just as slavery did, as a matter 
of economic and political policy.  
 
I don’t believe that it is an accident that people who are 
perceived of as economic liabilities have sud-
denly been turned into a major economic asset. 
That young oppressed child who this country 
labels worthless to the economy suddenly gener-
ates 30 thousand dollars a year once trapped in 
the criminal justice system. The expansion of 
prisons, parole, probation, the court and police 
systems has resulted in an enormous bureauc-
racy which has been a boon to everyone from 
architects, plumbers, and electricians to food 
and medical vendors – all with one thing in 
common – a pay check earned by keeping hu-
man beings in cages.  The criminal justice sys-
tem is a lucrative business with a large and 
growing middle class of all nationalities being 
paid a lot of money for containing mostly poor 
people in cages in human warehouses. Not 
unlike the era of chattel slavery, there is a class 
of people dependent on bodies of color as a 
source for income.   
 
In the US criminal justice system, the politics of the po-
lice, the politics of the courts, the politics of the prison 
system and the politics of the death penalty are a mani-
festation of the racism and classism which governs the 
lives of all of us. Every part of the criminal justice sys-
tem falls most heavily on the poor and people of op-


--- PAGE 464 ---
20 
  
they loose their chance at an equitable future. 
 
I also want to share the voices of adult prisoners, which 
are haunting testimonies of torture being committed in US 
prisons:   
  
From Utah State Prison:  “John was directed to leave the 
strip cell and a urine soaked  pillow case was placed over 
his head like a hood. He was walked, shackled and 
hooded to a different cell where he was placed in a device 
called “the chair”….he was kept in the chair for over 30 
hours resulting in extreme physical and emotional suffer-
ing.” 
 
From Florida, “during the struggle jailers shocked the 
prisoner multiple times with stun guns. Inmates who wit-
nessed his death estimate that he was shocked between 
eight and twenty times. The medical examiner put it at 22 
times….” 
 
A woman in Texas writes “the guard sprayed me with 
pepper spray because I wouldn’t take my clothes off in 
front of five male guards. Then  they carried me to a cell, 
laid me down on a steel bed and took my clothes off. 
They left me in that cell with that pepper spray in my face 
and nothing to wash my face with.  I didn’t give them any 
reason to do that. I just didn’t want to take my clothes off. 
 
Some of the most poignant letters I get are from prisoners 
writing on behalf of the mentally ill – like the man in 
California who spread feces over his body. The guards’ 
response to this was to put him in a bath so hot it boiled 
30% of the skin off him. Practices such as the indefinite 
use of shackles and other mechanical restraints, and the 
administration of dangerous chemical treatments, or the 
practice of extended isolation puts the US in violation of 
United Nations Treaties and Covenants. These past years 
have been full of thousands of calls and complaints from 
prisoners and their families, describing inhumane condi-
tions including cold, filth, callous medical care, extended 
isolation sometimes lasting over a decade, use of devices 
of torture, harassment, brutality and racism. I have re-
ceived vivid descriptions of four point restraints, restraint 
hoods, restraint belts, restraint beds, stun grenades, stun 
guns, stun belts, tethers, waist and leg chains.  
 
The use of extended isolation has been a growing concern 
for many prison activists, on both sides of the walls. The 
reports coming in about the use of devices of torture have 
largely been from isolation units, which are called control 
units or supermax prisons, where there are few witnesses. 
In New Jersey, New Afrikan prisoner Ojore Lutalo was 
(Continued from page 19) held in the Management Control Unit at New Jersey 
State Prison in total isolation from February 1986 
through January 2000. One of the first people placed in 
that Unit in the 1970’s was Sundiata Acoli. Ruchel 
Magee has lived under these conditions in California for 
more than 30 years. Both Russell Shoats and Mumia 
have been living in Pennsylvania isolation units for over 
20 years. There are thousands of others as well.   
 
Many of us trace the development of control units to the 
tumultuous years of the civil rights movement when 
many activists found themselves in US prisons. Sensory 
deprivation was used extensively with imprisoned mem-
bers of the Black Panther Party, Black Liberation Army 
formations, Puerto Rican independentistas, member of 
the American Indian Movement (AIM), and white radi-
cals. In later years we found jailhouse lawyers, Islamic 
militants and prisoner activists  placed in extended isola-
tion. In 1978, Andrew Young who was the US Ambassa-
dor to the United Nations noted the existence of US po-
litical prisoners. Too many of those elders are still in 
prisons throughout the country over 25 years later and 
their release is imperative as part of reparations.  
 
Right now, the latest explosi on filling the isolation cages 
include youth of oppressed nationalities imprisoned as a 
result of the racist crack-cocaine laws.  Current efforts to 
expand the solitary confinement population involve the 
alleged spread of gang pr oblems in US prisons. This 
trend is being repeated throughout the country, resulting 
in the increased building of supermax prisons. In these 
gang prisons called Security  Threat Group Management 
Units, prisoners are called upon to renounce their “gang” 
membership – which is reminiscent of the witch-hunts 
during the McCarthy investigations in the 1950’s and 
FBI Counter Intelligence Program.  
 
If you are a youngster of an oppressed nationality in this 
country, and you are poor, should you get arrested which 
is a likely occurrence, bail will be set so high you be-
come an economic hostage and the “phrase innocent un-
til proven guilty” has no meaning. You will certainly not 
get a trial by a jury of your peers. You will be defended 
by a public defender who has a caseload so vast you can-
not be a priority. You will serve a sentence which is 30 
per cent longer than a Caucasi an would receive for the 
same crime. If you have seen the same thing happen to 
your father, your uncles, your cousins – if you look 
around at the broader picture of what is happing to men, 
women, youth and children of your nationality, it is not 
hard to conclude that an economic and physical genocide 
is being committed.  
(Continued on page 26) 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 465 ---
21 
 
 
The Honorable Silis Muhammad & The Lost-Found Nation Of Islam 
 
Pharoah Bush uses enchanters to block reparations for Blacks 
                                                                   by Minister Malik Al-Arkam 
to force Pharoah to release us.  
 
In recent years we have seen some of the worst floods, 
droughts, tornadoes and insect plagues manifested in the 
USA. Since 1998, the Honorable Silis Muhammad, 
whom we revere as the Prophet like Moses, has repeat-
edly testified before diverse U.N. bodies, including the 
Human Rights Commission, concerning the fact that the 
U.S. government has been blatantly violating U.N. cove-
nants ever since it joined the U.N. by practicing impos-
ing ethnocide and forced assimilation upon African-
Americans as a people. 
 
In March of 2002, Mr. Muhammad and his wife, the 
Honorable Misshaki Muhammad, the attorney general of 
the Lost-Found Nation of Islam, participated in a U.N. 
sponsored conference in La Ceiba, Honduras, in which 
Black delegates from North, Central and South America 
and the Caribbean chose the name “Afro-Descendants” 
to identify ourselves in our quest for Reparations in the 
international legal arena. And the U.N. accepted that des-
ignation.  
 
However, there was no mention whatsoever of this his-
toric event in the white mass media, including NBC, 
CBS, ABC, CNN, BBC, the New York Times, the 
Washington Post, the Boston Globe and others which do 
Pharoah’s bidding. That should not surprise us in the 
least. Moses taught us that our open adversaries can only 
exist by making true appear false and false appear true.  
 
In one of history’s supreme ironies, Mr. George W. Bush 
stole the presidency of the white world’s greatest bastion 
of power by denying the descendants of slaves their right 
to vote in a state controlled by his crooked brother. After 
ascending to Pharoah’s throne, he then appointed the 
first Blacks in U.S. history to serve in the lofty positions 
of secretary of state and national security advisor.  
 
Pharoah Bush’s goal was to trick Blacks both inside and 
outside of the country into thinking that he is fair and 
wants to see our people elevated. However, the trick is 
doomed to fail.  
 
When Blacks in South Africa denounced Mr. Powell as 
an Uncle Tom, when Mr. Harry Belafonte correctly iden-
tified him as a house Negro, and when Dr. Condoleezza 
(Continued on page 38) 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
A few prominent African-Americans have indeed sold 
their souls to the oppressive Caucasian government and 
power structure. The most influential and visible of 
these at this time are Secretary of State Colin Powell and 
National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice. When 
these misguided Blacks oppose Reparations for Afro-
Descendants and justify U.S. imperialism worldwide, 
they are fulfilling the role of Pharoah’s enchanters in the 
Scriptures.  
 
When Moses demanded that Pharoah let the long-
enslaved Seed of Abraham go, after four centuries of 
bitter bondage, Pharoah counte r-attacked on several lev-
els. He contemptuously denied the slaves’ demand for 
freedom and justice, saying in effect that there was no 
power on Earth or in Heaven that could force him to 
release them. After all, he viewed them as his property 
and he and his forefathers had dictated the terms of their 
existence for centuries. 
 
He also increased the burden upon the slaves, ordering 
them to “make bricks without straw.”  In addition, he 
called for “enchanters” from th e ranks of the enslaved, 
and offered them great riches and nearness to him - pro-
vided they would mislead their own people into remain-
ing under Pharoah’s control instead of following Moses’ 
advice to separate and return to their original homeland. 
 
We, the Muslims who follow the Honorable Silis Mu-
hammad, the consistent cham pion of Reparations for all 
Afro-Descendants in the Western Hemisphere, have 
been blessed by Master Fard Muhammad, the Honorable 
Elijah Muhammad and their Spiritual Son to grow into 
the knowledge that the Biblical and Quranic stories 
about Moses vs. Pharoah are not historical accounts, but 
prophecies which have come to pass and are still being 
actualized in the 20th and early 21st century right here 
in the United States of America. 
 
It is an actual historical fact that Black people in Amer-
ica are the only people in history who have been in 
bondage for 400 years in a land which is not ours and 
who have been robbed of our own language, religion 
and culture. It is also well documented that, like Moses 
in the Bible and Quran, the Honorable Elijah Muham-
mad demanded for 40 years that Pharoah’s government 
“let my people go.” He also repeatedly said that Allah 
God would plague America with terrible weather events


--- PAGE 466 ---
22 
  
New Panther Vanguard Movement’s Intercommunal Reparations Campaign 
and  
TTHEHE Q QUESTIONUESTION  OFOF A B A BLACKLACK P PLEBISCITELEBISCITE      
 
By Kwaku Duren 
http://www.globalpanther.com/ 
merous [perhaps considerably more than a hundred sepa-
rate] "tribes" and/or "nations " of peoples who have resided 
on the African continent for thousands, if not millions, of 
years. However, over the past 400 years we have, i think, 
been transformed also as a "people." i don't have a problem 
with identifying myself, or "us," as "indigenous" or 
"autochthonous" peoples; but are the "majority" of "us" 
conscious enough right now to do likewise? Clearly, one of 
the characteristics we lost between "slavery" and so-called 
"freedom in the USA" is our very "tribal" or "nationalist" 
identities or consciousness.  In other words, we lost our 
cultural, historical, and "indigenous roots." 
 
Unfortunately, at this particular time in history, collec-
tively we don't even know, or cl aim, these roots. This real-
ity [or "state of mind"] poses a real challenge to 
"reparationists" among Africans living in the USA. As a 
long-time "reparationist," and a scientifically-oriented 
revolutionist, I think that if we "wily-nilly" held a 
"plebiscite" tomorrow, nearly 85% of, "us" would "choose" 
to be just "good-ole Black Americans."  
 
Nonetheless, we believe that the demand for "reparations" 
by "Africans living in the USA"  and by the world's dispos-
sessed peoples ["indigenous peoples" and "neo-colonized 
nations"] is entirely just, right eous, and, many would add, 
"divine." But while those qualities are absolutely necessary 
for waging a protracted struggl e, to achieve ultimately a 
political "demand," they are not sufficient in themselves 
for achieving reparations. In the NPVM we think that our 
challenge as "reparationists" and/or "revolutionists" [I don't 
believe the roles are mutually exclusive] is to both provide 
"liberatory" education, mass advocacy [and other tactics 
designed to promote the participation of the people], com-
bined with lots of "revolutionary inspiration." Our primary 
objective is to develop, and promote, a sufficient majority 
of those "New Afrikans" [or "Black Americans"] to carry 
out their historical destiny [which we believe is to "lead" a 
global assault or "revolution" on the existing "world or-
der"]. I might add, in such a manner that will result in 
minimal loss of life, the actual  transfer, or "redistribution," 
of the wealth of the world, and ultimately, the conditions 
for "all power to the people" to become the reality. 
    
Lenin pointed out, and correctly so, that without a 
(Continued on page 38) 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
In the tradition of the BPP we have actually defined 
this "USA Imperialist State" as a "reactionary inter-
communalist" new-World -Order.  Whereas the con-
cept of a "world order" is acceptable as an appropriate 
term referring to the "new" socio-economic, political 
and cultural state of the world, and is often popularly 
applied without much difficulty to the practical reach 
of the entirely negative impacts of the daily operations 
of the major multi-national corporations, the concept of 
Intercommunalism was created as a way to begin de-
veloping a more exact definition, and analysis, of this 
"new world order," in which the USA happens, not by 
chance, to play an all encompassing and the predomi-
nant role; the beginnings of this "new world order" can 
be traced directly to the widespread destruction of most 
of Western and Eastern Europe, and the continued 
"looting" of the labor and wealth of the "indigenous 
populations" following the ending of World II.  Walter 
Rodney, in his book, How Europe Undeveloped Africa, 
gives a brilliant analysis of this process. 
   
  In any event, after this second "world war," the 
"nation" that was born in 1776, in particular, ceased to 
exist! One can say, and recognize, that the American 
"nation" only continues to exist in the minds of those 
who do not really see, or who choose not to see the re-
ality, that we do really live in a "world order" that has 
been fundamentally altered [i.e., "qualitatively" 
changed]. And when "things" change qualitatively, the 
"scientific method" [which is not exactly foreign to our 
ancestral roots] dictates that they be distinguished, or, 
in other words, we should recognize the necessity of 
the requirement for "redefinition," or the formulation of 
a "new name." Like all things, "Intercommunalism," 
has its basic characteristics, and its positive and nega-
tive manifestations. However, it was never intended to 
define a "people." It is simply a effort to properly de-
fine the "world order," so as to be better prepared to 
change it.  "New Afrikans" is a term that i respect, but i 
doubt that more than a few percent of "Africans living 
in the USA" would consciously apply the term to them-
selves, individually or collectively. As had been dis-
cussed previously, Africans residing in the USA [i.e., 
in its contiguous 48 states or within its "territorial 
boundaries," which literally cover no less than a 
"global" geography] have  "ancestral roots" among nu-


--- PAGE 467 ---
23 
 
 
              Voices From The Past 
Support For Reparations 
Malcolm X.    
 
“If you are the son of a man who had a wealthy estate 
and you inherit your father's estate, you have to pay off 
the debts that your father incurred before he died. 
 
The only reason that the present generation of white 
Americans are in a position of economic strength... is 
because their fathers worked  our fathers for over 400 
years with no pay... We were sold from plantation to 
plantation like you sell a horse, or a cow, or a chicken, or 
a bushel of wheat... All that money... is what gives the 
present generation of American whites the ability to 
walk around the earth with their chest out... like they 
have some kind of economic ingenuity. 
 
Your father isn't here to pay.  My father isn't here to col-
lect 
 
But I'm here to collect and you're here to pay.” 
 
             November 23, 1964, Paris, France 
 
President Lyndon Johnson  
 
"Negro poverty is not white poverty. Many of its causes 
and many of its cures are the same. But there are 
differences -- deep, corrosive, obstinate differences -- 
radiating painful roots into the community, and into the 
family, and the nature of the individual. 
 
"These differences are not racial differences. They are 
solely and simply the conse quence of ancient brutality, 
past injustice, and present prejudice. They are 
anguishing to observe. For the Negro they are a constant 
reminder of oppression." 
 
           1965 Howard University 
 
 
Martin Luther King, Jr. 
 
"It is impossible to create a formula for the future which 
does not take into account that our society has been do-
ing something special against the Negro for hundreds of 
years.  How then can  he be absorbed into the main-
stream of American life if we do not do something spe-
cial for him now, in order to balance the equation and 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Sojourner Truth 
 
“We have been a source of wealth to this republic.  Our 
labor supplied the country with cotton, until villages and 
cities dotted the enterprising north for its manufacture, 
and furnished employment and support for a multitude, 
thereby bringing a revenue to the government.  Beneath a 
burning southern sun have we toiled, in the canebrake 
and the rice swamp; urged on by the merciless driver's 
lash, earning millions; and so highly we were valued 
there, that should one poor wretch venture to escape 
from this hell of slavery, no exertion of man or trained 
bloodhound was spared to seize and return him to his 
field of unrequited labor. 
  
The overseer's horn awoke us at the dawning of day from 
our half-finished slumbers to pick the disgusting worm 
from the tobacco plant, which was an added source of 
wealth.  Our tears and blood have been sacrificed on the 
altar of this nation's avarice. Our unpaid labor has been a 
stepping stone to its financial success.  Some of its divi-
dends must surely be ours.   
  
Our nation will yet be obliged to pay; sigh for sigh, 
groan for groan, and dollar for dollar, to this wronged 
and outraged race.  What an awful debt when we con-
sider that interest will surely be added.  Does this nation 
not realise that the debt is still unpaid, the note not taken 
up yet?” 
 
quotation from 'The Book of  Life' by Sojourner Truth, 
written in around 1850  
 
President Taft 
 
“(The) government and the people of the United States 
are eternally indebted (to Black People)…  They brought 
that race into this country against its will.  They planted 
it here irretrievably.  They first put it in bondage, and 
then they kept it in  the ignorance that that bondage 
seemed to make necessary, under the system then in 
vogue.  Then they freed it, and put upon it the responsi-
bilities of citizenship.  Now some sort of obligation fol-
lows that chain of facts with reference to the people who 
are responsible for what that government did.”   
 
Howard University, Washington, D.C., May 1909


--- PAGE 468 ---
24 
  
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
equip him to compete on a just and equal ba-
sis?  What will it profit him to be able to send his 
children to an integrated school if the family in-
come is insufficient to buy them school 
clothes?  What will he gain by being permitted to 
move into an integrated neighborhood if he cannot 
afford to do so because he  is unemployed or has a 
low-paying job with no future?  In asking for some-
thing special, the Negro is not seeking charity.  He 
does not want to languish on welfare rolls any more 
than the next man.  He does not want to be given a 
job he cannot handle.  Neither, however, does he 
want to be told that there is no place where he can 
be trained to handle it.  Few people consider the 
fact that, in addition to being enslaved for two cen-
turies, the Negro was, during all those years, 
robbed of the wages of his toil.  No amount of gold 
could provide an adequate compensation for the 
exploitation and humiliation of the Negro in Amer-
ica down through the centuries.  Not all the wealth 
of this affluent society could meet the bill.  Yet a 
price can be placed on unpaid wages." (pp. 30 - 31) 
 
"Justice for black people will not flow into society 
merely from court decisions nor from fountains of 
political oratory.  Nor will a few token change 
quell all the tempestuous yearning of millions of 
disadvantaged black people.  White America must 
recognize that justice for black people cannot be 
achieved without radical changes in the structure of 
our society.  The comfortable, the entrenched, the 
privileged cannot continue to tremble at the pros-
pect of change in the status quo.  When millions of 
people have been cheated for centuries, restitution 
is a costly process.  Inferior education, poor hous-
ing, unemployment, inadequate health care--each is 
a bitter component of the oppression that has been 
our heritage.  Each will require billions of dollars 
to correct.  Justice so long deferred has accumu-
lated interest and its cost for this society will be 
substantial in financial as well as human 
terms.  This fact has not been fully grasped, be-
cause most of the gains of the past decade were 
obtained at bargain rates.  The desegregation of 
public facilities cost nothing; neither did the elec-
tion and appointment of a few black public offi-
cials." (p. 41) 
 
King, Coretta Scott and Jean Highland (1987) The Words of Martin Luther King, Jr  
 
(Continued from page 23) 
  
I CAN’T HEAR YOU  
 
By Turban A. Shabazz 
 
You can talk about Legislation talk about Education.  
You can talk about Grade School, High School and College. 
You can talk about degrees; B.As., Masters, P.H.Ds.  
About people who have mountains full of knowledge.  
You can talk about Integration, talk about Desegregation.  
You can even talk about Democracy.  
But, If your conversation doesn’t mention Reparations,  
you ain’t talkin about a doggone thing to me.  
I’ve been here, I’ve been through that American bull-crap too. 
I’ve been “educated”, I’ve been well-bred and well-read.  
They did not give me the tools in these classrooms, or these schools, 
to keep me from utterly goin out of my head.  
The things that I have learned only helped to get me burned. 
They didn’t help me when I got out of school.  
That is why I want to say that this system has to pay.  
I want my forty acres and my mule.  
For over three hundred years, of pain, blood, sweat and tears, 
they worked my folks and never gave them one thin dime.  
Yet, I have always paid for every mistake that I have made. 
Either by paying fines, or by serving out my time.  
My people struggled, worked and died; stripped of dignity and pride. 
While pickin tobacco, soy beans, rice, sugar cane and cotton. 
What makes me mad today, is since they’ve passed away,  
all of their work and labor seems to be forgotten.  
They were brought here on sad trips; on galleons and slave ships. 
How many who died has not been summed up yet.  
I want you all to know that there’s a debt that these folks owe. 
And, I’m gonna make sure that they do not forget.  
You can keep on telling me that I’m American and I’m free;  
that all of my troubles very soon will pass.  
How can that ever be when you keep provin unto me  
that all I’ll ever be is Second-class?  
Now, I don’t care about Integration. What I want is Compensation. 
I don’t care if you don’t want me to live near you. 
I will say this loud and strong. You can keep talkin all day long. 
But, If you ain’t talkin about Reparations....,I can’t hear you.      
 
6-15-2000


--- PAGE 469 ---
25 
 
 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 470 ---
26 
  
 
The United Nations definition of  genocide is a) the kill-
ing of members of a racial or religious group b) the caus-
ing of serious bodily harm to members of a particular 
group c) deliberately inflic ting on a group conditions of 
life calculated to bring about its physical destruction d) 
imposing measures intended to prevent births within that 
group and e) forcibly transferring children of that group 
to another group. 
 
If we use this definition, it is n’t hard to see how the mass 
imprisonment that is occurring fits that definition. Cou-
pled with data on high infant mortality, early death of the 
elderly, lack of the same medical treatment, opportunities 
and education that is afforded to whites, and the realiza-
tion becomes even more compelling. 
 
Oppression is a condition common to all of us who are 
without the power to make the decisions that govern the 
political, economic and social life of this country. We are 
victims of an ideology of inhumanity on which this coun-
try was built.  If we dig deeper into the US practices that 
I’ve talked about, the political function that they serve is 
inescapable. Police, the courts, the prison system and the 
death penalty all serve as social control mechanisms. The 
economic function they serve is equally as chilling. Many 
people with whom I work believe that prisons are a form 
of neo-slavery and economic slavery. The US prison sys-
tem echoes the dynamics of chattel slavery with eco-
nomic gain and social control being a priority.  
   
There is no question in my mind that reparations are due 
to peoples of Native and African decent. Our move for-
ward with reparations will take many forms and address 
many levels of what is due African people, and how this 
should be delivered. As we succeed in gaining money 
and land reparations, there remains a need for social 
change that is revolutionary in nature. We have to alter 
the core of every system that slavery, racism and poverty 
(Continued from page 20) 
(Continued on page 39) 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Saleem & Ivy’s 
NIA NIGHT KWANZAA 
CELEBRATION 2004 
CONGRATULATES 
N’COBRA 
Keep The  African Culture Alive  
Thank you for your support over  
 the years


--- PAGE 471 ---
27 
 
 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
N’COBRA  
National Coalition Of Blacks For Reparations In America 
National Office 
 
 
CO-CHAIRPERSONS:  
Dorothy B. Lewis  
Baba Hannibal T. Afrik 
 
December 2, 2003  
 
Sister Mashariki N. Jywanza,Co-Chair 
N’COBRA International Affairs   
Indianapolis, Indiana 46205  
 
Jambo (hello) Sister Mashariki,  
 
It is with great pleasure and pride that we congratulate you on being installed as Queen Mother of 
Fiare-Kpotame, Tefle, Volta Region, Ghana on December 17, 2003.  
 
Your dedication and service to Pan Africanism over the years has made an indelible impression on Af-
rican people, those at home and abroad.  
 
As co-chairperson of NCOBRA’s International Affairs Commission, you have demonstrated organiza-
tional solidarity with Reparations advocates in the Motherland and throughout the diaspora.  
 
We look forward to joining your extended family in a dynamic and righteous celebration upon your 
return to Indianapolis. May the ancestors continue to guide and bless your noble mission for our birth-
right of African Redemption and economic justice.  
 
In unity,  
 
 
 
 
Baba Hannibal Afrik                           Sister Dorothy . Lewis  
     
                             N’COBRA National Co chairpersons


--- PAGE 472 ---
28 
  
BOB BROWN FILE  REPARATIONS 
 LAWSUIT 
 
Landmark Reparations Lawsuit Filed in Chicago at the 
U.S. Northern District Court of Illinois, 219 South Dear-
born St., Chicago, Ill., on Wed., Jan. 7, 2004  
 
Vatican, Governments, Industries, Colleges Are Charged 
with Conspiracy and Crimes Against Humanity  
 
(Chicago --- Jan. 5, 2004) Bob Brown, co-director of Pan-
African Roots, filed a private attorney general class action 
lawsuit on behalf of all descendants of enslaved Africans 
in Africa and the African Diaspora, who were and are vic-
tims of the MAAFA (from 1435 to 2003) i.e. the Trans-
Atlantic slave trade, slavery, slave-like practices and con-
ditions, colonialism, segregation and apartheid. Chicago-
based and other entities that have not complied with the 
Chicago Slavery Era Disclosure Act passed by the Chi-
cago City Council in October 2002 were named in the 
lawsuit.   The media was invited to attend Mr. Brown’s 
press conference after he filed his federal lawsuit.  Ac-
cording to Mr. Brown, "This lawsuit is only the tip of a 
Some News From Around The Reparations Movement 
Movement. Let us make no mistake, we will get repara-
tions in our lifetime" states N'COBRA-Atlanta's secretary, 
Warren Green. 
 
"From sharing space with AIM and SistaSpace to being 
based in the West End, we want to be a part of the day- to-
day 'repair work' in our community. We want people to 
understand that our current struggles are directly related to 
our historic and continued oppression, which reparations 
seeks to address," added N'COBRA- Atlanta's other co-
chair, Librarian Akilah Nosakhere. 
 
"We want to not only work with community organizations 
in the West End, we also want to continue to be involved 
with organizing students in the Atlanta University Center 
around the issue of reparations. For me the fight for repara-
tions is about continuing the legacy of struggle that I was 
exposed to as a student at Morehouse and by grandmother 
who was involved in the Civil Rights Movement. It's our 
time, it's our turn," concluded one of N'COBRA's youth 
commission organizers, Shaka T. Barrett. 
 
For more information on N'COBRA and the Atlanta Chap-
ter call 1(866) 225-7351 or send an email to ncobraat-
lanta@onebox.com. 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                         Black Reparations Times 
N'COBRA New Officer Reception 
 and Open House - Atlanta 
 
Atlanta Chapter of N'COBRA; 906 Ralph D. Aber-
nathy Blvd. S.W. Atlanta, Georgia 30310; (866) 225-
7351;  email:ncobraatlanta@onebox.com 
 
The Atlanta Local Reparations Organization hosted a 
Community Open House and New Officer's Reception 
on Friday, January 16, 2004 from 6:00 pm to 9:00 pm 
at N'COBRA's local office located at 906 Ralph David 
Abernathy Blvd, 2nd Floor Office Suite. 
 
The N'COBRA local office is housed in "Our House", 
the home of Aid to Children of Imprisoned Mothers 
(AIM) founded by attorney Sandra Barnhill. Our house 
also houses SistaSpace Inc., a non-profit created to help 
African American girls matu re into confident African 
American women. "AIM has a history of service to our 
people in general, and to our  children in particular. So 
to be welcomed into a space that has been created to 
help heal our community further reinforces our resolve 
to obtain the resources needed in our community for 
repair, reparations," stated N'COBRA-Atlanta's newly 
elected co-chair, Attorney Mawuli Mel Davis. 
 
The Community Open House and New Officer Recep-
tion was hosted by the Chris Askew of WAOK 1380's 
morning show, Unwrapped. The event included a num-
ber of community activists, artists, business people, 
political and civic leaders.  Invited guests included Dr. 
Reverend Aaron Parker of Zion Hill Baptist Church, 
Minister Ray Muhammad of the Nation of Islam, Cathy 
Harris of CEADA, Dr. Akinyele Umoja of the Malcolm 
X Grassroots Movement Atlanta Chapter, Minister Ish-
mael Abdul-Salaam of Lost Found Nation of Islam, 
spoken word artist Tommy Bottoms, vocalist Katina 
Barnes, N'COBRA's Southeast Regional Representative 
Njere Alghanee and many others. Food was prepared 
by culinary artist Sundiata and music by Mausiki 
Scales and the Common Ground Collective. The events 
activities included a Silent Auction of donated items 
and services provided by businesses and individuals. 
Members of N'COBRA's new executive committee 
shared the meaning and vision of the chapter's mes-
sage: 
 
”Reparations: Resources for Repair. Our work is to re-
pair our community by connecting our community or-
ganizations, grassroots groups¸ and businesses into a 
collective and organized voice for the Reparations


--- PAGE 473 ---
29 
 
 
THE BIG SIT-DOWN – REPARATIONS 
 
NDABA III Comes To Houston  
 
On Saturday, March 20, 2004 the Local Action Com-
mittee for Reparations (LAC) and the Society for the 
Study, Preservation and Dissemination of the History 
of Texas Southern University will host the BIG SIT-
DOWN (NDABA III) for REPARATIONS at Texas 
Southern University Health  and Physical Education 
Arena (corner of Wheeler & Ennis, Houston, Texas) at 
7:00pm (Doors Open 5:00pm). The National Town 
Hall Meeting and Report to the People is FREE and 
open to the public. The NDABA or Big Sit-Down is a 
process designed to bring people of African descent 
together in unity around the demand for full and com-
plete reparations. A series of  
NDABA gatherings in other cities have focused on 
unification and information sharing of many forma-
tions pushing the reparations demand.  People will get 
a full understanding of reparations and the many dif-
ferent tactics being employed to press this righteous 
call. 
 
For More Information Contact: NBUF (713) 942-0365
  
massive storm that is yet to come! African People 
worldwide, demand remedy, relief, reparations and 
repatriation. Victory is inevitable!" Bob Brown, Plain-
tiff, is an organizer and researcher for 40 years in the 
student, human rights, Black Power, national libera-
tion, Pan African, and peace movements.  
 
Defendants include: The Vatican, the Society of Jesus 
and the Catholic Church worldwide; the United States, 
British, French and Spanish Governments; the Ship-
ping, Gun, Sugar, Tobacco , Cotton and Textile, Min-
ing; Banking, Insurance, and other Industries and 
Companies; and several Colleges and Universities.  
 
 
  For more information, please contact:  
Maurice Weaver 
 
773.750.0817 or paroots02@yahoo.com 
 
Pan-African Roots  
1019 O Street NW 
Washington, DC 20001 
MEMORIAL COMMEMORATION  
FOR THE COLFAX MASSACRE VICTIMS 
 
On Easter Sunday April 13, 1873 in Colfax, Louisiana, 
hundreds of Black People (Afrikans) were slain on the 
Grant Parish courthouse grounds and surrounding area 
by various elements of the Ku Klux Klan and Confeder-
ate veterans in order to maintain “white supremacy”, 
according to an inscription on an obelisk in the cemetary 
a few blocks from the courthouse which honors three of 
the culprits. 
 
THE COMMITTEE TO COMMEMORATE THE COL-
FAX MASSACRE VICTIMS 
 
are  sponsoring a weekend of activity to honor the mem-
ory of these ancestors on the 131st anniversary of this 
most trajic event. 
 
Saturday  April 10, 2004
 
 
Community Awareness Day & Celebration! 
 
3:30-7pm@ Venue to be announced 
 
Sunday April 11, 2004
 
 
Special Memorial Tribute  
 
1:30pm@Grant Parish Courthouse....main st. & hwy 8. 
 
For more information: 
 
Contact: Ms. Diana Kimble..318-627-2759 or Odinga 
Kambui..214-421-9828. 
 
Email: dianamae11@netzero.com      odinga@juno.com 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
African Diaspora Ancestor Commemoration 
Institute (ADACI)  sponsored N’COBRA 
Sunrise Spiritual Service.   Thanks


--- PAGE 474 ---
30 
  
over --the court will allow us to file an amended com-
plaint.   Below is an article that gives a great status up-
date. 
  
In spite of the Court's miscarriage of justice, our team --
 plaintiffs, lawyers, and the grassroots community -- are 
all in good spirits and re main optimistic about our 
chances of winning this battle against tainted corpora-
tions.   
  
Thank you to those of you who have been showing your 
support for this effort, and those of you who are keeping 
the public educated about the case.  You are truly appre-
ciated! 
  
Be well, 
Deadria Farmer-Paellman 
917-365-3007 
  
Please visit the Reparations Now! petition at: http://
www.ipetitions.com/campaigns/ReparationsNow/ 
 THE NATIONAL REPARATIONS  
CONGRESS 
 
WHEN:  May 28-30, 2004 
 
WHAT: A gathering of repa rations activists—those 
doing the work  and getting the reparations work 
done 
 
WHY:   To meet and debate, discuss, and dialogue 
among and between ourselves about what is and is 
not working in our active pursuit of reparations for 
Blacks in the U.S.A.;  to share successful strategies; 
to agree on accepted guidelines and principles for 
the Reparations Movement; to establish a communi-
cations network for accurate, up-to-date information 
on the progress of the Movement; and to join forces 
nationwide to win this struggle. 
 
WHERE: Compton College, 11111 East Artesia 
Boulevard, Los Angeles/Compton, California 
 
WHO:    African and Afri can descendant delegates 
of reparations oriented organizations, and individual 
reparations activists 
(Continued on page 38) 
SLAVERY LAWSUIT DISMISSED:  
DESCENDANTS PROMISE IT'S ONLY 
ROUND ONE 
 
Greetings All, 
  
By now you may have heard that our reparations law-
suit was dismissed in court this Monday "without 
prejudice".  What this means is that this battle is not 
Some News From Around The Reparations Movement 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                         Black Reparations Times 
REPARATIONS AND EMPOWERMENT 
FOR  AFRICAN AMERICANS 
 
By Jihad Abdul-Mumit  
 
The “Reparations and Empowerment for African 
Americans” program held on Saturday, December 6, 
2003 at the Virginia Commonwealth University was 
sponsored by FOR OUR CHILDREN PRODUC-
TIONS ( a Muslim owne d and operated production 
company that sponsors such events, and also plays and 
film/documentary on the condition and lives of Afri-
cans, Muslims and African Americans) and the MSA of 
VCU.  The program was directed toward the African 
American community of Richmond, Virginia to coura-
geously break ground in introducing and explaining the 
need for reparations.  Guest speakers included Brother 
Hodari Abdul-Ali (Owner of Dar Es Salaam Bookstore 
in Hyattsville, Maryland and Executive Director of the 
Imam Jamil Al-Amin Action Network, Washington, 
DC), Muhammad Sharif (historian, author and Amir of 
the Sankore Institute, Pittsburgh, Pa.), and Jihad Abdul-
Mumit (playwright, author and former Black Panther/
BLA political prisoner). 
 
Although the attendance in the home of the Confeder-
acy was small the program had tremendous ground 
breaking repercussion, opening the door for dialogue, 
more programs and organizing and mobilizing around 
this most serious issue.  Count Richmond in! 
 
Quiet as it may be kept, Richmond already holds an 
esteemed mark in the struggle reparations for African 
Americans made by Richmond’s Randall Robinson’s 
best-selling book, “The Debt: What America Owes To 
Blacks,” released in January 2000.   The Muslims and 
concerned sisters and brothers from Richmond now 
open their arms in solidarity with all other sisters and 
brothers working in this righteous endeavor.


--- PAGE 475 ---
31 
 
 
Caucasians United for Reparations and Emancipation 
 by Rachel Naba 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                         Black Reparations Times 
Caucasians United for Reparations and Emancipation 
(CURE), founded and incorporated in 1992, gives a 
voice to white activists for reparations. Founded by Ida 
Hakim, CURE was formed largely on the recommenda-
tion from Black reparations leader Mr. Silis Muham-
mad.  Ms. Hakim had written to Mr. Muhammad asking 
what white people could do to make amends for the 
unspeakable acts that were fo rced upon enslaved Afri-
cans. Mr. Muhammad responded that white people 
could support the movement for reparations for slavery 
and its lingering effects, and support him in his work to 
bring the arguments for reparations to the United Na-
tions.   After receiving Mr. Muhammad's instruction, 
Ms. Hakim began to locate white people who were con-
nected in some way with the Black community, and 
soon CURE was formed.   
 
One of its primary goals is to back Black-led initiatives 
for reparations and to work  within white communities 
to win support for the movement.  “CURE is comprised 
of white Americans who have a passionate conviction 
that during the enslavement - and afterwards - our peo-
ple committed a horrendous crime against people of 
African descent, and that we owe reparations. We also 
know that slavery and the lingering effects of slavery 
are so far reaching that there will never be a way we can 
fully make up for it. As Whites, we do not see ourselves 
as deciding in any way what justice would look like,” 
writes Donna Lamb, CURE member. 
 
Many CURE members see themselves as continuing the 
work of the Abolitionists and are fighting not only to 
change how this society feels about reparations, but the 
very basis on which society is functioning. Members 
recognize that the Black Holocaust has not yet ended 
and that they have a duty and obligation to do whatever 
they can to ensure its death. CURE members are of dif-
ferent ages, from different  backgrounds, and hold var-
ied political and religious views, but they have all come 
together to call for both reparations and emancipation. 
 
At a reparations rally in Washington DC, CURE foun-
der Ida Hakim led the organization and encouraged 
members to voice their remorse about what Whites did.  
“The reparations movement is creating a spiritual revo-
lution. Our race of people, especially here in America, 
seems to have a very peculiar illness. Whites committed 
unspeakably savage and i nhumane acts against Black 
people during slavery, and these acts were justified with 
a belief in white superiority. Reparations forces us to 
examine whether we still feel this way deep within, and it 
offers us an opportunity to right ourselves while we work 
to right the wrong,” she told another activist during the 
rally. 
 
Why Reparations? 
  
Because it is just. Because it is right. Because this coun-
try was built on the labor, sweat and blood of slaves who 
were forced into a land, religion, culture and system that 
was not theirs. Perhaps these people say it best: 
 
“How unified and elevated can a people be when they 
have been thoroughly aliena ted from their own natural 
language and culture? Today, although 40 million Afri-
can-Americans earn $400 billion or more per year, mil-
lions of us live in slums, millions of us are addicted to 
drugs, millions of us are mal-educated and depressed, 
and, as a people we do not own one major airline, one 
major automobile producer or one major grocery chain. 
Sometimes our people wonder about why it is that rela-
tively newly arrived brown and yellow immigrant groups 
have been able to make much more progress than Blacks 
in certain areas of business (even though we have been 
here for centuries and even though we were allegedly 
freed in 1865). One of the pi votal reasons is that these 
groups (e.g. Chinese, Vietnamese, Arabs) are still in pos-
session of their mother tongues and still see their primary 
allegiance as something that is due not to America, but to 
their own nations and cultures. How can we as a people 
regain true freedom, justice and equality? How can we 
once again become a powerful and independent people? 
The Honorable Elijah Muhammad said: Accept your own 
and be yourself! Today Mr. Silis Muhammad is spear-
heading the legal battle for Reparations for all Black de-
scendants of slaves in America. Inside of that he has em-
phasized that the focus of Reparations is our restoration 
as a people. We will only achieve enduring progress 
when everything which was unjustly stolen from us is 
regained: our land, our govern ment, our religion, our lan-
guage and our culture. Hence, Reparations means much 
more than just money.”  Malik Al-Arkam, Boston 
 
“For 250 years we robbed millions of enslaved Africans 
of the wealth their labor created. The wealth that was 
rightfully theirs, which they should have been able to 
pass down to their descendants,  went instead into our 
pockets to be passed down ge neration after generation to 
our heirs, doubling and tripling in value all the way. That 
(Continued on page 32)


--- PAGE 476 ---
32 
  
 
TRF: What has been the response from the Black com-
munity to CURE? 
Hakim: Almost unanimously positive.  There was dis-
belief sometimes that CURE was intending to do good, 
as whites have a long history of interfering with Black 
movements. One of the reasons that we were looked 
upon favorably is that the leader who inspired the for-
mation of CURE is highly regarded, and not known as 
being a sell-out to whites. 
 
TRF: What has been the response from the white com-
munity to CURE? 
Hakim: Initially there was very little positive response 
from the white community. Today we have much more 
of a positive, receptive response.  Yet a large number of 
responses have been laced with anger and arguments 
against reparations. 
 
TRF: How successful has CURE been in opening the 
eyes of white people? 
Hakim: CURE has been a very keen and clear 
voice.  We allow white people to speak their mind, and 
we respond truthfully and with consideration.  If it is  
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
is the root cause of the huge economic disparity be-
tween Blacks and whites that exists in this nation to-
day. We also committed indescribable mental, physi-
cal, and spiritual brutality against these enslaved Af-
ricans in order to coerce th em into submitting to our 
exploitation. We robbed them of their identity as a 
people as we stripped from them their mother 
tongues, their traditional religions and original cul-
tures, and forced upon them instead European lan-
guage, religion and culture. We destabilized their 
social structures, relations between men and women, 
the family, and did everything we could to break their 
spirit, set one against another, and demoralize them 
as human beings. The heart-wrenching, far-reaching 
results of this, too, are very much with us now. What 
we did was truly a crime against humanity, and the 
massive damage it caused has to be repaired. In other 
words, reparations must be made!” Donna Lamb, 
New York City 
 
We were able to connect with CURE’s founder, Ida 
Hakim, and she graciously granted us a moment of 
her time and energy to answer a few questions. 
(Continued from page 31)


--- PAGE 477 ---
33 
 
 
                 Haiti Makes Its Case for Reparations - 
                                                               The meter is running at $34 per second. 
 
By J.Damu 
INTERNATIONAL   AFRICAN   REPARATIONS  MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL   AFRICAN   REPARATIONS  MOVEMENT  
French government’s efforts to extract 150 million 
French francs (which is equal to $21 billion today) from 
an economy the French knew couldn’t afford it, through 
the use of force. This is impermissible under interna-
tional law.”  
 
 “I can’t tell you how we plan to proceed legally,” he 
said by telephone. The Haitians will make their own an-
nouncement when they are ready he said. 
 
According to the booklet, wh ich will soon be published 
under the name of the Haiti Restitution Commission, 
following the 1804 revolution that expelled France, Haiti 
was divided into two districts, northern and southern, but 
was re-united following the death of Henri Christophe in 
1820. Under the new president, Jean Pierre Boyer, diplo-
matic notes began to be exchanged with various French 
functionaries on the diplomatic recognition of Haiti. 
 
Finally in 1825, France, which was being encouraged by 
former plantation owners to invade Haiti and re-enslave 
the Blacks, issued the Roya l Ordinance of 1825, which 
called for the massive indemnity payments. In addition 
to the 150 million franc payment, France decreed that 
French ships and commercial goods entering and leaving 
Haiti would be discounted at 50 percent, thereby further 
weakening Haiti’s ability to pay. 
 
According to French officials at the time, the terms of 
the edict were non-negotiable and to impress the serious-
ness of the situation upon the Haitians France delivered 
the demands by 12 warships armed with 500 canons. 
 
The 150 million franc indemnity was based on profits 
earned by the colonists, according to a memorandum 
prepared by their lawyers. In 1789, Saint Domingue (all 
of Haiti and Santo Domingo) exported 150 million 
francs worth of products to France. In 1823 Haitian ex-
ports to France totaled 8.5 million francs, exports to Eng-
land totaled 8.4 million francs, and exports to the United 
States totaled 13.1 million francs, for a total of 30 mil-
lion francs.  
 
The lawyers then claimed that one half of the 30 million 
francs went toward the costs of production, leaving 15 
million francs as profit. The 15 million franc balance 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
You’ve got to hand it to Haiti. Not only was it the 
world’s first country of enslaved workers to stand up 
and demand their freedom and independence; now they 
are the world’s first country to stand up to their former 
slavery-era master, France and demand the return of its 
stolen wealth. Everyone say “Amen.” 
 
Haiti’s president and other government officials claim 
their country was held-up at gunpoint in broad daylight 
in 1825 and now they want the admitted thief, France, to 
replace the stolen wealth to the tune of $21.7 billion.  
This, despite massive attempts, well documented else-
where, by the United States and world lending institu-
tions to destabilize and overthrow the democratically 
elected government of Jean Bertrand Aristide.  
 
Government officials also say due to forced efforts to 
hand over its wealth in a timely manner to France, the 
coerced payments so distorted and stunted the economy 
Haiti feels the effects this day. They also say due to 
those efforts, Haiti became sa ddled with a form of class 
oppression that resembles racism. 
 
In a soon to be published booklet provided to a U.S. re-
porter by the foreign press liaison to President Jean Ber-
trand Aristide, Haitian government officials dissect the 
1825 “agreement” that initially forced Haiti to pay to 
France 150 million francs in exchange for liberty.  
 
The booklet, as is Haiti’s restitution claim, is based 
largely on the research of Dr. Francis St. Hubert, a mem-
ber of the government’s Haiti Restitution Commission. 
 
“I did most of my research in New York at the Columbia 
University Library and the Schomburg Center,” Dr. 
Hubert said by phone from Port au Prince.  
 
“We are pursuing this case from three different angles. 
We are doing publicity and educational campaigns. We 
are pursuing our claims through the diplomatic commu-
nity and we are preparing a legal case,” he said. 
 
 “Haiti’s claim is not really for reparations for slavery,” 
said Ira Kurzban, Miami immigration attorney and 
Haiti’s chief counsel in the U.S “but for restitution spe-
cifically that happened in 1825.  It is based on the


--- PAGE 478 ---
34 
  
INTERNATIONAL  AFRICAN  REPARATIONS   MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL  AFRICAN  REPARATIONS   MOVEMENT  
torical Underpinnings,” the Rural Code laid the basis for 
the legal apartheid between rural and urban society in 
Haiti. With the Rural Code, the economically dominant 
class of merchants, government officials and military 
officers who lived in the cities legally established them-
selves as Haiti’s ruling class. 
 
Under the Rural Code agricultural workers were chained 
to the land and allowed little or no opportunity to move 
from place to place. Socializing was made illegal after 
midnight and the Haitian farmer who did not own prop-
erty was obligated to sign a 3, 6 or 9 year labor contract 
with a large property owner. The Code also banned 
small-scale commerce so that agricultural workers would 
produce crops strictly for export. 
  
The Haitian Rural Code was all embracing, governing 
the lives not only of farmers but of children as well. 
 
The Rural Code was specifically designed to regulate 
rural life in order to more efficiently produce export 
crops with which to pay the indemnity. The taxes levied 
on production were also used predominantly to pay the 
indemnity and not to build schools nor to provide other 
social services to the generators of this great wealth, the 
peasants. 
 
Leading Haitian activists in the U.S. claim between 1804 
and 1990, when President Aristide was first elected, a 
grand total of 32 high schools were built in Haiti, all 
within urban settings.  Since then more than 200 have 
been built, they say, most in the countryside.  
 
To this day the discrimination between rural and urban 
areas takes the form of color discrimination by light 
skinned blacks toward darker skinned blacks and it re-
mains intense. 
 
St. Hubert and the national bank compute the exact 
amount Haiti is demanding from France as 
$21,685,135,571.48 at 5 percent annual interest.  
“France is getting off easy,” St Hubert told a U.S. news-
paper. If Haiti charged 7.5 percent interest on the money, 
“France would owe $4 trillion today and much more to-
morrow. 
 
“The French can debate whether they want to pay as 
long as they like,” he said, “but at 5 percent interest it 
will cost them $34 per second.” 
 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
was multiplied by ten (ten years of lost revenues for the 
French colonists due to the war for liberation) which 
coincidentally totals 150 million francs, the value of 
exports in 1789. 
 
To make matters worse for Haiti the French anticipated 
and planned for Haiti to secure a loan to pay the first 
installment on the indemnity. Haiti was forced to bor-
row the 30 million francs from a French bank that then 
deducted the management fees from the face value of 
the loan and charged interest rates so exorbitant that 
after the payment was completed, Haiti was still 6 mil-
lion francs short. 
 
The 150 million franc indemnity represented France’s 
annual budget and ten years of revenue for Haiti. One 
study estimates the indemnity was 55 million more 
francs than was needed to restore the 793 sugar planta-
tions, 3117 coffee estates and 3,906 indigo, cotton and 
other crop plantations destroyed during the war for in-
dependence. 
 
By contrast, when it became clear France would no 
longer be in a position to capitalize on further west-
ward expansion in the Western hemisphere, they 
agreed to sell the Louisiana Territory, an area 74 times 
the surface area of Haiti, to the U.S. for just 60 million 
francs, less than half the Haitian indemnity. 
 
Even though France later lowered the indemnity pay-
ment to 90 million francs, the cycle of forcing Haiti to 
borrow from French banks to make the payments, 
chained the Black nation to perpetual poverty. Haiti did 
not finish paying her indemnity debt until 1947! 
 
According to the Haitian government’s reparations 
booklet the immediate consequence of the debt pay-
ment on the Haitian population was greater misery. The 
first thing President Boyer did to help pay the debt was 
to increase from 12 to 16 percent all tariffs on imports 
to offset the French discount.  
 
The next step Boyer took was to declare the indemnity 
to be a national debt to be paid by all the citizens of 
Haiti. Then he immediately brought into being the Ru-
ral Code. 
 
By Haitian First Lady Mildred Aristede’s account in 
her book “Child Domestic Service in Haiti and its His-
(Continued from page 33)


--- PAGE 479 ---
35 
 
 
Reparations In Repairing The Damage 
 
By Ras Tyehimba December 25, 2003  
INTERNATIONAL   AFRICAN  REPARATIONS   MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL   AFRICAN  REPARATIONS   MOVEMENT  
new world, forcing them to undergo deliberate and bru-
tal processes of dehumanisation and brainwashing. As a 
result, Afrikans both on the Continent and in the Dias-
pora have become disconnected from their true self, 
forced to function in systems rampant with racism, gen-
der discrimination, poverty, self-hate, drugs, crime, 
mis-education and white supremacy. Bombarded by a 
conglomeration of the aforementioned forces, many 
have grabbed (or in many cases forced to grab) onto a 
very Eurocentric form of Christianity, and indeed a very 
Eurocentric way of life that has transformed many 
many individuals into igno rant house-slaves, burying 
their heads in the dregs of Western civilization. It is a 
fact that Afrikan enslavement was sanctioned in the 
name of ‘converting the heathens to Christ' and the very 
first slave ship was even named the S.S. Jesus Christ.  
 
Reparation is not solely about money, not at all, it's 
about transferring technological resources and expertise 
to those that have been downtrodden by the technologi-
cally minded countries that have sought to rule the 
world with their superior armaments. Reparation is 
about putting mechanisms in place to provide equal op-
portunities to those that have laboured long and hard 
(without just reward) to build up what is known today 
as Western Civilization. In recent times, the Maori peo-
ple, survivors of the Jew ish Holocaust Native Ameri-
cans, Aboriginal peoples, Jap anese Americans, Korean 
sex-slaves, have all received some sort of Reparation 
for grave injustices that have  been meted out to them. 
The Afrikan Holocaust on the other hand, despite being 
far more damaging, brutal and long lasting has yet to 
receive any favorable redress from the countries that are 
responsible for these atrocities against humanity. In fact 
most countries haven't even recognized the Afrikan 
Holocaust as being a crime against humanity. Is it be-
cause Afrikan people are not seen as being part of hu-
manity?  
 
No amount of money could ever quantify the damage 
that was done, and no amount of compensation will be 
able to fully repair the trauma that has resulted. How-
ever, Reparations will help to provide new opportunities 
for growth and help bridge the disparate gap between 
rich developed countries and poor Afrikan countries 
that have suffered immensely because of the underde-
velopment forced upon them by European power. If for 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
All across the world, from Latin America, to the US, to 
Europe, to the Caribbean, to Africa and Asia, the roll 
call of Globalisation echoes, heralding the growing 
wealth of developed countries and the increasing eco-
nomic strain and exploitati on faced by developing and 
underdeveloped countries. The overwhelming debt 
faced by a lot of developing places them deeper in ser-
vitude to the IMF, the World Bank, and imperialistic 
‘developed countries'. Big Multi-national Corporations 
are the order of the day, siphoning resources including 
raw materials and cheap labour from the cash-strapped 
developing countries. It has been a little more than 500 
years since the first slave ship sailed from Afrika, and 
now Afrikans all across the globe are becoming more 
explicit and proactive in their struggle to obtain repara-
tions for the past injustices that have been meted out to 
Afrikan people 
 
Reactionary elements even within the black commu-
nity often jeer and scathingly ask: why should repara-
tions be paid. To those that choose to overlook and 
ignore the Afrikan Holocaust, I have this to say: the 
enslavement of Afrikans was a crime against humanity 
and international law recognizes the moral and legal 
obligations of those who commit crimes against hu-
manity to pay reparations. Slavery and colonialism has 
wreaked havoc across the globe especially in Afrika 
which is the richest continent in the world. This twin 
force has been responsible for the mass material wealth 
of Europe and America. Their wealth and Industriali-
zation has been gotten from the inhumane exploitation 
of Afrika's resources, both natural and human;it has 
been gotten from the blood, sweat and tears of millions 
and millions of Afrikans. Colonialism has wreaked 
havoc on the social structure of continental Afrika, 
stealing and killing skilled craf tsmen, leaders, farmers, 
healers, making Afrikan villages unable to cope with 
the challenges of day to day life. Precious Minerals, 
mines, fabulous treasures, breathtaking artifacts, rich 
land has all been dispossessed from the indigenous 
Afrikans who have been existing in their high cultures 
for thousands and thousands of years before the com-
ing of the Europeans 
 
The process of colonialism which included chattel 
slavery and the slave trade, uprooted indigenous Afri-
kans from their homes and transplanted them in the


--- PAGE 480 ---
36 
  
DO WE HAVE THE RIGHT TO DUAL CITIZENSHIP IN GHANA? 
 
By Garadina Gamba 
Afrikan United Action Front – Reparation Committee 
INTERNATIONAL   AFRICAN   REPARATIONS  MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL   AFRICAN   REPARATIONS  MOVEMENT  
 
I don’t wish to sound as if there is no hope has there are 
signs that the so-called educated classes are beginning to 
see the writing on the wall. I have added an article from 
the Daily Graphic to show that while the children of the 
stolen are fighting the never ending war there are those 
who hear the call of the drums. Nana Kwadwo O Akpan 
we hope Ghana listens. The article is quoted here in full.   
 
“In 2001 following the successful conclusion of the 
marking the fifth anniversary of the fourth republic, par-
liament, the legislative arm of government, was faced 
with a number of contentious, yet crucial issues. 
 
Among these were whether to propose an amendment to 
the earlier enacted law on citi zenship to include Africans 
of the Diaspora, there by enabling them to acquire citi-
zenship of Ghana in addition to maintaining the national-
ity of the country of their birth. 
 
Dual nationality, for descendants of Africans born in the 
Diaspora as the direct result of the Trans-Atlantic Slave 
Trade, is an issue, which has long consumed the attention 
of many persons from this historically unique group. 
 
The issue of African citizensh ip comprised part of the 
complex set of motivating factors, which led Henry Syl-
vester Williams, W.E.B Du-Bois and George Padmore to 
the worldwide pan-African movement. Indeed, dual na-
tionality was at the base of the dreams of many Africans 
in Diaspora as they lend their human and financial re-
sources to help defeat colonialism throughout Africa, for 
they felt their citizenship had never been legally revoked. 
 
It must also be stated that during the period immediately 
prior to the year 2000, many statements by African gov-
ernment officials had given encouragement to Diasporan 
who believed that such statements demonstrated that at 
long last African leaders had recognised the cultural and 
economic benefits to be de rived from granting citizen-
ship     to Africans of the Diaspora. 
 
Despite the foregoing, to fully understand the plea of Af-
rican of the Diaspora to once again be recognised as citi-
zens of Africa and of Ghana, and consequently to be ex-
tended the status of duel citizenship, one must first under-
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
The concept of reparations is one much misunderstood, 
most people think of money or some form of making 
good of the wrongs done to us. On the continent of Af-
rica the main thought is of debt cancellation. 
 
The real question is how do we put right that which was 
broken. In the crime that is called the “Trans-Atlantic 
Slave Trade,” the first crime was murder and the second 
was the theft of people. As we cannot bring back the 
dead, the people who where stolen and displaced should 
be allowed to reconstruct there lives, this would mean 
the right to choose whether or not they wanted to be 
citizens of the country they found themselves in. In ef-
fect this means no reparations without the right of repa-
triation. Repatriation is the right of every Diasporan 
African who has not chosen to given up their right of 
citizenship of an African country. To deny this is to 
continue the crime and to become an accessory to the 
crime. 
 
    For me the question has always been do those in the 
motherland understand our wish to return home. Before 
I arrived in Ghana I like so many others had been lead 
to believe that we had the right of dual nationality. It 
seems that it has been under consideration from the first 
day of Ghana’s in-dependence.  It is sad to see that no 
African leader has had the courage to truly abolish slav-
ery in all its forms, and to once again practice the cul-
ture that lead us to create the first civilisations of the 
world. To once again see our self as God, to see that all 
things are done by our will. To be able to see beyond 
the short term, beyond self, beyond a bank account, be-
yond the dictates of the IMF, World Bank, UN, US or 
EU. To be able to see its people and the wealth of 
knowledge and experience we have gained in a five 
hundred year war of survival in the west. To welcome 
home the children of the stolen to understand that our 
futures are tied together by bonds of blood that can 
never be broken. 
 
Or should African leaders just be selfish and do what is 
in the best interest of African nations and their people 
as the return of African from the Diaspora would boost 
the knowledge base and also solve the financial prob-
lems of the first country to make the move.


--- PAGE 481 ---
37 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL   AFRICAN  REPARATIONS  MOVEMENTINTERNATIONAL   AFRICAN  REPARATIONS  MOVEMENT  
ing the conditions of culture for the majority of the peo-
ple of the world, including those of Africa. Observe the 
effects of the promotion of globalization, and;  
 
  * Since being freed of colonial rule, the economies of 
African countries, with only a few exceptions, have de-
clined in terms of real growth in virtually all sectors rela-
tive to other economic regions of the world. 
 
Though the reasons for this decline are varied and nu-
merous, it is primarily a result of the colonial “self-
limiting vision” which Africans inherited and have not 
yet agreed to reject. It is an unflattering vision, which 
portrays Africa as follower rather than leader and as beg-
gar instead of provider.” 
   
In this vision Africa is seen meekly accepting the defini-
tions and development priorities given to it by interna-
tional funding agencies while refusing to question 
whether such pre-packaged images are indeed in Africa’s 
long-term development interest.  It is vision of Africa 
estranged from itself, its people scattered throughout the 
world, and superficially divided into antagonistic, ethnic, 
geographic, linguist and historical groups.  This vision is 
manufactured, packaged and marketed from outside Af-
rica. Far too many of Africa’s leaders have both enticed 
and then consumed by this vi sion, so much so that Af-
rica’s development policies have become as indistin-
guishable from this vision as their economies have be-
come indistinguishable from the many “white papers” 
promoted by foreign governments that seek to ensure 
Africa’s continued dependency. 
 
The Garveytown project 
 
The Garveytown project is in the process of setting up a 
living shrine to all the Africans who died during the 
Maafa and those who survived. 
 
We are appealing to all of the sons and daughters of the 
stolen Afrikans to send any item that represent the sur-
vivals of the Afrikan family. The calls for memorialising 
have now been answered.  Now do your part. 
  
Garveytown can be contacted on   00233 (0) 27 7446596 
or 00233 (0) 24 851 427 
 Email garadina@garveytown.com or 
niikojo@garveytown.com  
Address P.O. Box ml 359  
 Mallam, Accra, Ghana  West Africa 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
stand the significance and impact of the Trans-Atlantic 
Slave Trade. Therefore in part II of this paper provides a 
working summary of experiences and insight that lead to 
and result from that most unholy trade.   
 
It is a rarely disputed fact, that over a period of three and 
a half centuries, millions of Africans were captured, en-
slaved and forcibly expatriated from the shores of West 
Africa to countries in the north and western hemi-
spheres. 
 
Historians have conservatively put the number of Afri-
cans victimised by this slave trade at between 100 mil-
lion and 150 million. This forced expatriation is the larg-
est ever recorded and began around the year 1500 and 
was not officially abolished in Europe until 1815.  Al-
though this trans Atlantic traffic in human beings was 
originally conceived and promoted as an economic ven-
ture by various European governments and their agents, 
the potential profit from this trade attracted participation 
of American settler business interest and eventually 
gained the full support of its political establishment as 
well. 
 
By the first half of the 18h century, the evolution of lib-
eral philosophy in Europe persuaded countries on that 
continent to abolish the slave trade. Notwithstanding this 
belated European awakening to the horrors of chattel 
slavery, the countries of North and Central America as 
well as the white ruled island nations of the Caribbean 
and Antilles maintained thei r commitment to the slave 
trade well into the later half of the century. 
 
The land now known as Ghana, played a pivotal role 
during this period this fact has caused some historians to 
conclude that a sizable percentage of the Africans en-
slaved during this period were either Ghanaian or were 
transited through Ghana. 
 
In summary therefore, the principal lesson to be gained 
from this historical brief are: 
 
  * That centuries ago countless Africans were denied 
their freedom, were forcibly enslaved and then expatri-
ated from the land of their birth and; 
 
  * That profits gained from this trade were used by the 
Europeans and Americans to strengthen their economies 
and expand their power, to the extent that they now dic-
tate the terms of world trade and are increasingly defin-
(Continued from page 36)


--- PAGE 482 ---
38 
  
Rice rejected the concept of Reparations for her people 
on national television, it became more apparent that 
President Bush is only interested in elevating a few de-
scendants of slaves if they are willing to help keep the 
masses of their brothers and sisters in a state of subjuga-
tion. While Mr. Bush spends $1 billion per month on 
the war against terrorism, millions of Blacks are unem-
ployed and, with deep cuts in social services, are being 
told in effect to “make bricks without straw.” 
 
In conclusion, let me emphasize this: Pharoah Bush’s 
greatest fear is not the forces who are supporting Osama 
bin Laden or President Saddam Hussein. What he 
dreads most is the masses of Black people in the United 
States of America and throughout the Western Hemi-
sphere mobilizing politically, spiritually and financially 
to legally and peacefully obtain massive Reparations 
inside the United Nations. 
 
Email Minister Malik Al-Arkam at alarkam@webtv.net. 
(Continued from page 21) 
 
Black Law Students files brief:   
             TULSA REPARATIONS LAWSUIT 
                  
Hotep, 
 
I am proud to announce that the National Black Law 
Student Association and the University of Oklahoma 
Ada Lois Sipeul-Fisher Chapter of the Black Law Stu-
dent Association filed a brief today (12/14/03) in sup-
port of the lawsuit.   
 
Our time is coming!!!! 
 
Damario Solomon-Simmons, National Reparations  
                                               Director 
The National Reparations Congress 
 
CONTACT:  www.reparationunitedfront.org 
                        info@reparationunitedfront
 
                        (310) 967-5871 
(Continued from page 30) 
"revolutionary theory," there would, and could, not be a 
successful revolution. How many present day reparation-
ists recognize that without a "political theory" for caus-
ing the radical transformation of the "world order," i.e., 
the "actual redistribution" of the wealth of the world, the 
attainment of reparations in  the trillions of dollars re-
quired for "meaningful" reparations for the wrongs per-
petrated, without the inevitably bankruptcy of the USA 
Empire, and its multinational corporations, and that with-
out the development of new, truly global financial insti-
tutions, and, i might add, the demise of the USA 
as we know it, "genuine re parations" cannot, and will 
not, become a "reality." 
 
As we have stated in numerous forums, the NPVM 
predicates its "theory of revolution" on both the exis-
tence of this global moveme nt "demanding" reparations, 
in conjunction with a consciously determined process for 
achieving "genuine reconc iliation" among and between 
the world's peoples. As a certainly "distinct" people, Af-
ricans [Afrikans] living in the USA, who are in reality 
resident and "citizens" of this "make-believe nation," we, 
among all of the world's peoples, have the virtually 
unique distinction of not really having a real conscious-
ness of "nationhood," or for that matter "tribal conscious-
ness." But what better quality to lead a global movement 
based on the obsolescence of "nation-building" and even 
"nationalist sentiments." 
 
Whether we refer to this new world order as "reactionary 
intercommunalism," or "global USA dominance," the 
fact of the matter is that we don't even know [or have 
agreed upon collectively] how to even "identify" our-
selves [i.e., or we "Maroons," "Afrikans," "African 
Americans," "Blacks," "Black Israelites," "Bilalian," 
etc.]. But, this too, is not a new debate. 
 
We say whatever we decide to do, let's not just, right 
now, "call for a vote" until we are absolutely, or at best 
reasonably, certain that a majority of "us" still have our 
"wits about us," and, most importantly, are crystal clear 
in our vision of the destiny of those whom we prefer to 
refer to as "Africans living in the USA." 
 
Also, let us all remember; however defined, the "powers 
that be" are not prepared now,  and do not even want, to 
discuss the possibility that the various reparations de-
mands by African-descended peoples, and other Indige-
nous Peoples, are just and proper. The Third Decade UN 
World Conference Against Racism, etc., showed that to 
be, in fact, the situation we face. That is why "they" are 
very much aware of the "revolutionary" significance of 
(Continued from page 22) 
(Continued on page 39) 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times


--- PAGE 483 ---
39 
 
 
(D-FW) to carry the resolution in Austin. 
 
Months before the Baptist group made their request the 
coalition of black reparation leaders under the leadership 
of Africans & African Americans for Enslavement Repa-
rations had requested that Re p. Lewis sponsor a repara-
tion bill on their behalf. 
 
That bill, House Resolution HCR-28, is currently await-
ing passage before the State Affairs Committee where 
Rep. Lewis is a member. The bill calls on the Texas Leg-
islature to support US Congressional Bill HR-40 spon-
sored by Congressman John Conyers, Jr. (D-Mich) in 
Washington, DC. 
 
HR-40 calls on the US government to create a commis-
sion to study slavery and its affects on today’s blacks in 
America and to compensate blacks for centuries of suffer-
ing. 
 
Last year in Austin at the State Capital about 15 members 
of thereparation coalition spoke in support of HCR-28 
before the State Affairs Committee chaired by Rep. 
Kenny Merchant (R-Coppell). 
 
Representative Glenn Lewis is carrying both bills and will 
be available during the press conference to explain his 
support of both resolutions. 
 
Cities of Fort Worth, Houston, Dallas, Waco, Austin and 
San Antonio will have representatives attending the press 
meeting. 
 
Including Rev. S. C. Nash, President of the Statewide In-
terdenominational Ministerial Alliance (IMA) . Rev. Nash 
and his organization have b een long time supporters of 
black slavery compensation and the reparation movement 
on behalf of the church community. The IMA represents 
over 3500 churches in the state of Texas. 
(Continued from page 17) 
 
For more information please call Dr. Michael Bell, Sen-
ior Pastor of Greater St. Stephens First Church at 817-
929-6111 or Thomas Muhamma d, Founder of Africans 
& African Americans for Enslavement Reparations 
(A-AAER). 
 
Statement From National Black United Front (NBUF) 
and the Local Action Committee for Reparations (LAC) 
Houston, Texas Tuesday, January 13, 2004 
 
"As we in Houston prepare for a national gathering on 
the issue of reparations in March of 2004, it appears that 
the Texas Baptist Associati on has failed to fully grasp 
the scope and magnitude of the great and mighty de-
mand for full and complete reparations. It is clear 
that resolution HCR-28 captures accurately what the 
Texas State Legislature should pass at this stage. 
NOTHING less with do! We remain steadfast in our 
resolve to force the State of Texas to face truthfully 
it's past and present. THE STRUGGLE CONTINUES"  
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
the "demand for reparations," which they, in the hardest 
of their hearts, know all to well that it actually symbol-
izes that which they fear most, but have nevertheless 
been forced to consider its ramifications. 
When the people of the world finally achieve repara-
tions, and they will, on that day the obsolescence of 
"national boundaries" will be  popularly acknowledged, 
and widely practiced, along with the formal and equally 
widespread recognition of "new forms" of organizing 
"diverse communities" of the world's people. 
(Continued from page 38) 
gave birth to, particularly the criminal justice system. 
 
We must stop violating the human rights of children. We 
must alter the 13
th Amendment. We have to place a 
moratorium on prison construction and change the racial 
and economic profiling of arrest and sentencing prac-
tices.  Reparations have to include a focus on penal abo-
lition, which challenges the vi olence of the entire legal 
apparatus. We need to decriminalize poverty and mental 
illness. We must eliminate solitary confinement, torture 
and the use of devices of torture. We must support a vig-
orous monitoring of the police, court and prison systems 
with a citizen review process. We need to ensure voting 
rights for prisoners and ex-p risoners, and enhanced use 
of international law. Part of the dialogue on reparations 
has to include opposition to all of this on a more serious 
level. Until this happens, ne ither prison administrators 
nor local, state or government officials has to respond. 
Each of us needs to understand deeply and speak loudly 
about the connections between slavery and the criminal 
justice system.  
 
No real racial healing can take place until the US gov-
ernment takes responsibility for what it owes people of 
African decent. Reparations are not only about paying 
decedents of slaves for damage done but also a way for 
the country to humble itself before a great people whose 
sweat, blood, flesh and tears gave birth to so much of the 
wealth that exists in this country today. 
(Continued from page 26)


--- PAGE 484 ---
40 
  
elitist, to learn to speak the language of the grassroots 
community, and to join the grassroots  directly in their 
community struggles to improve education, health care, 
housing, employment, voting rights, the release of politi-
cal prisoners…etc. Many in the audience gave additional 
examples of how this coalition building work can and 
must be done if we are to mobilize the masses for repara-
tions. 
 
Kibibi Tyehimba, co-chair of the N’COBRA Legislative 
Commission and Milt McGriff, N’COBRA National Co-
ordinator of AYBP presented concrete plans for the fur-
ther development of N’COBRA’s impressive flag-
ship effort to lobby the US Congress relentlessly for 
the passage of HR40, the Reparations Study Bill in-
troduced by the Hon. John Conyers of Detroit, 
Michigan. Further, in r esponse to the advocacy of 
N’COBRA at-large national Board member, Herman 
Ferguson, the NE Region unanimously recognized 
the need of N’COBRA to work harder and more stra-
tegically for the release of our political prisoners and 
the region firmly committed to making the work to 
release political prisoners a high priority of its pro-
grammatic work. 
 
The regional meeting ended as it began with honor 
and praises to Rob Penny. Brother Penny came to the 
University of Pittsburgh as a direct result of the take 
over of the University of Pittsburgh by Black Stu-
dents in the early 1970’s who demanded Black Stud-
ies. When Brother Penny made his transition last 
year, he was a tenured Professor of Africana Studies 
at the University. He had co-founded with August 
Wilson, the Kuntu Repertoire Theater Workshop of 
Pittsburgh and was its artist in residence. In Novem-
ber 2003, he was inducted into the Gwendolyn 
Brooks National Literary Hall of Fame for Writers of 
African Descent. His last play Difficult Days Ahead in 
Blaze was directed by Dr. Lilly and played at Kuntu. His 
esteemed queen Timamu Penny, the noted poet and Univ. 
of Pitts. professor, Dennis Brutus, and a long list of fac-
ulty members as well as Prof. Penny’s most beloved cur-
rent and former students offered powerful words of honor 
and praise for Brother Penny’s life of unconditional sacri-
fice to educate and liberate the African mind, body, and 
spirit. 
 
Accordingly, Mama Timamu Penny, Dr. Brutus, the stu-
dents of the Africana Studies Department, and the N’CO-
BRA NE Region are committed to building on Brother 
Penny’s legacy as we now start to create the first N’CO-
BRA student chapter at the University of Pittsburgh. 
 
(Continued from page 16) 
example the digital divide is left to increase at the pre-
sent alarming rate, then the force of globalisation will 
have an even worse disastrous impact on the Afrikan 
economies. 
 
A proper understanding of history will reveal that 
Western countries will not pay Reparations to Afrikans 
unless their survival utterly depends upon it. In fact a 
lot of whites claim that since it was their ancestors that 
perpetuated the crimes against humanity, they (the pre-
sent White population) cannot be held accountable for 
compensating those disadvantaged... In making this 
outrageous claim they ignore one fundamental fact; that 
Western  
countries and 
their white 
populations 
has and is still 
benefiting  
from the ill 
gotten gains 
of slavery and 
colonialism. 
Reparations is 
a moral issue 
related inti-
mately with a 
wider move-
ment for 
equal rights 
and justice, 
and Western 
countries  
have shown 
time and time 
again that 
they are not motivated by morality, truth and justice, 
but rather by money and power. 
 
The US, one of the most racist countries in the world 
walked out of the World Conference against Racism 
because they were not prepar ed to deal expeditiously 
with the issues at hand. With  this in mind, the Repara-
tions movement must not take place within a vacuum; 
it must not be the main thrust of the Pan Afrikan Move-
ment. Allocation of scarce resources has to be a major 
concern of both Afrikans on the continent and those in 
the Diaspora. The main thrust of the movement and 
where the most resources should be allocated is in 
terms of the re-education of ourselves in the interest of 
reclaiming our divine identity. In reclaiming our iden-
tity and becoming more aware of ourselves, we will be 
(Continued from page 35) 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
Dr. Dennis Brutus


--- PAGE 485 ---
41 
 
 
My 40 Acres & My Mule 
 
There are some issues need addressing 
some sins that need confessing 
it seems I’ve been used like a tool 
For all these years I’ve worked 
yet I’m still being jerked 
Where’s my 40 acres and my mule 
 
The Pope confessed his dirt 
to the millions the Vatican hurt 
To the Jews who lost their lives in the holocaust 
but not once has he mentioned 
it’s slave-trading dimension 
or the 100 million African souls were lost 
 
Tell me how long can these nations 
continue their starvation 
of those on whose backs they were built 
How long will white lies 
flourish while a black dies 
Tell me, how much more blood must be spilt 
 
I’m tired of playing the fool. 
What happened to the golden rule 
Tell me, where are my 40 acres and my mule? 
Where’s my 40 acres and my mule? 
 
Ty Gray-EL  April 2000
 
in a better position to do what needs to be done in the 
interest of equal rights and justice. Where are the Afrikan 
schools teaching Afrikan history and the diverse range of 
culture that has been practiced on the continent for thou-
sands of years? Re-educating ourselves will put us in a 
better position to utilize the vast resources that we have 
already at our disposal and also the face the global chal-
lenge of surviving as an Afrikan people in these perilous 
times. Reparations must not become an excuse to forget 
our spirituality that has kept us alive throughtout chal-
lenging situations. We mus remind the world that no 
peace will ever be possible unless the injustices that have 
been perpetuated have been addressed in a meaningful 
manner. 
(Continued from page 40) 
Black Reparations Times 
 
 
In response to the growing momentum of the 
Reparations movement, th e Information and Media 
Commission is committed to disseminating timely 
information on issues related to our struggle for 
Reparations. Our new publication, "BLACK 
REPARATIONS TIMES" © 2003 will report news 
and information not only about N’COBRA’s work, 
but also the efforts of other Reparations advocates, 
nationally and internationally.  Your comments and  
suggestions are always welcome.  
 
You can also help by:   
 
1) providing items for possible publication such as 
articles, photos, etc; 2) volunteering professional 
skills (graphic arts, managing subscriptions & 
distribution, fundraising , etc.); 3) donating 
generously to this project, and 4)  identifying 
potential sponsors. 
 
Email: InformationMedia@aol.com 
Phone: 202.466.1622 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
C.U.R.E. 
 
possible to open the eyes of white America, CURE 
is one of the best organizations to help bring it 
about. 
TRF: What are some ways people can get in-
volved? 
Hakim: We invite participation through our web-
site, and in other ways depending upon the person 
and the community in which they live.  Persons 
should contact Ida Hakim at Hakimida@aol.com in 
order to get started. 
  
For more information on this organization, visit 
their website at www.reparationsthecure.org. But 
don’t stop there. Enlist your support. Become an 
activist and inspire real change within this society. 
Stand up to the powers that be and make sure that 
they know that we  demand justice and change. 
(Continued from page 32) 
For more information about Haiti or to learn what you 
can do to support Haiti please contact the Haiti Action 
Committee (510) 483-7481, write them at HAC, P.O. 
Box 2218, Berkeley, CA, 94702 or visit their website at 
www.haitiaction.org
. 
 
J.Damu is the acting Western Regional Representative 
for N’COBRA-National Coalition of Blacks for Repara-
tions in America. He can be contacted at 
jdamu@sbcglobal.net
. 
(Continued from page 34)


--- PAGE 486 ---
42 
  
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
National Coalition Of Blacks for Reparations in America 
 
 
 
PRINCIPLES OF UNITY 
 
As a collective of various organizations and philosophies, we will respect each other’s autonomy in organization 
and philosophy.   The central principles we unify and agree upon are: 
 
       1.  Our primary goal is to achieve Reparations for Africans in America; 
       2.  The so-called Trans-Atlantic "slave trade" was not trade but was in fact a Holocaust of Enslavement.  It  
 was morally wrong and a crime against humanity;   
       3.  We define Reparations as a process of repairing, healing and restoring our people; therefore we continue  
 our ancestors efforts to liberate us by focusing on repa iring, healing and restoring the personal, family, and 
             community damages that we suffered during the Holocaust of African Enslavement;  
        4.  Africans in America are due Restitution for the Holocaust of African Enslavement and its vestiges; and 
        5.  We support and work for the passage of HR-40, sponsored by Congressman John Conyers and other state 
             and local legislative initiatives.  
 
Reparations United Front  
 
        1.  Functioning as a "Reparations United Front," is critical to maintaining a unified public posture.  Members  
             of the Collective (organizations and individuals) agree not to attack each other, especially regarding  
              Reparations.  
        2.  In instances where there may be differences of opinion, members will emphasize their commitment to 
             Reparations, to minimize attempts to divide and neutralize the effectiveness of the Collective.    
        3.  The Collective may elect not to recognize those who fail to abide by the aforementioned principles of 
             unity. Everyone is encouraged to support the work of the Collective in ways most suitable for them, 
             whether inside or outside the Collective. 
 
We Believe 
 
We believe the Reparations Movement can empower African Americans to continue our task of gaining social, 
economic, and cultural parity and liberation for individuals, families and communities.  The movement provides an 
opportunity to address all issues impacting the Black Community by: 
 
        1.  Creating a path for self, family and community development and liberation; 
        2.  Providing a cause strong enough to unite Black People across socio-economic, and education barriers; 
        3.  Recognizing and assisting with  restoring the dignity of over 100 million Africans lost and sacrificed dur- 
             ing the Holocaust of Enslavement and one hundred years of lynching that followed; 
        4.  Providing an opportunity to expose the perpetrator of the Holocaust and educate the victims by creating  
             dialogue locally and nationally that thoroughly examines our collective oppression (and mistakes), and ex- 
             poses the perpetrator’s responsibility in creating our past and current social condition;  
        5.  Providing compensation for Black People locally and nationally; 
        6.  We believe our people are ultimately responsible for our collective achievement of social, economic, and  
             cultural parity and liberation.  Restitution will only assist in our recovery and building process.  The strug- 
             gle for Reparations is a sacred responsibility that must be assumed by African descendants in the Ameri- 
             cas; and 
        7.  We believe there can be no Reparations without mass participation.  Mass participation is essential to  
             achieving Reparations (repairing, healing and restoring Black People) and Restitution (receiving compen- 
             sation for the Holocaust and its vestiges).   
 
Issued by N”COBRA National Office June 29, 2002


--- PAGE 487 ---
43 
 
 
CONGRATULATIONS to the TRAIL BLAZERS 
 
HATS OFF to the forward thinking businesses that 
were the first to register with N'COBRA’s   
commitment to support the black community, justice, 
and the Reparations movement.  These are the first 
group of members supporting the BLACK FRIDAY 
MOVEMENT.  Be sure to buy from them. Join the 
BUY BLACK on FRIDAY campaign.  Get your Black 
Friday Palm Cards from one of these businesses and 
buy black every day. 
 
FLORIDA 
 
The African Violet,  Inc. 
P.O. Box  12627 
Gainesville, FL   32604 
Contact:   Delphine Jackson 
Ph.   352/ 335. 6161 
Fax.  352/ 335. 3737 
 
NEW YORK 
  
Southern Comforts 
483 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Nettie Paisley 
 
Zawadi Gift Shop 
519 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Lora Brown 
 
R & W Facility Care systems, Inc. 
485 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, New York 11217 
Wayne Miles
 
 
Indigo Cafe and Books 
672 Fulton St. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Tel: 718-488-5934
 
    
Lewis Gallery 
525 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Gwen Lewis 
  
Doe's Antiques 
442 Atlantic Ave. 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
718-858-6903 
4W Circle of Art & Enterprise 
794 Fulton Street 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
Contact:   Selma Jackson 
Ph.  718/ 875. 6500 
Selma4W@Searthlink.net 
 
Big Deal Books 
973 Fulton St. 
Brooklyn, NY 11238 
Phone# 718-622-4420 
Owner: David D. Mcleod
 
 
Harriets Alter Ego 
191 Flatbush Avenue 
Brooklyn, NY 11217 
 
Lion Heart Herbs,  
Natural Herbs and Spices from Jamaica 
676 Nostrand Ave.  
Brooklyn NY 11216 
718-778-3195 
 
WASHINGTON DC METRO 
 
YAWA Books & Gifts 
2206 - 18th Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20009-1813 
Contact:   Jacqueline Hawkins 
Ph.  202/ 483. 6805 
 
Dar Es Salaam 
4000 - 34th Street 
Mt. Ranier, MD  20712 
Contact:   Hodari Abdul-Ali 
Ph.  301/ 209. 0010 
Hodari2@Juno.com 
www.desbooks.com 
 
Heavenly Stitches 
512 - 24th Street, NE 
Washington, DC  20002 
Contact:   Tanya D. Claggett 
Ph.  202/ 390. 8806 
HeavenlyStitch3@aol.com 
 
 
 
 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
BLACK FRIDAYS CAMPAIGN


--- PAGE 488 ---
44 
  
INDIANAPOLIS, IN  
 
Zimbabwe Enterprise 
7874 Red Mill Dr. 
Indianapolis, IN  46226   
317/897-3626 
Contact Person: Zimbabwe Sankofa 
 
Sankofa Group 
4150 N. Carrollton Ave. 
Indianapolis, IN  46205 
317/923-3452 
Contact Person: Kamau Jywanza 
 
E. E., Inc. 
5341 Ashbourne Ln. 
Indianapolis, IN  46226 
317/545-5957 
Contact Person: Joe Epps 
 
B.M.D. Promotions 
609 N. Haugh St. 
Indianapolis, IN  46222 
317/281-4968 
Contact Person: Shereeta Lacy 
 
Mo Bev's 
3961 N. Blvd. Pl. 
Indianapolis, IN  46208  
317/536-0444 
Contact Person: Beverly Velasque 
 
Warm Spirits 
3539 N. Grant 
Indianapolis, IN  46218 
317/557-8990 
Contact Person: Rochelle Webster 
 
 
N’COBRA, the National Coalition of Blacks for 
Reparations in America, has launched a nationwide 
campaign based on the Kwanzaa principle of 
“cooperative economics.” N'COBRA's goal is to be a 
key mover in the powerful process of enabling the 
Black community to gain more economic control of 
our community. 
 
Contact:  BuyBlack4Friday@aol.com 
 
               202.291.8400 
N’COBRA, the National Coalition of Blacks 
for Reparations in America, has launched a 
nationwide campaign based on the Kwanzaa 
principle of “cooperative economics.” Our goal 
is to be a key mover in the powerful process of 
enabling the Black community to gain more 
economic control of our community. 
 
 
 
 
The Black Fridays Pledge 
 
We shall build and maintain our own business-street 
vending, retailing, wholesaling, and distributing, and 
profit from them together; 
 
We shall believe and act on the principle that our busi-
nesses are a service to the Black community; 
 
We shall affirmatively support meaningful efforts to 
uplift the Black community-spiritually, socially, cultur-
ally, economically and politically; 
 
We shall strive to offer the highest quality service and 
professionalism to our customers; 
 
We shall dismantle the myth that their ice is colder; 
 
We shall support Black people’s demand for full Repa-
rations for chattel enslavement, systemic racism/white 
supremacy, and the continuing present-day injuries to 
black people that have resulted. 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
BLACK FRIDAYS CAMPAIGN


--- PAGE 489 ---
45


--- PAGE 490 ---
46 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All natural  
all vegetarian grocery store  
 
Open 9 - 9 Mon - Sat 
11 - 9  Sun 
 
featuring  
 
“Source of Life” 
 juice and salad bar. 
 
Open 10:30 - 8:30 Mon - Sat 
          12:30 - 8:30 Sun 
 
AFRICAN-AMERICAN HOLIDAY ASSOCIATION (AAHA) 
since  
1989 perpetuates & preserves  culture 
through traditional & non- 
traditional holidays, celebrations & rituals  
 
*Holiday Services, Ceremonies, Rituals    
*Youth Entrepreneur Project (YEP)  
*Celebration Workshops, Lectures, Storytelling  
*Holiday Health Management  y Special Events    
*Black Love Day y  Unity in Diversity Day y 
    African American Holiday Expo On-Line 
 
Ayo Handy Kendi, Founder/Director     
P.O. Box 43255     Wash, D.C.  20001


--- PAGE 491 ---
47 
 
 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
“REPARATIONS AIN’T FREE” 
N’COBRA’s National Donation Drive 
  
 
FROM:  Dorothy Benton Lewis/Oravouche, National Co-Chair and  
                N’COBRA National Fund Development Committee 
 
TO:         All People Supporting Justice and Reparations 
 
 
An Urgent Call for Support  
 
The Reparations Movement needs you and your financial support.  “Reparations Ain’t Free.”  Our ancestors 
paid the ultimate price of suffering through 265 year s of slavery, and now those who have benefited from 
their sacrifices must pay us reparations. We, the descendants of enslaved Africans, MUST now sacrifice our 
time, talent and money for the work that must be done to get complete  and full Reparations for ourselves 
and future generations.  
 
This year, at our 14
th Annual Conference, the National Coalitio ns of Blacks for Reparations in America 
(N’COBRA)  unveil its 5-Year Action Plan, which outlines the various programs that have been imple-
mented to achieve Reparations.  We need your help wi th executing this Plan.  There are so many critical 
requirements that must be funded:  printing, postage, regular conference calls, travel, vehicle rental, adver-
tising, Website development and expansion, e-group support, supplies and equipment, just to name a few.  
  
N’COBRA also has a number of commissions that are tackling critical issues in each of the following areas: 
Legislative (HR 40 Lobbying, Reparations Resolution Campaign); Legal (legal injury research, filing briefs) 
International (WCAR, Global African Congress, UN Lobbying); Economic Development  (Black Friday 
Buying Campaign, Congress of Economic Development); Information & Media  (“Black Reparations 
Times,” “ENCOBRA magazine,” NCOBRA.org website, “REPARATIONS NOW!”; Grassroots Organiz-
ing (Town Hall Meetings, Direct Action, National Membe rship Drive), etc.  Each of these areas supports 
the other.  All are necessary to achieve Reparations, and all require people and money to make them work.  
 
For the past 14 years, N’COBRA has been an organiza tion of volunteers, who have funded the movement 
with their own resources, in order to supplement a nnual membership dues, which fall short of the Coali-
tion’s actual needs.   It is now time to take the Reparations movement to another level.  It is now time for all 
of us to pool our resources, creativity, and our genius.   
 
Please contribute generously to N’COBRA.  The form on the next  page establishes a number of different 
patron participation levels.  Each level acknowledges  Africans and African Descendants who have played an 
important role in our struggle for civil and human rights .   While you’re selecting the patron level that’s 
most appropriate for you, be sure to tell us which co mmissions you’d most like to support.  And remember, 
no amount is too great or too small! 
 
The Reparations movement is not for N’COBRA members alone—it is for all African Descendants and our 
allies.  Encourage your church, sorority, frater nity, family reunion, and other community based 
organizations to send a donation to N’COBRA to support this very spiritual work that we are doing in 
honor of the sacrifices of all our Ancestors.   
 
In Unity,


--- PAGE 492 ---
48 
  
I want my donation to support: 
(please check mark one or more areas of N’COBRA work listed below) 
 
Grassroots Organizing  ____    Membership & Organizational Development Commission   ___    Legislative Commission   ___     
 
Information & Media Commission  __   Economic Development Commission  ____    Legal Strategies Commission  ____     
 
National Office & Administrative  _____ International Commission   ____    Human Resources Commission  ____   
 
Youth Commission   ____    Education Commission  ____ 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
National Coalition Of Blacks for Reparations in America 
 
 
Please send your contributions (check/money order only) payable to: 
 
 N’COBRA 
 P.O. Box 90604 
      Washington, DC  20090  
Yes!  I pledge my support for the Reparations Movement  
struggle for Justice, Restitution and Reparations for the Afri-
can Holocaust of Enslavement and Its Vestiges. 
 
NAME________________________________________ 
 
ADDRESS_____________________________________  
 
CITY_________________________________________ 
 
STATE________________________________________ 
 
ZIP CODE _____________________________________ 
 
PHONE _______________________________________ 
 
Enclosed is my check or money order for $__________ 
             I PLEDGE: 
 
    $25    ___ 
    $50    ___ 
    $75    ___ 
    $100  ___ 
    Other Amount $______ 
 
Patron Participation Levels   
1. L’Ouverture       $5000  ___ 
2. Walker             $3000  ___ 
3. Tubman             $1000  ___ 
4. Garvey                $700  ___ 
5. DuBois                 $500  ___ 
6. King                     $300  ___ 
7. Moore         $200  ___ 
 
Payment Cycle 
 
Weekly    ___         Monthly   ___ 
Quarterly  ___        Annually  ___ 
PATRON PARTICIPATION LEVELS  
 
Become a Reparations Patron today and have your (or your group) name added to N’COBRA’s National Donation Drive.  An 
ongoing list of patrons will be updated and published.    
 
1. $5000.00  Toussaint L’Ouverture   {1743 - 1803} 
2. $3000.00  David Walker    {1796 - 1830} 
3. $1000.00  Harriet Tubman   {1819 - 1913} 
4.   $700.00         Marcus Garvey   {1887 - 1940} 
5.   $500.00 W.E.B. DuBois   {1868 - 1963} 
6.   $300.00 Martin Luther King, Jr.  {1929 - 1968} 
7.   $200.00 Queen Mother Moore   {1898 - 1997} 
 
          These noble ancestors contributions to our liberation and development are priceless.   
         We lift up their names in chronological order to honor them.


--- PAGE 493 ---
49 
 
 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America 
N ‘COBRAN ‘COBRA  
 
MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION 
 
PURPOSE 
We believe that the descendants of Africans, who were captured, taken from our homeland (Africa), en-
slaved, colonized and held captive for hundreds of years in the Americas and throughout the diaspora, be-
lieve that we should be compensated for the injustices, cruelties, brutalities, inhumanities and exploitations of 
racism, white supremacy, economic discrimination an d oppression imposed upon our people past and pre-
sent. 
DEFINITION 
REPARATIONS: Payment for a debt owed; the act of repairing a wrong or injury; to atone for wrongdo-
ings; to make amends; to make one whole again; the payment of damages to repair a nation; compensation in 
money, land, or materials for damages. In the Ancient African, Kemetic sense, Reparations means to rise up. 
Repair and restore the ruined and damaged, develop the underdeveloped, and create a just society. 
 
INVITATION 
Please help continue the organizing and expansion ef forts of N’COBRA in building our National & Interna-
tional Movements for Reparations. Reparations are ob tainable in our lifetime. A committed people with a 
righteous cause is a force that cannot be denied. 
 
Mail this bottom portion to the National Office N’COBRA, 
P.O. Box 90604, Washington, DC 20090-0604 
Tel: 202. 291. 8400 * Fax: 202. 291. 4600 * Website: http://www.ncobra.org 
----------------------------------------------------------Tear off---------------------------------------------------------- 
N’COBRA National (Annual) Membership Application 
Select appropriate categories.  Make check/money order payable to NCOBRA. 
 
There may be additional fees for local membership 
 
Individual:___ $10-one year;___ $20-two years; ___ $30- three-years; $___for ___years; or  __ $500.00 Life  
 
Membership (can be made in two $250 payments);  ___$25 Local Org; ___ 50 National Org. and 
 
I would like to support the Commissions (check one or more and enter $ amount): 
____Economic Development;____Education ____Human Resources; ____Information & Media; 
____International; Legal; ____Legislative; _____Youth 
 
Total Amount Enclosed $ _______________ 
 
Name ________________________________ Chpt/Org/Bus ____________________________
                         (Please Print) 
 
Street Address__________________________________________________________________ 
                                                                                      (Please Print) 
City/State/Zip Code_____________________________________________________________ 
 
Home Phone (      ) ________________________ Chapter/Org/Bus (       ) _________________ 
 
E-Mail _________________________________ FAX (    ) ______________________________ 
 
Collected by (NCOBRA Member Name) ____________________________________________ 
 
Chapter Name/Location __________________________________________________________


--- PAGE 494 ---
50 
  
N’COBRA’s Board of Directors 
 
Dorothy Aurevouche Benton Lewis, Co-Chair 
(Rockville, Maryland) 
 
Baba Hannibal Afrik, Co-Chair 
(Port Gibson, Mississippi)  
 
Kupenda Olusegun, Treasurer 
(Washington, DC) 
 
Ajamu Sankofa, Secretary and 
Northeast Region Rep (Brooklyn, New York) 
 
Dr. Imari Obadele, Emeritus and Ex-Officio 
(Baton Rouge, Louisiana) 
 
Frank Omowale Satterwhite, Western Region   
Representative (East Palo Alto, CA)   
 
J. Damu, Western Region  
Asst.  Representative (San Francisco, California) 
 
Njere Alghanee, Southeast Region Rep 
(Atlanta, Georgia) 
 
James Rodgers III, Southwest Region  
Representative (Dallas, TX) 
 
Alvin Brown, Midwest Region Rep 
(St. Louis, Missouri) 
 
Lady Claudia Nelson, At-Large 
(Dallas, Texas)  
 
Kalonji Tor Olusegun, At-Large 
(Washington, DC) 
 
Herman Ferguson, At-Large 
(Queens, NY) 
 
JoAnn Watson, At-Large 
(Detroit, Michigan) 
 
N’COBRA’s Elder Advisory Board and Commissions also 
have representation on our Board of Directors. 
 
Elder Advisory Board 
 
Erline Arikpo, Elder Advisor 
(Chicago, Illinois) 
 
Raymond “Reparations Ray” Jenkins, Elder Advisor 
(Detroit, Michigan 
 
 
General Ali X.  Rashid, Elder Advisor 
(Miami, Florida) 
 
General Mwesi Chui, Elder Advisor 
(Dayton, Ohio) 
 
Nia Kuumba, Elder Advisor 
(Washington, DC) 
 
Dr. Ron Walters, Elder Advisor 
(College Park, Maryland) 
 
N’COBRA’s Commission Leaders 
 
Economic Development 
 Alvin Brown (St. Louis, MO) 
 Taiwo Kugichagulia (Oakland, CA) 
 Baba Dr. Imari Obadele (BR, LA) 
Education 
  
Human Resources 
 Njere Alghanee (Atlanta, GA)  
Information and Media 
 JoAnn Watson (Detroit, MI)  
 Wautella ibn Yusuf (Washington, DC) 
 Jahahara Alkebulan-Ma’at(Oakland, CA) 
International 
 Mashariki Jywanza (Indianapolis, IN) 
 Sababu Shabaka, Baltimore, MD  
Legal Strategies 
 Adjoa Aiyetoro (Washington, DC) 
Legislative 
 Nkechi Taifa (Washington, DC) 
 Kibibi Tyehimba (Washington, DC) 
 Milton McGriff (Philadelphia, PA) 
Membershi/Organizational Development 
Kupenda Olusegun (Washington, DC) 
Johnita Scott (Baton Rouge, LA) 
Frank Omowale Satterwhite (E. PA, CA)   
Youth 
 Shereeta Lacy (Indianapolis, IN) 
 Nuri Madina, (Chicago, IL)   
  
 
Your Expertise and Participation Are Needed. 
 
Join An N’COBRA Commission! 
www.NCOBRA.org                                                                                                                                                                                Black Reparations Times 
N’COBRN’COBR AA  
National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America 
P.O. Box 90604  Washington, DC 20090-0604 
PHONE: 202.291.8400   FAX:  202.291.4600 
EMAIL: NationalNCOBRA@aol.com   WEBSITE: www.ncobra.org 
DISCUSSION: http://groups.yahoo.com/group/Reparations_For_Africans


--- PAGE 495 ---
51 
 
 
 
CONGRATULATIONS NCOBRA 
  
HERMAN FERGUSON, EFIA NWANGAZA, NATIONAL CO-CHAIRS 
JERICHO MVMT for AMNESTY & FREEDOM 
of U.S. POLITICAL PRISIONERS 
P.O. BOX 340084 Jamaica, New York 11434-3401  718-949-3937 
http://www.thejerichomovement.com/  
 
Washington DC Metro Chapter - N’COBRA 
National Coalition Of Blacks For 
 Reparations In America 
 
WISHING N’COBRA  
A SUCCESSFUL CONFERENCE 
15 Years of Educating & Organizing 
 
 
P.O. Box 716, Washington, D.C. 20044-0716    
Tel  (202) 466-1622    e-mail:  DcNcobra@aol.com 
N’COBRA Online websites:   NCOBRA.org   and  
http://groups.yahoo.com/group/Reparations_For_Africans


--- PAGE 496 ---
52 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONFERENCE LOGO 
Ghanaian Mythical Twin Crocodiles sharing one stomach expresses “Operational Unity.”   
Though both are complete with head, legs, and tail, they share the same  
destiny and must work together to survive. 
JUNE 17 - 20, 2004 
 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY   -   WASHINGTON DC 
 N’COBRA 15th  ANNUAL CONFERENCE  2004 
Juneteenth 2004  
 
 
Theme 
 
“COALITION BUILDING AND OPERATIONAL UNITY” 
NATIONAL COALITION OF BLACKS FOR REPARATIONS  
IN AMERICA


--- PAGE 497 ---
The Abuja Proclamation 
 
A declaration of the first Abuja Pan-African Conference 
on Reparations For African Enslavement, Colonization And 
Neo-Colonization, sponsored by The Organization Of African 
Unity and its Reparations Commission April 27-29, 1993, 
Abuja, Nigeria 
 
 
 
This First Pan-African Conference on Reparations held in Abuja, Nigeria, April 27-29, 1993, 
sponsored by the Group of Eminent Persons (GEP) and the Commission for Reparations of the 
Organization of African Unity, and the Federal Government of the Republic of Nigeria.  
 
Recalling the Organization of African Unity's establishment of a machinery the Group of Eminent 
Persons for appraising the issue of reparations in relation to the damage done to Africa and its 
Diaspora by enslavement, colonization, and neo-colonialism.  
 
Convinced that the issue of reparations is an important question requiring the united action of 
Africa and its Diaspora and worthy of the active support of the rest of the international community.  
 
Fully persuaded that the damage sustained by the African peoples is not a "thing of the past' but is 
Painfully manifest in the damaged lives of contemporary Africans from Harlem to Harare, in the 
damaged economies of the Black World from Guinea to Guyana, from Somalia to Surinam.  
 
Respectfully aware of historic precedents in reparations, ranging from German Payment of 
restitution to the Jews for the enormous tragedy of the Nazi Holocaust to the question of 
compensating Japanese-Americans for injustice 
of internment by Roosevelt Administration in the United States during the World War II.  
 
Cognizant of the fact that compensation for injustice need not necessarily be paid only in capital 
transfer but could include service to the victims or other forms of restitution and readjustment of 
the relationship agreeable to both 
parties.  
 
Emphatically convinced that what matters is not the guilt but the responsibility of those states and 
nations whose economic evolution once depended on slave labor and colonialism, and whose 
forebears participated either in selling and buying Africans, or in owning them, or in colonizing 
them.  
 
Convinced that the pursuit of reparations by the African peoples in the continent and in the 
Diaspora will itself be a learning experience in self-discovery and in uniting experience politically 
and psychologically. Convinced that numerous looting, theft and larceny have been committed on 
the African People calls upon those in Possession of their stolen goods artifacts and other 
traditional treasuries to restore them to their rightful owners the African 
People.


--- PAGE 498 ---
Calls upon the international community to recognize that there is a unique and unprecedented moral 
debt owed to the African peoples which has Yet to be paid - the debt of compensation to the 
Africans as the most humiliated and exploited people of the last four centuries of modern history.  
 
Calls upon Heads of States and Governments in Africa and the Diaspora itself to set up National 
Committees for the purpose of studying the damaged Black experience, disseminating information 
and encouraging educational courses on the impact of Enslavement, colonization ant neo-
colonialism on present-day Africa and its Diaspora.  
 
Urges the Organization of African Unity to grant observer status to select organizations from the 
African Diaspora in order to facilitate consultations between Africa and its Diaspora on reparations 
and related issues.  
 
Further urges the OAU to call for full monetary payment of repayments through capital transfer and 
debt cancellation.  
 
Convinced that the claim for reparations is well grounded in International Law.  
 
Urges on the OAU to establish a legal Committee on the issue of Reparations.  
 
Also calls upon African and Diaspora groups already working on reparations to communicate with 
the Organization of African Unity and establish continuing liaison;  
 
Encourages such groups to send this declaration to various countries to obtain their official support 
for the movement  
 
Serves notice on all states in Europe and the Americas which had participated in the enslavement 
and colonization of the African peoples, and which may still be engaged in racism and neo-
colonialism, to desist from any further damage and start building bridges of conciliation, co-
operation, and through reparation.  
 
Exhorts all African states to grant entrance as of right to all persons of African descent and right to 
obtain residence in those African states, if there is no disqualifying element on the African claiming 
the "right to return" to 
his ancestral home, Africa.  
 
Urges those countries which were enriched by slavery and the slave trade to give total relief from 
Foreign Debt, and allow the debtor countries of the Diaspora to become free for self-development 
and from immediate and direct economic domination.  
 
Calls upon the countries largely characterized as profiteers from the slave trade to support proper 
and reasonable representation of African peoples in the Political and economic areas of the highest 
decision-making bodies.


--- PAGE 499 ---
Requests the OAU to intensify its efforts in restructuring the international system in pursuit of 
justice with special reference to a permanent African seat on the Security Council of the U.N.


--- PAGE 500 ---
Reparations and A New Global Order: 
  A Comparative Overview 
 
by Professor Chinweizu 
 
A paper read at the second Plenary Session 
of the First Pan-African Conference on 
Reparations, Abuja, Nigeria, April 27, 1993. 
 
 
Contemplating the condition of the Black World is vexatious to the spirit: that is probably the 
strongest impetus which has brought us all here today. 
 
For many centuries, and especially in the last five, the black skin has been a badge of contempt.  
For instance, it used to be said in Brazil that if you are white and running down the street, you are 
an athlete; but if you are black and running down the street, you are a thief! And in most parts of 
the world today, if you are white and rich, you are honored and celebrated, and all doors fly open as 
you approach; but if you are black and rich, you are under suspicion, and handcuffs and guard dogs 
stand ready to take you away.  
 
Yes, the black skin is still the badge of contempt in the world today, as it has been for nearly 2,000 
years. To make sure it does not remain so in the 21st century is perhaps the overall purpose of our 
search for reparations.  
 
We are gathered here today, thinkers and activists who want to change Black People's condition in 
the world. What things do we need to change, both in the world and in ourselves, if we are to 
accomplish the mission of reparations? What changes must we make in structures, in psychology, 
in historical consciousness and much else?  
 
We might begin by noting that Blacks are not the only people in the world who are seeking, or who 
have sought, reparations. In fact, by only now pressing our claim for reparations, we are latecomers 
to a varied company of peoples in the Americans, in Asia, and in Europe. Here is a partial 
catalogue of reparations, paid and pending, which are 20th century precedents for reparations to the 
Black World.  
 
In the Americas, from Southern Chile to the Arctic north of Canada, reparations are being sought 
and being made. The Mapuche, an aboriginal people of Southern Chile, are pressing for the return 
of their lands, some 30 million hectares of which were, bit by bit, taken away and given to 
European immigrants since 1540. The Inuit of Arctic Canada, more commonly known as the 
Eskimo, were in 1992 offered restitution of some 850,000 sq. miles of their ancestral lands, their 
home range for millennia before European invaders arrived there.  
 
In the USA, claims by the Sioux to the Black Lands of South Dakota are now in the courts. And the 
US Government is attempting to give some 400,000 acres of grazing land to the Navaho, and some 
other lands to the Hopi in the south-west of the USA.


--- PAGE 501 ---
In 1988, the US Government admitted wrongdoing in interning some 120,000 Japanese-Americans 
under Executive Order 9066 of 1942, during WWII, and awarded each internee $20,000.  
 
Earlier on, and further afield, under the Thompson-Urrutia Treaty of 1921, the USA paid Colombia 
reparations, including the sum of $25 million, for excising the territory of Panama from Colombia 
for the purpose of building the Panama Canal.  
 
In Asia, following WWII, Japan paid reparations, mostly to the Asian countries it had occupied. By 
May 1949, $39 million had been paid from Japanese assets in Japan, and another unspecified 
amount had been paid from Japanese assets held outside Japan. And Japan was obliged to sign 
treaties of reparations with Burma (1954), the Philippines (1956), and Indonesia (1958). More 
recently, the Emperor of Japan has apologized to Korea for atrocities committed there by the 
Japanese, and North Korea is asking for $5 billion in reparations for damages sustained during 35 
years of Japanese colonization.  
 
In Europe, after WWII, the victors demanded reparations from Germany for all damages to 
civilians and their dependants, for losses caused by the maltreatment of prisoners of war, and for all 
non-military property that was destroyed in the war. In 1921, Germany's reparations liability was 
fixed at 132 billion gold marks. After WWII, the victorious Allies filed reparations claims against 
Germany for $320 billion. Reparations were also levied on Italy and Finland. The items for which 
these claims were made included bodily loss, loss of liberty, loss of property, injury to professional 
careers, dislocation and forced emigration time, spent in concentration camps because of racial, 
religious and political persecution. Others were the social cost of war, as represented by the burden 
from loss of life, social disorder, and institutional disorder; and the economic cost of war, as 
represented by the capital destroyed and the value of civilian goods and services foregone to make 
war goods. Payments were made in cash and kind -- goods, services, capital equipment, land, farm 
and forest products; and penalties were added for late deliveries.  
 
Perhaps the most famous case of reparations was that paid by Germany to the Jews. These were 
paid by West Germany to Israel for crimes against Jews in territories controlled by Hitler's 
Germany, and to individuals to indemnify them for persecution. In the initial phase, these included 
$2 billion to make amends to victims of Nazi persecution; $952 million in personal indemnities; 
$35.70 per month per inmate of concentration camps; pensions for the survivors of victims; $820 
million to Israel to resettle 50,000 Jewish emigrants from lands formerly controlled by Hitler. All 
that was just the beginning. Other, and largely undisclosed, payments followed. And even in 1992, 
the World Jewish Congress in New York announced that the newly unified Germany would pay 
compensation,  totalling $63 million for 1993, to 50,000 Jews who suffered Nazi persecution but 
had not been paid reparations because they lived in East Germany.  
 
With such precedents of reparations to non-Black peoples in four continents, it would be sheer 
racism for the world to discountenance reparations claims from the Black World.  
 
But our own search for reparations must, of necessity, be tailored to our peculiar condition, to our 
peculiar experience. Some others may need only that their ancestral home range be returned to 
them; some others that they be compensated for the indignities of internment and the loss of citizen 
rights; some others that acts of genocide and other atrocities against their people be atoned or and


--- PAGE 502 ---
paid for; some others that lands excised from their territory be paid for. We, however, who have 
experienced all of the above and more, and experienced them for much longer than most, and 
therefore suffer chronically from their effects -- we must take a more comprehensive view of what 
reparations must mean for us. We must ask not only that reparations be made for specific acts, or 
that restitution be made of specific properties; we who have been such monumental victims are 
obliged to also ask: What sorts of system, capitalist as well as pre-capitalist, with their values and 
world outlook, made this long holocaust possible; and what must be done to transform these 
systems into some other kind where holocaust could not be inflicted on us? Unless we address and 
effectively answer that question, our quest for reparations would be flawed and incomplete. We 
must therefore look into the nature of the old existing global order and see what needs to be done to 
change it for the better.  
 
The hallmarks of the old global order, which was initiated by the voyage by Columbus may be 
summarized as a propensity for perpetrating holocaust, a devotion to exploitation, and a passion for 
necrophobia. It has inflected holocaust, through genocide and culturecide -- but not only on the 
Black World; it has visited exploitation, through slavery and colonialism -- but not only on the 
Black World; but it has reserved for the Black World a special scourge: that virulent strain of 
racism known as Negrophobia!  
 
That old global order just described is not a thing of the past; it is still very much with us. In 
different parts of the world today, in 1993, even as we sit here in this hall, Blacks are still being 
subjected to the holocaust of genocide and culturecide (as in the Sudan); to the exploitations of 
slavery (as in Mauritania), and of colonialism and neo-colonialism (as in every part of the Black 
World); and to negrophobia, in all its forms and degrees, throughout the entire globe. To end this 
dreadful condition and to make all the appropriate repairs, i.e. reparations, we need to move from 
this old global order, where holocaust happened to us, to a different global order where holocaust 
will never happen to us. We need to move from this old global order, which sucks resources out of 
our veins and piles debt upon our heads, to a different global order in which our enormous 
resources shall serve our own prosperity. We need to move from this old global order, which is 
permeated with negrophobia, to a new global order that is cleansed of negrophobia, one where we 
would live in dignity and equality with all the other races of humanity.  
 
Now, what are we, the Black World, going to contribute to the making of these changes?  
 
Let me begin by noting that reparation is not just about money: it is not even mostly about money; 
in fact, money is not even one percent of what reparation is about. Reparation is mostly about 
making repairs. self-made repairs, on ourselves: mental repairs, psychological repairs, cultural 
repairs, organizational repairs, social repairs, institutional repairs, technological repairs, economic 
repairs, political repairs, educational repairs, repairs of every type that we need in order to recreate 
and sustainable black societies. For the sad truth is that five centuries of holocaust have made our 
societies brittle and unviable. And as the great Marcus Garvey warned over 50 years ago, if we 
continue as we are, we are heading for extinction.  
 
More important than any monies to be received; more fundamental than any lands to be recovered, 
is the opportunity the reparations campaign offers us for the rehabilitation of Black people, by 
Black people, for Black people; opportunities for the rehabilitation of our minds, our material


--- PAGE 503 ---
condition, our collective reputation, our cultures, our memories, our self-respect, our religious, our 
political traditions and our family institutions; but first and foremost for the rehabilitation of our 
minds.  
 
Let me repeat that the most important aspect of reparation is not the money the campaign may or 
may not bring: the most important part of reparation is our self-repair; the change it will bring 
about in our understanding of our history, of ourselves, and of our destiny; the chance it will bring 
about in our place in the world.  
 
Now, we who are campaigning for reparations cannot hope to change the world without changing 
ourselves. We cannot hope to change the world without changing our ways of seeing the world, our 
ways of thinking about the world, our ways of organizing our world, our ways of working and 
dreaming in our world. All these, and more, must change for the better. The type of Black Man and 
Black woman that was made by the holocaust -- that was made to feel inferior by slavery and then 
was steeped in colonial attitudes and values -- that type of Black will not be able to bring the post-
reparation global order into being without changing profoundly in the process that has begun; that 
type of Black will not be even appropriate for the post-reparation global order unless thoroughly 
and suitably reconstructed. So, reparation, like charity, must begin with ourselves, with 
the making of the new Black person, with the making of a new Black World. How?  
 
We must begin by asking ourselves: What weaknesses on our side made the holocaust possible? 
Weaknesses of organization?  Weakness of solidarity? Weaknesses of identity? Weaknesses of 
mentality? Weaknesses of behavior? If we do not correct such weaknesses, even if we got billions 
of billions of dollars in reparations money, even if we got back all our expropriated land, we would 
fritter it all away yet again, and recycle it all back into alien hands.  
 
We must therefore find out what deficiencies in our sense of identity what quirks in our mentality, 
what faults in our feelings solidarity made it possible for some of us to sell some of us into 
bondage; still make it possible for us to succumb to the divide and conquer tactics of our exploiters; 
make it possible for all too many of us to be afflicted with Negro necrophobia -- our counterpart of 
the self-hating disease of the anti-Semitic Semite.  Twenty years ago, when I was writing The West 
and the Rest of Us, I gave it a subtitle: "White Predators, Black Slavers and the African Elite."  
That was to serve notice that we cannot overlook our complicity, as Black Slavers and as the 
African Elite, in what happened, and is still happening to us. We must, therefore, change ourselves 
in order to end our criminal complicity in perpetuating our lamentable condition.  
 
Beyond all that, we must discover where we now are in our history. We must recognize that in 36 
years of independence, reckoning from Ghana's in 1957 (just four years short of the 40 years the 
Israelites spent in the wilderness!), we have been blundering about in the neo-colonial wilderness. 
And we must ask: Why did Moses lead his people into the wilderness and keep them wandering 
about for two generations? I do not believe that he, a learned man raised in the pharaoh's court, did 
not know the direct route to his people's Promised Land. I believe it was a dilatory sojourn whose 
tribulations were calculated to cure his people of the legacy of slavery. You can't make a free 
people out of slaves without first putting them through experiences that would purge them of the 
slave mentality.  We, in our own wilderness years, need to take conscious steps to purge ourselves 
of the legacy of a 500-year holocaust of slavery and colonialism.  In that way, when we finally


--- PAGE 504 ---
arrive at our own Promised Land -- a Black World cured of the holocaust legacy -- we would be 
ready for the new liberated phase of our long adventure on this Earth.  
 
To help us get our bearings in this wilderness phase, I would suggest four main measures:  
 
1.  The creation of Holocaust Monuments in all parts of the Black World, as reminders of what we 
have been through and are determined never again to go through. Efforts already being made in this 
area should continue and be added to. I am thinking, for instance, of the Goree Island Project in 
Senegal, and the Slave Route Project in Benin Republic. But let me recommend a major monument 
here in Abuja, this new capital rising in a zone that, in the past, witnessed intensive slave raiding 
for the trans-Sahara slave trade. We should erect here a monument complex that portrays scenes 
from the Black Holocaust, scenes taken from all parts of the world; a great Black Holocaust 
Monument that shall serve as the Black World's counterpart of the Wailing Wall of the Jews in 
Jerusalem.  
 
2.  The institution of a Holocaust Memorial Day, to be observed each year throughout the Black 
World, as a day of mourning and remembrance, with solemn ceremonies at local holocaust 
monuments. Perhaps this date, April 27, on which we have assembled here, should be designated 
the Holocaust Memorial Day of the Black World.  
 
3.  The creation of a Black Heritage Education Curriculum, to teach us our true history, and thereby 
restore our self-worth as descendants of the pioneers of world civilization, and supply us with the 
antidote to the White Supremacist Ideology and its damaging effects. This would produce a post-
holocaust Black personality, one cured of the debilities inflicted by the holocaust experience.  
 
4.  The creation of a Black World League of Nations, with its complex of institutions, to take care 
of our collective security, to foster solidarity and prosperity among us, and to prevent the infliction 
of any future damage on any part of the Black World.  
 
These measures, and others like them, would teach us who we are what we have been and ought to 
become, and would promote and concretize Black World solidarity. Having made such internal 
changes in ourselves and in our world, we would be better able to foster in the entire global order 
two key changes:  
 
a. A different view of global history, particularly of the last 500 year and of the millennia before 
525 BC -- that calamitous year when Black Egypt fell permanently to white invaders, leaving 
all of Africa open for incursions from West Eurasia; and  
b. structural changes that would block the possibility of future damage of the sorts for which we 
now seek reparations.  
 
To conclude, let me note that, for us, no global order would be truly new without apologies for 
ancient wrongs, without an end to continuing wrongs, without reparations, without restitutions, 
without the creation of systems and mechanisms that would ensure that the holocaust we have been 
through never happens again. Our crusade for reparations would be completed only when we 
achieve a global order without necrophobia, without alien hegemony over any part of the Black 
World, and without the possibility of holocaust. From our perspective, a global order which failed


--- PAGE 505 ---
to meet such conditions would not really be new or adequate: It would be an order serving us the 
same old bitter wine in some new bottle.  
 
From here today, I foresee a day when we too shall get back our expropriated lands; I foresee a day 
when we too shall get compensation for our losses and our pains; I foresee a day when negrophobia 
and the conditions which foster it shall have vanished from the earth. But between now and that 
day, much work waits to be done. The most serious part of that work is the work of self 
rehabilitation. And so I say: "Black Soul, Heal Thyself, and all shall be restored to you".  
 
I thank you all.


--- PAGE 506 ---
CORPORATE RESTITUTION FOR SLAVERY: 
PLAINTIFF AND DEFENDANT INFORMATION 
 
Compilation by Deadria C. Farmer-Paellmann


--- PAGE 507 ---
CORPORATE RESTITUTION FOR SLAVERY: 
PLAINTIFF AND DEFENDANT INFORMATION 
 
 
This compilation comprises materials on landmark class action lawsuits brought  
on behalf of 35 million descendants of enslaved Africans for slavery reparations.  The actions 
were filed by plaintiffs in six different states (New York, New Jersey, Illinois, California, 
Louisiana, and Texas) against a total of seventeen defendant corporations that allegedly profited 
from slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.  The  cases have been consolidated in the U.S. 
District Court, Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division, before Judge Charles R. Norgle.
 
 
 
DEFENDANT CORPORATIONS BY INDUSTRY 
 
 
INSURANCE 
AETNA  
LLOYD'S OF LONDON 
NEW YORK LIFE 
 
 
FINANCE 
FLEETBOSTON 
AFSA DATA CORP 
BROWN BROTHERS HARRIMAN 
JP MORGAN CHASE 
LEHMAN BROTHERS 
 
 
TOBACCO 
RJ REYNOLDS 
BROWN & WILLIAMSON 
LIGGET GROUP INC. 
LOEWS CORP 
 
 
RAILROAD 
CANADIAN NATIONAL 
CSX 
NORFOLK SOUTHERN 
UNION PACIFIC 
 
 
TEXTILE 
WESTPOINT STEVENS


--- PAGE 508 ---
PLAINTIFF/DEFENDANT CHART 
 
PLAINTIFFS DEFENDANTS STATE 
FILE DATE 
MDL-1491 
CASE No 
Deadria Farmer-Paellmann FleetBoston Financial Corporation 
Aetna Inc. 
CSX 
New York 
3/26/02 
02-C-7766 
Andre’ Carrington FleetBoston Financial Corporation 
Aetna Inc. 
CSX 
New York 
3/26/02 
02-C-7767 
Mary Lacey Madison FleetBoston Financial Corporation 
Aetna Inc. 
CSX 
New York 
3/26/02 
02-C-7768 
Richard Barber  Brown Brothers Harriman 
New York Life Insurance 
Company 
Norfolk Southern 
New Jersey 
5/1/02 
02-C-7765 
Marcelle Porter 
Hannah Jane Hurdle-Toomey 
Lloyd’s of London 
Lehman Brothers 
Union Pacific 
Illinois 
8/29/02 
02-C-6180 
Eddlee Bankhead c/o 
John Bankhead 
Lloyd’s of London 
Lehman Brothers 
Norfolk Southern 
Westpoint Stevens 
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company 
Brown and Williamson 
Liggett Group, Inc. 
Loews Corporation 
New York 
9/3/02 
02-C-9181 
Timothy Hurdle 
Chester Hurdle 
FleetBoston Financial Corporation 
Aetna Inc. 
Lloyd’s of London 
New York Life Insurance 
Company 
Westpoint Stevens 
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company 
Brown and Williamson 
Liggett Group, Inc. 
Loews Corporation 
Canadian National 
AFSA Data Corp 
 
California 
State Court 
 
9/10/02 
Pending 
Raymond Johnson 
Antoinette Harrell-Miller, et al. 
Aetna Inc. 
Lloyd’s of London 
Brown Brothers Harriman 
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company 
Brown and Williamson 
Liggett Group, Inc. 
Loews Corporation 
CSX Corp 
Norfolk Southern 
Union Pacific 
Canadian National 
Louisiana 
9/3/02 
02-C-9180 
Julie Mae Wyatt-Kervin 
Ina Daniels Hurdle-McGee 
J.P. Morgan Chase 
Westpoint Stevens 
Union Pacific 
Texas 
1/21/03 
Pending


--- PAGE 509 ---
DEFENDANT CORPORATIONS 
 
 
INSURANCE INDUSTRY 
 
 
AETNA 
AETNA INC. (“AETNA”) is a corporation with its principal place of 
business located at 151 Farmington Avenue, Hartford, Connecticut 06156. Upon 
information and belief, AETNA’s predecessor in interest, actually insured slave owners 
against the loss of their human chattel. AETNA knew the horrors of slave life as is 
evident in a rider through which the company declined to pay the premiums for slaves 
who were lynched or worked to death or who committed suicide. Additionally, AETNA 
insured enslaved Africans who worked in the agricultural industry of which Plaintiff’s 
enslaved. AETNA, therefore, unjustly profited from the institution of slavery. 
 
LLOYD'S OF LONDON 
LLOYD’S OF LONDON is an underwriting company with its principal places of 
business located at 1 Lime Street, London EC3M 7HA and at 590 5th Avenue, 17th Floor, 
New York, New York 10036.  It was involved in insuring ships utilized for the Trans-
Atlantic slave trade. The writing of such policies was an unfair business practice designed 
to help finance the international slave trade, to provide states with human chattel that 
were subjected to the immoral practices of slavery as set forth by the cruel and inhumane 
Slave Codes created and enforced by states.   
Furthermore, upon information and belief LLOYD’S OF LONDON, failed to 
comply with California Slavery Era Policy Law, Insurance Code sections 13810 et seq. 
and its reporting requirement. 
 
NEW YORK LIFE 
 NEW YORK LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY (“NEW YORK LIFE”) is a 
corporation with its general offi ce located at 2 New York Plaza, 7
th Floor, New York, 
New York 10004.  NEW YORK LIFE’s predecessor-in-interest, Nautilus Insurance, 
earned premiums from its sale of life insurance to slave owners.   It insured slaves in the 
agricultural industry.


--- PAGE 510 ---
FINANCE INDUSTRY 
 
FLEETBOSTON 
FLEETBOSTON is a Delaware corporation with its principal place of business 
located at 100 Federal Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02110.  FLEETBOSTON is a 
successor in interest to the Providence Bank of Rhode Island that was founded by Rhode 
Island businessman John Brown.  Brown owned ships that embarked on several 
transatlantic slave trading voyages when such trading was illegal according to Rhode 
Island Law.  Brown was prosecuted in federal court for participating in such trading in 
violation of a 1794 federal law that prohibited certain types of slave trading.1  Upon 
information and belief, the Providence Bank of Rhode Island lent substantial sums of 
money to Brown, thus financing and profiting from the founder’s illegal slave trading. 
Upon information and belief, FLEETBOSTON, through its predecessor bank, also 
collected custom duties and fees due on ships transporting enslaved Africans in violation 
of Rhode Island and federal law, thus profiting from the illegal slave trade 
Upon information and belief, over 41,369 Africans were enslaved during the time 
that FLEETBOSTON, through its predecessor bank, collected custom duties and fees on 
ships engaged in the illegal slave trade.2 Providing loans to slave traders to engage in 
illegal slave trading, and the regular collection of duties and fees, earned in the illegal 
enslavement of Africans constituted aiding and abetting in the illegal slave trade.   
 
AFSA DATA CORP 
 AFSA DATA CORPORATION (AFSA) is a Delaware corporation with its 
principal place of business located at 1 World Trade Center, Suite 2200, Long Beach, 
California.  AFSA is the education service unit of defendant FLEETBOSTON 
FINANCIAL CORPORATION.  Upon information and belief, AFSA has benefited 
directly from the fraudulent activities of FLEETBOSTON related to slavery through, and 
among other things, its management of about 8.1 million student loans taken out by 
members of the general public worth approximately $85 billion.  In addition, AFSA may 
have benefited from FLEETBOSTON’S historical unlawful business acts. 
 
BROWN BROTHERS HARRIMAN 
 BROWN BROTHERS HARRIMAN & COMPANY is a corporation with its 
principal place of business located at 59 Wall Street, New York, New York.  It is the 
successor corporation to Brown Brothers & Co.  The bank founders, James and William 
Brown, built their merchant bank by lending to Southern planters, brokering slave-grown 
                                                 
1 The laws violated include Rhode Island’s 1787 Act to prevent the Slave-Trade and Encourage the 
Abolition of Slavery, and the Federal government’s 1794 Act to Prohibit the Carrying on of the Slave Trade 
from the United States to Any Foreign Place of Country.    
2 Jay Coughtry, The Notorious Triangle: Rhode Island and the African Slave Trade 1700 to 1807, at 267-
285.


--- PAGE 511 ---
cotton and acting as a clearinghouse for the South’s complex financial system.  The firm 
earned commissions arranging cotton shipments form Southern ports to mills in New 
England and Britain.  It also loaned millions directly to planters, merchants and cotton 
brokers throughout the South.  Company records also reveal that Brown Brothers owed to 
plantation owners who told the firm that they needed the cash to buy slaves.  When those 
planters or their banks failed, it used its local agents to run repossessed plantations and 
manage the enslaved Africans working there. 
 
 
JP MORGAN CHASE 
JP MORGAN CHASE is a corporation with its principal place of business at 270 
Park Avenue, New York, New York 10017.  Two of its predecessor banks that merged to 
become JP Morgan Chase were behind a consortium to raise money to insure slavery.   
 
LEHMAN BROTHERS 
LEHMAN BROTHERS is a corporation with its principal business at c/o King 
and Spalding, 1185 Avenue of the Americas, 30th Floor, New York, NY 10036.  
LEHMAN BROTHERS founder Henry Lehman began as a peddler in 1844, but shortly 
thereafter when his two brothers, Mayer and Emanuel joined him, they soon grew rich as 
middlemen in the slave-grown cotton trade.  After Henry Lehman’s death in 1856 and 
after the war, the remaining two brothers moved north and continued trading in cotton, 
oil, sugar and coffee, and then took a seat on the New York Stock Exchange in 1887.


--- PAGE 512 ---
TOBACCO INDUSTRY 
 
RJ REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY 
R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY is a corporation with its principal 
place of business located at 401 North Main Street, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 
27102.  R.J. REYNOLDS TOBACCO COMPANY is the beneficiary of assets acquired 
through the forced uncompensated labors of enslaved African Americans.  Hardin 
Reynolds, father of R.J. Reynolds owned and operated a tobacco factory at the plantation 
called “Rock Spring Plantation” – the present day Reynolds Homestead in Critz, 
Virginia.
3   
Just before the Civil war, Hardin Reynolds owned at least 88 slaves who provided 
labor on the plantation, including in the Rock Spring tobacco factory.4  Operating 
information on the Rock Spring factory shows that slave labor was used to produce 
tobacco and other goods for the tobacco factory.5  Hardin Reynolds continued operation 
of his tobacco factory during and after the Civil war, and was not broken by the war.6  
Amongst other enterprises, he often engaged in business partnerships with his children.7 
  Hardin Reynolds’ son, Richard Joshua Reynolds, founder of R. J. Reynolds 
Tobacco Company, worked at the Rock Spring tobacco factory8 after the Civil War, and 
later formed a business partnership with his father at the factory.  The partnership was 
called “Hardin Reynolds and Son.”
9  In the fall of 1874, R.J. Reynolds sold his interest in 
the Rock Spring Factory10 and purchased land in North Carolina in October 1874 upon 
which he built an R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company factory.11  Records indicate that R. J. 
took half of two year’s profit from the Rock Spring factory to found his new company 
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.12 
                                                 
3 Nannie M. Tilley, The RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company, at  8. 
4 Id. at 9. 
5 Id. at 13. 
6 Id. at 27.  Hardin Reynolds was able to raise money to pay taxes in the late 1860s and the 1870s, an 
indication that he was relatively well off even after the Civil War. The Reynolds Homestead by Nannie 
M. Tilley, 17-18. 
7 The RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company at 14. 
8 Id. at 21. 
9 Id. at 24. 
10 Id. at 26. 
11 Id. at 31. 
12 Id. at 48.


--- PAGE 513 ---
On April 4, 1899, R. J. Reynolds Tobacco company became a subsidiary of the 
American Tobacco Company13 through its relationship with the Continental Tobacco 
Company,14 a holding company of the American Tobacco Company.15  The American 
Tobacco Company owned controlling shares of stock in R.J. Reynolds Tobacco 
Company thereby benefiting from and aiding in its already profitable operations.16  This 
relationship existed until 1911, when the U.S. Supreme Court issued a ruling that broke 
the old American Tobacco Company into several large competing companies.
17 
Currently existing companies, once part of the American Tobacco Company, and 
therefore beneficiaries of the slave labor include: R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, 
Brown & Williamson (formerly The American Tobacco Company via ownership of its 
predecessor by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company),
18 Liggett Group Inc. (formerly Liggett 
& Myers Tobacco Company), and Lorillard Tobacco Company a subsidiary of Loews 
Corporation.19 
 
 
BROWN & WILLIAMSON 
BROWN AND WILLIAMSON TOBACCO CORP. “BROWN & 
WILLIAMSON”) is a corporation with its principal place of business located at 200 
Brown & Williamson Tower, Louisville, Kentucky 40202.  BROWN AND 
WILLIAMSON is a successor in interest to The American Tobacco Company.  BROWN 
AND WILLIAMSON benefited from slave labor because it was formed out of the 
American Tobacco Company that benefited from assets acquired by R. J. Reynolds 
Tobacco Company from the uncompensated labor of enslaved Africans. 
 
LIGGET GROUP INC. 
LIGGETT GROUP INC. is a corporation with its principal place of business 
located at 100 Maple Lane, Mebane, Nort h Carolina.  LIGGETT GROUP INC. is a 
successor in interest to the American Tobacco Company.  LIGGETT GROUP INC. 
benefited from slave labor because it was fo rmed out of the American Tobacco Company 
that benefited from assets acquired by R.  J. Reynolds Tobacco Company from the 
uncompensated labor of enslaved Africans. Su ch use of enslaved Africans was an unfair 
business practice set forth by Slave Codes created and enforced by states.   
                                                 
13 This “Tobacco Combination” or trust formed by James Buchanan Duke was wholly owned by 
Continental Tobacco Company. 
14 Id. at 104 
15 Id. at 95 
16 Id. at 101 
17 http://www.bw.com/Index_sub2.cfm?ID=10 
18 Nanny M. Tilley.  The RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company, at 546. 
19 http://www.bw.com/Index_sub2.cfm?ID=10


--- PAGE 514 ---
LOEWS CORPORATION 
LOEWS CORPORATION is the parent corporation of Lorillard Tobacco 
Company with its principal place of business located at 667 Madison Avenue, New York, 
New York 10021.  LOEWS CORPORATION is a successor in interest to the American 
Tobacco Company due to its ownership of Lorillard Tobacco Company.  LOEWS 
CORPORATION benefited from slave labor because its subsidiary was formed out of the 
American Tobacco Company that benefited from assets acquired by R. J. Reynolds 
Tobacco Company from the uncompensated labor of enslaved Africans.


--- PAGE 515 ---
RAILROAD INDUSTRY 
 
CANADIAN NATIONAL RAILWAY CO. 
CANADIAN NATIONAL RAILWAY CO. is a corporation with its principal 
place of business located at 935 de La Gauchetiere St. West, Montreal, QU H3B 2, 
Canada.  It is the successor-in—interest to seven predecessor railroad lines, that were 
constructed and/or run in part by slave labor.20  Such use of enslaved Africans was an 
unfair business practice set forth by Slave Codes created and enforced by states.   
Furthermore, upon information and belief, CANADIAN NATIONAL was 
approached by members of the general public to verify their historical connection to 
slavery. They denied any connection. 
 
CSX 
CSX is a Virginia corporation with its principal place of business located at 901 
E. Cary Street, Richmond, VA 23219. It is a successor-in-interest to numerous 
predecessor railroad lines that were constructed or run, at least in part, by slave labor.
 
 
NORFOLK SOUTHERN 
 NORFOLK SOUTHERN is a corporation with its principal place of business 
located at Three Commercial Place, Norfolk Virginia 23410-9227.  It is a successor-in-
interest to numerous railroad lines that were constructed or run, in part, by slave labor. 
 
UNION PACIFIC 
 UNION PACIFIC is a corporation with its principal place of business located at 
1416 Dodge Street, Omaha, Nebraska 68179.  It  is a successor-in interest to numerous 
predecessor railroad lines that were constructed or run in part by slave labor. 
 
                                                 
20 Jim Cox, USA Today, Feb. 21, 2002, citing Canadian National’s ownership of seven rail lines built and/or 
operated by enslaved Africans including Mobile & Ohio which valued slaves lost to emancipation at 
$199,691 in 1865 (valued today at $2.2 million).


--- PAGE 516 ---
TEXTILE 
 
 
WESTPOINT STEVENS 
WESTPOINT STEVENS is a corporation with its principal place of business 
located at 1185 Avenue of Americas, New York, New York 10036.  It is a successor-in-
interest to Pepperell Manufacturing which utilized cotton from Southern planters farmed 
by enslaved Africans.  Such use of enslaved Africans was an unfair business practice set 
forth by the cruel and inhumane Slave Codes created and enforced by states.  Planters in 
turn purchased the finished product, a cheap, coarse cloth called “Negro cloth,” to clothe 
their human chattel.  The fabric served as a reminder to enslaved Africans of their inferior 
status in life.
21 
 
                                                 
21 Jim Cox, “Textile Firm Linked to ‘Negro Cloth’ for slaves,”   USA Today, Feb. 21, 2002.


--- PAGE 517 ---
An Act establishing the New Jersey African-American Reconciliation 
Study Commission and making an appropriation. 
 
Be It Enacted by the Senate and General Assembly of the State of New Jersey: 
 
1. The Legislature finds and declares that: 
 
a. The institution of slavery in America dates back to the beginning of the colonial period.  Slavery 
was constitutionally and statutorily sanctioned by the United States government from 1789 through 
1865.  During that period, millions of persons of African origin were brought to this country against 
their will, deprived of their liberty, their property, their children and often their lives.  Slavery 
assaulted the dignity and humanity of the persons who were enslaved, treating them as property and 
forced them to work under brutal physical and psychological conditions. 
 
b. The presence of slavery in New Jersey can be dated from the beginnings of Dutch settlement, 
between 1625 and 1626.   
 
c. The growing influence of the abolitionist movement in this State lead to the outlawing of the 
importation of slaves in 1786, the progressive manumission of slaves in 1794, and legislation 
enacted in 1804 to abolish slavery gradually. 
 
d. Slavery continued in New Jersey despite these laws.  The State Legislature passed "Peace 
Resolutions" denying President Lincoln's power to emancipate slaves and later voted against the 
13th Amendment to the United States Constitution.  Slavery was not abolished in this State until 
the 1865 enactment of the 13th Amendment. 
 
e. Emancipation was followed by over one hundred years of legal segregation and widespread 
discrimination against African-Americans.  Core elements of our democracy were affected, 
including voting and other political and constitutional rights and our system of civil and criminal 
justice.  These legacies of slavery impeded African-American efforts to protect themselves and 
their communities through political action. 
 
f. Slaves and their descendants were deprived of access to real property, public accommodations, 
public benefits and other resources that have enabled voluntary immigrant groups to advance 
economically in America. 
 
g. The legacy of slavery survives in New Jersey to this day, in the form of racial discrimination, 
racial profiling and social and economic segregation.  These legacies affect all areas of  
individual and community life, including housing, education, employment, health care, spiritual 
life, political rights, law enforcement and justice. 
 
h. The full effects of the institution and legacies of slavery on African-Americans living in New 
Jersey and their communities have never been sufficiently examined, nor has there been formal


--- PAGE 518 ---
acknowledgment of such effects, remedies for past injustice and present harm, or sufficient efforts 
at reconciliation. 
i. Reconciliation between the African-Americans community and other communities in New Jersey 
would benefit all persons in this State. 
 
j. Precedents in our country for reconciliation and remedies for past injustice have involved Native 
Americans, Japanese Americans, Jews, Filipino veterans and African-Americans victimized by the 
1930s' syphilis experiments, and the Rosewood riots. 
 
k. The Legislature declares that it is in the interest of the State and of the people of New Jersey for 
government to initiate and foster methods of improving knowledge and understanding between 
African-Americans and other peoples in New Jersey and adopting and initiating tested methods to 
foster communication and dialogue, for the purpose of achieving reconciliation and peace.  
 
2. There is established in the Executive Branch of the State Government a commission to be known 
as the New Jersey African-American Reconciliation Study Commission.  For the purpose of 
complying with the provisions of Article V, Section IV, paragraph 1 of the New Jersey 
Constitution, the commission is allocated within the Department of State. 
 
3. a. The commission shall consist of 39 members, chosen to ensure ethnic diversity and broad 
geographic representation within New Jersey.  Commission members shall be persons who are 
leaders in African-American organizations or communities, or have training or a verifiable interest 
in the history of slavery in America, New Jersey history and political science, African-American 
history, African-Caribbean history, labor history, penal history and law enforcement, economics, 
education, health, housing, human services, law, psychology, religion or sociology. 
 
b. The Secretary of State shall be a member of the commission.  The Governor shall appoint 31 
public members, three shall be historians, two shall be students or members of youth organizations 
that support the work of the commission, two shall be members of the public, one person shall have 
expertise in public health administration and policies affecting the African-American community, 
one shall be recommended by the Director of the Division on Civil Rights in the Department of 
Law and Public Safety, one shall be recommended by the Director of the Office of Bias Crimes and 
Community Relations in the Division of Criminal Justice in the Department of Law and Public 
safety, one shall be recommended by Amnesty International-USA, one shall be recommended by 
the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey, one shall be recommended by the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, one shall be recommended by the New Jersey 
Human and Civil Rights Association, one shall be recommended by the New Jersey Black Issues 
Convention, one shall be recommended by the National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in 
America, one shall be recommended by the New Jersey Coalition for Reparations, one shall be 
recommended by the Coalition for Justice, one shall be recommended by the Urban League, one 
shall be recommended by the New Jersey Chapter of the Association of Black Psychologists; one 
attorney shall be recommended by the Association of Black Women Lawyers of New Jersey and 
one attorney shall be recommended by the New Jersey Bar Association, each of which shall have 
experience in reparations, the representation of African-Americans or advocacy on behalf of the 
interests of African-Americans; one shall be recommended by the Black Cops Against Police 
Brutality, one shall be recommended by the Black Minister's Council, one shall be recommended


--- PAGE 519 ---
by the Black Psychiatrists of America, one shall be recommended by the Black Trade Unionists, 
one shall be recommended by the Education Law Center, one shall be recommended by the Fair 
Share Housing Center, one shall be recommended by the New Jersey Chapter of the National 
Economic Association, one shall be recommended by the New Jersey Association of Black 
Sociologists, and one shall be recommended by the New Jersey Association on Correction.  No 
more than 16 members appointed by the Governor shall be members of the same political party. 
 
c. Each Senate President shall appoint one member of the Senate, each of whom shall be a member 
of a different political party.  The Speaker of the General Assembly and the Majority Leader and 
the Minority Leader of the General Assembly shall each appoint one member of the General 
Assembly, no more than two of which shall be members of the same political party.  The Senate 
Presidents, together with the Speaker of the General Assembly and the Minority leader thereof shall 
jointly appoint two additional members, each shall be recommended by the Black and Latino 
Caucus and each shall be members of different political parties.   
 
d. Vacancies in the membership of the commission shall be filled in the same manner as the 
original appointments were made. 
 
4. The members of the commission shall be appointed and shall hold their initial organizational 
meeting within 60 days after the effective date of this act.  The members shall elect one of the 
members to serve as chair and the chair may appoint a secretary, who need not be a member of the 
commission.  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be 
eligible for reimbursement for necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of  
their official duties within the limits of funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the 
commission for its purposes.  In addition, the commission shall solicit, receive and accept 
appropriations, gifts and donations.  Legislative members shall serve during the term for which they 
were elected or selected. 
 
5.  The commission shall meet at least monthly and at the call of the chair.  A meeting of the 
commission shall be called upon the request of 20 of the commission's members and 20 members 
of the commission shall constitute a quorum at any meeting thereof. 
 
6. a. The commission shall hold at least five public hearings in different parts of the State, including 
Newark, Paterson, New Brunswick, Trenton and Camden at such times and places as the 
commission shall determine.  The mayor of the city or municipality in which the hearing is held, 
the members of the board of chosen freeholds and the members of the Human Relations Committee 
of the county in which the city or municipality is located shall be invited to testify before the 
commission.  All issues raised by those testifying at the hearings shall be recorded and included, 
together with the commission's responses if any, in the commission's report to the Governor and 
Legislature.  
 
b. The commission shall publicize its mission and procedures throughout the State, through county 
human rights committees, the organizations recommending members of the commission and 
other ways.  The commission shall invite public comment on the issues raised by the commission 
as part of its responsibilities.


--- PAGE 520 ---
7. The commission shall have the following responsibilities:   
 
a. examine the institution of slavery and its legacies in the colony and the State  between 1625 and 
the present;  
 
b. examine the extent to which the State supported the institution of slavery in its Constitutional 
and statutory law and in its regulations, policies, practices and judicial decisions; 
 
c identify the State-created or supported entities that profited or attempted to profit from 
commercial involvement with the international and domestic trade of African slaves or from the 
forced labor of African slaves and their descendants; 
 
d. examine the extent to which State laws that discriminated against freed African slaves, their 
decedents and other African-Americans residing in New Jersey, and to identify policies and 
practices, including economic, political and social discrimination by the State and State-created or 
supported entities, between 1865 and the present;  
 
e. examine the extent to which the State and State-created and supported entities benefited from the 
institution and legacies of slavery;  
 
f. examine the effects of the institution and legacies of slavery on African-Americans and their 
communities in New Jersey;  
 
g. quantify the debt owed by the State of New Jersey, local governments and State-created and 
supported entities to African-Americans residing in New Jersey for wages, benefits, interest and 
compensation for the de jure and de facto support and protection of the institution of slavery and its 
legacies; 
 
h. recommend specific remedies be offered to African-Americans residing in New Jersey and their 
communities for violations of the human and civil rights of African-Americans during two 
centuries of slavery, and the continuing suffering and harm caused by segregation, discrimination 
and other social, economic and political effects of slavery and its legacies; 
 
i. determine eligibility requirements for individuals and communities to be offered such remedies; 
 
j. research methods and materials for facilitating education, community dialogue, symbolic 
acknowledgment and other formal actions leading to reconciliation and a sense of justice among 
the peoples of this State; 
 
k. make recommendations for local, county and Statewide actions to follow up the commission's 
recommendations; 
 
l. estimate the intended benefits and costs of the commission's recommendations; and 
 
m. consider such other matters relating to the institution and legacies of slavery in New Jersey as 
the members of the commission may deem appropriate.


--- PAGE 521 ---
8.  a.  The commission is authorized to call upon any department, office, division or agency of the 
State, or of any county, municipality or school district of the State, to supply such data, program 
reports and other information, personnel and assistance as it deems necessary to discharge its 
responsibilities under this act.  
 
b.  These departments, offices, divisions and agencies shall, to the extent possible and not 
inconsistent with any other law of this State, cooperate with the commission and shall furnish 
it with such information, personnel and assistance as may be necessary or helpful to accomplish the 
purposes of this act.  
 
c. The commission is authorized to procure the services of such experts and consultants to assist 
with its work as it deems necessary. 
 
9. The commission shall report its initial findings and recommendations to the Governor, the 
Legislature and the public within 16 months of its initial organizational meeting.  The initial report 
shall be disseminated widely throughout the State, with notice given that additional comments 
received by the commission within 60 days after the release of the initial report shall be forwarded 
to the Governor and the Legislature.  After the initial report is released, the commission shall 
provide quarterly reports of its activities and findings to the Governor and the Legislature for the 
duration of its existence. 
 
10. There shall be appropriated from the General Fund to the commission the sum of $75,000 to 
effectuate its provisions. 
 
11.  This act shall take effect immediately and shall expire on the day exactly five years after the 
commission submits its findings and recommendations to the Governor and Legislature. 
 
STATEMENT 
 
This bill establishes in the Department of State a 39-member New Jersey African-American 
Reconciliation Study Commission. 
 
The commission has the following responsibilities: 
 
1) examine the institution of slavery and its legacies in the colony and the State  between 1625 and 
the present; 
 
2) examine the extent to which the State supported the institution of slavery in its Constitutional 
and statutory law and in its regulations, policies, practices and judicial decisions; 
 
3) identify the State-created or supported entities that profited or attempted to profit from 
commercial involvement with the international and domestic trade of African slaves or from the 
forced labor of African slaves and their descendants;


--- PAGE 522 ---
4) examine the extent to which State laws that discriminated against freed African slaves, their 
decedents and other African-Americans residing in New Jersey, and to identify policies and 
practices, including economic, political and social discrimination by the State and State-created or 
supported entities, between 1865 and the present; 
 
5) examine the extent to which the State and State-created and supported entities benefited from the 
institution and legacies of slavery; 
 
6) examine the effects of the institution and legacies of slavery on African-Americans and their 
communities in New Jersey; 
 
7) quantify the debt owed by the State of New Jersey, local governments and State-created and 
supported entities to African-Americans residing in New Jersey for wages, benefits, interest and 
compensation for the de jure and de facto support and protection of the institution  of slavery and 
its legacies; 
 
8) recommend specific remedies be offered to African-Americans residing in New Jersey and their 
communities for violations of the human and civil rights of African-Americans during two 
centuries of slavery, and the continuing suffering and harm caused by segregation, discrimination 
and other social, economic and political effects of slavery and its legacies; 
 
9) determine eligibility requirements for individuals and communities to be offered such remedies; 
 
10) research methods and materials for facilitating education, community dialogue, symbolic 
acknowledgment and other formal actions leading to reconciliation and a sense of justice among 
the peoples of this State; 
 
11) make recommendations for local, county and Statewide actions to follow up the commission's 
recommendations; 
 
12) estimate the intended benefits and costs of the commission's recommendations; and 
 
13) consider such other matters relating to the institution and legacies of slavery in New Jersey as 
the members of the commission may deem appropriate.  
 
The commission is to include among its 39 members the Secretary of State.  The Governor would 
appoint 31 public members, three historians, two students or members of youth organizations that 
support the work of the commission, two members of the public, one person with expertise in 
public health administration and policies affecting the African-American community, one 
recommended by the Director of the Division on Civil Rights in the Department of Law and Public 
Safety, one recommended by the Director of the Office of Bias Crimes and Community Relations 
in the Division of Criminal Justice in the Department of Law and Public safety, one recommended 
by Amnesty International-USA, one recommended by the American Civil Liberties Union of New 
Jersey, one recommended by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People,


--- PAGE 523 ---
one recommended by the New Jersey Human and Civil Rights Association, one recommended by 
the New Jersey Black Issues Convention, one recommended by the National Coalition of Blacks 
for Reparations in America, one recommended by the New Jersey Coalition for Reparations, 
one recommended by the Coalition for Justice, one recommended by the Urban League, one 
recommended by the New Jersey Chapter of the Association of Black Psychologists; one attorney 
recommended by the Association of Black Women Lawyers of New Jersey and one attorney 
recommended by the New Jersey Bar Association, each of which must have experience in 
reparations, the representation of African-Americans or advocacy on behalf of the interests of 
African-Americans; one recommended by the Black Cops Against Police Brutality, one 
recommended by the Black Minister's Council, one recommended by the Black Psychiatrists of 
America, one recommended by the Black Trade Unionists, one recommended by the Education 
Law Center, one recommended by the Fair Share Housing Center, one recommended by the New 
Jersey Chapter of the National Economic Association, one recommended by the New Jersey 
Association of Black Sociologists, and one recommended by the New Jersey Association 
on Correction.  No more than 16 members appointed by the Governor could be members of the 
same political party.  Each Senate President would appoint one member of the Senate, each of 
which must be a member of a different political party.  The Speaker of the General Assembly and 
the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader of the General Assembly would each appoint 
one member of the General Assembly, no more than two of which can be members of the same 
political party.  The Senate Presidents, together with the Speaker of the General Assembly and the 
Minority leader thereof would jointly appoint two additional members, each of which must be 
recommended by the Black and Latino Caucus and members of different political parties.  
Legislative members shall serve during the term for which they were elected or selected. 
The commission is to report its initial findings and recommendations to the Governor and 
Legislature within 16 months of its initial organizational meeting, which is to occur within 60 days 
of the date the bill becomes law.  After the initial report is released, the commission is to provide 
quarterly reports of its activities and findings to the Governor and the Legislature for the duration 
of its  five-year existence.  Finally, the bill appropriates from the General Fund to the commission 
the sum of $75,000 to effectuate its provisions. 
 
                            
Establishes 39-member New Jersey African-American Reconciliation 
Study Commission; appropriates $75,000.


--- PAGE 524 ---



--- PAGE 525 ---



--- PAGE 526 ---



--- PAGE 527 ---



--- PAGE 528 ---



--- PAGE 529 ---



--- PAGE 530 ---



--- PAGE 531 ---



--- PAGE 532 ---



--- PAGE 533 ---



--- PAGE 534 ---



--- PAGE 535 ---



--- PAGE 536 ---



--- PAGE 537 ---



--- PAGE 538 ---



--- PAGE 539 ---



--- PAGE 540 ---



--- PAGE 541 ---



--- PAGE 542 ---



--- PAGE 543 ---



--- PAGE 544 ---



--- PAGE 545 ---
The Meaning of Reparation 
 
The Meaning of Reparation 
 
Kimani Nehusi 
 
 
 
The original version of this paper was presented to the Birmingham Preparatory 
Reparation Conference, 11 December 1993. 
 
For the African people a full and correct understanding of the term ‘reparation’ 
demands that this notion be applied to the specific historical experience and the 
related contemporary condition of the great majority of our people across this 
planet. It will then be seen clearly that the meaning of this term transcends 
repayment for past and continuing wrong, to embrace self-rehabilitation through 
education, organisation and mobilisation. 
 
Ultimately, reparation means redressing the poverty of the people of Africa and 
the African Diaspora. There is a vulgar contradiction in the fact that the first 
civilisation of this planet is now the most backward in technology and social 
infrastructure, that the continent richest in resources has the poorest people with 
the least control over our lives. All of this is a direct result of centuries of 
destruction, subjugation and continuing exploitation of the African people and our 
resources. This meaning of reparation offers an end to this condition, as well as 
posing some fundamental questions of self-liberation. 
 
Etymology 
 
The term ‘reparation’ has its origin in Latin, but reached the English language 
through Old French. There are a number of meanings or shades of meaning 
associated with this concept. Its line of development is through one of the 
meanings of Modern English ‘repair’: to restore to good condition, after damage 
or wear; to set right, or make amends for (loss, wrong, error). This has come from 
the Latin reparare via Old French reparer. The Late Latin noun reparatio, from 
the verb reparare, gives rise, via Old French réparation, to Modern English 
‘reparation’: the act, or instance of making amends; compensation. 
 
It is timely to mention the other meaning of Modern English ‘repair’, for it sheds 
light on current confusions about exactly what forms reparation might take. 
Ironically, in the context of twentieth century racism in Britain, the second 
meaning of ‘repair’ (to resort to, have recourse; go often, or in great numbers, or 
for a specific purpose) has a quite different etymology from the first, deriving via 
Old French repairer, from Late Latin repatriare - to repatriate. Originally bearing 
a benign association (and still recorded as such in the Concise Oxford Dictionary) 
in the intransitive mode (to return to one’s native land), and even in the transitive 
(to restore (a person) to his or her native land), it has come to bear a malign 
denotation (to force ‘unwanted’ people back to their  supposed native land, 
whether they were born there or not). ‘Repatriation’ now has clinging to it, even 
Caribnet  Issue No 3  September 2000 31


--- PAGE 546 ---
The Meaning of Reparation 
 
moulding its central meaning, this sort of racist wishful thinking; so this sense of  
forcible ousting from a country or territory is conjured up with the use of the 
word, but it also hides under the benign shade of the original sense, that of an 
altruistic act of restoring someone to their native land. How often have we heard 
racists claim that, if black people are not happy in this country (the UK), they 
should ‘go back to where they came from’? It is difficult to use the word 
‘repatriation’ today without its operating as a euphemism for this sentiment. 
 
Discussion about reparation within the African Diaspora has tended to include the 
possibility of claiming payment for voluntary ‘repatriation’ from the nation states 
who have historically wronged us. However, the unfortunate visual similarity 
between the words ‘reparation’ and ‘repatriation’, and their coincidence in their 
Modern English manifestation (‘repair’), should serve to remind us of the dangers 
of easy elision, for to include repatriation in our discussions about reparation 
could well open the way for a sort of slippage, or telescoping, so that reparation 
comes to signify, and even mean, repatriation in its malign sense.  
 
With this caveat in mind, it is of the utmost importance for all Africans to 
consciously define this term in accordance with our own perceptions and practice. 
We have to be capable of employing the etymology of the languages of our 
oppressors in achieving our own ends. This means that whenever necessary we 
must turn around the use of these languages, which we first encountered as tools 
of our oppression, and deploy them as weapons for our liberation. 
 
It is also important to enrich our understanding of this notion of reparation by 
employing similar concepts from African languages. But above all we must 
recognise very clearly that the proper role of our scholars can only be to help, 
educate and advise us. In the final analysis it must be the African masses, the 
great majority of us, who decide on the meaning of the concept of reparation for 
Africans. 
 
The Great Holocaust 
 
Africans cannot understand the meaning of reparation unless we understand why 
we are owed reparations, and by whom. The importance to us of this term lies 
both in the horrendous pain and suffering that have been inflicted upon us in the 
Great Holocaust, which is still continuing, and more particularly in our restoration 
of ourselves as a vibrant and united people who make our own history - free from 
the evil impositions of those who oppress us. Many reams of paper could be 
covered by this and undoubtedly many reams of paper need to be devoted to it, 
but for the moment only the outline of this case can be presented because of the 
need for brevity. 
 
The term ‘holocaust’ means general or complete destruction, especially of a large 
number of persons. In modern times this term conjures up only the suffering 
inflicted upon the Jews by the Nazis in the period around 1930 to 1945. It is not a 
pleasant task to compare the suffering of peoples and highlight the differences in 
duration, extent, impact, restitution, and so on. However, in today’s world such 
Caribnet  Issue No 3  September 2000 32


--- PAGE 547 ---
The Meaning of Reparation 
 
comparisons have been made imperative by the continuing racism and 
insensitivity of the western world and their wicked and utter disregard for the 
African people as well as the continuing impoverishment and endangering of our 
people by these very interests. 
 
So, though comparisons are usually invidious, one needs at least to question why 
there is seen to be only one holocaust. Most estimates of the number of Jews 
murdered by the Nazis arrive at a figure of about six million. In contrast, even 
Eurocentric apologists for the destruction of Africa and Africans put the figure of 
murdered Africans at eleven million for the European aspect of this Great 
Holocaust. A much more realistic estimate put this number at over two hundred 
million. Besides, although pogroms had been organised against the Jews for many 
generations, the sustained intensity of the attack upon Africa and Africans has 
been much greater - not witnessed in the history of this planet. No other nation 
has been so obliterated, save perhaps for the native American people. 
 
Eurocentrism in particular has attempted to construct a false and demeaning 
identity for us. We Africans have the longest history in the world, for we are the 
first People, the only real autochthones of Mother Earth. Yet we are told that we 
have no history. We invented history, science, architecture, the first civilisations; 
and we civilised Europe. Yet this false identity tries to say that we have never 
developed anything. African civilisation was constructed on the principles of 
Humanism, Matriarchy (gender equality), Collectivism, a profound respect for the 
environment, and a great desire to live in harmony with it (today called 
environmentalism), on Spirituality and on a trajectory towards Pan-Africanism. 
The highest expression of these fundamental principles is in Ma’at, the 
philosophy of Kemet (Ancient Egypt). Today, our centres of learning (the first 
universities in the world), including great libraries, have been destroyed. Much of 
our civilisation, and therefore the history and achievements of the world, have  
been obliterated and our artefacts shipped to many parts of the European world. 
Our very culture is under relentless attack. Many of us have believed the lies told 
about us and have accepted a status inferior to that of our despoilers. 
 
The full meaning of reparations for us rests with a complete understanding of this 
history by all Africans. We must come to understand ourselves - both our riches 
and our losses. Africans everywhere have a sacred duty to understand and put into 
the popular consciousness of the world the fact that we Africans are the victims of 
the largest holocaust which has ever  been perpetrated in the history of this planet, 
and that we have never been given reparations, not even an apology. 
 
The African holocaust has unfolded under the twin catastrophes of the Arab 
invasion, destruction and subjugation of Africa, and the European invasion, 
subjugation and destruction of Africa. This Great Holocaust has resulted in the 
imposition of foreign values which do not serve the interests of Africa. It has also 
caused consequent confusion among many generations of us about who we are 
and what are our real interests. 
 
Caribnet  Issue No 3  September 2000 33


--- PAGE 548 ---
The Meaning of Reparation 
 
The Arabs employed warfare and the religion of Islam as their chief weapons. 
Two major outcomes are the enslavement of millions of Africans and an increase 
in the African Diaspora in the East. (Historically, there have been large migrations 
from Africa to the East; Africans founded many civilisations and states there.) 
The Europeans employed warfare and the religion of Euro-Christianity as their 
chief weapons. Major outcomes are the enslavement of millions of Africans, an 
African Diaspora in the west, and the continuing presence of settler colonialism in 
Africa - the most notorious example having been apartheid in Azania. The foreign 
attack upon Africa continues to this day. All Africans must know this history. 
 
How Long? How Many?: Detecting and Quantifying our Injuries and Loss 
 
Much work still needs to be devoted to detecting and quantifying all our injuries. 
Here are some of the questions we must be able to answer fully or in part: 
* How many Africans died as a result of the practices of enslavement and 
trading in enslaved Africans? 
* How many Africans died in the Great Holocaust? The figure we arrive at 
must include all who went to join our ancestors as a result of Arab and European 
activity - both directly and indirectly. It must therefore include all the murders 
inflicted upon us, as well as those who left this side of reality from the famines, 
hunger and starvation promoted by our tormentors, those who were driven to 
suicide, infanticide, patricide, matricide; those who died through overwork, 
disease, etc. 
* How many Africans were enslaved in Arab countries and in the European-
controlled west? What is the total number of hours we have been labouring in 
these places for lashes instead of wages in the largest pogroms of forced labour in  
history? 
* How many of us have been overworked, underpaid, refused promotion, 
refused employment, under-employed, and otherwise discriminated against - and 
for  how long? 
* How many of us have lost life or limb in the pursuit of our basic human 
right to resist enslavement, to be free, to associate with whomsoever we choose? 
How many of us were mutilated, both physically and mentally, in these places? 
How many of us were raped, beaten, used as studs, etc.? 
* Has there been another people whose environment was made dangerously 
hostile through being thrown out on our own at ‘emancipation’, untrained, 
unsupported by any programme of public assistance, ejected into this vast 
plantation of prejudice? Has there ever been a people who have had to climb up 
from these vast depths of deprivation, overcome such sustained hostility in order 
to enjoy basic human rights - which are still denied us? 
* How many of us were lynched in the USA, that bastion of civilisation and 
epitome of the ‘advanced free world’? 
* How many of us have been sent to join our ancestors or maimed 
(physically or psychologically) in imperialist wars into which we have been 
forcibly deployed? 
* How many of us have been discriminated against on racial grounds? What 
has been the total impact of this upon us - psychologically, economically, 
socially? 
Caribnet  Issue No 3  September 2000 34


--- PAGE 549 ---
The Meaning of Reparation 
 
* How many of us have been the victims of false diagnosis, incomplete 
treatment, etc.?  
* How many of us have been falsely imprisoned in the mental hospitals of 
the west, or have been deliberately exposed to diseases, or have had our wombs 
wrongfully removed? 
* How many of our children have been psychologically damaged through 
being alienated, deliberately held back, held in low esteem by teachers, etc. in the 
racist education system of the west? 
* How many of our cultural artefacts were stolen, damaged or destroyed in  
these processes? 
* How many of our inventions were stolen or used without our permission? 
* How much of our property, including our lands, has been stolen, destroyed 
or abused by our oppressors? 
* What is the total sum misappropriated from us through that reprehensible 
notion of ‘free’ trade and the operation of those western institutions which serve 
its purpose: GATT (now WTO), IMF, ‘World’ Bank, the so-called charitable 
institutions, Aid, etc., etc.? 
* How many Africans have been rendered poorer or murdered by the 
‘World’ Bank and IMF ‘remedies’, such as Structural Adjustment Programmes, 
Restructuring, etc.? 
 
Assessing the Damages, Counting the Cost 
 
The three tasks here are these: 
 
* Assessing how far (that is, how developed) we would have been as a 
people if these wrongs had not been perpetrated. This seems the same as finding 
out how much these atrocities have prevented and distorted our development. 
* Assessing how much (or what) it will take to restore us to where we would 
have been but for these injuries. 
* Assessing the entire cost of restoration, plus compensation for our 
injuries. 
 
There are some problems which appear to arise here. For example, how do we 
count the cost of human lives? Our oppressors can be made to return all our 
artefacts, but they cannot return the creative talent, the vision and the energy lost 
to us with the lives they took from us. How will they pay? How do you count the 
cost of the generations of disconnection from our history and our culture? How 
does one calculate in monetary terms the loss of tongues, the retreat of learning 
and the word? How do you count the cost of the identity crisis, self hate, 
confusion and the other forms of psychological damage we have sustained as a 
result of the destruction and distortion of our history and our culture? 
 
We could go on to mention a number of other things here, but also have to 
establish how those who have wronged us may correct their historical mistakes. 
What action must they undertake to atone for the inhumanities they have been 
inflicting upon us? 
 
Caribnet  Issue No 3  September 2000 35


--- PAGE 550 ---
The Meaning of Reparation 
 
They must guarantee to cease these injustices totally and immediately. They must 
pay a sum of money, to be agreed upon by us, for all the injuries they have 
inflicted upon us, including the social disorganisation of Africa and the cost of the 
consequent disruption and the distortion of the rate of development and patterns 
of development we were unfolding on our continent before their wicked 
interventions. 
 
This sum must include the interest which would have accrued to the time of 
payment if the damages were paid promptly, as well as a further sum which 
results from the cost of further injuries sustained as a result of the delay in 
compensation and the consequent deprivation of collective health. (It is perhaps 
useful to note here in passing that when, in the last century, the European 
bourgeois class recognised that it was in their interest to terminate the system of 
chattel enslavement, they ‘compensated’ our enslavers, who were another group 
of Europeans. They did not compensate us, though in the USA, they ‘promised’ 
each of us forty acres of land and a mule.) 
 
This sum must also include a quantification of the negative impact on Africa of 
the loss of millions of our ‘most virile and productive’ sons and daughters (in the 
words of Walter Rodney), as well as the positive impact of the labour, both 
physical and mental, of the survivors among us in the Arab and European 
controlled lands; for it is we who built these ‘shining cities of the damned’. (The 
Industrial Revolution and the processes of Western development consequent upon 
it, were all made possible mainly because of the vast accumulation of the 
bourgeois class of Europe. African labour, and other resources, were by far the 
major factor in this accumulation.) 
 
All the cultural artefacts stolen from us over the centuries must be returned. 
Damages must be paid for the deprivation of our people of the use of these items. 
Damages must be paid for those artefacts damaged, destroyed or otherwise lost as 
a result of these nefarious interventions. 
 
The centuries of lies, misrepresentation and distortion of our history, and therefore 
of world history, must be corrected. This process of correction must begin 
immediately, must take place throughout the world, especially among Europeans, 
who were also the victims, but also among us. They must not be permitted to 
undertake this process among us. We must do it for ourselves, but they must 
provide the resources. 
Compensation and damages must be paid for these centuries of lies and 
falsification and for the loss of positive self concept, for the collective amnesia, 
the neurosis, the psychosis and other harmful developments which arose from the 
conditions of captivity imposed upon us. 
 
Beyond ‘Repayment’ 
 
It must be emphasised here that reparations mean more than ‘repayment’ and 
compensation for the wholesale theft, destruction and falsification visited upon 
Africa and all Africans. We have seen that the law dictionaries define reparation 
Caribnet  Issue No 3  September 2000 36


--- PAGE 551 ---
The Meaning of Reparation 
 
to mean the recovery of rights to a country as though one was born in that 
country. This is a very important aspect of reparation which should also be well 
understood by all Africans. For many generations the notion of ‘Back to Africa’, 
especially as articulated in the doctrine and practice of Rastafari, has sought to 
concretise this very meaning of reparation. 
 
Many Rastafari use the term ‘repatriation’ to express this longing for Africa, and a 
determination to return physically. However, when we examine the practice of 
Rastafari, we can see that the idea of a return to Africa goes beyond just 
repatriation, the physical resettlement on the continent of our ancestors. It also 
means a return to the values, culture and history of Africa, and a particular 
Africentric way of seeing the world.  
 
Many of these ideas have also been expressed in the work of Marcus Garvey, 
Malcolm X, Kwame Nkrumah and other leading fighters for the rights of Africans 
at home and abroad. In the Diaspora, the increasing preoccupation of our youth 
with the history and culture of Africa amounts to a very clear statement that the 
idea of a return to Africa also means a return to ourselves: to our history, our 
values, our institutions, our culture. For it is clear that our oppressors did not only 
physically separate Africans from Africa. They also separated Africans from our 
traditions, our values, our history. Africans at home and abroad have been 
dispossessed of our traditional role as makers of history and dumped outside of 
the process of history. We have become the objects rather than the subjects of 
history. We cannot win our freedom if we have lost our culture. Reparation must 
therefore mean a return to ourselves as the makers of our own culture and history. 
We cannot expect to transform our reality without being willing to transform 
ourselves. 
 
Africans must be equally clear about the context in which the subversion of Africa 
unfolded. This was the loss of African sovereignty to the Arabs and Europeans. 
The historical process of African underdevelopment is expressed in particular eras 
as enslavement, colonialism, neo-colonialism, and all their ramifications, such as 
racism, the creation of dependency and self hate. These are all different aspects of 
the same thing: the subversion and destruction of African civilisation, our loss of 
sovereignty and the continuing exploitation of our people and resources in a 
system organised by our exploiters for their own benefit. The ‘International’ 
Monetary Fund, ‘World’ Bank, Aid agencies and Charities are mostly successors 
to the terrorists who kidnapped and enslaved Africans, thereby taking away the 
human rights of our people.  
 
These rights have never been returned. Today millions of Africans continue to be 
impoverished and our lives fundamentally endangered by Structural Adjustment 
Programmes and other ‘medicines’ of those western institutions. The western 
media continue to distort and misrepresent Africa and Africans, sometimes even 
to ourselves. These activities constitute a continuing, organised, violation of our 
human and people’s rights, which is a violation of international law. Africans 
must know that, unless there is an end to the domination of our continent, its 
resources and the lives of our people by those foreign agencies and their African 
Caribnet  Issue No 3  September 2000 37


--- PAGE 552 ---
The Meaning of Reparation 
 
accomplices, the notion of reparation will be incomplete and ultimately 
meaningless. Another meaning of reparation for us must therefore be the 
withdrawal of these vampires and their system so that Africans can take 
responsibility for our own lives and organise our own freedom. 
 
But even all of this must not be the complete meaning of reparation. To fully 
realise all which this historical moment offers, we must recognise the initial 
meaning of reparations as return, restoration, etc., which is part of our objective, 
perhaps the initial, or most visible one to many of us. That is right, righteous and 
in total harmony with any decent and civilised notion of justice. But we must be 
very clear that merely to achieve the repayment for the centuries of wrong, 
perhaps in some form of cash, would be both an incomplete and a misleading idea 
of reparation. For the meaning of reparation also includes the notion of restoring 
our people - collectively and individually - to where we would have been had we 
not suffered from this Great Holocaust. This means that reparation must include 
the restoration of our shattered African society. We must be very clear that it is 
virtually impossible to remake the past, or to predict where we Africans as a 
people would have been today if we had not suffered from this Great Holocaust. 
However, after more than 500 years of destabilisation inside and outside Africa, it 
is equally clear that there are certain things African to which we need to return, 
which make the idea of return much more than just a physical journey. It is also 
patently clear that we are the ones who have to undertake our own rehabilitation. 
We cannot leave this to our oppressors. Only we can free ourselves. 
 
 
Organisation: Strategies and Tactics 
 
Once the objectives of reparation have been established, it is also then necessary 
to contemplate the practice which is essential for the achievement of these 
objectives, for it is our practice which will give the best meaning to this term. 
 
One of the first things we can observe about practice is that it recognises the 
notion of process. It is not an event. We must be guided by our best minds as well 
as the lessons of our history. Frederick Douglas, notable fighter for African rights 
in the USA, and Antonio Maceo, the pre-eminent commander in the Cuban war of 
independence, both observed that we have to engage in struggle to achieve our 
ends. This is because our oppressors will not surrender their power and privileges 
without a fight. We must therefore be prepared for a long struggle. In some ways 
this has already been begun - that is why we are here. 
 
Perhaps the worst thing our oppressors can do to us right now is to repay us, for 
we are in a state of unreadiness. Where is the representative organisation of all 
Africans on this planet? What are its objectives? What are our strategies and 
tactics for the way forward out of domination and impoverishment? It is important 
that the meaning of reparation also embodies a highly disciplined movement, 
supremely conscious of its historical role of self restoration. 
 
Caribnet  Issue No 3  September 2000 38


--- PAGE 553 ---
The Meaning of Reparation 
 
Caribnet  Issue No 3  September 2000 39
Some features of this Reparations Movement appear self evident at this point. As 
our struggle develops we may see the need to modify some and implement 
completely new ones. It is clear, though, that the mobilisation of all Africans is 
necessary to achieve our goals. It is also necessary to unite all of our diverse 
groups into one vast community of interests governed by the principles of African 
self determination, collectivism and internal democracy. 
 
W.E.B. Dubois, one of our foremost intellectuals, said that the twentieth century 
would be the century of the ‘colour line’, that we would decide on this question of 
segregation and racial discrimination. We stand at the close of this century now, 
surveying the opening of the twenty-first century. We ought to be careful to check 
to see if we Africans have fulfilled or failed this challenge, and why. But 
whatever answers we find let us ensure that the challenge of the twenty-first 
century is the challenge of self-organisation and self-rehabilitation offered by this 
issue of Reparation. 
 
******************************************************************
**


--- PAGE 554 ---
REMARKS 
Milton McGriff 
National Coordinator 
A Year of Black Presence Coalition (AYBP) 
National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America (N’COBRA) 
 
Press Conference on Capitol Hill 
January 30, 2003 
 
We read and hear a lot about how the country has moved to the right and how so many 
ambitious politicians try to find the political center. The work we’re doing is the 
beginning of moving them back from being on the right to DOING right. With the help of 
the Creator, we’re going to show that standing in the moral center is superior to being 
weak-kneed in the political center. Being politically in the center with moderate views on 
everything when radical change is needed, is like being neutral and taking positions to try 
and please everybody. I believe it was Dante who said the hottest places in Hell are 
reserved for those who, in a time of great moral crisis, choose to maintain their neutrality. 
     
Among our many great men and women who are with the ancestors, I have chosen the 
wisdom of two, Malcolm X and the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, to show us how to 
get HR 40 passed in a timely manner. 
 
Brother Malcolm told us that, of all the disciplines, history was best suited to reward our 
research. For our purposes, I take that to mean that as long as we place our views in the 
context of history, our argument to pass HR 40 and obtain a reparations settlement is 
irrefutable. Brother Malcolm also said that he believed in doing anything that was 
intelligently directed and designed to get results. Those should be out litmus tests for 
action: Is it intelligently directed? Is it designed to get results? 
 
In his brilliant work of genius, “Letter From Birmingham Jail,” Brother Martin spelled 
out a blueprint for action that is designed to get results. There are four basic steps, he 
said. (1) collection of the facts to determine whether injustices are alive, (2) negotiation, 
(3) self-purification, and (4) direct action.  
 
Nonviolent direct action, Dr. King explained, “seeks to create such a crisis and establish 
such creative tension that a community that has constantly refused to negotiate is forced 
to confront the issue ... the purpose of the direct action is to create a situation so crisis-
packed that it will inevitably open the door to negotiation.”  
 
Today we want to talk about the possibilities of working together with our friends in 
Congress, and working together against our adversaries in Congress, to get a bill of 
monumental significance passed: HR40.  HR40 has languished in the House Judiciary 
Committee since it was first introduced in 1989. When HR40 is passed, a discussion will 
begin with the government, for the first time in the nation’s history, about reparations and


--- PAGE 555 ---
restitution for Black people. We will talk, for the first time, about a debt due because 60 
to 100 million of our ancestors were snatched from their African homeland into captivity. 
We have indeed been strangers in a strange land. In 1865, the captors of our ancestors 
claimed to set them free — free without a ny land, free without any funds, free without 
any education, free without any property and, as it turned out, free without any freedom. 
In other words, free without reparations for irrefutable crimes against humanity that had 
lasted 246 years. 
 
We’re here to begin a dialogue about these issues because they are being ignored by most 
of the policymakers here inside the Beltway. There’s a need for a Black Agenda and 
that’s not even being discussed. Any sensible Black Agenda must discuss reparations 
because it must place the problems facing African-Americans within the context of 
history. Conservative politicians and policymakers who are currently dominating the 
dialogue in Washington can only make the arguments they make by ignoring or distorting 
history. We must not let that happen. 
 
Some critics say, “We never enslaved anybody. You’ve never been enslaved. All the 
slaveholders and slaves are dead. Why should we pay anything?” I say to those critics, 
you weren’t here when the Constitution and Declaration of Independence were written, 
and all the people who wrote them, and all the people who lived then, who benefited and 
suffered under them, are dead, so why should you benefit from them?  
 
But I also tell them the country was so steeped in the racism that the United States 
government was incapable of doing what was right in 1865 and 1875. If the country had 
not ended Reconstruction with a new Reconstruction, the reconstruction of the evil 
ideology of white supremacy, if the country had not held white privilege and white 
supremacy in place with presidents like Rutherford Hayes and Woodrow Wilson and 
senators like Strom Thurmond and Jesse Helms (members in good standing in that all-
white club known as the United States Senate), if the government had acknowledged its 
debt for the crimes committed against our ancestors, then we wouldn’t have to be here 
today having this conversation about reparations. 
 
Furthermore, the crimes didn’t stop in 1865. Slavery was modernized when a racist 
Supreme Court provided the backbone for white supremacy with a ruling that said 
“separate but equal” was the law of the land, knowing full well that everything — 
ownership of property, jobs, education, health care, housing, the inalienable right to life, 
liberty and the pursuit of happiness — would be as unequal as they could possibly make 
it. So those who say it happened way back then have historical amnesia and need to 
check themselves with that idiotic argument. 
 
So since we never had that discussion, we need to have it today and we are going to have 
it with our elected representatives. The United States needs to explain to the world why 
they never even considered paying restitution as reparation for the most horrendous 
crimes committed against an enslaved people in human history. 
 
The man who currently sits in the White House, a house reserved throughout history for


--- PAGE 556 ---
white males, had an opportunity to tell the world and set the record right in September 
2001, at the United Nations World Conference Against Racism in Durban, South Africa. 
But instead President Bush and Secretary of State Colin Powell, with an astonishing 
display of arrogance, told the world that the kidnapping, murder and rape of 60 to 100 
million Africans across two and a half centuries, the unpaid labor across the same span of 
time, the lynching and degradation and discrimination across another century, did not 
constitute crimes against humanity. Bush told Powell he couldn’t go to the conference 
and Powell stayed home. Neither man said whether they do not consider kidnapping, 
murder and rape crimes, or whether they do not consider our ancestors human. In 
Powell’s case, they’re his ancestors, too, and I feel sad that he dishonored them.  
 
When our ancestors were snatched to the ships, slavery was not new. Enslaving people 
goes back almost to the dawn of recorded history. What was new was the forcible 
stripping of a people of virtually everything that enables a human being to know him or 
herself as a human being. Left spiritually naked without their identities, their names, their 
language, their religion, their family structure, their own laws, their culture, our forebears 
were then told to toil to build a new nation in which they would have no voice. Those 
who did have a voice in this new nation, the Washingtons and Jeffersons and Franklins 
and Andrew Johnsons and Robert E. Lees and Jefferson Davises, would enforce this 
relationship, this Holocaust of enslavement, with violence and terror, as would their 
successors, the Richard Russells and Ross Barnetts and George Wallaces and Strom 
Thurmonds and Jesse Helmses and J. Edgar Hoovers and Richard Nixons and Ronald 
Reagans. 
 
HR 40 is still in committee 14 years after it was first introduced because there are 
policymakers, virtually all of them conservatives, who do not want the bill to see the light 
of day. 
 
As I said before, most conservatives have historical amnesia. When this bill is passed, 
something unprecedented will happen. For the first time in the nation’s history, its 
government would look at that history with an eye, not on white supremacy and white 
privilege, but with a formal acknowledgment, in the words of HR40’s preamble, of “the 
fundamental injustice, cruelty, brutality, and inhumanity” of the Holocaust of African 
captivity and enslavement. 
 
We say it’s time for that acknowledgment. It’s time for this government to answer some 
fundamental questions: Was an injury committed against our ancestors? What was the 
nature of that injury? Did that injury exist overtly and by illegal means up until at least 
1965? Has the nature of that injury had an impact on living African-Americans? 
 
We’re here today to talk about the language of reparations. The when, where, what, who, 
why and how of reparations. In looking at using the right language, we can determine 
several things. First, we can determine where we are on the subject. We can also decide 
what needs to be done to move this process forward. And finally, we can decide what we 
can do TOGETHER to try and transform and heal the racial divisions that have existed 
on these shores since twenty of our ancestors were forcibly taken ashore at Jamestown in


--- PAGE 557 ---
1619. 
 
Opponents of reparations claim that reparations for African-Americans will be divisive. 
The same argument was used at the dawn of the civil rights movement. The same 
argument was used during Reconstruction. And the ones making this argument are 
usually the ones who will be divisive because they defend the status quo, a status quo that 
already has us divided. They want to keep it that way. 
 
Reparations can be healing to this nation. It should seem obvious that if Black 
communities improve, the nation will improve. If the time, money and effort spent 
incarcerating our young for selling drugs imported into this country by others, if this 
effort is spent on education instead, it will be healing and the country will be better for it. 
 
Beginning in the 1960s, the entire world started looking and borrowing the techniques 
and tactics developed by African-Americans to bring progressive change. So, as we have 
in the past, let’s be the vanguard in repairing the global damage done by racism. But even 
though there is unquestionably global damage, let’s start here at home by establishing a 
dialogue between the government and the people. 
 
The WHAT is the passage of HR 40 and, just as important, making certain that we have a 
voice in who sits on the Commission. The WHEN and WHERE of working on HR40 is 
an easy one. HERE and RIGHT NOW is where it begins. NOW, this year, is when the 
bill should be passed and a commission established to study the reparations issue. 
 
The WHO is also easy. It’s you, and folks like you, as N’COBRA builds a nationwide 
movement to tell the government it demands redress. A YEAR OF BLACK PRESENCE 
may have to take more than a year. If you think we worked hard to get here, I have to tell 
you that the hard work begins today. 
 
The WHY is to honor our uncounted millions of ancestors whose voices still scream 
silently for justice and remembrance, and to use every fiber of our being to see that those 
not yet born will grow to adulthood in schools that we provide to teach them about their 
beautiful Black selves, in neighborhoods free of poisonous drugs and violence, in 
communities bright with infinite promise and hope, with health care available to all who 
need it.  In the words of Dr. Maulana Karenga, when we honor our ancestors, we honor 
not only them  but all that is good in ourselves, and when we dishonor our ancestors, we 
dishonor ourselves. 
 
Finally, a word about the president who was selected, not elected. When the president 
took time, on the birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., no less, to tell us how he was 
opposing affirmative action because it’s discriminatory and discrimination is 
unconstitutional, I saw a man who was (a) insulting the intelligence of Black folks (b) 
pandering and doing all that he can to sustain white privilege by perversely invoking the 
Constitution (c) perverting attempts, however mild, to bring justice to Black people with 
odious phrases like “states rights” and “separate but equal,” and this latest one, “reverse 
discrimination” or “reverse racism” or (d) all of the above.  I pick (d).


--- PAGE 558 ---
During the century of Jim Crow laws that were supported by violence and terror, if any 
one president had been as concerned about the Constitution as George W. Bush claims he 
is now, then racists like Thurmond and Helms would not have ascended to power in 
violation of the Constitution. We wouldn’t have to be talking about reparations in 2003 
because the justice of reparations would have been dealt with in 1873 or 1903. I believe, 
if he had been alive, that George W. Bush would have pandered to the forces of white 
supremacy then and violated the Constitution just as he panders to white supremacy now 
in his urgency to claim to be the guardian of the Constitution. We hope he will overcome 
his historical amnesia and be a guardian of justice. 
 
I did not forget the HOW of what we’re doing to come to that day when this government 
will do right instead of just being on the so-called “right.”  We will continue to do what 
we started today. We will build mass support for reparations and the passage of HR40 in 
every Black community in the country. For anyone, Republican or Democrat, at the local, 
state or federal level, we will have questions: Where do you stand on reparations? What 
are you doing to help establish a Federal Reparations Commission, a commission that we 
will have a voice in establishing? Are you working to educate the American people about 
this issue or are you trying to poison their views about the truth of this nation’s history?  
 
If we like the answer, we will vote for that politician, regardless of his color or his 
political affiliation. If we don’t like the answer, we will do all we can to defeat him or 
her. If both so-called major party candidates for a position have answers we don’t like, 
we will stand strong with a Black agenda and creatively find an alternative. We will no 
longer vote for “the lesser of two evils.” We can no longer afford to vote for any evil, 
lesser or otherwise.  
 
Reparations must be a part of the presidential campaign in 2004. If you can’t support 
reparations with a position of substance, don’t come to our community asking for our 
vote. No lip service. And please, no diluted, watery suggestions that sound like a 
variation on affirmative action. Come correct or don’t come at all. 
 
We will win because our cause is a just one. Dr. King reminded us that the moral arc of 
the universe is long but it bends toward justice.  We will win because we will give the 
nation no rest until they confront this issue. We will win because we will define the 
issues through the prism of truth while our adversaries continue to use euphemisms and 
outright lies to disguise their true intentions: sophisticated language that will maintain 
white privilege without it appearing to. We will win because God don’t like ugly, and 
ugly is the appropriate word to describe the heinous conditions that have existed in 
America for 384 years. We will win because what we are proposing is just and can heal 
this nation and overcome the forces of divisiveness who are trying to taking us back a 
century to separate and unequal. Resist with everything in your being and we will win! 
# # #


--- PAGE 559 ---
http://laws.findlaw.com/9th/9417102.html  
U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals  
CATO v USA  
JEWEL CATO; JOYCE CATO; HOWARD 
 
CATO; EDWARD CATO,                               No. 94-17102 
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants,                           D.C. No. 
 
v.                                               CV-94-01470-SBA                       
 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
 
Defendant-Appellee. 
 
 
 
LEERMA PATTERSON; CHARLES 
 
PATTERSON; BOBBIE TRICE JOHNSON,                 No. 94-17104 
 
et al.,                                          D.C. No. 
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants,                           CV-94-01193-SBA 
 
v.                                               OPINION 
 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
 
Defendant-Appellee. 
 
 
 
Appeals from the United States District Court for the Northern District of 
California Saundra B. Armstrong, District Judge, Presiding  
 
Argued and Submitted October 16, 1995--San Francisco, California  
Filed December 4, 1995  
Before: Mary M. Schroeder, Betty B. Fletcher, and Pamela Ann Rymer, Circuit Judges.  
Opinion by Judge Rymer  
COUNSEL


--- PAGE 560 ---
Eva Jefferson Paterson and William McNeill, Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights of the 
San Francisco Bay Area, San Francisco, California, for the plaintiffs-appellants.  
Mary Beth Uitti, Assistant United States Attorney, San Francisco, California, for the 
defendant-appellee.  
OPINION  
RYMER, Circuit Judge:  
Two groups of plaintiffs, Jewel Cato, Joyce Cato, Howard Cato and Edward Cato; and 
Leerma Patterson, Charles Patterson, and Bobbie Trice Johnson (collectively "Cato"), 
filed nearly identical complaints in forma pauperis against the United States for damages 
due to the enslavement of African Americans and subsequent discrimination against 
them, for an acknowledgment of discrimination, and for an apology. 1 The district court 
in both cases dismissed the complaints prior to service pursuant to 28 U.S.C. S 1915(d). 2 
   
We have carefully considered Cato's pleading and the arguments of appellate counsel. On 
our own, we have tried to conceive of possibilities for stating a cognizable claim. As 
Judge Armstrong stated so well:  
Discrimination and bigotry of any type is intolerable, and the enslavement of 
Africans by this Country is inexcusable. This Court, however, is unable to 
identify any legally cognizable basis upon which plaintiff's claims may proceed 
against the United States. While plaintiff may be justified in seeking redress for 
past and present injustices, it is not within the jurisdiction of this Court to grant 
the requested relief. The legislature, rather than the judiciary, is the appropriate 
forum for plaintiff's grievances.  
To us, as to the district court, it is clear that this complaint cannot be cured by 
amendment. Cato's theories of liability either fall outside the limited waiver of sovereign 
immunity by the United States, or otherwise are not within the jurisdiction of the federal 
courts. Because the district court did not abuse its discretion, we affirm.  
I  
Cato's complaint seeks compensation of $100,000,000 for forced, ancestral indoctrination 
into a foreign society; kidnapping of ancestors from Africa; forced labor; breakup of 
families; removal of traditional values; deprivations of freedom; and imposition of 
oppression, intimidation, miseducation and lack of information about various aspects of 
their indigenous character. She also requests that the court order an acknowledgment of 
the injustice of slavery in the United States and in the 13 American colonies between 
1619 and 1865, as well as of the existence of discrimination against freed slaves and their 
descendants from the end of the Civil War to the present. In addition, she seeks an 
apology from the United States.


--- PAGE 561 ---
The complaint itself does not refer to any basis upon which the United States might have 
consented to suit. However, because Cato was proceeding pro se, the district court 
construed her papers liberally and surveyed the most likely authorities for waiver, but 
found them unavailing. Specifi cally, the court noted that the waiver of sovereign 
immunity in tort actions against the government in the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA), 
28 U.S.C. SS 1346, 2674, is limited to claims accruing on and after January 1, 1945, id. 
at S 1346(b); and that the Civil Rights Act, 42 U.S.C. S 1981(a), applies to individual 
federal officials but not to the United States. The court also observed that while Cato's 
action appears to be patterned after the reparations authorized by Congress for individuals 
of Japanese ancestry who were forced into internment camps during World War II, those 
reparations were not awarded as damages in court but rather were enacted into law in the 
Civil Liberties Act of 1988, codified at 50 App. U.S.C. S 1989a(a). The court concluded 
that Cato's claims are barred by sovereign immunity, and that the appropriate forum for 
policy questions of the sort raised by her complaint is Congress, rather than the courts. 
Cato timely appealed.  
II  
First, Cato contends that dismissal of her action was premature in that she was given no 
opportunity to be heard on the adequacy of her complaint, or to amend. She also argues 
that the complaint should not have been dismissed merely because the court has doubts 
that the plaintiff will prevail.  
A district court may, in its discretion, dismiss an in forma pauperis complaint "if satisfied 
that the action is frivolous or malicious." 28 U.S.C. S 1915(d); Denton, 504 U.S. at 33 . A 
complaint is frivolous within the meaning of S 1915(d) if it lacks an arguable basis either 
in law or in fact. Id. at 31 (quoting Neitzke v. Williams, 490 U.S. 319, 325 (1989)). A pro 
se litigant must be given leave to amend his or her complaint, and some notice of its 
deficiencies, unless it is absolutely clear that the deficiencies of the complaint could not 
be cured by amendment. Noll v. Carlson, 809 F.2d 1446, 1448 (9th Cir. 1987).  
We do not read the district court's order as dismissing Cato's complaint on account of 
doubts about her ability to succeed. Rather, the court determined that Cato had not met 
her burden of showing a waiver of sovereign immunity, and that her claims were not 
legally cognizable because they raise "a `policy question' which the judiciary `has neither 
the authority nor wisdom to address.' " (Order Dismissing Complaint, quoting Fullilove 
v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448, 537 (1980) (Stevens, J., dissenting)). For these reasons, the 
court concluded that while Cato may be justified in seeking redress for past and present 
injustices from the Congress, the court lacked jurisdiction to grant the requested relief.  
As Cato's complaint neither identifies any constitutional or statutory right that was 
violated, nor asserts any basis for federal subject matter jurisdiction or waiver of 
sovereign immunity, it was properly dismissed. Section 1915(d) authorizes a court to 
review a complaint that has been filed in forma pauperis, without paying fees and costs, 
on its own initiative and to decide whether the action has an arguable basis in law before 
permitting it to proceed.


--- PAGE 562 ---
The critical question, however, for the district court as for us, is whether leave to amend 
should have been given. Cato was not represented by counsel in the district court, but is 
here; we therefore have the benefit of counsel's suggestions for curative amendments, as 
well as those hypothesized by the district court. Accordingly, we turn to Cato's 
disagreements with the court's ruling and to the possibilities for amendment that she 
suggests on appeal.  
III  
Cato first contends that we should not affirm the district court's dismissal on statute of 
limitations grounds. Strictly speaking, we don't. The dispositive question is whether her 
theories of liability are barred by sovereign immunity, or otherwise fall outside the 
district court's jurisdiction.3  
A  
It is axiomatic that the United States can be sued only to the extent that it has waived its 
sovereign immunity. Baker v. United States, 817 F.2d 560, 562 (9th Cir. 1987). The 
terms of the United States' consent to be sued in any court define that court's jurisdiction 
to entertain the suit. F.D.I.C. v. Meyer, 114 S. Ct. 996, 1000 (1994). It is likewise well 
settled that a waiver of the government's sovereign immunity " `cannot be implied but 
must be unequivocally expressed.' " United States v. Mitchell, 445 U.S. 535, 538 (1983) 
(quoting United States v. King, 395 U.S. 1, 4 (1969)). The burden is on the plaintiff to 
make such a showing. Baker, 817 F.2d at 562.  
The district court looked to the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA), 28 U.S.C. SS 1346, 
2674, to resolve this threshold question because it is the most likely candidate for 
waiver.4 As the district court properly concluded, however, Cato did not meet this 
burden.5  
Section 1346(b) of the FTCA gives federal courts jurisdiction only over "civil actions on 
claims against the United States, for money damages, accruing on and after January 1, 
1945." 28 U.S.C. S 1346(b). Moreover, a tort claim against the United States "shall be 
forever barred" unless it is presented within two years after the claim accrues. 28 U.S.C.  
S 2401(b). By its own terms, therefore, claims arising out of the fact of slavery, 
kidnapping, and other offenses to Cato's ancestors that occurred prior to 1945 or were not 
pursued within two years of their accrual, fall outside the FTCA's limited waiver of 
sovereign immunity.  
B  
We take Cato's argument that her action is not barred by the statute of limitations in this 
context to mean that no time constraint (whether as a condition of the government's 
waiver of sovereign immunity or otherwise6), should apply to her claims. She offers two 
reasons: First, that courts should not sustain dismissal of actions on statute of limitations


--- PAGE 563 ---
grounds where the wrong sued upon is based on a constitutional or statutory prohibition. 
For this proposition she analogizes the wrongs about which she complains to recent cases 
arising under the Indian Trade and Intercourse Act, 25 U.S.C. S 177, which prohibited 
the sale of land by Indians unless it was by treaty made under the authority of the United 
States, where the federal courts have addressed Indian land claims that are hundreds of 
years old. See, e.g., Oneida Indian Nation of New York v. State of New York, 691 F.2d 
1070, 1083-84 (2d Cir. 1982). Cato locates the relevant prohibition in her case in the 
Thirteenth Amendment.  
To the extent her argument is that we should for the same reason ignore time limitations 
on the government's waiver of sovereign immunity, we can't agree. Analogy to Indian 
land claim cases is not persuasive, for the courts' willingness to hear the kind of claim 
exemplified by Oneida does not turn on whether the claims were based on a prohibition. 
Rather, Oneida, for example, turned on the well-established rule that a suit by the United 
States as trustee on behalf of an Indian Tribe is not subject to state delay-based defenses, 
and the anomalous result that would otherwise obtain if the trustee were allowed to sue 
under more favorable conditions than those afforded the tribes themselves. Id. at 1084. 
Further, the circumstances under which an action by the United States can be brought 
sheds no light on the circumstances under which an action against the United States can 
be brought. In any event, as the government points out, regardless of whether there are 
factual similarities between the treatment accorded Indian Tribes and African American 
slaves and their descendants (as Cato contends), there is nothing in the relationship 
between the United States and any other persons, including African American slaves and 
their descendants, that is legally comparable to the unique relationship between the 
United States and Indian Tribes. Courts have recognized fiduciary responsibilities 
running from the United States to Indian Tribes because of specific treaty obligations and 
a network of statutes that by their own terms impose specific duties on the government. 
See, e.g., United States v. Mitchell, 463 U.S. 206 (1983); United States v. Mason, 412 
U.S. 391 (1973); Seminole Nation v. United States, 316 U.S. 286 (1941). Similar 
strictures do not appear in the Thirteenth Amendment alone, or in combination with the 
other Civil War amendments and the various Civil Rights Acts which have been enacted 
in the meantime. We therefore see no basis in the Indian land cases, or the relationship 
between the federal government and Indian Tribes, for relieving a private plaintiff such as 
Cato of the need to show that her action against the United States meets all the 
conditions, including time constraints, of the consent by the United States to be sued.  
C  
As a second ground for avoiding affirmance on the basis of the statute of limitations, 
Cato argues that she need not allege discrimination within any particular time period 
because discrimination is a continuing act. She submits that African Americans continue 
to face virtually unfettered police activity and intolerance by others; none has been 
elected President and only three to the Senate; and Congress has failed to pass legislation 
that would eliminate disparity in executions of African Americans for capital crimes. 
From this, she contends, the continuing violations doctrine applies because African 
Americans are still subjected to the badges and indicia of slavery.


--- PAGE 564 ---
We have, of course, recognized the doctrine, see, e.g., Siseton-Wahpeton Sioux Tribe v. 
United States, 895 F.2d 588 (9th Cir. 1990); Williams v. Owens-Illinois, Inc., 665 F.2d 
918 (9th Cir. 1982), and we agree with Cato that it is applicable to constitutional as well 
as statutory violations. However, it can't create jurisdiction, or help overcome 
jurisdictional hurdles, unless this plaintiff can sue the United States for the acts 
complained of. We therefore turn to the substantive bases upon which Cato suggests that 
her action is justiciable.  
IV  
Cato argues that the action is justiciable because the Thirteenth Amendment created a 
national right for African Americans to be free of the badges and indicia of slavery, they 
continue to suffer from the lingering incidents of slavery, and there are theories of relief 
available under the FTCA for intentionally inflicted harm and violation of duty by the 
federal government. She first draws on the legislative history of the Thirteenth 
Amendment and the Civil Rights Act of 1866 to contend that the federal government had 
an obligation to end the vestiges of slavery, but has failed to keep the promise. As she 
puts it, "[t]his action is the means to seek the remedy which has been prescribed by 
Congress and the Court 7 and which is long overdue."  
Then, in addition to disparities in employment, income, and education, Cato identifies 
two contemporary actions, or inactions, by Congress which she contends evince its 
failure to fulfill its duty under the Thirteenth Amendment: Congress's failure to pass the 
Racial Justice Act (introduced as HR 4017 in the House on March 11, 1994, to amend 
Title 28 of the United States Code to prevent racially discriminatory capital sentencing) 
and legislation introduced in the United States Senate that would repeal federal 
affirmative action programs (introduced February 22, 1995, as S. 497, called an "Act to 
End Unfair Preferential Treatment," to amend Part VI of Title 28). Finally, she suggests 
that the FTCA imports both the prima facie tort doctrine, Restatement (Second) of Torts 
S 870, and Cal. Gov't Code S 815.6, under which the government might be liable for 
failing to act or to discharge a duty with which it has been charged.  
These theories afford no basis for curing the complaint, for two main reasons. First, Cato 
proceeds on a generalized, class-based grievance; she neither alleges, nor suggests that 
she might claim, any conduct on the part of any specific official or as a result of any 
specific program that has run afoul of a constitutional or statutory right and caused her a 
discrete injury. 8 Without a concrete, personal injury that is not abstract and that is fairly 
traceable to the government conduct that she challenges as unconstitutional, Cato lacks 
standing. Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S. 737 (1984). As the Court explained in Allen:  
Standing doctrine embraces several judicially selfimposed limits on the exercise 
of federal jurisdiction, such as the general prohibition on a litigant's raising 
another person's legal rights, the rule barring adjudication of generalized 
grievances more appropriately addressed in the representative branches, and the 
requirement that a plaintiff's complaint fall within the zone of interests protected 
by the law invoked. The requirement of standing, however, has a core component


--- PAGE 565 ---
derived directly from the Constitution. A plaintiff must allege personal injury 
fairly traceable to the defendant's allegedly unlawful conduct and likely to be 
redressed by the requested relief.  
Id. at 751. No plaintiff has standing "to complain simply that their Government is 
violating the law." Id. at 755. Neither does Cato have standing to litigate claims based on 
the stigmatizing injury to all African Americans caused by racial discrimination. Id. In 
any case, she does not trace the presence of discrimination and its harm to the United 
States rather than to other persons or institutions. Accordingly, Cato lacks standing to 
bring a suit setting forth the claims she suggests.  
In addition, there is no cognizable avenue for litigating a complaint about the judgment 
calls of legislators in their legislative capacity. The FTCA does not apply to any claim 
"based upon the exercise or performance or the failure to exercise or perform a 
discretionary function or duty on the part of a federal agency or an employee of the 
Government,  
whether or not the discretion involved be abused. " 28 U.S.C. S 2680(a). Legislative 
conduct is discretionary for purposes of the exception. See Baker, 817 F.2d at 564. 
Further, the FTCA waives sovereign immunity only where the United States, "if a private 
person, would be liable to the claimant in accordance with the law of the place where the 
act or omission occurred." 28 U.S.C. S 1346(b). The relevant private person in Cato's 
scenario would be a Senator, or member of Congress, who is, however, protected by 
absolute immunity under Article I, S 6 of the Constitution. Supreme Court of Virginia v. 
Consumers Union, 446 U.S. 719 
(1980); Eastland v. United States Servicemen's Fund, 
421 U.S. 491 (1975). As we explained in Baker, "Congress wished to prevent judicial 
`second guessing' of legislative and administrative decisions grounded in social, 
economic, and political policy through the medium of an action in tort." Baker, 817 F.2d 
at 564 (citation omitted). Thus, at the end of the day no jurisdiction would lie, and no 
claim for relief would be stated, even were the complaint to be amended along the lines 
proposed and even if an administrative claim could be filed with some government 
agency as required by S 2675(a) of the FTCA.  
V  
Cato submits that sovereign immunity does not bar her action because the United States 
can be sued directly under the Thirteenth Amendment, because it can be sued through its 
agents even where there is no express statutory provision, and because the United States 
waives its sovereign immunity whenever Congress has explicitly provided a private right 
of action in a statute or through legislative history. Cato argues that the first clause of the 
Thirteenth Amendment ends slavery and its vestiges, while the second allows Congress 
to enact appropriate legislation to fulfill the obligation set out in the first. 9 
   
In her view, this gives rise to a right to sue the United States directly because otherwise, 
the Thirteenth Amendment's obligation is meaningless. Also, drawing upon Bivens v. Six 
Unknown Named Agents of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 403 U.S. 388 (1971), Cato 
argues that when an important constitutional right has been violated and there is no


--- PAGE 566 ---
explicit Congressional declaration barring suit, an action for damages against the United 
States may lie. Finally, she infers in the adoption of the Thirteenth Amendment a promise 
by Congress to enforce these articles (which she claims that Congress has failed to 
fulfill), thereby waiving sovereign immunity. We cannot agree.  
Regardless of whether the text of the Thirteenth Amendment itself admits of the self-
enforcing construction that Cato attaches to it, she cannot possibly assert a right to 
damages on account of it. In F.D.I.C. v. Meyer, the Supreme Court declined to extend the 
Bivens rationale beyond individual employees to actions against agencies of the United 
States. Meyer, 114 S. Ct. at 1004-06. A fortiori, no Bivenstype claim lies against the 
United States itself. See Hohri v. United States, 586 F.Supp. 769, 782 (D. D.C. 1984) 
(sovereign immunity bars claim against the United States brought directly under, among 
other things, the Thirteenth Amendment), aff'd, 847 F.2d 779 (D.C. Cir. 1988). Nor may 
Cato sue under the FTCA by alleging violation of the Thirteenth Amendment as the 
underlying tort. Meyer, 114 S. Ct. at 1001. As the Court stated, "the United States simply 
has not rendered itself liable under [the FTCA] for constitutional tort claims." Id.  
Cato again analogizes to the relationship between the United States and Indian Tribes. 
She points to United States  
v. Mitchell, 463 U.S. 206 (1983), where the Court found that the United States had 
waived sovereign immunity by investing the Court of Claims with jurisdiction to hear 
contract disputes in the Tucker Act, 28 U.S.C. S 1505, and recognized a substantive right 
to compensation for damages sustained on account of the government's mismanagement 
of forest resources arising out of statutory mandates and the "elaborate control" over 
Indian lands that was vested in the United States. To the extent that she relies on Mitchell 
to support a waiver of sovereign immunity, she cannot succeed because the claims 
considered in Mitchell fell within the Tucker Act, while there is no suggestion that Cato's 
do. To the extent that she relies on Mitchell to support a right to a remedy, it is unhelpful 
because, as Mitchell itself makes clear, whether sovereign immunity is waived is a 
different question from whether a cause of action exists.  
We accordingly conclude that the deficiencies in Cato's claim for damages cannot be 
cured.  
VI  
Although sovereign immunity bars Cato's request for damages, the United States has 
waived its sovereign immunity in suits requesting non-monetary relief in the 
Administrative Procedures Act (APA), 5 U.S.C. S 702 (providing that in a case seeking 
"other than money damages" a suit shall not be dismissed "on the ground that it is against 
the United States"). She seeks an acknowledgment of discrimination and an apology from 
the United States. For reasons we have already explained, however, Cato lacks standing 
to seek relief premised on the stigmatizing injury of discrimination in general. Allen, 468 
U.S. at 754 -756, 757, n.22. As the district court indicated, the legislature, rather than the


--- PAGE 567 ---
judiciary, is the appropriate forum for this relief. Accordingly, her requests for non-
monetary relief were properly dismissed.  
VII  
As the United States has not waived its sovereign immunity with respect to any of Cato's 
theories of relief that might fall within the Federal Tort Claims Act or any other source 
that we can identify, and under well-established principles Cato lacks standing to pursue 
claims in court arising out of the government's failure to do right as she sees it, we 
conclude that the district court did not abuse its discretion in dismissing both complaints 
with prejudice pursuant to S 1915(d).  
AFFIRMED.  
Footnotes  
[ Footnote 1 ] Since Cato was the only named individual to sign the complaint and the in 
forma pauperis declaration in No. 94-17102, and Johnson the only such plaintiff in her 
action (No. 94-17104), the district court dismissed the other plaintiffs as a non-attorney 
may appear only in her own behalf. C.E. Pope Equity Trust v. United States, 818 F.2d 
696, 697 (9th Cir. 1987). Both Cato and Johnson are represented by counsel on appeal.  
[ Footnote 2 ] The court's order dismisses the complaint with prejudice, but provides that 
it "does not foreclose plaintiff from refiling her action as a paid complaint." Both 
plaintiffs had previously filed in forma pauperis complaints with the same allegations, 
which had previously been dismissed pursuant to S 1915(d) by different judges. The 
district court held that this provided an independent ground for dismissal of Cato's 
complaint. We agree. There is no abuse of discretion where a district court dismisses 
under S 1915(d) a complaint "that merely repeats pending or previously litigated claims." 
Bailey v. Johnson, 846 F.2d 1019, 1021 (5th Cir. 1988); see also Denton v. Hernandez, 
504 U.S. 25, 33 (1992) (recognizing Congress's concern that "a litigant whose filing fees 
and court costs are assumed by the public, unlike a paying litigant, lacks an economic 
incentive to refrain from filing frivolous, malicious, or repetitive lawsuits") (quotation 
omitted).  
[ Footnote 3 ] As these issues do not break neatly into categories without overlap, we 
intermingle them with our discussion of Cato's arguments on appeal.  
[ Footnote 4 ] Cato suggests no other statutory sources of waiver on appeal.  
[ Footnote 5 ] We also hold that she cannot do so, because it is absolutely clear that the 
FTCA provides no basis for waiver on any of the theories for monetary recovery that 
Cato offers on appeal. See infra at 15169-70 (alleged failures of the Congress to 
discharge duties are within the discretionary function which the FTCA excepts from the 
limited waiver of sovereign immunity); and at 15171 (no waiver of sovereign immunity 
for claim against the United States under the Thirteenth Amendment). However, as we


--- PAGE 568 ---
shall discuss in Part VI, infra at 15172, the United States has waived sovereign immunity 
in claims for non-monetary relief in the Administrative Procedures Act (APA), 5 U.S.C. 
S 702, but Cato's theories fail on other grounds.  
[ Footnote 6 ] The government relies on the general statute of limitations in claims 
against the United States, which is six years, 28 U.S.C. S 2401(a), to argue that the court 
has no jurisdiction to consider claims for historical events, such as the wrongs upon 
which Cato sues, that occurred during times prior to the Civil War of 1861-1865. See, 
e.g., Japanese War Notes Claimants Association of the Philippines, Inc. v. United States, 
373 F.2d 356, 358, 178 Ct.Cl. 630, cert. denied, 389 U.S. 971 (1967); Hohri v. United 
States, 586 F.Supp. 769 (D.D.C. 1984), aff'd, 847 F.2d 779 (D.C. Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 
488 U.S. 925 (1988). While this may well have provided an alternative basis for 
dismissing the complaint, we believe the district court correctly grounded its ruling on 
lack of subject matter jurisdiction. Therefore, we do not consider whether Cato's action is 
barred by the general six year statute of limitations.  
[ Footnote 7 ] Cato's reference is to Jones v. Mayer Co., 392 U.S. 409 (1968), where the 
Court stated:  
"By its own unaided force and effect," the Thirteenth Amendment "abolished 
slavery, and established universal freedom." [Civil Rights Cases.] Whether or not 
the Amendment itself did any more than that -- a question not involved in this 
case -- it is at least clear that the Enabling Clause of that Amendment empowered 
Congress to do much more. For that clause clothed "Congress with power to pass 
all laws necessary and proper for abolishing all badges and incidents of slavery in 
the United States." Id. at 439 (emphasis in original).  
[ Footnote 8 ] We express no view with respect to any such possibility, which we regard 
as being outside the parameters both of the pleading that was dismissed and the court's 
ruling on it.  
[ Footnote 9 
] The Thirteenth Amendment provides:  
Section 1. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for 
crime whereof the party shall have been duly  
convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their 
jurisdiction.  
Section 2. Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate 
legislation.

