=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: a-tale-of-two-convicted-cop-killers-archive.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 22
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:57:22.661449
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
ATALE OF TWO
CONVICTED COP KILLERS:
Why Mumia Abu-Jamal
Is Not
Winston Silcott


--- PAGE 2 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
A TaIe Of Two Convicted Cop KiIIers
Murder At The Furm
In October 1985, serious public disorder broke out on a North London housing estate. TheBroadwater Farm riot was sparked by the death of an overweight black *o-uo namedCynthia Jarrett who dropped dead of a heart attack during a po[Ie raid on her home. Theriot itself resulted most tragically in the now notorious murder of 40 y"u, old police constableKeith Blakelock. The unfortunate victim was literally hacked to death f,y ,unug.sn andunsurprisingly as ever when one of their own are cut down, Britain's finest moved into actionin double quick time and with their by now de rigueur lack of finesse. Six people wereeventually to stand trial for this senseless murder - three juveniles and three uOott, - tn"adults were convicted, and the alleged ringleader, Winston Silcott, seemed destined to standforever in the halls of infamy alongside the likes of fellow .op Lill.. Harry Roberts, serialmurderer Peter Sutcliffe, and multiple child killer Myra,rrindrey.'(l)
A most unflattering photograph of Silcott grinning Iike a Cheshire cat was circulated farand wide; its message was simple: this is the face of a cop killer, although the fact that Silcottis black also lent its use to exploitation by both the far iight and by so--called , anti-racists,, .The reality though is that race is not an issue in this case, nor is it in the case of Mumia Abu-Jamal - shortly to be discussed - but the cynical manipulation and gerrymandering of suchtragedies by people with political and/or racial agendas over the past twodecades and more -
what has become known as "playing the race card" - has become depressingly familiar onboth sides of the Atlantic. (2)
After the conviction of the three who were to become known as "The Tottenham Three,, ashocking revelation was made: Silcott had done it before. At the time of the murder of KeithBlakelock he was actually out on bail after being charged with the murder of boxer AnthonySmith. That sealed things, didn't it? The only question was how could a monster fif.eiif.oithave been granfed bail on a murder charge in the first place?
That question was premature, to put it mildly, because on November 2Sr 1991 after years ofcampaigning, Winston Silcott was cleared of the murder of Keith Blakelock by the Court ofAppeal. Silcott's co-accused, Mark Braithwaite and Engin Raghip, were also cleared (3) sothe question of who actually murdered Keith Blakelock ..otui^ unanswered. The only
"evidence" against Silcott was a supposedly contemporaneous (and unsigned) witnessstatement (4) which was later proved by forensic tests to have been manufactured after theevent. (5)
Two police officers were subsequently sent for trial as a result of the inquiry into the fit-upof The Tottenham Three. As was to be expected, they were acquitted. (6i fn July 199i,Detective Chief Superintendent Graham Melvin was committed at Bow Street MagistratesCourt on charges of perjury and perverting the course of justice; Detective InspectorIf{axwell Dingle was committed on a charge of conspiring with him. (7) Melvin retired inNovember 1994; he'd been suspended since November lggI, (8) presumunty oo full pay. Nicework if you can get it.
Melvin's dirty work was not limited to framing Silcott. Silcottrs co-convicted MarkBraithwaite was denied access to a solicitor for twelve days! (9) Another suspect, 13 year oldJason Hill, who was also charged with the murder, was kept in his underpants and given onlya blanket while he was interrogated for three days while being denied u..^"r, to a solicitor andto his parents. Melvin was at least found guilty of four disciplinary offences in thisconnection. (10)
Although as his supporters claim, Winston Silcott was indeed demonised by the media asmuch as by the police, he is not quite the Iittle angel that some people would have us believe.


--- PAGE 3 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
He was after all convicted of the murder of Anthony Smith, and remains in gaol to this day.
Prior to his arrest for this murder he had eight previous convictions going back as many
years. Only one of these, for malicious wounding, involved violence, an offence for which he
received a six month sentence, but perhaps just as signilicantly he had been tried for murder
before. In 1980, Silcott was cleared of murdering Leonard Mclntosh. A retrial was ordered
when the jury in the first trial couldn't agree. (11) Of course, the fact that Silcott was
convicted of a subsequent murder doesn't mean that he should also have been convicted of
the first one, but for something as comparatively rare as murder it does suggest that Silcott
was accident prone at the very least.
Murder On The Highwuy
Which brings us to the case of Mumia Abu-Jamal, who was also convicted of the murder of
a police officer, in 1982, and like The Tottenham Three has been the subject of intense
campaigning. Like Winston Silcott, Abu-Jamal remains in gaol, but unlike Silcott who may
one day taste freedom, Abu-Jamal is likely to remain on Death Row until he is evenfually
executed. Although the campaign to clear Silcott and his two co-accused was intensive, it was
not of the same scope or on the same scale as the campaign on Abu-Jamal's behalf. In the age
of the Internet and the World Wide Web Abu-Jamal's supporters have set up websites and
mailing lists to lobby for a retrial. Abu-Jamal has also published a book of his prison writings
as well as engaging in numerous journalistic assignments from Death Row.
An uninfonned observer might conclude that there are disturbing similarities between the
framing of The Tottenham Three and the conviction of Abu-Jamal, certainly if he relied on
the biased, distorted and often blatantly dishonest reporting of Abu-Jamal's many and vocal
supporters.
The creeping left wing magrzine CARF carried an inset on Abu-Jamal in a 1999 issue.
Obviously based uncritically on a press release, CARFs readers were told that Abu-Jamal is
a political prisoner, which he certainly is not, and that he was "sentenced to death in 1982
after a rigged trial on charges of shooting a policeman". (12) Incredibly, CARF managed to
publish this item without once using its controllers' favourite word: racism. (13)
A leaflet which turned up here in London announces that Abu-Jamal (14) was
FRAMED','.
for a murder he didntt commit.
SENTENCED
after a rigged and racist trial.
CONDEMNED
for working to expose police brutality.
The leaflet calls on its readers to demand justice for Abu-Jamal before it is too late.
However, anyone who does a little probing will swiftly realise that what Abu-Jamal needs is
not justice but a reality check Apart from the colour of his skin Abu-Jamal has only two
things in common with Winston Silcott; the first is that he is a tiar. (15)


--- PAGE 4 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
Politicsl Prisoner?
The facts about "political prisoner" Mumia Abu-Jamal as presented by his supporters are
that he is "a prominent radio journalist" who was committed to the poor and the black
communities of Philadelphia as well as a strident critic of the city's I'racist police forcer'. (16)
In 1981 he saw his brother being beaten up by police officer Daniel Faulkner, ran to defend
him and was shot in the stomach. That much is certainly true, Abu-Jamal was indeed shot by
Faulkner. The officer was then shot and killed, not by Abu-Jamal, but by an unidentified man
who subsequently fled the scene of the crime. Although Abu-Jamal was carrying a gun, this
was a .33 calibre while the murderweapon fired a.44 calibre bullet.
Witnesses who testified at the trial have subsequently claimed they were intimidated into
perjuring themselves by the police. Testimony supporting Abu-Jamals version of events was
suppressed or ignored; Abu-Jamalts attorney was incompetent, and his client was not
permitted to defend himself. Abu-Jamal was sentenced to death solely on the basis of his
political beliefs and to make sure that he was convicted, no. less than eleven African-
Americans were struck from the jury.
rflve, - thatfs us - have got to stop I'the execution of a man who has not committed any
crime, except that of speaking out against oppression and yiolence."
A contact phone number for the London Mumia Support Group is given on the leaflet: 0l7l
326 0353. On the morning of April 14,1999I dialled this number and received a number not
available message. I was informed by the operator that since March there had been no
customer on that line.
If the London number is no longer functioning, the websites are. One of the Abu-Jamal
websites publishes a precis of the book by American lawyer Leonard Weinglass who has
taken up Abu-Jamal's case. Among other things this site claims that:
The Commonwealth withhbld materially favorable evidence from the defense, and
knowingly used false evidence. Evidence withheld and false evidence include the following:
...statements by an eyewitness, indicating that another individual, not Mumia, was the
shootern that the actual shooter fled the scene, and that a critical prosecution witness was
actually not present at the scene.
And that
Mumia was effectively barred from presenting crucial evidence that he had not made any
incriminatory statements. Consequently, the prosecutionrs claim that Mumia had confessed to
the shooting of Officer Faulkner remained unrebutted.
And that
The court unjustifiably banished |lumia on numerous occasions from the trial proceedings,
thereby violating his right to seH-representation, his right to assist in his own defense, and his
right to confront the prosecution's witnesses.
And that
The jury pool from which the jury was selected was not a product of a random cross-section
of the community.


--- PAGE 5 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
And that
A medical examinerts report states that Faulkner's wounds were made by a.44-cal gun, but
Mumia had a .38. This key evidence was withheld from Mumia and his defense in his 1982
trial. Moreover, a weapons expert found it incredible that the police at the scene of the
shooting failed to test Jamal's gun to see if it had been recently fired or to test his hands to see
if he had fired a weapon. (17)
These are serious criticisms and, if true, would give genuine cause for concern that a
miscarriage of justice had indeed been perpetrated. The current writer has read Weinglass's
book Race For Justice where these criticisms are amplified. Forfunately the book has been
written with such an outrageous spin that no critical person could read it without doubting
both the noble intentions and the veracity of the author.
The book, which runs to over 270 pages, carries the insinuation of racism throughout the
text. This word is a much over-used epithet and can mean practically anything its users want
it to mean, but let us assume that in this context it means that Abu-Jamal was treated unfairly
by the system because he was black, notwithstanding any other possible reasons. Abu-Jamal
was convicted of the murder of Daniel Faulkner on July 2, 1982. One of his problems,
according to Weinglass, was "his younger brother's inability or unwillingness to testify on his
behalf." This, we are told, is because his brother is said to have rfa history of drug problems
and was terrified of police retribution". (18)
Prosecution witness Cynthia White - a prostitute - had allegedly been schooled by the police
repeatedly to give I'correct evidence" (my quotes). (19)
Abu-Jamal was repeatedly excluded from the court during the trial, (20) something which
sounds remarkable but which sounds less remarkable when the full facts - which Weinglass
does not present here - are known.
Four witnesses are alleged to have seen someone else fleeing from the crime scene. (21)
The prosecution is said to have withheld evidence, including statements relating to the
alleged killer and the fact that a prosecution witness allegedly failed to identiff Abu-Jamal.
Robert Harkins, a taxi driver, said he could identiff the killer but was unable to pick out
Abu-Jamal from a photographic array. Q2)
Abu-Jamal was said, falsely, to have confessed to the killing and "was effectively barred
from presenting crucial evidence that he had not made any inculpatory statements. As a
resultn the prosecution's claim Mr. Jamal had confessed to the killing of Officer Faulkner was
never actually challenged at trial." (23)
This is an outright lie, and next to the ludicrous protestations of Abu-Jamal's innocence is
the biggest lie of all.
The defence was said to have suffered severe financial restrictions. (2a) This is a serious
criticism - if true - but in view of the weight of the evidence against Abu-Jamal it is doubtful if
even O.J. Simpson's extremely expensive lawyers could have bought him his freedom.
While Abu-Jamal's supporters have been extremely vocaln his detractors have,
unfortunately, largely been muted, barring calls for the death sentence to be carried out
without further delay. The current writer contacted the District Attorney for Philadelphia
and the Philadelphia Police Department as well as the Philadelphia Inquirer newspaper, the
latter of which which has covered the Abu-Jamal case extensively. I received no replies.
However, DA Lynne Abrahams did publish an article about the case in the New York Times in
1995, and that, combined with an excellent essay by local journalist Paul Mulshine in the 1997
book The Race Card, an in-depth article on the case published in Vanity Fair magazine
(several months after I began researching this monograph), the book by Weinglass, and a
handful of other reports ranging from fairly neutral to slavishly pro-Abu-Jamal, allows us to
piece together a reasonably objective picture of the true facts of this case. fn the light of thiso
how Abu-Jamal ever became a cause cdlibre remains a mystery.


--- PAGE 6 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
The slaying of Daniel x'aulkner was reported briefly in the New york Times of Sunday,December 13, 1981. Abu-Jamal - formerly known as Wesley Cook - was said to be 27 yru.,old, a freelance reporter and the retiring president of the local chapter of the Associatiln ofBlack Journalists. There were said to have been four civilian witnesses to the shooting.Abu-Jamal had (in his youth) been a Black Panther Party spokesman. He was saii to havebeen working for a radio station, WUHY-FM, earlier in 1981. His brother was released on$10'000 bail on the Friday. This report was filed saturday, December lz. es)Curiously, for such a prominent radio journalist who hit the headlines in a big way, Abu-Jamal is not listed in the Black Newspaper Index for the last quarter of l98l nor for the wholeof 1982, which indicates that the word prominent has been used rather liberally. In fact, asPaul Mulshine points out, at the time of the murder of Daniel Faulkner, Abu-Jamal had onlythe most tenuous of contacts with journalism, he made his living by iriving a cab. (26) I;Britain, the National Union of Journalists has taken up the cause of iiooo..nt" Mumia Abu-Jamal, and even made him an honorary member of the union in 1995, e7) although onecorrespondent writing to the Union's official journal from New York exercised a little morecritical faculty than most when he pointed out that the reference to Abu-Jamal being ajournalist is "not exactly correct". He was fired"frgm his job for his overt advocacy oi,,ublack political party" (the MOVE organisation) and became a taxi driver. (2g)
Abu-Jamal: The Best Case For
The Defence Deconstructed
Now let us turn to the book by attorney Leonard Weinglass and compare what he says withthe facts of the case. On page 20 he tells us that during the trial, Abu-Jamal was replatedlyexcluded from the court. What was the reason for this? According to Weinglass on page Se,Abu-Jamal's desired representative, John Africa, was not a member of the bar. This is asgood a reason as any for denying any accused his desired representation. In Britain anaccused (or either party in civil proceedings) may represent himself and have the assistance ofa McKenzie X'riend, (29) but he must conduct his own case. (30) When the trial judge, AlbertSabo, refused to permit John Africa to join the defence ieu-, "Jamal responded bydisrupting the trial and playing to the audience, which was composed largely of MOVEmembers...After warning him several times to cease disrupting the proceedings, Sabo wouldhave Jamal removed from the courtroom and let his backup attorney, Anihony Jackson,handle the defense. Then Jamal would return for a while, until his next disruption.; (3t;Weinglass and the rest of Abu-Jamal's vocal supporters are strangely silent about this. Orperhaps not so strangely, because as Mulshine rightly points out, those who worship in thecult of Mumia Abu-Jamal are allergic to the facts, (32) something which is a nicessaryprerequisite for many political and lobbying causes, of course.
Obviously it cannot be satisfactory to run a trial, any trial, in such a fashion, but Abu-Jamalwas largely if not entirely to blame.
Earlier, on page 15 of his book, Weinglass claims that Cynthia White - a prostifute - hadallegedly been schooled by the police repeatedly to give "correct evidence". Anotherprostitute who allegedly witnessed the slaying of Daniel F'aulkner at 4am at the junction ofBroad and Locust was 20 year old Veronica Jones. She was said to have been visited in gaolby detectives where she was awaiting trial on serious charges and threatened with a ten /eargaol sentence if she gave evidence in Abu-Jamal's favour. (33)
This may be true, but it is more likety that the officers were warning her of the consequencesof committing perjury or of failing to testiff. Ordinary people are often reluctant witnesses in


--- PAGE 7 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
criminal trials for all sorts of reasons, not the least being that it can be inconvenient and
boring hanging around a court building for hours or even days on end in order to give
evidence. A prostitute might also be reluctant to be so identified and to be subjected to public
cross-examination concerning her trade and antecedents by an aggressive defence lawyer.
Abu-Jamal's supporters have been aided by inconsistencies in the eyewitness evidence. In
her 1995 New York Times article on the Abu-Jamal campaigno Philadelphia DA Lynne
Abraham refers contemptuously to "The Fleeing Stranger Theory". Abu-Jamal's supporters
claim that "several witnesses saw the 'real' shooter escape. The reality is that after years of
empty assertions, the defense only recently presented testimony from these
'witnesses.'...Essential parts of their stories contradict one another and don't square with the
physical vestiges of the crime. The only witnesses whose testimony agrees with the known
facts came forward immediately after the crime." (34)
Abraham is also dismissive of the claim that the defence was starved of funds. "Mr. Abu-
Jamal's supporters say he was forced to accept a novice larvyer [and] was given no money for
preparations... (35) The record shows that the court paid the lawyero that the defense received
additional public and private funds and that the lawyer hired an investigator who worked on
the case for months before and during the trial." Nor was the lawyer a novice, she says.
Paul Mulshine is just as contemptuous of the attempts to absolve Abu-Jamal and says there
are "at least four separate and mutually exclusive theories of what happened that night...In
this latest hearing, the defense one day produced a witness who said that Faulkner was shot
by a passenger in William Cook's car and on another day produced a witness who said
Faulkner was shot by a guy with 'Johnny Mathis hair' who drove up to the scene in the
middle of the action..." (36)
Both Abraham and Mulshine are in danger of going over the top in the same way - although
in the opposite direction - as Abu-Jamal's supporters. What are we to make of the claim
made by Weinglass earlier that taxi driver Robert Harkins failed to identiff Abu-Jamal as
the killer?
There are serious problems with eyewitness evidence, even when the witnesses are sincere,
willing, and have no reason or motive to lie. In Britain, when eyewitness evidence is crucial a
judge must in his summing up to a jury administer a Turnbull Warning, which is named
zfter a Court of Appeal case. (37) I have personal experience of the problems the police face
with eyewitness testimony. A few years ago I witnessed an attempted armed robbery at the
Abbey National building society in Catford. Shortly, two detectives turned up at my flat to
take a statement and I was asked what colour was the robber? White, I said. Are you sure? I
was asked; at least one witness had claimed he was black. Granted, there are black men who
can pass for white and white men who ate dark complexioned, but at the end of the day there
were two, perhaps several, conflicting statements
The murder of Daniel Faulkner took place at 4am on a Deiember morning; the incident was
suddeno totally unexpectedo and traumatic. It is hardly surprising that several witnesses
should give different accounts of what happened. It is quite conceivable that one man failed to
identify Abu-Jamal as the assailant, and it is just as conceivable that someone mistakenly
thought they saw the killer (or someone) fleeing from the crime scene. But one must consider
the weight of the evidence, and in this case there is plenty of it.
I don't know if anyone was apprehended for the Catford building society robbery, certainly
I was never called upon to give evidence, but suppose the police had arrested a suspect and
found his fingerprints at.the scene, CCTV evidence, and forensic evidence at his flat. Would
that mean that a conviction would be unsafe if one witness said the perpetrator was black,
another white and a third that the robber was a woman?
Did police officers verbal up witnesses to give "correct evidence" in the Abu-Jamal case?
This sort of thing happens all the time - as I know from personal experience - it may even
happen subconsciously, but there is no meaningful evidence that Abu-Jamal was fitted up. At
worst it appears that witnesses - some of whom were of dubious character - were reminded of


--- PAGE 8 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
the consequences of failing to testify truthfully. Neither Weinglass nor any other of Abu-Jamal's supporters has adduced any meaningful evidence that the potice suppressed ordoctored any of the prosecution evidence, in fact the only hard evidence of such doctoring isby the likes of Weinglass.
At two hearings in 1995 and1996, the defence produced six alleged witnesses, one of whomgave ludicrous "evidence"o including claiming to have heard Faulkner's last words; he also
said F'aulkner had been shot by a passenger in Cook's car. Three had previously claimed orclaimed during these hearings that they hadn't seen the shooting; another said Faulkner hadbeen shot by two different people, while the sixth substantiated the prosecution case! (3g)
The eyewitness evidence is not the only evidence that has been doctored by the deience;
there is also the manufactured controversy over the calibre of the bullet which killed Daniel
Faulkner.
The reader will recall that the leaflet the current writer picked up in London claims that
Abu-Jamal's gun was a .33 calibre weapon while Daniel Faulkner was shot with a .44 calibre.
Weinglass claims that Abu-Jamal didn't fire his gun at all! (39) Actually, Abu-Jamal's gun
was a .38 calibre. According to. the Mazelis World Wide Web article (already citea;,
"Mumia's gun, a .38, could not have fired such a bullet. Moreovern the police allegedly failed
to conduct a test to determine if Mumia's gun had-6vd'n been fired recently, or a routine test
to see if he had recently fired any weapon." Note the qualification there: "allegedly".The DA takes a somewhat different view of this: "Abu-Jamal supporters contend he
couldn't be guilty because Officer Faulkner was killed with a .44-calibei bullet, not the .38-
caliber bullet from Mr. Abu-Jamal's gun. This assertion is based on a handwritten note on a
medical examiner's pre-autopsy worksheet. But the examiner who made the notation testified_
that he was no weapons expert and could not precisely measure the bullet. The real expert
who examined the bullet determined conclusively that it was a .38 caliber. That bullet stil
exists. It has been made available to the defense, whose expert refuses to look at it but
concedes that all the documentation supports the prosecutionrs evidence that the bullet is a
.38. If the Abu-Jamal legal team could have disproved the expert assessment and shown that
the .38 was a .44ritwould have done so." (40)
X'orensic tests were conducted, albeit rather belatedly, and they proved inconclusive. (41)
Under the circumstances - the fact that Abu-Jamal was found lying at the scene with the
murder weapon at his feet, with several eyewitnesses to boot - one can forgive the police for
failing to give immediate forensic testing of the weapon or of Abu-Jamal himself the highest
priority; the thought that he might actually deny shooting Faulkner probably never entered
their heads. (In fact, as we shall see in due course, he never has!)
Now for the biggest lie of allo Abu-Jamal had allegedly confessed to the murder, probably by
screaming something like I'I shot the motherfucker" as he was dragged off to hospitai,
himself in a critical condition. This confession, boastn or whatever, was ruled admissibL, so
Abu-Jamal was "effectively barred from presenting crucial evidence that he had not made
any inculpatory statements. As a result, the prosecution's claim Mr. Jamal had confessed to
the killing of officer Faulkner was never actually challenged at trial."
Why wasn't this apparently so crucial piece of evidence challenged at trial? Because Abu-
Jamal did not give evidence, that's why not! This is the other thing Mumia Abu-Jamal has in
common with Winston Silcott, but unlike Sitcott he has no excuse for failing to testify. And at
this point we must introduce one of the major defects of the British legal system: the shield
against cross-examination.


--- PAGE 9 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
A Serious Legul Defect
Awhileagolwasinformedbyabarristerthatevidenceofadefendant'sprevious
convictions is not introduced by the piosecution in criminal cases because it is regarded as so
prejudicial that rt *iri, "ri things O:,"t equal, lead to.the conviction of the accused' period'
This opinion appea^ io r* helJright-ieros, tile board. Actuaily it isn't true, as r know from
personal .*p.ri.o..l uoi u, r yid it is nevertheless widely accepted' and a defendant's
previous convictions cannot be introduced by the prosecution to blacken his character, but
there is a price to pay. If a defendant, either in person or through his counsel' attacks the
character of a prosle.otioo witness, tn.n t e will lose his shield against cross-examination on
his previous convictions'
Now there i, u ^llnod in the madness heren let us supposethat the defendant in a rape case
is accused of raping a fourteen year old giri in tne partc dragging her into the bushes and
having his way witfr her. His defence is th-at he met ihe girl in the local boozer' she told him
she was seventeen, propositioneo nii, in.r, ,tttu-ea rafre when her parents found out she'd
Tl*ffi::jfi #l,r*1il:;ffiiution wourd turn to the triar judge and sav "rhis man has
just made a totatty^u^nw"rrurrt.d "*;;k 
on a perfectly innocent young girl of good characterl
I think the jury i""ro hear somethi"g aboui his_character." or words to that effect. under
the circumstances no reasonape ;oo"ge could object, and the defendant would be cross-
examined on his antecedents. Now ir n-e naa three previous convictions for indecent assaults
on young girts, h; goose would be well and truly cooked, and rightly so'
unfortunately, thii isn,t the *"y tu. a.i.ndani usuaily loses his shield..usualry he loses it by
attackingtheintegrityofpoliceofficers.Thatisbyaccusingthemoflying.Manysuspectsin
raperarmedrobberyrandothcrseriouscasesarearrestednotonanymeaningfulevidence
but as a result of police trawls. This is especially so in high profile cases where a terrible
murder has been committed and where the police att oodt' pressure from the media' the
generar pubtic and sundry others to gJ i"rtait results. A couple of exampres which spring to
mindaretheRachelNickellcasewhereayoungwomanwasbatteredtodeathonWimbledon
Common in broad daylight in the p..r.o.L of her young son' and the. even more terrible case
of the murder of Megan Russell uoJ n* daughter in siiilar circumstances. rn such cases the
police don,t simply collate-forensic evidence-and take witness statements from people in the
area, they go through their database and round up all the known sex offenders and other
likely suspects rioiofro""lly, if g"ry io etimipate th:.T from their inquiries' (42)
Now if they pull iisomeone they believe to be a likely suspect' ""i!: 
prime suspecto and he
doesn,t have an alibi, what is to stop ii.- froo, verbailing 
-him 
u91 How does a suspect deny
making a detaited confession to a pilice officer without aicusing Lim of lying? Does he claim
he was cracking a joke? or that the officer somehow misunderstood what he said? And if this
alleged confession is made to seveiar police officers, such denials are likety to diminish his
'f*T:3r::'],:;t:;,"at Eviitence Act, 1st4 -usuany known bv 11" acronvm PACE - has
gone some way towards eliminating such abuses; police interrogations - I refuse to use the
sick euphemism interviews - now n":o. to be taped. .Ltteged confessions made to police officers
in the absence of a tape recordinf are likely io le .*iodrd by the judge. winston silcott's
a'eged confession was not taped - for obvio's reasons. Nowadays the British police wouldn't
have got away with verballing up a suspect in this fashion' one hopes' (43)
Silcott was in a difficult position; t. ufr.uay had an appalling criminal record, and by the
time of the Blakerock trial he was a convictedmurderet.'An tnis haa to be kept from the jury
andinfactpresscoverageofSilcott,strialforthemurderofAnthonySmithwascompletely
squelched. (44)


--- PAGE 10 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
As Silcott himself explained in a 1994 interview from Swaleside Prison: "I wanted to go to
court to give evidence] But I knew that my previous record and my charge for the murder of
Anthony Smith would come out and prejudice the trial. The prosecution would have brought
it up, and the jury would think I'm guilty.
lri;a said the poti.. were liarsn all my criminal record would have been brought in. By not
taking the stand, the previous record didn't come out'" (45)
My f,ersonal opinion is that an accused should always give evidence in his own defence no
-"it". how appalling his criminal record, unless there are really exceptional reasons - as in
the O.J.'Simpsoo .ur-", 1r.. below). The correct approach is to make a submission of no case
to answer at the end of ihe prosecution case, and if this is rejected then it is essential that an
accused testify.
That being said, it is dilficult to criticise Silcott for failing to do this, but his legal team is a
different t<ettte of fish. Silcott had the misfortune to be represented by Barbara Mills QC'
who later went on to become Director of Public Prosecutions until she was forced to resign for
persistently refusing to prosecute corrupt police officers. (46) At the trial, Mills made no
attempt tochallengf the-accuracy df the fabricated police record, and didn't even ask for a
voire 
-dire 
in which to make a submission to the ju.{ge concerning the obvious difficulty of
Silcott's giving evidence. The bent copper Melvin speit i grand total of 30 minutes in the
witness box! (47)
ln t992 the' judge himself told journalist and author David Rose that he would not have
allowed Silcott's murder conviction to go before the jury' (48)
That was Silcott's predicament, but Mumia Abu-Jamal is not Winston Silcott; Abu-Jamal
had no previous convictions at all, (49) and in fact called a number of character witnesses
who testified that he wasn't the sort of person who would murder anyone. (50)
How could Abu-Jamal have not given evidence in this case? It is not of course mandatory for
an accused to give evidence, but it is a calculated risk not to put him in the witness box. (51)
O.J. Simpson declined to give evidence at his trial for double murder, or rather his legal team
decided that to put the functionally illiterate, half-witted (and obviously guilty) Simpson on
the stand would be suicidal.
But Abu-Jamal was found at the crime scene with a gun at his feet, and independent
witnesses claimed they'd seen him shoot Faulkner. On top of that he was alleged to have
confessed to the killing, and Weinglass has the gall to claim that Abu-Jamal was "effectively
barred from prese"ti"g crucial evidence that he had not made any inculpatory statements."
No, he wasn't! He could have taken the stand and said t'I didn't shoot hiln"r or words to that
effect, but then he would have had to subject himself to cross-examination, and that would
have made him a laughing stoclc
And what was the o"torr of this "confession"? The current writer's guess was not a bad one,
because the Vanity Fair article reports that Abu-Jamal was alleged to have said: "I shot that
motherfucker and I hope the motherfucker dies." Officer Gary Bell is said to have reported
this only 77 days after the event, while another officer filed a report to the effect that Abu-
Jamal had said nothing. Abu-Jamals supporters make much of this supposed discrepancy'
but a woman security guard reported it the next day. She told hospital investigators Abu-
Jamal had said: "I snot the motherfucker and I hope the motherfucker dies." (52) Not a
world of difference.
Where Were The Defence lVilnesses?
One final point regarding Abu-Jamal's possible line of defence, there was another witness
who eould have been called, his brother, whom he so gallantly attempted to rescue from this
alleged act of police brutality, remember?


--- PAGE 11 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
Weinglass's claim that Abu-Jamalfs brother had 'ra history of drug problems and was
terrified of police retribution" is pathetic. And remember what Paul Mulshine said: "the
defense one day produced a witness who said that Faulkner was shot by a passenger in
William Cook's car". Of course, if that were the case, Cook would have found himself an
accessory to murderr but he has never been charged with any offence relating to this cold-
blooded slaying because this is a classic open and shut case with one victim and one
perpetrator. Are we really expected to believe that Cook was so terrified of police retribution
that he refused to give evidence in his own brother's defence? What could he have said other
than that Abu-Jamal shot Faulkner? (53)
One other point, the leaflet in Abu-Jamal's defence which proclaims that f'Wef' have got to
stop "the execution of a man who has not committed any crime, except that of speaking out
against oppression and violence" is more than a touch on the naive side. The tendency of his
defenders to portray Abu-Jamal as a cuddly, dreadlocked teddy bear is totally out of touch
with reality. In addition to disrupting his trial, Abu-Jamal was said to have disrupted a pre-
trial hearing' calling the judge a bastard aafl fslling him to go to Helt. (54) Most amusingly,
an American correspondent who did a World Wide Web search for me came up with a
headline fron the Philadelphia Inquirer, the print out of which does rather dent Abu-Jamal's
teddy bear imagez ABU-JAtuIAL, SENTENCED TO DIE, THREATENS THE JUDGE This
was published June 26119832
In a final act of courtroom defiance, convicted murderer Mumia Abu-Jamal yesterday
threatened the judge who had moments before sentenced him to die in the electric chair,
shouting f rJudge, you have just sentenced yourself to die."...Several dozen supporters of Abu-
Jamal shouted their encouragement to him. "Sabo, you wonft be around for the executionr"
one of them yelled...
What was that about stopping the execution of a man who speaks out against oppression and
violence? Still want to free Mumia?
One final point before we move on, Abu-Jailal's reputation as a critic and exposer of police
brutality has been made up out of the whole cloth. He had indeed been a promising radio
talent, but had gone downhill over a period of time prior to the slaying of Daniel Faulkner.
He was said to have done practically no original reporting on alleged police brutality; one
informed critic says that the claim that he was some sort of crusader is "a triumph of
propaganda over truthrf. (55) Just like the entire I'Mumia is innocent" campaign.
COINTELPRO: The Government Aren,t
The Only Liars Out There
Returning to the book by Leonard Weinglass, on pages 213-27 he refers to the book The
COINTELPRO Papers, and even reproduces a document relating to the young Wesley Cook,
ie Abu-Jamal. I was familiar with this book, having consulted it some time ago in connection
with totally different matters. COINTELPRO is an acronym for the X'BIrs 'Counter-
Intelligence Program. This was directed initially against political I'extremists" of the far left;
its targets included both the Black Panthers and pro-race-mixing activists such as Martin
Luther Kog; COINTELPRO was also later used against the far right.
Abu-Jamalrs supporters place great emphasis on his youthful involvement with the Btack
Panthers, and claim that he was set up partly on account of this. The F'BI and its fellow
travellers obviously still take an interest in Abu-Jamal because the document reproduced on
l0


--- PAGE 12 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
prge 227 of Weinglass's book is very recent. It also states, incorrectly, that Abu-Jamal was
convicted of murder in 1983. Some people though are skeptical of the COINTELPRO
connection. In his essay True Lies, Cristopher Rapp comments "The evidence indicates that
COINTELPRO was neither far-reaching nor particularly successful." (56) I consulted The
COINTELPRO Papers wherein the reader is informed that
...Mumia Abu-Jamal, a former BPP member in Philadelphia, convicted and sentenced to
death on July 3, 1982, ostensibly for having killed a cop, despite eyewitnesses having
identified an entirely different individual as the assailant On March 6, 1989, the
Pennsylvania Supreme Court denied Abu-Jamal's last possible appeal prior to the electric
chair even while acknowledging that "genuine doubt" exists as to the killer's identity... (57)
This is very damning, superficially, and the extract above is footnoted. However, when one
turns to the footnotes, the source given on page 417 is Wages bf COINTELPRO: The case of
Mumia Abu-Jamal, by Ward Churchill, published in New Studies on the Left,YoL XIV' Nos.
1-2, Spring-Summer 1989, pages 96-9.
Ward Churchill is co-author of The COINTELPRO Papers.
Suspicious that Churchill had cited his own work I lished around for a copy of this article;
the British Library does not hold NeD Studies on the Leftrbat through an American contact I
managed to obtain a faxed copy of Churchills article. It contains a great deal of background
on Abu-Jamal's involvement with the Black Panthers and so on, but precious little about the
murder of Daniel Faulkner. What Churchill does say is revealing, though sadly it reveals
more about himself than it does about the incident. Abu-Jamal witnessed the "beating" and
moments later
an unarmed Mumia Abu-Jamal was sitting on the curb, a serious bullet wound from a police
service revolver in his stomach. Nearby, the patrolman who had been engaged in the beating
lay dead' killed by a weapon which was never recovered...Witnesses to the event did not
describe Mumia as being the man who shot the cop. fnstead, they described a "short"
individual of approximately "200 poundst'wearing an I'Afro hair-do".
How many lies is that? Was Faulkner beating Cook? There was certainly a struggle, but
according to Mulshine, "Cook sucker-punched Faulkner, eyewitnesses said." (58)
Faulkner was "killed by a weapon which was never recoveredtt. As Mulshine says,
"Weinglass can nibble at the edges of the evidence all he wants, but he can't get rid of the
Charter Arms revolver found at Mumia Abu-Jamal's feet". (59) Nor of the five spent casings
found in the gun. (60) Weinglass canrt get rid of the gun, but Churchill doesn't even mention
it!
"Witnesses to the event did not describe Mumia as being the man who shot the cop." Really,
then how about cab driver Robert Chobert who when cross-examined by Abu-Jamal replied:
"I saw you, buddy. f saw you shoot him and I never took my eyes off you." (61)
Churchill refers to what he calls an eerie parallel to the 1967 killing of patrolman John Frey
in Oakland, California which resulted in the conviction of Black Panther founder Huey
Newton for manslaughter, a conviction which Churchill says was subsequently overturned
"on evidentiary groundstt because "there was no evidence that Newton had fired a weapon at
alltt.
This is yet another bare-faced lie and an apolory for a cop-killer. Newton's conviction was
overturned on a technicality; years later Newton boasted to his circle that he had murdered
Frey. (62)
Churchill might have alluded to another case in which another black activist gunned down a
police officer in (genuinely) disputed circumstances. This was in New Jersey in May 1973 and
ll


--- PAGE 13 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
the gunwoman - in this case - was Joanne Chesimard aka Assata Shakur. Unlike Abu-Jamal
though she - or rather her supporters - do not claim that she didn't actually shoot the cop (or
that she wasnrt involved in tfe shoot-out) - but claim he shot first. She was in a car with two
other Btack Liberation Army members stopped on the turnpike. She was gaoled for life in
1977 butsubsequently escapedl she was granted asylum by Cuba in 19-84' (63)
The fact that one .ur. hur parallels with another is hardly evidence of evil intent by
COINTELpRO specialists, which is clearly what Churchill wants his readers to think it is.
Sadly the murders of police officers are all too common. In Britain there have been many
,o.h -orders, including shootings, over the yearsr and we have already alluded to the
Braybrook Street Massalre of 1966, not to mention the hacking to death of Keith Blakelock.
Churchill again: *At trial, the prosecution faced obvious evidentiary difficulties in
demonstrating that Mumia had killed anyone at all..." But these were as nothing as compared
with the difficulties Abu-Jamal would have faced in explaining away how he had drawn his
gun and fired five bullets without killing Faulkner, and that without salling his brother or
Ii"i"g evidence himself. Abu-Jamal was denied the counsel of his choice, says Churchill;
again, the representative Abu-Jamal wanted was not qualified to represent him so he made
the unwise decision to represent himself, to plead not guilty, and at the end of the trial to
threaten to kill the judge!
Churchilt again: i'...t-h. prosecution capped its performance in its summation by arguing
that the defendant must ie guilty simply on the basis of his having believed in the Panther
ideolory of black liberation and armed self-defense for nearly 20 years"'
What about the eyewitnesses, the murder weapon found at the scene and Abu-Jamal's total
inability to discredit the prosecution evidence?
Churchill's article not only has no merit, it is a dishonest and dangerous polemic. There is
enough injustice in the American legal system as in the British without people like him
,p..idiog-lies and distortions of this magnitude which are likely to discredit campaigns
against real injustices.
bne final poiot, Churchin is even wrong about Abu-Jamal's last possible appeal; ten years
'later he is still on Death Row.
The "Racist" fury Claim
According to Churchill, the jury at Abu-Jamal's murder trial contained eleven white
members. This is a slight exaggeration. According to Mulshine, two of the jurors were black.
(64) Churchill -.otioor Amnesty International in his essay in connection with its
condemnation of the death penalty. On July t9,1999I wrote to Amnesty in London asking
for information concerning th. ."se of Abu-Jamal stressing that "I am particularly interested
in the allegations concerning a police frame-up."
I received a letter from Allan Hogarth of the organisation's Information and Publicity Office
dated 2g July lggg.significantty his reply contains no reference to any possible police frame-
up. The four main poiitr the leiter makes are that Amnesty is opposed to the death penalty -
fair enough, ,o ". I in most cases, including this one - that there has been a gteat deal of
animosity directed towards Abu-Jamat by police officers in particular (which may in turn
have prejudiced his trial 4nd appeal); that the prosecution overplayed its hand concerning
Abu-iamal's political beliefs, "oo tnut "The jury [of 10 whites and 2 blaclis] did not ethnically
represent the local community [which was 407o black]"'
This last is a rather weak .tui-, the inference being that whites would be more likely to
convict and sentence a black man to death. This is nonsense. With regard to conviction, Abu-
Jamal was not in the same position as O.J. Simpson whose lawyers could argue speciously
(albeit successfully) that he had been framed by an all-encompassing conspiracy of racist
t2


--- PAGE 14 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
police officers. Abu-Jamal never left the scene of the crime and there were witnesses to the
event. With regard to the death penalty, Abu-Jamal would probably have had less chance of a
death sentence from an all-white jury. As I write these words the Caribbean island of
Trinidad is waging a campaign to hang more convicted murderers in defiance of the Privy
Council in England - to which there is a right of final appeal. Blacks tend to favour the death
penalty more than whites the same way working class people tend to favour it more than than
the middle and upper classesl there is no racial inference in this statement one wav or
"l;:T;';:::iTffi:;::Hil;t"*T; ,,ethnicaily represenfthe rocar communfty,,, the n;-.concern is that a iury should be random. In practise - in Britain at any rate - certain types of
people are more likely to lind their ways onto juries than others. The trial of the Broadwater
Farm suspects lasted for forty days; some trials last considerably longer. One should not be
surprised if people who are unemployed or retired were to find their ways onto juries in such
cases. In Britain, the defence can't choose a jury by actively selecting jurors as in the United
States, but this is something which cuts both ways: if the defence has the right to exclude
certain jurors on the basis of race or whatever, then so does the prosecution. One could also
argue that if a iury was selected deliberately to "ethnically represent the local communit5r"
that it wouldn't be random!
Another weak claim, by Leonard Weinglass, is that I'The prosecutionrs guilt-phase
summation violated Mr. Jamal's right to due process. The prosecution invited the jury to
draw a negative inference from Mr. Jamal's decision not to take the witness stand." (65) An
entirely proper inference in my humble opinion.
The jury's sentencing Abu-Jamal to death may have had something to do with his obvious
contempt for them. In his letter to the Journalist (already cited), Jeffrey Blyth points out that
Abu-Jamal called his court appointed lawyer a baboon and a shyster, the jury a pack of
racists and the judge a hangman. He adds that "Abu Jamal's case has been investigated by
many journalists, of who few appear to be convinced of his innocence."
But that doesn't stop Weinglass and Abu-Jamal's noisy coterie from banging the drum ofpolice fit-up. The motive behind this isnrt at all obvious, but Paul Mulshine has Weinglass
sussed.
Abu-Jamal was back in the news recently when a former prison visitor, Philip Bloch,
claimed in the magazine Vanity Fair that in an unguarded moment seven years ago he had
admitted shooting Daniel Faulkner. (66) This puts the man himself in a difficuli position
because he cannot publicly deny that he shot Faulkner. As Mulshine points out, Abu-Jamal
has never actually denied the killing, including at his trial. Att the talk about fit-ups and a
mystery gunman emanates not from Abu-Jamal but from others and is window dressingn part
of a fund-raising stunt engineered by his supporters to win a retrial. f'In the event that he and
his supporters outside the courtroom manage to win a retrial, Weinglass is likely to admit the
obvious: that Jamal shot Faulkner." (67) He could then plead guilfy to manslaughter and if
sentenced to say fifteen years, he would walk free time served.
In the meantime though if he claims that he didn't kill Faulknern that could be used against
him in any future retrial. Although some media dupes have been convinced and have caled
for a retrial, (68) Abu-Jamal's chances are somewhere between zero and minus one. The
reason for thaf is that in the United States as here, before a retrial can be ordered there must
be not just proof of procedural or factual error but substantial grounds for believing that in
the absence of such error there would be a possibitity of the verdict being reversed. (69)
There is no realistic possibility of that, so Abu-Jamal's goose is cooked.
t3


--- PAGE 15 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
The Bottom Of The Burrel
There appears to be no limit to the depths to which some lawyers will sink. According to
Bissinger, Weinglass is currently working on a ridiculous conspiracy theory - for want if a
better phrase - which is nothing more than scurrilous gossip (which he may well have
invented himsell). This is that Faulkner was set up for execution by his own department.
Bissinger refers to this as "a certain desperation on the part of the defense". (70)
Abu-Jamal And Silcott
Incarceration on Death Row in the United States is not a pleasant fate for anyone. At the
time of writing Abu-Jamal has been on Death Row for over a decade and a half, which does
rather make a mockery of its name. Perhaps Psychological Torture Row would be a better
one? AII the same, it is difficult to have any sympathy at all with Abu-Jamal because he is the
author of his own misfortune. Mulshine points out that if he had told the truth and allowed
his lawyer to do his job he would not have been sentenced to death and would quite likely be a
free man by now. (71) Ie he would have escaped with third-degree murder or manslaughter.
In spite of Abu-Jamal's proven track record of animosity towards the police and in spite of
the murder of Daniel Faulkner being inexcusable, it was not a premeditated act in the sense
that he set out to kill Faulkner or anyone else that night. Clearly he didn't. A verdict of
second degree murder would I think have been appropriateo or at worse a verdict of first
degree murder with a life sentence. The current writer is opposed to the death penalty, by
and large, and most people who believe in the death penalty have some reservations about its
use. Certainly there is a case for restricting the death penalty only to the very worse types of
murder, which clearly this wasnrt.
Likewise it is difficult to have any sympathy with Winston Silcott, in spite of his eventual
acquittal for the murder of Keith Blakelock Silcott too claims to be a political prisoner, and
that although he was convicted of the murder of Anthony Smith he is in reality serving a life
sentence for the murder of Keith Blakelock. (72) This is not true, even though Silcott was the
victim of "noble cause corruption". (73) This practice is widely endorsed not only by the
police but by many members of the public; the argument goes something like this: Silcott and
people like him deserve to be taken off the streetsl they are a menace to society, if Silcott
didnrt murder Keith Blakelock he murdered someone elseo and if he didn't murder anyone he
is the sort of person who would if given the chance.
There is some merit in part of this"argumentl Silcott does have an appalling criminal record
in spite of his being rightly acquitted of the murder of Leonard Mclntosh. In his book on the
case, Observer joarnalist David Rose (74) does his best to whitewash Silcott and goes as near
as he can to absolve him of the murder of Anthony Smith, yet by his own admission Silcott
habitually carried a knife and was not shy about using it. Moreover, Anthony Smith suffered
truly appalling injuries: his face and abdomen were slashed, he had a lacerated lung and he'd
been stabbed in the heart. (75) It is difficult to reconcile such injuries with Silcott's claim of
self-defence - he denied the killing at first, of course - and for all the talk of racism which this
case generatedn Silcott has never shown the slightest remorse or regret for the death of
Anthony Smith, a fellow black man.
Winston Silcott would probably be viewed by many people as a worthy case of "noble cause
corruption"l the real problem with "noble cause corruption" though is that it is a slippery
slope; Mark Braithwaite and Engin Raghip who were convicted and sentenced to life aiong
with Silcott were neither career criminals nor knife-wielding psychos, they just happened to
T4


--- PAGE 16 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
be in the wrong place at the wrong time, and then only maybe. Both men were none too
bright - to put it mildly. (76) And let us not forget that at the beginning of the trial there were
three juveniles in the dock along with these three men. This is the real face of "noble cause
corruption".
While there are many disturbing features of the Tottenham Three case there are none with
regard to the open and shut case of Mumia Abu-Jamal, except the way damned liars with
political and racial agendas have duped large tranches of the public with the constant refrain
of a murderer's innocence in the face of overwhelming evidence to the contrary. Abu-Jamal's
supporters have played the race card for all it is worth, in fact if Abu-Jamal had been white,
no one would have batted an eyelid and he would have been sent to the chair donkey's years
ago. As I said' Death Row is not a pleasant place even for a guitty man, but don't shed any
tears for Mumia Abu-Jamal; he and he alone is the author of his misfortune. There are
countless young black men in gaol in America and Britain, many of whom are every bit as
guitfy as Abu-Jamal, and all of whom are more deserving of your sympathy.
Appendix: Derek Bentley
- A Waste Of Spuce (77)
After nearly half a century of campaigning, the Bentley famity has finally secured not only a
pardon but a hand out for the supposed injustice meted out to their imbecile relative who was
sentenced to death and executed for the murder of PC Miles while Christopher Craig, who
actually pulled the trigger, escaped the hangman on account of his youth. Bentley has been
portrayed by his family as a victim in the same manner as Winston Silcott - framed for the
murder of PC Keith Blakelock - or even as Stefan Kiszko - the tragic, "vulnerable, man who
spent the best years of his life in gaol branded a child rapist and murderer because forensic
evidence that would have exonerated him was suppressed by police officers and a forensic
scientist.
The "injustice" allegedly perpetrated against Derek Bentley is not in the same category as
the misfortunes of either of these men. Bentley went out with his youthful chum Craigwith a
loaded gun, and during the course of committing a felony, Craig shot and killed a totally
innocent police officer. When two men go out armed with a common purpose and one of them
commits a murder during the course of committing a felony, they can both rightly be
convicted of murder. Why else carry a loaded gun? There is the manufacfured controversy
over "Let him have it, Chris". But if Bentley had really intended his chum to give up he could
have shouted something like "Put the gun down, Chris'r.
As for Bentleyf s supposed mental deficiency, he was certainly of low intelligence, (he was 19
years old with a mental age of 11), but since when has a low mental age absolved
responsibility for murder? The child killers of James Bulger - Robert Thompson and Jon
Venables - were not even eleven years old when they committed their terrible crimeo but no
reasonable person would suggest they were not culpable.
True, PC Miles was not a two year old boy who was abducted, sadistically tortured then
callously put to death, but he had a right to life, and it is an insult to his memory that the
heirs of one of his killers should be paid "compensation" for what was without doubt a totally
unnecessary and unprovoked murder, and one which would most certainly not have
happened if Derek Bentley had refused his chum Craig's invitation to burglary and carrying
a loaded firearm with intent. The death sentence on Bentley may have been harsh, but he was
no victim, and neither he nor his family should profit from his crime.
15


--- PAGE 17 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
PostscriPt
Sincethefirstdraftofthisshortmonographwalcompletedtherehavebeendevelopmentsin
both cases. Abu-Jamal's final appeal 1fris'nnal final appeal?) has been dismissed and a new
date set for his execution: December ), iggg,It seems likely however that he will be with us
well into the next millennium'
In the silcott case there was mock outrage *h:l the Metropolitan_police agreed an out-of-
court setrement with silcott,s lawyers for"f50,000 0ver the Biakerock fit-up. Now that he has
some assets there have been suggestions that ihe widow of Keith Blakelock will bring a civil
action against him. Any such action would be ill-advised and would surely be struck out'
writing in the Daily Mirror on october 17, Glen smythn chairman of the Metropolitan
PoliceFederation,arguedthatSilcottshouldneverhavebeengrantedbailintheAnthony
Smith case: ,,If the decision had r..o tut .o to keep winston silcott in custody for a murder
for which he is now serving a rife ,.oi.o"., Keith Blakelock wourd probably still be alive
today.,, yeah, ,o".. IIe coiinued: "One thing's for certaino Silcott certainly made sure he
nevergaveevidenceinthiscase"t r rr-- '-^^r-,^*ar Eqrrm rnrrrder trial have been
The reasons silcott never gave evrdence at the Broadwater Farm murder trial have beel
spelled out here in some oetiil, and snyth obviouslylnows these reasons; his comments are
beneath contempt. Silcott himself *u"tia to give .oid.o.rn as he explained in \994, and as I
have pointed out here. He got his reward foifo[owing his legal team's advice, and Barbara
Mills got n".r, or,tit she wis forced'to-resign for refising to prosecute bent coppers' Glen
Smythobviously knows about that too'
T6


--- PAGE 18 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
Notes And References
(1) For the benefit of overseas readers (and future generations?) Harry Roberts was a former
soldier turned career criminal who gunned down three police oflicers in the Braybrook Street
Massacre of August l2,lg66,peter witti"- Sutcliffe (the Yorkshire Ripper) was convicted of
the murders of thirteen women, mostly prostitutes; he is now insane. Myra Hindley was the
partner of fellow child killer Ian Brady (known collectively as the Moors Murderers); she has
oft.o been the subject of sensationalist reporting due both to the enormity of her crimes and
to the misguided campaign by upper class do-gooders and half-wits to secure her release.
(2) The term "race cirdJappea"s to have come into common usage in the wake of the
acquittal for double murdei of O.J. Simpson due to the _outrageous antics of Simpson's legal
tea-m who, with a little help from police perjury, secured their glient's acquittal in the face of
overwhelming evidence of guilt by presenting him as the victim of a police frame-up for
racially motivated reasons.
(3) Braithwaite and Raghip were freed by the Court of Appeal on November27r 1991; their
murder convictions were quashed December 5' 1991'
(4) See for example Tests bring hopefor Silcott appealrby John Mullin, published in the
Guardian, ICD-ROM versionl, July 15, Lggl,page2. According to this report the "e-vidence"
against Silcott was an "unsigned interview".
(S] See for example Silcott oid o system in the dock, published in the Guardian, [CD-ROM
version;, November 26,lg9l,page22. (This article refers to Keith Blakelock as Colin
Blakelock and to Mrs cynthia Jarrett as cynthia Jarman, but the then ongoing case was
reported widely in all newsmedia).
(6) For it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than it is to bring a bent
copper to justice.
llibetecnes tu be tried,published in the Guardian, [CD-ROM version], July 13' l992,page2.
iti Sitcou,confession, ditective retiresrby David Roseo published in the Observer, ICD-ROM
versionf , November 27,lgg4rPage 8.
(9) The VoicerDecember 3rlgglrNo.475' page 5.
ilj;y Broadwater detective guiltyrby David Rose, published in the Guardian, [CD-ROM
versionl, June 5, 1990, Page 1..
1t1; See fft e Law tWagizine,2T MarchlgSTrpages 5-6 and the Times, March 20r1987, page 3.
(Zj fnnn MaMA ina nAnI, publish ed in CARF,December 98/January 99' page 11.
(13) cARFis an acronym for campaign Against Racism and Fascism.
if +) ,q.f"-.Iamal's surname is spelt both with and without the hyphenl he was born Wesley
Cook.
(15) Re his conviction for the murder of Anthony Smith, "At his trial in 1986' Silcott denied
it rxittiog, but now claims he acted in self-defence..." (Silcott is refused murder appealrby
Richard Fordo published in the Times, ICD-ROM version], Jaly 22,1997, page 4)'
(16) The aforementioned leaflet refers to Abu-Jamal's career as a radio journalist in the
present tense.
(17) Downloaded from FREE MUMM at
http://wrvw.geocities.com/CapitolHitv8533/MuMlA.HTMl. This precis was apparently
penned by Robert Meeropoln the son of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg who were executed in
Sing Sing in June f953.
Otl n qig FoR J(ISTICE: MaMIA ABU-JAMAL'r FIGHT AGAINST THE DEATH
iitf,qtfV,by Leonard Weinglass,Introduction by E.L. Doctorow, published by Common
Courage Press, Monroe, Maine, (1995)' page 4.
(19) Weinglass,Race For Justice,p^ge 15' (ibid).
(20) Weinglass, Race For Justice, Page 20' (ibid).
t7


--- PAGE 19 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
(21) Weinglass, Rcce For Justicerpnge 30' (ibid)'
izziW.i"Elass', Race For Justice' pages 35 & 38' (ibid)'
iZfl W.in[lass,, Race For Justice, pages 35-6 & 160' (ibid)'
tzli W.i"gr orr,, Rort For Justice' p^ge 161, (ibid)
(ZS) ^OLICEMAN'S DEATH SfnintCi fn*stON,pubtished in the New York Times'
S,rrrA"y, December 13, 1981, (LATE CITY EDITION)' page 35'
(26\ Free Mumia?,bv Paul nnu5gefis pugtt 2?!4-o-f-i!IE "RACE" CARD: WHITE GaILT'
BLACK RESENTMhNT AND THE ASSAin oN TRUrH AND JrISTICE,Edited bv Peter
collier and David Horowitz, published by Prima Publishing, Rocklin' cA'(1997)' See page
32.
ii|7tfn" Journalist, August/September 1995' page 19' -
(28) Letter rro*.l.ni.inrvtn g1llished in ine iournulist, octoberAlovember 1995' page 5'
(29) This dates from thl case McKeoi"o McKenzie t19701 although the principle actually
goes back a lot further.
(30) In child sex abuse cases an accused may no longcr cross-examine his accuser in person'
something any defendant would be ill-advir.o to doln any case in view of the hysteria such
cases always generate. More recently there have been suggestiont q"i an accused should be
denied the right to cross-examine his alteged victim in rape cases'-This-resulted from two high
profile cases in which the perpetrators: {'htoo EdwardJ (in 1996) and Milton Brown (in
lggg) conducted their own defences and conducted "improper cross-examination". Both men
were convicted and received heavy sentences. Brownts case is now the leading case on cross-
examination by defendants in person in rape cases'
(31) Mulshine, Free Mumia?rpage32, (op cit)'
iszi fvf"frnine, Free Mumia?,page 30, (ibid)' ,
(33) The Case of MumiaAbu-iaiott iittttral prisoner denied new trial after 16 yearc on death
rowrbyFred Mazelis, published on world sociatist web site; the article is dated 18
November 1998.
(34)MUMAABU-JAMAL,CELEBRITYCOPKILLER'byLynneAbraham',publishedinthe
New york Times,Late Edition Final, ICD-ROMI, A-ugust 13, 1995, Section 4, page 15'
(35) Actuag tfrey don,t say that, whaithey say it tnot he was denied sufficient funding' which
is not quite the same thing.
(SO) Munnine, Free Mumia?rpage 38, (op cit)'
(37) See Rv Turnbult and othirs,pubiitn.a intheA7,l ENGLAND LAW REPORTS'(1976)'
vol.3, pages 549-60. Turnbull and his co-defendant had their appeals dismissed' and rightly
so, but two other appeals which were heard at the same time, R v Roberts and R v whitby'
were successful.
(38) See page37 of THE FAMoaS AND THE DEAD,by Buzz Bissinger, published in
VA'NITY FAIR, Augustlggg,No 468, pages 32-9'
(39) Weinglass, Raie For Justice,WEe 56'(op cit)'-
ilOi .qfttut am, New York Times, August 13, 1995' (o! tit)'
ilti nittio g"r, fht Famous And The Dead,page 36' (op cit)'
(a2) In the Nickell case the police went way^ov-er the top when they tried to fit up a local
oddball, going to the extraordinary lengths of using an undercover temptress to encourage
him to confess. The "case" against colin stagg was never heard by a jury' In the Russell case'
a menta'y disturbed -uo ou..d Michael stone was convicted of the grisly double murderl at
the time of writing his conviction isunder appear and it is widety believed - including by
senior police offic-ers - not only that he will win his appeal but that he is not the man
responsible. Thei,case" against Stone was built almost totally on unreliable confessions he is
alleged to have made to pJople of dubious character, one of whom has since been charged
with Perjury.
(43) PACE came into force January 1, 1986, shortly after Silcott and company were fitted up.
18


--- PAGE 20 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
(44) According to crime reporter (the appropriately named) Tim Crook, the trial of Winston
Silcott for the murder of Anthony Smith was censored by Section (4)2 of the Contempt of
Court Act: I'Not one word of this case was published anywhere before the trial for murdering
PC Blakelock.tt And during the former case, no reference was permitted to the then
forthcoming Blakelock trial. [Letter from Tim Crook published in the Journalist,
August/September 1995, page 51.
(45) Winston Silcott: from the inside speaking outrby Tessa Mayes, published in the Guardian,
ICD-ROM versionl, August 13, 1994, page 23.
(46) Mills finally resigned in 1998 after sustained pressure
(47) A CLIMATE OF FEAR The Murder of PC Blakelock and the Case of the Tottenham
Three, by David Rose, published by Bloomsbory, London, (1992)rpages 156 and 159.
(48) Rose,,,4 Climate Of Fear,page 156, (ibid).
(49) Bissinger, The Famous And The Dead, page 36, (op cit).
(50) But see below re Abu-Jamal's failure to actually deny the lrilling.
(51) Or on the stand, as they say in America.
(52) Bissinger, The Famous And The Dead, page 36, (op cit).
(53) According to Bissinger, Cook's words at the scene were "f ain't got nothing to do with
it.tt
(54) Bissinger, The Famous And The Deadrpage37, (ibid).
(55) Bissinger, The Famous And The Dead, page 35, (ibid).
(56) From THE nRACEt' CARD,pageZS, (op cit).
(57) The COINTELPRO Papers: Documentsfromthe FBIts Seuet Warc Against Domestic
Dissent, by Ward Churchill and Jim Vander Wall, Foreword by John Trudell, Preface by
Brian Gliclq published by South End Press, Boston, MA, (1990), pages 319-20.
(58) Mulshine, Free Mumia?, pages 39-40, (op cit).
(59) Mulshine, Free Mamia?, page 38, (ibid).
(60) One of the criticisms levelled at the police is that the gun wasnft tested to see if it had
been fired recently. When asked how a gun is so tested Weinglass replied "You just smell itr',
to which Mulshine retorts cynically "Wonderful: His client was literally caught with a
smoking gun, so he criticizes the police for not smelling the smoke."
(61) Mulshine, Free Mumia?, page 39, (ibid).
6D THE SIUDOW OF THE PANTHER: HUEY NETYTON AND THE PRICE OF BLACK
POWER IN AMERICA, by Hugh Pearson, published by Addison-Wesley, New York, (1994),
pages 4 and22l.
(63) See for example a black and white case,by Alix Kirsta, publishedrnthe times magazine,
29 may lggg,pages 24-5,27-8 & 30-1.
(64) Mutshine, Free Mumia?,page32, (op cit).
(65) WeinglassrRace For Justicerp^ge 1710 (op cit).
(66) Deoth row inmate defended by stars tadmitst cop killingrby Martin Kettlen published in the
Guardian, July 10, 1999, page 16. [This is where I first learned of the Vanity Fair articlel.
(67) Mulshine, Free Mamia?, page 39, (op cit).
(68) In 1995 a Channel4 TV programme was devoted to this case. A review in the Gaardian
claimed that "The programme did not clear Jamal but raised enough questions in one's mind
to doubt the safeness of the original conviction. The stay of execution granted to Jamal on
Wednesday opens the way for a retrial." * The Journalist reported that Abu-Jamal had won a
retrial; ** this was wishful thinking.
* Roaghiastice meted oat in the land of thefree, by Stuart Jeffries, published in the
Gaardian, ICD-ROM version], August 11, 1995, page 9.** Journalist, August/September 1995, page 19.
(69) In Englandn on conviction in the Magistrates Court there is an automatic right of appeal
to the Crown Court where the case will be heard by a judge sitting with two magistrates. A
t9


--- PAGE 21 ---
A TALE OF TWO CONVICTED COP KILLERS
conviction on indictment can be appealed to the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division, but first,
leave must be obtained.
(70) Bissinger, The Famous And The Dead, page 38, (op cit).
(71) Mulshine, Free Mumia?,page 44, (op cit).
(72) Mayes, Silcott interview, the Guardian, August 13,l994rpage23, (op cit).
(73) Which is defined by the Police Complaints Authority as "the use of dishonest practices to
secure convictions or boost performance figures".
(74)l have some experience of Rose from another - and totally unrelated matter - and it is my
experience that not everything he says is to be taken at face value, to put it mildty. He is also a
little on the gullible side.
(75) Rose,,4 Climate Of Fear,page230, (op cit).
(76) According to Rose, Braithwaite was very poorly educated and only learned to read
properly while in prison. * Raghip was said to have had a mental age of ten and to have been
highly suggestible. ** At the time of the trial both Braithwaite and Raghip were twenty years
old, *** so lost the best years of their lives.
* Rose,.4 Climate Of Fear, page 200, (ibid).
** The Voice, December 3rlgglrNo. 475, page 5.
'('()k The Times, March 20r1987rpage2.
(77) This was originally written as a stand alone article.
20


--- PAGE 22 ---
Abu-JamaL: Icon Or Cop-KiIIer?
on Death Row since the early 80s, Mumia Abu-Jamal has become a virtual living saint for"radicals" and opponents of the death penalty. The story of how campaigning blackjournalist and social activist Abu-Jamal rou, i.u-rd by ihe racistrnitaae-tptria police
Department for a murder he didntt commit has been rlported widely in the left press, themainstream mediao the Internet and the WorldWideWeb. The campaign to win a retrial forAbu-Jamal has bee-n supported by media personalities such as actress Whoopie Goldberg andmusician Sting, and orchestrated on three continents.
Though Abu-Jamal remains on Death Row, another campaign to clear a young black manconvicted of murdering a police officer was ultimately successful. In November lgglrWinstonsilcott was cleared by the court of Appeal of the -u.d". of pc Keith Blakelock during thenow notorious Broadwater Farm riot of October 1985. Silcott's unsigned so-called confessionhad been made up out of the whole cloth by corrupt police officers; the confessions of his co-accused were extracted by holding these none-too-bright youths incommunicado for up totwelve days.
-I9-t people might be tempted to draw comparisons between Mumia Abu-Jamal andWinston Silcott; the-sad truth though is that ihe only thing Abu-Jamal and Silcott have incommon is an inability to face up to their crimes: A6u-Jamal was convicted of the murder ofofficer Daniel Faulkner on overwhelming evidence, and Silcott, although f.am*o for themurder of PC Blakelock, lingers in gaol 
"igtruy convicted of the brutal knife murder of ayoung boxer.
This comparative study exposes the lies of the Abu-Jamal camp, the whitewashing of Silcottby observer journalist David Rose, and the mendacity of the Metropolitan police, amendacity which even British judges in their ivory towers are coming increasingly torecognise.
Published by In/oText Manuscripts,
93c Venner Roado
Sydenharlo
London SE26 5HU.
England.
5n q
ISBN | 871473 G*.'O
Copyright Alexander Baron, lggg.

