=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Afrikan Centered Consciousness Versus the New World Order Garveyism in the Age of Globalism Dr Amos Wilson.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 21
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:01:09.532387
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
AFRIKAN WISDOM
Voices of the Ancestors
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness Versus The New 
World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism
By Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
(Excerpt: From a lecture delivered by Amos N. Wilson at the 
Marcus Garvey Senior Citizen Center, Brooklyn, NY in 1985;
Transcribed by Sababu Plata
We don't have time today to review the history of Marcus 
Garvey. Rather that try to recap this history, which I'm 
sure most of you are familiar with anyway, I'll just take a 
brief look at some things I think Marcus Garvey left us as 
an individual, as an organizational person and as a leader 
of Afrikan people.
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
1


--- PAGE 2 ---
PERCEPTION. One of the major things in the Marcus Garvey 
legacy was that of his perception of reality. I often talk 
about reality in my classes and general lectures so that 
attendees would recognize that at the center of one's 
adjustment to the world, at the center of one's ability to 
deal with the world, to change the world to suit one's 
advantage, is a knowledge of reality. The very essence of 
pathology, whether political, ideological, economic, social, 
or psychological, is a lack of knowledge of reality. How 
can one deal with reality if one does not know what it is? 
How can you deal with reality if you're blind to it or if it is 
distorted?
It is somewhat interesting that the brain is locked up in 
the darkness of the skull, yet the brain is the central unit 
that guides our behavior. It guides that behavior based on 
the information it receives from our senses. Therefore, 
our senses must relay to the brain an accurate knowledge 
of reality. This is the only knowledge, ultimately, that the 
brain gets from the outside world. The brain, using its 
innate capacities, such as reasoning capacities, 
comparative capacities, basic knowledge, memory and 
experience, uses the information given to it by the senses 
to determine how the person is going to deal and cope 
with reality, how the individual is going to shape reality to 
its own purposes. Therefore, if that information is 
distorted, then the brain determines behavior on that 
distorted information and the individual is maladjusted. 
This is the case then with a people.
It is necessary for a people, if they are coping with 
reality, if they are trying to advance themselves, to know 
that reality. They need sensors and people who can tell 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
2


--- PAGE 3 ---
what that reality is, who can inform that as to the nature 
of that reality such that the decisions the group must 
make in determining how it will behave, how it will shape 
its destiny, can be based on the real, not on the unreal. In 
Marcus Garvey, I see this great sensor, this great seer 
who informed us of the real world in which we existed. Not 
of a dream world, not of a world of wishful thinking, not a 
world distorted by hope, but a world that was seen as it 
is, a world that was sometimes brutally projected to us as 
a people so that we could use that knowledge to advance 
our interests as such. This is a legacy from Garvey that 
we must continue. Regardless of our pain, regardless of 
our discouragement, regardless as to what may be going 
on, we must be determined to look reality in the face and 
to use that reality as a base and foundation of our 
behavior.
PERCEPTION AND SELF-KNOWLEDGE. I also see in the legacy 
of Marcus Garvey the legacy of self-knowledge. Teachers, 
wise men and women from eons past have indicated that 
the foundations of sanity and wisdom rest on a knowledge 
of self: knowing self. We know that at the very center of 
Egyptian philosophy was the admonition, Know Thyself. 
That is the essence of wisdom. Garvey thus recognized 
that a lack of knowledge, an amnesia about who and what 
we are, is pathological. We recognize today in psychology 
that amnesia is a pathological state of mind; that a people 
who suffer from a lack of knowledge of themselves and of 
their history, a lack of knowledge of their creation, are a 
people who suffer from a loss of identity. We recognize, 
as Garvey recognized, that this lack of self-knowledge 
was deliberately induced into the mind and psyche of 
black people. We could not be Afrikans and slaves at the 
same time; we could not hold onto our Afrikan identity, 
our Afrikan selves, knowledge of our Afrikan culture, and 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
3


--- PAGE 4 ---
be enslaved; the subordinates of another people. It is 
only when that knowledge is removed, erased, degraded, 
stolen, taken and distorted that we lose our identity. It is 
then that an identity is placed upon us by another people 
and by external forces. Therefore, a lack of self-
knowledge is a lack of self-awareness. A lack of self-
awareness is an insensitivity to the self. But an 
insensitivity in the self is also an insensitivity to reality 
and to the outside world. Without the sensitivity of the 
outside world and the self, we are left to blindly stumble 
from one point to another.
Ultimately, self-knowledge in its deepest sense is a 
knowledge of others. We cannot really get to know 
ourselves deeply without in essence knowing our enemies 
and friends and without ultimately knowing the Creator, in 
whatever form or fashion. It reasons that to know the self 
ultimately involves moving beyond the self and seeing the 
world from the vantage point of universalism. 
Consequently we see in Marcus Garvey, in his efforts to 
rescue us from the pathology of racism, the putting of 
major emphasis on self-knowledge and self-knowing. We 
must recognize today that if we are to regain our Afrikan 
selves, we must then deeply engage in self-knowledge 
and self-knowing.
PERCEPTION AND; LACK OF SELF-KNOWLEDGE. In 
psychology, we also recognize that at the center of 
pathology is the individual's inability to control the self. 
One of the amazing things about the human mind when one 
looks at it from the point of view of the so-called 
unconscious, is that the individual who does not know 
himself and does not know reality, is the individual who 
escapes from self-knowledge, is an individual who 
does 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
4


--- PAGE 5 ---
not know the roots and bases of his actions. He is an 
individual who seems to be determined by external forces 
(or by internal forces) of which he has little or no 
knowledge. He is often constantly puzzled by his own 
behavior. He is often a wonderment to himself. He 
struggles against impulses, desires and wishes over which 
he has little or no control because he has, in his escape 
from self-knowing and reality, conceded his self-control 
and given it over to someone else. In releasing his 
identity and permitting another to place an identity within 
his psyche, he has at the same time placed in the hands 
of that other the ability to control his behavior.
We see in Marcus Garvey's legacy that if we are to control 
our destiny, we then must control ourselves. We must 
enter into phase where the control of our behavior comes 
under the domination of our will. The essence in many 
psychotherapeutic approaches is to make the individual 
aware of the unconscious forces, wishes and impulses 
that are determining his behavior against his will. And in 
making these forces conscious, the individual can bring 
them under conscious control; the individual can bring his 
behavior under the dominant control of reason and logic. 
He, then, is not a victim of his emotions. He is not swept 
by emotions and feelings only, but his emotions serve his 
interest. His emotions are his handmaidens and he is not 
just one who is swept along helter-skelter by feelings and 
impulses.
We see in Marcus Garvey the ultimate psychotherapist, 
one who is revealing and who reveals the unconscious 
controls, the controls that were implanted outside of our 
consciousness by our enemies and oppressors. Yet, 
despite those controls being outside of our 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
5


--- PAGE 6 ---
consciousness, they were manipulating our behavior to 
our own disadvantage. In bringing those unconscious 
forces into consciousness, he made it possible for us to 
bring those forces under our control, rule, logic, 
rationality, and under the control of the ideology of 
nationalism.
Often we see in the neurotic and pathological individual, 
one who has little self-esteem and self-acceptance. The 
acceptance of reality, which I referred to in the beginning, 
ultimately must be the acceptance of one's self. The 
acceptance of reality, as Marcus Garvey recognized and 
projected, ultimately must mean the acceptance of our 
Afrikanicity, the acceptance of the fact that we are an 
Afrikan people. It seems a bit simple when we state it. It 
seems a bit obvious. However, when we engage in 
psychotherapy, we recognize that sometimes we have the 
patient who comes into the office who is intellectually 
aware and can quite often lecture the therapist in terms 
of theoretical ideas and the theoretical grounds for his 
therapeutic work, but who has not recognized and 
confronted himself emotionally, who has not really in his 
heart accepted what he knows. What I am stating here is 
that while we may recognize superficially and intellectually 
that it is important we accept the reality of our Afrikan 
history, we must recognize deeply in our hearts, in the 
very bottoms of our psyches, our Afrikanicity.
Much of the pathology of Afrikan people today is this vain 
hope that somehow we will be able to escape our Afrikan 
heritage, that somehow the white man will become color 
blind and will not see us for whom and what we are, that 
somehow we will be looked upon as some kind of 
abstraction and as just a man. Not as an Afrikan man, not 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
6


--- PAGE 7 ---
as a black man, but as a man, a human being only; without 
culture, without recognition, without identity. Too many of 
us want to shed our Afrikanicity for this kind of bogus, 
abstract existence, which is no existence at all, and which 
is the ultimate acceptance of invisibility. We must 
recognize that we are an Afrikan people and we will be 
Afrikan people to the end of time  and we must accept all 
that goes with that. We must accept the good, the bad, 
and all of the possibilities that go with being Afrikan. We 
must accept the fact that this white man is never going to 
accept us totally, and get used to the idea. Hope is a 
wonderful thing in some senses, but it can be pathological 
in others. The neurotic individual uses hope in a 
pathological way. He lives in hope and does not know 
when to give it up. There's a time that hope has to be 
given up; when one looks at reality and recognizes reality 
for what it is, and one accepts certain aspects of that 
reality and moves on it. The hope that this white man is 
going to accept you as one of his own, is one of those 
hopes that you must give up. The hope and the dream 
that you're going to be holding hands with little white 
boys and girls; that the white man is going to feed your 
children before he feeds his own; that he's going to 
clothe you before he clothes his own; that he's going to 
give up his ill-gotten gains and wealth in the name of some 
kind of bogus brotherhood or classless society, is a vain 
hope. Give it up! Turn it loose! When you turn it loose you 
will see a growth and development of self. It would mean 
then an acceptance of self. We see this in Marcus Garvey 
as he got us to accept and tried to get us to accept the 
reality of ourselves and the reality of our Afrikanicity.
He recognized, as we must recognize today, that we 
cannot get self-acceptance through another people's 
acceptance of us as one of them. Self-acceptance can 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
7


--- PAGE 8 ---
only be achieved through the self. We must not wait for 
our enemies to approve of us and to so-call accept us as 
a way of accepting ourselves. Because, ladies and 
gentlemen, our enemies, their very lives and very way of 
life depend upon our non self-acceptance. If the 
foundation of their very culture and the foundation of 
their economic, political and social system is one that is 
founded upon the subordination of black people, then you 
must recognize that they are not going to give that up. 
For it would be like giving up their very lives and their 
very existence itself. Therefore, for us to wait around in 
the vain hope that through their acceptance we will come 
to accept ourselves, is to wait for nothing, because we 
will gain nothing as a result of this kind of illusion.
One of the things that we must recognize is that our 
oppressor represents death; our oppressor is deadly. 
One of the things that impressed me most when I went to 
graduate school and rally had my first real contact with 
the white educational establishment was that these 
people are dead. There's death around them somewhere, 
which is the reason they are deadly as a people, why 
every advance of knowledge for them is an advancement 
in the knowledge of destruction. Every advancement in 
knowledge is an advancement in the ability to kill and 
destroy the earth, kill and destroy nature, kill and destroy 
others, rape and rob the earth of its wealth, people and 
life forms, so much so that now they are having great 
difficulty even reproducing themselves. At the very center 
of their lives is death and destruction. We cannot imitate 
a people who are our oppressors. And we have this kind 
of silliness that goes on in this system today. You are 
going to complain on one hand about these racist people, 
about how they enslaved us, exploited us discriminated 
against us, how they lynched and pillaged us, and then 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
8


--- PAGE 9 ---
turn right around and see their behavior as something to 
be emulated and imitated.
Imitation of the oppressor is then equivalent to the 
treatment of the self and one's fellows just as the 
oppressor would treat us. It is equal to the treatment of 
the self and the group in a destructive manner. It equals 
the lack of self-respect and respect for the group, since 
the oppressor lacks respect for us as individuals and as a 
group. If our oppressors exploit us, then the imitation of 
our oppressor means self-exploitation. Consequently we 
see in the legacy of Marcus Garvey, a moving away from 
the imitation of our oppressors and a moving toward the 
identification with all that is Afrikan
When we look at the legacy of Marcus Garvey we see 
again an emphasis on productivity. Marcus Garvey did not 
have to read Frederic Engels, Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin, 
even though he was familiar with them. He did not have to 
read those to recognize the intimate relationship between 
the means of production and the character of a people, to 
recognize the intimate relationship between the nature of 
the economic relationships of people and their social 
relationships one with the other. It was apparent in his 
observing of our people across the world. He recognized, 
as we must recognize, that social character is to a 
significant extent determined by the nature of social and 
labor relations. He recognized intuitively that the eating 
at lunch counters with our enemies, the sharing of hotels 
and beds with those enemies, the marrying and sleeping 
with their daughters, would not advance our interests 
ultimately as a people; that consuming their products 
would not rescue us from subordination. Ultimate freedom 
and independence is founded on production, upon the 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
9


--- PAGE 10 ---
creation of employment, upon the creation of labor and 
the creation of products for our own consumption. When 
we look in the world today, we will see that the powerful 
nations and people are producing people, not consuming 
people. As I've often said, you cannot consume yourself 
into equality; you cannot consume yourself into power. 
Those nations who depend upon consumption will see as 
they consume the product of others and do not produce 
themselves, that they will be consumed by others.
IRONY OF EDUCATION. The paradox I have to deal with 
daily in my classroom is the amount of lying that must take 
place in the name of education; the amount of outright 
deception that goes by the name of education; how truth 
must be nailed to the cross in classroom after classroom; 
how people tremble, quake and suffer from anxiety when 
truth and reality is brought up by their teachers; how 
people are pushed out of the universities and punished 
because they dare talk about truth; how people think they 
should go to school only to be made comfortable.
And each day they sit in my class, Asians, whites, 
Afrikans, Hispanics and ofttimes it's an exercise in 
twisting, turning and squirming because I dare talk about 
slavery, colonialism, the sickness of Europeans; the lying 
deceptive and devilish nature and the pathology of the 
people who now rule the world; because I dare talk about 
the irony of where white men sit down and determine the 
destiny of a world that's over 90% colored; when I dare 
tell them that they sit in these classes and let these 
whites and their education brainwash and propagandize 
them into servitude, and how their education is an 
education into ignorance. But if we are to rescue our 
children, students and our people, these unpleasant 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
10


--- PAGE 11 ---
issues must be dealt with forthrightly.
When we deal with an assimilationist leadership that sees 
solutions to our problems as getting our children more 
soundly educated in these lies, we are going to see a 
decline and the destruction of Afrikan people who think 
that their salvation is one of being educated by the very 
people who destroyed them in the first place.
We must recognize that the white man's rule depends 
upon ongoing deceptions and lies. Ultimately, then, we 
cannot see him as the foundation and basis of truth. Thus 
we cannot let him be the educator of our children and let 
the reality that he projects become our reality. For he is 
sick of mind and heart. He is deceived by his own lies and 
therefore the reality he projects must be a lying reality. 
He suffers and he is deadly. How can we not suffer and 
die if we accept what he sees as real and unreal? Those 
leaders who seek to tell us that we can only rescue 
ourselves through accepting the identity of the white man 
are leaders who will lead us to our peril and our death. 
We must recognize that if we are to live, we have to 
remove these kinds of leaders.
THE ASSIMILATIONIST TREADMILL. The assimilationist often 
accepts, consciously or unconsciously, the idea that the 
white man will continue to rule the world. He bases his 
ideology and political action on the concept that somehow 
our destiny is not to overthrow the white man; that our 
destiny is not to remove this pathological person; that our 
destiny is not to suppress and bring these sick people 
under control but heal them in some sort of way, to 
convert them, to even become a part of 
them. Our destiny 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
11


--- PAGE 12 ---
becomes not one that sees the very system and very 
ideology upon which these oppressors move as one of 
sickness and insanity and therefore in need of 
replacement by an Afrikan-centered and healthy ideology 
that comes out of our own self-knowing. This leadership 
wants us to accept this sickness as normality and to 
follow these pathological beings into self-destruction.
And consequently you will see the enemy's children, the 
enemy's personality being held up as normal, as 
representing the norm. Our behavior, to the degree that it 
differs from that of our enemy, is seen as deviant and 
thus abnormal. To that degree we confuse equality with 
sameness, where we think that in order to be equal or 
greater than our enemy we have to be the same as our 
enemy; to the degree we think differentness automatically 
represents inferiority and therefore we become alarmed 
at anything that says we are somehow different from our 
enemy. We must recognize, ladies and gentlemen, that 
racism is a sickness, that the exploitation and wholesale 
rape and pillaging of the earth by the European 
represents a pathology and a illness. Therefore, our 
destiny is not one of trying to become a member of this 
gang of thieves, but to end its existence here on earth, 
to inhibit its rapacious ways and to bring this group of 
people to heel!
Yet we have a leadership that makes us think that our 
only crime has been that we've been left out on the 
looting of these thieves. We get a leadership that cries 
about how we're only getting a certain percentage of 
their robbery and thievery. We must recognize, Afrikan 
people, that it is not about getting a piece of the stolen 
gains of these people, but to stop their thievery and rape 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
12


--- PAGE 13 ---
of the world, period! So it is not about being left out of 
the mainstream; it is about bringing into being a new world 
order.
This leadership has thus robbed us of the Marcus Garvey 
legacy. We have a leadership that has sold us 
conspicuous consumption as a way of salvaging our egos. 
It makes us think that we will be equal to the white man 
when we can drive the same cars, have the same jobs, 
sleep in the same beds and buy in the same 
neighborhoods; a consumer equality: not an equality of 
ownership, not an equality based on wealth.
We have had that kind of leadership and thus have seen 
Afrikan people the world-over, in this country and on the 
Afrikan continent give up the very basic wealth of their 
own lands and their very basic real estate to their 
enemies for a few pennies and materials which fade away 
and are corruptible. We have a leadership that is not 
concerned with developing its own productive capacities, 
but with merely getting jobs and being identified with the 
productive capacities of others, with literally marrying the 
enemy and thus trying to achieve the status of the enemy 
through marriage instead of through strength and power.
We have seen this asimilationist leadership, which came to 
the fore and to a degree has pushed back the nationalist 
leadership, reign over the decline of Afrikan people the 
world-over; the decline in Afrikan education, the 
disruption of the Afrikan family, the retardation of Afrikan 
technology, the decline and paralysis of Afrikan 
economics, the rampaging of our community by drugs, the 
colonial occupation of our community by foreign 
police 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
13


--- PAGE 14 ---
forces and others who are not members of the Afrikan 
community. When we look over the past 20 to 40 years, 
we see an assimilationist leadership that has brought us 
to the terrible moral, economic, social, political, and 
educational impasse that we are griping about today.
To a degree, simultaneous with the rise of assimilationist 
leadership, I think we had a rise of pseudo-nationalistic 
leadership; a nationalist rhetoric without a nationalist 
substance, a people who talked a good nationalism but 
who do not behave and actualize what that nationalism 
means. We are now engaged in a struggle between true 
nationalism and counterfeit nationalism. It is time for us to 
remove those counterfeit nationalists, who are also in a 
subtle sort of similar way the partners of the 
assimilationists.
THE TRUE NATIONALIST. The true nationalist is not 
obsessed with the past to the exclusion of the present. 
One of the things I think you will see in the Marcus Garvey 
legacy is that while he raised the black man's past to 
great heights, project that past and made it a part of the 
consciousness of black people, there was a thorough 
going concern with the present and the future.
The true nationalist is forward-looking and futuristic. I see 
too few conferences, too few people concerned with the 
future, even nationalists: "What must we do today to 
secure the survival and the advancement of Afrikan 
people the world-over? What must we do to fight off the 
threat of the Asian takeover of the world? Are we to 
throw off or to see the death of European civilization, 
only to fall under the yoke of the Asian civilization? 
We 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
14


--- PAGE 15 ---
can look out in our streets today and see it coming. It is 
around us everywhere. The invasion of our communities by 
Asians is a sign of times to come.
The true nationalist is intrepid. Not that the nationalist 
does not have fear, but he learns to operate in spite of 
fear; fear does not paralyze him. He uses the fear as 
energy to move forward and to confront his enemies. He 
does not hide his fear behind high-sounding phrases, high-
sounding scholarship and dredging up the past. He 
dredges up the past as a means of integrating it into his 
personality, as a foundation for his movement forward and 
his thrust into the future.
The true nationalist is entrepreneurial: he's building 
something; he's constructing something. We see that in 
Garvey; not just a concern with the past, not just an 
identification with Egypt and other great Afrikan empires 
of the past, not just picking up little detail upon little 
detail of some Afrikan past, but of a sound movement 
forward in concrete, brick and mortar construction; a 
sound hands-on developing and actualization of Afrikan 
ideology and political development. He is one who thrusts 
his fear aside and moves forward, the true Afrikan 
nationalist.
He not only respects his ethnic heritage and the glories 
of his ancestors, but he is equally, if not more, concerned 
with the inheritance he's going to pass on to his children, 
with the legacy he's going to give to his children.
We see the true nationalist in the guise and person 
of 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
15


--- PAGE 16 ---
Marcus Garvey, in the person of the Honorable Elijah 
Muhammad, who not only complains about the nature of 
the education of Black children but who does something 
about it. He builds the schools and universities and 
constructs and instructs as a part of his nationalist 
mission..
The true nationalist is not obsessed about the 
destruction of his civilizations, about the cruelty of his 
fate and the devilishness of his enemies. Certainly he 
analyzes that and looks at it. Certainly he laments the 
destruction of black civilization and the fall of our empires 
and kingdoms and our fall from grace to a degree. But he 
does not become traumatized by those falls and 
destruction. He does not become obsessed and 
compulsive about their analysis. He looks at them, he 
learns from them, he integrates them into his personality 
and ideology, he swears never again, and he moves 
forward using that knowledge to construct a new 
civilization. He looks at the mistakes of his ancestors; he 
looks at the mistakes of his past civilizations and he 
integrates those mistakes into his personality; he then 
moves forward to build new civilizations, new worlds, and 
found new empires; not just lament the ones past and 
gone.
Though the true nationalist recognizes the greatness of 
Osiris (Asar), Isis (Aset) and all of the rest, he recognizes 
that ultimately the pyramids were built by the hands of 
men. I have yet to see a god build a temple. I see men 
building temples; I see men building cities; I see men and 
people digging the mines; I see people doing the jobs. 
There is nothing wrong with using the astrologies, the 
esoteric religions and using the moons and planets 
as 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
16


--- PAGE 17 ---
guides for our behavior; but let us not become obsessed 
with them to such a degree that we do nothing else. In 
fact, in my daily life the most retarded people I see, in 
terms of economic, social, political and personal 
development, are the ones who know the most about the 
moon, the most about the planets, the most about the 
numbers-and-you (numerology). Why not demonstrate the 
effectiveness of what you're talking about into your own 
behavior, life and therefore be a beacon to other people, 
demonstrate through your life-behavior and habits the 
effectiveness of your ideologies, religions and concepts? I 
don't say don't believe in it; but let it work for you!
We can differentiate between the pseudo-nationalist and 
the true nationalist in the question of whether his religion, 
his ideology, his philosophy is serving him or is he merely 
serving them.
A brief look at the movement of the Asian today. If you 
study a bit of Asian culture you will recognize that at its 
very center is so-called ancestor worship; great respect 
for the ancestors. At the center is a huge and long 
history built around tradition. But one of the things that 
puzzles western man (the European) as he looks at the 
Asian, is how the Asian, though he respects highly his 
ancestors and engages in ancestor worship and is 
exceedingly traditional, at the same time technologically 
equals and advances over him. He shows clearly that one 
can still respect, love and worship the ancestors yet still 
be very much into the world of today, can still move and 
advance technologically and otherwise beyond his or her 
enemies. The worship and respect for ancestors and the 
respect for tradition do no imply that we cannot concern 
ourselves with the immediate and with the future. The 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
17


--- PAGE 18 ---
correct worship of ancestors and the correct praise of 
tradition is the foundation for and advancement in the 
future.
The true nationalist not only educates the wounded egos 
of adults, but also educates its young. Nationalist 
organizations that are concerned almost exclusively with 
the education of children are practicing a nationalism that 
is incomplete. That is why you see in Marcus Garvey and 
Elijah Muhammad concurrent education of the adults and 
the children, an education of the family as a whole and of 
individuals as well. A true nationalist knows he must 
educate, as the word nationalism implies, the nation and 
everyone in it.
The true nationalist recognizes the necessity of building 
both a national and international government; that we 
ultimately must build in this country a nation, and nations 
of Afrikan people the world-over. A true nationalist is not 
afraid to delegate power. I often warn people not to fall 
for people merely because they project a nationalist 
ideology. You must look into their souls; you must look at 
their character and see what the character really has in it. 
It is that which determines your relationship with them, 
not just the statements of their ideology.
Ultimately if we are to control our destiny, as Marcus 
Garvey indicated, we must become self-governing. A 
nationalism not talking about self-government, not talking 
about nation-building, not constructing a national network, 
not constructing a national economic, social, and political 
system, is a false nationalism, Brothers and Sisters.
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
18


--- PAGE 19 ---
A true nationalist not only motivates through language, 
rhetoric and oratory, but trains. You cannot train a people 
with a two-hour lecture on Saturdays. Institutions have to 
be developed and built so that this training could take 
place. The greater part of their time and the time and 
efforts of our children should be dedicated to being 
trained to acquire the behavior that we need to advance 
our interests. We are not going to get that behavior if we 
depend upon that behavior being trained into our children 
by our enemies, by people who need to have ill-adjusted 
and maladjusted behavior to maintain their power position 
in life.
The true nationalist grounds his social and political 
philosophy and practice on a realistic analysis of his 
situation. He cognizes his enemies. He is not a slavish 
reader of foreign sources and of other political 
ideologies. Does it mean that he should not read the 
other people? Certainly he can read the other people, but 
his ultimate decision is based on his own analysis, upon 
the sound knowledge of himself, who and what he is, and 
upon his reality.
The true nationalist is not a purist to the degree that he 
is paralyzed. Some of us want to be nationalists but also 
want to be so pure that in the end we end up doing 
nothing. We end up paralyzed. We would go into business, 
but that's capitalism, isn't it? So we don't go into that. We 
would do this, but that's in some way related to this 
ideology or that enemy ideology. So you see the individual 
often trying to be such a pure nationalist until he cannot 
engage in real, practical behavior. He is so concerned 
about getting his hands dirty that he dares not 
do 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
19


--- PAGE 20 ---
anything at all. We can see the nationalist who is so hung 
up in his traumas of nationalism and capitalism that he 
dares not engage in any economic development. 
Consequently, we get a nationalist who is hung up waiting 
for Afrikan communalism to come into being, or 
communism; who is also frightened to engage in any kind 
of business, because that's capitalism, so he remains 
frozen while the other economic groups move into his 
community, taking his economic resources, un-employing 
his children and using his wealth against him.
The true nationalist is not caught up in indecisiveness and 
in some pie-in-the-sky dream about classless societies. He 
gets engaged in the true work of building and 
construction.
The true nationalist is also not afraid to overthrow 
tradition when tradition is unproductive. He is one who 
says: "Even though I revere the Afrikan past and I revere 
the Afrikan tradition, that tradition can be built upon. I and 
my generation have something to add to that tradition. I 
have a right then to use the legacy of that tradition to 
confront the realities of my current times and thus modify 
that tradition and see to the survival of my people.
The true nationalist is thus not afraid to engage in 
productive behavior. Where one sees nationalism, one 
sees construction, actual growth and development. Where 
one sees nationalism, one sees building, one sees 
institutional development; one sees trade, development 
and commerce; one sees restructuring of values, 
restructuring of priorities; one sees the rebuilding of 
relationships; one sees the reallocation of 
resources. 
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
20


--- PAGE 21 ---
When we as nationalists say that we are carrying out the 
legacy of Marcus Garvey, let us show that legacy in 
concrete development, institution building and, ultimately, 
nation-building.
******
Afrikan-Centered Consciousness versus the New World Order: Garveyism in the Age of Globalism 
Dr. Amos N. Wilson (1999)
RBG Communiversity
21

