=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: African American Social Science Baseline Essay by John Henrik Clarke.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 90
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:55:31.053441
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Portland Public Schools Geocultural Baseline Essay Series 
 
 
 
African-American Social 
Science Baseline Essay 
 
 
 
by 
 
John Henrik Clarke 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biographical Sketch of the Author 
 
Professor Emeritus of African World History, Department of Africa na and Puert o Rican Studies, Hunter 
College of the City U niversity, New  York, New York. 
 
 
PPS Geocultural Baseline Essay Series


--- PAGE 2 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Contents                   Page 
 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF THE AUTHOR.............................................................................................. I 
CONTENTS ............................................................................................................................... ...........................II 
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................... ..............................1 
AFRICAN HISTORY, A FACTOR IN W ORLD H ISTORY ...................................................................... 9 
THE ANTECEDENTS OF AFRICAN-AMERICANS IN THE ANCIENT WORLD..................................14 
AFRICAN ANCIENT WORLD: THE SOUTHERN AFRICAN CIVILIZATION IN THE ORIGINS OF 
EGYPT .......................................................................................................................... .......................................21 
THE HISTORY OF EGYPT ........................................................................................................... ...................26 
PRE-DYNASTIC PERIOD...............................................................................................................................27 
THE DYNASTIC PERIOD: THE MAINSTREAM OF EGYPTIAN HISTORY ............................................. 28 
THE PTOLEMAIC PERIOD - 332-47 B.C........................................................................................................... 43 
ISLAMIC EGYPT 642-1798 A.D..................................................................................................................... 46 
ISLAM IN WEST AFRICA........................................................................................................... .....................47 
WEST AFRICA'S GOLDEN AGES...................................................................................................... ............49 
GHANA.......................................................................................................................... ..................................49 
MALI ........................................................................................................................... .....................................51 
SONGHAY........................................................................................................................ ...............................52 
THE AFRICAN PRESENCE IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE.............................................................. 57 
RESISTANCE TO SLAVERY ........................................................................................................................ .68 
THE STRUGGLE AGAINST RACISM........................................................................................................... 72 
THE EDUCATION OF AFRICAN-AMERICANS.......................................................................................... 74 
REFERENCES ..................................................................................................................... ...............................80 
INDEX .......................................................................................................................... ........................................86 
 
 
 
SS-ii


--- PAGE 3 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
Africa and its people are the most written about and the least understood of all of the world's 
people. This condition started in the fifteenth and the sixteenth centuries with the beginning 
of the slave trade and the colonialism system. The Europeans not only colonized most of 
the world, but also began to colonize information about the world and its people. I n order 
to do this, they had to forget, or pretend to forget, all they had previously known about the 
Africans. They were not meeting them for the first time; there had been another meeting 
during t he G reek an d R oman t imes. A t t hat t ime the Africans and Europeans 
complemented each other. 
 
 
The people and the cultures of what is known as Africa are older than the word A frica. 
According to most records we know about, ol d and new , A fricans a re the oldest 
people on the face of the earth. The people now called Africans not only influenced the 
Greeks and the Romans, but they also influenced the early world before there was a place 
called Europe. 1 
 
 
When the early Europeans first met Africans, at  the crossroads of  history, it was a 
respectful meeting and the A fricans were not slaves. Thei r nations w ere old before 
Europe was born.2 I n this period in history what was to be later known as "Africa" was an 
unknown place to the people wh o would someday be called "Eur opeans." Only the 
people of a few of the Mediterranean Islands and some states of the areas which later 
became Greek and Roman States knew about parts of North Africa, the land of mystery. 
After the rise and decline of Greek civilization and the Roman destruction of the City of 
SS-1


--- PAGE 4 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
 Carthage, they made the conquered territories into a province which they called, "Africa," 
a word derived from "afri," and the name of a group of people about whom little is known. 
At first the word applied only to the Roman colonies in North Africa. There was a time 
when all dark-skinned people were called Ethiopians, for the Greeks referred to Africa as 
"the land of the burnt-face people."3 
 
 
If Africa, in general, is a man-made mystery, Egypt, in particular, is a bigger one. T here 
has long been an attempt on the part of some European "scholars" to deny that Egypt was a 
part of Africa. To do this they had to ignore the great masterpieces on Egyptian history 
written by European wri ters, such a s Ge rald Ma ssey's Ancient Egypt: Light of The 
World, Volumes One and Two, and a whole school of European thought that placed Egypt 
in proper focus in relationship to the rest of Africa.4 
 
 
The distorters of African hi story also had to ignore t he fact t hat the people of the 
ancient land, which would later be called Egypt, never called their country by that name. 
It was called TA-MERRY or KAMPT and some times KEMET or S AIS. The ancient 
Hebrews c alled it MIZ RAIN. Later the Mos lem Ar abs used the same term b ut later 
discarded it. Both the Greeks and the Romans referred to the country as the "Pearl of 
the Nile." The Greeks gave it the simple name, AEGYPTCUS. Thus the word we know 
as Egypt is of Greek origin.5 
 
 
Until recent times most Western scholars have been reluctant to call attention to the fact 
that the Nile River is four-thousand miles long. It starts in the South, in the heart of Africa, 
and flows to the Nort h. It was t he world's first cultural h ighway. Thus, Egypt was a  
 
SS-2


--- PAGE 5 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
composite of many African cultures. In his article, The Lost Pharaohs of Nubia, Professor 
Bruce Williams infers that the nations in the South c ould be older than Egypt.6 This 
information is not  new. When r ebel European scholars were saying t his one hundred 
years ago, and proving it, they were not taken seriously. 
 
 
It is unfortunate that so m uch of the hist ory of A frica has been wr itten by conquerors, 
foreigners, missionaries, and adventurers. The Egyptians left the best record of their 
history written by local writers. It was not until near the end of the eighteenth century when 
a few European scholars learned to decipher their w riting that this was 
understood. 
 
 
The Greek traveler, Herodotus, was in Africa about 450 B.C. His eyewitness account is 
still a revelation. He witnessed African civilization in decline, partly in ruins, after many 
invasions. However, he could still see the indications of the greatness that it had been.? 
In this period in history, the Nile Valley civilization of Africa had already brought forth two 
"Golden Ages" of achievement and had left its mark for all the world to see. 
 
 
Invasions from Western Asia (now called the Middle-East) had reduced thi s once great 
land to ruin and sadness. One invader after the other would rule this land for the next two-
thousand years. Egypt's place in world history is still being debated, mainly because a 
large number of Western scholars do not want to accept the fact that this was a nation 
and t hat its great ac hievements i n history was the collective achievement of an 
African people. 
SS-3


--- PAGE 6 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
Slavery and colonialism strained, but did not completely break, the cultural umbilical cord 
between the Africans in Africa and those who, by forced mi gration, now live in what is 
called the western world. A small group of African-Americans and Caribbean writers, 
teachers and preachers, collectively developed the basis of what would be an  A frican-
consciousness movement over one-hundred years ago. Their concern was with Africa, 
in general, Egypt and Ethiopia, and what we now call the Nile Valley. 
 
 
In the years before emancipation of slaves in the United States and in the Caribbean 
Islands, these "free" blacks had barely mastered their conqueror's language, however; 
in spite of the lack of formal training, their first writing reflected a concern f or Africa as 
their homeland. The great A frican-American scholar, W. E. B. D uBois, describes the 
situation in this manner: 
 
From the fifteent h thr ough t he sev enteenth cen-
turies, the Africans impor ted to America regarded 
themselves as temporary settlers destined to return 
eventually to Africa. T heir increasing r evolts 
against the slave system wh ich culminated in the 
eighteenth century, show ed a feeling of close 
kinship t o the m otherland and even well  i nto the 
nineteenth century they ca lled their organizations 
"African" as witnes s t he "African Un ions" o f Ne w 
York and Newport, and th e A frican Churches of 
Philadelphia and New York. In the West Indies and 
South America there was ev en closer indication of 
feeling of k inship with Afr ica and the Eas t.8 
 
 
In approaching this subject, preference is g iven to writers of African descent who are 
generally neglected. African scholars are the final authority on Africa. The writings of W. E. 
B. DuB ois, George Washingt on Willi ams, D rusilla Dungee  Houston, C arter G .  
 
SS-4


--- PAGE 7 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
Woodson, Willis N. Huggins, and John G. Jackso n are given major consideration. I 
have al so read the manuscrip ts of some of the unpublis hed books of C harles C . 
Seifert, especially manuscripts of his last completed book, Who Are The Ethiopians? 
Among Caribbean scholars, like Charles C. Seifert, J. A. Rogers (from Jamaica) is the best 
known and the most proli fic. Over fifty years of his life was devoted to 
documenting the role of Afric an personalities in world hist ory. His two-volume work, 
World's Great Men of Color, is a pioneer study in the field. 
 
 
Among the present day scholar s w riting about Afri can hi story, cul ture and poli tics, 
Yosef ben-Jochannan 's books are the most  chall enging. He bel ongs to the main 
cultural branch of the Afric an world, havi ng been born in Ethi opia, Africa, and he 
grew to early manhood in the Caribbean Islands and has li ved in the Afri can-
American community of the United States fo r over twenty years. His major books on 
African history are: Black Man of the Nile (1979), Africa: Mother of Western Civilization 
(1976), and The African Origins of Major Western Religions (1970). 
 
 
The southern African origins of Egypt and the importance of  the Tw enty-Fi fth 
Dynasty have been referred to by a larg e number of writers,  both Afric an and 
European. Ch arles C. S eifert c alls a ttention to this in  his manuscript, Who Are the 
Ethiopians? He says: 
 
 
Its fame reached Europe long before the Christian 
epoch. In his "Historical Research," Arnold Heeren 
(1760-1842) wrote the following about the 
Ethiopians: 
SS-5


--- PAGE 8 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
Except the Egyptians, there is no other people in Africa with so many claims upon their 
attention as the Ethiopians, from the remotest times to the present one of the most 
celebrated and most mysterious of nations. In the earliest traditions of nearly all the 
most civilized nations of antiquity the name of this distant people is found. The annals of the 
Egyptians were full of them. The nations of inner Asia, on the Tigris and the Euphrates 
have interwoven the legends of Ethiopia with their own t raditions of conquests and 
the wars of thei r heroes; and, at a period equally remo te, they g limmer in Greek 
mythology.9 
 
 
This description about the E thiopians was only one of the many tri butes given to the 
people of Ethiopia by many objective foreign scholars. There is also the great work of 
Count Volney, The R uins o f E mpires, i n w hich he describes the Ethiopians in the 
following glowing language: 
 
Those piles of ru ins which you see in t hat narrow 
valley watered by the Nile are the ruins of opulent  
cities, the pride of t he ancient kingdom of Ethiopia. 
These, a people now forgot ten, di scovered, while 
others wer e barbar ians, t he elements of the arts  
and the sciences. A race of men now rejected from 
society founded, from the study of the laws of  
nature, those civil and religious systems which s till 
govern the universe. 
 
The survival of the kingdom of Ethiopia in Africa is a 
source of great i nspiration to the A frican continent. 
This survival has cost the people of Ethiopia on behalf 
of Africa as a whole great sacrifices. The people of 
Ethiopia have res isted t he destruction of t heir 
kingdom by foreign powers in full knowledge t hat 
Ethiopia may bequeath to a future re-emerging Africa 
a source of inspiration and pride and thus h elp to 
be a continental throbbing heart of PanAfrican and 
African Unity.10 
SS-6


--- PAGE 9 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
The past Golden Ages are part of the history that the exploiters of Africa want the world 
to ignore. The great Ghanaian scholar, Dr. Joseph B. Danquah, outlined the pre-slavery 
history of Africa in his introduction to the book, United West Africa (or Africa) at the Bar of 
the Family of Nations, when he said: 
 
By the ti me Alexander the Great was sw eeping the 
civilized worl d wi th conque st after conquest from 
Chaeronia to Gaza, from B abylon to Cabul; by the 
time this first of the Aryan conquerors was learning the 
rudiments of war and gover nment at the feet of 
philosophic Aristotle; and by the time Athens was  
laying down the foundations  of modern European 
civilization, the earliest and greatest Et hiopian 
culture had already fl ourished and dominated the 
civilized world for ov er four centur ies and one-
half. Imperial Ethiopia had conquered Egypt and  
founded the XXL! D ynasty, and for a century and 
one-half the central seat of civilization in the known 
world was  held by the ancestors of the m odern 
Negro, maintaining and defendi ng it a gainst the 
Assyrian and Persian Empi res of the East. Thus, 
at the time when the first European ( Grecian) 
Olympiad was as yet to  be hel d. Rome w as 
nowhere to be seen on t he map, and sixteen 
centuries were to pass before Charlemagne would 
rule i n Europe and Egbert become first King of  
England. Even then,  histor y was to drag on for 
another seven hundred w eary years, before 
Roman Catholic Europe could s ee fit to end the 
Great Schism, soon to  be followed by the 
disturbing news of the di scovery of America and 
by the fateful rebirth of the youngest of the world 
civilizations.11 
 
 
Our own great historian, W. E. B. DuBois, tells us, "Always Africa is giving us something 
new ... On its black bosom arose one of the earliest, if not the earliest, of self-protecting 
civilizations, and grew so mightily that it still furnishes superlatives to t hinking and  
SS-7


--- PAGE 10 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
speaking men. Out of its darker and more remote forest vastnesses came, if we may credit 
many recent scientists, the first welding of iron, and we know that agriculture and trade 
flourished there when Europe was a wilderness." 
 
Dr. DuBois tells us further that, "Nearly every human empire that has arisen in the world, 
material and spiritual, has found some of its greatest crises on this continent of Africa. It was 
through Africa that Christianity became the religion of the world. In Africa the last flood 
of Germanic Invasions spent itself within hearing of the last gasp of Byzantium, and it was 
again through Africa that Islam came to play its great role of conqueror and civilizer." 
 
Egypt and the nations of the Nile Valley were, figuratively, the beating heart of Africa and 
the incubator for its greatness for more than a thousand years. The human traffic from the 
South renewed the creative energy of Egypt and helped i t meet one of the g reatest 
challenges in history. Egypt gave bi rth to what l ater became k nown as W estern 
civilization, long before the greatness of Greece and Rome.12 
SS-8


--- PAGE 11 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
AFRICAN HISTORY, A FACTO R IN WORLD HISTORY 
 
 
African history is a part of world history, a very old and very important division of the total 
study of man. Because it is an essential segment in this field of learning, scholars today 
consider it to be worthy of  considerable attent ion in the schools. In recent year s, 
intensive research has opened up new vi stas in our understanding of the A frican 
continent, and students at all levels can profit by a better appreciation of the contributions 
of African culture to the culture of the world. 
 
Old and new research on Africa and its place in human history has proved that Africa is 
the birt hplace of m ankind an d was, for m any centur ies, in the forefront of  hum an 
progress. African history must be looke d at anew and seen in its relationship to world 
history. What we us ually refer to as wor ld history is only t he history of t he first and 
second rise of Europe. Yet, the history of Africa was already old when Eur ope was 
born. Until quite recently it was rather generally assumed, even among we ll-educated 
persons in the West, that the continent of Africa was a gr eat expanse of land, mostly 
jungle, inhabited by savages and fierce beasts. It was not realized that great civilizations 
could hav e existed there, or t hat great kings c ould have r uled ther e in m ight and 
wisdom over vast empires. It is true that there are some current notions about the cultural 
achievement of Egypt, but Egypt was erroneously conceived as a European land rather 
than as a country of Africa. Although a glance at an atlas or a globe would show Egypt 
to be in Africa, the Sahara Desert was seen as a formidable barrier that divided Africa 
into two parts: one, North of  the Sahara, inhabited by a Eu ropean-like people of high 
culture and noble hist ory; the other, South of the Sahara, was inhabited by a dark-
skinned people who had no c ulture, and were i ncapable of having done anything in  
SS-9


--- PAGE 12 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
their dim and d istant past that could b e dignified by the designation of "history." Such 
ideas, of course, are far from the truth, as this essay will prove. But it is not difficult to 
understand why they persisted, and unfortunately, why they still persist in one form or 
another in the popular mind. 
 
 
Europeans have long been in contact with Africa, that is, Northern Africa. The names of 
Aesop and Memnon, of Te rence and Cleopatra, are the names of Africans who 
have f igured in the legend, lit erature, t he arts and history of Greec e a nd Rome. 
Indeed, the land of Africa was a land of wonders for the ancient Greeks and Romans, and 
this to such an extent that among them it was a proverb that, "Out of Africa there is always 
something new." The concept of "darkest Africa" refers to the comparative ignorance of 
Europeans regarding that cont inent and its people over the last four c enturies. An 
English writer, Jonathan Swift, made a sharp but witty comment on his fellow Europeans' 
lack of knowledge of Africa when he wrote: 
 
Geographers in Africa maps 
With savage pictures fill their gaps, 
and o'er uninhabitable downs 
Paint elephants instead of towns.13 
 
 
There is another reason why the people of Africa, with the notable exclusion of Egypt, were 
depicted as uncivilized, and lacking in cultural attainments. A number of pious people in 
Europe would have been struck with horror if t hey knew the cruel and bloody acts of 
their coun trymen in the course  of t he inhumane sl ave trade . Ruthless European 
adventurers promoted t he destruction of comp lete villages in or der to c apture the 
inhabitants and sell them like cattle. Therefore, slave traders would  invent 
SS-10


--- PAGE 13 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
fantastic tales of savagery about Africans so that their capture and their transportation to 
labor on the plantations of the Americas would appear to be acts of Christian concern 
and high-minded enlightenment. 
 
To justify the enslavement and the exploitation of Africans, the Europeans began in the 
fifteenth century to read them  out of the respectable comm entary of human hi story. 
Many achievements of black people were attributed to white people. Misconceptions die 
slowly, but eventually th ey die. In an essay on The Changing A frican Historical 
Tradition, Dr. Charles H. Wesley calls attention to the reason for some of the changes in 
attitudes toward Africa. He says: 
 
The dr amatic emer gence on the wor ld sc ene of  
African people s eeking s elf-government and 
independence has been accompanied by a 
change in the t radition that Africa is without 
history. This tradition c reated by non-Africans 
made Af rica into a dark c ontinent. This 
designation with its c onnotations was c ontinued 
through centuries not only  on account  of t he dark 
hues of the people but also because little was known 
of Africa except that i t was a land of unknown, of 
mystery and legend.  It was in its first discovery the 
land of " Sheba," and of "Prester John," and "King 
Solomon's Mines."14 
 
Of course, there was another reason writers of African descent throughout the world 
were, at l ast, bei ng given serious attention.  T he m ajor pr oject inv olving A frican 
writers in the propos ed eight-v olume General H istory of Africa , sponsored by 
UNESCO, was a pr oduct of t his new att ention. The idea f or an eight -volume history, 
with major emphasis on the African point of view , was first announced a t the 
inaugural meeting of the International Congress of African Studies in Accra in 1961. 
SS-11


--- PAGE 14 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
This was a radical departure from the opinion on A frica, its history and its people then 
prevailing in the Western academic community. The colonizers of Africa had repeatedly 
proclaimed that the African people had no histor y. Th e Af rican inde pendence 
explosion, starting with Ghana in 1957, and the proliferation of African states speaking 
for themselves, helped to influence this change. 
 
In the booklet entitled Preparation For a General History of Africa, published by  
UNESCO in 1979, the following description of the project is given: 
 
In 1964, the General Conf erence of UNESCO, as 
part of the Organization's effort to further the mutual 
understanding of peoples and nations, aut horized 
the Direct or-General to take the nec essary 
measures for the preparation and publication of a 
General History of Africa. 15 
 
 
It was considered that such a project would add significantly to our knowledge of the history 
of mankind. I n particular, it was felt to be a matter of urgency to study the past of Africa at a 
time of intense and ra pid change when the continent's traditional institutions and their 
forms of expression were being threatened by an economic, social and cultural evaluation 
that was, in great measure, unplanned and uncontrolled. It was also felt that the project 
could provide a fac tor of cultu ral cont inuity among peoples a nd nat ions w hich h ad 
recently ascended to independence by enabling them to have a clearer understanding of 
their own identity with the past and with the present. 
 
 
Because the second volume of this work is devoted mainly to the relationship of Egypt 
with the Nile Valley nations in the South, there is a need to extend this i nformation in  
SS-12


--- PAGE 15 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
order to identify Egypt and its civilization as a distinct African creation, with no original 
indebtedness to Western Asia (called the Middle East) or to Europe, which did not exist 
during the formative years of Egypt's development. If Egypt is an enigma in world history, 
it is an enigma by design created by West ern historians, travelers and adventurers. 
There are notable exceptions to this charge, beginning with the eyewitness account of 
the great Greek traveler, Herodotus. 
 
Herodotus was the first writer to refer to the probable Southern African origins of the 
people who would later be call ed Egyptians. He and other European writers (who are 
generally neglected) saw the Nile River as a great cultural highway bringing people and 
creative talent out of inner Africa. Migrations constantly renewed the energy and genius of 
Ancient Egypt until it became the greatest nation the world has ever 
known.16 
SS-13


--- PAGE 16 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
THE ANTECEDENTS OF AFRICAN-AMERICANS IN THE 
ANCIENT WORLD 
 
It is generally conceded in most scholarly circles that mankind originated in Africa. This 
makes the African man and the African woman the FA THER and MOTHER of 
humankind. No one knows, for sure, the exact color of the people who became known 
as Africans. Physically, they have always been known to the world as a people of black or 
brown complexion. 
 
In Africa there is evidence of one of the earliest organized societies. In his book, The 
Progress and Evolution of Man in Africa, Dr. L. S. B. Leakey has said: 
 
I n every country that one visits and where one is drawn 
into conversation about Africa, the question is regularly 
asked by people who should know better: "But 
what has Afr ica c ontributed to wor ld progres s?" 
These critics of Africa fo rgot that men of science 
today are, w ith fe w ex ceptions, satisfied t hat A frica 
was the birthplace of man himself, and for many 
hundreds of centuri es thereafter A frica was in the 
forefront of all world progress.17 
 
A primary myth has been devel oped in W estern thought and  culture which depicts 
Africa as the "dark continent." This darkness was not only a physical description of the 
inhabitants of Africa, but also an insinuation that Africa and Africans had never produced 
a high level of civilization and had existed in isolation and savagery from the rest of the 
world. The m yth maintains that only in the modern period, when Europeans came to 
Africa to explore and colonize, was it civilized. Such a position is patently untrue and, 
historically s peaking, u nsupportable. T he g rowing body of scientific knowledge 
produced in this century has made such clumsy fabrications no longer tenable. 
SS-14


--- PAGE 17 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
The dark continent myth was a product of the European's desire in the modern period to 
explain and justi fy the often expl oitive relationships they were  forming with the n on-
white world as the w hites rose to gl obal dominance. In general , the theori es and 
discoveries of the Western world functioned to support the presumption of Caucasian 
superiority. Wi thin thi s co ntext, it became im portant that the Western wor ld be 
acknowledged as the origins of bot h humankind and civ ilization; such simply was not 
the case. 
 
Human development occurred almost exclusively on the African continent according to 
archaeologist J. Desmond Clark: 
 
There is a great need today to stand back, as it were, 
and to consider thi s reco rd of our past in the 
light of the long-term viewpoint that the radiometric 
chronology and recent prehistori c studies are now 
making possible. If we do  thi s, we  c annot fail to 
achieve a more realistic and balanced appreciation 
of t he rol e pl ayed by the huge conti nental land 
mass of Africa in the history of mankind. 
 
From this l ong-term standpoint, we can see that  
about the first t wo-thirds of t hat record have been 
found solely in Africa. Indeed, the researches of the 
last few years have produced a lar ge, still growing, 
body of evidence strongly suggesting that, not only 
was it in A frica that the human race first began, but 
that just about every significant biological and cultural 
advance -  at least for t he first two and one-hal f 
million years - took place in Africa.18 
 
New research by Richard E. Leakey, son of Dr. L. S. B. Leakey, in East Africa and by 
Donald Johanson and Mait land Edey in the hill s and valleys  of Ethi opia have put to  
 
SS-15


--- PAGE 18 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
rest many of the myths and mi sconceptions relating to Africa. There is now some 
reconsideration for some old information on the subject that was previously ignored.  
 
In his pam phlet, The African Contribution (1966), t he sc holar r esearcher, John  W.  
Weatherwax, speaks of the African contribution to the early development of mankind in this 
manner: 
 
The early Africans made hooks to catch fish, spears 
to hunt with, the bola, with which to catch birds and 
animals, the blow-gun, the hammer, the stone-
axe, canoes and paddles, bags and buckets, 
poles, bows and arrows... 
 
The pre-history of mank ind is called t he old 
Stone Age. It may have lasted half a million years ... 
canoes made it possible for men to travel farther from 
his early home. Over many centuries, canoes went 
down the Nile and  the Congo and up many 
smaller rivers and streams... 
 
From the blow-gun of ancient Africa there followed, in 
later ages, many dev ices bas ed on it s pr inciples. 
Some of them are the bellows, bamboo air pumps, 
the rifle, the pistol, the revolv er, the automatic  
machine gun, and even those industrial guns that puff 
grain ... African hunters m any t imes c utup g ame. 
There still exist, from the old Stone Age, drawings of 
animal bones, hearts and other organs. The early 
drawings are a part of m an's early beginnings in 
the field of anatomy.19 
 
The Western scientist, until very recently, maintained that the birthplace of the human 
species had been in Asia, specifically the Java area of Southeast Asia. The first modern 
man t o s uggest t hat Africa was the b irthplace of m an was C harles Darwin in his 
Descent Of Man, as early as 1871. Darwin, of course, had shaken the s cientific world 
earlier w ith h is t heories o f e volution a nd n atural s election. H is prophecy in 1871  
SS-16


--- PAGE 19 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
that Africa would be found to be the or igin of the human species was rejected out of 
hand by the scientific community and considered heresy in the social and political world. 
 
Conversely, the scholars of the ancient world, uncontaminated by the need to conform 
to the presumption of Caucasian superiority, had routinely hypothesized that Africa had 
been the birthplace of man. Diodorus Siculus, a Roman writing in the first century B.C., 
for example says: 
 
The Ethio pians sa y tha t the y were the  fi rs t 
men that ever were in the world and that to prove 
this they have c lear demonstrations. It i s most 
probable that those who inhabit the South were the 
first l iving m en t hat s prang out of the earth. It is 
rational to conclude that those places nearest to the 
sun s hould h ave b een t he first parents of all living 
creatures .20 
 
Herodotus, a Golden A ge Greek, found no problem i n identi fying A fricans in very 
positive terms as well: 
 
Here (Ethiopia) gold is found in great abundance 
and huge elephants and ebony,  and all sorts of 
trees growing wild. The men, too, are the tallest in the 
world, the best-looking and the longest-lived.21 
 
The modern Western world mightily resisted the movement to recognize Africa as the 
birthplace of man. Through the work of several dedicated scholars, the evidence finally 
became too strong to deny. T he process, however, took nearly a hal f a c entury. It 
began when Miss Josephine Salm ons, a student of  noted s cientist Raymond A. 
Dart, was searching for primate fossils in South Africa in 1924. Instead she found fossil  
SS-17


--- PAGE 20 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
remains of an early ancestor of mankind from appr oximately one m illion B.C. Dart 
verified her discovery which greatly predated any previous samples. Dart's discovery, 
like Dar win's prophecy, was ri diculed and soundly rej ected in t he general scientific 
community as late as 1955. 
 
 
Robert Broom was a scientist who worked in Africa from  1936 to 1945. His research 
provided the foundation of fo ssil evidenc e for mammal evol ution from reptil e form. 
Broom strongly supported Dart's position. 
 
 
Finally, overwhelming evidence of the A frican origin of humans was provided 
through the painstak ing and tenacious work of the Leakey, family and their native 
Kenyan r esearchers in the Olduvai Gorge area of  Ea stern Africa. This team 
discovered over 600 specimens of the oldest fossil remains of early humans. Perhaps the 
most important of which was skull 1470,  found by  Be rnard Nyeneo, an African 
member of the Leakey team, in 1972. 
 
 
Although much remains to be learned, and several academic controversies continue to 
boil concerning specifi c details of these early ancestors, the broad outline of earl y 
human history has become increasingly clear. It includes the following beliefs: 
 
1. As recently as 600, 000 B.C. there were 
only Africans. T hat is, the only ancestors of  
humans alive, lived on the African continent.  
 
2. Between 500,000 - 400,000 B.C., Africans began 
to migrate to other part s of the wor ld. 
SS-18


--- PAGE 21 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
3. Isolation and environmental differences worked to 
produce differing phy sical c haracterist ics w ithin 
migrating groups. 
 
This is an expanding field of research and some of the old myths are falling faster than new 
ones can be created. There w as a period of  migration within A frica and some 
migrations out of Afr ica. This ac counts for the appear ance of Af rican p hysical-type 
people in widely scattered areas outside of Africa. It may, at least in part, explain the basis 
of P rofessor Ivan Van Serti ma's book, They Came Before Columbus: The African 
Presence in Ancient America.22 
 
 
The reason for these migrations is not known. Organized societies came into being in 
spite of the movement of people to other land s. These societies were in the midst of 
change. New things were being learned and new challenges were being met. In the early 
development of man in Africa, the family was the most important social unit. The survival 
needs of the family determined the activity and movement of each group. 
 
 
The women of early Africa did more to develop farming than the men. The men were often 
away for long periods of time searching for supplies of food or a new hunting ground. 
During the old S tone Age, me n and women lived a very si mple life and c ontinued to 
utilize the environment around them. Tool making and the discovery of fire brought some 
security to the lives of these early Africans. 
 
 
What is called the New Stone A ge started when man learned to farm. M any families 
began to stay in one place for a long time because they had enough food to feed 
SS-19


--- PAGE 22 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
themselves. With this new stability, clusters of villages began to grow into what would later 
be cities. 
 
By the New Stone Age, all of Africa had benefitted from the introduction of iron, new 
building methods, new methods of anima l husbandry, and a new u se of  t he la nd 
through irrigation. For thousands of years, Africans had neither help nor interference from 
other nations and people. Euro pe was not yet a factor in d eveloping cultures and 
civilizations when these events were unfolding in Africa. Organized societies had already 
started along the banks of a long river that would later be called the Nile. This river became 
Africa's firs t great c ultural highway. In early world hist ory a  d istinct African people 
moved down that highway, settled in the delta area at the end of the river and built a nation 
that is best known to the world as Egypt.23 
SS-20


--- PAGE 23 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
AFRICAN ANCIENT WORLD: THE SOUTHERN 
AFRICAN CIVILIZATION IN THE ORIGINS OF EGYPT 
 
Egypt has long been an area of primary attraction for students of the past. The high level 
of civilization which  grew and flourish ed in the Nile Valley in many ways  
symbolizes the emergence from the animal kingdom of the human species onto a level 
of behavior exclusively i ts ow n. The designati on of Egypt as the fi rst g reat 
civilization is so well supported by documents and physical evidence that not even white 
supremacists have attempted to deny the fact. But because the concession of Egypt's 
achievements would seriously undermine theories of white superiority in the m odern 
period if Egypt ians were black Africans, traditions of treatment of the E gyptian past 
have been created and preserved in Western thought that conceal and distort the true 
nature of the Egyptian experience. 
 
The typical treatment of the Egyptian past, which functions to make it acceptable in the 
context of Western concepts of civilization, contains the following ingredients: 
 
1. A di sconnection of Eg ypt from the Afri can 
continent. This disconnection is a ccomplished in 
both a geographic and chr onological framework. 
Egypt is typically presented not as a part of Africa, but 
standing ei ther alone oras a part of s ome hybrid 
middle-eastern entity. This ignores the obvious fact 
that Egypt is now and always has been l ocated on 
the A frican continent. Chronol ogically, E gypt is 
always presented in the "immaculate conc eption" 
context. T his i s a s i f i t had no antecedents. This 
approach i s necessary bec ause the antecedents  
to Egyptian culture were even further into the interior 
of Africa and thus even more obviously African and, 
therefore, more troublesom e to the white theories 
of civilization. 
 
What the creato rs of these theo ries seem  to have forgotten (if indeed they knew), is  
SS-21


--- PAGE 24 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
that Egypt's greatest achievement was a fact long before the creation of the first nation-
state in Europe. I n their book, A History of The Modern World, the writers R. R. Palmer 
and Joel Colton made the following admission: 
 
Europeans were by no means the pi oneers in 
human civilization. Half of man's recorded history 
had passed before anyone in Europe could read or 
write. T he p riests of Egypt began to keep w ritten 
records between 4000 and 3000 B .C.... W hile th e 
Pharaohs were building the f irst pyram ids, 
Europeans were crea ting nothing more 
distinguished than garbage heaps. 24 
 
With this stated, there is a need to cont inue to ask the probing question about Egypt's 
proper place in Africa and in human histor y. What and who are the Egyptians? To 
begin with we must reject the assumption that Egypt is an extension of Europe, or at the 
very least Asia. The ancient Egyptians were  distinctly African people. They were n ot 
Hamites as most history books tend to indicate. The manners, customs and religions of 
the historic Egyptians suggest that the original home of their prehistoric ancestors was 
south in a country in the neighborhood of Uganda and Punt. (The Biblical land of Punt 
was believed to be in the area now known as Somalia.) 
 
In many ways, Egypt is the key to ancient African history. African history is incomplete 
and distorted until Egypt is look ed at as a distinct Af rican nation. The i nvasions of 
Egypt that started about 450 B.C. and continued until after the Roman period brought 
into Egypt large num bers of people who were not indige nous to the c ountry. The 
bulk of the Arab population in present-day Egypt has no direct rel ationship to 
ancient Egyptian history. Most of these peo ple came into Africa in the 7th and 8th 
centuries during the rapid spread of Islam. 
SS-22


--- PAGE 25 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
The Edfu Text is an important source document on the early history of the Nile Valley. This 
famous inscription, found in the Temple of  Horus at Edfu, giv es an accou nt of t he 
origin of Egyptian civilization. According to this record, civilization was brought from the 
South by a band of invaders under the leadership of King Horus. This ruler, Horus, was 
later deified. His followers were called "The Blacksmiths," because they possessed iron 
implements. This early culture has been traced back to Somaliland, although it may 
have originated in the Great Lakes region of Central Africa. In Somaliland there are 
ruins of buildings constructed with dressed stone, showing a close resemblance to the 
architecture of early Egypt. The Nile River played a major role in the relationship of Egypt 
to the nations in Southeast Africa. The Nile in ancient times was a great cultural highway, 
bringing elements, of civilization out of and into inner Africa. If Egypt can be credited with 
creating the world's first civilization, that credit must be shared with people of other parts of 
Africa. 
 
 
In calling attention to Egypt' s Golden Age, the intent is  to look at a collective 
achievement. Egypt had many G olden Ages. This is best refl ected in the lives of the 
great personalities that made the splendid ages of achievement possible. The nation that 
became known to the world as Egypt was a creation of a special circumstance of history. Its 
civilization was a blend of many cultures, mostly comi ng from within A frica. The 
following quotation emphasizing this  fact is from the book A Tropical Dependency, 
by Lady Lugar d. She says: 
 
The ancient civilization of Egypt spread, as we know, 
from South to North and without venturing to accept 
or reject the assumption of some learned writers that it 
 
SS-23


--- PAGE 26 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
came originally by way of the Arabian Gulf from 
India, there is seemingly no doubt that the earliest  
seat of civilization in Africa was the country 
watered by the upper Nile, which was known by the 
name of "Ethiopia," to the ancients ... The principal 
state of this Ethiopian c ountry bore the well 
known name of Meroe. The c apital of Meroe was 
a city of the same name, which stood a little below 
the present Shendy, under 17 N. latitude and in 32 
E. longitude ... This i s n ot th e p lace n or am I 
competent to discuss the arguments which form the 
ground of belief that the civilization of Meroe 
preceded that of Egypt. It is enough to say very briefly, 
that on the site of the city of Meroe there exist remains 
of tem ples and pyr amids, from  which 
archaeologists have drawn the conc lusion that  
the pyramid was  a f orm of architecture native to 
Meroe, and only  afterwards brought to perfection in 
Egypt. It is evident from the decoration of the temples 
that they were dedicated to the worship of Ammon. It 
is believed that the r emains of the temple of the 
most famous oracle of Jupiter Ammon are to be 
found in ruins at about eight h ours' journey to the 
northeast of Shendy. This temple of the oracle was  
known to exist within a few hours of Meroe, and the 
priestly traditions of Et hiopia and E gypt assert 
that the worship of A mmon and Os iris, w ith its 
feasts and processions, was  settled at the 
metropolis of Me roe. This remarkable spot is  
regarded by a ncients a s " the c radle o f t he a rts 
and sciences, where h ieroglyphic w riting w as 
discovered, and where temples and pyramids had 
already sprung up while E gypt still remained 
ignorant of their exist ence."25 
 
There is a small  li brary of  negl ected li terature on this subjec t. In the book The 
Destruction of Black Civilization, Professor Chancellor Williams refers  to Egypt as, 
"Ethiopia's Oldest Daughter."26 Evidence has been discovered that clearly showed that 
there were nations in Africa whose culture was older than the existence of Egypt, and that 
the culture that is thought of as sole ly Egyptian-created had its origin in Nubia and 
SS-24


--- PAGE 27 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 other nations South of Egypt. Professor Bruce Wi lliams ma kes t he fo llowing 
statement about the new evidence: 
 
A newly discovered ancient kingdom is always a  
matter of intense intere st, but when it precedes 
the earliest known m onarchy, the uni fication of 
Egypt in the fourth millennium B.C., then history 
itself i s reborn. T he plac e is anci ent N ubia at 
Qustul, w here there investigation of 
archaeological materials recove red during the 
great 1960's rescue effort has recently unveiled a 
birthplace of pharaonic civilization several 
generations before the rise of the first historic 
Egyptian Dynasty. This fi nding is rendered even 
more startling by the fact that advanced political 
organization was not believed to have come to 
Nubia, or  anywhere south of Egypt, for another 
2,500 years.27 
SS-25


--- PAGE 28 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
THE HISTORY OF EGYPT 
 
It is time now to look, though graphically, at the historical chronology of Egypt and how it 
developed into the w orld's first enduring nation . The controversy around E gypt has 
been over the fact that Egypt is located at the crossroads of three c ontinents. It is 
at the back door of Europe, the side door of Asia, and the front door of Africa. When the years 
of envy attracted invader after invader to its shores, it became part of a Mediterranean 
melting pot. 
 
There is a need to look at Egypt before these invaders came and assess why they came, 
the consequences of their c oming, and t he harm they did to t he internal structure of 
Egypt and t o other parts of Africa. Generally speaking, most of th is harm was done to 
Egypt. The first population of Egypt came from the South, within Africa. There were later 
populations from the Northwest after the drying-up of the Sahara. For over one thousand 
years, Egypt became the beneficiary of the best talent and craftsmanship of the world of 
its day. Its  ac hievement, at its  height, was t he achievement of a co mbination o f 
nations and people and not that of one nati on. Because of its early development of 
agriculture, it could feed a massive population, and because Egypt is literally the gift of the 
Nile, the flow of this river has determined its destiny. For convenience, Egypt's history has 
been divided into a number of main periods which can be summarized as follows: 
 
1st The dawn of P re-Dynastic P eriod (P aleolithic Period) -  undated  
2nd Pre-Dynastic Period -  ended about 3200 B.C.  
3rd Dynastic Period - 3200 B.C. - 332 B.C. 
SS-26


--- PAGE 29 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
4th The Greek Period (or Ptolemaic) - 332 B.C. - 30 B.C.  
5th The Roman Period - 30 B.C. - 640 A.D. 
 
Each one of these periods will be examined graphically, and separately, knowing full well 
that this condensation is an injustice to a subject that needs far more attention than is 
being given here. In looking at the dawn of  the Pre-Dynastic period and its s ubtitle, 
The Paleolithic Period, this period is also called the, "Age of Chipped Stone," when metals 
were not wi dely used, and to some ex tent, weren't kn own. T his w as a  period of 
building with crudel y-shaped instruments bef ore the Egyptians had p erfected the 
art of cons truction. The "Age of the F inished Stone," was a leap f orward. It was not 
only their desire to improve building but also it was their desire to search for things of 
exquisite beauty. This might have been th e beginning of what m ay have been the 
artistic period in Egyptian history. 
 
PRE-DYNASTIC PERIOD 
 
The Pre-Dynastic period was nota period when there were no established rulers, but a 
period when there was a lack of decision as to who exactly would be the rulers, and what 
methods w ould be used to choose them. In tellectual advances had already s tarted 
and the Egyptians had di scovered t he s olar y ear c onsisting of 365 days. By m ost 
evidence, it seems that the calendar was introduced in 4241  B.C. Building in s tone 
was not widespread at this time. Inhabitants lived in reed and wattle huts near the Nile 
River. When the erratic temper ament of the riv er changed and it began to o verflow 
with some regularity, the people learned to build their homes on the h ighlands 
away from its banks, and how to come back after the overflowing and plant their crops in 
the rich, black soil that wa s deposited along its shores. This was the b eginning o f 
massive agriculture. The Pre-Dynastic period began to come slowly to an end once  
SS-27


--- PAGE 30 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
the arguments among small kingdom s gave way to the concept of a f eudal state. It 
was agreed that one of the ruling famili es wou ld lead the stat e. A Dynasty was 
really the rule of the state by a specific family with, of course, the consent of councils 
and other representatives of the people. These states grew out of communal societies with 
little emphasis on who was rich and w ho was poor. They p racticed collective 
ownership and collective distribution of goods  within their s ociety. This was the 
dawn of the Dynastic Period. It might have taken nearly 1,000 years to prepare for it. 
 
THE DYNASTIC PERIOD: THE MAINSTREAM OF EGYPTIAN HISTORY 
 
The most quoted chronology of Egyptian history was left by an Egyptian historian who 
lived through the last of the Dynastic Period. His name was Manetho. A lot of the material 
used by modern historians of Egyptian history is taken from the chronicles of Manetho. 
The Dynastic Period incl udes the pyramid-buildi ng period, which a ccording to 
Manetho, extended from the third through the sixth Dy nasty, giving the exact dates of 
2778-2270 B.C. What is called the First Intermediate Period includes the Dynasties from 
the S ixth t o t he T enth a nd a  p art o f the E leventh D ynasty, 2270-2060 B.C. The 
Middle Kingdom includes the sec ond part of the Eleventh D ynasty and the Twelfth 
Dynasty, 2060-1785 B.C. The Second Intermediate Period extended from the Thirteenth 
to the Seventeenth Dynasty, 1785-1580 B.C. 
 
New evidence about the F irst Dynasty, sometimes referred to as The Archaic Perio d, 
3200-2980 B.C., proves that there is a need for a re-assessment of  this period. Both 
Herodotus and Manetho identi fy Menes as the fi rst P haraoh of this dynasty. Other  
SS-28


--- PAGE 31 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
historians say that the name means Na'rmer. He is reported to be the founder of the city of 
Memphis at the juncture of the two lands before the unification of the Upper and Lower 
Nile to form the Greater Egypt that was still to come. 
 
The Second Dynasty, 2990-2778 B.C., w as n ot p articularly o utstanding a nd n ot a  
great deal is known about i t and its personalities. This was a period when the previous 
consolidation of power was contained, but not expanded. But it did make way for the Third 
Dynasty that was spectacular. This dynasty left a mark on Egyptian history that reverberates 
to this very day. 
 
With the Third Dynasty, Egypt's place in world history was finally established. This was 
an age of intellectual outpouring.  The Pharaoh of this dynasty was Zoser, 2778-2723 
B.C. This was also the period of the emergence of Imhotep, the world's first multi-genius. 
He was the real father of medicine and lived 2,000 years before the Greek Hippocrates who 
is given this credit. He was also called the Prince of Peace. Shrines were erected in his 
name. In Sir William Osler's book, The History of Modern Medicine, he refers to Imhotep as, 
"The first figure of a physician to stand out clear ly from the midst of antiquity." His 
building of  the step- pyramid set in mot ion the m assive building of temples and other 
structures in the Egypt of his day. To a great extent, his name and his fame 
overshadows that of the Pharaoh Zoser whom he served as The Grand Vizier. 
 
The F ourth D ynasty, 2 723-2563 B .C., built  on the foundations  of  the Thir d. The 
pyramid-building period was still in its main thrust of achievement, but the name and the  
SS-29


--- PAGE 32 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
achievements of the Third Dynasty would record over the Fourth and a number of dynasties 
still to come. 
 
 
During the Fifth and Sixth Dynasties there were rumors of threats from Western Asia (now 
called the Middle East). The nations and people in the other river valley, the Tigris and 
the Euphrates, were laying the foundation of Sumerian civilization. At this time, Asia was 
no threat to Egypt; later on it would become one. What is referred to as the Old Kingdom 
was noted for leaving behind numerous temples, tombs, and pyramids, indicating that 
they had also built on previous foundations and preserved the spiritual structure that 
would later be t he foundation of the three major religions: Judaism, Christianity, and 
Islam. 
 
 
What is called the F irst Intermediate Pe riod, 2270-2060 B.C., c ame a fter t he O ld 
Kingdom. It was a transi tional  peri od and a peri od of i nternal disputes and 
weaknesses within one monarchy that would not go unnoticed by  the Asians who for  
many years envied the stability and wealth of Egypt. 
 
 
The Seventh and Eighth Dynasties were ve ry short, according to Manetho. He 
mentioned that the Seventh Dynasty consisted of seventy kings. Some ruled for very short 
periods. The Eighth Dynasty lasted for about thirty years. The rulers displayed no 
particular strengths. 
 
The first part of the Eleventh Dynasty still  reflected some of the weaknes s of the 
previous dynasties; mainly, the inability of the ruling families to decide on who would 
SS-30


--- PAGE 33 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
be Pharaoh and where the ruling seat of power would be. This weakness brought 
about a civil war that came to an end at the time of the Middle Kingdom, 2060-1785 B.C. 
New strength began to be refl ected during the second part of the Eleventh Dy nasty, 
2060-2000 B.C. 
 
During the Twelfth Dynasty, 2000-1785 B.C., new strength was reflected in the fact that, 
"This is considered to be one of  the most gl orious dynasties of Egyptian history." The 
country was back on the hi gh road of dealing, building again and dealing  
succ es sfully  wit h a n umber of  en vi ous enemi es who would not let i ts 
armies rest. During this time, the safety of Egypt was secure on all sides by successful 
treaties with Libya and Nubia. 
 
The Second Intermediate P eriod might be call ed the peri od of trouble. Thi s was the 
period of the first massive invasion of Egypt from Wes tern Asia. It w as the peri od of 
invasion by the Hyksos, sometimes referred to as the "Shepherd Kings." It was also the 
period of the first Hebrew entry into Africa that we have a record of. That Hebrew entry is 
described by Reverend A. H. Sayce in the book, The Egypt of the  Hebrews and 
Herodotus: 
 
Abraham went down into Egypt to sojourn there. 
When he e ntered t he c ountry t he c ivilization and 
Monarchy of Egypt  wer e already ver y old. T he 
pyramids had been built hundr eds of y ears before 
and the origin of the Sphinx were already a mystery. 
Even t he g reat obelisks of Heliopolis, which is still 
the object of an afternoon dr ive t o t he t ourist of  
Cairo, had long been s tanding in front of the 
temple of the Sun God. 
SS-31


--- PAGE 34 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
The monuments of Baby lonia enable us to fix  the 
age to which Abraham bel ongs. A rioch of E llnar 
has l eft memorials of himself on the bricks of 
Chaldaea, and w e now know when he and his  
Elamite allies were driven out of Babylonia and the 
Babylonian states were u nited i nto a  s ingle 
monarchy, this was 2350 B.C.28 
 
This period in African history is often m isinterpreted. There are misconceptions about 
the role the Hebrew s played in Africa during that peri od. They came originally from  
Western Asia, escaping famine. They literally entered world history during this period 
and were t reated much better in Africa than history tends to indicate. NonB iblical 
history of the per iod indicates the Hebr ews were not slav es in Egypt. Some  of t he 
Hebrews mistakenly took s ides with t he enemies of Africa and we re punished. This 
punishment did not c onsist of s lavery. T he Hebrews , like  th e Greek s, Roma ns, 
Hyksos, a nd other foreigne rs, benefi tted relig iously and in tellectually from t heir 
sojourn in Africa. What they learned there would influence all of their future 
history.29 
 
The future religious foundations of the world were being strengthened at this time. The 
social thought and the main elements that would, in the future, go into the making of the 
world's major religions already existed in Africa. A num ber of wr iters, both of African  
and European extraction, have been very clear in explaining this misunderstood aspect 
of religious history. 
 
Professor Yosef ben-Jochannan explains this subject, in-depth, in hi s book, African 
Origins of the Major Western Religions, and again in a larger work, Africa: Mother of 
Western Civilization. Another scholarly explanation can be found in two books by Dr. 
SS-32


--- PAGE 35 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
Alvin Boyd Kuhn, Who is This King of Glory, and Shadow of the Third Century. The m ain 
works on this subject by  European writers are: Ancient Egypt, Light of the World, by 
Gerald Massey, in two volumes, and The Folklore of the Old Testament, by S ir James 
Frazer, in three volumes. The African-American writer, John G. Jackson, author of Man, 
God and Civilization, has recently published another book on this s ubject under the title, 
Christianity Before Christ.30 
 
 
The Hyksos Period, 1680-1580 B.C., left its mark, mostly negative, on Egyptian history. 
As a people, they  did not  have great s kills in nat ion-building or  nationmanagement. 
If it can be said that any good at all c ame from the Hyksos occupation, it was that the 
internal strife between the indigenous rulers of Egypt abated and they developed a sense 
of national unity during this occupation. It was this national unity t hat gave them the 
strength and organization to ultimately expel the Hyksos from Egyptian soil. 
 
 
The Hyksos had adopted many of the cust oms o f the Egyptians and assumed  
Egyptian royal titles. This assumption did not give them the Egyptian culture that they 
never could fully understand. During the reign of the Hyksos in the Delta and in t he 
internal part of Upper Egy pt, they cont inued their crude imit ation of Egy ptian 
culture while Egy ptian milit ary friends,  to the sout h, prepared to com e to her  
assistance. Gradually, the indigenous Egyptian royal families were coming back to power 
and true Egyptian pharaohs were again occupying the throne of Egypt in the face of the 
weakening power of t he Hyksos. A warr ior pharaoh named Ahmose s ucceeded in 
driving the Hyksos out of Egypt after his son had initiated the action. 
SS-33


--- PAGE 36 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
The expulsion of the Hyksos ended and the pe riod of the New Kingdom b egan. This 
period was one of gr eat wealth, prosperity a nd a widening of the E gyptian empire. 
Monument-building started again and the army was rei nforced. S ome of the former 
colonies of Egypt came back under its influence. The Period of the New Kingdom, 1580-
1085 B.C., extended from the Eighteenth to the Twentieth Dynasties. Egypt was then a 
powerful united kingdom and reached the apex of her greatness in wealth and political 
influence. 
 
 
More needs to be said about this period and the great personalities that came out of it. 
Administratively, the King was the head of the state. The business of government and the 
duties of kingship were such that he appointed two viziers. One resided at Thebes for the 
administration of the South, the first cataract as far downstream as the town of Asyirt. Nubia 
was then under Egyptian influence so the King appointed a viceroy of Nubia who was 
given the title, "King's Son of  Kush." This port grew in importance and the Kings took 
interest in the lands to the far south. 
 
 
Another important offi cial of this peri od was the High P riest Amu n, wh o wa s t he 
supreme head of the great body  of priests. This  was, i n essence, t he political, 
religious, and cul tural posi tion of Egyp t as i t approached t he mighty Eighteenth 
Dynasty spoken of by some writers as the most able dynasty ever to occupy any throne, 
of any country, at any time in the history of the world. It was in this dynasty that the last 
remnants of the foreigners were driven from Egyptian soil. Egypt was fully herself again 
and the master of her own destiny. 
SS-34


--- PAGE 37 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
By the time of the Ei ghteenth Dynasty, all elements of a feudal state had completely 
disappeared. The government was, in the main, centralized and the administration was 
in the hands of the first King of the Eighteenth Dynasty (Ahmose, 1580-1558 B.C.). The 
most outst anding King of  the Eighteent h Dy nasty wa s Th otmose, 15 301515 B.C., 
sometimes called Thotmoses. The first Thot mose was the son o f Amenhotep I and , 
because his mother was not of royal blood, he was not th e l egal successor to the 
throne. He directed armies against some of the remaining foreign soldiers and pursued 
them as far as the Euphrates  River. Thotmose II, the s on of Thotmose I, married his 
half-sister, Hatshepsut, who was a legitimate daughter of Thotmose I. Hatshepsut was 
not well-treated by him and she did not begi n to pursue p ower until after his death, 
although her father had-full y tr ained her for power. A nother brother, Thotmose Ill,  
aspired for the throne of Egypt. He was young and inexperienced and the forces of 
Hatshepsut came to power in the middle of this controversy. The Nile Valley was now 
her domain and she began at once to put Egypt's house in order. She did not forget the 
heritage that her family had left behind. So many of them tried hard to remove the stamp 
of foreign domination from Egypt, and yet she was determined to continue in this  
tradition. Her influence spread to the South where she had relatives and she made it 
clear to the people of Western Asia that Egypt was strong enough to repel any army 
coming from that region. She s trengthened Egypt's position with Kush and Nubia and 
according to most records, Hatshepsut ruled Egypt for 21 years and ruled it well. 
 
 
Hatshepsut's demise came abruptly and m ysteriously. She m ay have died a natur al 
death, but some historians believe that Thotmose III had her murdered. After her death,  
SS-35


--- PAGE 38 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
he tried to destroy all memory of her in Egypt. He defiled all of her statues that he found. 
Fortunately, he did not discover all of them and Hatshepsut comes down to us as one of 
the outstanding women of all times.31 
 
The writers of the book, Brief History of Ancient Egypt, describe the early part of  
Thotmose III's reign in this way: 
 
When Thotmose was left sole rul er, he proved to 
be energetic, and he is just ly considered as the 
greatest pharaoh in the history of Egypt. 
 
At the beginning of his reign by himself, the Asiatic 
rulers, having seen no Eg yptian troops during the 
coregency, had uni ted un der the di recti on of 
the Prince of Kadesh, and rebelled against the king. 
As m entioned in t he " Annals of Thotm ose I  II" at  
Karnak, Thotmose carried out seventeen 
campaigns against them i n P alestine a nd Sy ria 
which he subdued, and p ushed the frontier of 
Egypt as far back as the Euphrates. He also led a 
military expedition into Nubia and thus during his reign 
the E gyptian E mpire ex tended f rom t he F ourth 
Cataract in the South to the Euphrates in the North. 
He brought the sons of the Asiatic rulers with him to 
Egypt, where they were educated in all the wisdom of 
the Egyptians.32 
 
Sometime around 1386 B .C., Queen Tiy of Egypt gave birt h to a boy  who was first 
named Amenhates after his father. Very little is known of his childhood, except that he 
was sickl y from bi rth and devel oped an i nterest  in art, poetry, and religion. His  
closest companion was said to be Nefertit i, his beautiful l ittle c ousin. (Some 
archaeologists have referred to her as his sister.) When the Crown Prince was about 21, 
he and the lovely Neferti ti were married. Three years later, his aging father,  
SS-36


--- PAGE 39 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
Amenhotep III, named him coregent of Egypt and crowned him Amenhotep IV. After the 
death of his father , he cam e into fu ll power in Egy pt and took t he n ame 
Akhenaton. He produced a profound effect on Egypt and the entire world of his day. 
 
Akhenaton, often referred to as "The Here tic King," i s one of history's most 
extraordinary monarchs. Thirteen hundred years before Christ, he preached and lived 
a gospel of love, brotherhood and truth. He has been called the world's first idealist, the 
first temporal ruler ever to lead his people toward the worship of a single 
god.33 
When Akhenaton came to the throne in 1362 B.C., Egypt d ominated t he world. B ut 
behind this panoply of power was a coweri ng citizenry plagued by gods and demons  
conjured up by a si nister priestcraft. Akh enaton created hi s own priesthood and 
proclaimed a new religion that centered on the worship of a s ingle god. T his visionary 
Pharaoh, more interested in philosophy than in power, was unlike any other Egyptian 
ruler. When he introduced the concept of  monotheism, Akhenaton was at an historic 
crossroads, for, at that point in time, the Hebrews were in Egypt. 
 
The story of Akhenaton is not co mplete without the story of his beautiful wife and full 
partner, Nefertiti. She was a woman of fabled beauty and grace. A magnificent treasure 
remains to remind us of her lo veliness, a painted bust which is c onsidered one of the 
great works of Egyptian art. I n some of the many portraits of Akhenaton, he is shown in 
affectionate poses wit h Queen  Nefertiti. Although she presented him wit h s even 
daughters, and he longed for a son, he did not take another wife, as was the custom. The  
SS-37


--- PAGE 40 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
relationship between Akhenaton and Nefertiti was one of history's first well-known love 
stories. The Egyptian artist and sculptors of the day left more than ample proof of this 
fact. Akhenaton and Nefertiti humanized the Egyptian monarchy. A nd after hi s death, 
Nefertiti, almost single-handedly , t ried to keep alive the new religion t hat he  had 
founded. 
 
 
The pharaoh that came afte r Akhenaton, Smerkhkare, 1352-1341 B.C., was out-
standing, principally because he kept order in the Egypt of that day and held warfare to an 
absolute m inimum. O ne of the best-k nown pharaohs of the Eight eenth Dynasty was 
Tutankhamun, known as King Tut. As an administrator and pharaoh, there was nothing 
outstanding to his credit. And sometimes he is unkindly spoken of as a minor king who had 
a major funeral. The fortunate ci rcumstance of his tomb's d iscovery i s that its finding 
advanced curiosity and world study of Eg yptian history and his name b ecame 
synonymous with spl endor in the ancient world. His was one of the few tombs found 
intact, principally, because it was buried cl ose to previously b uilt tombs and w as 
overlooked by grave robbers who ravished Egypt after the decline of its great dynasties. The 
tone of the finery and the ornamentation and the number of objects taken from his tomb, 
made his name known to nearly every school child in the United States. He was the last 
well-known king of the Eighteenth Dynasty. 
 
 
The Nineteenth Dynasty, 1341-1200 B.C., is sometimes called the Rameses Dynasty, 
although a number of pharaohs with other  names rul ed with s ome success. The 
Eighteenth Dynasty had lasted for 260 years. The period from the reign of Akhenaton to 
the end of this dynasty i s known as the "Heresy Period" because it w as a  t ime o f  
SS-38


--- PAGE 41 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
repeated disputes over the changing natur e of religi on. Thi s dynasty got the f ull 
attention of the Egyptian people during the reign of the great Rameses 11, 1298-1232 B. C. 
 
 
At t he beginning of  his  reign,  Ram eses II  l ed a  s uccessful campaign against the 
armies o f S yria w ho w ere a gain t hreatening t he bo rders o f Egypt. He led another 
campaign into Western Asia and forced the Hi ttites to retreat. Copies of the treaty of 
peace that was signe d on that day still survive and can b e found in Egypt at the 
Temple of Karnak, in Thebes. These campai gns are further recorded in a recent 
book, When Egypt Ruled the East. 
 
 
Rameses 11 made the City of Tanis, in the eastern Delta, the capitol so that he could be near 
the Egyptian possessions in Western Asia. While Rameses and the magnificence of his 
reign seemed to overshadow the other pharaohs of the Nineteenth Dynasty, he was not the 
only capable pharaoh. Both Seti I and Seti I I were able pharaohs, as were many of the 
others. But the name Rameses would extend into the Twenty-first and Twenty-second 
Dynasties b y v irtue o f h is n umerous c hildren. He had married many wives, the most 
notable being the Queen Nefertari, whose magnificent tomb is in the Valley of the Queens 
at Thebes. 
 
 
The Twentieth Dynasty, 1200-1085 B.C., had many Rameses, III through XI. But it can be said 
with fairness that Egypt's great genius in  state building had reached its peak b y the 
Twentieth Dynasty. Its Pharaohs were holding the great state together, without advancing it 
as previous pharaohs had done. 
SS-39


--- PAGE 42 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
The next f our dy nasties were not remarkab le; in fact, the Twenty-first Dynasty is 
referred t o as, "T he Decade nt Per iod," 108 5-715 B.C. While Egyptian influence 
extended into Kush, to the south, it was not very effective. 
 
On the eve of the Twenty-fifth Dynasty, Egypt had grown somewhat indifferent to power 
and the people in the south who had been un der Egyptian control began to q uestion 
Egypt's right to control them. This challenge was led to Kashta, who came to power in 751 
B.C, followed by Piankhi, who ruled from 744-712 B.C., and continued by Taharka, who 
ruled from 686-663 B.C. 
 
Egypt and the nations of the Nile  Valley had been the beating h eart of Africa and th e 
incubator for its greatness for more than a thousand years. The human traffic from the 
south r enewed the cr eative energy of Egyp t and helped it m eet some of t he great 
challenges in history. The weakness and internal strife of the Twenty-fourth Dynasty, 730-
715 B.C., caused a number of the priests and commercial rulers of Egypt to move to the 
south. Egypt was then ruled by contemporary kinglets who had no real power that was 
widely res pected. Under t hese conditions,  Egypt was in vaded b y t he Nubians or 
Ethiopians. 
 
From the research notebooks of William Leo Hansberry, comes the following quote: 
 
Seven hundred and tw enty-three years before the 
birth of Christ, Piankh y, King of Ethiopia , 
commanding a large army and a numerous fleet of 
war-boats, left Napata, his distant capi tal near the 
heart of Africa, swept do wn the Nile to Egypt,  
 
SS-40


--- PAGE 43 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
and in a few months m ade himself the indisputable 
master of the entire kingdom of the ancient pharaohs. 
For n early 1 00 y ears after the event, standards 
symbolizing Ethiopian s overeignty waved 
triumphantly over the verdant valley of the Nile from the 
Sixth Cataract on the South, as far northward as the 
Mediterranean, or ... as the ancients called it, "The 
Great Green Sea." 
 
At the time when Et hiopia entered upon this her  
greatest v enture in the diff icult art of imperiali sm, 
Egypt's fortunes, w aning for well over 300 
hundred years, had ebbed to a very low tide.34 
 
Dr. Hansberry states further: 
An objecti ve analysis of the principal s and 
precepts which prompted and guided the Ethiopian 
occupation of Egypt , as well as an impartial 
appraisal of the national an d international results, 
would seem to justify the conclusion that this entire 
undertaking was one of t he most blameless and 
beneficent ventures in imperialism ever attempted 
in the anci ent world. C ompared with it in method 
and s pirit, Ass yrian an d Babylonian warfare and 
domination were adventur es in cruelty and 
exploitation of the rankes t kind, and by t he same 
criteria, the history of Greek imperialism and the story 
of Pax Romana are tales of gore and greed 
personified. 
 
Far reaching assertions are these indeed, and they 
will no doubt provoke serious challenge from many 
sides but a careful and dispassionate review of the 
available evidence will reveal that they are as well 
grounded as any thesis can be which is founded 
upon recorded e vents of former times. A 
comparative s tudy o f t he annals of the early  
world seems to indicate, for e xample, that with 
one or two pos sible e xceptions, the E thiopian 
occupation of Egypt was the instance in 
recorded ancient histor y where imperialistic   
 
SS-41


--- PAGE 44 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
endeavor on such a grand scale was not motivated 
primarily by a desire for plunder and in an insatiable 
thirst for military renown.35 
 
The Kushite kings restored the declining culture and economy of Egypt and took this  
nation to unprecedent ed heights of leadership in the way it cared for its people. 
Though a colony, Egypt was once more a world power. The Twenty-fifth Dynasty was 
the last purely African Dynasty to rule Egypt. 
 
 
The Assyrian invasion of 671 B.C. drove the Kushite forces to the south and began the 
disorganization and misrule that destroyed the grandeur that was once Egypt . Egypt 
continued to decline while a young nation on the othe r s ide of  the M editerranean, 
Greece, began to gather its power, around 500 B.C. The aftermath of this invasion and 
the new European interest in dominating the trade of the Mediterranean world, led to the 
Punic Wars and the invasion of Africa by the Romans. 
 
 
The other Dynasties were mixed with We stern Asians, Greeks, and subsequently  
Romans. These invaders did not understand the people and the cultures of Egypt and did 
more harm than good. We refer to this period in Egyptian history as the Dynasties of the 
Mixed-Breeds. 
 
 
The time of the Twenty-sixth Dynasty is referred to as "The Static Period," and for good 
reason. N o progress was made during th is period. The Twenty-seventh D ynasty 
was the period of the first Roman domination, 525-404 B.C. The Twentyeighth Dynasty, 
392-378 B.C. lasted for only six years, 404-398 B.C., during which time only one King, 
Amyrtoeos, reigned over  Egypt. The Twen ty-ninth Dynasty, 398-378 B.C., originated  
SS-42


--- PAGE 45 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
at Menes. The most im portant of the f our kings of th is dynasty is Achoris, sometimes 
referred to as Hagar who repelled a Persian invasion after three years of resistance. At the 
time of the Thirtieth Dynasty, 378-341 B.C., the Persians still had desires to retake the 
country. The founder of this Dynasty was N ectanebo I, one of the last of Egypt's great 
rulers. 
 
 
The rulers of these last dynasties had lost the art of holding the state together and they 
were too taken with foreign ideas. This was the condition in Egypt on the eve of the Greek 
invasion. 
 
THE PTOLEMAIC PERIOD - 332-47 B.C. 
 
In 332 B.C . Alexander the Great  of Macedonia, a student of A ristotle, conquered 
Egypt. This was the first purely European in vasion of Africa. As his c apital, h e 
constructed Alexandria and installed one of his generals, Ptolemy, as ruler of Egypt. This 
was the beginning of the Ptolemaic Dynasty which included Cleopatra in th e time of 
Roman Julius Caesar. While Ptolemy himself was European in appearance, t he 
subsequent P tolemaic pharaohs  incr easingly r eflected the Afr ican nat ure of th e 
Egyptian location and experience. J.A. Rogers states: 
 
The earliest Ptolemaic rule rs a re in appe arance 
white, but as time went on, the physiognomies 
changed more and more towards the African one. 
The African strain in Alexander II is apparent, and 
still more so in Ptolemy XIII. Cleopatra herself, is 
known through t radition as having been of a tawny, 
or mulatto color, and is so described by  
Shakespeare.36 
SS-43


--- PAGE 46 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
The Cleopatra best known to history is Cl eopatra VII. She was o f m ixed African and 
Greek parentage. If she were alive today, t here is no way she could pass for 
Caucasian. If living today, s he would probably be living in one of the Black 
communities of the United States. Both in the movies and i n the plays by 
Shakespeare, she was portrayed as a disti nctly African per son, in c olor, until r ecent 
modern times. More nonsense has been written about Cleopatra than about any other 
African Queen, mainly because it has been the desire of many writers to paint her white. 
She was not a white woman, she was not fully a G reek. Let us dispose of this matter 
before explaining the most impo rtant aspects of her life. Until t he emergence of th e 
doctrine of white superiority, Cleopatra was generally pictured as a d istinctly A frican 
woman, dark in color. Shakespeare in the opening line of Anthony and Cleopatra calls 
her "tawny." In his day, mulattos were called "tawny Moors." The word "Moor" came into 
the European languages meaning black of a Blackamoor. 
 
 
Born in 69 B.C., Cleopatra came to the throne that she shared with her brother, Ptolemy 
XIII, when she was 18 years old. Egy pt, now a Roman protectorate, was beset with 
internal strife and intrigue. Cleopatra aligned herself with Julius Caesar, who reinforced 
her power. Their political and sexual relationship was a maneuver to save Egypt from 
the worst aspects of R oman dominati on. A fter Julius Caesar was murdered, 
Cleopatra, still in her early twenties, met Ma rk An thony and  a  love a ffair st rongly 
motivated by politics began. 
 
 
Her effect on Mark Anthony was profound. This noble R oman turned traitor to his 
own people when he attempted to  save the country of this fascin ating African queen  
SS-44


--- PAGE 47 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
from Roman domination. Afte r Ant hony's death, the vict or, Octavius, assumed full 
control of Egypt and Cleopatra, now with out a protector or champion, c ommitted 
suicide. 
 
 
After Cleopatra's death, Egypt became a Roman colony and the harsher aspects of 
Roman rule settled over Egypt and the Middl e East. To the south, in the lands  
untouched by Rome, new proud civilizations w ere rising. A nd, i n t he centuries t hat 
followed, Afri can women once again began to play major roles in the theatre of 
history. 
 
 
Cleopatra died on the eve of the Christian era and it can-be said that the heavy hand of 
Roman domination caused African and Western Asians to question old gods and turn to 
new gods and this was the basis that would lead to the formation of a religion. Roman 
taxation and its repeated burdens on the people and the folk stories about the . coming of 
a Messiah merged into hopefulness until what a large number of people .  were, later, 
willing to accept as the Messiah appeared. 
 
 
At first the Romans  did not t ake this new religion seriously and ent ertained 
themselves by killing Christians in the arenas of Rome and in the Amphitheaters of North 
Africa.  The martyrdom of these early Christians drew converts to their cause, including 
some R omans, u ntil i n essence, large numbers of Romans stopped killing 
Christians and bec ame Chr istians. T his religion which was supposed to hal t the 
decline of the Roman Empire came in co nflict with the Roman personali ty and the 
internal dis putes between di fferent groups proclaiming bel ief in this new religion,  
SS-45


--- PAGE 48 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
destroyed some confidence in the Church and in the people's belief in the religion on the 
eve of the emergence of Islam. 
 
Africans had made an able contribution to this religion before the rise of Islam. There had 
been three African popes: Victor, Pontificate C. 189-199, Miltiades, Pontificate C. 311 
January 10, 314, and Gelasias, Pontificate March 1, 492-November 21, 496. 
 
ISLAMIC EGYPT 642-1798 A.D. 
 
Following the Roman conquest, Egypt was under Roman control for six centuries. Then 
in 642 A. D. the Muslims under Amr-ibn-al-As conquered Egypt as the Islamic religion 
swept across Northern Africa and eventually into Southern Europe through Spain and 
Portugal. The Islamic influence remains strong in Egypt today, although various groups 
and cultures within that tradition have dominated at different points. 
SS-46


--- PAGE 49 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
ISLAM IN WEST AFRICA 
 
By the year 711 A.D. the f orces of Islam had moved westward into inner West A frica, 
known as Western Sudan, and had converted a large number of Africans. Some of these 
Africans joined the army of Islam and were instrumental in the conquest of Spain, that, 
militarily, was an African conquest. The power of Islam literally pushed the Europeans 
out of the Mediterranean, ended the last phase of the R oman Empire and literally 
prevented the Europeans' powers from penetrating the Mediterranean for the next 800 
years. This might have, to some extent, been the underlying cause of the Europeans going 
into what they called, "The Middle Ages." 
 
 
This lethargy on the part of the Europeans and the fear and hatred of the (infidel) Arabs 
was not partly broken until the period of the Crusades. While these Crusades, beginning 
in the Eleventh Century,  were far from milit ary successes, t he Europeans g ained 
information about the world beyond their shores they would not otherwise have known. 
They discovered nations that had produced creature comforts that the Europeans of that 
day had not known, such as: softer fabrics and more comfortable shoes. The Crusaders 
brought back into Europe some of the human necessities that the Europeans had not 
enjoyed as well as information about parts of the world that had, literally, moved ahead of 
them. 
 
 
The A rabs, B erbers, a nd t he A fricans w ere s till do minating t he Mediterranean. T he 
Portuguese freed themselves from Moorish dominance in about 1240 A.D., but Spain did 
not free herself from Moorish rule until about 1450. Five years later, in 1455, Spain and  
SS-47


--- PAGE 50 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
Portugal approached the Pope in Rome to settle some of their basic disputes, because 
these two European nations that had been dominated by the power of Islam now ha d 
imperial ideas of their own. Thus, Mediterranean Europe was awakening from its years of 
"Middle-Age Lethargy." 
 
The ideas and intentions that would ultimately go into  the European slave trade had 
already been set in motion by the Portuguese to be followed by the Spanish. 
 
Inside Africa, itself, a great dram a had been  unfolding for over 1,000 years. After the 
decline in power and the decline in the state-building genius of Egypt, the Western Sudan 
of Africa brought into being great states and empires that  lasted for 1,000 y ears and 
did not begin to decline until the eve of the slave trade and some existed into this period, 
in spite of it. The best known of this period were Ghana, Mali, and Songhay. 
SS-48


--- PAGE 51 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
WEST AFRICA'S GOLDEN AGES 
 
GHANA 
 
The first of the great empires of the Western Sudan to become known to the outside world 
was Ghana. It began as a small settlement during the second century of the Christian era. 
It would later develop into a state with a known history more than 1,000 years old. In Europe 
and in the Arab countries, Ghana was known as a country rich in gold. This was a natural 
attraction for the Arabs and later the Europeans. The country reached the height of its 
greatness during the reign of Tenkamenin, one of its greatest kings, who came to power in 
1062 A.D. The king lived in a palace of stone and wood which was built to be defended in 
time of war. The E mpire was well o rganized. The political progress and social well-
being of its people could be favorably compared to the best kingdoms and empires that 
prevailed in Europe at this time. The country had a military force of 200,000 men. 
 
 
In one of t he holy wars, or jihads, Ghana was invaded by the Almoravides under t he 
leadership of Abu Bekr of the Sosso Empire in 1076 A.D. This conquest brought an end 
to Ghana's age of prosperity and cultural development. The character of the c ountry 
was slow to change. Nearly 100 years later the Arab writer, Al Idrisi, wrote of it as being "the 
greatest kingdom o f the bl acks." In a later account, Al Idrisi said, "Ghana ... is the 
most commercial of all the black countries. It is visited by merchants from all the surrounding 
countries and from the extremities of the West."37 
SS-49


--- PAGE 52 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
In 1087 Ghana regained its independence, but wit hout regaining its old strength,  
state organization, and gran deur. T he r uins of the Empi re of Gha na bec ame t he 
Kingdoms of Diara and Sosso. The province s of Ghana became a part of the Mali 
Empire and were later absorbed into the Songhay Empire. 
 
 
The gr eat dram a of  state- building, tr ade, and com merce and po wer br okerage 
unfolded in Timbuctoo, the queen city of the Western Sudan. Two hundred miles down 
the Niger from Ti mbuctoo the competing ci ty of Gao stood. It wa s founded about the 
Seventh Century and was t he c apital of t he large African Empire o f Songhay. Like 
Timbuctoo, it was in a favorable position for the trans-Saharan trade in the days of the 
regular caravans from North Africa. Also, like Timbuctoo, the greatest days of Gao came 
in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. 
 
 
In the years when Timbuctoo was the great intellectual nucleus of the Songhay Empire, 
African scholars were enjoying a renaissance that was known and respected throughout 
most of Africa and in parts of Europe. At this period in African history the University of 
Sankore was the educational capital of the Western Sudan. In his book, Timbuctoo the 
Mysterious, Felix DuBois gives us the following picture: 
 
The schol ars of Ti mbuctoo yiel ded in nothing to 
the saints and their so journs i n the foreign 
universities of Fez, Tunis, Cai ro. They astounded 
the most lear ned men of Is lam by t heir erudition. 
That these Africans were on a level with the Arabian 
savants is proved by t he fact that they were 
installed a s p rofessors i n Morocco and Egypt. I n 
contrast to this, we find that the Arabs were not always 
equal to the requirements of Sankore.38 
SS-50


--- PAGE 53 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
MALI 
 
The famous Emperor of Mali, Mansa Mussa, stopped at Timbuctoo on his pilgrimage to 
Mecca in 1324. He went in regal sp lendor with an entour age of 60,000 persons,  
including 12,000 servants. Five hundred bondsmen, each of whom carried a staff of  
pure gold, marched in front of  the Emper or. Two hundred ei ghty camels bor e 2,400 
pounds of  gold whic h this African m onarch distribut ed as alm s and gifts . Mussa 
returned from Mecca with an architect who designed imposing buildings in Timbuctoo 
and in other parts of his realm. 
 
 
To the outside world of the late medieval period, the Emperor Mansa Mussa was more 
than an individual. He was Africa. He c onquered the Songhay Empire and rebuilt the 
University of Sankore. He figured, by name, on every map. In his lifetime he became the 
symbol of the mystery and the fabulous wealth of the unknown African continent. He was 
the most colorful of the African kings of the fourteenth century. He still held his position 
nearly two centuries after his death. 
 
 
After the death of Mansa Mussa, the Empire of Mali declined in importance. Its place was 
taken by Song hay, whose great king was Askia the Great (Mohammed Toure). Askia 
came to power in 1493, one year afte r Columbus landed in America. H e 
consolidated the territory conquered by the previous ruler Sonni Ali and built S onghay 
into the most powerful state in the Western Sudan. His realm, it is said, was larger than all 
of Europe. 
SS-51


--- PAGE 54 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
SONGHAY 
 
The German w riter, Henry Bart h, i n his famous w ork, Travels and Discoveries in 
North and Central Africa, calls Askia the Great, "One of the most brilliant and 
enlightened adm inistrators of  a ll t imes." He re organized the army of Songhay , 
improved the system of banking and credit, and made the city-states of Gao, Walata,  
Timbuctoo, and J enne into in tellectual centers. "Timbuct oo, during his reign, was a 
city of more than 100,000 people, a city, fill ed to the t op," says a chronic ler of that 
time, "with gold and dazzling women." 
 
Askia encouraged scholarship  and li terature. Students from all over the Moslem 
world came t o Timbuct oo t o st udy grammar,  law and surgery at the Uni versity of 
Sankore; scholars c ame from North Afri ca and Europe to confer wit h learned 
historians and writers of this A frican empire. Many books were wri tten and Sudanese 
literature developed. Leo Af ricanus, who wr ote one of the best known wor ks on t he 
Western Sudan, says: 
 
In Timbuctoo there are numerous judges, 
doctors, and clerics, all receiving good salaries from 
the king. He pays great respect to men of learning. 
There is a big demand for books in manus cript, 
imported from Barbary (North Africa). More profit 
is made from the book trade than from any other 
line of business. 39 
 
Askia has been hailed as one of the wisest m onarchs of the Middle Ages. Alexander 
Chamberlain, in his book, "The Contribu tion of the Negro to  Human Civilization,"  
says of him: 
SS-52


--- PAGE 55 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
In personal character, i n administrative a bility, i n 
devotion t o the welfar e o f his subjects, i n open-
mindedness towards fore ign influenc es, and in 
wisdom in the adoption of  enlightened ideas and 
institutions from abroad King Askia was certainly the 
equal of the average European monarch of the time 
and superior to many of them.40 
 
 
After the death of Askia the Great in 1528 A.D., the Songhay Empire began to l ose its 
strength and its control over its vast territory. When the Song hay Empire collapsed after 
the capture of Timbuctoo and Gao by the Moroccans in 1591, the whole of the Western 
Sudan was devastated by the invading tro ops. The Sultan of Morocco, EI-Mansur, 
had sent a lar ge army with European fi rearms a cross the Sa hara to a ttack t he once-
powerful empire of Songhay. The army did not reach Timbuctoo until 1591 The prosperous 
city of Timbuctoo was plundered by the army of freebooters. A state of anarchy prevailed. 
The University of Sankore, which had stood for over 500 years, was destroyed and the 
faculty exiled to Morocco. The greatest Sudanese scholar of that day, Ahmed Baba, was 
among those exiled. Baba was a scholar of great depth and inspiration. He was the author 
of more than 40 books on such diverse themes as theology, astronomy, ethnography, and 
biography. His rich library of 1600 books was lost during his expatriation from Timbuctoo. 
 
 
Timbuctoo provides t he most tragic exampl e of the struggles o f t he W est Af rican 
states and towns as they tried to preserve what was once their Golden Age. The 
Arabs, Berbers, and Tuaregs from the North showed them no mercy. Timbuctoo h ad 
previously been sacked by the Tuaregs as early as 1433 and they had occupied it for thirty 
years. Between 1591 and 1593, the Tuaregs had already taken advantage of the situation  
SS-53


--- PAGE 56 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
to plunder Timbuctoo once more. Between  1723 and 1726, the T uaregs once more 
occupied the looted Timbuctoo. Thus, Timbuctoo, once the queen city of t he Western 
Sudan, with more than 200,000 inhabitants and the center of a powerful state, degenerated 
into a shadow of its former stature. 
 
 
Now, West Africa entered a sad period of decline. During the Moorish occupation wrack 
and ruin became the order of the day. When the Europeans arrived in this part of Africa and 
saw these conditions they assumed that nothing of order and value had existed in these 
countries. The past Gol den Ages are part of t he history that the e xploiters of Africa 
want the world to ignore. 
 
 
The discovery of America and the birth of the youngest of world civilizations had an 
unforeseen effect upon African people. Th is young ci vilization created a need for 
slavery, the magni tude of wh ich conti nues to be experie nced by A fricans to thi s 
present day. When the Eur opeans first came  down t he West Coast of Africa, they  
were treated as guests by the unsuspecting  Africans whom they would later  enslave. 
When the Africans began to suspect that the intentions of the Europeans were not good, 
in most cases, it was too late and they did not have the modern weapons of that day to defend 
themselves. 
 
 
In his book, Ghana the Morning After, K. Budu-Acquah explains the effort of one king of the 
country that would later be called The Gold Coast (now Ghana), to save his people from 
the slave trade. His name was Nana Kwam ena Ansa. His attempt to d iscourage the 
Portuguese from s ettling in his co untry was m et w ith f orce. T he following is  
 
SS-54


--- PAGE 57 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
Budu-Acquah's explanation of his efforts: 
 
Our forefathers' antipat hy to Imperialism is 
exemplified by the s peec h of Nana Ans a, who 
foresaw clearly that they were going to be called 
upon to prey on one another, to be left helpless, 
disorganized, and demoralized. His speech has 
been quoted by the late Mr. Mensah-Sarbah, Dr. 
deGraft Johnson and o thers, and it is worth 
quoting once more from W.E. Claridge's History of 
the Gold Coast and Ashanti for it shows equally 
well t he d evelopment o f t he A kan language, its 
poetry which is, "as perfect and musi cal a s any 
Latin or  Roman language," and "if the 
richness of a language to be an index t o the 
natural eloquence of the Akan people i t is a sure  
indication of a balanced and highly  developed 
mental equipment."41 
 
In his speech to Diego de Azambuia, co mmander of the Portuguese expedition, King 
Ansa said: 
 
I am not i nsensible to the high honour whic h 
your great master the Chief of Portugal ha s 
this day conferred upon me. His friendship I have 
always endeavoured to merit by the strictness of my 
dealings with the Portuguese and by my c onstant 
exertions to procure an immediate landing for the 
vessels. But never until this day did I observe such 
a difference in the appearance of his subjects; they 
have hit herto been meanly attired; were eas ily 
contented with the co mmodity th ey re ceived; an d 
so far from wishing to continue in this country, were 
never happy until they c ould complete their landing 
and return. Now I remark a  strange di fference. A 
great number, ri chly dressed, are anxious to be 
allowed to build houses, and to c ontinue among 
us. Men of such eminence, conducted b y a  
commander who from his own account seems to  
SS-55


--- PAGE 58 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
have descended from the God who made day and 
night, can never bring th emselves to endure the 
hardships of this climate;  nor w ould they here be 
able to procure any of the luxuries that abound in 
their own country. The passions that are common to 
us all men will therefore inevitably bring on disputes; 
and it is far preferable that both our nations should 
continue on the same footing as they hitherto had 
done, allowing your s hips t o c ome a nd g o a s 
usual; the desire of seeing each other occasionally 
will preserve peace b etween us. The sea and 
the land being always n eighbours are continually 
at variance and contending who shall give way; the 
sea with great violence attempting to subdue the land; 
and the land with equal o bstinancy resol ving to 
oppose the sea.42 
 
The Portuguese were not i mpressed by t he eloquence King Ansa's speech. They 
forced thei r way into his country and bu ilt the first permanent slave trading 
settlement in West Afri ca. The year was 1582. K. Budu-Acquah explains the 
tragedy in the following statement: 
 
This was the beginn ing of European 
colonization, the beginning of the hunti ng-
ground for procur ing slave labor, the di sruption 
of o ur r eligion, o ur s ocial systems, the loss of 
respect for our forefathers; all t hese things being 
taken away without anyt hing of v alue being put in 
their place.43 
 
It is evident that the Europe an coloni zation w as instrumental in bringing about the 
decline of the third of Africa's Golden Ages. Therefore, this history of exploitation and 
the responsibility for the present condition of the societies of the Third G olden Age 
are understandabl y attributed to  the greed and imperi alistic goals of the E uropean 
nations.44 
SS-56


--- PAGE 59 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
THE AFRICAN PRESENCE IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE 
 
Americans who c ame from Africa were not i mmigrants in t he usual sense. If they were 
immigrants at all, they were  immigrants against their will. T herefore, in looking at the 
African-Americans and their impact on the E nglish colonies that became the United 
States, a different vantage point and frame of reference must be used. First, there is a need 
to locate the Africans on the maps of hum an geography, history and culture, and then 
explain how and why the slave trade started. 
 
 
The Africans are a very old people, and they have played many  roles in history, from 
saints to buffoons. They have been both the makers and destroyers of great nations. 
The Africans have met the Europeans many ti mes on the crossroads of h istory. In 
the c losing years of  the fourteenth cent ury, Europeans began t o recover from 
the confusion of the Middle Ages , and once again pu shed outward. 
 
 
During the latter half of the fifteenth century, European nat ionalism was reflected in 
the expans ion of trade in both slav es and manufactur ed goods. The marri age of 
Queen Isabella and King Ferdi nand gave Spai n the unity to driv e out the Moors. 
Portugal, likewise, was becoming a power ful Mediterranean and Atlantic nation. 
 
 
European skill in s hipbuilding had impr oved and, in search of ne w worlds t o 
conquer and souls to conver t, Europeans began to vent ure beyond their shores.  
There are many  reas ons wh y t he Europeans  had not embarked u pon worldwide 
SS-57


--- PAGE 60 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
exploration before this time: their ships were small and unsafe fo r long sea journeys; 
while oars were sometimes used to propel these ships, the outcome of a ll voyages 
depended lar gely on the wind ; there were few good maps or instruments to guide 
sailors through unknown waters.  Furthermore , at that time m ost Europeans w ere 
ignorant of  the s hape of t he world. I ndeed, some of them thought it w as fl at. The 
Portuguese sought to disprove this, and, about the middle of the fifteenth century, they 
began trading with the people along the West coast of Africa, to which they gave the 
name "Guinea" after the Sudanic Empire of Ghana. 
 
 
In 1488, Bartholomew Diaz had sailed around the southern tip of Africa. About ten years 
later, an other Por tuguese s ailor, Va sco da G ama, s ailed p ast t he po int reached by 
Diaz. With the help of an Arab pilot, Vasco da Gama reached India in 1498. For Europe, 
the door to the vast worlds of Asia and Africa was open. 
 
 
Initially, the Europeans did not come to Africa to find slaves. For years they had heard 
stories of t he great r iches of Africa. At the Battle of Ceuta against the M oslems in 
1416. P rince Henry the Navigator of Po rtugal heard about the p rosperity of 
Timbuctoo and the wealth of the great states along the West coast of A frica. He also 
heard stories about a great African Christian King named Prester John. 
 
 
Before the end of the fifteent h century, the Portuguese sailors had come to know t he 
general shape of the continent of Africa. Th ey traded regularly wit h African countries  
SS-58


--- PAGE 61 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
from 1471 on. Forts were built along the c oast of West Africa. The most f amous of 
these forts, still in existence,  is Elmina Castle in what is now Ghana. T his fort was 
started in 1482 by a Portug uese capt ain, Don Diego D' Azambuja. B ecause of the 
large profits gained by  the Portuguese in thei r trading in t his country, they called it 
the Gold Coast. 
 
 
Social and political unrest began to develop among some of the nations of Af rica-" at 
the time Europe was regaining its strength and a degree of unity. The first Europeans 
to visit the West coast of Africa di d not have to f!ght their way -- they came as guests 
and were treated as  such. Lat er they decided to st ay as c onquerors and slave 
traders. In orde r to gain a posi tion strong e nough to a ttain these ambitions, they 
began to take sides in tribal disputes.  They u sed r acist a s '  w ell a s r eligious 
arguments to justify their subjugation of the Africans. . 
 
 
During the latter half of the fifteenth century, S panish ships began to interf ere and 
challenge the dominant position of the Portuguese in the slave trade. This caused the 
Portuguese to build a cluster of forts along the West coast of Africa to protect their . 
interests. They landed in Elmina early in the year 1492. The leader of the ex pedition, 
Diego D'Azambuja, wasted no time in asking to see the country's reigning king, Nana 
Kwamena Ansa. 
 
 
As the Spanish began to seriously compete with the Portuguese in the slave trade, the 
Pope i ntervened and a ttempted to defi ne th eir r espective spheres of influence. 
Europe's Reformat ion and the s ubsequent conversion of Engla nd and Holland to 
SS-59


--- PAGE 62 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
Protestantism in the sixteenth c entury also had reper cussions in Africa. Pr otestant 
kings no longer felt  bound t o obey the authority of the Pope an d his division of th e 
world. Owners of ships in these countries felt free to enter the slave trade in areas  
that the Pope had assigned to the Portuguese and the Spanish in 1493. Francis I of 
France voiced his celebrated protest: 
 
The sun shines for me as for others, I should very 
much l ike t o s ee t he cl ause in Adam's will that 
excludes me from a share of the world.45 
 
 
The king of Denmark refused to accept the Pope's ruling as far as the East Indies was 
concerned. Sir William Cecil, the famous Elizabethan statesman, denied the Pope's 
right to "give and tak e kingdoms to whom soever he pleased." E ngland, France and 
Holland began to challenge Spain and Portugal. They insisted that they too had a 
right to colonize in South America and the Caribbean Wands. They also insisted that . 
they had a right to the slave labor that was needed in order to develop the sugar, tobacco 
and cotton plantations of the New World. 
 
 
The fact that a form of domestic s lavery existed in West Africa prior to contact with 
Europeans is often used to e xcuse the European slave trade. The two systems had 
few si milarities. The tragic and distingui shing f eature of the slave trade that was  
introduced by the Europeans was that it totally (dehumanized the slave and denied his 
basic personality. This crucial act was supported by a rationale that was created, in part, by the 
Christian church and later extended by the writers and pseudo-scientific racists of the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries. The myth of a people with no history and culture emerged from this 
period. 
SS-60


--- PAGE 63 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
The slave trade prospered, and Africans continued to be poured into the New 
World. Figures on the subject vary, but it has been estimated that during the years of the 
African slave trade, Africa lost millions of her sons and daughters. This was one of 
the most tragic acts of protracted genocide. 
 
 
Contrary to popular belief, the first Africans who came to the New World were not in 
bondage. Africans participated in some of  the early expeditions mainly with Spanish 
explorers. The best known of  these African explorers was Estevanico, sometimes  
known as Little Steven, who accompanied the de Vaca expedition during six years of 
wandering from Fl orida to Mexi co. The remarkable thing abou t Estevani co, who 
came to America in 1527, is that he was an extraordin ary linguist. He learned the 
language of the Indians in a matter of weeks. Because of his knowledge of herbs and 
medicines, he was accepted as a deity by some Indian tribes. In 1539, Estevanico set out 
from Mexico. in a party with Fray Marcos de Niza in search of the fabulous Seven Cities 
of Cibola. When most of the expedition , includin g Fray Marcos,  b ecame i ll, 
.Estevanico went on alone and opened up what is now known as New Mexic o and 
Arizona. 
 
 
/\ number of hi storians have stated that Pe dro Alonso Nino, one of  the pilots of the 
command ship of Christopher Columbus, was an African. In the discovery of the 
Pacific i n 1513, Balboa carried thirty Africans who helped to clear the road acr oss the 
isthmus between the two oceans. In the conquest of Mexico, Cortez was accompanied 
by a number of Africans. Incidentally, one was a pioneer of wheat farming in the new 
world. 46  in the exploration of Guatemala,  Chile, Pe ru, and Venezuela, Africans 
 
SS-61


--- PAGE 64 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
arrived nearly a hundred years before they  reappeared as slaves i n J amestown, 
Virginia in 1619. Thus , Africans were maj or contributors to t he m aking of the New 
World, and they did not come culturally empty-handed. Many of the Africans brought to the 
New World such skills as ironworking, leatherworking, and carpentry. 
 
 
Before the breaking up of the social struct ure of the West African s tates s uch a s 
Ghana and Song hay, and the internal strife that made the slave trade possible, many 
Africans, especially West Africans, lived in a society in which u niversity life was fairly 
common and scholars were held in reverence. It is quite clear that there existed in Africa 
prior to the beginning of the slave trade a c ultural way of life th at in many w ays was 
equal, if not superior, to many of the civilizations then existing in Europe. The slave trade 
destroyed these cultures and created a dilemma that the African has not been able to 
extract himself from to this day. 
 
 
The greatest destroyer of African culture, the greatest exploiter of the African, was the 
plantation system of the New World. The African was transformed into something called a 
"Negro." He was demeaned. Myths were created that nearly always read the African out of 
human history, beginning with the classification of the Afri can as a l esser being. The 
Church's justification for slavery was that the Africans were b eing brought under the 
guidance of Christendom and that they would eventually receive its blessings. 
 
 
There were several competi ng slave systems on the personali ty of t he African. We 
have to look at each separately. I n Cuba and Haiti, the Africans were often a majority of the  
SS-62


--- PAGE 65 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
population. This is also true of certain portions of Brazil. Therefore, the system operated 
differently in these areas, and although it w as still slavery, the Africans in it h ad some 
cultural mobility. 
 
 
In South America and in the West Indies, the slave maker did not outlaw the African drum, 
African or namentations, Africa n religion,  or other  thin gs dear t o t he African, 
remembered from his former way of l ife. T his permitted a form  of cultural continui ty 
among the slaves in the West Indies, Cuba and South America that did not e xist in the 
United States. 
 
 
In the Portuguese areas, in the West Indies, and often in South America, the plantation 
owner would buy a shipload or half a s hipload of slaves. These slaves usually came 
from the same areas of Africa, and they nat urally spoke the same language and had 
the same basic culture. Families, in the main, were kept together a slave on an island was 
sold to a plantation owner at the other end V the island, he could still walk to see his 
relatives. This made for a form of cultural continuity among the slaves in South America, 
Cuba and Haiti that later made their revolts more successful than revolts in the United 
States. 
 
 
In the United States, an attempt was made to destroy every element of culture of the 
slaves. No other system did so much to deny the slave's personality or to ruthlessly sell 
family members away from each other. T he American slave system operated a lmost 
like the American brokerage system. If a person bought twenty slaves at the beginning of 
the week and found himself short of cash at the end of the week, he might, if the price  
SS-63


--- PAGE 66 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
was r ight, sell ten. These ten might be r esold within a few days. The f amily, the most 
meaningful entity in Af rican life, was systematically destroyed. In spite of these drastic 
drawbacks, the Afr icans in the Unit ed States made a meaningf ul c ontribution to the 
preservation of the country in which they were slaves. 
 
 
Another neglected aspect of the Afric an in  the Ne w World is t he ro le of Africa n 
women. Many families of the New World originated from cohabitation between the white 
slave master and the African wo man. Later, this same slave master, especially in the 
United States, made and supported laws forbidding his own children to have an education or 
to sit beside him on public transportation. In Haiti, the African woman sometimes had 
kind of semi-legal stat us. In South A merica, especially in Brazil, s ometimes the white 
slave master married the African woman and she became a free person. This condition did 
not prevail in the United States. 
 
 
The mentality, the rationales, and the various  ways of justifying the slave trade had  
already started in Europe with the attempt to justify the enslavement of other Europeans. 
It is rarely recalled that at first there was a concerted effort to obtain European labor to 
open up the vast regions of the New World. It is often forgotten that, in what later became 
the United States, white enslavement started before black enslavement. 
 
 
African-American historia n Lerone Bennett, Jr., gives the following information 
about this period: 
SS-64


--- PAGE 67 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
When someone r emoves the cat aracts of 
whiteness from our eyes, and when we look 
with unclouded vision on the bloody shadows of  
the American past, we r ecognize for the first time 
that the Afri can-American, w ho w as s o o ften 
second in freedom, was also second in slavery. 
 
Indeed, it will be revealed that the African-
American was thi rd in slavery. For he inheri ted 
his c hains, in  a  manner of speaking, from the 
pioneer bondmen, who w ere red and white.47 
 
The enslavement of both red and white m en in the early A merican col onies was  
a contradiction of English la w. It contai ned no provi sion for slave labor.  Yet, forced 
labor was widely used in E ngland. Thi s syst em was tr ansf erred to the colonies 
and used to justify a form of s lavery that was visited upon red and white men. 
 
It was decreed that the apprentice must serve hi s maste r se ven years, and take  
floggings as his master  saw fit; the hi red servant must  carry out his contr act for his 
term of service. Convicts of  the state, often i ncluding political offenders, were slaves  
of the st ate and s ometimes s old to private owners over seas. T he c olonists 
claimed those rights over so me of the white fellow coun trymen. A large  cl ass o f 
"indentured" servants bought by their masters under legal obligation to serve for a 
term o f ye ars and subject to the sam e penaltie s of bran ding, whipping and  
mutilation as African slaves. T hese forms of servitude were supposed to be 
limited in duration and t rans mitted no c laim  t o t he s ervant 's c hildr en.  I n 
spite of this servitude, the p resumption, in law, was that a white man w as born 
free. 
 
As the Englis h settlers began t o ens lave their Indian  neighbors, they settl ed their 
SS-65


--- PAGE 68 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
conscience with the argument that it was right to make slaves of pagans. In large numbers, 
the Indians fled or died in c aptivity, leaving few of their descendants in bondage. The 
virgin soil of the new English settlements continued to need  more labor. This led to a 
fierce search for white labor that subsequently led to a search for black labor. 
 
 
By the end of the seventeent h century, Europeans saw in African manpower the 
means to secure free labor for the buil ding of the Ameri cas. The A fricans, upon  
entering into the slave system of the A mericas, became exposed to a diabolical and 
consistent application of mental and physical torture. As the Africans reflected on their 
miserable state, and the strange and brutal hell surrounding them, they became creatures 
of conflicting emotions caught in the throes of nostalgia. Very often the Africans would 
recklessly gamble their lives away in suicidal attempts to destroy the entire slave system. 
These attempts only had limited success - but enough to drive fear into the hearts of the 
slave-owning hierarchy. The prime targets of the Africans during these attacks were the 
slave masters and their families. 
 
 
As a consequence of these spasmodic attacks, the slave owners soon realized that they 
were losing face and money, and sometimes their lives. They decided that a full course of 
action, spiritual and physical, and psychological, must be i mplemented if the Africans 
were to be transformed from proud rebellious men to docile servants. The plans of the 
slave owners entailed some of the most extreme forms of torture. Despite the atrocities 
inflicted on the Africans as a means of br eaking their spirit, the slave masters soon 
realized that this alone would be useless as long as the Africans 
SS-66


--- PAGE 69 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
retained their proud spirit. The Christian church came up with a design to bring about  
complete subversion of the Africans to the desired slave code of conduct demanded by 
the feudal societies of the Americas. 
 
Reverend Kyle Ha selden, Editor  of the m agazine Christian Centur y, made the  
following statement on the role of the church  in the planting of racism in the Unite d 
States: 
 
The relig ious com munity in Amer ican soc iety 
produced and s ustained - sometimes o n B iblical 
grounds-the anti-Negro bias which has permeated 
the American mind from the beginning of the nation 
until the present day. O ut o f t he n ation's r eligious 
community c ome Bibli cally and doctrinally 
supported theories of racial inferiority, and from this 
same sour ce cam e immo ral ethical codes which 
justified the exploitation of the Negro and demanded 
that the white man hold himself in sanctifying 
aloofness from the Negro. 
 
Moreover, the patterns of segregation which divide 
the common life of the country racially had their 
beginning in t he c hurch be fore t hey f ound t heir 
perfection i n the sec ular society. It was not the  
secular world which infused the church with its 
contemptuous views of the Ne gro and imposed a 
segregated life on the Christian community. These 
offenses appeared fi rst in t he religious community 
in its narrowest definition. 
 
The white man distorted t he Bible into a defense 
for slavery and taught the Negro the passive virtues 
of Christianity, partly in the hope of making him  
tractable and content with his servile life. The white 
Christian, in developing American culture, confused 
Christianity with morality, morality with gentility, and 
gentility with aloofness from the Negro. As early as  
 
SS-67


--- PAGE 70 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
1630, a bare ten y ears af ter t he arrival of t he f irst 
Negro slaves, white C hristians condemned the 
crossing of  the rac ial line a s an "abuse to the 
dis honor of God and shame o f Christians."48 
 
RESISTANCE TO SLAVERY 
 
Blacks did not submit without a fight. As early as 1663, a gr oup of slaves joined white 
indentured servants to plan a rebellion. Later too, some slaves took the Christian 
version of the Bible literally and believed that God meant all men to be free. Such a slave 
was Gabriel Prosser, of Virginia, who felt in 1800 that he was divinely inspired to lead his 
people out of bondage. Over 40,000 slaves were involved in the revolt before it was 
betrayed. 
 
 
While different manifestations of resi stance to slavery and colonialism existe d 
throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the best organized resistance 
came in the nineteenth ce ntury. T he ninet eenth c entury fr eedom m ovements in  
Africa and the West  Indies, and in t he United States m ade the present-day twentieth 
century movement possible. In  fact, the whole of the ni neteenth century for us can 
justifiably be called "The Century of Resistance." Concurrent with the slave revolts in the 
United Stat es there were anti-colonial revo lts in Africa. The new Western c apitalist 
class was demanding more profits from the slave system while the British were actually 
changing from one form of slavery to another. I n the United States there was no such 
pretending. In his essay, "A Brief History of  the Negro in the United S tates," John 
Hope Franklin gives us this picture of that period: 
SS-68


--- PAGE 71 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
By the beginning of the nineteenth century there were 
unmistakable signs of profound economic and 
social change taking place in the United States. 
The c ommercial activities of the new nation were  
expanding; and there were those who already were 
beginning to think i n t erms o f p romoting i ndustrial 
development similar to that which was occurring in 
England and on the Continent. Beyond the areas 
of s ettlement, r ich new land was beckoning 
settlers w ho c ould p lant staple crops and enjoy 
the freedom offered by the f rontier. In 1803, the 
United St ates pur chased the vast L ouisiana 
Territory, and al though i t woul d be many y ears 
before the entire area would be settled, Americans and 
European immigrants were rapidly moving beyond the 
mountains. The greater por tion of the people who 
moved from the A tlantic seaboard were commi tted 
to the insti tution of slav ery, and if they had any 
slaves they took them along. Not even the War 
of 1812, in w hich several thousand blacks fought, 
halted the march of Americans and slavery into the 
New West.49 
 
There were two distinct freedom movements among African-Americans during the first 
part of the nineteenth century. One represented by continuous slave revolts and the other 
by "free" black men and wome n who were engaged in a c oncerted effort to free their 
enslaved brothers and sisters. The movement, led by "free" black petitioners for freedom, 
was started during the latter part of the eighteenth century by men like Prince Hall. He was 
ably abetted by others in the nineteenth century. 
 
When Hall arrived i n Boston that city was the center of the American slave trade. Most of the 
major leaders of the revolutionary movement of that day were, in fact, s laveholders or 
investors in slave-supported businesses. Hall, lik e many other Am ericans, wondered 
"What did these men mean by freedom?" The condition of t he "free" black man, as 
 
SS-69


--- PAGE 72 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 Prince Hall found them, wa s not an e nviable one. T hey we re f ree in name only. 
Discriminatory practices severely circumscribed their freedom of movement. 
 
 
In 1765, he saw little change in the condition of the blacks, and though free men at least in 
theory, he saw them debased as though they were still in bondage. 
 
 
In 1788, he petitioned the Massachusetts Legislature, protesting the kidnapping of "free" 
Afri cans. This was a ti me when A merican patrio ts were engaged in a  
constitutional struggle for fre edom. They had proclaimed th e inherent ri ghts of all 
mankind to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Hall dared to remind them that the 
Africans in the United States were human beings and as such were entitled to freedom 
and respect for their human personality. 
 
 
Many other Africans aided the cause of  Abolition. Frederick Douglass was the 
noblest of all. This great abolitionist's civil rights views are as valid today as they were a 
century ago. Samuel E. Cornish and John B. Russwurm started a newspaper in order to tell 
the African-American's story from his poin t of view. Russwurm, talented e ditor and 
politician, is generally  credited with being the fi rst African-American g raduate of an 
American college (Bowdoin, 1826). Henry Highland Garnet, a fiery Presbyterian minister, 
was a leader of the militant abolitionist wing. SojournerTruth, the first African-American 
woman t o b ecome a n a nti-slavery l ecturer, w as a lso a  strong leader in the feminist 
movements of the nineteenth centur y. Harriet Tubman w as a pioneer rebel and slave 
activist who later served as a nurse, scout and spy in the Civil War. John Brown, called "God's 
Angry Man," was the first white martyr to die for black freedom. Am ong other white men  
 
SS-70


--- PAGE 73 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
who helped to create the first freedom movement, Wendell Phillips and William Lloyd 
Garrison were outstanding. 
 
 
In 185T the famous Dred Scott Decision theoretically opened all territories to slavery. But 
before any considerable number of slaves could be taken to them, the Civil War began 
and Congress, in 1862, prohibited slavery in the territories. After four years of c onflict, 
Northern victory in the Civil War resulted in the emancipation of the slaves. The slaves 
had played a n i mportant p art i n the achievement of their freedom. Some 186, 000 
African-American t roops t ook p art i n one hundred and ninety-eight battles a nd 
skirmishes and suffered 6,000 casualties. T he total number of African Americans 
including servants, laborers, and spies, amounted to m ore than 300,000. President 
Lincoln acknowledged that the war could not have been won without the help of African 
troops. 
 
 
In the opening chapter of his book, Black Reconstruction in  America 1860-1880,  
Dr. W.E.B. DuBois has stated "Easily the most dramatic episode in American 
history was the sudden mov e to free four million black s laves in an eff ort to stop a 
great Civil War and forty years of bitter controversy, and to a ppease the moral sense of 
civilization."50 The appeasement, if it was an appeasement at all, was short-lived. For 
eleven years following the end of the Civil War, African-Americans participated in the 
political life of the nation on both state and national levels. For the first time in the nation's 
existence it seemed as i f its democratic promise was going to be kept. By 1 875, the 
tide turned against the African in the South and in t he rest of the country. The 
Republican Party bargained away the political rights of African-Americans in order to  
SS-71


--- PAGE 74 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
pacify the brooding white South. Some African politicians held on for a few more years 
but their heyday in American politics was over. 
 
THE STRUGGLE AGAINST RACISM 
 
The period in African-American history from 1877 to 1901 is called the Nadir - the lowest 
point - the time of the great depression. This is the period when Africans lost the right to 
participate in the government of this country. It was during this period that lynching became 
the order of the day. Most of  the Jim Crow laws also came into b eing during these 
years. 
 
By the early part of the twentieth century, the African-American people had produced an 
intellectual class that was in revolt against the second-class citizenship that had been 
fastened upon their people. This revolt, led by the great scholar W.E.B. DuBois, did not 
stop the solidif ication of di senfranchisement and s egregation in the South. Sout hern 
politicians and Northern philanthropists had already anointed Booker T. W ashington, of 
Tuskegee Institute, and declared that he was the leader of the African people. The people 
themselves were never consulted in this matter. The AfricanAmerican journalist, Loren 
Miller, in a speech, "The Call for Leadership," delivered in 1962 at Stanford University in 
California, makes the following appraisal of Dr. DuBois for this period: 
 
When W.E.B. DuBois won the battle for the minds of 
Negroes i n hi s hi stori c confli ct wi th B ooker 
T. Washington, his v ictory signalized the triumph  
of his concept of the talented tenth as the leaders of, and the  
 
SS-72


--- PAGE 75 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
spokesmen for A merican Negroes. We beli eved 
that members of this talented tenth, educators, ministers, 
lawyers, editors, doctors and dentists, political leaders, would, in 
the very process of securing an education to fit them for their 
professions, furnish pragmatic proof of the invalidity of the then 
current doctrine of racial inferiority. He was confident 
that this educated and select minority would lead the 
masses in a sustained and purposeful assault on the 
restrictions that doomed the N egro t o p overty a nd 
degradation; it was  an e ssential aspect of the DuBois 
credo that the talented tenth w ould a ccept i ts r ole a s 
servants of the other ninety percent, just as he believed 
he had done . .  .  D uBois and his contemporaries 
fashioned t he NAACP a s the chosen instrument 
of the elit e to whom he b elieved the masses 
should look for guidance and salvation.51 
 
 
The c oncept o f the Talented Tenth failed because the African elite did not assume the 
'responsibility expected of them. They were too busy imitating the white middle class and 
retreating from their own people. DuBois, without their assistance, embarked upon a more 
radical course of action. During the ear ly part o f this c entury, he became t he 
intellectual father of this people. After t he d eath o f B ooker T . Washington in 1915, his 
leadership was unchallenged until t he e mergence of Marcus Garvey in the early  
twenties. Dr. DuBois, more than any other person, sowed the seeds of what is now 
called "The Black Revolution." Near the end of the nineteenth century this intellectual 
giant took up the fight and ably carried it to the middle of the t wentieth century. He is  the 
father of the p resent struggle against racism and for African r edemption. Men like 
Marcus Garvey, though they  differed with DuBois,  would dr aw in part from his 
intellectual conclusions. 
SS-73


--- PAGE 76 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
There is now an internationa l struggle on the part of  people of African desc ent 
against racism and for a more honest look at their history. On university campuses and in 
international conferences they are demandi ng that thei r history be looked at f rom an 
African perspective or from an Afro-centric point of v iew. This has taken the s truggle 
against racism to th e world's campuses, where the theoreti cal basis of r acism 
started. This has helped to create new battlelines and a lot of fear and frustration on the 
part of white scholars. They still do not recognize that removing this racism is the healthiest 
thing that present-day African scholars can contribute to the world; th at in the cry for 
power and a knowledge of their history, African people are s aying a very powerful, 
complex, yet simple thing, "I am a man." The struggle against racism all along has been a 
struggle to regain the essent ial manhood l ost after the European e xpansion i nto t he 
broader world and the attempt to justify the slave trade. 
 
 
THE EDUCATION OF AFRICAN-AMERICANS 
 
The struggle within the African educational institutions had centered, in most cases, on 
how to remove the stigma of slavery and make African-Americans, the immigrants against 
their will, think better of th emselves and prepare to dem and full-citizenship s tatus. 
African-Americans c ame int o the twenti eth century with some of the u nresolved 
educational problems of the nineteenth century. Carter G. Woodson c alled 
attention to this in two near cl assic, though still neglected books, The Education 
of the Negro Prior to 1861, and The Miseducation of the Negro. Dr. Woodson tells 
us: 
SS-74


--- PAGE 77 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
It r equired little argument t o convince intelligent 
masters that slaves, who had some conception of 
modern civilization and understood the language of 
their ow ners, w ould be mo re v aluable th an rude 
men with w hom one coul d not  communicate. T he 
questions, however, as to  exactly what kind of 
training these Negroes should have and how far it 
should go, were to the white race then as much a 
matter of perplexity as they are now.52 
 
Often the motive of the slave owners who agreed on some education for their slaves, was 
to mak e t hem mor e productive wor kers on the plantation. Fr om the be ginning, t he 
African-Americans were educated to serve others, and not themselves. In The 
Education of the Negro Prior to 1861, Woodson outlines the beginning of African 
education in this country. 
 
The history of the educ ation of  th e ant ebellum 
Negroes, therefore, falls into two periods. Th e first 
extends from the time of the introduction of slavery to 
the climax of the insurr ectionary movement about 
1835, when the majority of the people in this country 
answered in the affirmative the question whether or 
not it was prudent to educate slaves. Then followed 
the second period, when industrial revolution  
changed slavery from a patriarchal, to an economic 
institution, and when intelligent Negroes, encouraged 
by abolitionists, made so many attempts to organize 
insurrections that the pendulum began to swing the 
other w ay. B y t his t ime most Southern white 
people reached the conclusion t hat it was 
impossible to cultivate the mind of  Negroes without 
arousing over much self-assertion. 
 
The early advocates of the education of N egroes 
were of three classes; first, masters who desired to 
increase the ec onomic eff iciency of t heir labor 
supply; second, sympathetic p ersons w ho 
wished to help t he o ppressed; and third,  
 
SS-75


--- PAGE 78 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
zealous m issionaries w ho, believing that the 
message o f d ivine l ove c ame e qually to all, taught 
slaves the English language that they might learn 
the principles of the Chri stian religion. Through the 
kindness of the first class, slaves had their best chance 
for mental improvement. Each slaveholder dealt with 
the situation to suit hims elf, regardless of p ublic 
opinion. Later when m easures wer e p assed t o 
prohibit the educ ation of slaves , some masters, 
always a law unto themselv es, continued to teach 
their Negroes in defiance of  t he hostile legislation. 
Sympathetic persons were not usually reformers, 
who not only did not own slav es, but dwelt in 
practically free s ettlements fa r fro m t he plantation 
on which the bondsmen lived.53 
 
The Spanish and French missionaries had di fferent approaches to the education of  
the slaves. Some of them were anxious to see the Africans enlig htened and brought 
into the church. Thi s was a change from thei r previous posi tion when they had 
originally advocated the ens lavement of the African ra ther t han t he Indians. The 
position of these Catholic mi ssionaries forced the English into a m ore positive stance 
in matters  relat ing t o the education of Af ricans. Dr. Woodson t ells us that, "The 
English were put to shame by  the noble example of the C atholics. They had to find 
a way to overcome the object ions of these who, g ranting that t he enlightenment of  
the slaves might not lead them  to servile insurrection, nev ertheless feared that their  
conversion might work manumission." This situation forced the English to deal with a 
contradiction wit hin t he Ch ristian Church  that still exists. Can a Christian hold 
another Christian as a slave and still be a Christian? In order to deal with the urgency 
of t his m atter t he c olonists secured, th rough legislation by their assemblies and 
formal declaration of the Bishop of London, the abrogation of the law that a Christian 
could not be held as a slave. A fter t he a pproval o f t he C hurch o f  
 
SS-76


--- PAGE 79 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
England,  the miss ionaries sent  out by the Soc iety  for the 
propagat ion of t he Gos pel am ong “Heathen” in the F orein Parts,  
undertook to educate the slaves  for the purpos e of ext ens iv e 
proselytizing. 
 
Reaction to this plan was not slow  in coming. During t he first  
quarter of the nineteenth cent ur y, es pec ially  in the Sout h, 
reactionaries forced public opin ion to gradually prohibit the 
educ ation of the Afric ans, exc ept  in s ome urban com munities  
wher e pr ogress ive Afric ans were ab le to pr ovide their o wn schools .  
The mas sive s lav e revolts  that came during this period, convinc ed 
a large number  of whites, som e of them former allies  of t he 
Africans, that the educat ing of Africans was a dang erous thing.  
This opinion continue d until the Civ il War when Africans began to 
build ne w institu tions, m ain ly s chools.  Most of th ese new scho ols  
soon began to fall into old traps. They were imitations  of whit e 
schools whose teachings  were of fensiv e to African people.  No w 
the education of African Americ ans began to move on several 
lev els.  Education in churches, communit y center s, and in homes  
began t o supplement the educ atio n in the schools.  In these  
independent instit utions, lay histor ians began the formal  search for 
the Afric an her itage 
 
In what can st ill be referr ed to as  “The Bo oker T. Washington Er a,  
1895 – 1915,” new men and m ovem ent s were emerging.  The 
Niagar a Movement, under the leader ship of W.E.B. DuBois and 
Monroe Trotter, was bor n in 1905.   Some of the idea s of the 
Niagar a Movement went into the making of the NAACP in 1909. 
SS-77


--- PAGE 80 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
During the years  leading to the ev e of the First World W ar, and 
those that immediaately  followed,  the flight from the Sount h 
continued.  Over a half  millio n Africans migrat ed Nort hwar d in 
search of better-paying wartim e jobs,  better schools for their  
children, and better housing.  For  a s hort  while, t hey entertained 
the illusion that they had been improved and that they e scaped 
from the oppress ion of t he South.  The illus ion was short-lived.   
Rac e rio ts in war time St. Lou is an d in pos t-war Ch ica go wa kene d 
the new urban settlers to reality.  In Washi ngton, D.C., Pres ident 
Woodrow Wilson and t he Souther n Democrats who had c ome to 
power with him, had int roduced segr egation in federal facilit ies 
that had long been integrated.  Book er T. W ashington died in  1915.   
An inves tigation into his last y ear s revealed that he had private ly 
battled against dis enfranchisem ent and had secretely f inanced 
lawsuits  agains t segregation,  but publicly  maint ained his  
submissive stance.  With Washin gton gone, and t he influence of  
the “Tus kegee M achine” in decline,  a new class of Afric an radic als  
came for ward.  F or a few years Du Bois was at the center  of the 
school of leaders hip.  As  the founder-edi tor of the NAACP’s  Crisis  
magaz ine, urged in 1918: “Let us, while this war lasts, forget our 
spec ial griev anc es and c los e ranks shoulder to should er with our  
fellow citizens  … ”  The c ontin ued discr imination against African-
Americ ans, both soldiers  and civi lians, soon made W.E.B. DuBois  
regret having made this s tatement .  The end of the war brought no 
improvement to t he liv es of Afric an Amer ic ans.  T he the n pr evailing 
condition made a lar ge number  of them ripe for the militant  
program of Marcus Garvey .  This  was the beginning  of the heroic 
and troubled years of the African urban ghetto. 
SS-78


--- PAGE 81 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
African people, in America and the rest of the world, now stand at the crossroads of history, 
seeking new definition of themselves and new directions .  In the book, Tom-Tom , t he 
writer John.W. Vandercook has said, " A. rac e is lik e a m an, and unt il it  us es its 
own talents, takes pride in its histor y, and loves its memo ries, i t can never 
fulfill i tself completely.” 54 Today African-Ameri cans are beginning to use their talents 
more creatively in their struggle for total liberation and.nationhood.  This is why they are 
taking pride in their own history and lov ing their own memories. They are searchin g 
for a way to better relate to Africans in Africa and   in other parts of the world. There 
are clear i ndications that they w ill move beyond Pan-Afri canism and h elp to build a 
world union of African people , This will not make the African-American relate less to 
America, but more, and in a different- way. 
 
Now that we are becoming more aware of  our his tory and how to us e it as an 
instrument for our liberat ion, we know th at we ar e the only immigrant group who  
were invited here. Those who invited us wait ed anxiously for our arrival , They sent 
large ships to bring us here, manned by well-armed thugs. We faced no unemployment 
problems, there were plenty of jobs wait ing for us. T he jobs th at we did helped to 
make America. 55 
SS-79


--- PAGE 82 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
  
1. Africa in Earl y W orld History, by John Henrik Clarke, Ebony Magazine, 
August, 1976,  Johnson Publi shing Co mpany: Chicago,  I L, pp.  125-126.  
Also, Africa's Golden Past, by Dr. William Leo Hansberry, Ebony Magazine, 
Parts 1 through 5, N ovember, 1964 to March, 1965. Also, Africa and Africans 
as Seen b y Classical Writers, by Dr. William Leo Hansberry , edited by 
Joseph E. Harris, H oward U niversity Press: Washington, D.C., 1981. 
 
2. Blacks in Antiquity: Ethiopians in the Graeco-Roman Experience, by Frank 
Snowden,  Jr., Harvard Univer sity Pr ess: Cambridg e, MA. Also, and OSC 
Co.: New York, NY, pp. 36-38. Also, The N egro in Gre ek and R oman 
Civilization: A Study of the E thiopian Type, by Grace Hardley Beardsley,  
The John Hopkins University Press: Baltimore, MD. Also, Africa in Classical 
Antiquity, edited b y L . Thompson and J. Ferguson, Ibadan University  
Press: Ibadan, Nigeria, 1969, p p. 91-103. 
 
3. The Destruction of Black Civilization: Great Issues of a Race from 4500 B.C. 
to 2000 A.D., by Chancellor Williams, Third  World Press: Chicago, IL, pp. 62-
100. Also, Introduction to African Civilization, by John G. Jackson, Citadel 
Press: Secaucus, NJ, 1974, pp. 60-92. 
 
4. The main works of G erald Mas sey that deal wit h an cient Egy pt are: Ancient 
Egypt, Light of the World, Vol. I and II, Samuel Weiser, Inc.: New York, N Y. 
Natural Genesis, Vol. I and 11, Samuel Weiser, Inc.: New York, NY, and A Book of 
the Beginnings, Vol. I '& II. 
 
5. Black Man of the Nile and H is Family, by Yos ef ben-Jochannan, Alkebu-lan 
Books: New York, NY. Also, Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization, by John G. 
Jackson, Black Clas sics Press: Balt imore, MD. Also,  The Peopling of Ancient 
Egypt and the Deciphering of Meroitic Script, UNESCO Documents I, on the 
General History of Africa. Also, The Origin of Ancient Egypt, by Cheikh Anta 
Diop, in the Journal of Afri can Ci vilizations, Special Issue on Egypt, 
Rutgers University: Ne w Brunswick, NJ. 
 
6. The Lost Pharaohs of Nubia in Nile Valley Civilizations, by Bruce Williams, edited 
by Ivan V an Serti ma, Journal of African Civilization, New Bruns wick, NJ, 
1985, pp. 24-42. 
SS-80


--- PAGE 83 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
7. This H istory o f Her odotus, translated by George R awlinson' edited by 
Manuel Komonoff, Tudor Publishing Co,.: New York,  NY.  Also , Nile V alley 
Civiliza tions , edited by Oar, Van Sertima, November, 1984 
 
8.  From a speech by W.E.B . DuBois, The American Negro and the Darker 
World, delivered in New York City, April 30, 1957. 
 
9. Who a re t he Ethiopians, by C harles C . S eifert, a n unpubli shed 
manuscript, Schomburg Public Library ' New York 
 
10. The Ruins or a Survey Of the Revoluti on of  Em pir es b y C.F.  Volney, 
Translated by George Underwood, The Pion eer Press: London, 1921, pp. 
12_13. 
 
11. United West Africa (or Africa at th e Bar of the Famil y of  Nations) , by 
Dr. Joseph B. Danquah., privately publi shed, Ghana, 1927, p. 1. 
 
12. Essays in Ancient  Eg yptian S tudies, by Dr. Jaco b H.  Carruth ers, 
Timbuctoo Publis hers: Los Angeles, pp. 45-55.  Also, Africa: Mo ther o f 
Western Civilization, by Dr. Yo sef ben- Jochannan. Alk ebu-lan Book s: Ne w 
York. Also,  Africa in the Roman  Empire, by I.M. Barton, Ghana University 
Press: Accra, Ghana,  1972, pp. 15-39. 
 
13. An o ften-quoted e xcerpt from Jonat han. Swift's writ ings; however, the 
book has never been identified. 
 
14. The Changing Af rican Hi storical Tradition, an essay i n The Journal of 
Human Relations, \/ol. 8, Nos. 3 & 4, publishe d by Central State Colleg e: 
Wilberforce, O hio, 1960. 
 
15. A booklet, Preparation of a General History of Africa, printed by the workshops 
of UNESCO, Paris, 1979, p.. 3. 
 
16. Modern Falsification of History, by Cheikh Anta Diop, Chapter III in his book, 
The African Origin of Civilizati on: M yth or Reality , Law rence Hill and Co.: 
Westport, CN ' pp. 43-84. Also, A History of Egy pt, by James Henry Bre asted, 
Bantam Books Edition: New York, NY. pp. 1-122. Also, The Dwellers of the Nile, by 
A.E. Wallis Budge, Dover Publications: New York, NY, pp. 1-50. Also S ee' 
African Saga, by Stanlake Samkange, Abingdon P ress: Nashville, TN, 1971, 
p. 25; and Africa in History, MacMillan Co.: New York, NY, 1969, p. 69. 
 
17. The Progress and Evolut ion of Man i n Africa, by Dr. L. S.B. Leakey, Oxford 
University Press: London, 1961, p. 1. 
SS-81


--- PAGE 84 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
18. J. Desmond Clark, The Huxley Memorial Science Lecture, delivered at the 
London S chool  of E conomi cs and Poli tical S cience, N ovember 7, 1974. 
 
19. The Afric an Contribution, Part 1, by John W. Weatherwax, Bryant  
Foundation, Los Angeles, 1966. 
 
20. This Histor y of  Her odotus, Translated by George R awlinson, edited by 
Manuel  Komonoff, Tudor Publishing Co.: New York, 1932. 
 
21. Ibid. 
 
22. They Came Before Columbus: The Af rican Presence in An cient America, 
by lvan Van Sertima, Random House: New York, 1 976, p p. 1 -18. A lso, The 
Black Discovery of America, by Mic hael Bradley, Pers onal Li brary: Toronto, 
Canada. Als o, Progress and Evol ution of  Man i n Africa,  by L.S. B.  
Leakey, Oxford University Press: New York, NY, 1961, pp. 27-50. 
 
?3.  People of the Lake: Mankind and I ts Beginning, by Richard E. Leakey 
and Roger Lewin, A von B ooks: N ew Y ork, N Y, 1 . 983, pp. 90-114. Also, 
Lucy. The Beginning of Humankind, by Donald Johanson and Maitl and 
Edey, Warner Book s: N ew York, NY, 19 81, pp. 309-340. Also, The Search 
for Earl y M an, article in Speciai ISSUE) O f Nationa l Geogra phic  
Magazine , December, 1985, Vol. 168, No. 5. Als o, Black Man of the Nile 
and His F amily, by Y osef ben-Jochannan, /\lkebu-Ian Books: New York, 
NY, 1981 , pp. 1-76. Also, The Origin of the Ancient Eg yptians, by Cheikh Anta 
Diop, article in Special Issue o f Journal of African Civilizat ions, November,  
1982, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 9-37. Also, African Beginnings, by Oliv ia V lahos, 
Fawcett World Library: Grenwick, CN,        1967, pp. 29-43. Also, Introduction to 
African Civilizations, by John G. Jackson, Citadel P ress: Secaucus, NJ, 1974, 
pp. 37-59. Also, Africa in Classical Antiquity, edited by L. Thompson and J. 
Ferguson, Ibadan Universi ty Press  Ibadan. Niger ia, 1969, pp. .63-80. Also, 
Africa in t he Iron Age, by Roland O liver, Cam bridge Un iversity Pres s: Ne w 
York, NY, 197n pp. 1-3i . 
 
24. A History of the Modern World, by R.R. Palmer and Joel Colton, Alf red A. 
Knopf: New York, 1956. 
 
`25 A Tropic al Depende ncy, by Lady Lugard, Cass Limi ted, London, quoted in 
the book, Benvenuto Cellini Had No Pre judice A gainst Bronze , Wa verly 
Press: Baltimore, 1943, pp. 6-13. 
 
26 The Destruction of Black Civilization, by Chancellor WiI!iams, Third World Press: 
Chicago, 1974, p. 62. 
SS-82


--- PAGE 85 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
27. The Destruction of Black Civilization, by Chancellor Williams, Third World Press: 
Chicago, IL, 1974, pp. 62-124. Also, The Lost Pharaohs of Nubiz, by B ruce 
Williams, Archaeology Magazine, Sept-Oct, 1980, pp . 12 -22. Al so Ethiopia 
and the Origin of Civilizat ion, by John G. Jackson, Black Class ic Pr ess: 
Baltimore, M D, pamphlet. 
 
28. The Egypt of the Hebrews and Herodotus, by Reverend A.H. Sayce. 
 
29. World's Great Men of Colo r 3000 B.C. to 1946 A .D., by J. A. Roger s. Also,  
Imhotep, God of Medicine, 1947, pp. 1-3. Also, A History of Egypt, by James 
Henry Br easted, Bant am Matrix edition : New Yor k, NY, 1967 , pp . 61 -148. 
Also, Black Man of the Nile and His Family, by Yosef ben-Jochannan, Alk ebu-
lan Books:  New Yor k, NY, 1981, pp. 1- 60. Als o, The Pri ests of Anci ent 
Egypt, by Serge Sauneron, Grove Press: New York, NY, 1960, pp. 29-52. 
 
30. Who Is This King of Glory, by Alvin Boyd K uhn, Academy  Press: Eliz abeth, NJ, 
1944, pp. 1-47. Also, Shadow of the Third Century, by Alvin Boyd Kuhn, 
Academy Press: Elizabeth, NJ. Also, African Origins of t he Major Western 
Religions, by Yosef ben-Jochannan, Alkebu-lan Books: New York, NY, 1970, 
pp. 1-35, and Africa: Mother of Western Civilization, by Yosef ben-Jochannan,  
Alkebu-lan Books: New York, NY, pp. 1-40. Also, Ancient Egypt the Light of the 
World, by Gerald Massey, Weiser Publ ishers: New York, NY, 1970. Also, 
Christianity Before Christ, by John  G. Ja ckson , 1985, pp. 173-218. 
 
31. World's Great Men of Color, by J .A. Roger s, Vol. 1, pp. 57- 64. 
 
32. A Brief Histor y of Anci ent Eg ypt, by Zaky Iskander and Alexander 
Badewry , Thir d Edit ion, Cair o, 1954, entir e book.  
 
33. World's Great Men of Color, by J .A. Roger s, Vol. 1, pp. 57- 64. 
 
34. From the unpublis hed res earch not ebooks of  histor ian, William  Leo 
Hansberry. 35. Ibid. 
 
36. World's Great Men of Color, by J.A. Rog ers, MacMillan an d Co .: New Yor k, 
pp. 57-66. Also, The Black Woman: A Figure in World History, by John H enrik  
Clarke, Essence Magazine, May, 1971. Also, A History of Egypt, by James 
Henry Breasted, Bantam B ooks: New York, 1967. Also, The Cultura l Unity 
of Black Africa, by Cheikh Anta Diop, Thi rd World Press: Chicago, pp. 115-
116. Also, Treasures of Tutankhamen, by I.E.S. Edwards, Penguin Books: New 
York, 1976. 
SS-83


--- PAGE 86 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
37. Topics in West African History, by Adu Boahen, Lo ngmans,  Green & Co.: 
London, 1966, p. 12. 
 
38. Timbuctoo the M ysterious, by Felix Du Bois, Negro University Press: New 
York, 1969. Also, Pillars of Et hiopian History, by William Leo Hansberry, 
edited by Joseph E. Harr is, Howard  Un iversity Pre ss: W ashington, D .C., 
1981, pp. 1-30. Also, The Wonderful Ethiopians of the Ancient Cushite Empire, 
by Drusilla Dunjee H ouston, Bl ack Classi cs Press: Balti more, pp. 1 -53. Also , 
Ethiopia and the Orig in of Civilization, by John G. Jackso n, Blac k Clas sic 
Press: Baltimor e, pamphlet. Also, Essays in Ancient Eg yptian Studies, by 
Jacob H. Carruthers, T imbuctoo Publishers: Los Angeles, pp. 45-55. 
 
39. The History and Description of Africa, by Leo Africanus, Hakluyt Society, Vol. 1, 
2, 3, 1896. 
 
40. The Contribution of the Negr o to Human Civiliza tion, by Alexander Cham-
berlain. Also, The Story of Old Ghana, Mali and Songhay, by R.J. Wingfield, 
Cambridge Universi ty Press: London, 1957. Also, West Africa Since 1000 A.D., 
by F.K. Bush, MacMillan and Co.: London, 1974. Also, Topics in Western African 
History, by A. Boahen, Longmans:  New York, 1969. Also, The University of 
Sankore at Timbuctoo: A Neglected Achievement in Black Intellectual History, 
y John Henrik Clarke, Journal of Western Black Studies, 1977, Vol. l, No. 2, pp. 
142-147. Also, United West Africa (or Africa) at the Bar of the Family of Nations, 
by Dr. Joseph B . Danquah, pri vately published, Ghana, 1927. 
 
41. Ghana, The Morning After, by K . Budu-Acquah, Goodwin P ress, 1960. 
 
42. Ibid.'  
 
43.  bid.  
 
44. Ibid. 
 
45.  Capitalism and Slavery, by Eric Williams, Pedigee Bo oks: New York, 1980, p. 
4. Eric Wi lliams is quoting, in turn, from Lectures on Colonization, by H.  
Merivale, Oxford University P ress: London, 1928  edition, p. 262. 
 
46.  Famous A merican N egroes, by Langst on Hughes Dodd-M ead and Co.: 
New York, 1954. Also, Great Negroes, Past and Present, by Russell L. Adams, 
AfroAmerican Publishing Co.: Chicago, 1969. 
 
47.  White Servitude in the United States, an article by Lerone Bennett, Jr., in Essence 
Magazine, November, 1969. 
SS-84


--- PAGE 87 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
 
48. New York Times, August 2, 1964, a com ment ma de by the Rever end Ky le 
Haselden, Editor of the Christian Century Magazine. 
 
49. A Brief History of the Negro in  the United States, an essay by John Hope 
Franklin. 
 
50. Black Reconstruction in America, 1860-1880, by Dr. W.E.B. DuBois, Meridia n 
Books, The World P ublishing Co .: Cleveland, 1965, pp. 3-16. 
 
51. The Call for Leadership, a speech delivered by Lor en Miller, at Stanford 
University, California, 1962. 
 
52. The Miseducation of the Negro, by Dr. Carter G. Woodson. 
 
53. The Education of the Negro Prior to 1861, by Dr. Carter G. Woodson.  
 
54. Tom-Tom, by John W. Vandercook. 
 
55. The Impact of the African on the New World: A Reappraisal, by John Henr ik 
Clarke, The Black Scholar, February, 1973, pp. 32- 39. Also, The Influence of 
African Cultural Continuity on the Sl ave Revolts in South America and the 
Caribbean Islands, Conf erenc e paper prepar ed by  John Henr ik Clar ke and 
delivered before the Thir d Internationa l Congr ess of Africanists, Addis 
Ababa, Ethiopia, Decem ber 9-19, 1973. Als o, The Ame rican Negr o 
Reference Book, edited by John P. Davis, Prentice Hall and Co.: New York, NY, 
1966. Also, Black Reconstruction in America 1860-1880, by W.E. B. Du Bois, 
Meridian B ooks: The W orld Publishing Company: Cleveland, 1965, pp. 3-
16. Also, Reconstruction After the Civil War, by John Hope Franklin, The 
University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, 1961, pp. 152-173. 
SS-85


--- PAGE 88 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
INDEX 
 
A 
Abu Bekr                                                                              SS-49  
Achoris                                                                                  SS-43  
Aegptcu                                                                                  SS-2  
Aesop                                                                                    SS-10  
African: 
Education                                                                    SS-75 
the Oldest People                                                        SS-1 
Women                                                                       SS-64  
Africanus, Leo                                                                     SS-52  
Age of Chipped Stone (Pre-Period)                                SS-27, 
Dynastic                                                                       SS-28  
Age of the Finished Stone                                                 SS-27  
Ahmose                                                                  SS-33, SS-35  
Akan People                                                                        SS-55  
Akhenaton                                                             SS-37, SS-38  
Al Idrisi                                                                                   SS-49  
Alexander                                                                             SS-43  
Ali, Sonni                                                                               SS-51  
Almoravides                                                                        SS-49 
Amenhates                                                                          SS-36  
Amenhotep I                                                                       SS-35  
Amyrtoeos (King)                                                              SS-42  
Ancient Egypt: Light of the World                                     SS-2  
Ansa, Nana Kwamena (King                           SS-54, SS-55, 
of the Gold Coast)                                               SS-56, SS-59  
Archaic Period                                                                    SS-28  
Askia (King)                               SS-51, SS-52, SS-53 
 
B 
 
Baba, Ahmed                                                                    SS-53  
Balboa                                                                                 SS-61  
Barth, Henry                                                                      SS-52  
Battle of Ceuta                                                                  SS-58  
Ben-Jochannan, Yosef                                       SS-5, SS-32  
Bennett, Jr., Lerone                                                          SS-64  
Black Revolution                                                               SS-73  
Broom, Robert                                                                  SS-18  
Brown, John                                                                      SS-70  
Budu-Acquah, K.                                  SS-54, SS-55, SS-56  
Burnt-Faced People                                           SS-2 
 
C 
 
Caesar, Roman Julius                                      SS-43, SS-44  
Cecil, Sir William                                                               SS-60  
Chamberlain, Alexander                         SS-52 - SS-53 
 
Civilization, African                                               SS-21 - SS-25  
Claridge, W.E.                                                                     SS-55  
Clark, J. Desmond                                                              SS-15  
Cleopatra                                     SS-10, SS-43, SS-44, SS-45  
Colton, Joel                                                                          SS-22  
Cornish, Samuel E.                                                           SS-70  
Crow, Jim                                                             SS-72 
 
D 
 
daGama, Vasco                                                                 SS-58  
Danquah, Joseph B.                                                            SS-7  
Dart, Raymond A.                                                SS-17, SS-18  
Darwin, Charles                                                                  SS-16  
Decadent Period                                                                SS-40  
Diara (Kingdoms)                                                                SS-16  
Diaz, Bartholomew                                                             SS-58  
Diego de Azambuia, Don                                   SS-55, SS-59  
Douglass, Frederick                                                            SS-70  
DuBois, Felix                                                                         SS-50  
DuBois, W.E.B. '                                SS-4, SS-7, SS-8, SS-71, 
                                                       SS-72, SS-73, SS-77, SS-78 
 
E 
 
Edey, Maitland                                                                      SS-15  
Edfu Text                                                                               SS-23  
Egypt: 
Early Names                                                                 SS-2 
History                                                                           SS-26  
EI-Mansur                                                                              SS-53  
Elmina Castle                                                                        SS-59  
Estevanico                                                                              SS-61 
Euphrates                                                                               SS-30 
Euphrates River                                                                SS-35 
 
F 
 
Franklin, John Hope                              SS-68 - SS-69 
Frazer, James                                                                SS-33 
 
G 
 
Gao                                                                                         SS-52  
Garnet, Henry Highland                                                     SS-70  
Garrison, William Lloyd                                                       SS-71  
Garvey, Marcus                                                      SS-73, SS-78  
Ghana                                                                      SS-49 - SS-50 
Gold Coast (now Ghana)                                 SS-54 SS-86 
SS-86


--- PAGE 89 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
SS-87 
 
H 
 
Hall, Prince                                                           SS-69  
Hansberry, William Leo                        SS-40 - SS-41  
Haselden, Kyle                                      SS-67 - SS-68  
Hatshepsut                                              SS-35, SS-36  
Heresy Period                                                      SS-38  
Heretic King                                                          SS-37  
Herodotus                         SS-3, SS-13, SS-17, SS-28  
Horus, King                                                            SS-23  
Houston, Drusilla Dungee                                     SS-4  
Huggins, Willis N.                                                    SS-5  
Hyksos                                        SS-31, SS-32, SS-33 
 
I 
 
lbn-al-As, Amr                                                       SS-46  
Imhotep                                                                  SS-29  
Islam: 
Egypt                                                   SS-46 
West Africa                                     SS-47 - SS-48 
 
J 
 
Jackson, John G.                                       SS-5, SS-33  
Jenne                                                                      SS-52  
Johanson, Donald                                                 SS-15  
John, Prester                                             SS-1 1, SS-58  
Johnson, de Graft                                                    SS-55 
 
K 
 
Kampt (Egypt)                                                          SS-2  
Kashta                                                                     SS-40  
Kemet (Egypt)                                                           SS-2  
Khun, Alvin Boyd                                                    SS-33  
Kingdom of Diara                                                    SS-50  
Kingdom of Sosso                                                  SS-50  
Kushite (King)                                                     SS-42 
 
L 
 
Leakey, L.S.B.                                            SS-14, SS-15  
Leakey, Richard E.                                    SS-15, SS-18  
Lugard, Lady                                       SS-23 - SS-24 
 
M 
 
Mali                                                        SS-48, SS-51 
 
Manetho                                                       SS-28, SS-30  
Mansa Mussa (Emperor of Mali)                           SS-51  
Marcos, Fray                                                            SS-61  
Massey, Gerald                                            SS-2, SS-33  
Memnon                                                                    SS-10  
Menes (Pharaoh)                                        SS-28, SS-43  
Mensah-Sarbah                                                       SS-55  
Meroe                                                                        SS-24  
Messiah                                                                    SS-45  
Middle Ages                                                             SS-47  
Middle-Age-Lethargy                                              SS-48  
Miller, Loren                                                              SS-72  
Mizrain                                                                         SS-2  
Moorish                                                         SS-47, SS-54 
 
N 
 
Nadir (Period in African-                                       SS-72 
American History) 
Nectanebo (Egypt's Ruler)                         SS-43 
Nefertiti (Queen)                            SS-36, SS-37, SS-38, 
                                                                                     SS-39 
New Stone Age                                                         SS-19 
New World                          SS-60, SS-61, SS-62, SS-64 
Niagara Movement                                                   SS-77 
Nile River                                                                      SS-2 
Nino, Pedro Alonso                                                   SS-61 
Nyeneo, Bernard                                                       SS-18 
 
O 
 
Octavius                                                       SS-45 
Osler, Sir William                                                       SS-29 
 
P 
 
Paleolithic Period                                                      SS-26  
Palmer, R.R.                                                              SS-22  
Pan-Africanism                                                          SS-79 
Phillips, Wendell                                                        SS-71  
Piankhi (King of Ethiopia)                                         SS-40 
Portuguese                         SS-54, SS-55, SS-56, SS-58 
Pre-Dynastic Period (Egypt)          SS-27  SS-28 
Prosser, Gabriel                                                        SS-68  
Ptolemaic Period (Egypt)                          SS-43 - SS-46  
Ptolemy                                                                     SS-43  
Punic Wars                                                               SS-42  
Pyramid                                                        SS-28 - SS-30


--- PAGE 90 ---
AUTHOR:  Clarke         SUBJECT:  Social Science 
 
 
SS-88 
 
R 
 
Racism, The Struggle Against                 SS-72, SS-74 
Rameses II                                                             SS-39  
Rogers, J.A.                                                 SS-5, SS-43  
Russwurm, John B.                                    SS-70 
 
S 
 
Sais                                                                            SS-2  
Salmons, Josephine                                              SS-17  
Sankore, University                                   SS-51, SS-52  
Sayce, A.H. (Reverend)                          SS-31 - SS-32  
Seifert, Charles C.                                          SS-5-SS-6  
Shakespeare                                             SS-43, SS-44  
Shepherd Kings (period)                                       SS-31  
Siculus, Diodorus                                                    SS-17  
Slavery, Resistance to                            SS-68 - SS-72  
Smerkhkare                                                            SS-38  
Songhay                                  SS-48, SS-50, SS-51, 
                                                                   SS-52 - SS-56 
Sosso Empire                                            SS-49, SS-50  
Static Period                                                            SS-42  
Sudanic Empire                                                      SS-58  
Swift, Jonathan                                                   SS-10 
 
T 
 
Ta-Merry (Egypt)                                                      SS-2  
Taharka                                                                    SS-40  
Temple: 
Edfu                                                                   SS-23  
Horus                                                                SS-23  
Karnak                                                    SS-39 
Tenkamenin (King)                                     SS-49 
 
Terence                                                                     SS-10  
Thotmose (King)                                                       SS-35  
Tigris                                                                           SS-30  
Timbuctoo                           SS-50, SS-51, SS-52, SS-53 
Truth, Sojourner                                                        SS-70  
Tubman, Harriet                                                        SS-70  
Tut SS-38  
Tutankhamun (King Tut)                                       SS-38 
 
V 
 
Vandercook, John W.                                              SS-79  
Van Sertima, Ivan                                                     SS-19  
Volney, Count                                                         SS-6 
 
W 
 
Walata                                                                       SS-52 
Washington, Booker T.                         SS-72, SS-73, 
                                                                                     SS-77 
Weatherwax, John W.                                              SS-16 
Wesley, Dr. Charles H.                                             SS-11 
West Africa: 
Golden Ages                          SS-49, SS-56 
Islam in                                                SS-47   SS-48  
Williams, Bruce                                              SS-3, SS-25  
Williams, Chancellor                                                 SS-24  
Williams, George Washington                                   SS-4 
Wilson, Woodrow                                                      SS-78 
Woodson, Carter G.              SS-4, SS-74, SS-75, 
                                                                                    SS-76 
 
Z 
 
Zoser (Pharoah)                                                       SS-29 
 
 
1220C

