=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Africans at the Crossroads African World Revolution Dr John Henrik Clarke andMore.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 21
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:56:36.135218
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Dr. John Henrik Clarke  
Jan. 15, 1915 to Jul. 16, 1998 
The following article by excerpted from larger work originally published;  
 Los Angeles Times, 3/03/1991, Part E, Page 1, "Elder Statesmen An Era Is Passing for Five Authors Known for Reclaiming the 
Role of Blacks in History," by Yemi Toure 
John Henrik Clarke  was born in Union Springs, Alabama on New Years Day, 1915. His family came from a long line of 
sharecroppers.  
Clarke noticed that although many bible stories "unfolded in Africa...I saw no African people in the printed and illustrated Sunday 
school lessons," he wrote in 1985. "I began to suspect at this early age that someone had distorted the image of my people. M y 
long search for the true history of African people the world over began."  
That search took him to libraries, museums, attics, archives and collections in Asia, the Caribbean, Europe, Latin America an d 
Africa. 
What he found was that the history of black people is worldwide; that "the first light of human consciousness and the world's first 
civilizations were in Africa"; that the so called Dark Ages were dark only for Europe and that some African nations at the ti me were 
larger than any in Europe; that as Africa sends its children to Europe to study because that is where the best universities are, early 
Greece once sent its children to Africa to study because that was where the best universities were; and that slavery, althoug h 
devastating was neither the beginning nor the end of Black people's impact on the world. 
Clarke gathered his findings into books on such figures as the early 20th century mass movement leader Marcus Garvey, into 
articles with titles like "Africa in the Conquest of Spain" and "Harlem as mecca  and New Jerusalem," and many books including 
American Heritage's two volume "History of Africa." 
While he was teaching at Hunter College in New York and at Cornell University in the 1980's, Clarke's lesson plans became wel l 
known for their thoroughness. T hey are so filled with references and details that the Schomburg Library in Harlem asked for copies. 
Clarke plans to provide them, he said, "so that 50 years from now, when people have a hard time locating my grave, they won't  
have a hard time locating my lessons." 
In 1985, the year of his retirement, the newest branch of the Cornell University Library - a 60 seat, 9,000 volume facility- was named 
the "John Henrik Clarke Africana Library."


--- PAGE 2 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Africans at the Crossroads: African 
World Revolution 
 
PLAY THE LECTURE


--- PAGE 3 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 3 
THE ELDER RADICAL-JOHN HENRIK CLARKE- 
BAD BOY OF ACADEME 
http://www.africanaonline.com/2010/09/john-henrik-clarke-bad-boy-of-academe/ 
THE ELDER RADICAL-JOHN HENRIK CLARKE- BAD BOY OF ACADEME Interview with Ja A. 
Jahannes America‟s most fervent radical in the 1980s and 90s was not found wearing black 
power symbols on tee shirts, or dreadlocks, or in the Nation of Islam. America‟s  most fervent 
black radical did not spew forth racist expletives.  
America‟s foremost black radical was John Henrik Clarke, an 80 year old gentleman from the 
old South who lived in Harlem. He was a professor Emeritus of Hunter College, who trained 
generations of freedom fighters to use their minds and history as weapons of liberation. Born in 
Union Springs, Alabama, January 1, 1915, John Henrik Clarke grew to young manhood in 
Columbus, Georgia. He moved to New York City in 1933, with the ambition of becomin g a 
writer. He studied history and world literature at New York University. From his early years, Dr. 
Clarke studied the history of the world and the history of African people in particular. There was 
no voice in America during this period that spoke singu larly and more authoritatively on the 
plight of African American people than Dr. Clarke. There were few voices that spoke as 
powerfully of African world history.  
Professor Clarke‟s articles and keynote addresses on African and African -American history, 
politics and culture have been published in leading journals throughout the world. Professor 
Clarke has written or edited twenty -two books. The best known are: American Negro Short 
Stories, 1966,  
William Styron‟s Nat Turner: Ten Black Writers Respond, 1968,  Malcolm X: The Man and His 
Times, 1969, Harlem, U.S.A., 1971, Marcus Garvey and the Vision of Africa, 1973, and African 
World Revolution: Africa At The Crossroads, 1991. He was a galvanizing speaker with few 
equals. His credits for founding organization t hat deal with the protection of African and African 
American life alone would have been enough to enshrine him in African  
American history. Yet, he reached young folks and seasoned scholars alike as he traveled 
throughout the world enlightening people abo ut the heritage of African peoples. Teacher, 
philosopher, scholar, lecturer, social activist, Dr. John Henrik Clarke was without peer in 
America history. 
I was privileged to serve as Chair of the Pan African Movement USA (PAMUSA) with Dr. Clarke 
as Co -chair, and took the opportunity on August 23, 1995 to interview him. Knowing his 
advanced age and sometimes failing health, I wanted future generations to hear from him on a 
number of topics related to the African American and Pan African experience. Though Dr . 
Clarke was legally blind, he saw with an appareled clarity the issues that confronted African 
Americans, Africans and their relationship to the world. Below is that interview, unedited.


--- PAGE 4 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 4 
JAHANNES: What are the central problems in American society today?  
CLARKE: The search for definition, direction and political orientation.  
JAHANNES: What kinds of leaders do we need for today in America? In the Black community?  
CLARKE: We need leaders who will give us a new vision of ourselves and our future in relatio n 
to the search for our definition of self and our political orientation.  
JAHANNES: You are in demand as a lecturer around the globe. What are the topics most 
requested of you to address as a public speaker?  
CLARKE: African history, in general, followed by the African family, both at home and abroad, 
and the African Resistance Movements in the 19th and 20th centuries.  
JAHANNES: Since the early days of Black Studies, which you helped pioneer, how far have 
they come?  
CLARKE: Black Studies has made a few steps forward but these have not been giant steps. My 
personal disappointment is how researchers overlook the very rich and available material on the 
African people in world history, in Africa, the Caribbean Island, the United States and the impact 
of the African on Asia, Europe and the Americas.  
JAHANNES: What is your view of the current wave called "multiculturalism?”  
CLARKE: I think it is a lot of educational fakery which has as its mission the mixing of Afr ican 
history with the history of other cultures to the point where the history of African people will no 
longer be outstanding.  
JAHANNES: What is the impact of Africentrism, in your view?  
CLARKE: The whole concept of Africentrism is overestimated. It sho uld have been called 
“African Consciousness” because without African Consciousness we will have no understanding 
of our history and its significance to world history.  
JAHANNES: Has the Black power revolution of the 1960′s been betrayed?  
CLARKE: The Black  power revolution was betrayed from the beginning by its creators. It was 
further betrayed by those that inherited it.  
JAHANNES: What is the legacy of the Civil Rights Movement? 
CLARKE: Frustration, disappointment, broken hopes, broken dreams. „ 
JAHANNES: I will mention some of the issues that invariably characterize any discussion of 
African American life, whether rightly or wrongly, and ask you to comment on them. Welfare.  
CLARKE: Where Black people are concerned welfare is a sham because most of the pe ople in 
this nation one way or another are on some form of welfare.


--- PAGE 5 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 5 
JAHANNES: Drugs in inner cities.  
CLARKE: Drugs are not controlled by the victims. The victims have no way of controlling the 
entry of drugs into this country. The small seller of drugs are the victims in the final analysis.  
JAHANNES: Unwed mothers in the African American community.  
CLARKE: Numerically there are just as many unwed mothers outside of the African American 
community. We need to put more emphasis on this statistic.  
JAHANNES: What is your opinion of historically Black colleges and universities?  
CLARKE: I believe profoundly in the existence of Black colleges and universities because 
people rise and fall within the context of these institutions. Some of these institutions are 
stillborn children who never developed into manhood or womanhood and not a single one of 
them is fully dedicated to teaching students about Africa from an African point of view.  
JAHANNES: Recently you gave some of your papers and books to Clark Atlanta Un iversity. 
Why did you make this gift to Clark Atlanta University and what was included in the collection?  
CLARKE: My personal library of relevant books on African and African American history will go 
to the Robert Woodruff Library at Clark Atlanta University. My personal papers will be deposited 
at the Schomburg Center for the Study of Black Culture in Harlem. The significance of my gift to 
Clark Atlanta is that I was born in Alabama, grew up in Georgia and wanted to make this 
donation to one of the states  that nurtured me. Clark Atlanta has the best facilities for 
maintaining a library of this size.  
JAHANNES: The library at Cornell University is named in your honor. What is the significance of 
this honor to you?  
CLARKE: The significance of this honor to me is that the Africana Center at Cornell, like the 
Department of Black and Puerto Rican Studies is one of my two academic homes. In my three 
years as Distinguished Visiting Professor at Cornell, I not only did some of my best teaching, I 
learned to be a better teacher by becoming a better human being.  
JAHANNES: Can African Americans get a decent education in predominantly white colleges 
and universities?  
CLARKE: African Americans can get a decent "Western Education" in predominantly white 
universities th at they can adapt to their own needs if they have the insight and intellectual 
industry to do so.  
JAHANNES: What do you view as essential to the Black man who would presume to be 
educated?  
CLARKE: Simply, a knowledge of his own people and how they relate  to the people of the 
world.


--- PAGE 6 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 6 
JAHANNES: You have been critical of Islam as a religion, and Arabs as despoilers of Africa? 
Why do you hold these views?  
CLARKE: I hold these views because they are true. The Arabs like all invaders of Africa did 
Africa more harm than good. They have used Islam to subjugate people instead of enhancing 
them spiritually. Islam has and has always been the handmaiden of Arab design. The Arabs 
were in the slave trade before Islam and to some extent they are still in the slave trade today.  
JAHANNES: What is your definition of racism?  
CLARKE: Race is a myth because nature created no races. Racism is a derogatory 
manifestation of this myth and the concept that people by virtue of race are better than other 
people.  
JAHANNES: DuBois said the problem of the 20th century was the problem of race? Is there the 
potential for man to overcome racism in the 21 century?  
CLARKE: DuBois actually said the problem of the 20th century is the problem of the color line. I 
extend his comment by saying that the problem of the 20th century is the problem of the culture 
line and the political line. We can overcome the problem of race by becoming enough to ignore 
racists or isolate them.  
JAHANNES: As a writer of fiction, you have publish ed over fifty short stories that have been 
distributed in this country and abroad, including your best known short story, "The Boy Who 
Painted Christ Black," which been translated into more than a dozen languages. Why have 
never written a novel?  
CLARKE: I have written several novels. None of them have been published. My main novel, 
Journey to the Fair, deals with a young kid who hoboes across country on his way to the 
Chicago World‟s Fair. It is somewhat autobiographical and it is some of the best writing I have 
ever done. For over 20 years I have been trying to get back to it.  
JAHANNES: Of your many published works, short stories, poems, essays, histories, etc. which 
of them are you most proud of and why?  
CLARKE: Africans At The Crossroads: Notes For An African World Revolution. This is the book 
I have always wanted to write.  
JAHANNES: Some critics, like historian Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., Pulitzer Prize winning 
historian, in his new book The Disuniting Of America: Reflections On A Multicultural Societ y, 
sees the African American intellectual discovery of self as a hustle by misguided and 
miseducated Black social scientists. Schlesinger has scoffed at your view of history and implied 
that it is less than accurate. How do you respond?  
CLARKE: The accura cy of my view of history is what frightens Professor Schlesinger. It is the 
truth of it that he cannot live with. The truth is that a bunch of frightened people came out of 
Europe to colonize the truth about the world. The truth of my history exposes the l ie of their 
history.


--- PAGE 7 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 7 
JAHANNES: You have visited every country in Africa except South Africa. Have you deliberately 
avoided South Africa?  
CLARKE: Yes. I have deliberately avoided South Africa because some of the political activists 
have asked me to do so. They believe some whites would misinterpret my visit to their 
detriment. I have not visited South Africa out of respect for their wishes.  
JAHANNES: What are the prospects for peace and democracy in South Africa?  
CLARKE: There are no prospects for peace a nd democracy in South Africa as long as the 
power is held by whites and white -approved blacks. After the revolution, which must come, and 
it is a revolution that Africans must win, I hope you will ask me the same question again.  
JAHANNES: You have been ca lled "radical" often. What is your view of a radical in America? 
When people call you a radical what do you think they mean by it?  
CLARKE: I think they mean a person that dares to disagree with the norm, when the norm does 
not serve the best interests of the people. I believe a radical is one who dares to search for the 
truth, expose it, live with it, even if it is against him or herself.  
JAHANNES: It is reputed that although you are 85% blind, you read about ten books each 
week?  
CLARKE: In fact I have less than 2% vision which makes me 98% blind. I read by either having 
books read to me or I read them on my reading machine for the blind or from cassettes sent by 
the Lighthouse For the Blind.  
JAHANNES: What books would you recommend as essential to read for a sound grounding in 
African history and African American survival issues? 
CLARKE: For a good grounding in African history and African America survival, I recommend 
some simplified works first. Lerone Bennett‟s‟ Before the Mayflower is well written and  is good 
reading. They should also read John Hope Franklin‟s From Slavery to Freedom. I would 
recommend for a good overview of slavery they should read John Blassingame‟s The Slave 
Community, and the books by Carter G. Woodson should not be ignored. Especi ally his works, 
The Negro in Our History, and The Miseducation of The Negro. In African history, a few books 
would serve as an overview. John G. Jackson‟s Introduction to African Civilizations, Joseph 
Harris‟ African People and Their History. The heavy wei ghts in the fields, Chancellor William‟s 
Destruction of Black Civilizations, and his neglected work, The Birth of African Civilization. 
Another heavy weight is Cheikh Anta Diop: definitely read his African Origins of Civilization: 
Myth or Reality and his t he last work he completed before his death, Civilization or Barbarism. 
For an understanding of Caribbean history, definitely read Eric Williams, The Caribbean from 
Columbus to Castro, and his work, Capitalism to Slavery: Documents in West Indian History. 
For the importance of the African in world history, they should read three special issues of the 
Journal of African Civilizations, edited by Ivan Van Sertima read Africa in Early America, Africa 
in Early Asia, and Africa in Early Europe. Reading these books  will eventually lead to other 
books. Reading books should be like an addiction. It should take over your life and you should 
never let it go. Reading is the only positive addiction I know.


--- PAGE 8 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 8 
JAHANNES: What is your view of what is needed to get the masses of African Americans out of 
this self-destructive abyss they seem to be in?  
CLARKE: First, we would have to understand that war has been declared on the African 
American family and this war shows no mercy. If we are to stop the war or slow it down, we 
might have to break some TVs or burn some Bibles. Religion, which should be our spiritual, 
physical, and our financial liberation, is so large in our lives we are imprisoned by it. No people 
will prosper without a knowledge of their history that they can respect. This is where you start to 
use history to tell your time of day, wherever you are.  
JAHANNES: What is the quality of African American leadership, today? 
CLARKE: As a people, we have more leaders and less leadership than other people. A lot of 
people we accept as leaders are showmen, some good, some bad.  
JAHANNES: Some names seem synonymous with leadership of African American people. 
Please comment on a few of them.  
JAHANNES: Marcus Garvey.  
CLARKE: Marcus Garvey was the finest leader to emerge in the African world in the 20th 
century.  
JAHANNES: W. E. B. DuBois. CLARKE: DuBois was an intellectual leader, emphasis on 
intellectual, and the finest leader of this caliber we produced outside of Africa.  
JAHANNES: Martin Luther King Jr.  
CLARKE: King was a great spiritual leader and one of America‟s greatest theologians, black or 
white.  
JAHANNES: Farrakhan.  
CLARKE: I consider Farrakhan part leader, part showman, part faker.  
JAHANNES: Jesse Jackson. CLARKE: I am not too clear where Jesse  Jackson is leading us or 
if he is worthy of being called a leader. Of all the black men of the 20th century, he had the 
finest opportunity of becoming a leader. He sacrificed this potential to the altar of his ego.  
JAHANNES: Is violence ever necessary in  the African American struggle for equality and 
freedom in America?  
CLARKE: Among all people in their struggle for freedom there is a time for violence. It cannot be 
avoided. Violence at the right time is right, at the wrong time, it is wrong.  
JAHANNES: Why haven‟t African Americans and Africans on the continent come together for 
economic and political self help?


--- PAGE 9 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 9 
CLARKE: Africans and African Americans have not come together because both of them are 
still listening to the voices of their former slave mast ers and their former colonial master. You 
cannot help yourself until you know yourself. You cannot change the world until you change 
yourself.  
JAHANNES: Why does the Caribbean, with its heavy African descendant populations, continue 
to be exploited by white America and European economic interests? 
CLARKE: Caribbean people have a color fascination different from other people living outside of 
Africa and too many of them believe white is right.  
JAHANNES: What is the real threat of Cuba to the U.S.?  
CLARKE: The real threat of Cuba, as it is conceived, is that the Cubans might develop a type of 
government that is viable without it being capitalist. People have a right to develop a form of 
government that suits their needs but America considers this a threat i n the western 
hemisphere.  
JAHANNES: Why has Haiti suffered so profoundly and so long? How do we end Haiti‟s 
suffering?  
CLARKE: Haiti still suffers because the U. S. and Europe do not want the example of a former 
slave state to be successful anywhere in the world.  
JAHANNES: You have said that you believe white men do not like women. What do you mean 
by that?  
CLARKE: Their treatment of women manifest a desire to either dominate or avoid them. They 
consider women a threat to their manhood. Because they hav e a question with their manhood, 
they created a situation that would not have existed if they were secure.  
JAHANNES: In your book African World Revolution: Africans At The Crossroads you ask the 
question "Can African People Save Themselves?" Can they? What will it take?  
CLARKE: No people will save themselves until they know themselves and are willing to make 
sacrifices on behalf of themselves.  
JAHANNES: Why is it that little is known of African peoples in Asia, in Europe, in the Polynesian 
and Melanesian islands?  
CLARKE: Little is known of Africans throughout the world because we live in a Eurocentric 
intellectual universe. The rulers of this universe intent to project the concept that the world 
waited in darkness for Europeans to bring the light. The exact opposite is true.  
JAHANNES: Is there still a crisis among African American intellectuals?  
CLARKE: If ignorance is a crisis then the answer is "yes." I am not a believer in Harold Cruse‟s 
(author of The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual) imagined crisi s among black intellectuals; his 
crisis is more about Harold Cruse‟s personal intellectual crisis.


--- PAGE 10 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 10 
JAHANNES: Who are the scholars you most respect?  
CLARKE: The present day scholars I most respect are Jacob Carruthers and his new work on 
Egypt and the Car ibbean Islands, especially Haiti. Sterling Stuckey, his new approach to slave 
cultures and the ideology of Black Nationalism. Anderson Thompson‟s new approach to the 
politics of the civil rights movement. Joseph Harris, of Howard University, and his approa ch to 
African world history. Among the African historians that I have great respect for are Theophile 
Obenga, protégé of Cheikh Anta Diop; Father Mbane, a neglected Jesuit priests who writes 
more history than he teaches; and Joseph Gazebo, who is only second to Cheikh Anta Diop in a 
new approach to African history.  
JAHANNES: Who have been some of your protégés?  
CLARKE: Both Jacob Carruthers and Iva Carruthers of Chicago. Frank Scruggs, a young lawyer 
in Florida. Professor William Drake of Virginia Commonw ealth University, and Professor Ralph 
Crowder of Purdue University, Professor Dona Richards of Hunter College, and many others.  
JAHANNES: Do African American writers have any obligation to the African American 
experience?  
CLARKE: Yes, as much obligation as all other writers and the same obligation as other African 
Americans.  
JAHANNES: What would you want your legacy to be? 
CLARKE: That I used my life to make a positive statement about the right of African people to 
be sovereign rulers of that piece of geography called Africa and to walk this earth with peace 
and dignity, giving the same respect to others that they would ask for themselves. c. 1995 by Ja 
A. Jahannes 
© 2010 by Ja A. Jahannes.  
Dr. Ja A. Jahannes is a psychologist, educator, writer, and a social critic. He is a frequent 
columnist for numerous publications. His work has appeared in such diverse publications as the 
Journal of Ethnic Studies, Vital Speeches, the Journal of the National Medical Association, 
Ebony, the Black Scholar, Encore, Class, Black Issues in Higher Education and the Saturday 
Review. He was national chair of the Pan African Movement U.S. A. (PAMUSA) with Dr. John 
Henrik Clarke as co-chair in 1992 and 1993. Dr. Jahannes has lectured throughout the U. S., in 
Africa, Asia, South America and the Middle East. Please contact the author for questions and 
comments at Jahannes@Africanaonline.com 
PhotoCredit: Roland L. Freeman. Photo Content: Dr. Asa Hilliard III; Dr. Ja A.  Jahannes, Chair, 
Pan African Movement USA (PAMUSA); and Dr. John Henrik Clarke, Co -chair, at Pan African 
Conference, Colony Square Hotel, Atlanta, GA 1993.


--- PAGE 11 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 11 
 
 
 
Portrait of a Liberation Scholar 
by John Henrik Clarke 
 http://www.africawithin.com/clarke/portrait_of_a_liberation_scholar.htm 
Almost from the beginning as a child I started to raise essential questions inside myself about 
the things I observed, and about the things people declared "true" and literally dared me to 
question. These who would impose the "truth" on me had no control over me when I was alone. 
I would question their truth and keep my conclusions to myself. I did not argue with them about 
what I thought or felt because I never told them. I lived inside myself seemingly forever and 
hoped for the day when I could speak my mind. 
  
Essential Questioning 
The earliest and most persistent question that came to my mind while growing up in a strict 
Baptist household and a very religious family was why do we use God to excuse so many man-
made things, so much man-made misery? People in my family, community and race attribute to 
God a lot of things which are ungodly, and then claim that God will straighten them out in the by-
and-by. We seem not to want to understand  that God did not mess things up in the first place. 
We have made a folklore out of this limited view of God and out of God -dependency as a 
spiritual necessity when we gave up on ourselves or others. We say that we have done all you 
can for them and then l eave them alone. God will fix it by -and-by. Why must God fix something 
that God did not initiate and did not cause? What kind of God is this, or, more precisely, what 
kind of faith is this? 
I believe that if God was merciful enough to give you a brain, two  functioning hands, and two 
legs where you put one in front of the other, then God has given you the facility to take care of 
yourself, to be responsible for your actions and for what happens to you. This is as self -evident 
to me as abilities to taste and to distinguish between a flower and an ear of corn. We use God 
as an excuse for not taking responsibility for our lives. This was not an anti -God argument. We 
have drawn the wrong conclusions from religion. Instead of being a source of liberation, our 
religions have become psychological traps. It is ironic that people have to leave religion as it 
was (and still is) practiced in order to understand and appreciate its meaning and to enjoy its 
benefits. 
While in Baptist Sunday school, I began to look at the im ages they presented of God—that God 
was all loving, and that God was universal. If these claims are true, why do some people work 
very little and have so much, and why do others work so hard and have so little? If he is 
merciful, show me the mercy in this case? As a child, I could not ask these questions externally 
because I would be slapped down and it was impolite. I would be called "child of the devil."


--- PAGE 12 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 12 
Something grew in me early that I would have to grow to adulthood to understand. I am as 
religious as any person on earth and I had something that was above religion—spirituality! I was 
spiritual and that spirituality is the big umbrella under which religions function and out of which 
religions came. To be truly spiritual makes you a part of all religions without having to adhere to 
the mythology in any of them. But while growing up I had to brood and keep these impressions 
to myself. I had not worked out the images of all those white angels, a white God and white 
saints. I could not understand how of all the people who died down through the years, why not a 
single black or brown person got into heaven? Heaven was snow -white and even the devil was 
red. 
What I grew up brooding over and confused by were the millions of impressions, ideas, and 
beliefs that see myself and my people outside the context of history. It appeared that we had no 
place in history, no place in religion, had contributed nothing to civilization and, therefore, could 
not exist or be acknowledge as of value as human beings in the present. Th is is what drove me 
to study history seriously and at an early age in my life. After reading the Bible my curiosity led 
me to encyclopedias, almanacs, and out of town newspapers. I used to even read movie 
magazines. Since I had good memory, I could remember the names of all of the movie stars, as 
well as the names of the stars' wives. This was pure nonsense and rubbish of no meaning to 
black people or to anyone else. Devoting my mind to nonsense occurred in school as well. 
Because I was a good student, I had to memorize all of the state capitals. I had to ask essential 
questions inside myself amidst a clutter of irrelevant information that those around seemed to 
think important. 
When it became apparent to me that I wanted to do more serious reading, I left " Jim Crow" 
Columbus, Georgia, when I was eighteen. There was very little to hold me since my mother had 
died in 1922 when I was about seven. She was from the Mays family out of which came the 
famous baseball player, Willie Mays. My father's income was not e nough for us to survive on. 
So she earned extra money as a washerwoman taking in white people's laundry. She did whole 
bundles from one white family for one dollar —wash and iron. Sometimes they would throw in 
the soap. Now, these same white people would ca ll us "lazy people" on welfare. Yet for 300 
years during our slavery and during "Jim Crow," white people were on welfare, and we paid for 
it. 
After my mother nearly worked herself to death, I will never forget seeing her in that racially 
segregated hospita l. The hospital was totally inadequate and it stank, literally stank. No one 
deserved to be put in such a place. But there she was, a beautiful woman, dying needlessly 
because whites denied us access to adequate hospital facilities. She died from pellagra,  a 
disease caused by insufficient diet. It was bad enough being poor, but it was far worse being 
regarded as so utterly worthless as not even to deserve to be alive. 
My mother was a beautiful quiet woman, who loved all of her children and tried to keep it a 
secret that I was her personal favorite. She told me so on her last day in the hospital. I knew 
that she would never come home. I hate hospitals to this day. Despite our short time together, 
she and two other women helped me to form a positive concept of  myself. Besides my mother, 
there was my great grandmother who witnessed the last slaves bought over from Africa, and 
finally there was my fifth grade teacher who taught me to believe in myself. I feel the presence 
of those three women even today. 
My mother's death was not the only event that prompted me to leave the South. There was my 
own circumstance. After my mother died. My father went back to Union Springs, Alabama,


--- PAGE 13 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 13 
chose another wife, and returned to Columbus, Georgia. I finished grammar scho ol, and then I 
had to work because my family needed my financial support. Our poverty did not care that I was 
a good student. My jobs were to haul wood and take breakfast to my father and his co -workers. 
He worked in a brickyard where the men had to go to work very early. I would go to their 
houses, take their breakfasts to the men, and then go to school. There were six men. At the end 
of the week, I would get five cents from each. So I made 30 cents a week. 
I was fortunate to be able to go to school at all . Only one child in each family living outside the 
city limits could go to the city school because you had to pay $3.75 for a book fee. My father 
only made $12 to $15 per week and we needed every penny of it. So I was the one chosen from 
my family. All of my brothers and sisters believe to this day that they should have been chosen 
to go to school. For example, the last time I saw my brother, Alvin, in Detroit, we were eating 
together and I answered a question for his wife. He said smugly, "my brother went to the city 
school"—meaning that I had a terrible advantage over him. 
I read as much as I could by picking up books from the white people I worked for and by 
borrowing books. Most of these white people had books for decoration and had not read them. I 
would go to the public library as if I was on an errand for a white person. Blacks could not use 
the library at the time. I would forge their name to take books out. My experience just calls to 
mind that the story has yet to be told of what black people in the  South did in order to survive. 
We lived in an atmosphere tantamount to Nazism right here in the U.S. I swore that I would get 
out of the South when I could. Eighteen years was long enough. 
Being "Taken In" 
Miss Roselee took me in. She was a maid and coo k in one of the white homes that I did chores 
in. I went to Miss Roselee and stayed there for four years. She had an old boarding -house that 
was an undeclared house of prostitution. That did not faze me because the ladies were nice to 
me and gave me school , lunch and church money. "Taking in" was a custom and substitute for 
adoption among blacks in the South. "Taking in" a young person was part of our humanity that 
we then took for granted and has now passed from us unnoticed. This was part of our extended 
family practices. But now extended families can no longer afford to do this for economic 
reasons. 
We have not discussed "taking in" and other indigenous customs as part of how we survived. 
How is it that people would just take in a child with no paperwork and raise that child as their 
own straight up into manhood or womanhood, ask no questions, and not be compensated in 
any way? The people who explain blacks to white people have ignored our customs, and the 
things we did to survive and, in doing so, have do ne black people a great disservice. Clearly, I 
was better off "taken in" at a house of prostitution than I was at home because of our poverty. 
While "taken in" I was able to go to school where I completed the eighth grade. 
I traveled by boxcar to Chicago in an unsuccessful attempt to get into the World's Fair in 1932. If 
you did not know anyone in Chicago to stay with and had no money, the police would not let you 
enter the city. I found myself back on a freight-train and on my way to Jersey City—a nickel ferry 
ride from New York City. I have lived in New York for over 50 years. What attracted me initially 
was the opportunity to go to WPA school at night. It did not matter then whether or not I 
graduated from high school. What was important to me was that I could read anything I wanted 
and as much as I could and could question anyone. My readings and associations led me to 
further questioning.


--- PAGE 14 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 14 
  
 
Radical Associations 
I was immediately drawn to radical elements. They were the only ones who acknowledge our 
plight and attempted to do anything about it. I became active in the Young Communist League. I 
was never a member of the Communist Party, contrary to what many believed. As a matter of 
principle, if I had been a member of the Communist Party, I would have said so unashamedly. I 
was active with radicals who were committed to doing something. This is where those who 
claimed that I was a communist got mixed up. There were communist -sponsored activities 
where non-communists like myself were more effective and more a ctive. For example, I was 
active in the Scottsboro and Angelo Herndon cases as a young street speaker and fundraiser. I 
was at the rallies and did things automatically. 
My first act with the Young Communist League was to prevent Henry Winston and family fr om 
being evicted from their Lower East Side apartment. The law was written in such a way that if 
you are evicted and someone put your things back in the house, the marshal had to wait 
another thirty days to give you another eviction notice. In three days y ou could find another 
place to stay. So I was head of a group of young Turks who put their furniture back in the house. 
Henry and I remained friends, though we had some strong disagreements about Marxism. 
When Henry wrote his book, Strategy for a Black Age nda, I was the only one to raise the 
question of whose black agenda? I had arrived at an important position in the 1930s—a position 
that has been verified by events in the communist world today. Communism and socialism were 
not monoliths to be applied in t he same way in all nations. Each country will have to approach 
socialism based on its own needs and character. Poland is a good example. No matter how 
communist Poland becomes, they are going to remain Catholic. You can say religion is the 
opiate of the pe ople and I might agree with you, but that will not change anything. Poles are 
going to remain Catholic. You can declare that Russia is an atheist nation all you want, but there 
are going to continue to be millions of religious people in Russia, including 30 million Moslems. I 
told Henry and other communists that they had to work from reality, not their ideological 
declarations. So if black people become socialist, we become Baptist socialists, Methodist 
socialists, holy-roller socialists, Father Divine socialists, and Moslem socialists. That is reality. 
But a more telling critique of the left is in the study of African tribal societies —a study that Karl 
Marx missed. It is very clear that African tribal societies have successfully functioned for their 
people far longer than any nation devised by European thinkers. These tribal societies in their 
structure and administration were fundamentally socialist. They were socialist not only before 
Karl Marx was born, but before Europe was born. They did not wait for so meone to ordain them 
"socialist" and say that they were "socialist." They never said once that they were socialist —
they did not have to. Examine African tribal societies before they were interfered with by 
foreigners. There is nothing in socialism that the y did not have. Africans had the purest form of 
socialism that ever existed on this earth. 
So I have no problem with socialism if you take it from its African universal base. But if you take 
it solely from its European base, then I have an extreme problem with it. Then it is still based on 
the assumption of European dominance of the world. What European ideologies of the left and 
right do not understand is that they assume continued European dominance. They believe that,


--- PAGE 15 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 15 
if the world is to be socialist, it will be socialist under European dominance. If it is to be 
capitalist, it is to be capitalist under European dominance. I have problems with both 
assumptions. In contrast, if Africa had built its own enduring socialist societies all over the 
continent, it would be evident by no network of jails, no psychiatrists, no orphanages, and no old 
people's homes. 
All of the social services we in the West have built outside the family would exist inside the 
family if the West had any kind of humanity. African tribal societies were far beyond where we in 
the West are right now and beyond where we say we hope to go. So it is time to examine what 
Africans had as a basis that we still need. Clearly we need to stop calling African societies 
"primitive." If they were primit ive, why is it that their social order came before and has outlived 
every form of government and social order that this alleged Western civilization has ever 
devised? The key to all of our salvations as a people here, in Africa, and in Europe may be in 
the social wisdom of African tribal peoples. 
Harlem Street Speakers 
When I came to New York I first learned of the Harlem "street speakers." I do not know of any 
other place in the country where there was this tradition. The "street speakers" were men who 
stood on street corners expounding on the topics of the day. They had to be knowledgeable, 
relevant, good speakers, and able to hold their own, because their audiences were not passive. 
People would speak up from the crowd, and boo them away if they were outdone. The speakers 
on Lenox Avenue were considered to be the junior or "undergraduate" speakers. The Speakers 
on Seventh Avenue were the senior graduate speakers —the elite. You had to speak first on 
Lenox Ave. And could do so for years before you could get to Seventh Ave. 
On Lenox Ave. there was Ras DeKiller, who I believe became the role model for the street 
speaker in Ralph Ellison's book, Invisible Man. On Seventh Ave., Arthur Reed was king and 
trained a young man named Ira Kemp. He sold dresses made by  his family from door to door. 
Ira Kemp became the king of street speakers. Also on Seventh Ave. there was a young 
Dominican named Carlos Cook —arrogant as hell and a good speaker. Unknown to the 
audience, Cook's people owned brownstone houses in Harlem and  were slum landlords. I 
coined the phrase "Carlos Cook is a crook." When he saw me in his audience, he would start 
blasting away, "we got to get rid of the traitors in our midst." When I would say something, he 
would turn towards me and say that "this man is a disgrace to the skin he wears." I was the only 
one to say that Carlos Cook was a hustler. Nonetheless, he was a very effective speaker and 
had a segment of the Garvey Movement in his following. Unfortunately, Cook and his Garveyite 
following misinterpreted Garvey. Carlos Cook passed on about 10 years ago. 
 
The Harlem History Club 
My formal introduction to history began in Harlem in the 1930s. I was active in the Harlem 
history club at the H arlem YMCA under Willis N. Huggins. I was fortunate enough to have met 
Arthur Schomburg and remembered reading his famous essay "The Negro Digs up His Past"  
while I was still in Georgia. I can say that it was Arthur Schomburg who taught me the 
interrelation of African history to world history. Willis N. Huggins taught me the political meaning 
of history. I would go to the lectures of William Leo Hansberry on the philosophical meaning of 
black history. The Harlem History Club was literally a graduate level history department with


--- PAGE 16 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 16 
some of the most important figures in black history right there in th e middle of Harlem. I learned 
all that I could. 
Some of the club's publications would include John G. Jackson's and Willis Huggins', "A Guide 
to the Study of African History." In this work, the references on Africa alone made it an important 
contribution. Besides his essay "The Negro Digs up His Past," Schomburg wrote a book entitled 
The New Negro. Huggins and Jackson later wrote an Introduction to African Civilization . I was 
being introduced to material and books I had never seen or heard of before. This would lead me 
to read more deeply. It might surprise you that H.G. Wells' Outline of History, despite its white 
supremacist views, is a good outline of history. It led me to read other work s in history like 
Spingler's Decline of the West  and the early works of Will Durant —the seven-volume Story of 
Philosophy. 
John G. Jackson's works still have a great influence on me and this is evident in my inquiry into 
the role of religion as a force in h istory and the African origins of the legend of the Garden of 
Eden. He was one of the earliest scholars who attempted to separate myth from truth in biblical 
history. See his book Pagan Origins of the Christ Myth  as well as his pamphlet Christianity 
Before Christ—later made into a book. His writing indicates that in some cases biblical stories 
were not true and were not meant to be true. The bible was meant to provide fables and myth to 
illustrate the truth. If you understand the truth from the illustrations, the bible has done what it 
was meant to do. For example, the story of the Exodus is told to illustrate that, at a given hour, 
God will come to the resc ue of his people. It is a story on the ultimate goodness of God to 
rescue his people in their most desperate time. If you have real faith in yourself and God, the 
story is nothing more than that and has served its purpose. 
Of particular value to me were Wi lliam Hansberry's "Sources for the Study of Ethiopian History" 
and the writings of Charles Seiford, especially his unpublished "Who Are the Ethiopians?" In 
addition to the historic readings, I enjoyed a lot of good general writings such as the early fictio n 
of Richard Wright. In fact, my writing style has been influenced by the white writers such as 
Sherwood Anderson, Ernest Hemingway, James Joyce, and other great writers who tried to 
take their writing into other dimensions that otherwise would not have been. 
Dedication 
I appreciate people with insight, white or black, who have looked for the fifth side of a four -sided 
square. This is what I have learned from writers who write well and thinkers who think well. 
Many young people, and older ones as well, have not developed the sense of challenge to seek 
out and find other people who do things well. We can all benefit from being exposed to the 
masters and respect the fact that what they do is something well done. Unfortunately, many 
scholars and writers today  do not see the standard that they have to move up to. I am clearly 
partial to the works, writings, and thinking of our people's freedom movement, but I have no 
hesitation in going outside the movement to get any truth, idea, or theory that I think will ad d to 
what I have learned from my own people. 
The writers and scholars in the Harlem history club were good writers and scholars, who were 
dedicated to their people and to history. They had little comfort or financial advantage. Being 
scholars meant that they had to pursue their work and live with economic uncertainty. There 
was uncertainty in their personal relations as well. They were expected to be ordinary men with 
ordinary interests when they w ere in fact extraordinary in who they were and what they did. 
They were not masochistic, yet many of them suffered at the hands of their wives, children and


--- PAGE 17 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 17 
friends. Despite lack of support and misunderstanding from those closest to them, they stuck to 
what they set out to do as men of dedication. 
The necessity for dedication was expressed some years ago by an Englishman named Edmund 
O'Brian. He said "thinking is at its best when you make a priesthood out of duty." A writer could 
not do his best work before  he understood the priesthood of his endeavor. You cannot express 
ideas well externally until you have made sense of them internally. All of the external material 
measures of success do not motivate or really reward the dedicated scholar. I know O'Brian's 
point well. My deepest disappointment has not been financial or for the years that I could not get 
a teaching position. My disappointment was in the lack of support from the two women I 
married. 
Teaching 
For years I could not get a regular teaching job. I taught in high schools, in the community, and 
in odd-ball places in the Depression years and after I came out of the Army in 1945. I did odd 
jobs for almost 20 years to support myself, my family, and my historical studies and research. 
Finally, in 1949, the administrator at the New School for Social Research had to fund an African 
Studies Center and I was allowed to give courses in the community. Later, I became head of the 
heritage teaching programme for Haryou Act, the first anti-poverty programme in Harlem. Then I 
was training head-start teachers at New York University. 
All of these positions were on soft money lines. When the grant ran out, the job ran out. I could 
get those kind of jobs. I became known for my radical approach to teaching and as a teac her 
who documented things and proved my points. Sometimes I would work in the bank at night to 
supplement my income. Then James Turner expressed an interest in me coming to Cornell 
University and the black and Puerto Rican students at Hunter College wanted  me to develop 
their curriculum as well. I was making a little money then as a consultant for CBS and was not 
ready to teach yet. So I told the Dean at Hunter College that I would do two courses for $15,000 
thinking they would tell me to go to hell. They a ccepted. To my Surprise I was hired at Hunted 
College and, for the first time in my life. I was paid $15,000 per year to teach two courses. The 
students told them to hire me and this was not a time when administrations ignored their 
students' wishes. 
Research Topics 
If I were able to direct a new generation of students in historical studies, I would have them do a 
number of studies that are not being done. We need to see general studies as well as detailed 
specializations on the peoples and cultures of th e world. The work on Africa, Asia and Europe, 
that European scholars initiated in the nineteenth century, needs to be carefully reviewed. We 
will undoubtedly find much to re -do without the assumptions and bias of European supremacy. 
We need to see students  trained in the different periods of African history, doing studies of 
European peoples in the same periods. What they would look to study are the connections and 
interactions between Africans and Europeans. 
New European Studies 
In particular, there is a need for Africanists to study the emergence of Europe from 1400 to 1600 
AD. This period was a critical turning point in the history of the world. We need studies of the 
700 years before 1400 AD when Islamic Africans, Arabs, and Berbers had isolated Europe ,


--- PAGE 18 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 18 
controlling commerce in the Mediterranean. Europe was hemmed in and struggling with its own 
internal conflicts. The Crusades gave Europe an external reason for certain ideas and certain 
people to dominate. In the process, a lot of pressure was taken off the Catholic Church to 
reform and Europe was forced to look at the world beyond itself. 
Europeans looked at the world beyond Europe and realized that they could not conquer it, not 
until they learned maritime skill. This maritime knowledge, primarily from China, was translated 
at the University of Salamanca in Spain by Arab, African and Berber scholars. The acquisition of 
this knowledge by Europeans in the 1400s is an essential turning point in world history. 
Europeans would now punish the world for what it had suffered at its own hands and because of 
its own failures during the period between the decline of the Roman Empire and the second rise 
of Europe in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Within this 200 -year rise, they would turn to 
Christianity to justify their criminal assault on the rest of the world. With religious justification and 
at best the church's indifference, they created and expanded the slave trade and the expansion 
of European people in settler nations beyond Europe. This period needs t o be studied 
specifically with attention to the impact it had on African and Asian peoples. 
Consider two small points. First, Europe is really not a continent. It is a part of Asia. Europe 
does not qualify as a continent by the dictionary definition of a c ontinent. Second, Europeans 
are multiracial. These two points have major implications for how we view European cultures 
and the European identity. We need more work which looks at the ways that European scholars 
used to argue that Egypt was not a part of A frica. We need to study the relationship of Egypt to 
the rest of Africa, especially before the European distortion of their own and Egyptian history. 
For students to understand the twenty -first century, they must understand the centuries of 
disruption that led us to where we are today. We really have to study the last 500 years of world 
history and the last 500 years of disruption in favor of Europe and the downgrading of other 
peoples. Once things are placed in their proper historical perspective, they mig ht have a better 
idea of where the world can go tomorrow. 
South America and the Caribbean 
We need to study South America were the majority of the population is neither black nor white 
and could go either way in whom they identify with, depending on the future flow of world power. 
South Americans, in particular Brazilians, claim white or European preferences because they 
assume that blacks and African peoples will not come to power in the world community. We 
need to study the formation of nations in South America and the slow destruction of Indian 
cultures in Mexico and in Canada. There needs to be in -depth studies of the destruction of 
indigenous cultures in both South and North America. There have been no in -depth studies of 
how these people came to America since they are supposed to be of Asian descent. The Asian 
ancestors of North and South American Indians could have come due to curiosity, or 
overcrowding. They could have been cattle -raising people who needed space. By studying the 
Asian migration patterns I have not been able to identify a disruptive period in Asian history that 
would have made that many people want to leave Asia. 
What happened to the indigenous people of the Caribbean? They have disappeared. We need 
to study the Caribbean mentality aft er 1850 because the Caribbeans had a rebellious mentality 
up until the middle of that century. They identified themselves specifically with Africa, but they 
lost this after 1850 and became imitation -English, imitation-Dutch, imitation-Spanish, and now 
they have a color complex indicative of a confused racial identity. At what point did they lose


--- PAGE 19 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 19 
their revolutionary attitude, and start to refer to their heritage from the viewpoint of their colonial 
masters? 
  
Historic Africa 
Africa as a place of history, mig rations, cultures and influences on the world is older than 
Europe and is rich and diverse in all human experiences. Yet we still know so little about Africa 
as a pace with people central to world history and to the future. We need studies of the 
migration patterns of the peoples of Africa and the impact those migrations have had on present 
cultures. This would mean looking at the infusion of one African culture into another, creating 
still another culture that had vitality. The Ashanti and the Fante social  order and world systems 
are examples. These people of the Upper Niger migrated and blended cultures. 
We need to study cultural retentions where Africans have held on to their culture through 
centuries of wars and all sorts of other difficulties. They have  held on to their concept of nation 
and concept of self. A good example is the Zulu. The Zulu nation is not South African in origin. 
They have East African origins and were called "Inguana." They migrated to central Africa and 
then down to South Africa. We  need to study the marital and courtship habits of some Africans, 
such as the Herro who pledge to bring virginity to their wedding bed, in contrast with the Mandi 
who have trial marriages. Among the Mandi the couple live together and have two or three 
children before they are married later with a big ceremony. In cases where they do not marry, 
the children belong to the family of the wife because their lineage is matrilineal. Whoever later 
marries her becomes the guardian of the children she had by the prev ious man. This is a very 
civilized custom. 
We need to study Africa since 1957 with the beginning of the independence explosion when 
African states started to receive their so -called independence. What happened? Africa may 
have gone down the wrong road to freedom because we did not first have stable African states. 
There was no African state methodology, and we did not observe African political 
traditionalisms. What we adopted were European parliame ntary forms. Africa should have 
adopted some form of African traditionalism in government. As a result, I see where so -called 
independence has done more harm than good. The methods and directions towards 
independence we took should be an issue with in crit ical studies of neo -colonialism. It would 
have made a great difference if there had been one African state in existence with stability and 
vitality. It would have been a role model for other African states. But the former colonial powers 
do not intend any one state to be such a role model. 
The USA 
We need to study the period between 1619 and 1776 in America history. Very little is said about 
what happened between the arrival in Jamestown, Virginia, and the American Revolution. Very 
little has been said ab out the contradictions of the American Revolution. In fact, the American 
Revolution and its proclamation of liberty and democracy was a contradiction because it was 
clearly not meant for African Americans —we had not been accepted as citizens. Northerners 
and Southerners had no difficulty in classifying us as three-fifths of a person. 
Southerners voted according to our presence in their political constituency. A white man could 
cast votes for us without our consent as though we were cattle. Liberty and justi ce for all did not


--- PAGE 20 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 20 
include people of African descent. We need to study the small number of freedmen in the South 
who were stripped to the point of not being free —who were they, why did they stay, what did 
they think, and how did they maintain their free st atus? Many of them were craftsmen, barbers, 
builders and blacksmiths. They were restricted in where they could go, and what they could do. 
When they went into a new town, they had to give notice. They were watched, and had to carry 
papers on them at all times. This was humiliating. I challenge the idea that they were free. They 
just had a little more ability to move about a little more than bondsmen. We know even less 
about the status and experiences of New England freedmen. 
Asia 
We need to investigate the large historic African presence in Asia, especially in India where 
there are 100 million people of partly African descent. We need to investigate the African 
presence in the pacific islands. There are entire nations made up of people of African extraction. 
We need to investigate Australia before the British destroyed its black inhabitants. Tasmania 
was black before the British destroyed every man, woman and child on the island. 
The Future 
African Americans will play a key role in the new and second political awakening of African 
peoples. Despite our subordinate domestic status, African Americans are already the most 
politically active Africans outside Africa. The first political awakening was with Nkrumah in the 
independence of Ghana. The second will have to be based on the various nationalisms, Pan -
Africanisms, and other forms of African u nity that go across all religious and political lines. We 
can no longer discuss who is Baptist, who is Protestant, etc. If you are African, even if you are a 
Moslem, being African will have to take precedence over what else you are. 
By asserting that there  will be new a African awakening does not mean that I am ignoring the 
declining African American domestic plight. The destruction of black communities in the U.S. is 
very deliberate and the power and responsibility for this destruction rests squarely on th e 
shoulders of government and economic leaders. They know that, if we succeed in building 
sound communities after all that we have been put through, we can build and run a nation. 
Successful communities are small role models for a successful nation. It is from the community 
that you get the ideas and impetus to build a nation. Those who do not want us to come to 
power are intent on keeping our communities so disrupted that we will never build a sound 
community. And these people behind this destruction are n ot black (no black men or women 
have that kind of power), do not live in our community, and cannot succeed forever. 
Conclusion 
We have a lot of scholars, writers and politicians doing more talking than writing and more 
talking than acting. We have enough  actors. We have enough people to talk about us and to 
beg. We now need people who understand what real liberation is all about and who will act to 
make positive change for black people happen. 
Our people and scholars are focusing on their "blackness" as a n historic and cultural value. 
They struggle and are confused about whiteness, which is everywhere, and everything good 
and of value in this culture. But this does not always mean that self -appreciation is lacking. 
What is lacking is a proper value on blac kness. I think a lot of black scholars are misleading us 
with statistics and charts and examples that do not make sense. They are explaining us to


--- PAGE 21 ---
RBG Blakademics                                                                                                               November, 2010 
 Africans at the Crossroads- African World Revolution-Dr. John Henrik Clarke                                   Page 21 
whites and their explanations make no sense to black people. Their unwillingness to come 
before black people and explain their explanations suggests that they do not believe their own 
explanations. Once we solve the internal problem of who we are, we can solve the external 
problem of what we will be. 
It is understandable why I would grow up to fight Jim Crow and racial prejudice and the 
separation of races. I have literally risked my life fighting these things because I knew racial 
hatred and ignorance was so damned unnecessary. I also knew one other thing: if there is a 
superior race in the world, it damned well is not white people. I have always been clear on this 
point from early in my life. 
No people can do to other people what they have done to the world. European culture has 
produced people who are terribly insecure and frightened. No one on this earth should  tremble 
at the sight of them. I would fear because a coward has the upper hand and not because he is 
brave. He is not brave. That is something I will never get out of my mind. 
If I ever have any influence over a state, the first thing I would build is a d ecent hospital—some 
place to care for children and old people. A civilization has to be measured by how it takes care 
of its old and its very young.

