=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: African Americans as Internal Colony The Theory of Internal Colonialism.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 6
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:54:22.395507
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 6 
 
African-Americans as an Internal Colony: The Theory of Internal Colonialism                    Peter Bohmer 
African-Americans as an Internal Colony:  
The Theory of Internal Colonialism 
  
Text by Peter Bohmer 
December 20, 1998 
Introduction 
The theory of internal colonialism attempts to expose, analyze and critique the history of rac ism. 
It explains the oppression of African -Americans and other people of color in the United States, 
particularly people of Mexican and Puerto Rican background, Native Americans and African -
Americans, as internalized colonies, and includes a strategy for the elimination of racism. 
The intellectual origin of this theory was the written and spoken condemnation of European 
colonialism and the putting forward of an anti -colonial national liberation strategy by Kwame 
Nkrumah, and most influentially, Frantz Fanon . Early proponents of this theory in the United 
States such as Malcolm X and Stokely Carmichael (Kwame Turé), were inspired by anti-colonial 
and anti -imperialist movements in the Third World, and their victories in Ghana, Cuba and 
Algeria. They decided that the critique of colonialism and neo -colonialism was the most suitable 
one for understanding the oppression of blacks and other people of color in the United States. 
They found relevant the analysis of the domination of oppressed people based on the viole nce of 
the colonizer, the exploitation of their land, labor and natural resources, and the systematic 
attempt to destroy the culture of non-European people in the search for profits.


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 6 
 
African-Americans as an Internal Colony: The Theory of Internal Colonialism                    Peter Bohmer 
In the late 1960’s and 1970’s, anti -racist analysis and activism increasi ngly worked from within 
a developing internal colonial framework. This framework converged with the long tradition of 
Black Nationalism, the movement for Black Power, and the growing radicalization of many 
activists. This led to a theory and practice that identified black people within the United States as 
part of the Third World, requiring political and economic independence – a national liberation 
struggle -- to end their oppression. 
While organizations such as the Black Panther Party, the Student Nonviol ent Coordinating 
Committee (SNCC) after 1965, and the League of Revolutionary Black Workers described their 
ideology and strategy as revolutionary nationalism, they implicitly subscribed to the theory of 
internal colonialism. These groups have been destroy ed by severe repression and by internal 
weaknesses, but the theory of internal colonialism remains relevant. 
The Theory 
Carmichael and Hamilton define racism as "the predication of decisions and policies on 
considerations of race for the purpose of subordi nating a racial group and maintaining control 
over that group." This theory uses the terms of racism, internal colonialism and institutional 
racism interchangeably to focus on white and capitalist domination over all aspects of the lives 
of blacks. The the me of white domination and black subordination based on the unequal 
distribution of political and economic power is pervasive. To Barrera, internal colonialism is: 
"a structured relationship of domination and subordination which are defined along ethnic an d/or 
racial lines when the relationship is established or maintained to serve the interests of all or part 
of the dominant group." ..."in which the dominant and subordinate populations intermingle." 
These relations of dominance were established by force to  secure the labor of colonized people 
for the least desirable jobs, for the "dirty and servile" jobs that whites wish to avoid. The internal 
colony continues to provides labor for the secondary labor market, as a ‘reserve army of labor’ 
and reproduces black subordination. 
To Robert Allen, the basis of this racial system is: 
"A historically evolved structure of inequality aimed at securing total control of the labor of the 
victimized group. Racial oppression amounts to building an economic social and cultura l wall 
around a group of workers, to create in effect a labor concentration camp… Historically, the 
structure evolved to meet the American capitalist system's need for a permanent reservoir of 
subordinated labor -- labor that could be locked into the worst  jobs with lowest pay (or no pay in 
the case of slaves); labor that could be readily mobilized and demobilized as the capitalist system 
swings through its boom -recession economic cycle, labor that could be kept unorganized and 
used as pawns in the battles between employers and other workers."


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 6 
 
African-Americans as an Internal Colony: The Theory of Internal Colonialism                    Peter Bohmer 
The culture, the State, and particularly the ghetto constitute the racial system. The ghetto 
substitutes for the Third World nation in this theory. The ghetto depends on small and large 
capitalist enterprises, which are controlled by whites, for jobs and for purchasing most goods and 
services. Its inhabitants must sell their labor power and buy necessary commodities at inflated 
prices from these enterprises. Loans or other credit to finance economic development are eith er 
not available or available only at interest rates well above the market rate. The police, schools, 
social service agencies and all levels of government exercise political control over the ghetto 
residents. The government distributes public services in a  racially discriminatory manner. Local 
politicians may be residents of the community but they have little power and they serve the needs 
of outside forces. Ghettos also shield whites from severe social problems and much of the cost of 
racial capitalism. 
The dominant culture and segregated living patterns produce a white nationality, where 
‘American’ means ‘white American’, where white people are considered the norm and black 
people are considered different, unfamiliar and not quite equal. The destructive ps ychological 
effects of the racist culture cause an internalized oppression within black people, including 
feelings of inferiority, and antagonism toward other black people. 
Integration is not the solution in this framework. Rather the ghetto is seen as the  site of 
oppression but simultaneously the potential base for black resistance and power. A key part of 
this strategy is building a self-conscious culture of resistance from existing black culture. 
The State maintains white capitalist domination in two mai n ways. It represses demands for 
black power and the self-determination but sponsors social programs, such as the war on poverty, 
and affirmative action to co-opt political challenges. 
The theory of internal colonialism (like the class -based theory) sees c apitalism as the root of 
racial oppression and the accumulation of capital as a key determinant of earnings, profits and 
economic change. Unlike the orthodox Marxist approach, nationality or race relations are not 
reducible to class relations and the clas s struggle. Rather, ones race is central to the 
determination of ones identity, ones consciousness, ones work and ones life. The underlying 
economic interests between black and white workers is not assumed to be the same as each other, 
nor is it believed that they will eventually forge a unified class, which will lead the anti -capitalist 
movements. The focus in internal colonialism is on racial oppression itself, rather than on racial 
division as merely an instrument of capitalist control and as an imp ediment to working class 
unity.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 6 
 
African-Americans as an Internal Colony: The Theory of Internal Colonialism                    Peter Bohmer 
Strengths of the Theory of Internal Colonialism 
The internal colonialist model resonates with the perceived political, social and economic reality 
of many black, Latino and Native American activists, intellectuals, and other memb ers of these 
communities, and of Asian American and white activists and anti-racist intellectuals. Its focus on 
race and racism as shaping the consciousness and activities of blacks and whites and their 
interaction is essential. It counters claims that rac ism is not a primary aspect of past and present 
United States political economy. It highlights the interrelated nature of racism in the economy, 
neighborhoods and communities, the culture and the State. No theory has a better explanation for 
the causes and  consequences of high black unemployment, of the high concentration of black 
people in the least desirable jobs in society, and their underrepresentation in professional, 
managerial and administrative occupations. 
Weakness of the Theory: It’s Economics 
An economic theory of internal colonialism should be able to analyze continuities and changes in 
racial inequality at the micro and societal level. The actual mechanisms for reproducing these 
inequalities are not clearly specified. There is ample discussion an d analysis of the functions of 
an internal colony, but little on how the internal colony actually functions. The racial system 
seems to be based on a cross class alliance of whites dominated by capitalists. It is perpetuated 
by and within the State and ide ological institutions, and by the hiring, firing and promotion 
policies of private firms. Although suggestive of why firms want to discriminate, it is of little 
help in explaining how they discriminate – or of the behavior of unions or government 
employment. It does not show how profit maximizing behavior by individual firms cause and 
perpetuate systematic racial inequality within the firm and on a societal scale. 
Substantial inequality between blacks and whites persists in virtually all indicators of raci al 
equality. However, a class analysis of blacks as predominantly unemployed or in the secondary 
labor market, with only a token group receiving sizeable incomes and enjoying decent working 
conditions, disguises significant gains. In 1997, 8.8% of black me n and 1.7% of black women 
earned over $50,000, compared to only 1.7% of black men and 0.6% of black women in 1967 
(correcting for inflation). The proportion of the black labor force that is employed as 
professionals or managers grew from 4.8% in 1960 to 11 .8% in 1984, and to 17.8% by 1996. 
Though far lower than the 30% proportion of the white labor force that are professionals or 
managers, this is more than tokenism. 
The absence of an adequate economic analysis in the theory of internal colonialism has 
paralleled the absence of an adequate theory of racism in radical and Marxist economics. The 
attempts by Barrera to apply the theory of internal colonialism to analyze the racial practices of a 
single firm, and by Baron to synthesize the model of internal colonialism with the theory of labor 
market segmentation were a start towards incorporating a more concrete economic analysis into 
the theory of internal colonialism. However, little progress has been made since.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 6 
 
African-Americans as an Internal Colony: The Theory of Internal Colonialism                    Peter Bohmer 
 
A Deficient Theory of the State 
The internal colonialist framework lacks a developed theory of the State and its practices, and is 
more applicable to the United States before 1960 than after. The context for examining the 
contemporary State is a highly industrialized capitalist society, where racial categories are 
relevant and whites are the majority of the population, with a white elite that has preponderant 
economic power, and where the State is formally democratic and not overtly discriminatory. The 
relation between the State in the U. S. and African -Americans is different from the relation 
between an imperialist State and residents of Third World nations. Residents of neo -colonies 
have no democratic rights or political influence in the colonizer nation, nor claims on 
government services  or income transfers from that State. Although the constitutional rights of 
African-Americans are often violated -- look at the disproportionate number of blacks arrested 
and imprisoned -- the civil and political rights of blacks since the Civil Rights and  Voting Rights 
Act of 1964 and 1965 are substantially greater than the residents of a Third World nation in an 
imperialist State. 
Seeing government laws, policies and practices as either repressive or co -optive effectively 
denies that the Civil Rights, Bla ck Power and other movements won anything significant. The 
end of legal segregation is a gain, so is affirmative action. The increase in public sector 
employment of blacks since the 1950's in all regions of the country, in all occupations and at all 
levels of government is significant. Public sector employment of blacks caused the growth of 
many indicators of racial equality. 
These gains are not necessarily permanent, and they can be lost, witness the last 20 years. Racial 
domination was not dealt a fatal b low; and the government still contributes to its perpetuation. 
Reforms were passed to weaken social movements and to limit the extent of change, but there 
still were victories. To deny this, means that short of revolution, positive effects or victories 
cannot result from the struggles of oppressed people. The view that all reforms are co -optive or 
trivial leads to the erroneous conclusion that all government policies and racial systems are 
equivalent. 
Concluding Comments on Internal Colonialism 
As a theory , internal colonialism explains continuities in the structure of U.S. racial inequality 
well. It is weak in explaining changes or discontinuities: the end of Jim Crow, real gains 
achieved in educational opportunities and in earnings of those employed, and increased 
possibilities of upward occupational mobility. In order to counter those who argue that racism is 
a serious problem of the past but not of the present, proponents of this theory often counter by 
claiming that the structure of racial inequality is  fixed and unchanging. There are many useful 
analogies between colonial and neocolonial oppression of the Third World and the oppression of 
blacks and other people of color inside the United States. However, internal colonialism needs to


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 6 
 
African-Americans as an Internal Colony: The Theory of Internal Colonialism                    Peter Bohmer 
be revised, developed and updated with regards to the economy, the State and gender relations, if 
it is to be more than just a powerful analogy. 
Conclusion: Racism is the Problem, Capitalism is Not the Solution 
Racial inequality in earnings and the distribution of wealth, in poverty and unemployment, and in 
the occupational and class structure persist in the contemporary period. Although much has 
changed, racism and racial inequality are still integral to U.S. capitalism. While racism cannot be 
reduced to employers’ needs to  divide the working class, this is one important aspect of racism. 
While the situation of blacks in the United States is different from formerly colonized people in 
Africa or Asia, the focus of the theory of internal colonialism on systematic inequalities of power 
between blacks and whites in the culture, the State, and the economy is absolutely necessary for 
an analysis of racism as we approach the 21st century. While being aware of the limitations of 
Marxist and internal colonialist theories of racism, it  would be a big mistake to ignore their 
contributions towards understanding and challenging racial oppression. 
 
  Note: This article appears in a book edited by John Whitehead and Cobie Kwasi Harris, 
Readings in Black Political Economy (1999, Kendall/Hunt, Dubuque, Iowa). In converting it to a 
Web document, all footnotes and references were erased. Please access the book or e-mail / write 
Peter Bohmer for the references.

