=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Albert Pike- Morals and Dogma (1871).pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 1121
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:54:54.975268
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
SHORT BIOGRAPHY
Albert Pike, born December 29, 1809, was the oldest of six children born
to Benjamin and Sarah Andrews Pike. Pike was raised in a Christian home
and attended an Episcopal church. Pike passed the entrance examination at
Harvard College when he was 15 years old, but could not attend because
he had no funds. After traveling as far west as Santa Fe, Pike settled in
Arkansas, where he worked as editor of a newspaper before being admitted
to the bar. In Arkansas, he met Mary Ann Hamilton, and married her on
November 28, 1834. To this union were born 11 children.
He was 41 years old when he applied for admission in the Western Star
Lodge No. 2 in Little Rock, Ark., in 1850. Active in the Grand Lodge of
Arkansas, Pike took the 10 degrees of the York Rite from 1850 to 1853.
He received the 29 degrees of the Scottish Rite in March 1853 from Albert
Gallatin Mackey in Charleston, S.C. The Scottish Rite had been
introduced in the United States in 1783. Charleston was the location of the
first Supreme Council, which governed the Scottish Rite in the United
States, until a Northern Supreme Council was established in New York
City in 1813. The boundary between the Southern and Northern
Jurisdictions, still recognized today, was firmly established in 1828.
Mackey invited Pike to join the Supreme Council for the Southern
Jurisdiction in 1858 in Charleston, and he became the Grand Commander
of the Supreme Council the following year. Pike held that office until his
death, while supporting himself in various occupations such as editor of
the Memphis Daily Appeal from February 1867 to September 1868, as well
as his law practice. Pike later opened a law office in Washington, D.C.,
and argued a number of cases before the U.S. Supreme Court. However,


--- PAGE 2 ---
Pike was impoverished by the Civil War and remained so much of his life,
often borrowing money for basic living expenses from the Supreme
Council before the council voted him an annuity in 1879 of $1,200 a year
for the remainder of his life. He died on April 2, 1892, in Washington,
D.C.
Realizing that a revision of the ritual was necessary if Scottish Rite
Freemasonry were to survive, Mackey encouraged Pike to revise the ritual
to produce a standard ritual for use in all states in the Southern
Jurisdiction. Revision began in 1855, and after some changes, the Supreme
Council endorsed Pike's revision in 1861. Minor changes were made in
two degrees in 1873 after the York Rite bodies in Missouri objected that
the 29th and 30th degrees revealed secrets of the York Rite.
Pike is best known for his major work, Morals and Dogma of the Ancient
and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, published in 1871. Morals and
Dogma should not be confused with Pike's revision of the Scottish Rite
ritual. They are separate works. Walter Lee Brown writes that Pike
"intended it [Morals and Dogma] to be a supplement to that great
'connected system of moral, religious and philosophical instruction' that
he had developed in his revision of the Scottish ritual."
Morals and Dogma was traditionally given to the candidate upon his
receipt of the 14th degree of the Scottish Rite. This practice was stopped
in 1974. Morals and Dogma has not been given to candidates since 1974. A
Bridge to Light, by Rex R. Hutchens, is provided to candidates today.
Hutchens laments that Morals and Dogma is read by so few Masons. A
Bridge to Light was written to be "a bridge between the ceremonies of the
degrees and their lectures in Morals and Dogma."
TITLES OF DEGREES 
1º - Apprentice


--- PAGE 3 ---
2º - Fellow-craft 
3º - Master 
4º - Secret Master 
5º - Perfect Master 
6º - Intimate Secretary 
7º - Provost and Judge 
8º - Intendant of the Building 
9º - Elu of the Nine 
10º - Elu of the Fifteen 
11º - Elu of the Twelve 
12º - Master Architect 
13º - Royal Arch of Solomon 
14º - Perfect Elu 
15º - Knight of the East 
16º - Prince of Jerusalem 
17º - Knight of the East and West 
18º - Knight Rose Croix


--- PAGE 4 ---
19º - Pontiff 
20º - Master of the Symbolic Lodge 
21º - Noachite or Prussian Knight 
22º - Knight of the Royal Axe or Prince of Libanus 
23º - Chief of the Tabernacle 
24º - Prince of the Tabernacle 
25º - Knight of the Brazen Serpent 
26º - Prince of Mercy 
27º - Knight Commander of the Temple 
28º - Knight of the Sun or Prince Adept 
29º - Scottish Knight of St. Andrew 
30º - Knight Kadosh 
31º - Inspector Inquistor 
32º - Master of the Royal Secret


--- PAGE 5 ---
MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
1º - Apprentice
THE TWELVE-INCH RULE AND THE COMMON GAVEL.
FORCE, unregulated or ill-regulated, is not only wasted in the void, like
that of gunpowder burned in the open air, and steam unconfined by
science; but, striking in the dark, and its blows meeting only the air, they
recoil and bruise itself. It is destruction and ruin. It is the volcano, the
earthquake, the cyclone;-not growth and progress. It is Polyphemus
blinded, striking at random, and falling headlong among the sharp rocks
by the impetus of his own blows.
The blind Force of the people is a Force that must be economized, and
also managed, as the blind Force of steam, lifting the ponderous iron arms
and turning the large wheels, is made to bore and rifle the cannon and to
weave the most delicate lace. It must be regulated by Intellect. Intellect is
to the people and the people's Force, what the slender needle of the
compass is to the ship--its soul, always counselling the huge mass of wood
and iron, and always pointing to the north. To attack the citadels built up
on all sides against the human race by superstitions, despotisms, and
prejudices, the Force must have a brain and a law. Then its deeds of daring
produce permanent results, and there is real progress. Then there are
sublime conquests. Thought is a force, and philosophy should be an
energy, finding its aim and its effects in the amelioration of mankind. The
two great motors are Truth and Love. When all these Forces are combined,


--- PAGE 6 ---
and guided by the Intellect, and regulated by the RULE of Right, and
Justice, and of combined and systematic movement and effort, the great
revolution prepared for by the ages will begin to march. The POWER of
the Deity Himself is in equilibrium with His WISDOM. Hence the only
results are HARMONY.
It is because Force is ill regulated, that revolutions prove failures.
Therefore it is that so often insurrections, coming from those high
mountains that domineer over the moral horizon, Justice, Wisdom, Reason,
Right, built of the purest snow of the ideal after a long fall from rock to
rock, after having reflected the sky in their transparency, and been swollen
by a hundred affluents, in the majestic path of triumph, suddenly lose
themselves in quagmires, like a California river in the sands.
The onward march of the human race requires that the heights around it
should blaze with noble and enduring lessons of courage. Deeds of daring
dazzle history, and form one class of the guiding lights of man. They are
the stars and coruscations from that great sea of electricity, the Force
inherent in the people. To strive, to brave all risks, to perish, to persevere,
to be true to one's self, to grapple body to body with destiny, to surprise
defeat by the little terror it inspires, now to confront unrighteous power,
now to defy intoxicated triumph--these are the examples that the nations
need and the light that electrifies them.
There are immense Forces in the great caverns of evil beneath society; in
the hideous degradation, squalor, wretchedness and destitution, vices and
crimes that reek and simmer in the darkness in that populace below the
people, of great cities. There disinterestedness vanishes, every one howls,
searches, gropes, and gnaws for himself. Ideas are ignored, and of
progress there is no thought. This populace has two mothers, both of them
stepmothers--Ignorance and Misery. Want is their only guide--for the
appetite alone they crave satisfaction. Yet even these may be employed.
The lowly sand we trample upon, cast into the furnace, melted, purified by
fire, may become resplendent crystal. They have the brute force of the
HAMMER, but their blows help on the great cause, when struck within the
lines traced by the RULE held by wisdom and discretion.
Yet it is this very Force of the people, this Titanic power of the giants,
that builds the fortifications of tyrants, and is embodied in their armies.
Hence the possibility of such tyrannies as those of which it has been said,
that "Rome smells worse under Vitellius than under Sulla. Under Claudius


--- PAGE 7 ---
and under Domitian there is a deformity of baseness corresponding to the
ugliness-of the tyranny. The foulness of the slaves is a direct result of the
atrocious baseness of the despot. A miasma exhales from these crouching
consciences that reflect the master; the public authorities are unclean,
hearts are collapsed, consciences shrunken, souls puny. This is so under
Caracalla, it is so under Commodus, it is so under Heliogabalus, while
from the Roman senate, under Caesar, there comes only the rank odour
peculiar to the eagle's eyrie."
It is the force of the people that sustains all these despotisms, the basest
as well as the best. That force acts through armies; and these oftener
enslave than liberate. Despotism there applies the RULE. Force is the
MACE of steel at the saddle-bow of the knight or of the bishop in armour.
Passive obedience by force supports thrones and oligarchies, Spanish
kings, and Venetian senates. Might, in an army wielded by tyranny, is the
enormous sum total of utter weakness; and so Humanity wages war against
Humanity, in despite of Humanity. So a people willingly submits to
despotism, and its workmen submit to be despised, and its soldiers to be
whipped; therefore it is that battles lost by a nation are often progress
attained. Less glory is more liberty. When the drum is silent, reason
sometimes speaks.
Tyrants use the force of the people to chain and subjugate--that is, enyoke
the people. Then they plough with them as men do with oxen yoked. Thus
the spirit of liberty and innovation is reduced by bayonets, and principles
are struck dumb by cannonshot; while the monks mingle with the troopers,
and the Church militant and jubilant, Catholic or Puritan, sings Te Deums
for victories over rebellion.
The military power, not subordinate to the civil power, again the
HAMMER or MACE of FORCE, independent of the RULE, is an armed
tyranny, born full-grown, as Athene sprung from the brain of Zeus. It
spawns a dynasty, and begins with Caesar to rot into Vitellius and


--- PAGE 8 ---
Commodus. At the present day it inclines to begin where formerly
dynasties ended.
Constantly the people put forth immense strength, only to end in immense
weakness. The force of the people is exhausted in indefinitely prolonging
things long since dead; in governing mankind by embalming old dead
tyrannies of Faith; restoring dilapidated dogmas; regilding faded, worm-
eaten shrines; whitening and rouging ancient and barren superstitions;
saving society by multiplying parasites; perpetuating superannuated
institutions; enforcing the worship of symbols as the actual means of
salvation; and tying the dead corpse of the Past, mouth to mouth, with the
living Present. Therefore it is that it is one of the fatalities of Humanity to
be condemned to eternal struggles with phantoms, with superstitions,
bigotries, hypocrisies, prejudices, the formulas of error, and the pleas of
tyranny. Despotisms, seen in the past, become respectable, as the
mountain, bristling with volcanic rock, rugged and horrid, seen through
the haze of distance is blue and smooth and beautiful. The sight of a
single dungeon of tyranny is worth more, to dispel illusions, and create a
holy hatred of despotism, and to direct FORCE aright, than the most
eloquent volumes. The French should have preserved the Bastile as a
perpetual lesson; Italy should not destroy the dungeons of the Inquisition.
The Force of the people maintained the Power that built its gloomy cells,
and placed the living in their granite sepulchres.
The FORCE of the people cannot, by its unrestrained and fitful action,
maintain and continue in action and existence a free Government once
created. That Force must be limited, restrained, conveyed by distribution
into different channels, and by roundabout courses, to outlets, whence it is
to issue as the law, action, and decision of the State; as the wise old
Egyptian kings conveyed in different canals, by sub-division, the swelling
waters of the Nile, and compelled them to fertilize and not devastate the
land. There must be the jus et norma, the law and Rule, or Gauge, of
constitution and law, within which the public force must act. Make a
breach in either, and the great steam-hammer, with its swift and ponderous
blows, crushes all the machinery to atoms, and, at last, wrenching itself
away, lies inert and dead amid the ruin it has wrought.


--- PAGE 9 ---
The FORCE of the people, or the popular will, in action and exerted,
symbolized by the GAVEL, regulated and guided by and acting within the
limits of LAW and ORDER, symbolized by the TWENTY-FOUR-INCH
RULE, has for its fruit LIBERTY, EQUALITY, and FRATERNITY,--liberty
regulated by law; equality of rights in the eye of the law; brotherhood with
its duties and obligations as well as its benefits.
You will hear shortly of the Rough ASHLAR and the Perfect ASHLAR, as
part of the jewels of the Lodge. The rough Ashlar is said to be "a stone, as
taken from the quarry, in its rude and natural state." The perfect Ashlar is
said to be "a stone made ready by the hands of the workmen, to be
adjusted by the working-tools of the Fellow-Craft." We shall not repeat the
explanations of these symbols given by the York Rite. You may read them
in its printed monitors. They are declared to allude to the self-
improvement of the individual craftsman,--a continuation of the same
superficial interpretation.
The rough Ashlar is the PEOPLE, as a mass, rude and unorganized. The
perfect Ashlar, or cubical stone, symbol of perfection, is the STATE, the
rulers deriving their powers from the consent of the governed; the
constitution and laws speaking the will of the people; the government
harmonious, symmetrical, efficient, --its powers properly distributed and
duly adjusted in equilibrium.
If we delineate a cube on a plane surface thus:
we have visible three faces, and nine external lines, drawn between seven
points. The complete cube has three more faces, making six; three more


--- PAGE 10 ---
lines, making twelve; and one more point, making eight. As the number 12
includes the sacred numbers, 3, 5, 7, and 3 times 3, or 9, and is produced
by adding the sacred number 3 to 9; while its own two figures, 1, 2, the
unit or monad, and duad, added together, make the same sacred number 3;
it was called the perfect number; and the cube became the symbol of
perfection.
Produced by FORCE, acting by RULE; hammered in accordance with lines
measured by the Gauge, out of the rough Ashlar, it is an appropriate
symbol of the Force of the people, expressed as the constitution and law
of the State; and of the State itself the three visible faces represent the
three departments,--the Executive, which executes the laws; the
Legislative, which makes the laws; the Judiciary, which interprets the
laws, applies and enforces them, between man and man, between the State
and the citizens. The three invisible faces, are Liberty, Equality, and
Fraternity, the threefold soul of the State--its vitality, spirit, and intellect.
Though Masonry neither usurps the place of, nor apes religion, prayer is
an essential part of our ceremonies. It is the aspiration of the soul toward
the Absolute and Infinite Intelligence, which is the One Supreme Deity,
most feebly and misunderstandingly characterized as an "ARCHITECT."
Certain faculties of man are directed toward the Unknown--thought,
meditation, prayer. The unknown is an ocean, of which conscience is the
compass. Thought, meditation, prayer, are the great mysterious pointings
of the needle. It is a spiritual magnetism that thus connects the human
soul with the Deity. These majestic irradiations of the soul pierce through
the shadow toward the light.
It is but a shallow scoff to say that prayer is absurd, because it is not
possible for us, by means of it, to persuade God to change His plans. He
produces foreknown and foreintended effects, by the instrumentality of the
forces of nature, all of which are His forces. Our own are part of these.
Our free agency and our will are forces. We do not absurdly cease to make
efforts to attain wealth or happiness, prolong life, and continue health,


--- PAGE 11 ---
because we cannot by any effort change what is predestined. If the effort
also is predestined, it is not the less our effort, made of our free will. So,
likewise, we pray. Will is a force. Thought is a force. Prayer is a force.
Why should it not be of the law of God, that prayer, like Faith and Love,
should have its effects? Man is not to be comprehended as a starting-
point, or progress as a goal, without those two great forces, Faith and
Love. Prayer is sublime. Orisons that beg and clamour are pitiful. To deny
the efficacy of prayer, is to deny that of Faith, Love, and Effort. Yet the
effects produced, when our hand, moved by our will, launches a pebble
into the ocean, never cease; and every uttered word is registered for
eternity upon the invisible air.
Every Lodge is a Temple, and as a whole, and in its details symbolic. The
Universe itself supplied man with the model for the first temples reared to
the Divinity. The arrangement of the Temple of Solomon, the symbolic
ornaments which formed its chief decorations, and the dress of the High-
Priest, all had reference to the order of the Universe, as then understood.
The Temple contained many emblems of the seasons--the sun, the moon,
the planets, the constellations Ursa Major and Minor, the zodiac, the
elements, and the other parts of the world. It is the Master of this Lodge,
of the Universe, Hermes, of whom Khurum is the representative, that is
one of the lights of the Lodge.
For further instruction as to the symbolism of the heavenly bodies, and of
the sacred numbers, and of the temple and its details, you must wait
patiently until you advance in Masonry, in the mean time exercising your
intellect in studying them for yourself. To study and seek to interpret
correctly the symbols of the Universe, is the work of the sage and
philosopher. It is to decipher the writing of God, and penetrate into His
thoughts.
This is what is asked and answered in our catechism, in regard to the
Lodge.


--- PAGE 12 ---
* * * * * *
A "Lodge" is defined to be "an assemblage of Freemasons, duly
congregated, having the sacred writings, square, and compass, and a
charter, or warrant of constitution, authorizing them to work." The room
or place in which they meet, representing some part of King Solomon's
Temple, is also called the Lodge; and it is that we are now considering.
It is said to be supported by three great columns, WISDOM, FORCE or
STRENGTH, and BEAUTY, represented by the Master, the Senior Warden,
and the Junior Warden; and these are said to be the columns that support
the Lodge, "because Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty, are the perfections of
everything, and nothing can endure without them." "Because," the York
Rite says, "it is necessary that there should be Wisdom to conceive,
Strength to support, and Beauty to adorn, all great and important
undertakings." "Know ye not," says the Apostle Paul, "that ye are the
temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man
desecrate the temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the temple of God
is holy, which temple ye are."
The Wisdom and Power of the Deity are in equilibrium. The laws of nature
and the moral laws are not the mere despotic mandates of His Omnipotent
will; for, then they might be changed by Him, and order become disorder,
and good and right become evil and wrong; honesty and loyalty, vices; and
fraud, ingratitude, and vice, virtues. Omnipotent power, infinite, and
existing alone, would necessarily not be constrained to consistency. Its
decrees and laws could not be immutable. The laws of God are not
obligatory on us because they are the enactments of His POWER, or the
expression of His WILL; but because they express His infinite WISDOM.
They are not right because they are His laws, but His laws because they
are right. From the equilibrium of infinite wisdom and infinite force,
results perfect harmony, in physics and in the moral universe. Wisdom,
rower, and Harmony constitute one Masonic triad. They have other and
profounder meanings, that may at some time be unveiled to you.


--- PAGE 13 ---
As to the ordinary and commonplace explanation, it may be added, that the
wisdom of the Architect is displayed in combining, as only a skillful
Architect can do, and as God has done everywhere,--for example, in the
tree, the human frame, the egg, the cells of the honeycomb--strength, with
grace, beauty, symmetry, proportion, lightness, ornamentation. That, too,
is the perfection of the orator and poet--to combine force, strength,
energy, with grace of style, musical cadences, the beauty of figures, the
play and irradiation of imagination and fancy; and so, in a State, the
warlike and industrial force of the people, and their Titanic strength, must
be combined with the beauty of the arts, the sciences, and the intellect, if
the State would scale the heights of excellence, and the people be really
free. Harmony in this, as in all the Divine, the material, and the human, is
the result of equilibrium, of the sympathy and opposite action of
contraries; a single Wisdom above them holding the beam of the scales. To
reconcile the moral law, human responsibility, free-will, with the absolute
power of God; and the existence of evil with His absolute wisdom, and
goodness, and mercy,-- these are the great enigmas of the Sphynx.
You entered the Lodge between two columns. They represent the two
which stood in the porch of the Temple, on each side of the great eastern
gateway. These pillars, of bronze, four fingers breadth in thickness, were,
according to the most authentic account--that in the First and that in the
Second Book of Kings, confirmed in Jeremiah-- eighteen cubits high, with
a capital five cubits high. The shaft of each was four cubits in diameter. A
cubit is one foot and 707/1000. That is, the shaft of each was a little over
thirty feet eight inches in height, the capital of each a little over eight feet
six inches in height, and the diameter of the shaft six feet ten inches. The
capitals were enriched by pomegranates of bronze, covered by bronze net-
work, and ornamented with wreaths of bronze; and appear to have imitated
the shape of the seed-vessel of the lotus or Egyptian lily, a sacred symbol
to the Hindus and Egyptians. The pillar or column on the right, or in the
south, was named, as the Hebrew word is rendered in our translation of the
Bible, JACHIN: and that on the left BOAZ. Our translators say that the
first word means, "He shall establish;" and the second, "In it is strength."


--- PAGE 14 ---
These columns were imitations, by Khurum, the Tyrian artist, of the great
columns consecrated to the Winds and Fire, at the entrance to the famous
Temple of Malkarth, in the city of Tyre. It is customary, in Lodges of the
York Rite, to see a celestial globe on one, and a terrestrial globe on the
other; but these are not warranted, if the object be to imitate the original
two columns of the Temple. The symbolic meaning of these columns we
shall leave for the present unexplained, only adding that Entered
Apprentices keep their working-tools in the column JACHIN; and giving
you the etymology and literal meaning of the two names.
The word JACHIN, in Hebrew, probably pronounced Ya-kayan, and meant,
as a verbal noun, He that strengthens; and thence, firm, stable, upright.
The word Boaz is Baaz which means Strong, Strength, Power, Might,
Refuge, Source of Strength, a Fort. The prefix means "with" or "in," and
gives the word the force of the Latin gerund, roborando--Strengthening
The former word also means he will establish, or plant in an erect
position--from the verb Kun, he stood erect. It probably meant Active and
Vivifying Energy and Force; and Boaz, Stability, Permanence, in the
passive sense.
The Dimensions of the Lodge, our Brethren of the York Rite say, "are
unlimited, and its covering no less than the canopy of Heaven." "To this
object," they say, "the mason's mind is continually directed, and thither he
hopes at last to arrive by the aid of the theological ladder which Jacob in
his vision saw ascending from earth to Heaven; the three principal rounds
of which are denominated Faith, Hope, and Charity; and which admonish
us to have Faith in God, Hope in Immortality, and Charity to all mankind."
Accordingly a ladder, sometimes with nine rounds, is seen on the chart,


--- PAGE 15 ---
resting at the bottom on the earth, its top in the clouds, the stars shining
above it; and this is deemed to represent that mystic ladder, which Jacob
saw in his dream, set up on the earth, and the top of it reaching to Heaven,
with the angels of God ascending and descending on it. The addition of the
three principal rounds to the symbolism, is wholly modern and
incongruous.
The ancients counted seven planets, thus arranged: the Moon, Mercury,
Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. There were seven heavens and
seven spheres of these planets; on all the monuments of Mithras are seven
altars or pyres, consecrated to the seven planets, as were the seven lamps
of the golden candelabrum in the Temple. That these represented the
planets, we are assured by Clemens of Alexandria, in his Stromata, and by
Philo Judaeus.
To return to its source in the Infinite, the human soul, the ancients held,
had to ascend, as it had descended, through the seven spheres. The Ladder
by which it reascends, has, according to Marsilius Ficinus, in his
Commentary on the Ennead of Plotinus, seven degrees or steps; and in the
Mysteries of Mithras, carried to Rome under the Emperors, the ladder,
with its seven rounds, was a symbol referring to this ascent through the
spheres of the seven planets. Jacob saw the Spirits of God ascending and
descending on it; and above it the Deity Himself. The Mithraic Mysteries
were celebrated in caves, where gates were marked at the four equinoctial
and solstitial points of the Zodiac; and the seven planetary spheres were
represented, which souls needs must traverse in descending from the
heaven of the fixed stars to the elements that envelop the earth; and seven
gates were marked, one for each planet, through which they pass, in
descending or returning.
We learn this from Celsus, in Origen, who says that the symbolic image of
this passage among the stars, used in the Mithraic Mysteries, was a ladder
reaching from earth to Heaven, divided into seven steps or stages, to each
of which was a gate, and at the summit an eighth one, that of the fixed


--- PAGE 16 ---
stars. The symbol was the same as that of the seven stages of Borsippa, the
Pyramid of vitrified brick, near Babylon, built of seven stages, and each of
a different colour. In the Mithraic ceremonies, the candidate went through
seven stages of initiation, passing through many fearful trials--and of
these the high ladder with seven rounds or steps was the symbol.
You see the Lodge, its details and ornaments, by its Lights. You have
already heard what these Lights, the greater and lesser, are said to be, and
how they are spoken of by our Brethren of the York Rite.
The Holy Bible, Square, and Compasses, are not only styled the Great
Lights in Masonry, but they are also technically called the Furniture of the
Lodge; and, as you have seen, it is held that there is no Lodge without
them. This has sometimes been made a pretext for excluding Jews from
our Lodges, because they cannot regard the New Testament as a holy book.
The Bible is an indispensable part of the furniture of a Christian Lodge,
only because it is the sacred book of the Christian religion. The Hebrew
Pentateuch in a Hebrew Lodge, and the Koran in a Mohammedan one,
belong on the Altar; and one of these, and the Square and Compass,
properly understood, are the Great Lights by which a Mason must walk
and work.
The obligation of the candidate is always to be taken on the sacred book
or books of his religion, that he may deem it more solemn and binding;
and therefore it was that you were asked of what religion you were. We
have no other concern with your religious creed.
The Square is a right angle, formed by two right lines. It is adapted only
to a plane surface, and belongs only to geometry, earth-measurement, that
trigonometry which deals only with planes, and with the earth, which the


--- PAGE 17 ---
ancients supposed to be a plane. The Compass describes circles, and deals
with spherical trigonometry, the science of the spheres and-heavens. The
former, therefore, is an emblem of what concerns the earth and the body;
the latter of what concerns the heavens and the soul. Yet the Compass is
also used in plane trigonometry, as in erecting perpendiculars; and,
therefore, you are reminded that, although in this Degree both points of
the Compass are under the Square, and you are now dealing only with the
moral and political meaning of the symbols, and not with their
philosophical and spiritual meanings, still the divine ever mingles with
the human; with the earthly the spiritual intermixes; and there is
something spiritual in the commonest duties of life. The nations are not
bodies politic alone, but also souls-politic; and woe to that people which,
seeking the material only, forgets that it has a soul. Then we have a race,
petrified in dogma, which presupposes the absence of a soul and the
presence only of memory and instinct, or demoralized by lucre. Such a
nature can never lead civilization. Genuflexion before the idol or the
dollar atrophies the muscle which walks and the will which moves.
Hieratic or mercantile absorption diminishes the radiance of a people,
lowers its horizon by lowering its level, and deprives it of that
understanding of the universal aim, at the same time human and divine,
which makes the missionary nations. A free people, forgetting that it has a
soul to be cared for, devotes all its energies to its material advancement.
If it makes war, it is to subserve its commercial interests. The citizens
copy after the State, and regard wealth, pomp, and luxury as the great
goods of life. Such a nation creates wealth rapidly, and distributes it
badly. Thence the two extremes, of monstrous opulence and monstrous
misery; all the enjoyment to a few, all the privations to the rest, that is to
say, to the people; Privilege, Exception, Monopoly, Feudality, springing
up from Labour itself: a false and dangerous situation, which, making
Labour a blinded and chained Cyclops, in the mine, at the forge, in the
workshop, at the loom, in the field, over poisonous fumes, in miasmatic
cells, in unventilated factories, founds public power upon private misery,
and plants the greatness of the State in the suffering of the individual. It is
a greatness ill constituted, in which all the material elements are
combined, and into which no moral element enters. If a people, like a star,
has the right of eclipse, the light ought to return. The eclipse should not
degenerate into night.
The three lesser, or the Sublime Lights, you have heard, are the Sun, the
Moon, and the Master of the Lodge; and you have heard what our Brethren


--- PAGE 18 ---
of the York Rite say in regard to them, and why they hold them to be
Lights of the Lodge. But the Sun and Moon do in no sense light the Lodge,
unless it be symbolically, and then the lights are not they, but those things
of which they are the symbols. Of what they are the symbols the Mason in
that Rite is not told. Nor does the Moon in any sense rule the night with
regularity.
The Sun is the ancient symbol of the life-giving and generative power of
the Deity. To the ancients, light was the cause of life; and God was the
source from which all light flowed; the essence of Light, the Invisible
Fire, developed as Flame manifested as light and splendour. The Sun was
His manifestation and visible image; and the Sabaeans worshipping the
Light--God, seemed to worship the Sun, in whom they saw the
manifestation of the Deity.
The Moon was the symbol of the passive capacity of nature to produce, the
female, of which the life-giving power and energy was the male. It was the
symbol of Isis, Astarte, and Artemis, or Diana. The "Master of Life" was
the Supreme Deity, above both, and manifested through both; Zeus, the
Son of Saturn, become King of the Gods; Horus, son of Osiris and Isis,
become the Master of Life; Dionusos or Bacchus, like Mithras, become the
author of Light and Life and Truth.
* * * * *
The Master of Light and Life, the Sun and the Moon, are symbolized in
every Lodge by the Master and Wardens: and this makes it the duty of the


--- PAGE 19 ---
Master to dispense light to the Brethren, by himself, and through the
Wardens, who are his ministers.
"Thy sun," says ISAIAH to Jerusalem, "shall no more go down, neither
shall thy moon withdraw itself; for the LORD shall be thine everlasting
light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended. Thy people also shall
be all righteous; they shall inherit the land forever." Such is the type of a
free people.
Our northern ancestors worshipped this tri-une Deity; ODIN, the Almighty
FATHER; FREA, his wife, emblem of universal matter; and THOR, his
son, the mediator. But above all these was the Supreme God, "the author
of everything that existeth, the Eternal, the Ancient, the Living and Awful
Being, the Searcher into concealed things, the Being that never changeth."
In the Temple of Eleusis (a sanctuary lighted only by a window in the roof,
and representing the Universe), the images of the Sun, Moon, and
Mercury, were represented.
"The Sun and Moon," says the learned Bro.'. DELAUNAY, "represent the
two grand principles of all generations, the active and passive, the male
and the female. The Sun represents the actual light. He pours upon the
Moon his fecundating rays; both shed their light upon their offspring, the
Blazing Star, or HORUS, and the three form the great Equilateral Triangle,
in the centre of which is the omnific letter of the Kabalah, by which
creation is said to have been effected."
The ORNAMENTS of a Lodge are said to be "the Mosaic Pavement, the
Indented Tessel, and the Blazing Star." The Mosaic Pavement, chequered
in squares or lozenges, is said to represent the ground-floor of King
Solomon's Temple; and the Indented Tessel "that beautiful tessellated


--- PAGE 20 ---
border which surrounded it." The Blazing Star in the centre is said to be
"an emblem of Divine Providence, and commemorative of the star which
appeared to guide the wise men of the East to the place of our Saviour's
nativity." But "there was no stone seen" within the Temple. The walls were
covered with planks of cedar, and the floor was covered with planks of fir.
There is no evidence that there was such a pavement or floor in the
Temple, or such a bordering. In England, anciently, the Tracing-Board was
surrounded with an indented border; and it is only in America that such a
border is put around the Mosaic pavement. The tesserae, indeed, are the
squares or lozenges of the pavement. In England, also, "the indented or
denticulated border" is called "tessellated," because it has four "tassels,"
said to represent Temperance, Fortitude, Prudence, and Justice. It was
termed the Indented Trassel; but this is a misuse of words. It is a
tesserated pavement, with an indented border round it.
The pavement, alternately black and white, symbolizes, whether so
intended or not, the Good and Evil Principles of the Egyptian and Persian
creed. It is the warfare of Michael and Satan, of the Gods and Titans, of
Balder and Lok; between light and shadow, which is darkness; Day and
Night; Freedom and Despotism; Religious Liberty and the Arbitrary
Dogmas of a Church that thinks for its votaries, and whose Pontiff claims
to be infallible, and the decretals of its Councils to constitute a gospel.
The edges of this pavement, if in lozenges, will necessarily be indented or
denticulated, toothed like a saw; and to complete and finish it a bordering
is necessary. It is completed by tassels as ornaments at the corners. If
these and the bordering have any symbolic meaning, it is fanciful and
arbitrary.
To find in the BLAZING STAR of five points an allusion to the Divine
Providence, is also fanciful; and to make it commemorative of the Star
that is said to have guided the Magi, is to give it a meaning comparatively
modern. Originally it represented SIRIUS, or the Dog-star, the forerunner
of the inundation of the Nile; the God ANUBIS, companion of ISIS in her


--- PAGE 21 ---
search for the body of OSIRIS, her brother and husband. Then it became
the image of HORUS, the son of OSIRIS, himself symbolized also by the
Sun, the author of the Seasons, and the God of Time; Son of ISIS, who
was the universal nature, himself the primitive matter, inexhaustible
source of Life, spark of uncreated fire, universal seed of all beings. It was
HERMES, also, the Master of Learning, whose name in Greek is that of
the God Mercury. It became the sacred and potent sign or character of the
Magi, the PENTALPHA, and is the significant emblem of Liberty and
Freedom, blazing with a steady radiance amid the weltering elements of
good and evil of Revolutions, and promising serene skies and fertile
seasons to the nations, after the storms of change and tumult.
In the East of the Lodge, over the Master, inclosed in a triangle, is the
Hebrew letter YOD. In the English and American Lodges the Letter G.'. is
substituted for this, as the initial of the word GOD, with as little reason as
if the letter D., initial of DIEU, were used in French Lodges instead of the
proper letter. YOD is, in the Kabalah, the symbol of Unity, of the Supreme
Deity, the first letter of the Holy Name; and also a symbol of the Great
Kabalistic Triads. To understand its mystic meanings, you must open the
pages of the Sohar and Siphra de Zeniutha, and other kabalistic books, and
ponder deeply on their meaning. It must suffice to say, that it is the
Creative Energy of the Deity, is represented as a point, and that point in
the centre of the Circle of immensity. It is to us in this Degree, the symbol
of that unmanifested Deity, the Absolute, who has no name.
Our French Brethren place this letter YOD in the centre of the Blazing
Star. And in the old Lectures, our ancient English Brethren said, "The
Blazing Star or Glory in the centre refers us to that grand luminary, the
Sun, which enlightens the earth, and by its genial influence dispenses
blessings to mankind." They called it also in the same lectures, an emblem
of PRUDENCE. The word Prudentia means, in its original and fullest
signification, Foresight; and, accordingly, the Blazing Star has been
regarded as an emblem of Omniscience, or the All-seeing Eye, which to
the Egyptian Initiates was the emblem of Osiris, the Creator. With the
YOD in the centre, it has the kabalistic meaning of the Divine Energy,
manifested as Light, creating the Universe.


--- PAGE 22 ---
The Jewels of the Lodge are said to be six in number. Three are called
"Movable," and three "Immovable." The SQUARE, the LEVEL, and the
PLUMB were anciently and properly called the Movable Jewels, because
they pass from one Brother to another. It is a modern innovation to call
them immovable, because they must always be present in the Lodge. The
immovable jewels are the ROUGH ASHLAR, the PERFECT ASHLAR or
CUBICAL, STONE, or, in some Rituals, the DOUBLE CUBE, and the
TRACING-BOARD, or TRESTLE-BOARD.
Of these jewels our Brethren of the York Rite say: "The Square inculcates
Morality; the Level, Equality; and the Plumb, Rectitude of Conduct."
Their explanation of the immovable Jewels may be read in their monitors.
Our Brethren of the York Rite say that "there is represented in every well-
governed Lodge, a certain point, within a circle; the point representing an
individual Brother; the Circle, the boundary line of his conduct, beyond
which he is never to suffer his prejudices or passions to betray him."
This is not to interpret the symbols of Masonry. It is said by some, with a
nearer approach to interpretation, that the point within the circle
represents God in the centre of the Universe. It is a common Egyptian sign
for the Sun and Osiris, and is still used as the astronomical sign of the
great luminary. In the Kabalah the point is YOD, the Creative Energy of
God, irradiating with light the circular space which God, the universal
Light, left vacant, wherein to create the worlds, by withdrawing His
substance of Light back on all sides from one point.


--- PAGE 23 ---
Our Brethren add that, "this circle is embordered by two perpendicular
parallel lines, representing Saint John the Baptist and Saint John the
Evangelist, and upon the top rest the Holy Scriptures" (an open book). "In
going round this circle," they say, "we necessarily touch upon these two
lines as well as upon the Holy Scriptures; and while a Mason keeps
himself circumscribed within their precepts, it is impossible that he
should materially err."
It would be a waste of time to comment upon this. Some writers have
imagined that the parallel lines represent the Tropics of Cancer and
Capricorn, which the Sun alternately touches upon at the Summer and
Winter solstices. But the tropics are not perpendicular lines, and the idea
is merely fanciful. If the parallel lines ever belonged to the ancient
symbol, they had some more recondite and more fruitful meaning. They
probably had the same meaning as the twin columns Jachin and Boaz. That
meaning is not for the Apprentice. The adept may find it in the Kabalah.
The JUSTICE and MERCY of God are in equilibrium, and the result is
HARMONY, because a Single and Perfect Wisdom presides over both.
The Holy Scriptures are an entirely modern addition to the symbol, like
the terrestrial and celestial globes on the columns of the portico. Thus the
ancient symbol has been denaturalized by incongruous additions, like that
of Isis weeping over the broken column containing the remains of Osiris at
Byblos.
* * * * * *
Masonry has its decalogue, which is a law to its Initiates. These are its
Ten Commandments:


--- PAGE 24 ---
I. God is the Eternal, Omnipotent, Immutable WISDOM and Supreme
INTELLIGENCE and Exhaustless Love.
Thou shalt adore, revere, and love Him !
Thou shalt honour Him by practising the virtues!
II. Thy religion shall be, to do good because it is a pleasure to thee, and
not merely because it is a duty.
That thou mayest become the friend of the wise man, thou shalt obey his
precepts !
Thy soul is immortal ! Thou shalt do nothing to degrade it !
III. Thou shalt unceasingly war against vice!
Thou shalt not do unto others that which thou wouldst not wish them to do
unto thee !
Thou shalt be submissive to thy fortunes, and keep burning the light of
wisdom !
IV. Thou shalt honour thy parents !
Thou shalt pay respect and homage to the aged!


--- PAGE 25 ---
Thou shalt instruct the young!
Thou shalt protect and defend infancy and innocence !
V. Thou shalt cherish thy wife and thy children!
Thou shalt love thy country, and obey its laws!
VI. Thy friend shall be to thee a second self !
Misfortune shall not estrange thee from him !
Thou shalt do for his memory whatever thou wouldst do for him, if he
were living!
VII. Thou shalt avoid and flee from insincere friendships !
Thou shalt in everything refrain from excess.
Thou shalt fear to be the cause of a stain on thy memory! 
VIII. Thou shalt allow no passions to become thy master !
Thou shalt make the passions of others profitable lessons to thyself!


--- PAGE 26 ---
Thou shalt be indulgent to error !
IX. Thou shalt hear much: Thou shalt speak little: Thou shalt act well !
Thou shalt forget injuries!
Thou shalt render good for evil !
Thou shalt not misuse either thy strength or thy superiority !
X. Thou shalt study to know men; that thereby thou mayest learn to know
thyself !
Thou shalt ever seek after virtue !
Thou shalt be just!
Thou shalt avoid idleness !
But the great commandment of Masonry is this: "A new commandment
give I unto you: that ye love one another! He that saith he is in the light,
and hateth his brother, remaineth still in the darkness."


--- PAGE 27 ---
Such are the moral duties of a Mason. But it is also the duty of Masonry to
assist in elevating the moral and intellectual level of society; in coining
knowledge, bringing ideas into circulation, and causing the mind of youth
to grow; and in putting, gradually, by the teachings of axioms and the
promulgation of positive laws, the human race in harmony with its
destinies.
To this duty and work the Initiate is apprenticed. He must not imagine that
he can effect nothing, and, therefore, despairing, become inert. It is in
this, as in a man's daily life. Many great deeds are done in the small
struggles of life. There is, we are told, a determined though unseen
bravery, which defends itself, foot to foot, in the darkness, against the
fatal invasion of necessity and of baseness. There are noble and
mysterious triumphs, which no eye sees, which no renown rewards, which
no flourish of trumpets salutes. Life, misfortune, isolation, abandonment,
poverty, are battle-fields, which have their heroes,--heroes obscure, but
sometimes greater than those who become illustrious. The Mason should
struggle in the same manner, and with the same bravery, against those
invasions of necessity and baseness, which come to nations as well as to
men. He should meet them, too, foot to foot, even in the darkness, and
protest against the national wrongs and follies; against usurpation and the
first inroads of that hydra, Tyranny. There is no more sovereign eloquence
than the truth in indignation. It is more difficult for a people to keep than
to gain their freedom. The Protests of Truth are always needed.
Continually, the right must protest against the fact. There is, in fact,
Eternity in the Right. The Mason should be the Priest and Soldier of that
Right. If his country should be robbed of her liberties, he should still not
despair. The protest of the Right against the Fact persists forever. The
robbery of a people never becomes prescriptive. Reclamation of its rights
is barred by no length of time. Warsaw can no more be Tartar than Venice
can be Teutonic. A people may endure military usurpation, and subjugated
States kneel to States and wear the yoke, while under the stress of
necessity; but when the necessity disappears, if the people is fit to be free,
the submerged country will float to the surface and reappear, and Tyranny
be adjudged by History to have murdered its victims.


--- PAGE 28 ---
Whatever occurs, we should have Faith in the Justice and overruling
Wisdom of God, and Hope for the Future, and Lovingkindness for those
who are in error. God makes visible to men His will in events; an obscure
text, written in a mysterious language. Men make their translations of it
forthwith, hasty, incorrect, full of faults, omissions, and misreadings. We
see so short a way along the arc of the great circle! Few minds
comprehend the Divine tongue. The most sagacious, the most calm, the
most profound, decipher the hieroglyphs slowly; and when they arrive with
their text, perhaps the need has long gone by; there are already twenty
translations in the public square--the most incorrect being, as of course,
the most accepted and popular. From each translation, a party is born; and
from each misreading, a faction. Each party believes or pretends that it
has the only true text, and each faction believes or pretends that it alone
possesses the light. Moreover, factions are blind men, who aim straight,
errors are excellent projectiles, striking skillfully, and with all the
violence that springs from false reasoning, wherever a want of logic in
those who defend the right, like a defect in a cuirass, makes them
vulnerable.
Therefore it is that we shall often be discomfited in combating error
before the people. Antaeus long resisted Hercules; and the heads of the
Hydra grew as fast as they were cut off. It is absurd to say that Error,
wounded, writhes in pain, and dies amid her worshippers. Truth conquers
slowly. There is a wondrous vitality in Error. Truth, indeed, for the most
part, shoots over the heads of the masses; or if an error is prostrated for a
moment, it is up again in a moment, and as vigorous as ever. It will not
die when the brains are out, and the most stupid and irrational errors are
the longest-lived.
Nevertheless, Masonry, which is Morality and Philosophy, must not cease
to do its duty. We never know at what moment success awaits our efforts--
generally when most unexpected--nor with what effect our efforts are or
are not to be attended. Succeed or fail, Masonry must not bow to error, or
succumb under discouragement. There were at Rome a few Carthaginian
soldiers, taken prisoners, who refused to bow to Flaminius, and had a
little of Hannibal's magnanimity. Masons should possess an equal
greatness of soul. Masonry should be an energy; finding its aim and effect


--- PAGE 29 ---
in the amelioration of mankind. Socrates should enter into Adam, and
produce Marcus Aurelius, in other words, bring forth from the man of
enjoyments, the man of wisdom. Masonry should not be a mere watch-
tower, built upon mystery, from which to gaze at ease upon the world, with
no other result than to be a convenience for the curious. To hold the full
cup of thought to the thirsty lips of men; to give to all the true ideas of
Deity; to harmonize conscience and science, are the province of
Philosophy. Morality is Faith in full bloom. Contemplation should lead to
action, and the absolute be practical; the ideal be made air and food and
drink to the human mind. Wisdom is a sacred communion. It is only on
that condition that it ceases to be a sterile love of Science, and becomes
the one and supreme method by which to unite Humanity and arouse it to
concerted action. Then Philosophy becomes Religion.
And Masonry, like History and Philosophy, has eternal duties-- eternal,
and, at the same time, simple--to oppose Caiaphas as Bishop, Draco or
Jefferies as Judge, Trimalcion as Legislator, and Tiberius as Emperor.
These are the symbols of the tyranny that degrades and crushes, and the
corruption that defiles and infests. In the works published for the use of
the Craft we are told that the three great tenets of a Mason's profession,
are Brotherly Love, Relief, and Truth. And it is true that a Brotherly
affection and kindness should govern us in all our intercourse and
relations with our brethren; and a generous and liberal philanthropy
actuate us in regard to all men. To relieve the distressed is peculiarly the
duty of Masons--a sacred duty, not to be omitted, neglected, or coldly or
inefficiently complied with. It is also most true, that Truth is a Divine
attribute and the foundation of every virtue. To be true, and to seek to find
and learn the Truth, are the great objects of every good Mason.
As the Ancients did, Masonry styles Temperance, Fortitude, Prudence, and
Justice, the four cardinal virtues. They are as necessary to nations as to
individuals. The people that would be Free and Independent, must possess
Sagacity, Forethought, Foresight, and careful Circumspection, all which
are included in the meaning of the word Prudence. It must be temperate in
asserting its rights, temperate in its councils, economical in its expenses;
it must be bold, brave, courageous, patient under reverses, undismayed by
disasters, hopeful amid calamities, like Rome when she sold the field at


--- PAGE 30 ---
which Hannibal had his camp. No Cannae or Pharsalia or Pavia or
Agincourt or Waterloo must discourage her. Let her Senate sit in their
seats until the Gauls pluck them by the beard. She must, above all things,
be just, not truckling to the strong and warring on or plundering the weak;
she must act on the square with all nations, and the feeblest tribes; always
keeping her faith, honest in her legislation, upright in all her dealings.
Whenever such a Republic exists, it will be immortal: for rashness,
injustice, intemperance and luxury in prosperity, and despair and disorder
in adversity, are the causes of the decay and dilapidation of nations.
 MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
2º - Fellow-craft
In the Ancient Orient, all religion was more or less a mystery and there
was no divorce from it of philosophy. The popular theology, taking the
multitude of allegories and symbols for realities, degenerated into a
worship of the celestial luminaries, of imaginary Deities with human
feelings, passions, appetites, and lusts, of idols, stones, animals, reptiles.
The Onion was sacred to the Egyptians, because its different layers were a
symbol of the concentric heavenly spheres. Of course the popular religion
could not satisfy the deeper longings and thoughts, the loftier aspirations
of the Spirit, or the logic of reason. The first, therefore, was taught to the
initiated in the Mysteries. There, also, it was taught by symbols. The
vagueness of symbolism, capable of many interpretations, reached what


--- PAGE 31 ---
the palpable and conventional creed could not. Its indefiniteness
acknowledged the abstruseness of the subject: it treated that mysterious
subject mystically: it endeavored to illustrate what it could not explain; to
excite an appropriate feeling, if it could not develop an adequate idea; and
to rmake the image a mere subordinate conveyance for the conception,
which itself never became obvious or familiar.
Thus the knowledge now imparted by books and letters, was of old
conveyed by symbols; and the priests invented or perpetuated a display of
rites and exhibitions, which were not only more attractive to the eye than
words, but often more suggestive and more pregnant with meaning to the
mind.
Masonry, successor of the Mysteries, still follows the ancient manner of
teaching. Her ceremonies are like the ancient mystic shows,--not the
reading of an essay, but the opening of a problem, requiring research, and
constituting philosophy the arch-expounder. Her symbols are the
instruction she gives. The lectures are endeavors, often partial and one-
sided, to interpret these symbols. He who would become an accomplished
Mason must not be content merely to hear, or even to understand, the
lectures; he must, aided by them, and they having, as it were, marked out
the way for him, study, interpret, and develop these symbols for himself
* * * * * *
Though Masonry is identical with the ancient Mysteries, it is so only in
this qualified sense: that it presents but an imperfect image of their
brilliancy, the ruins only of their grandeur, and a system that has
experienced progressive alterations, the fruits of social events, political
circumstances, and the ambitious imbecility of its improvers. After
leaving Egypt, the Mysteries were modified by the habits of the different
nations among whom they were introduced, and especially by the religious
systems of the countries into which they were transplanted. To maintain
the established government, laws, and religion, was the obligation of the
Initiate everywhere; and everywhere they were the heritage of the priests,
who were nowhere willing to make the common people co-proprietors with
themselves of philosophical truth.
Masonry is not the Coliseum in ruins. It is rather a Roman palace of the
middle ages, disfigured by moderll architectural improvements, yet built


--- PAGE 32 ---
on a Cyclopcean foundation laid by the Etruscans, and with many a stone
of the superstructure taken from dwellings and temples of the age of
Hadrian and Antoninus.
Christianity taught the doctrine of FRATERNITY; but repudiated that of
political EQUALITY, by continually inculcating obedience to Caesar, and
to those lawfully in authority. Masonry was the first apostle of
EQUALITY. In the Monastery there is fraternity and equality, but no
liberty. Masonry added that also, and claimed for man the three-fold
heritage, LIBERTY, EQUALITY, and FRATERNITY.
It was but a development of the original purpose of the Mysteries, which
was to teach men to know and practice their duties to themselves and their
fellows, the great practical end of all philosophy and all knowledge.
Truths are the springs from which duties flow; and it is but a few hundred
years since a new Truth began to be distinctly seen; that MAN IS
SUPREME OVER INSTITUTIONS, AND NOT THEY OVER HIM. Man
has natural empire over all institutions. They are for him, aecording to his
development; not he for them. This seems to us a very simple statement,
one to which all men, everywhere, ought to assent. But once it was a great
new Truth,--not revealed until governments had been in existence for at
least five thousand years. Once revealed, it imposed new duties on men.
Man owed it to himself to be free. He owed it to his country to seek to
give her freedom, or maintain her in that possession. It made Tyranny and
Usurpation the enemies of the Human Race. It created a general outlawry
of Despots and Despotisms, temporal and spiritual. The sphere of Duty
was immensely enlarged. Patriotism had, henceforth, a new and wider
meaning. Free Government, Free Thought, Free Conscience, Free Speech!
All these came to be inalienable rights, which those who had parted with
them or been robbed of them, or whose ancestors had lost them, had the
right summarily to retake. Unfortunately, as Truths always become
perverted into falsehoods, and are falsehoods when misapplied, this Truth
became the Gospel of Anarchy, soon after it was first preached.
Masonry early comprehended this Truth, and recognized its own enlarged
duties. Its symbols then came to have a wider meaning; but it also
assumed the mask of Stone-masonry, and borrowed its working-tools, and
so was supplied with new and apt symbols. It aided in bringing about the
French Revolution, disappeared with the Girondists, was born again with
the restoration of order, and sustained Napoleon, because, though


--- PAGE 33 ---
Emperor, he acknowledged the right of the people to select its rulers, and
was at the head of a nation refusing to receive back its old kings. He
pleaded, with sabre, musket, and cannon, the great cause of the People
against Royalty, the right of the French people even to make a Corsican
General their Emperor, if it pleased them.
Masonry felt that this Truth had the Omnipotence of God on its side; and
that neither Pope nor Potentate could overcome it. It was a truth dropped
into the world's wide treasury, and forming a part of the heritage which
each generation receives, enlarges, and holds in trust, and of necessity
bequeaths to mankind; the personal estate of man, entailed of nature to the
end of time. And Masonry early recognized it as true, that to set forth and
develop a truth, or any human excellence of gift or growth, is to make
greater the spiritual glory of the race; that whosoever aids the march of a
Truth, and makes the thought a thing, writes in the same line with
MOSES, and with Him who died upon the cross; and has an intellectual
sympathy with the Deity Himself.
The best gift we can bestow on man is manhood. It is that which Masonry
is ordained of God to bestow on its votaries: not sectarianism and
religious dogma; not a rudimental morality, that may be found in the
writings of Confucius, Zoroaster, Seneca, and the Rabbis, in the Proverbs
and Ecclesiastes; not a little and cheap common-school knowledge; but
manhood and science and philosophy.
Not that Philosophy or Science is in opposition to Religion. For
Philosophy is but that knowledge of God and the Soul, which is derived
from observation of the manifested action of God and the Soul, and from a
wise analogy. It is the intellectual guide which the religious sentiment
needs. The true religious philosophy of an imperfect being, is not a system
of creed, but, as SOCRATES thought, an infinite search or approximation.
Philosophy is that intellectual and moral progress, which the religious
sentiment inspires and ennobles.
As to Science, it could not walk alone, while religion was stationary. It
consists of those matured inferences from experience which all other
experience confirms. It realizes and unites all that was truly valuable in
both the old schemes of mediation,--one heroic, or the system of action
and effort; and the mystical theory of spiritual, ccntemplative commullion.
"Listen to me," says GALEN, "as to the voice of the Eleusinian
Hierophant, and believe that the study of Nature is a mystery no less


--- PAGE 34 ---
important than theirs, nor less adapted to display the wisdom and power of
the Great Creator. Their lessons and demonstrations were obscure, but
ours are clear and unmistakable."
We deem that to be the best knowledge we can obtain of the Soul of
another man, which is furnished by his actions and his life-long conduct.
Evidence to the contrary, supplied by what another man informs us that
this Soul has said to his, would weigh little against the former. The first
Scriptures for the human race were written by God on the Earth and
Heavens. The reading of these Scriptures is Science. Familiarity with the
grass and trees, the insects and the infusoria, teaches us deeper lessons of
love and faith than we can glean from the writings of FENELON and
AUGUSTINE. The great Bible of God is ever open before mankind.
Knowledge is convertible into power, and axioms into rules of utility and
duty. But knowledge itself is not Power. Wisdom is Power; and her Prime
Minister is JUSTICE, which is the perfected law of TRUTH. The purpose,
therefore, of Education and Science is to make a man wise. If knowledge
does not make him so, it is wasted, like water poured on the sands. To
know the formulas of Masonry, is of as little value, by itself, as to know
so many words and sentences in some barbarous African or Australasian
dialect. To know even the meaning of the symbols, is but little, unless that
adds to our wisdom, and also to our charity, which is to justice like one
hemisphere of the brain to the other.
Do not lose sight, then, of the true object of your studies in Masonry. It is
to add to your estate of wisdom, and not merely to your knowledge. A man
may spend a lifetime in studying a single specialty of knowledge,--
botany, conchology, or entomology, for instance,--in committing to
memory names derived from the Greek, and classifying and reclassifying;
and yet be no wiser than when he began. It is the great truths as to all that
most concerns a man, as to his rights, interests, and duties, that Masonry
seeks to teach her Initiates.
The wiser a man becomes, the less will he be inclined to submit tamely to
the imposition of fetters or a yoke, on his conscience or his person. For,
by increase of wisdom he not only better knows his rights, but the more
highly values them, and is more conscious of his worth and dignity. His
pride then urges him to assert his independence. He becomes better able to
assert it also; and better able to assist others or his country, when they or
she stake all, even existence, upon the same assertion. But mere


--- PAGE 35 ---
knowledge makes no one independent, nor fits him to be free. It often only
makes him a more useful slave. Liberty is a curse to the ignorant and
brutal.
Political science has for its object to ascertain in what manner and by
means of what institutions political and personal freedom may be secured
and perpetuated: not license, or the mere right of every man to vote, but
entire and absolute freedom of thought and opinion, alike free of the
despotism of monarch and mob and prelate; freedom of action within the
limits of the general law enacted for all; the Courts of Justice, with
impartial Judges and juries, open to all alike; weakness and poverty
equally potent in those Court.s as power and wealth; the avenues to office
and honor open alike to all the worthy; the military powers, in war oY
peaee, in strict subordination to the civil power; arbitrary arrests for acts
not known to the law as crimes, impossible; Romish Inquisitions, Star-
Chambers, Military Commissions, unknown; the means of instruction
within reach of the children of all; the right of Free Speech; and
accountability of all public omcers, civil and military.
If Masonry needed to be justified for imposing political as well as moral
duties on its Initiates, it would be enough to point to the sad history of the
world. It would not even need that she should turn back the pages of
history to the chapters written by Tacitus: that she should recite the
incredible horrors of despotism under Caligula and Domitian, Caracalla
and Commodus, Vitellius and Maximin. She need only point to the
centuries of calamity through which the gay French nation passed; to the
long oppression of the feudal ages, of the selfish Bourbon kings; to those
times when the peasants were robbed and slaughtered by their own lords
and princes, like sheep; when the lord claimed the firstfruits of the
peasant's marriage-bed; when the captured city was given up to merciless
rape and massacre; when the State-prisons groaned with innocent victims,
and the Church blessed the banners of pitiless murderers, and sang Te
Deums for the crowning mercy of the Eve of St. Bartholomew.
We might turn over the pages, to a later chapter,--that of the reign of the
Fifteenth Louis, when young girls, hardly more than children, were
kidnapped to serve his lusts; when lettres de cachet filled the Bastile with
persons accused of no crime, with husbands who were in the way of the
pleasures of lascivious wives and of villains wearing orders of nobility;
when the people were ground between the upper and the nether millstone
of taxes, customs, and excises; and when the Pope's Nuncio and the
Cardinal de la Roche-Ayman, devoutly kneeling, one on each side of


--- PAGE 36 ---
Madame du Barry, the king's abandoned prostitute, put the slippers on her
naked feet, as she rose from the adulterous bed. Then, indeed, suffering
and toil were the two forms of man, and the people were but beasts of
burden.
The true Mason is he who labors strenuously to help his Order effect its
great purposes. Not that the Order can effect them by itself; but that it,
too, can help. It also is one of God's instruments. It is a Force and a
Power; and shame upon it, if it did not exert itself, and, if need be,
sacrihce its children in the cause of humanity, as Abraham was ready to
offer up Isaac on the altar of sacrifice. It will not forget that noble
allegory of Curtius leaping, all in armor, into the great yawning gulf that
opened to swallow Rome. It will TRY. It shall not be its fault if the day
never comes when man will no longer have to fear a conquest, an
invasion, a usurpation, a rivalry of nations with the armed hand, an
interruption of civilization depending on a marriage-royal, or a birth in
the hereditary tyrannies; a partition of the peoples by a Congress, a
dismemberment by the downfall of a dynasty, a combat of two religions,
meeting head to head, like two goats of darkness on the bridge of the
Infinite: when they will no longer have to fear famine, spoliation,
prostitution from distress, misery from lack of work, and all the
brigandages of chance in the forest of events: when nations will gravitate
about the Truth, like stars about the light, each in its own orbit, without
clashing or collision; and everywhere Freedom, cinctured with stars,
crowned with the celestial splendors, and with wisdom and justice on
either hand, will reign supreme.
In your studies as a Fellow-Craft you must be guided by REASON, LOVE
and FAITH.
We do not now discuss the differences between Reason and Faith, and
undertake to define the domain of each. But it is necessary to say, that
even in the ordinary affairs of life we are governed far more by what we
believe than by what we know; by FAITH and ANALOGY, than by
REASON. The "Age of Reason" of the French Revolution taught, we know,
what a folly it is to enthrone Reason by itself as supreme. Reason is at
fault when it deals with the Infinite. There we must revere and believe.
Notwithstanding the calamities of the virtuous, the miseries of the
deserving, the prosperity of tyrants and the murder of martyrs, we must
believe there is a wise, just, merciful, and loving God, an Intelligence and
a Providence, supreme over all, and caring for the minutest things and
events. A Faith is a necessity to man. Woe to him who believes nothing!


--- PAGE 37 ---
We believe that the soul of another is of a certain nature and possesses
certain qualities, that he is generous and honest, or penurious and knavish,
that she is virtuous and amiable, or vicious and ill-tempered, from the
countenance alone, from little more than a glimpse of it, without the
means of knowing. We venture our fortune on the signature of a man on
the other side of the world, whom we never saw, upon the belief that he is
honest and trustworthy. We believe that occurrences have taken place,
upon the assertion of others. We believe that one will acts upon another,
and in the reality of a multitude of other phenomena that Reason cannot
explain.
But we ought not to believe what Reason authoritatively denies, that at
which the sense of right revolts, that which is absurd or self-contradictory,
or at issue with experience or science, or that which degrades the
character of the Deity, and would make Him revengeful, malignant, cruel,
or unjust.
A man's Faith is as much his own as his Reason is. His Freedom consists
as much in his faith being free as in his will being uncontrolled by power.
All the Priests and Augurs of Rome or Greece had not the right to require
Cicero or Socrates to believe in the absurd mythology of the vulgar. All
the Imaums of Mohammedanism have not the right to require a Pagan to
believe that Gabriel dictated the Koran to the Prophet. All the Brahmins
that ever lived, if assembled in one conclave like the Cardinals, could not
gain a right to compel a single human being to believe in the Hindu
Cosmogony. No man or body of men can be infallible, and authorized to
decide what other men shall believe, as to any tenet of faith. Except to
those who first receive it, every religion and the truth of all inspired
writings depend on human testimony and internal evidences, to be judged
of by Reason and the wise analogies of Faith. Each man must necessarily
have the right to judge of their truth for himself; because no one man can
have any higher or better right to judge than another of equal information
and intelligence.
Domitian claimed to be the Lord God; and statues and images of him, in
silver and gold, were found throughout the known world. He claimed to be
regarded as the God of all men; and, according to Suetonius, began his
letters thus: "Our Lord and God commands that it should be done so and
so;" and formally decreed that no one should address him otherwise, either
in writing or by word of mouth. Palfurius Sura, the philosopher, who was
his chief delator, accusing those who refused to recognize his divinity,
however much he may have believed in that divinity, had not the right to


--- PAGE 38 ---
demand that a single Christian in Rome or the provinces should do the
same.
Reason is far from being the only guide, in morals or in political science.
Love or loving-kindness must keep it company, to exclude fanaticism,
intolerance, and persecution, to all of which a morality too ascetic, and
extreme political principles, invariably lead. We must also have faith in
ourselves, and in our fellows and the people, or we shall be easily
discouraged by reverses, and our ardor cooled by obstacles. We must not
listen to Reason alone. Force comes more from Faitll and Love: and it is
by the aid of these that man scales the loftiest heights of morality, or
becomes the Saviour and Redeemer of a People. Reason must hold the
helm; but these supply the motive power. They are the wings of the soul.
Enthusiasm is generally unreasoning; and without it, and Love and Faith,
there would have been no RIENZI, or TELL, or SYDNEY, or any other of
the great patriots whose names are immortal. If the Deity had been merely
and only All-wise and All-mighty, He would never have created the
Universe.
* * * * * *
It is GENIUS that gets Power; and its prime lieutenants are FORCE and
WISDOM. The unruliest of men bend before the leader that has the sense
to see and the will to do. It is Genius that rules with God-like Power; that
unveils, with its counsellors, the hidden human mysteries, cuts asunder
with its word the huge knots, and builds up with its word the crumbled
ruins. At its glance fall down the senseless idols, whose altars have been
on all the high places and in all the sacred groves. Dishonesty and
imbecility stand abashed before it. Its single Yea or Nay revokes the
wrongs of ages, and is heard among the future generations. Its power is
immense, because its wisdom is immense. Genius is the Sun of the
political sphere. Force and Wisdom, its ministers, are the orbs that carry
its light into darkness, and answer it with their solid reflecting Truth.
Development is symbolized by the use of the Mallet and Chisel; the
development of the energies and intellect, of the individual and the
people. Genius may place itself at the head of an unintellectual,
uneducated, unenergetic nation; but in a free country, to cultivate the
intellect of those who elect, is the only mode of securing intellect and
genius for rulers. The world is seldom ruled by the great spirits, except
after dissolution and new birth. In periods of transition and convulsion,


--- PAGE 39 ---
the Long Parliaments, the Robespierres and Marats, and the semi-
respectabilities of intellect, too often hold the reins of power. The
Cromwells and Napoleons come later. After Marius and Sulla and Cicero
the rhetorician, CAESAR. The great intellect is often too sharp for the
granite of this life. Legislators may be very ordinary men; for legislation
is very ordinary work; it is but the final issue of a million minds.
The power of the purse or the sword, compared to that of the spirit, is
poor and contemptible. As to lands, you may have agrarian laws, and equal
partition. But a man's intellect is all his own, held direct from God, an
inalienable fief. It is the most potent of weapons in the hands of a paladin.
If the people comprehend Force in the physical sense, how much more do
tlley revelence the intellectual! Ask Hildebrand, or Luther, or Loyola.
They fall prostrate before it, as before an idol. The mastery of mind over
mind is the only conquest worth having. The other injures both, and
dissolves at a breath; rude as it is, the great cable falls down and snaps at
last. But this dimly resembles the dominion of the Creator. It does not
need a subject like that of Peter the Hermit. If the stream be but bright and
strong, it will sweep like a spring-tide to the popular heart. Not in word
only, but in intellectual act lies the fascination. It is the homage to the
Invisible. This power, knotted with Love, is the golden chain let down into
the well of Truth, or the invisible chain that binds the ranks of mankind
together.
Influence of man over man is a law of nature, whether it be by a great
estate in land or in intellect. It may mean slavery, a deference to the
eminent human judgment. Society hangs spiritually together, like the
revoiving spheres above. The free country, in which intellect and genius
govern, will endure. Where they serve, and other influences govern, the
national life is short. All the nations that have tried to govern themselves
by their smallest, by the incapables, or merely respectables, have come to
nought. Constitutions and Laws, without Genius and Intellect to govern,
will not prevent decay. In that case they have the dry-rot and the life dies
out of them by degrees.
To give a nation the franchise of the Intellect is the only sure mode of
perpetuating freedom. This will compel exertion and generous care for the
people from those on the higher seats, and honorable and intelligent
allegiance from those below. Then political public life will protect all men
from self-abasement in sensual pursuits, from vulgar acts and low greed,
by giving the noble ambition of just imperial rule. To elevate the people
by teaching loving-kindness and wisdom, with power to him who teaches


--- PAGE 40 ---
best: and so to develop the free State from the rough ashlar:-- this is the
great labor in which Masonry desires to lend a helping hand.
All of us should labor in building up the great monument of a nation, the
Holy House of the Temple. The cardinal virtues must not be partitioned
among men, becoming the exclusive property of some, like the common
crafts. ALL are apprenticed to the partners, Duty and Honor.
Masonry is a march and a struggle toward the Light. For the individual as
well as the nation, Light is Virtue, Manliness, Intelligence, Liberty.
Tyranny over the soul or body, is darkness. The freest people, like the
freest man, is always in danger of relapsing into servitude. Wars are
almost always fatal to Republics. They create tyrants, and consolidate
their power. They spring, for the most part, from evil counsels. When the
small and the base are intrusted with power, legislation and administration
become but two parallel series of errors and blunders, ending in war,
calamity, and the necessity for a tyrant. When the nation feels its feet
sliding backward, as if it walked on the ice, the time has come for a
supreme effort. The magnificent tyrants of the past are but the types of
those of the future. Men and nations will always sell themselves into
slavery, to gratify their passions and obtain revenge. The tyrant's plea,
necessity, is always available; and the tyrant once in power, the necessity
of providing for his safety makes him savage. Religion is a power, and he
must control that. Independent, its sanctuaries might rebel. Then it
becomes unlawful for the people to worship God in their own way, and the
old spiritual despotisms revive. Men must believe as Power wills, or die;
and even if they may believe as they will, all they have, lands, houses,
body, and soul, are stamped with the royal brand. "I am the State," said
Louis the Fourteenth to his peasants; "the very shirts on your backs are
mine, and I can take them if I will."
And dynasties so established endure, like that of the Caesars of Rome, of
the Caesars of Constantinople, of the Caliphs, the Stuarts, the Spaniards,
the Goths, the Valois, until the race wears out, and ends with lunatics and
idiots, who still rule. There is no concord among men, to end the horrible
bondage. The State falls inwardly, as well as by the outward blows of the
incoherent elements. The furious human passions, the sleeping human
indolence, the stolid human ignorance, the rivalry of human castes, are as
good for the kirlgs as the swords of the Paladins. The worshippers have all
bowed so long to the old idol, that they cannot go into the streets and
choose another Grand Llama. And so the effete State floats on down the


--- PAGE 41 ---
puddled stream of Time, until the tempest or the tidal sea discovers that
the worm has consumed its strength, and it crumbles into oblivion.
* * * * * *
Civil and religious Freedom must go hand in hand; and Persecution
matures them both. A people content with the thoughts made for them by
the priests of a church will be content with Royalty by Divine Right,-- the
Church and the Throne mutually sustaining each other. They will smother
schism and reap infidelity and indifference; and while the battle for
freedom goes on around them, they will only sink the more apathetically
into servitude and a deep trance, perhaps occasionally interrupted by
furious fits of frenzy, followed by helpless exhaustion.
Despotism is not dimcult in any land that has only known one master from
its childhood; but there is no harder problem than to perfect and
perpetuate free government by the people themselves; for it is not one
king that is needed: all must be kings. It is easy to set up Masaniello, that
in a few days he may fall lower than before. But free govermnent grows
slowly, like the individual human faculties; and like the forest-trees, from
the inner heart outward. Liberty is not only the common birth-right, but it
is lost as well by non-user as by mis-user. It depends far more on the
universal effort than any other human property. It has no single shrine or
holy well of pilgrimage for the nation; for its waters should burst out
freely from the whole soil.
The free popular power is one that is only known in its strength in the
hour of adversity: for all its trials, sacrifices and expectations are its own.
It is trained to think for itself, and also to act for itself. When the
enslaved people prostrate themselves in the dust before the hurricane, like
the alarmed beasts of the field, the free people stand erect before it, in all
the strength of unity, in self-reliance, in mutual reliance, with effrontery
against all but the visible hand of God. It is neither cast down by calamity
nor elated by success.
This vast power of endurance, of forbearance, of patience, and of
performance, is only acquired by continual exercise of all the functions,
like the healthful physical human vigor, like the individual moral vigor.


--- PAGE 42 ---
And the maxim is no less true than old, that eternal vigilance is the price
of liberty. It is curious to observe the universal pretext by which the
tyrants of all times take away the national liberties. It is stated in the
statutes of Edward II., that the justices and the sheriff should no longer be
elected by the people, on account of the riots and dissensions which had
arisen. The same reason was given long before for the suppression of
popular election of the bishops; and there is a witness to this untruth in
the yet older times, when Rome lost her freedom, and her indignant
citizens declared that tumultuous liberty is better than disgraceful
tranquillity.
* * * * * *
With the Compasses and Scale, we can trace all the figures used in the
mathematics of planes, or in what are called GEOMETRY and
TRIGONOMETRY, two words that are themselves deficient in meaning.
GEOMETRY, which the letter G. in most Lodges is said to signify, means
measurement of land or the earth--or Surveying; and TRIGONOMETRY,
the measurement of triangles, or figures with three sides or angles. The
latter is by far the most appropriate name for the science intended to be
expressed by the word "Geometry." Neither is of a meaning sufficiently
wide: for although the vast surveys of great spaces of the earth's surface,
and of coasts, by which shipwreck and calamity to mariners are avoided,
are effected by means of triangulation;--though it was by the same method
that the French astronomers measured a degree of latitude and so
established a scale of measures on an immutable basis; though it is by
means of the immense triangle that has for its base a line drawn in
imagination between the place of the earth now and its place six months
hence in space, and for its apex a planet or star, that the distance of
Jupiter or Sirius from the earth is ascertained; and though there is a
triangle still more vast, its base extending either way from us, with and
past the horizon into immensity, and its apex infinitely distant above us;
to which corresponds a similar infinite triangle below--what is above
equalling what is below, immensity equalling immensity; yet the Science
of Numbers, to which Pythagoras attached so much importance, and whose
mysteries are found everywhere in the ancient religions, and most of all in
the Kabalah and in the Bib]e, is not sufficiently expressed by either the
word "Geometry" or the word "Trigonometry." For that science includes
theseJ with Arithmetic, and also with Algebra, Logarithms, the Integral
and Differential Calculus; and by means of it are worked out the great
problems of Astronomy or the Laws of the Stars.


--- PAGE 43 ---
* * * * * *
Virtue is but heroic bravery, to do the thing thought to be true, in spite of
all enemies of flesh or spirit, in despite of all temptations or menaces.
Man is accountable for the uprightness of his doctrine, but not for the
rightness of it. Devout enthusiasm is far easier than a good action. The
end of thought is action; the sole purpose of Religion is an Ethic. Theory,
in political science, is worthless, except for the purpose of being realized
in practice.
In every credo, religious or political as in the soul of man, there are two
regions, the Dialectic and the Ethic; and it is only when the two are
harmoniously blended, that a perfect discipline is evolved. There are men
who dialectically are Christians, as there are a multitude who dialectically
are Masons, and yet who are ethically Infidels, as these are ethically of the
Profane, in the strictest sense:--intellectual believers, but practical
atheists:-- men who will write you "Evidences," in perfect faith in their
logic, but cannot carry out the Christian or Masonic doctrine, owing to the
strength, or weakness, of the flesh. On the other hand, there are many
dialectical skeptics, but ethical believers, as there are many Masons who
have never undergone initiation; and as ethics are the end and purpose of
religion, so are ethical believers the most worthy. He who does right is
better than he who thinks right.
But you must not act upon the hypothesis that all men are hypocrites,
whose conduct does not square with their sentiments. No vice is more
rare, for no task is more difficult, than systematic hypocrisy. When the
Demagogue becomes a Usurper it does not follow that he was all the time
a hypocrite. Shallow men only so judge of others.
The truth is, that creed has, in general, very little influence on the
conduct; in religion, on that of the individual; in politics, on that of party.
As a general thing, the Mahometan, in the Orient, is far more honest and
trustworthy than the Christian. A Gospel of Love in the mouth, is an
Avatar of Persecution in the heart. Men who believe in eternal damnation
and a literal sea of fire and brimstone, incur the certainty of it, according
to their creed, on the slightest temptation of appetite or passion.
Predestination insists on the necessity of good works. In Masonry, at the
least flow of passion, one speaks ill of another behind his back; and so far
from the "Brotherhood" of Blue Masonry being real, and the solemn
pledges contained in the use of the word "Brother" being complied with,


--- PAGE 44 ---
extraordinary pains are taken to show that.Masonry is a sort of
abstraction, which scorns to interfere in worldly matters. The rule may be
regarded as universal, that, where there is a choice to be made, a Mason
will give his vote and influence, in politics and business, to the less
qualified profane in preference to the better qualified Mason. One will
take an oath to oppose any unlawful usurpation of power, and then become
the ready and even eager instrument of a usurper. Another will call one
"Brother," and then play toward him the part of Judas Iscariot, or strike
him, as Joab did Abner, under the fifth rib, with a lie whose authorship is
not to be traced. Masonry does not change human nature, and cannot make
honest men out of born knaves.
While you are still engaged in preparation, and in accumulating principles
for future use, do not forget the words of the Apostle James: "For if any be
a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his
natural face in a glass, for he beholdeth himself, and goeth away, and
straightway forgetteth what ma1lner of man he was; but whoso looketh
into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth, he being not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his work. If
any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but
deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain.... Faith, if it hath not
works, is dead, being an abstraction. A man is justified by works, and not
by faith only.... The devils believe,--and tremble.... As the body without
the heart is dead, so is faith without works."
* * * * * *
In political science, also, free governments are erected and free
constitutions framed, upon some simple and intelligible theory. Upon
whatever theory they are based, no sound conclusion is to be reached
except by carrying the theory out without flinching, both in argumcnt on
constitutional qucstions and in practice. Shrink from the true theory
through timidity, or wander from it througll want of the logical faculty, or
transgress against it througll passion or on the plea of necessity or
expediency, and you have denial or invasion of rights, laws that offend
against first principles, usurpation of illegal powers, or abnegation and
abdication of legitimate authority.
Do not forget, either, that as the showy, superficial, impudent and self-
conceited will almost always be preferred, even in utmost stress of danger
and calamity of the State, to the man of solid learning, large intellect, and


--- PAGE 45 ---
catholic sympathies, because he is nearer the common popular and
legislative level, so the highest truth is not acceptable to the mass of
mankind.
When SOLON was asked if he had given his countrymen the best laws, he
answered, "The best they are capable of receiving." This is one of the
profoundest utterances on record; and yet like all great truths, so simple as
to be rarely comprehended. It contains the whole philosophy of History. It
utters a truth which, had it been recognized, would have saved men an
immensity of vain, idle disputes, and have led them into the clearer paths
of knowledge in the Past. It means this,--that all truths are Truths of
Period, and not truths for eternity; that whatever great fact has had
strength and vitality enough to make itself real, whether of religion,
morals, government, or of whatever else, and to find place in this world,
has been a truth for the time, and as good as men were capable of
receiving.
So, too, with great men. The intellect and capacity of a people has a single
measure,--that of the great men whom Providence gives it, and whom it
receives. There have always been men too great for their time or their
people. Every people makes such men only its idols, as it is capable of
comprehending.
To impose ideal truth or law upon an incapable and merely real man, must
ever be a vain and empty speculation. The laws of sympathy govern in this
as they do in regard to men who are put at the head. We do not know, as
yet, what qualifications the sheep insist on in a leader. With men who are
too high intellectually, the mass have as little sympathy as they have with
the stars. When BURKE, the wisest statesman England ever had, rose to
speak, the House of Commons was depopulated as upon an agreed signal.
There is as little sympathy between the mass and the highest TRUTHS.
The highest truth, being incomprehensible to the man of realities, as the
highest man is, and largely above his level, will be a great unreality and
falsehood to an unintellectual man. The profoundest doctrines of
Christianity and Philosophy would be mere jargon and babble to a
Potawatomie Indian. The popular explanations of the symbols of Masonry
are fitting for the multitude that have swarmed into the Temples,--being
fully up to the level of their capacity. Catholicism was a vital truth in its
earliest ages, but it became obsolete, and Protestantism arose, flourished,
and deteriorated. The doctrines of ZOROASTER were the best which the
ancient Persians were fitted to receive; those of CONFUCIUS were fitted
for the Chinese; those of MOHAMMED for the idolatrous Arabs of his


--- PAGE 46 ---
age. Each was Truth for the time. Each was a GOSPEL, preached by a
REFORMER; and if any men are so little fortunate as to remain content
therewith, when others have attained a higher truth, it is their misfortune
and not their fault. They are to be pitied for it, and not persecuted.
Do not expect easily to convince men of the truth, or to lead them to think
aright. The subtle human intellect can weave its mists over even the
clearest vision. Remember that it is eccentric enough to ask unanimity
from a jury; but to ask it from any large number of men on any point of
political faith is amazing. You can hardly get two men in any Congress or
Convention to agree;--nay, you can rarely get one to agree with himself.
The political church which chances to be supreme anywhere has an
indefinite number of tongues. How then can we expect men to agree as to
matters beyond the cognizance of the senses? How can we compass the
Infinitc and the Invisible with any chain of evidence? Ask the small sea-
waves what they murmur among the pebbles ! How many of those words
that come from the invisible shore are lost, like the birds, in the long
passage ? How vainly do we strain the eyes across the long Infinite ! We
must be content, as the children are, with the pebbles that have been
stranded, since it is forbidden us to explore the hidden depths.
The Fellow-Craft is especially taught by this not to become wise in his
own conceit. Pride in unsound theories is worse than ignorancc. Humility
becomes a Mason. Take some quiet, sober moment of life, and add
together the two ideas of Pride and Man; behold him, creature of a span,
stalking through infinite space in all the grandeur of littleness ! Perched
on a speck of the Universe, every wind of Heaven strikes into his blood
the coldness of death; his soul floats avvay from his body like the melody
from the string. Day and night, like dust on the wheel, he is rolled along
the heavens, through a labyrinth of worlds, and all the creations of God
are flanling on every side, further than even his imagination can reach. Is
this a creature to make for himself a crown of glory, to deny his own flesh,
to mock at his fellow, sprung with him from that dust to which both will
soon return? Does the proud man not err? Does he not suffer? Does he not
die? When he reasons, is he never stopped short by difficulties ? When he
acts, does he never succumb to the temptations of pleasure? When he
lives, is he free from pain? Do the diseases not claim him as their prey?
When he dies, can he escape the common grave ? Pride is not the heritage
of man. Humility should dwell with frailty, and atone for ignorance, error
and imperfection.


--- PAGE 47 ---
Neither should the Mason be over-anxious for office and honor, however
certainly he rmay feel that he has the capacity to serve the State. He
should neither seek nor spurn honors. It is good to enjoy the blessings of
fortune; it is better to submit without a pang to their loss. The greatest
deeds are not done in the glare of light, and before the eyes of the
populace. He whom God has gifted with a love of retirement possesses, as
it were, an additional sense; and among the vast and noble scenes of
nature, w e find the balm for the wounds we have received among the
pitiful shifts of policy; for the attachment to solitude is the surest
preservative from the ills of life.
But Resignation is the more noble in proportion as it is the less passive.
Retirement is only a morbid selfishness, if it prohibit exertions for others;
as it is only dignified and noble, when it is the shade whence the oracles
issue that are to instruct mankind; and retirement of this nature is the sole
seclusion which a good and wise man will covet or command. The very
philosophy which makes such a man covet the quiet, will make him
eschew the inutility of the hermitage. Very little praiseworthy would
LORD BOLINGBROKE have seemed among his haymakers and
ploughmen, if among haymakers and ploughmen he had looked with an
indifferent eye upon a profligate minister and a venal Parliament. Very
little interest would have attached to his beans and vetches, if beans and
vetches had caused him to forget that if he vvas happier on a fann he could
be more useful in a Senate, and made him forego, in the sphere of a
bailiff, all care for re-entering that of a legislator.
Remember, also, that therc is an education which quickens the Intellect,
and leaves the heart hollower or harder than before. There are ethical
lessons in the laws of the heavenly bodies, in the properties of earthly
elements, in geography, chemistry, geology, and all the material sciences.
Things are symbols of Truths. Properties are symbols of Truths. Science,
not teaching moral and spiritual truths, is dead and dry, of little more real
value than to commit to the menlory a long row of unconnected dates, or
of the names of bugs or butterflies.
Christianity, it is said, begins from the burning of the false gods by the
people themselves. Education begins with the burning of our intellectual
and moral idols: our prejudices, notions, conceits, our worth]ess or
ignoble purposes. Especially it is necessary to shake off the love of
worldly gain. With Freedom comes the longing for worldly advancement.
In that race men are ever falling, rising, running, and falling again. The
lust for wealth and the abject dread of poverty delve the furrows on many


--- PAGE 48 ---
a noble brow. The gambler grows old as he watches the chances. Lawful
hazard drives Youth away before its time; and this Youth draws heavy bills
of exchange on Age. Men live, like the engines, at high pressure, a
hundred years in a hundred months; the ledger becomes the Bible, and the
day-book the Book of the Morning Prayer.
Hence flow overreachings and sharp practice, heartless traffic in which the
capitalist buys profit with the lives of the laborers, speculations that coin
a nation's agonies into wealth, and all the other devilish cnginery of
Mammon. This, and greed for office, are the two columns at the entrance
to the Temple of Moloch. It is doubtful whether the latter, blossoming in
falsehood, trickery, and fraud, is not even more pernicious than the
former. At all events they are twins, and fitly mated; and as either gains
control of the unfortunate subject, his soul withers away and decays, and
at last dies out. The souls of half the human race leave them long before
they die. The two greeds are twin plagues of the leprosy, and make the
man unclean; and whenever they break out they spread until "they cover
all the skin of him that hath the plague, from his head even to his foot."
Even the raw flesh of the heart becomes unclean with it.
Alexander of Macedon has left a saying behind him which has survived his
conquests: "Nothing is nobler than work." Work only can keep even kings
respectable. And when a king is a king indeed, it is an honorable office to
give tone to the manners and morals of a nation; to set the example of
virtuous conduct, and restore in spirit the old schools of chivalry, in which
the young manhood may be nurtured to real greatness. Work and wages
will go together in men's minds, in the most royal institutions. We must
ever come to the idea of real work. The rest that follows labor should be
sweeter than the rest which follows rest.
Let no Fellow-Craft imagine that the work of the lowly and uninfluential
is not worth the doing. There is no legal limit to the possible influences of
a good deed or a wise word or a generous effort. Nothing is really small.
Whoever is open to the deep penetration of nature knows this. Although,
indeed, no absolute satisfaction may be vouchsafed to philosophy, any
more in circumscribing the cause than in limiting the effect, the man of
thought and contemplation falls into unfathomable ecstacies in view of all
the decompositions of forces resulting in unity. All works for all.
Destruction is not annihilation, but regeneration.


--- PAGE 49 ---
Algebra applies to the clouds; the radiance of the star benefits the rose; no
thinker would dare to say that the perfume of the hawthorn is useless to
the constellations. Who, then, can calculate the path of the molecule? How
do we know that the creations of worlds are not determined by the fall of
grains of sand ? Who, then, understands the reciprocal flow and ebb of the
inrlnitely great and the infinitely small; the echoing of causes in the
abysses of beginning, and the avalanches of creation? A fleshworm is of
account; the small is great; the great is small; all is in equilibrium in
necessity. There are marvellous relations between beings and things; in
this inexhaustible Whole, from sun to grub, there is no scorn: all need
each other. Light does not carry terrestrial perfumes into the azure depths,
without knowing what it does with them; night distributes the stellar
essence to the sleeping plants. Every bird which flies has the thread of the
Infinite in its claw. Germination includes the hatching of a meteor, and the
tap of a swallow's bill, breaking the egg; and it leads forward the birth of
an earth-worm and the advent of a Socrates. Where the telescope ends the
microscope begins. Which of them the grander view ? A bit of mould is a
Pleiad of flowers --a nebula is an ant-hill of stars.
There is the same and a still more wonderful interpenetration between the
things of the intellect and the things of matter. Elements and principles
are mingled, combined, espoused, multiplied one by another to such a
degree as to bring the material world and the moral world into the same
light. Phenomena are perpetually folded back upon themselves. In the vast
cosmical changes the universal life comes and goes in unknown quantities,
enveloping all in the invisible mystery of the emanations, losing no dream
from no single sleep, sowing an animalcule here, crumbling a star there,
oscillating and winding in curves; making a force of Light, and an element
of Thought; disseminated and indivisible, dissolving all save that point
without length, breadth, or thickness, The MYSEF; reducing everything to
the Soul-atom ; making everything blossom into God; entangling all
activities, from the higllest to the lowest, in the obscurity of a dizzying
mechanism; hanging the flight of an insect upon the movement of the
earth; subordinating, perhaps, if only by the identity of the law, the
eccentric evolutions of the comet in the firmament, to the whirlings of the
infusoria in the drop of water. A mechanism made of mind, the first motor
of which is the gnat, and its last wheel the zodiac.
A peasant-boy, guiding Blucher by the right one of two roads, the other
being impassable for artillery, enables him to reach Waterloo in time to
save Wellington from a defeat that would have been a rout; and so enables
the kings to imprison Napoleon on a barren rock in mid-ocean. An


--- PAGE 50 ---
unfaithful smith, by the slovenly shoeing of a horse, causes his lameness,
and, he stumbling, the career of his world-conquering rider ends, and the
destinies of empires are changed. A generous officer permits an
imprisoned monarch to end his game of chess before leading him to the
block; and meanwhile the usurper dies, and the prisoner reascends the
throne. An unskillful workman repairs the compass, or malice or stupidity
disarranges it, the ship mistakes her course, the waves swallow a Caesar,
and a new chapter is written in the history of a world. What we call
accident is but the adamantine chain of indissoluble connection between
all created things. The locust, hatched in the Arabian sands, the small
worm that destroys the cotton-boll, one making famine in the Orient, the
other closing the mills and starving the vvorkmen and their children in the
Occident, with riots and massacres, are as much the ministers of God as
the earthquake; and the fate of nations depends more on them than on the
intellect of its kings and legislators. A civil war in America will end in
shaking the world; and that war may be caused by the vote of some
ignorant prize-fighter or crazed fanatic in a city or in a Congress, or of
some stupid boor in an obscure country parish. The electricity of universal
sympathy, of action and reaction, pervades everything, the planets and the
motes in the sunbeam. FAUST, with his types, or LUTHER, with his
sermons, worked greater results than Alexander or Hannibal. A single
thought sometimes suffices to overturn a dynasty. A silly song did more to
unseat James the Second than the acquittal of the Bishops. Voltaire,
Condorcet, and Rousseau uttered words that will ring, in change and
revolutions, throughout all the ages.
Remember, that though life is short, Thought and the influences of what
we do or say are immortal; and that no calculus has yet pretended to
ascertain the law of proportion between cause and effect. The hammer of
an English blacksmith, smiting down an insolent official, led to a
rebellion which came near being a revolution. The word well spoken, the
deed fitly done, even by the feeblest or humblest, cannot help but have
their effect. More or less, the effect is inevitable and eternal. The echoes
of the greatest deeds may die away like the echoes of a cry among the
cliffs, and what has been done seem to the human judgment to have been
without result. The unconsidered act of the poorest of men may fire the
train that leads to the subterranean mine, and an empire be rent by the
explosion.
The power of a free people is often at the disposal of a single and
seemingly an unimportant individual;--a terrible and truthful power; for
such a people feel with one heart, and therefore can lift up their myriad


--- PAGE 51 ---
arms for a single blow. And, again, there is no graduated scale for the
measurement of the influences of different intellects upon the popular
mind. Peter the Hermit held no office, yet what a work he wrought !
* * * * * *
From the political point of view there is but a single principle,-- the
sovereignty of man over himself. This sovereignty of one's self over one's
self is called LIBERTY. Where two or several of these sovereignties
associate, the State begins. But in this association there is no abdication.
Each sovereignty parts with a certain portion of itself to form the common
right. That portion is the same for all. There is equal contribution by all to
the joint sovereignty. This identity of concession which each makes to all,
is EQUALITY. The common right is nothing more or less than the
protection of all, pouring its rays on each. This protection of each by all,
is FRATERNITY.
Liberty is the summit, Equality the base. Equality is not all vegetation on
a level, a society of big spears of grass and stunted oaks, a neighborhood
of jealousies, emasculatillg each other. It is, civilly, all aptitudes having
equal opportunity; politically, all votes having equal weight; religiously,
all consciences having equal rights.
Equality has an organ;--gratuitous and obligatory instruction. We must
begin with the right to the alphabet. The primary school obligatory upon
all; the higher school offered to all. Such is the law. From the same school
for all springs equal society. Instruction ! Light ! all comes from Light,
and all returns to it.
We must learn the thoughts of the common people, if we would be wise
and do any good work. We must look at men, not so much for what
Fortune has given to them with her blind old eyes, as for the gifts Nature
has brought in her lap, and for the use that has been made of them. We
profess to be equal in a Church and in the Lodge: we shall be equal in the
sight of God when He judges the earth. We may well sit on the pavement
together here, in communion and conference, for the few brief moments
that constitute life.
A Democratic Government undoubtedly has its defects, because it is made
and administered by men, and not by the Wise Gods. It cannot be concise


--- PAGE 52 ---
and sharp, like the despotic. When its ire is aroused it develops its latent
strength, and the sturdiest rebel trembles. But its habitual domestic rule is
tolerant, patient, and indecisive. Men are brought together, first to differ,
and then to agree. Affirmation, negation, discussion, solution: these are
the means of attaining truth. Often the enemy will be at the gates before
the babble of the disturbers is drowned in the chorus of consent. In the
Legislative office deliberation will often defeat decision. Liberty can play
the fool like the Tyrants
Refined society requires greater minuteness of regulation; and the steps of
all advancing States are more and more to be picked among the old
rubbish and the new matcrials. The difficulty lies in discovering the right
path through the chaos of confusion. The adjustment of mutual rights and
wrongs is also more difficult in democracies. We do not see and estimate
the relative importance of objects so easily and clearly from the level or
the waving iand as from the elevation of a lone peak, towering above the
plain; for each looks through his own mist.
Abject dependence on constituents, also, is too common. It is as miserable
a thing as abject dependence on a minister or the favorite of a Tyrant. It is
rare to find a man who can speak out the simple truth that is in him,
honestly and frankly, without fear, favor, or affection, either to Emperor
or People.
Moreover, in assemblies of men, faith in each other is almost always
wanting, unless a terrible pressure of calamity or danger from without
produces cohesion. Hence the constructive power of such assemblies is
generally deficient. The chief triumphs of modern days, in Europe, have
been in pulling down and obliterating; not in building up. But Repeal is
not Reform. Time must bring with him the Restorer and Rebuilder.
Speech, also, is grossly abused in Republics; and if the use of speech be
glorious, its abuse is the most villainous of vices. Rhetoric, Plato says, is
the art of ruling the minds of men. But in democracies it is too common to
hide thought in words,to overlay it, to babble nonsense. The gleams and
glitter of intellectual soap-and-water bubbles are mistaken for the
rainbow-glories of genius. The worthless pyrites is continually mistaken
for gold. Even intellect condescends to intellectual jugglery, balancing
thoughts as a juggler balances pipes on his chin. In all Congresses we
have the inexhaustible flow of babble, and Faction's clamorous knavery in
discussion, until the divine power of speech, that privilege of man and


--- PAGE 53 ---
great gift of God, is no better than the screech of parrots or the mimicry of
monkeys. The mere talker, however fluent, is barren of deeds in the day of
trial.
There are men voluble as women, and as well skilled in fencing with the
tongue: prodigies of speech, misers in deeds. Too much calking, like too
much thinking, destroys the power of action. In human nature, the thought
is only made perfect by deed. Silence is the mother of both. The trumpeter
is not the bravest of the brave. Steel and not brass wins the day. The great
doer of great deeds is mostly slow and slovenly of speech. There are some
men born and brcd to betray. Patriotism is their trade, and their capital is
speech. But no noble spirit can plead like Paul and be false to itself as
Judas.
Imposture too commonly rules in republics; they seem to be ever in their
minority; their guardians are self-appointed; and tlhe unjust thrive better
than the just. The Despot, like the night-lion roaring, drowns all the
clamor of tongues at once, and speech, the birthright of the free man,
becomes the bauble of the enslaved.
It is quite true that republics only occasionally, and as it were
accidentally, select their wisest, or even the less incapable among the
incapables, to govern them and legislate for them. If genius, armed with
learning and knowledge, will grasp the reins, the people will reverence it;
if it only modestly offers itself for office, it will be smitten on the face,
even when, in the straits of distress and the agonies of calamity, it is
indispensable to the salvation of the State. Put it upon the track with the
showy and superficial, the conceited, the ignorant, and impudent, the
trickster and charlatan, and the result shall not be a moment doubtful. The
verdicts of Legislatures and the People are like the verdicts of juries,--
sometimes right by accident.
Offices, it is true, are showered, like the rains of Heaven, upon the just
and the unjust. The Roman Augurs that used to laugh in each other's faces
at the simplicity of the vulgar, were also tickled with their own guile; but
no Augur is needed to lead the people astray. They readily deceive
themselves. Let a Republic begin as it may, it will not be out of its
minority before imbecility will be promoted to high places; and shallow
pretence, getting itself puffed into notice, will invade all the sanctuaries.
The most unscrupulous partisanship will prevail, even in respect to
judicial trusts; and the most unjust appointments constantly be made,


--- PAGE 54 ---
although every improper promotion not merely confers one undeserved
favor, but may make a hundred honest cheeks smart with injustice.
The country is stabbed in the front when those are brought into the stalled
seats who should slink into the dim gallery. Every stamp of Honor, ill-
clutched, is stolen from the Treasury of Merit.
Yet the entrance into the public service, and the promotion in it, affect
both the rights of individuals and those of the nation. Injustice in
bestowing or withholding office ought to be so intolerable in democratic
communities that the least trace of it should be like the scent of Treason.
It is not universally true that all citizens of equal character have an equal
claim to knock at the door of every public office and demand admittance.
When any man presents himself for service he has a right to aspire to the
highest body at once, if he can show his fitness for such a beginning,--that
he is fitter than the rest who offer themselves for the same post. The entry
into it can only justly be made through the door of merit. And whenever
any one aspires to and attains such high post, especially if by unfair and
disreputable and indecent means, and is afterward found to be a signal
failure, he should at once be beheaded. He is the worst among the public
enemies.
When a man sumciently reveals himself, all others should be proud to give
him due precedence. When the power of promotion is abused in the grand
passages of life whether by People, Legislature, or Executive, the unjust
decision recoils on the judge at once. That is not only a gross, but a
willful shortness of sight, that cannot discover the deserving. If one will
look hard, long, and honestly, he will not fail to discern merit, genius, and
qualification; and the eyes and voice of the Press and Public should
condemn and denounce injustice wherever she rears her horrid head.
"The tools to the workmen!" no other principle will save a Republic from
destruction, either by civil war or the dry-rot. They tend to decay, do all
we can to prevent it, like human bodies. If they try the experiment of
governing themselves by their smallest, they slide downward to the
unavoidable abyss with tenfold velocity; and there never has been a
Republic that has not followed that fatal course.


--- PAGE 55 ---
But however palpable and gross the inherent defects of democratic
governments, and fatal as the results finally and inevitably are, we need
only glance at the reigns of Tiberius, Nero, and Caligula, of Heliogabalus
and Caracalla, of Domitian and Commodus, to recognize that the
difference between freedom and despotism is as wide as that between
Heaven and Hell. The cruelty, baseness, and insanity of tyrants are
incredible. Let him who complains of the fickle humors and inconstancy
of a free people, read Pliny's character of Domitian. If the great man in a
Republic cannot win omce without descending to low arts and whining
beggary and the judicious use of sneaking lies, let him remain in
retirement, and use the pen. Tacitus and Juvenal held no office. Let
History and Satire punish the pretender as they crucify the despot. The
revenges of the intellect are terrible and just.
Let Masonry use the pen and the printing-press in the free State against
the Demagogue; in the Despotism against the Tyrant. History offers
examples and encouragement. All history, for four thousand years, being
filled with violated rights and the sufferings of the people, each period of
history brings with it such protest as is possible to it. Under the Caesars
there was no insurrection, but there was a Juvenal. The arousing of
indignation replaces the Gracchi. Under the Caesars there is the exile of
Syene; there is also the author of the Annals. As the Neros reign darkly
they should be pictured so. Work with the graver only would be pale; into
the grooves should be poured a concentrated prose that bites.
Despots are an aid to thinkers. Speech enchained is speech terrible. The
writer doubles and triples his style, when silence is imposed by a master
upon the people. There springs from this silence a certain mysterious
fullness, which filters and freezes into brass in the thoughts. Compression
in the history produces conciseness in the historian. The granitic solidity
of some celebrated prose is only a condensation produced by the Tyrant.
Tyranny constrains the writer to shortenings of diameter which are
increases of strength. The Ciceronian period, hardly sumcient upon Verres,
would lose its edge upon Caligula.
The Demagogue is the predecessor of the Despot. One springs from the
other's loins. He who will basely fawn on those who have office to bestow,
will betray like Iscariot, and prove a miserable and pitiable failure. Let
the new Junius lash such men as they deserve, and History make them
immortal in infamy; since their influences culminate in ruin. The Republic
that employs and honors the shallow, the superficial, the base,


--- PAGE 56 ---
"who crouch
Unto the offal of an office promised,"
at last weeps tears of blood for its fatal error. Of such supreme folly, the
sure fruit is damnation. Let the nobility of every great heart, condensed
into justice and truth, strike such creatures like a thunderbolt ! If you can
do no more, you can at least condemn by your vote, and ostracise by
denunciation.
It is true that, as the Czars are absolute, they have it in their power to
select the best for the public service. It is true that the beginner of a
dynasty generally does so; and that when monarchies are in their prime,
pretence and shallowness do not thrive and prosper and get power, as they
do in Republics. All do not gabble in the Parliament of a Kingdom, as in
the Congress of a Democracy. The incapables do not go undetected there,
all their lives.
But dynasties speedily decay and run out. At last they dwindle down into
imbecility; and the dull or flippant Members of Congresses are at least the
intellectual peers of the vast majority of kings. The great man, the Julius
Caesar, the Charlemagne, Cromwell, Napoleon, reigns of right. He is the
wisest and the strongest. The incapables and imbeciles succeed and are
usurpers; and fear makes them cruel. After Julius came Caracalla and
Galba; after Charlemagne, the lunatic Charles the Sixth. So the Saracenic
dynasty dwindled out; the Capets, the Stuarts, the Bourbc1ns; the last of
these producing Bomba, the ape of Domitian.
Man is by nature cruel, like the tigers. The barbarian, and the tool of the
tyrant, and the civilized fanatic, enjoy the sufferings of others, as the
children enjoy the contortions of maimed flies. Absolute Power, once in
fear for the safety of its tenure, cannot but be cruel.
As to ability, dynasties invariably cease to possess any after a few lives.
They become mere shams, governed by ministers, favorites, or courtesans,
like those old Etruscan kings, slumbering for long ages in their golden
royal robes, dissolving forever at the first breath of day. Let him who
complains of the shortcomings of democracy ask himself if he would
prefer a Du Barry or a Pompadour, governing in the name of a Louis the
Fifteenth, a Caligula making his horse a consul, a Domitian, "that most


--- PAGE 57 ---
savage monster," who sometimes drank the blood of relatives, sometimes
employing himself with slaughtering the most distinguished citizens
before whose gates fear and terror kept watch; a tyrant of frightful aspect,
pride on his forehead, fire in his eye, constantly seeking darkness and
secrecy, and only emerging from his solitude to make solitude. After all,
in a free government, the Laws and the Constitution are above the
Incapables, the Courts correct their legislation, and posterity is the Grand
Inquest that passes judgment on them. What is the exclusion of worth and
intellect and knowledge from civil office compared with trials before
Jeffries, tortures in the dark caverns of the Inquisition, Alvabutcheries in
the Netherlands, the Eve of Saint Bartholomew, and the Sicilian Vespers?
* * * * * *
The Abbe Barruel in his Memoirs for the History of Jacobinism, declares
that Masonry in France gave, as its secret, the words Equality and Liberty,
leaving it for every honest and religious Mason to explain them as would
best suit his principles; but retained the privilege of unveiling in the
higher Degrees the meaning of those words, as interpreted by the French
Revolution. And he also excepts English Masons from his anathemas,
because in England a Mason is a peaceable subject of the civil authorities,
no matter where he resides, engaging in no plots or conspiracies against
even the worst government. England, he says, disgusted with an Equality
and a Liberty, the consequences of which she had felt in the struggles of
her Lollards, Anabaptists, and Presbyterians, had "purged her Masonry"
from all explanations tending to overturn empires; but there still remained
adepts whom disorganizing principles bound to the Ancient Mysteries.
Because true Masonry, unemasculated, bore the banners of Freedom and
Equal Rights, and was in rebellion against temporal and spiritual tyranny,
its Lodges were proscribed in 1735, by an edict of the States of Holland.
In 1737, Louis XV. forbade them in France. In 1738, Pope Clement XII.
issued against them his famous Bull of Excommunication, which was
renewed by Benedict XIV.; and in 1743 the Council of Berne also
proscribed them. The title of the Rull of Clement is, "The Condemnation
of the Society of Conventicles de Liberi Muratori, or of the Freemasons,
under the penalty of ipso facto excommunication, the absolution from
which is reserved to the Pope alone, except at the point of death." And by
it all bishops, ordinaries, and inquisitors were empowered to punish
Freemasons, "as vehemently suspected of heresy," and to call in, if
necessary, the help of the secular arm; that is, to cause the civil authority
to put them to death.


--- PAGE 58 ---
* * * * * *
Also, false and slavish political theories end in brutalizing the State. For
example, adopt the theory that offices and employments in it are to be
given as rewards for services rendered to party, and they soon become the
prey and spoil of faction, the booty of the victory of faction;--and leprosy
is in the flesh of the State. The body of the commonwealth becomes a
mass of corruption, like a living carcass rotten with syphilis. All unsound
theories in the end develop themselves in one foul and loathsome disease
or other of the body politic. The State, like the man, must use constant
effort to stay in the paths of virtue and manliness. The habit of
electioneering and begging for office culminates in bribery with office,
and corruption in office.
A chosen man has a visible trust from God, as plainly as if the commission
were engrossed by the notary. A nation cannot renounce the executorship
of the Divine decrees. As little can Masonry. It must labor to do its duty
knowingly and wisely. We must remember that, in free States, as well as in
despotisms, Injustice, the spouse of Oppression, is the fruitful parent of
Deceit, Distrust, Hatred, Conspiracy, Treason, and Unfaithfulness. Even in
assailing Tyranny we must have Truth and Reason as our chief weapons.
We must march into that fight like the old Puritans, or into the battle with
the abuses that spring up in free government, with the flaming sword in
one hand, and the Oracles of God in the other.
The citizen who cannot accomplish well the smaller purposes of public
life, cannot compass the larger. The vast power of endurance, forbearance,
patience, and performance, of a free people, is acquired only by continual
exercise of all the functions, like the healthful physical human vigor. If
the individual citizens have it not, the State must equally be without it. It
is of the essence of a free government, that the people should not only be
concerned in making the laws, but also in their execution. No man ought
to be more ready to obey and administer the law than he who has helped to
make it. The business of government is carried on for the benefit of all,
and every co-partner should give counsel and cooperation.
Remember also, as another shoal on which States are wrecked, that free
States always tend toward the depositing of the citizens in strata, the
creation of castes, the perpetuation of the jus divinurn to office in
families. The more democratic the State, the more sure this result. For, as
free States advance in power, there is a strong tendency toward


--- PAGE 59 ---
centralization, not from deliberate evil intention, but from the course of
events and the indolence of human nature. The executive powers swell and
enlarge to inordinate dimensions; and the Executive is always aggressive
with respect to the nation. Offices of all kinds are multiplied to reward
partisans; the brute force of the sewerage and lower strata of the mob
obtains large representation, first in the lower offices, and at last in
Senates; and Bureaucracy raises its bald head, bristling with pens, girded
with spectacles, and bunched with ribbon. The art of Government becomes
like a Craft, and its guilds tend to become exclusive, as those of the
Middle Ages.
Political science may be much improved as a subject of speculation; but it
should never be divorced from the actual national necessity. The science
of governing men must always be practical, rather than philosophical.
There is not the same amount of positive or universal truth here as in the
abstract sciences; what is true in one country may be very false in another;
what is untrue to-day may become true in another generation, and the truth
of to-day be reversed by the judgment of to-morrow. To distinguish the
casual from the enduring, to separate the unsuitable from the suitable, and
to make progress even possible, are the proper ends of policy. But without
actual knowledge and experience, and communion of labor, the dreams of
the political doctors may be no better than those of the doctors of divinity.
The reign of such a caste, with its mysteries, its myrmidons, and its
corrupting influence, may be as fatal as that of the despots. Thirty tyrants
are thirty times worse than one.
Moreover, there is a strong temptation for the governing people to become
as much slothful and sluggards as the weakest of absolute kings. Only give
them the power to get rid, when caprice prompts them, of the great and
wise men, and elect the little, and as to all the rest they will relapse into
indolence and indifference. The central power, creation of the people,
organized and cunning if not enlightened, is the perpetual tribunal set up
by them for the redress of wrong and the rule of justice. It soon supplies
itself with all the requisite machinery, and is ready and apt for all kinds of
interference. The people may be a child all its life. The central power may
not be able to suggest the best scientific solution of a problem; but it has
the easiest means of carrying an idea into effect. If the purpose to be
attained is a large one, it requires a large comprehension; it is proper for
the action of the central power. If it be a small one, it may be thwarted by
disagreement. The central power must step in as an arbitrator and prevent
this. The people may be too averse to change, too slothful in their own


--- PAGE 60 ---
business, unjust to a minority or a majority. The central power must take
the reins when the people drop them.
France became centralized in its government more by the apathy and
ignorance of its people than by the tyranny of its kings. When the inmost
parish-life is given up to the direct guardianship of the State, and the
repair of the belfry of a country church requires a written order from the
central power, a people is in its dotage. Men are thus nurtured in
imbecility, from the dawn of social life. When the central government
feeds part of the people it prepares all to be slaves. When it directs parish
and county affairs, they are slaves already. The next step is to regulate
labor and its wages.
Nevertheless, whatever follies the free people may commit, even to the
putting of the powers of legislation in the hands of the little competent
and less honest, despair not of the final result. The terrible teacher,
EXPERIENCE, writing his lessons on hearts desolated with calamity and
wrung by agony, will make thelll wiser in time. Pretence and grimace and
sordid beggary for votes will some day cease to avail. Have FAITH, and
struggle on, against all evil influences and discouragements! FAITH is the
Saviour and Redeemer of nations. When Christianity had grown weak,
profitless, and powerless, the Arab Restorer and Iconoclast came, like a
cleansing hurricane. When the battle of Damascus was about to be fought,
the Christian bishop, at the early dawn, in his robes, at the head of his
clergy, witll trle Cross once so triumphant raised in the air, came down to
the gates of the city, and laid open before the army the Testament of
Christ. The Christian general, THOMAS, laid his hand on the book, and
said, "Oh God ! If our faith be true, aid us, and deliver us not into the
hands of its enemies!" But KHALED, "the Sword of God," who had
marched from victory to victory, exclaimed to his wearied soldiers, "Let
no man sleep! There will be rest enough in the bowers of Paradise; sweet
will be the repose never more to be followed by labor." The faith of the
Arab had become stronger than that of the Christian, and he conquered.
The Sword is also, in the Bible, an emblem of SPEECH, or of the
utterance of thought. Thus, in that vision or apocalypse of the sublime
exile of Patmos, a protest in the name of the ideal, overwhelming the real
world, a tremendous satire uttered in the name of Religion and Liberty,
and with its fiery reverberations smiting the throne of the Gesars, a sharp
two-edged sword comes out of the mouth of the Semblance of the Son of
Man, encircled by the seven golden candlesticks, and holding in his right
hand seven stars. "The Lord," says Isaiah, "hath made my mouth like a


--- PAGE 61 ---
sharp sword." "I have slain them," says Hosea, "by the words of my
mouth." "The word of God," says the writer of the apostolic letter to the
Hebrews, "is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit." "The sword of
the Spirit, which is the Word of God," says Paul, writing to the Christians
at Ephesus. "I will fight against them with the sword of my mouth," it is
said in the Apocalypse, to the angel of the church at Pergamos.
* * * * * *
The spoken discourse may roll on strongly as the great tidal wave; but,
like the wave, it dies at last feebly on the sands. It is heard by few,
remembered by still fewer, and fades away, like an echo in the mountains,
leaving no token of power. It is nothing to tlle living and coming
generations of men. It was the written hulllan speech, that gave power and
permanence to human thought. It is this that makes the whole human
history but one individual life.
To write on the rock is to write on a solid parchment; but it requires a
pilgrimage to see it. There is but one copy, and Time wears even that. To
write on skins or papyrus was to give, as it were, but one tardy edition,
and the rich only could procure it. The Chinese stereotyped not only the
unchanging wisdom of oid sages, but also the passing events. The process
tended to suffocate thought, and to hinder progress; for there is continual
wandering in the wisest minds, and Truth writes her last words, not on
clean tablets, but on the scrawl that Error has made and often mended.
Printing made the movable letters prolific. Thenceforth the orator spoke
almost visibly to listening nations; and the author wrote, like the Pope, his
cecumenic decreesJ urbi et orbi, and ordered them to be posted up in all
the market-places; remaining, if he chose, impervious to human sight. The
doom of tyrannies was thenceforth sealed. Satire and invective became
potent as armies. The unseen hands of the Juniuses could launch the
thunderbolts, and make the ministers tremble. One whisper from this giant
fills the earth as easily as Demosthenes filled the Agora. It will soon be
heard at the antipodes as easily as in the next street. It travels with the
lightning under the oceans. It makes the mass one man, speaks to it in the
same comtnon language, and elicits a sure and single response. Speech
passes into thought, and thence promptly into act. A nation becomes truly
one, with one large heart and a single throbbing pulse. Men are invisibly
present to each other, as if already spiritual beings; and the thinker who


--- PAGE 62 ---
sits in an Alpine solitude, unknown to or forgotten by all the world, among
the silent herds and hills, may flash his words to all tlle cities and over all
the seas.
Select the thinkers to be Legislators; and avoid the gabblers. Wisdom is
rarely loquacious. Weight and depth of thougbt are unfavorable to
volubility. The shallow and superficial are generally voluble and often
pass for eloquent. More words, less thought,--is the general rule. The man
who endeavors to say something worth remembering in every sentence,
becomes fastidious, and condenses like Tacitus. The vulgar love a more
diffuse stream. The ornamentation that does not cover strength is the
gewgaws of babble.
Neither is dialectic subtlety valuable to public men. The Christian faith
has it, had it formerly more than now; a subtlety that might have entangled
Plato, and which has rivalled in a fruitless fashion the mystic lore of
Jewish Rabbis and Indian Sages. It is not this which converts the heathen.
It is a vain task to balance the great thoughts of the earth, like hollow
straws, on the fingertips of disputation. It is not this kind of warfare
whicll makes the Cross triumphant in the hearts of the unbelievers; but the
actual power that lives in the Faith.
So there is a political scholasticism that is merely useless. The dexterities
of subtle logic rarely stir the hearts of the people, or convince them. The
true apostle of Liberty, Fraternity and Equality makes it a matter of life
and death. His combats are like those of Bossuet,-- combats to the death.
The true apostolic fire is like the lightning: it flashes conviction into the
soul. The true word is verily a two-edged sword. Matters of government
and political science can be fairly dealt with only by sound reason, and the
logic of common sense: not the common sense of the ignorant, but of the
wise. The acutest thinkers rarely succeed in becoming leaders of men. A
watchword or a catchword is more potent with the people than logic,
especially if this be the least metaphysical. When a political prophet
arises, to stir the dreaming, stagnant nation, and hold back its feet from
the irretrievable descent, to heave the land as with an earthquake, and
shake the silly-shallow idols from their seats, his words vvill come
straight from God's own nlouth, and be thundered into the conscience. He
will reason, teach, warn, and rule. The real "Sword of the Spirit" is keener
than the brightest blade of Damascus. Such men rule a land, in the
strength of justice, with wisdom and with power. Still, the men of
dialectic subtlety often rule well, because in practice they forget their
finely-spun theories, and use the trenchant logic of common sense. But


--- PAGE 63 ---
when the great heart and large intellect are left to the rust in private life,
and small attorneys, brawlers in politics, and those who in the cities
would be only the clerks of notaries, or practitioners in the disreputable
courts, are made national Legislators, the country is in her dotage. even if
the beard has not yet grown upon her chin.
In a free country, human speech must needs be free; and the State must
listen to the maunderings of folly, and the screechings of its geese, and the
brayings of its asses, as well as to the golden oracles of its wise and great
men. Even the despotic old kings allowed their wise fools to say what they
liked. The true alchelllist will extract the lessons of wisdom from the
babblings of folly. He will hear what a man has to say on any given
subject, even if the speaker end only in proving himself prince of fools.
Even a fool will sometimes hit the mark. There is some truth in all men
who are not compelled to suppress their souls and speak other men's
thoughts. The finger even of the idiot may point to the great highway.
A people, as well as the sages, must learn to forget. If it neither learns the
new nor forgets the old, it is fated, even if it has been royal for thirty
generations. To unlearn is to learn; and also it is sometimes needful to
learn again the forgotten. The antics of fools make the current follies more
palpable, as fashions are shown to be absurd by caricatures, which so lead
to their extirpation. The buffoon and the zany are useful in their places.
The ingenious artificer and craftsman, like Solomon, searches the earth for
his materials, and transforms the misshapen matter into glorious
workmanship. The world is conquered by the head even more than by the
hands. Nor will any assembly talk forever. After a time, when it has
listened long enough, it quietly puts the silly, the shallow, and the
superficial to one side,--it thinks, and sets to work.
The human thought, especially in popular assemblies, runs in the most
singularly crooked channels, harder to trace and follow than the blind
currents of the ocean. No notion is so absurd that it may not find a place
there. The master-workman must train these notions and vagaries with his
two-handed hammer. They twist out of the way of the sword-thrusts; and
are invulnerable all over, even in the heel, against logic. The martel or
mace, the battle-axe, the great double-edged two-handed sword must deal
with follies; the rapier is no better against them than a wand, unless it be
the rapier of ridicule.


--- PAGE 64 ---
The SWORD is also the symbol of war and of the soldier. Wars, like
thunder-storms, are often necessary to purify the stagnant atmosphere. War
is not a demon, without remorse or reward. It restores the brotherhood in
letters of fire. When men are seated in their pleasant places, sunken in
ease and indolence, with Pretence and Incapacity and Littleness usurping
all the high places of State, war is the baptism of blood and fire, by which
alone they can be renovated. It is the hurricane that brings the elemental
equilibrium, the concord of Power and Wisdom. So long as these continue
obstinately divorced, it will continue to chasten.
In the mutual appeal of nations to God, there is the acknowledgment of
His might. It lights the beacons of Faith and Freedom, and heats the
furnace through which the earnest and loyal pass to immortal glory. There
is in war the doom of defeat, the quenchless sense of Duty, the stirring
sense of Honor, the measureless solemn sacrifice of devotedness, and the
incense of success. Even in the flame and smoke of battle, the Mason
discovers his brother, and fulfills the sacred obligations of Fraternity.
Two, or the Duad, is the symbol of Antagonism; of Good and Evil, Light
and Darkness. It is Cain and Abel, Eve and Lilith, Jachin and Boaz,
Ormuzd and Ahriman, Osiris and Typhon.
THREE, or the Triad, is most significantly expressed by the equilateral
and the right-angled triangles. There are three principal colors or rays in
the rainbow, which by intermixture make seven. The three are the blue, the
yelloW, and the red. The Trinity of the Deity, in one mode or other, has
been an article in all creeds. He creates, preserves, and destroys. He is the
generative power, the productive capacity, and the result. The immaterial
man, according to the Kabalah, is composed of vitality, or life, the breath
of life; of soul or mind, and spirit. Salt, sulphur, and mercury are the great
symbols of the alchemists. To them man was body, soul, and spirit.
FOUR is expressed by the square, or four-sided right-angled figure. Out of
the symbolic Garden of Eden flowed a river, dividing into four streams,--
PISON, which flows around the land of gold, or light; GIHON, which
flows around the land of Ethiopia or Darkness; HIDDEKEL, running
eastward to Assyria; and the EUPHRATES. Zechariah saw four chariots
coming out from between two mountains of bronze, in the first of which
were red horses; in the second, black; in the third, white; and in the
fourth, grizzled: "and these were the four winds of the heavens, that go
forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth." Ezekiel saw the four


--- PAGE 65 ---
living creatures, each with four faces and four wings, the faces of a man
and a lion, an ox and an eagle; and the four wheels going upon their four
sides; and Saint John beheld the four beasts, full of eyes before and
behind, the LION, the young Ox, the MAN, and the flying EAGLE. Four
was the signature of the Earth. Therefore, in the 148th Psalm, of those
who must praise the Lord on the land, there are four times four, and four
in particular of living creatures. Visible nature is described as the four
quarters of the world, and the four corners of the earth. "There are four,"
says the old Jewish saying, "which take the first place in this world: man,
among the creatures; the eagle among birds; the ox among cattle; and the
lion among wild beasts." Daniel saw four great beasts come up from the
sea.
FIVE is the Duad added to the Triad. It is expressed by the five-pointed or
blazing star, the mysterious Pentalpha of Pythagoras. It is indissolubly
connected with the number seven. Christ fed His disciples and the
multitude with five loaves and two fishes, and of the fragments there
remained twelve, that is, five and seven, baskets full. Again He fed them
with seven loaves and a few little fishes, and there remained seven baskets
full. The five apparently small planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn, with the two greater ones, the Sun and Moon, constituted the
seven celestial spheres.
SEVEN was the peculiarly sacred number. There were seven planets and
spheres presided over by seven archangels. There were seven colors in the
rainbow; and the Phoenician Deity was called the HEPTAKIS or God of
seven rays; seven days of the week; and seven and five made the number
of months, tribes, ancl apostles. Zechariah saw a golden candlestick, with
seven lamps and seven pipes to the lamps, and an olive-tree on each side.
Since he says, "the seven eyes of the Lord shall rejoice, and shall see the
plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel." John, in the Apocalypse, writes seven
epistles to the seven churches. In the seven epistles there are twelve
promises. What is said of the churches in praise or blame, is completed in
the number three. The refrain, "who has ears to hear," etc., has ten words,
divided by three and seven, and the seven by three and four; and the seven
epistles are also so divided. In the seals, trumpets, and vials, also, of this
symbolic vision, the seven are divided by four and three. He who sends his
message to Ephesus, "holds the seven stars in his right hand, and walks
amid the seven golden lamps."
In six days, or periods, God created the Universe, and paused on the
seventh day. Of clean beasts, Noah was directed to take by sevens into the


--- PAGE 66 ---
ark; and of fowls by sevens; because in seven days the rain was to
commence. On the seventeenth day of the month. the rain began; on the
seventeenth day of the seventh month, the ark rested on Ararat. When the
dove returned, Noah waited seven days before he sent her forth again; and
again seven, after she returned with the olive-leaf. Enoch was the seventh
patriarch, Adam included, and Lamech lived 777 years.
There were seven lamps in the great candlestick of the Tabernacle and
Temple, representing the seven planets. Seven times Moses sprinkled the
anointing oil upon the altar. The days of consecration of Aaron and his
sons were seven in number. A woman was unclean seven days after child-
birth; one infected with leprosy was shut up seven days; seven times the
leper was sprinkled with the blood of a slain bird; and seven days
afterwards he must remain abroad out of his tent. Seven times, in
purifying the leper, the priest was to sprinkle the consecrated oil; and
seven times to sprinkle with the blood of the sacrificed bird the house to
be purified. Seven times the blood of the slain bullock was sprinkled on
the mercy-seat; and seven times on the altar. The seventh year was a
Sabbath of rest; and at the end of seven times seven years came the great
year of jubilee. Seven days the people ate unleavened bread, in the month
of Abib. Seven weeks were counted from the time of first putting the
sickle to the wheat. The Feast of the Tabernacles lasted seven days.
Israel was in the hand of Midian seven years before Gideon delivered
them. The bullock sacrificed by him was seven years old. Samson told
Delilah to bind him with seven green withes; and she wove the seven locks
of his head, and afterwards shaved them off. Balaam told Barak to build
for him seven altars. Jacob served seven years for Leah and seven for
Rachel. Job had seven sons and three daughters, making the perfect
number ten. He had also seven thousand sheep and three thousand camels.
His friends sat down with him seven days and seven nights. His friends
were ordered to sacrifice seven bullocks and seven rams; and again, at the
end, he had seven sons and three daughters, and twice seven thousand
sheep, and lived an hundred and forty, or twice seven times ten years.
Pharaoh saw in his dream seven fat and seven lean kine, seven good ears
and seven blasted ears of wheat; and there were seven years of plenty, and
seven of famine. Jericho fell, when seven priests, with seven trumpets,
made the circuit of the city on seven successive days; once each day for
six days, and seven times on the seventh. "The seven eyes of the Lord,"
says Zechariah, "run to and fro through the whole earth." Solomon was
seven years in building the Temple. Seven angels, in the Apocalypse, pour
out seven plagues, from seven vials of wrath. The scarlet-colored beast, on


--- PAGE 67 ---
which the woman sits in the wilderness, has seven heads and ten horns. So
also has the beast that rises Up out of the sea. Seven thunders uttered their
voices. Seven angels sounded seven trumpets. Seven lamps of fire, the
seven spirits of God, burned before the throne; and the Lamb that was
slain had seven horns and seven eyes.
EIGHT is the first cube, that of two. NINE is the square of three, and
represented by the triple triangle.
TEN includes all the other numbers. It is especially seven and three; and
is called the number of perfection. Pythagoras represented it by the
TETRACTYS, which had many mystic meanings. This symbol is
sometimes composed of dots or points, sometimes of commas or yods, and
in the Kabalah, of the letters of the name of Deity. It is thus arranged:
,
, ,
, , ,
, , , ,
The Patriarchs from Adam to Noah, inclusive, are ten in number, and the
same number is that of the Commandments.
TWELVE is the number of the lines of equal length that form a cube. It is
the number of the months, the tribes, and the apostles; of the oxen under
the Brazen Sea, of the stones on the breast-plate of the high priest.
 
 MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE


--- PAGE 68 ---
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
3º - Master
To understand literally the symbols and allegories of Oriental books as to
ante-historical matters, is willfully to close our eyes against the Light. To
translate the symbols into the trivial and commonplace, is the blundering
of mediocrity.
All religious expression is symbolism; since we can describe only what we
see, and the true objects of religion are THE SEEN. The earliest
instruments of education were symbols; and they and all other religious
forms differed and still differ according to external circumstances and
imagery, and according to differences of knowledge and mental
cultivation. All language is symbolic, so far as it is applied to mental and
spiritual phenomena and action. All words have, primarily, a material
sense, however they may afterward get, for the ignorant, a spiritual non-
sense. "To retract," for example, is to draw back, and when applied to a
statement, is symbolic, as much so as a picture of an arm drawn back, to
express the same thing, would be. The very word "spirit" means "breath,"
from the Latin verb spiro, breathe.
To present a visible symbol to the eye of another is not necessarily to
inform him of the meaning which that symbol has to you. Hence the
philosopher soon superadded to the symbols explanations addressed to the
ear, susceptible of more precision, but less effective and impressive than
the painted or sculptured forms which he endeavored to explain. Out of
these explanations grew by degrees a variety of narrations, whose true
object and meaning were gradually forgotten, or lost in contradictions and
incongruities. And when these were abandoned, and Philosophy resorted to
definitions and formulas, its language was but a more complicated
symbolism, attempting in the dark to grapple with and picture ideas
impossible to be expressed. For as with the visible symbol, so with the
word: to utter it to you does not inform you of the exact meaning which it
has to me; and thus religion and philosophy became to a great extent


--- PAGE 69 ---
disputes as to the meaning of words. The most abstract expression for
DEITY, which language can supply, is but a sign or symbol for an object
beyond our comprehension, and not more truthful and adequate than the
images of OSIRIS and VISHNU, or their names, except as being less
sensuous and explicit. We avoid sensuousness only by resorting to simple
negation. We come at last to define spirit by saying that it is not matter.
Spirit is--spirit.
A single example of the symbolism of words will indicate to you one
branch of Masonic study. We find in the English Rite this phrase: "I will
always hail, ever conceal, and never reveal;" and in the Catechism, these:
Q.'. "I hail."
A.'. "I conceal,"
and ignorance, misunderstanding the word "hail," has interpolated the
phrase, "From whence do you hail."
But the word is really "hele," from the Anglo-Saxon verb elan, helan, to
cover, hide, or conceal. And this word is rendered by the Latin verb
tegere, to cover or roof over. "That ye fro me no thynge woll hele," says
Gower. "They hele fro me no priuyte," says the Romaunt of the Rose. "To
heal a house," is a common phrase in Sussex; and in the west of England,
he that covers a house with slates is called a Healer. Wherefore, to "heal"
means the same thing as to "tile,"--itself symbolic, as meaning, primarily,
to cover a house with tiles,--and means to cover, hide, or conceal. Thus
language too is symbolism, and words are as much misunderstood and
misused as more material symbols are.
Symbolism tended continually to become more complicated; and all the
powers of Heaven were reproduced on earth, until a web of fiction and
allegory was woven, partly by art and partly by the ignorance of error,
which the wit of man, with his limited means of explanation, will never
unravel. Even the Hebrew Theism became involved in symbolism and
image-worship, borrowed probably from an older creed and remote regions
of Asia,--the worship of the Great Semitic Nature-God AL or ELS and its
symbolical representations of JEHOVA Himself were not even confined to
poetical or illustrative language. The priests were monotheists: the people
idolaters.


--- PAGE 70 ---
There are dangers inseparable from symbolism, which afford an
impressive lesson in regard to the similar risks attendant on the use of
language. The imagination, called in to assist the reason, usurps its place
or leaves its ally helplessly entangled in itsweb. Names which stand for
things are confounded with them; the means are mistaken for the end; the
instrument of interpretation for the object; and thus symbols come to
usurp an independent character as truths and persons. Though perhaps a
necessary path, they were a dangerous one by which to approach the Deity;
in which many, says PLUTARCH, "mistaking the sign for the thing
signified, fell into a ridiculous superstition; while others, in avoiding one
extreme, plunged into the no less hideous gulf of irreligion and impiety."
It is through the Mysteries, CICERO says, that we have learned the first
principles of life; wherefore the term "initiation" is used with good
reason; and they not only teach us to live more happily and agrceably, but
they soften the pains of death by the hope of a better life hereafter.
The Mysteries were a Sacred Drama, exhibiting some legend significant of
nature's changes, of the visible Universe in which the Divinity is revealed,
and whose import was in many respects as open to the Pagan as to the
Christian. Nature is thc great Teacher of man; for it is the Revelation of
God. It neither dogmatizes nor attempts to tyrannize by compelling to a
particular creed or special interpretation. It presents its symbols to us, and
adds nothing by way of explanation. It is the text without the commentary;
and, as we well know, it is chiefly the commentary and gloss that lead to
error and heresesy and persecution. The earliest instructors of mankind not
only adopted the lessons of Nature, but as far as possible adhered to her
method of imparting them. In the Mysteries, beyond the current traditions
or sacred and enigimatic recitals of the Temples, few explanations were
given to the spectators, who were left, as in the school of nature, to make
inferences for themselves. No other method could have suited every
degree of cultivation and capacity. To employ nature's universal
symbolism instead of the technicalities of language, rewards the humblest
inquirer, and discloses its secrets to every one in proportion to his
preparatory training and his power to con1prellend them. If their
philosophical meaning was above the comlirellension of some, their moral
and political meanlngs are within the reach of all.
These mystic shows and performances were not the reading of a lecture,
but the opening of a problem. Requiring research, they were calculated to
arouse the dormant intellect. They implied no hostility to Philosophy,
because Philosophy is the great expounder of symbolism; although its


--- PAGE 71 ---
ancient interpretations were often illfounded and incorrect. The alteration
from symbol to dogma is fatal to beauty of expression, and leads to
intolerance and assumed infallibility.
* * * * * *
If, in teaching the great doctrine of the divine nature of the Soul, and in
striving to explain its longings after immortality, and in proving its
superiority over the souls of the animals, which have no aspirations
Heavenward, the ancients struggled in vain to express the nature of the
soul, by comparing it to FIRE and LIGHT, it will be well for us to
consider whether, with all our boasted knowledge, we have any better or
clearer idea of its nature, and whether we have not despairingly taken
refuge in having none at all. And if they erred as to its original place of
abode, and understood literally the mode and path of its descent, these
were but the accessories of the great Truth, and probably, to the Initiates,
mere allegories, designed to make the idea more palpable and impressive
to the mind.
They are at least no more fit to be smiled at by the self-conceit of a vain
ignorance, the wealth of whose knowledge consists solely in words, than
the bosom of Abraham, as a home for the spirits of the just dead; the gulf
of actual fire, for the eternal torture of spirits; and the City of the New
Jerusalem, with its walls of jasper and its edifices of pure gold like clear
glass, its foundations of precious stones, and its gates each of a single
pearl. "I knew a man," says PAUL, "caught up to the third Heaven;.... that
he was caught up into Paradise, and heard ineffable words, which it is not
possible for a man to utter." And nowhere is the antagonism and conflict
between the spirit and body more frequently and forcibly insisted on than
in the writings of this apostle, nowhere the Divine nature of the soul more
strongly asserted. "With the mind," he says, "I serve the law of God; but
with the flesh the law of sin....As many as are led by the Spirit of God, are
the sons of GOD.... The earnest expectation of the created waits for the
manifestation of the sons of God.... The created shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption, of the flesh liable to decay, into the glorious
liberty of the children of God."
* * * * * *


--- PAGE 72 ---
Two forms of government are favorable to the prevalence of falsehood and
deceit. Under a Despotism, men are false, treacherous, and deceitful
through fear, like slaves dreading the lash. Under a Democracy they are so
as a means of attaining popularity and office, and because of the greed for
wealth. Experience will probably prove that these odious and detestable
vices will grow most rankly and spread most rapidly in a Republic. When
office and wealth become the gods of a people, and the most unworthy and
unfit most aspire to the former, and fraud becomes the highway to the
latter, the land will reek with falsehood and sweat lies and chicane. When
the offices are open to all, merit and stern integrity and the dignity of
unsullied honor will attain them only rarely and by accident. To be able to
serve the country well, will cease to be a reason why the great and wise
and learned should be selected to render service. Other qualifications, less
honorable, will be more available. To adapt one's opinions to the popular
humor; to defend, apologize for, and justify the popular follies; to
advocate the expedient and the plausible; to caress, cajole, and flatter the
elector; to beg like a spaniel for his vote, even if he be a negro three
removes from barbarism; to profess friendship for a competitor and stab
him by innuendo; to set on foot that which at third hand shall become a
lie, being cousin-german to it when uttered, and yet capable of being
explained away,--who is there that has not seen these low arts and base
appliances put into practice, and becoming general, until success cannot
be surely had by any more honorable means ?--the result being a State
ruled and ruined by ignorant and shallow mediocrity, pert self-conceit, the
greenness of unripe intellect, vain of a school-boy's smattering of
knowledge.
The faithless and the false in public and in political life, will be faithless
and false in private. The jockey in politics, like the jockey on the race-
course, is rotten from skin to core. Everywhere he will see first to his own
interests, and whoso leans on him will be pierced with a broken reed. His
ambition is ignoble, like himself; and therefore he will seek to attain omce
by ignoble means, as he will seek to attain any other coveted object,--land,
money, or reputation.
At length, office and honor are divorced. The place that the small and
shallow, the knave or the trickster, is deemed competent and fit to fill,
ceases to be worthy the ambition of the great and capable; or if not, these
shrink from a contest, the weapons to be used wherein are unfit for a
gentleman to handle. Then the habits of unprincipled advocates in law
courts are naturalized in Senates, and pettifoggers wrangle there, when the
fate of the nation and the lives of millions are at stake. States are even


--- PAGE 73 ---
begotten by villainy and brought forth by fraud, and rascalities are
justified by legislators claiming to be honorable. Then contested elections
are decided by perjured votes or party considerations; and all the practices
of the worst times of corruption are revived and exaggerated in Republics.
It is strange that reverence for truth, that manliness and genuine loyalty,
and scorn of littleness and unfair advantage, and genuine faith and
godliness and large-heartedness should diminish, among statesmen and
people, as civilization advances, and freedom becomes more general, and
universal suffrage implies universal worth and fitness ! In the age of
Elizabeth, without universal suffrage, or Societies for the Diffusion of
Useful Knowledge, or popular lecturers, or Lycaea, the statesman, the
merchant, the burgher, the sailor, were all alike heroic, fearing God only,
and man not at all. Let but a hundred or two years elapse, and in a
Monarchy or Republic of the same race, nothing is less heroic than the
merchant, the shrewd speculator, the office-seeker, fearing man only, and
God not at all. Reverence for greatness dies out, and is succeeded by base
envy of greatness. Every man is in the way of many, either in the path to
popularity or wealth. There is a general feeling of satisfaction when a
great statesman is displaced, or a general, who has been for his brief hour
the popular idol, is unfortunate and sinks from his high estate. It becomes
a misfortune, if not a crime, to be above the popular level.
We should naturally suppose that a nation in distress would take counsel
with the wisest of its sons. But, on the contrary, great men seem never so
scarce as when they are most needed, and small men never so bold to
insist on infesting place, as when mediocrity and incapable pretence and
sophomoric greenness, and showy and sprightly incompetency are most
dangerous. When France was in the extremity of revolutionary agony, she
was governed by an assembly of provincial pettifoggers, and Robespierre,
Marat, and Couthon ruled in the place of Mirabeau, Vergniaud, and
Carnot. England was governed by the Rump Parliament, after she had
beheaded her king. Cromwell extinguished one body, and Napoleon the
other.
Fraud, falsehood, trickery, and deceit in national affairs are the signs of
decadence in States and precede convulsions or paralysis. To bully the
weak and crouch to the strong, is the policy of nations governed by small
mediocrity. The tricks of the canvass for office are re-enacted in Senates.
The Executive becomes the dispenser of patronage, chiefly to the most
unworthy; and men are bribed with offices instead of money, to the greater
ruin of the Commonwealth. The Divine in human nature disappears, and


--- PAGE 74 ---
interest, grced, and selfishness takes it place. That is a sad and true
allegory which represents the companions of Ulysses changed by the
enchantments of Circe into swine.
* * * * *
"Ye cannot," said the Great Teacher, "serve God and Mammon." When the
thirst for wealth becomes general, it will be sought for as well dishonestly
as honestly; by frauds and overreachings, by the knaveries of trade, the
heartlessness of greedy speculation, by gambling in stocks and
commodities that soon demoralizes a whole community. Men will
speculate upon the needs of their neighbors and the distresses of their
country. Bubbles that, bursting, impoverish multitudes, will be blown up
by cunning knavery, with stupid credulity as its assistants and instrument.
Huge bankruptcies, that startle a country like the earthquakes, and are
more fatal, fraudulent assignments, engulfment of the savings of the poor,
expansions and collapses of the currency, the crash of banks, the
depreciation of Government securities, prey on the savings of self-denial,
and trouble with their depredations the first nourishment of infancy and
the last sands of life, and fill with inmates the churchyards and lunatic
asylums. But the sharper and speculator thrives and fattens. If his country
is fighting by a levy en masse for her very existence, he aids her by
depreciating her paper, so that he may accumulate fabulous amounts with
little outlay. If his neighbor is distressed, he buys his property for a song.
If he administers upon an estate, it turns out insolvent, and the orphans
are paupers. If his bank explodes, he is found to have taken care of
himself in time. Society worships its paper-and-credit kings, as the old
Hindus and Egyptians worshipped their worthless idols, and often the most
obsequiously when in actual solid wealth they are the veriest paupers. No
wonder men think there ought to be another world, in which the injustices
of this may be atoned for, when they see the friends of ruined families
begging the wealthy sharpers to give alms to prevent the orphaned victims
from starving, until they may findways of supporting themselves.
* * * * * *
States are chiefly avaricious of commerce and of territory. The latter leads
to the violation of treaties, encroachments upon feeble neighbors, and
rapacity toward their wards whose lands are coveted. Republics are, in
this, as rapacious and unprincipled as Despots, never learning from history
that inordinate expansion by rapine and fraud has its inevitable


--- PAGE 75 ---
consequences in dismen1berment or subjugation. When a Republic begins
to plunder its neighbors, the words of doom are already written on its
walls. There is a judgment already pronounced of God upon whatever is
unrighteous in the conduct of national affairs. When civil war tears the
vitals of a Republic, let it look back and see if it has not been guilty of
injustices; and if it has, let it humble itself in the dust !
When a nation becomes possessed with a spirit of commercial greed,
beyond those just and fair limits set by a due regard to a moderate and
reasonable degree of general and individual prosperity, it is a nation
possessed by the devil of commercial avarice, a passion as ignoble and
demoralizing as avarice in the individual; and as this sordid passion is
baser and more unscrupulous than ambition, so it is more hateful, and at
last makes the infected nation to be regarded as the enemy of the human
race. To grasp at the lion's share of commerce, has always at last proven
the ruin of States, because it invariably leads to injustices that make a
State detestable; to a selfishness and crooked policy that forbid other
nations to be the friends of a State that cares only for itself.
Commercial avarice in India was the parent of more atrocities and greater
rapacity, and cost more human lives, than the nobler ambition for extended
empire of Consular Rome. The nation that grasps at the commerce of the
world cannot but become selfish, calculating, dead to the noblest impulses
and sympathies which ought to actuate States. It will submit to insults that
wound its honor, rather than endanger its commercial interests by war;
while, to subserve those interests, it will wage unjust war, on false or
frivolous pretexts, its free people cheerfully allying themselves with
despots to crush a commercial rival that has dared to exile its kings and
elect its own ruler.
Thus the cold calculations of a sordid self-interest, in nations
commercially avaricious, always at last displace the sentiments and lofty
impulses of Honor and Generosity by which they rose to greatness; which
made Elizabeth and Cromwell alike the protectors of Protestants beyond
the four seas of England, against crowned Tyranny and mitred Persecution;
and, if they had lasted, would have forbidden alliances with Czars and
Autocrats and Bourbons to re-enthrone the Tyrannies of Incapacity, and
arm the Inquisition anew with its instruments of torture. The soul of the
avaricious nation petrifies, like the soul of the individual who makes gold


--- PAGE 76 ---
his god. The Despot will occasionally act upon noble and generous
impulses, and help the weak against the strong, the right against the
wrong. But commercial avarice is essentially egotistic, grasping, faithless,
overreaching, crafty, cold, ungenerous, selfish, and calculating, controlled
by considerations of self-interest alone. Heartless and merciless, it has no
sentiments of pity, sympathy, or honor, to make it pause in its remorseless
career; and it crushes down all that is of impediment in its way, as its
keels of commerce crush under them the murmuring and unheeded waves.
A war for a great principle ennobles a nation. A war for commercial
supremacy, upon some shallow pretext, is despicable, and more than aught
else demonstrates to what immeasurable depths of baseness men and
nations can descend. Commercial greed values the lives of men no more
than it values the lives of ants. The slave-trade is as acceptable to a
people enthralled by that greed, as the trade in ivory or spices, if the
profits are as large. It will by-and-by endeavor to compound with God and
quiet its own conscience, by compelling those to whom it sold the slaves
it bought or stole, to set them free, and slaughtering them by hecatombs if
they refuse to obey the edicts of its philanthropy.
Justice in no wise consists in meting out to another that exact measure of
reward or punishment which we think and decree his merit, or what we
call his crime, which is more often merely his error, deserves. The justice
of the father is not incompatible with forgiveness by him of the errors and
offences of his child. The Infinite Justice of God does not consist in
meting out exact measures of punishment for human frailties and sins. We
are too apt to erect our own little and narrow notions of what is right and
just into the law of justice, and to insist that God shall adopt that as His
law; to measure off something with our own little tape-line, and call it
God's love of justice. Continually we seek to ennoble our own ignoble
love of revenge and retaliationJ by misnaming it justice.
Nor does justice consist in strictly governing our conduct toward other
men by the rigid rules of legal right. If there were a community anywhere,
in which all stood upon the strictness of this rule, there should be written
over its gates, as a warning to the unfortunates desiring admission to that
inhospitable realm, the words which DANTE says are written over the
great gate of Hell: LET THOSE WHO ENTER HERE LEAVE HOPE
BEHIND ! It is not just to pay the laborer in field or factory or workshop
his current wages and no more, the lowest market-value of his labor, for
so long only as we need that labor and he is able to work; for when
sickness or old age overtakes him, that is to leave him and his family to


--- PAGE 77 ---
starve; and God will curse with calamity the people in which the children
of the laborer out of work eat the boiled grass of the field, and mothers
strangle their children, that they may buy food for themselves with the
charitable pittance given for burial expenses. The rules of what is
ordinarily termed "Justice," may be punctiliously observed among the
fallen spirits that are the aristocracy of Hell.
* * * * * *
Justice, divorced from sympathy, is selfish indifference, not in the least
more laudable than misanthropic isolation. There is sympathy even among
the hair-like oscillatorias, a tribe of simple plants, armies of which may be
discovered with the aid of the microscope, in the tiniest bit of scum from
a stagnant pool. For these will place themselves, as if it were by
agreement, in separate companies, on the side of a vessel containing them,
and seem marching upward in rows; and when a swarm grows weary of its
situation, and has a mind to change its quarters, each army holds on its
way without confusion or intermixture, proceeding with great regularity
and order, as if under the directions of wise leaders. The ants and bees
give each other mutual assistance, beyond what is required by that which
human creatures are apt to regard as the strict law of justice.
Surely we need but reflect a little, to be convinced that the individual man
is but a fraction of the unit of society, and that he is indissolubly
connected with the rest of his race. Not only the actions, but the will and
thoughts of other men make or mar his fortunes, control his destinies, are
unto him life or death, dishonor or honor. The epidemics, physical and
moral, contagious and infectious, public opinion, popular delusions,
enthusiasms, and the other great electric phenomena and currents, moral
and intellectual, prove the universal sympathy. The vote of a single and
obscure n1an, the utterance of self-will, ignorance, conceit, or spite,
deciding an election and placing Folly or Incapacity or Baseness in a
Senate, involves the country in war, sweeps away our fortunes, slaughters
our sons, renders the labors of a life unavailing, and pushes on, helpless,
with all our intellect to resist, into the grave.
These considerations ought to teach us that justice to others and to
ourselves is the same; that we cannot define our duties by mathematical
lines ruled by the square, but must fill with them the great circle traced by
the compasses; that the circle of humanity is the limit, and we are but the
point in its centre, the drops in the great Atlantic, the atom or particle,


--- PAGE 78 ---
bound by a mys terious law of attraction which we term sympathy to every
other atom in the mass; that the physical and moral welfare of others
cannot be indifferent to us; that we have a direct and immediate interest in
the public morality and popular intelligence, in the well-being and
physical comfort of the people at large. The ignorance of the people, their
pauperism and destitution, and consequent degradation, their brutalization
and demoralization, are all diseases; and we cannot rise high enough
above the people, nor shut ourselves up from them enough, to escape the
miasmatic contagion and the great magnetic currents.
Justice is peculiarly indispensable to nations. The unjust State is doomed
of God to calamity and ruin. This is the teaching of the Eternal Wisdom
and of history. "Righteousness exalteth a nation; but wrong is a reproach
to nations." "The Throne is established by Righteousness. Let the lips of
the Ruler pronounce the sentence that is Divine; and his mouth do no
wrong in judgment !" The nation that adds province to province by fraud
and violence, that encroaches on the weak and plunders its wards, and
violates its treaties and the obligation of its contracts, and for the law of
honor and fair-dealing substitutes the exigencies of greed and the base
precepts of policy and craft and the ignoble tenets of expediency, is
predestined to destruction; for here, as with the individual, the
consequences of wrong are inevitable and eternal.
A sentence is written against all that is unjust, written by God in the
nature of man and in the nature of the Universe, because it is in the nature
of the Infinite God. No wrong is really successful. The gain of injustice is
a loss; its pleasure, suffering. Iniquity often seems to prosper, but its
success is its defeat and shame. If its consequences pass by the doer, they
fall upon and crush his children. It is a philosophical, physical, and moral
truth, in the form of a threat, that God visits the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children, to the third and fourth generation of those who violate
His laws. After a long while, the day of reckoning always comes, to nation
as to individual; and always the knave deceives himself, and proves a
failure.
Hypocrisy is the homage that vice and wrong pay to virtue and justice. It
is Satan attempting to clothe himself in the angelic vesture of light. It is
equally detestable in morals, politics, and religion; in the man and in the
nation. To do injustice under the pretence of equity and fairness; to
reprove vice in public and commit it in private; to pretend to charitable
opinion and censoriously condemn; to profess the principles of Masonic
beneficence, and close the ear to the wail of distress and the cry of


--- PAGE 79 ---
suffering; to eulogize the intelligence of the people, and plot to deceive
and betray them by means of their ignorance and simplicity; to prate of
purity, and peculate; of honor, and basely abandon a sinking cause; of
disinterestedness, and sell one's vote for place and power, are hypocrisies
as common as they are infamous and disgraceful. To steal the livery of the
Court of God to serve the Devil withal; to pretend to believe in a God of
mercy and a Redeemer of love, and persecute those of a different faith; to
devour widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayers; to preach
continence, and wallow in lust; to inculcate humility, and in pride surpass
Lucifer; to pay tithe, and omit the weightier matters of the law, judgment,
mercy and faith; to strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel; to make clean
the outside of the cup and platter, keeping them full within of extortion
and excess; to appear outwardly righteous unto men, but within be full of
hypocrisy and iniquity, is indeed to be like unto whited sepulchres, which
appear beautiful outward, but are within full of bones of the dead and of
all uncleanness.
The Republic cloaks its ambition with the pretence of a desire and duty to
"extend the area of freedom," and claims it as its "manifest destiny" to
annex other Republics or the States or Provinces of others to itself, by
open violence, or under obsolete, empty, and fraudulent titles. The Empire
founded by a successful soldier, claims its ancient or natural boundaries,
and makes necessity and its safety tlle plea for open robbery. The great
Merchant Nation, gaining foothold in the Orient, finds a continual
necessity for extending its dominion by arms, and subjugates India. The
great Royalties and Despotisms, without a plea, partition among
themselves a Kingdom, dismember Poland, and prepare to wrangle over
the dominions of the Crescent. To maintain the balance of power is a plea
for the obliteration of States. Carthage, Genoa, and Venice, commercial
Cities only, must acquire territory by force or fraud, and become States.
Alexander marches to the Indus; Tamerlane seeks universal empire; the
Saracens conquer Spain and threaten Vienna.
The thirst for power is never satisfied. It is insatiable. Neither men nor
nations ever have power enough. When Rome was the mistress of the
world, the Emperors caused themselves to be worshipped as gods. The
Church of Rome claimed despotism over the soul, and over the whole life
from the cradle to the grave. It gave and sold absolutions for past and
future sins. It claimed to be infallible in matters of faith. It decimated
Europe to purge it of heretics. It decimated America to convert the
Mexicans and Peruvians. It gave and took away thrones; and by
excommunication and interdict closed the gates of Paradise against


--- PAGE 80 ---
Nations, Spain, haughty with its dominion over the Indies, endeavored to
crush out Protestantism in the Netherlands, while Philip the Second
married the Queen of England, and the pair sought to win that kingdom
back to its allegiance to the Papal throne. Afterward Spain attempted to
conquer it with her "invincible" Armada. Napoleon set his relatives and
captains on thrones, and parcelled among them half of Europe. The Czar
rules over an empire more gigantic than Rome. The history of all is or will
be the same,--acquisition, dismemberment, ruin. There is a judgment of
God against all that is unjust.
To seek to subjugate the will of others and take the soul captive, because
it is the exercise of thc highest power, seems to be the highest object of
human ambition. It is at the bottom of all proselyting and propagandism,
from that of Mesmer to that of the Church of Rome and the French
Republic. That was the apostolate alike of Joshua and of Mahomet.
Masonry alone preaches Toleration, the right of man to abide by his own
faith, the right of all States to govern themselves. It rebukes alike the
monarch who seeks to extend his dominions by conquest, the Church that
claims the right to repress heresy by fire and steel, and the confederation
of States that insist on maintaining a union by force and restoring
brotherhood by slaughter and subjugation.
It is natural, when we are wronged, to desire revenge; and to persuade
ourselves that we desire it less for our own satisfaction than to prevent a
repetition of the wrong, to which the doer would be encouraged by
immunity coupled with the profit of the wrong. To submit to be cheated is
to encourage the cheater to continue; and we are quite apt to regard
ourselves as God's chosen instruments to inflict His vengeance, and for
Him and in His stead to discourage wrong by making it fruitless and its
punishment sure. Revenge has been said to be "a kind of wild justice;" but
it is always taken in anger, and therefore is unworthy of a great soul,
which ought not to suffer its equanimity to be disturbed by ingratitude or
villainy. The injuries done us by the base are as much unworthy of our
angry notice as those done us by the insects and the beasts; and when we
crush the adder, or slay the wolf or hyena, we should do it without being
moved to anger, and with no more feeling of revenge than we have in
rooting up a noxious weed.
And if it be not in human nature not to take revenge by way of
punishment, let the Mason truly consider that in doing so he is God's
agent, and so let his revenge be measured by justice and tempered by
mercy. The law of God is, that the consequences of wrong and cruelty and


--- PAGE 81 ---
crime shall be their punishment; and the injured and the wronged and the
indignant are as much His instruments to enforce that law, as the diseases
and public detestation, and the verdict of history and the execration of
posterity are. No one will say that the Inquisitor who has racked and
burned the innocent; the Spaniard who hewed Indian infants, living, into
pieces with his sword, and fed the mangled limbs to his bloodhounds; the
military tyrant who has shot men without trial, the knave who has robbed
or betrayed his State, the fraudulent banker or bankrupt who has beggared
orphans, the public officer who has violated his oath, the judge who has
sold injustice, the legislator who has enabled Incapacity to work the ruin
of the State, ought not to be punished. Let them be so; and let the injured
or the sympathizing be the instruments of God's just vengeance; but
always out of a higher feeling than mere personal revenge.
Remember that every moral characteristic of man finds its prototype
an1ong creatures of lower intelligence; that the cruel foulness of the
hyena, the savage rapacity of the wolf, the merciless rage of the tiger, the
crafty treachery of the panther, are found among mankind, and ought to
excite no other emotion, when found in the man, than when found in the
beast. Why should the true man be angry with the geese that hiss, the
peacocks that strut, the asses that bray, and the apes that imitate and
chatter, although they wear the human form? Always, also, it remains true,
that it is more noble to forgive than to take revenge; and that, in general,
we ought too much to despise those who wrong us, to feel the emotion of
anger, or to desire revenge.
At the sphere of the Sun, you are in the region of LIGHT. * * * * The
Hebrew word for gold, ZAHAB, also means Light, of which the Sun is to
the Earth the great source. So, in the great Oriental allegory of the
Hebrews, the River PISON compasses the land of Gold or Light; and the
River GIHON the land of Ethiopia or Darkness.
What light is, we no more know than the ancients did. According to the
modern hypothesis, it is not composed of luminous particles shot out from
the sun with immense velocity; but that body only impresses, on the ether
which fills all space, a powerful vibratory movement that extends, in the
form of luminous waves, beyond the most distant planets, supplying them
with light and heat. To the ancients, it was an outflowing from the Deity.
To us, as to them, it is the apt symbol of truth and knowledge. To us, also,
the upward journey of the soul through the Spheres is symbolical; but we
are as little informed as they whence the soul comes, where it has its
origin, and whither it goes after death. They endeavored to have some


--- PAGE 82 ---
belief and faith, some creed, upon those points. At the present day, men
are satisfied to think nothing in regard to all that, and only to believe that
the soul is a something separate from the body and out-living it, but
whether existing before it, neither to inquire nor care. No one asks
whether it emanates from the Deity, or is created out of nothing, or is
generated like the body, and the issue of the souls of the father and the
mother. Let us not smile, therefore, at the ideas of the ancients, until we
have a better belief; but accept their symbols as meaning that the soul is
of a Divine nature, originating in a sphere nearer the Deity, and returning
to that when freed from the enthralhment of the body; and that it can only
return there when purified of all the sordidness and sin which have, as it
were, become part of its substance, by its connection with the body.
It is not strange that, thousands of years ago, men worshipped the Sun,
and that to-day that worship continues among the Parsees. Originally they
looked beyond the orb to the invisible God, of whom the Sun's light,
seemingly identical with generation and life, was the manifestation and
outflowing. Long before the Chaldcean shepherds watched it on their
plains, it came up regularly, as it now does, in the morning, like a god,
and again sank, like a king retiring, in the west, to return again in due
time in the same array of majesty. We worship Immutability. It was that
steadfast, immutable character of the Sun that the men of Baalbec
worshipped. His light-giving and life-giving powers were secondary
attributes. The one grand idea that compelled worship was the
characteristic of God which they saw reflected in his light, and fancied
they saw in its originality the changelessness of Deity. He had seen
thrones crwnble, earthquakes shake the world and hurl down mountains.
Beyond Olympus, beyond the Pillars of Hercules, he had gone daily to his
abode, and had come daily again in the morning to behold the temples they
built to his worsl1ip. They personified him as BRAHMA, AMUN, OSRIS,
BEL, ADONIS, MALKARTH, MITHRAS, and APOLLO; and the nations
that did so grew old and died. Moss grew on the capitals of the great
columns of his temples, and he shone on the moss. Grain by grain the dust
of his temples crumbled and fell, and was borne off on the wind, and still
he shone on crumbling column and architrave. The roof fell crashing on
the pavement, and he shone in on the Holy of Holies with unchanging
rays. It was not strange that men worshipped the Sun.
There is a water-plant, on whose broad leaves the drops of water roll
about without uniting, like drops of mercury. So arguments on points of
faith, in politics or religion, roll over the surface of the mind. An
argument that convinces one mind has no effect on another. Few intellects,


--- PAGE 83 ---
or souls that are the negations of intellect, have any logical power or
capacity. There is a singular obliquity in the human mind that makes the
false logic more effective than the true with nine-tenths of those who are
regarded as men of intellect. Even among the judges, not one in ten can
argue logically. Each mind sees the truth, distorted through its own
medium. Truth, to most men, is like matter in the spheroidal state. Like a
drop of cold water on the surface of a red-hot metal plate, it dances,
trembles, and spins, and never comes into contact with it; and the mind
may be plunged into truth, as the hand moistened with sulphurous acid
may into melted metal, and be not even warmed by the immersion.
* * * * * *
The word Khairum or Khurum is a compound one. Gesenius renders
Khurum by the word noble or free-born: Khur meaning white, noble. It
also means the opening of a window, the socket of the eye. Khri also
means white, or an opening; and Khris, the orb of the Sun, in Job viii. 13
and x. 7. Krishna is the Hindu Sun-God. Khur, the Parsi word, is the
literal name of the Sun.
From Kur or Khur, the Sun, comes Khora, a name of Lower Egypt. The
Sun, Bryant says in his Mythology, was called Kur; and Plutarch says that
the Persians called the Sun Kuros. Kurios, Lord, in Greek, like Adonai,
Lord, in Phcenician and Hebrew, was applied to the Sun. Many places
were sacred to the Sun, and called Kura, Kuria, Kuropolis, Kurene,
Kureschata, Kuresta, and Corusia in Scythia.
The Egyptian Deity called by the Greeks "Horus," was Her-Ra, or Har-
oeris, Hor or Har, the Sun. Hari is a Hindu name of the Sun. Ari-al, Ar-es,
Ar, Aryaman, Areimonios, the AR meaning Fire or Flame, are of the same
kindred. Hewnes or Har-mes, (Aram, Remus, Haram, Harameias), was
Kadmos, the Divine Light or Wisdom. Mar-kuri, says Movers, is Mar, the
Sun.
In the Hebrew, AOOR, is Light, Fire, or the Sun. Cyrus, said Ctesias, was
so named from Kuros, the Sun. Kuris, Hesychius says, was Adonis.
Apollo, the Sun-god, was called Kurraios, from Kurra, a city in Phocis.
The people of Kurene, originally Ethiopians or Cuthites, worshipped the
Sun under the title of Achoor and Achor.


--- PAGE 84 ---
We know, through a precise testimony in the ancient annals of Tsur, that
the principal festivity of Mal-karth, the incarnation of the Sun at the
Winter Solstice, held at Tsur, was called his rebirth or his awakening, and
that it was celebrated by means of a pyre, on which the god was supposed
to regain, through the aid of fire, a new life. This festival was celebrated
in the month Peritius (Barith), the second day of which corresponded to
the 25th of December. KHUR-UM, King of Tyre, Movers says, first
performed this ceremony. These facts we learn from Josephus, Servius on
the AEneid, and the Dionysiacs of Nonnus; and through a coincidence that
cannot be fortuitous, the same day was at Rome the Dies Natalis Solis
Invicti, the festal day of the invincible Sun. Under this title, HERCULES,
HAR-acles, was worshipped at Tsur. Thus, while the temple was being
erected, the death and resurrection of a Sun-God was annually represented
at Tsur, by Solomon's ally, at the winter solstice, by the pyre of MAL-
KARIH, the Tsurian Haracles.
AROERIS or HAR-oeris, the elder HORUS, is from the same old root that
in the Hebrew has the form Aur, or, with the definite article prefixed,
Haur, Light, or the Light, splendor, flame, the Sun and his rays. The
hieroglyphic of the younger HORUS was the point in a circle; of the Elder,
a pair of eyes; and the festival of the thirtieth day of the month Epiphi,
when the sun and moon were supposed to be in the same right line with
the earth, was called "The birth-day of the eyes of Horus."
In a papyrus published by Champollion, this god is styled "Haroeri, Lord
of the Solar Spirits, the beneficent eye of the Sun." Plutarch calls him
"Har-pocrates," but there is no trace of the latter part of the name in the
hieroglyphic legends. He is the son of OSIRIS and Isrs; and is represented
sitting on a throne supported by lions; the same word, in Egyptian,
meaning Lion and Sun. So Solomon made a great throne of ivory, plated
with gold, with six steps, at each arm of which was a lion, and one on
each side to each step, making seven on each side.
Again, the Hebrewword Khi, means "living;" and ram, "was, or shall be,
raised or lifted up." The latter is the same as room, aroom, harum, whence
Aram, for Syria, or Aramoea, High-land. Khairum, therefore, would mean
"was raised up to life, or living."
So, in Arabic, hrm, an unused root, meant, "was high," "made great,"
"exalted;" and Hirm means an ox, the symbol of the Sun in Taurus, at the
Vernal Equinox.


--- PAGE 85 ---
KHURUM, therefore, improperly called Hiram, is KHUR-OM, the same as
Her-ra, Her-mes, and Her-acles, the "Heracles Tyrius Invictus," the
personification of Light and the Son, the Mediator, Redeemer, and
Saviour. From the Egyptian word Ra came the Coptic Ouro, and the
Hebrew Aur, Light. Har-oeri, is Hor or Har, the chief or master. Hor is
also heat; and hora, season or hour; and hence in several African dialects,
as names of the Sun, Airo, Ayero, eer, uiro, ghurrah, and the like. The
royal name rendered Pharaoh, was PHRA, that is, Pai-ra, the Sun.
The legend of the contest between Hor-ra and Set, or Set-nu-bi, the same
as Bar or Bal, is older than that of the strife between Osiris and Typhon;
as old, at least, as the nineteenth dynasty. It is called in the Book of the
Dead, "The day of the battle between Horus and Set." The later myth
connects itself with Phoenicia and Syria. The body of OSIRIS went ashore
at Gebal or Byblos, sixty miles above Tsur. You will not fail to notice that
in the name of each murderer of Khurum, that of the Evil God Bal is
found.
* * * * *
Har-oeri was the god of TIME, as well as of Life. The Egyptian legend was
that the King of Byblos cut down the tamarisk-tree containing the body of
OSIRIS, and made of it a column for his palace. Isis, employed in the
palace, obtained possession of the column, took the body out of it, and
carried it away. Apuleius describes her as "a beautiful female, over whose
divine neck her long thick hair hung in graceful ringlets ;" and in the
procession female attendants, with ivory combs, seemed to dress and
ornament the royal hair of the goddess. The palm-tree, and the lamp in the
shape of a boat, appeared in the procession. If the symbol we are speaking
of is not a mere modern invention, it is to these things it alludes.
The identity of the legends is also confirmed by this hieroglyphic picture,
copied from an ancient Egyptian monument, which may also enlighten you
as to the Lion's grip and the Master's gavel.


--- PAGE 86 ---
in the ancient Phcenician character, and in the Samaritan, A B, (the two
letters representing the numbers 1, 2, or Unity and Duality, means Father,
and is a primitive noun, common to all the Semitic languages.
It also means an Ancestor, Originator, Inventor, Head, Chief or Ruler,
Manager, Overseer, Master, Priest, Prophet.
is simply Father, when it is in construction, that is, when it precedes
another word, and in English the preposition "of" is interposed, as Abi-Al,
the Father of Al.
Also, the final Yod means "my"; so that by itself means "My father. David
my father, 2 Chron. ii. 3.
(Vav) final is the possessive pronoun "his"; and Abiu (which we read
"Abif") means "of my father's." Its full meaning, as connected with the
name of Khurum, no doubt is, "formerly one of my father's servants," or
"slaves."
The name of the Phcenician artificer is, in Samuel and Kings, [2 Sam. v.
11; 1 Kings v. 15; 1 Kings vii. 40]. In Chronicles it is with the addition of
[2 Chron. ii. 12]; and of [2 Chron. iv. 16].
It is merely absurd to add the word "Abif," or "Abiff," as part of the name
of the artificer. And it is almost as absurd to add the word "Abi," which
was a title and not part of the name. Joseph says [Gen. xlv. 8], "God has
constituted me 'Ab l'Paraah, as Father to Paraah, i.e., Vizier or Prime
Minister." So Haman was called the Second Father of Artaxerxes; and
when King Khurum used the phrase "Khurum Abi," he meant that the
artificer he sent Schlomoh was the principal or chief workman in his line
at Tsur.


--- PAGE 87 ---
A medal copied by Montfaucon exhibits a female nursing a child, with ears
of wheat in her hand, and the legend (Iao). She is seated on clouds, a star
at her head, and three ears of wheat rising from an altar before her.
HORUS was the mediator, who was buried three days, was regenerated,
and triumphed over the evil principle.
The word HERI, in Sanscrit, means Shepherd, as well as Savior. CRISHNA
is called Heri, as Jesus called Himself the Good Shepherd.
Khur, means an aperture of a window, a cave, or the eye. Also it means
white.
It also means an opening, and noble, free-born, high-born.
KHURM means consecrated, devoted; in AEthiopic. It is the name of a
city, [Josh. xix. 38]; and of a man, [Ezr. ii. 32, x. 31; Neh. iii. 11].
Khirah, means nobility, a noble race.
Buddha is declared to comprehend in his own person the essence of the
Hindu Trimurti; and hence the tri-literal monosyllable Om or Aum is
applied to him as being essentially the same as Brahma-Vishnu-Siva. He is
the same as Hermes, Thoth, Taut, and Teutates. One of his names is Heri-
maya or Hermaya, which are evidently the same name as Hermes and
Khirm or Khurm. Heri, in Sanscrit, means Lord.
A learned Brother places over the two symbolic pillars, from right to left,
the two words IHU and BAL: followed by the hieroglyphic equivalent, of
the Sun-God, Amun-ra. Is it an accidental coincidence, that in the name of
each murderer are the two names of the Good and Evil Deities of the
Hebrews; for Yu-bel is but Yehu-Bal or Yeho-Bal? and that the three final
syllables of the names, a, o, um, make A.'.U.'.M.'. the sacred word of the
Hindoos, meaning the Triune God, Life-giving, Life-preserving, Life-
destroying: represented by the mystic character ?
The genuine acacia, also, is the thorny tamarisk, the same tree which grew
up around the body of Osiris. It was a sacred tree among the Arabs, who


--- PAGE 88 ---
made of it the idol Al-Uzza, which Mohammed destroyed. It is abundant as
a bush in the Desert of Thur: and of it the "crown of thorns" was
composed, which was set on the forehead of Jesus of Nazareth. It is a fit
type of immortality on account of its tenacity of life; for it has been
known, when planted as a door-post, to take root again and shoot out
budding boughs over the threshold.
* * * * *
Every commonwealth must have its periods of trial and transition,
especially if it engages in war. It is certain at some time to be wholly
governed by agitators appealing to all the baser elements of the popular
nature; by moneyed corporations; by those enriched by the depreciation of
government securities or paper; by small attorneys, schemers, money-
jobbers, speculators and adventurers--an ignoble oligarchy, enriched by
the distresses of the State, and fattened on the miseries of the people.
Then all the deceitful visions of equality and the rights of man end; and
the wronged and plundered State can regain a real liberty only by passing
through "great varieties of untried being," purified in its transmigration by
fire and blood.
In a Republic, it soon comes to pass that parties gather round the negative
and positive poles of some opinion or notion, and that the intolerant spirit
of a triumphant majority will allow no deviation from the standard of
orthodoxy which it has set up for itself. Freedom of opinion will be
professed and pretended to, but every one will exercise it at the peril of
being banished from political communion with those who hold the reins
and prescribe the policy to be pursued. Slavishness to party and
obsequiousness to the popular whims go hand in hand. Political
independence only occurs in a fossil state; and men's opinions grow out of
the acts they have been constrained to do or sanction. Flattery, either of
individual or people, corrupts both the receiver and the giver; and
adulation is not of more service to the people than to kings. A Ccesar,
securely seated in power, cares less for it than a free democracy; nor will
his appetite for it grow to exorbitance, as that of a people will, until it
becomes insatiate. The effect of liberty to individuals is, that they may do
what they please; to a people, it is to a great extent the same. If accessible
to flattery, as this is always interested, and resorted to on low and base
motives, and for evil purposes, either individual or people is sure, in
doing what it pleases, to do what in honor and conscience should have
been left undone. One ought not even to risk congratulations, which may
soon be turned into complaints; and as both individuals and peoples are


--- PAGE 89 ---
prone to make a bad use of power, to flatter them, which is a sure way to
mislead them, well deserves to be called a crime.
The first principle in a Republic ought to be, "that no man or set of men is
entitled to exclusive or separate emoluments or privileges from the
community, but in consideration of public services; which not being
descendible, neither ought the omces of magistrate, legislature, nor judge,
to be hereditary." It is a volume of Truth and Wisdom, a lesson for the
study of nations, embodied in a single sentence, and expressed in language
which every man can understand. If a deluge of despotism were to
overthrow the world, and destroy all institutions under which freedom is
protected, so that they should no longer be remembered among men, this
sentence, preserved, would be sufficient to rekindle the fires of liberty and
revive the race of freemen.
But, to preserve liberty, another must be added: "that a free State does not
confer office as a reward, especially for questionable services, unless she
seeks her own ruin; but all officers are employed by her, in consideration
solely of their will and ability to render service in the future; and
therefore that the best and most competent are always to be preferred."
For, if there is to be any other rule, that of hereditary succession is
perhaps as good as any. By no other rule is it possible to preserve the
liberties of the State. By no other to intrust the power of making the laws
to those only who have that keen instinctive sense of injustice and wrong
which enables them to detect baseness and corruption in their most secret
hiding-places, and that moral courage and generous manliness and gallant
independence that make them fearless in dragging out the perpetrators to
the light of day, and calling down upon them the scorn and indignation of
the world. The flatterers of the people are never such men. On the
contrary, a time always comes to a Republic, when it is not content, like
Liberius, with a single Sejanus, but must have a host; and when those
most prominent in the lead of affairs are men without reputation,
statesmanship, ability, or information, the mere hacks of party, owing their
places to trickery and want of qualification, with none of the qualities of
head or heart that make great and wise men, and, at the same time, filled
with all the narrow conceptions and bitter intolerance of political bigotry.
These die; and the world is none the wiser for what they have said and
done. Their names sink in the bottomless pit of oblivion; but their acts of
folly or knavery curse the body politic and at last prove its ruin.


--- PAGE 90 ---
Politicians, in a free State, are generally hollow, heartless, and selfish.
Their own aggrandisement is the end of their patriotism; and they always
look with secret satisfaction on the disappointment or fall of one whose
loftier genius and superior talents overshadow their own self-importance,
or whose integrity and incorruptible honor are in the way of their selfish
ends. The influence of the small aspirants is always against the great man.
His accession to power may be almost for a lifetime. One of themselves
will be more easily displaced, and each hopes to succeed him; and so it at
length comes to pass that men impudently aspire to and actually win the
highest stations, who are unfit for the lowest clerkships; and incapacity
and mediocrity become the surest passports to once.
The consequence is, that those who feel themselves competent and
qualified to serve the people, refuse with digust to enter into the struggle
for office, where the wicked and jesuitical doctrine that all is fair in
politics is an excuse for every species of low villainy; and those who seek
even the highest places of the State do not rely upon the power of a
magnanimous spirit, on the sympathizing impulses of a great soul, to stir
and move the people to generous, noble, and heroic resolves, and to wise
and manly action; but, like spaniels erect on their hind legs, with fore-
paws obsequiously suppliant, fawn, flatter, and actually beg for votes.
Rather than descend to this, they stand contemptuously aloof, disdainfully
refusing to court the people, and acting on the maxim, that "mankind has
no title to demand that we shall serve them in spite of themselves."
* * * * * *
It is lamentable to see a country split into factions, each following this or
that great or brazen-fronted leader with a blind, unreasoning,
unquestioning hero-worship; it is contemptible to see it divided into
parties, whose sole end is the spoils of victory, and their chiefs the low,
the base, the venal and the snlall. Such a country is in the last stages of
decay, and near its end, no matter how prosperous it may seem to be. It
wrangles over the volcano and the earthquake. But it is certain that no
government can be conducted by the men of the people, and for the
people, without a rigid adherence to those principles which our reason
commends as fixed and sound. These must be the tests of parties, men, and
measures. Once determined, they must be inexorable in their application,
and all must either come up to the standard or declare against it. Men may
betray: principles never can. Oppression is one invariable consequence of
misplaced confidence in treacherous man, it is never the result of the
working or application of a sound, just, well-tried principle. Compromises


--- PAGE 91 ---
which bring fundamental principles into doubt, in order to unite in one
party men of antagonistic creeds, are frauds, and end in ruin, the just and
natural consequence of fraud. Whenever you have settled upon your theory
and creed, sanction no departure from it in practice, on any ground of
expediency. It is the Master's word. Yield it up neither to flattery nor force
! Let no defeat or persecution rob you of it! Believe that he who once
blundered in statesmanship will blunder again; that such blunders are as
fatal as crimes; and that political near-sightedness does not improve by
age. There are always more impostors than seers among public men, more
false prophets than true ones, more prophets of Baal than of Jehovah; and
Jerusalem is always in danger from the Assyrians.
Sallust said that after a State has been corrupted by luxury and idleness, it
may by its mere greatness bear up under the burden of its vices. But even
while he wrote, Rome, of which he spoke, had played out her masquerade
of freedom Other causes than luxury and sloth destroy Republics. If small,
their larger neighbors extinguish thelll by absorption. If of great extent,
the cohesive force is too feeble to hold them together, and they fall to
pieces by their own weight. The paltry ambition of small men disintegrates
them. The want of wisdom in their councils creates exasperating issues.
Usurpation of power plays its part, incapacity seconds corruption, the
storm rises, and the fragments of the incoherent raft strew the sandy
shores, reading to mankind another lesson for it to disregard.
The Forty-seventh Proposition is older than Pythagoras. It is this: "In
every right-angled triangle, the sum of the squares of the base and
perpendicular is equal to the square of the hypothenuse."
The square of a number is the product of that number, multiplied by itself.
Thus, 4 is the square of 2, and 9 of 3.
The first ten numbers are: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10;
their squares are .........1, 4, 9,16,25,36,49,64,81,100;
and ...........................3,5, 7, 9,11,13,15,17, 19
are the differences between each square and that which precedes it; giving
us the sacred numbers, 3, 5, 7, and 9


--- PAGE 92 ---
Of these numbers, the square of 3 and 4, added together, gives the square
of 5; and those of 6 and 8, the square of 10; and if a right-angled triangle
be formed, the base measuring 3 or 6 parts, and the perpendicular 4 or 8
parts, the hypothenuse will be 5 or 10 parts; and if a square is erected on
each side, these squares being subdivided into squares each side of which
is one part in length, there will be as many of these in the square erected
on the hypothenuse as in the other two squares together.
Now the Egyptians arranged their deities in Triads the FATHER or the
Spirit or Active Principle or Generative Power; the MOTHER, or Matter,
or the Passive Principle, or the Conceptive Power; and the SON, Issue or
Product, the Universe, proceeding from the two principles. These were
OSRIS, ISIS, and HORUS. In the same way, PLATO gives us thought the
Father; Primitive Matter the Mother; and Kosmos the World, the Son, the
Universe animated by a soul. Triads of the same kind are found in the
Kabalah.
PLUTARCH says, in his book De Iside et Osiride, "But the better and
diviner nature consists of three,--that which exists within the Intellect
only, and Matter, and that which proceeds from these, which the Greeks
call Kosmos; of which three, Plato is wont to call the Intelligible, the
'Idea, Exemplar, and Father', Matter, 'the Mother, the Nurse, and the place
and receptacle of generation'; and the issue of these two, 'the Offspring
and Genesis,"' the KOSMOS, "a word signifying equally Beauty and Order,
or the Universe itself." You will not fail to notice that Beauty is
symbolized by the Junior Warden in the South. Plutarch continues to say
that the Egyptians compared the universal nature to what they called the
most beautiful and perfect triangle, as Plato does, in that nuptial diagram,
as it is termed, which he has introduced into his Commonwealth. When he
adds that this triangle is right-angled, and its sides respectively as 3, 4,
and 5; and he says, "We must suppose that the perpendicular is designed
by them to represent the masculine nature, the base the feminine, and that
the hypothenuse is to be looked upon as the offspring of both; and
accordingly the first of them will aptly enough represent OSIRIS, or the
prime cause; the second, ISIS, or the receptive capacity; the last, HORUS,
or the common effect of the other two. For 3 is the first number which is
composed of even and odd; and 4 is a square whose side is equal to the
even number 2; but 5, being generated, as it were, out of the preceding
numbers, 2 and 3, may be said to have an equal relation to both of them,
as to its common parents."
* * * * * *


--- PAGE 93 ---
The clasped hands is another symbol which was used by PYTHAGORAS.
It represented the number 10, the sacred number in which all the preceding
numbers were contained; the number expressed by the mysterious
TERACTYS, a figure borrowed by him and the Hebrew priests alike from
the Egyptian sacred science, and which ought to be replaced among the
symbols of the Master's degree, where it of right belongs. The Hebrews
formed it thus, with the letters of the Divine name:
The Tetractys thus leads you, not only to the study of the Pythagorean
philosophy as to numbers, but also to the Kabalah, and will aid you in
discovering the True Word, and understanding what was meant by "The
Music of the Spheres." Modern science strikingly confirms the ideas of
Pythagoras in regard to the properties of numbers, and that they govern in
the Universe. Long before his time, nature had extracted her cube-roots
and her squares.
* * * * * *
All the FORCES at man's disposal or under man's control, or subject to
man's influence, are his working tools. The friendship and sympathy that
knit heart to heart are a force like the attraction of cohesion, by which the
sandy particles became the solid rock. If this law of attraction or cohesion
were taken away, the material worlds and suns would dissolve in an
instant into thin invisible vapor. If the ties of friendship, affection, and
love were annulled, mankind would become a raging multitude of wild and
savage beasts of prey. The sand hardens into rock under the immense
superincumbent pressure of the ocean, aided sometimes by the irresistible
energy of fire; and when the pressure of calamity and danger is upon an
order or a country, the members or the citizens ought to be the more
closely united by the cohesion of sympathy and inter-dependence.
Morality is a force. It is the magnetic attraction of the heart toward Truth
and Virtue. The needle, imbued with this mystic property, and pointing
unerringly to the north, carries the mariner safely over the trackless ocean,
through storm and darkness, until his glad eyes behold the beneficent
beacons that welcome him to safe and hospitable harbor. Then the hearts
of those who love him are gladdened, and his home made happy; and this
gladness and happiness are due to the silent, unostentatious, unerring
monitor that was the sailor's guide over the weltering waters. But if
drifted too far northward, he finds the needle no longer true, but pointing
elsewhere than to the north, what a feeling of helplessness falls upon the


--- PAGE 94 ---
dismayed mariner, what utter loss of energy and courage ! It is as if the
great axioms of morality were to fail and be no longer true, leaving the
human soul to drift helplessly, eyeless like Prometheus, at the mercy of
the uncertain, faithless currents of the deep.
Honor and Duty are the pole-stars of a Mason, the Dioscuri, by never
losing sight of which he may avoid disastrous shipwreck. These Palinurus
watched, until, overcome by sleep, and the vessel no longer guided truly,
he fell into and was swallowed up by the insatiable sea. So the Mason who
loses sight of these, and is no longer governed by their beneficent and
potential force, is lost, and sinking out of sight, will disappear unhonored
and unwept.
The force of electricity, analogous to that of sympathy, and by means of
which great thoughts or base suggestions, the utterances of noble or
ignoble natures, flash instantaneously over the nerves of nations; the force
of growth, fit type of immortality, Iying dormant three thousand years in
the wheat-grains buried with their mummies by the old Egyptians; the
forces of expansion and contraction, developed in the earthquake and the
tornado, and giving birth to the wonderful achievements of steam, have
their parallelisms in the moral world, in individuals, and nations. Growth
is a necessity for nations as for men. Its cessation is the beginning of
decay. In the nation as well as the plant it is mysterious, and it is
irresistible. The earthquakes that rend nations asunder, overturn thrones,
and engulf monarchies and republics, have been long prepared for, like the
volcanic eruption. Revolutions have long roots in the past. The force
exerted is in direct proportion to the previous restraint and compression.
The true statesman ought to see in progress the causes that are in due time
to produce them; and he who does not is but a blind leader of the blind.
The great changes in nations, like the geological changes of the earth, are
slowly and continuously wrought. The waters, falling from Heaven as rain
and dews, slowly disintegrate the granite mountains; abrade the plains,
leaving hills and ridges of denudation as their monuments; scoop out the
valleys, fill up the seas, narrow the rivers, and after the lapse of thousands
on thousands of silent centuries, prepare the great alluvia for the growth
of that plant, the snowy envelope of whose seeds is to employ the looms
of the world, and the abundance or penury of whose crops shall determine
whether the weavers and spinners of other realms shall have work to do or
starve.


--- PAGE 95 ---
So Public Opinion is an immense force; and its currents are as inconstant
and incomprehensible as those of the atmosphere. Nevertheless, in free
governments, it is omnipotent; and the business of the statesman is to find
the means to shape, control, and direct it. According as that is done, it is
beneficial and conservative, or destructive and ruinous. The Public
Opinion of the civilized world is International Law; and it is so great a
force, though with no certain and fixed boundaries, that it can even
constrain the victorious despot to be generous, and aid an oppressed
people in its struggle for independence.
Habit is a great force; it is second nature, even in trees. It is as strong in
nations as in men. So also are Prejudices, which are given to men and
nations as the passions are,--as forces, valuable, if properly and skillfully
availed of; destructive, if unskillfully handled.
Above all, the Love of Country, State Pride, the Love of Home, are forces
of immense power. Encourage them all. Insist upon them in your public
men. Permanency of home is necessary to patriotism. A migratory race will
have little love of country. State pride is a mere theory and chimera, where
men remove from State to State with indifference, like the Arabs, who
camp here to-day and there to-morrow.
If you have Eloquence, it is a mighty force. See that you use it for good
purposes--to teach, exhort, ennoble the people, and not to mislead and
corrupt them. Corrupt and venal orators are the assassins of the public
liberties and of public morals.
The Will is a force; its limits as yet unknown. It is in the power of the will
that we chiefly see the spiritual and divine in man. There is a seeming
identity between his will that moves other men, and the Creative Will
whose action seems so incomprehensible. It is the men of will and action,
not the men of pure intellect, that govern the world.
Finally, the three greatest moral forces are FAITH, which is the only true
WISDOM, and the very foundation of all government; HOPE, which is
STRENGTH, and insures success; and CHARITY, which is BEAUTY, and
alone makes animated, united effort possible. These forces are within the
reach of all men; and an association of men, actuated by them, ought to
exercise an immense power in the world. If Masonry does not, it is
because she has ceased to possess them.


--- PAGE 96 ---
Wisdom in the man or statesman, in king or priest, largely consists in the
due appreciation of these forces; and upon the general non-appreciation of
some of them the fate of nations often depends. What hecatombs of lives
often hang upon the not weighing or not sumciently weighing the force of
an idea, such as, for example, the reverence for a flag, or the blind
attachment to a form or constitution of government!
What errors in political economy and statesmanship are committed in
consequence of the over-estimation or under-estimation of particular
values, or the non-estimation of some among them ! Everything, it is
asserted, is the product of human labor; but the gold or the diamond which
one accidentally finds without labor is not so. What is the value of the
labor bestowed by the husbandman upon his crops, compared with the
value of the sunshine and rain, without which his labor avails nothing?
Commerce carried on by the labor of man, adds to the value of the
products of the field, the mine, or the workshop, by their transportation to
different markcts; but how much of this increase is due to the rivers down
which these products float, to the winds that urge the keels of commerce
over the ocean !
Who can estimate the value of morality and manliness in a State, of moral
worth and intellectual knowledge ? These are the sunshine and rain of the
State. The winds, with their changeable, fickle, fluctuating currents, are
apt emblems of the fickle humors of the populace, its passions, its heroic
impulses, its enthusiasms. Woe to the statesman who does not estimate
these as values !
Even music and song are sometimes found to have an incalculable value.
Every nation has some song of a proven value, more easily counted in
lives than dollars. The Marseillaise was worth to revolutionary France,
who shall say how many thousand men?
Peace also is a great element of prosperity and wealth; a value not to be
calculated. Social intercourse and association of men in beneficent Orders
have a value not to be estimated in coin. The illustrious examples of the
Past of a nation, the memories and immortal thoughts of her great and
wise thinkers, statesmen, and heroes, are the invaluable legacy of that Past
to the Present and Future. And all these have not only the values of the
loftier and more excellent and priceless kind, but also an actual money-
value, since it is only when co-operating with or aided or enabled by
these, that human labor creates wealth. They are of the chief elements of


--- PAGE 97 ---
material wealth, as they are of national manliness, heroism., glory,
prosperity, and immortal renown.
Providence has appointed the three great disciplines of War, the Monarchy
and the Priesthood, all that the CAMP, the PALACE, and the TEMPLE
may symbolize, to train the multitudes forward to intelligent and
premeditated combinations for all the great purposes of society. The result
will at length be free governments among men, when virtue and
intelligence become qualities of the multitudes; but for ignorance such
governments are impossible. Man advances only by degrees. The removal
of one pressing calamity gives courage to attempt the removal of the
remaining evils, rendering men more sensitive to them, or perhaps
sensitive for the first time. Serfs that writhe under the whip are not
disquieted about tbeir political rights; manumitted from personal slavery,
they be come sensitive to political oppression. Liberated from arbitrary
power, and governed by the law alone, they begin to scrutinize the law
itself, and desire to be governed, not only by law, but by what they deem
the best law. And when the civil or temporal despotism has been set aside,
and the municipal law has been moulded on the principles of an
enlightened jurisprudence, they may wake to the discovery that they are
living under some priestly or ecclesiastical despotism, and become
desirous of working a reformation there also.
It is quite true that the advance of humanity is slow, and that it often
pauses and retrogrades. In the kingdoms of the earth we do not see
despotisms retiring and yielding the ground to self-governing
communities. We do not see the churches and priesthoods of Christendom
relinquishing their old task of governing men by imaginary terrors.
Nowhere do we see a populace that could be safely manumitted from such
a government. We do not see the great religious teachers aiming to
discover truth for themselves and for others; but still ruling the world, and
contented and compelled to rule the world, by whatever dogma is already
accredited; themselves as much bound down by this necessity to govern, as
the populace by their need of government. Poverty in all its most hideous
forms still exists in the great cities; and the cancer of pauperism has its
roots in the hearts of kingdoms. Men there take no measure of their wants
and their own power to supply them, but live and multiply like the beasts
of the field,--Providence having apparently ceased to care for them.
Intelligence never visits these, or it makes its appearance as some new
development of villainy. War has not ceased; still there are battles and
sieges. Homes are still unhappy, and tears and anger aud spite make hells
where there should be heavens. So much the more necessity for Masonry !


--- PAGE 98 ---
So much wider the field of its labors ! So much the more need for it to
begin to be true to itself, to revive from its asphyxia, to repent of its
apostasy to its true creed !
Undoubtedly, labor and death and the sexual passion are essential and
permanent conditions of human existence, and render perfection and a
millennium on earth impossible. Always,--it is the decree of Fate !--the
vast majority of men must toil to live, and cannot find time to cultivate
the intelligence. Man, knowing he is to die, will not sacrifice the present
enjoyment for a greater one in the future. The love of woman cannot die
out; and it has a terrible and uncontrollable fate, increased by the
refinements of civilization. Woman is the veritable syren or goddess of the
young. But society can be improved; and free government is possible for
States; and freedom of thought and conscience is no longer wholly
utopian. Already we see that Emperors prefer to be elected by universal
suffrage; that States are conveyed to Empires by vote; and that Empires
are administered with something of the spirit of a Republic, being little
else than democracies with a single head, ruling through one man, one
representative, instead of an assembly of representatives. And if
Priesthoods still govern, they now come before the laity to prove, by
stress of argument, that they ougllt to govern. They are obliged to evoke
the very reason which they are bent on supplanting.
Accordingly, men become daily more free, because the freedom of the man
lies in his reason. He can reflect upon his own future conduct, and
summon up its consequences; he can take wide views of human life, and
lay down rules for constant guidance. Thus he is relieved of the tyranny of
sense and passion, and enabled at any time to live according to the whole
light of the knowledge that is within him, instead of being driven, like a
dry leaf on the wings of the wind, by every present impulse. Herein lies
the freedom of the man as regarded in connection with the necessity
imposed by the omnipotence and fore-knowledge of God. So much light,
so much liberty. When emperor and church appeal to reason there is
naturally universal suffrage.
Therefore no one need lose courage, nor believe that labor in the cause of
Progress will be labor wasted. There is no waste in nature, either of
Matter, Force, Act, or Thought. A Thought is as much the end of life as an
Action; and a single Thought sometimes works greater results than a


--- PAGE 99 ---
Revolution, even Revolutions themselves. Still there should not be divorce
between Thought and Action. The true Thought is that in which life
culminates. But all wise and true Thought produces Action. It is
generative, like the light; and light and the deep shadow of the passing
cloud are the gifts of the prophets of the race. Knowledge, laboriously
acquired, and inducing habits of sound Thought,--the reflective
character,--must necessarily be rare. The multitude of laborers cannot
acquire it. Most men attain to a very low standard of it. It is incompatible
with the ordinary and indispensable avocations of life. A whole world of
error as well as of labor, go to make one reflective man. In the most
advanced nation of Europe there are more ignorant than wise, more poor
than rich, more autornatic laborers, the mere creatures of habit, than
reasoning and reflective men. The proportion is at least a thousand to one.
Unanimity of opinion is so obtained. It only exists among the multitude
who do not think, and the political or spiritual priesthood who think for
that multitude, who think how to guide and govern them. When men begin
to reflect, they begin to differ. The great problem is to find guides who
will not seek to be tyrants. This is needed even more in respect to the
heart than the head. Now, every man earns his special share of the produce
of human labor, by an incessant scramble, by trickery and deceit. Useful
knowledge, honorably acquired, is too often used after a fashion not
honest or reasonable, so that the studies of youth are far more noble than
the practices of manhood. The labor of the farmer in his fields, the
generous returns of the earth, the benignant and favoring skies, tend to
make him earnest, provident, and grateful; the education of the market-
place makes him querulous, crafty, envious, and an intolerable niggard.
Masonry seeks to be this beneficent, unambitious, disinterested guide; and
it is the very condition of all great structures that the sound of the hammer
and the clink of the trowel should be always heard in some part of the
building. With faith in man, hope for the future of humanity, loving-
kindness for our fellows, Masonry and the Mason must always work and
teach. Let each do that for which he is best fitted. The teacher also is a
workman. Praiseworthy as the active navigator is, who comes and goes
and makes one clime partake of the treasures of the other, and one to share
the treasures of all, he who keeps the beacon-light upon the hill is also at
his post.
Masonry has already helped cast down some idols from their pedestals,
and grind to impalpable dust some of the links of the chains that held
men's souls in bondage. That there has been progress needs no other
demonstration than that you may now reason with men, and urge upon


--- PAGE 100 ---
them, without danger of the rack or stake, that no doctrines can be
apprehended as truths if they contradict each other, or contradict other
truths given us by God. Long before the Reformation, a monk, who had
found his way to heresy without the help of Martin Luther, not venturine
to breathe aloud into any living ear his anti-papal and treasonable
doctrines, wrote them on parchment, and sealing up theperilous record, hid
it in the massive walls of his monastery. There was no friend or brother to
whom he could intrust his secret or pour forth his soul. It was some
consolation to imagine that in a future age some one might find the
parchment, and the seed be found not to have been sown in vain. What if
the truth should have to lie dormant as long before germinating as the
wheat in the Egyptian mummy ? Speak it, nevertheless, again and again,
and let it take its chance !
The rose of Jericho grows in the sandy deserts of Arabia and on the Syrian
housetops. Scarcely six inches high, it loses its leaves after the flowering
season, and dries up into the form of a ball. Then it is uprooted by the
winds, and carried, blown, or tossed across the desert, into the sea. There,
feeling the contact of the water, it unfolds itself, expands its branches,
and expels its seeds from their seed-vessels. These, when saturated with
water, are carried by the tide and laid on the sea-shore. Many are lost, as
many individual lives of men are useless. But many are thrown back again
from the sea-shore into the desert, where, by the virtue of the sea-water
that they have imbibed, the roots and leaves sprout and they grow into
fruitful plants, which will, in their turns, like their ancestors, be whirled
into the sea. God will not be less careful to provide for the germination of
the truths you may boldly utter forth. "Cast," He has said, "thy bread upon
the waters, and after many days it shall return to thee again."
Initiation does not change: we find it again and again, and always the
same, through all the ages. The last disciples of Pascalis Martinez are still
the children of Orpheus; but they adore the realizer of the antique
philosophy, the Incarnate Word of the Christians.
Pythagoras, the great divulger of the philosophy of numbers, visited all
the sanctuaries of the world. He went into Judaea, where he procured
himself to be circumcised, that he might be admitted to the secrets of the
Kabalah, which the prophets Ezekiel and Daniel, not without some
reservations, communicated to him. Then, not without some difficulty, he
succeeded in being admitted to the Egyptian initiation, upon the
recommendation of King Amasis. The power of his genius supplied the


--- PAGE 101 ---
deficiencies of the imperfect communications of the Hierophants, and he
himself became a Master and a Revealer.
Pythagoras defined God: a Living and Absolute Verity clothed with Light.
He said that the Word was Number manifested by Form.
He made all descend from the Tetyactys, that is to say, from the
Quaternary.
God, he said again, is the Supreme Music, the nature of which is Harmony.
Pythagoras gave the magistrates of Crotona this great religious, political
and social precept:
"There is no evil that is not preferable to Anarchy."
Pythagoras said, "Even as there are three divine notions and free
intelligible regions, so there is a triple word, for the Hierarehical Order
always manifests itself by threes. There are the word simple, the word
hieroglyphical, and the word symbolic: in other terms, there are the word
that expresses, the word that conceals, and the word that signifies; the
whole hieratic intelligence is in the perfect knowledge of these three
degrees."
Pythagoras enveloped doctrine with symbols, but carefully eschewed
personifications and images, which, he thought, sooner or later produced
idolatry.
The Holy Kabalah, or tradition of the children of Seth, was carried from
Chaldcea by Abraham, taught to the Egyptian priesthood by Joseph,
recovered and purified by Moses, concealed under symbols in the Bible,
revealed by the Saviour to Saint John, and contained, entire, under
hieratic figures analogous to those of all antiquity, in the Apocalypse of
that Apostle.


--- PAGE 102 ---
The Kabalists consider God as the Intelligent, Animated, Living Infinite.
He is not, for them, either the aggregate of existences, or existence in the
abstract, or a being philosophically definable. He is in all, distinct from
all, and greater than all. His name even is ineffable; and yet this name
only expresses the human ideal of His divinity. What God is in Himself, it
is not given to man to comprehend.
God is the absolute of Faith; but the absolute of Reason is BEING, "I am
that I am," is a wretched translation.
Being, Existence, is by itself, and because it Is. The reason of Being, is
Being itself. We may inquire, "Why does something exist?" that is, "Why
does such or such a thing exist?" But we cannot, without being absurd,
ask, "Why Is Being?" That would be to suppose Being before Being. If
Being had a cause, that cause would necessarily Be; that is, the cause and
effect would be identical.
Reason and science demonstrate to us that the modes of Existence and
Being balance each other in equilibrium according to harmonious and
hierarchic laws. But a hierarchy is synthetized, in ascending, and becomes
ever more and more monarchial. Yet the reason cannot pause at a simle
chief, without being alarmed at the abysses which it seems to leave above
this Supreme Monarch. Therefore it is silent, and gives place to the Faith
it adores.
What is certain, even for science and the reason, is, that the idea of God is
the grandest, the most holy, and the most useful of all the aspirations of
man; that upon this belief morality reposes, with its eternal sanction. This
belief, then, is in humanity, the most real of the phenomena of being; and
if it were false, nature would affirm the absurd; nothingness would give
form to life, and God would at the same time be and not be.
It is to this philosophic and incontestable reality, which is termed The
Idea of God, that the Kabalists give a name. In this name all others are
contained. Its cyphers contain all the numbers; and the hieroglyphics of its
letters express all the laws and all the things of nature.
BEING IS BEING: the reason of Being is in Being: in the Beginning is the
Word, and the Word in logic formulated Speech, the spoken Reason; the
Word is in God, and is God Himself, manifested to the Intelligence. Here


--- PAGE 103 ---
is what is above all the philosophies. This we must believe, under the
penalty of never truly knowing anything, and relapsing into the absurd
skepticism of Pyrrho. The Priesthood, custodian of Faith, wholly rests
upon this basis of knowledge, and it is in its teachings we must recognize
the Divine Principle of the Eternal Word.
Light is not Spirit, as the Indian Hierophants believed it to be; but only
the instrument of the Spirit. It is not the body of the Protoplastes, as the
Theurgists of the school of Alexandria taught, but the first physical
manifestation of the Divine afflatus. God eternally creates it, and man, in
the image of God, modifies and seems to multiply it.
The high magic is styled "The Sacerdotal Art," and "The Royal Art." In
Egypt, Greece, and Rome, it could not but share the greatnesses and
decadences of the Priesthood and of Royalty. Every philosophy hostile to
the national worship and to its mysteries, was of necessity hostile to the
great political powers, whichlose their grandeur, if they cease, in the eyes
of the multitudes, to be the images of the Divine Power. Every Crown is
shattered, when it clashes against the Tiara.
Plato, writing to Dionysius the Younger, in regard to the nature of the
First Principle, says: "I must write to you in enigmas, so that if my letter
be intercepted by land or sea, he who shall read it may in no degree
comprehend it." And then he says, "All things surround their King; they
are, on account of Him, and He alone is the cause of good things, Second
for the Seconds and Third for the Thirds."
There is in these few words a complete summary of the Theology of the
Sephiroth. "The King" is AINSOPH, Being Supreme and Absolute. From
this centre, which is everywhere, all things ray forth; but we especially
conceive of it in three manners and in three different spheres. In the
Divine world (AZILUTH), which is that of the First Cause, and wherein
the whole Eternity of Things in the beginning existed as Unity, to be
afterward, during Eternity uttered forth, clothed with form, and the
attributes that constitute them matter, the First Principle is Single and
First, and yet not the VERY Illimitable Deity, incomprehensible,
undefinable; but Himself in so far as manifested by the Creative Thought.
To compare littleness with infinity,--Arkwright, as inventor of the
spinning-jenny, and not the man Arkwright otherwise and beyond that. All
we can know of the Very God is, compared to His Wholeness, only as an
infinitesimal fraction of a unit, compared with an infinity of Units.


--- PAGE 104 ---
In the World of Creation, which is that of Second Causes [the Kabalistic
World BRIAH], the Autocracy of the First Principle is complete, but we
conceive of it only as the Cause of the Second Causes. Here it is
manifested by the Binary, and is the Creative Principle passive. Finally: in
the third world, YEZIRAH, or of Formation, it is revealed in the perfect
Form, the Form of Forms, the World, the Supreme Beauty and Excellence,
the Created Perfection. Thus the Principle is at once the First, the Second,
and the Third, since it is All in All, the Centre and Cause of all. It is not
the genius of Plato that we here admire. We recognize only the exact
knowledge of the Initiate.
The great Apostle Saint John did not borrow from the philosophy of Plato
the opening of his Gospel. Plato, on the contrary, drank at the same
springs with Saint John and Philo; and John in the opening verses of his
paraphrase, states the first principles of a dogma common to many
schools, but in language especially belonging to Bhilo, whom it is evident
he had read. The philosophy of Plato, the greatest of human Revealers,
could yearn toward the Word made man; the Gospel alone could give him
to the world.
Doubt, in presence of Being and its harmonies; skepticism, in the face of
the eternal mathematics and the immutable laws of Life which make the
Divinity present and visible everywhere, as the Human is known and
visible by its utterances of word and act,--is this not the most foolish of
superstitions, and the most inexcusable as well as the most dangerous of
all credulities ? Thought, we know, is not a result or consequence of the
organization of matter, of the chemical or other action or reaction of its
particles, like effervescence and gaseous explosions. On the contrary, the
fact that Thought is manifested and realized in act human or act divine,
proves the existence of an Entity, or Unity, that thinks. And the Universe
is the Infinite Utterance of one of an infinite number of Infinite Thoughts,
which cannot but emanate from an Infinite and Thinking Source. The
cause is always equal, at least, to the effect; and matter cannot think, nor
could it cause itself, or exist without cause, nor could nothing produce
either forces or things; for in void nothingness no Forces can inhere.
Admit a self-existent Force, and its Intelligence, or an Intelligent cause of
it is admitted, and at once GOD Is.
The Hebrew allegory of the Fall of Man, which is but a special variation
of a universal legend, symbolizes one of the grandest and most universal
allegories of science.


--- PAGE 105 ---
Moral Evil is Falsehood in actions, as Falsehood is Crime in words.
Injustice is the essence of Falsehood; and every false word is an injustice.
Injustice is the death of the Moral Being, as Falsehood is the poison of the
Intelligence.
The perception of the Light is the dawn of the Eternal Life, in Being. The
Word of God, which creates the Light, seems to be uttered by every
Intelligence that can take cognizance of Forms and will look. "Let the
Light BE! The Light, in fact, exists, in its condition of splendor, for those
eyes alone that gaze at it; and the Soul, amorous of the spectacle of the
beauties of the Universe, and applying its attention to that luminous
writing of the Infinite Book, which is called "The Visible," seems to utter,
as God did on the dawn of the first day, that sublime and creative word,
"BE! LIGHT !"
It is not beyond the tomb, but in life itself, that we are to seek for the
mysteries of death. Salvation or reprobation begins here below, and the
terrestrial world too has its Heaven and its Hell. Always, even here below,
virtue is rewarded; always, even here below, vice is pwlished; and that
which makes us sometimes believe in the impunity of evil-doers is that
riches, those instruments of good and of evil, seem sometimes to be given
them at hazard. But woe to unjust men, when they possess the key of
gold ! It opens, for them, only the gate of the tomb and of Hell.
All the true Initiates have recognized the usefulness of toil and sorrow.
"Sorrow," says a German poet, "is the dog of that unknown shepherd who
guides the flock of men." To learn to suffer, to learn to die, is the
discipline of Eternity, the immortal Novitiate.
The allegorical picture of Cebes, in which the Divine Comedy of Dante
was sketched in Plato's time, the description whereof has been preserved
for us, and which many painters of the middle age have reproduced by this
description, is a monument at once philosophical and magical. It is a most
complete moral synthesis, and at the same time the most audacious
demonstration ever given of the Grand Arcanum, of that secret whose


--- PAGE 106 ---
revelation would overturn Earth and Heaven. Let no one expect us to give
them its explanation ! He who passes behind the veil that hides this
mystery, understands that it is in its very nature inexplicable, and that it is
death to those who win it by surprise, as well as to him who reveals it.
This secret is the Royalty of the Sages, the Crown of the Initiate whom we
see redescend victorious from the summit of Trials, in the fine allegory of
Cebes. The Grand Arcanun1 makes him master of gold and the light, which
are at bottom the same thing, he has solved the problem of the quadrature
of the circle, he directs the perpetual movement, and he possesses the
philosophical stone. Here the Adepts will understand us. There is neither
interruption in the toil of nature, nor gap in her work. The Harmonies of
Heaven correspond to those of Earth, and the Eternal Life accomplishes its
evolutions in accordance with the same laws as the life of a dog. "God has
arranged all things by weight, number, and measure," says the Bible; and
this luminous doctrine was also that of Plato.
Humanity has never really had but one religion and one worship. This
universal light has had its uncertain mirages, its deceitful reflections, and
its shadows; but always, after the nights of Error, we see it reappear, one
and pure like the Sun.
The magnificences of worship are the life of religion, and if Christ wishes
poor ministers, His Sovereign Divinity does not wish paltry altars. Some
Protestants have not comprehended that worship is a teaching, and that we
must not create in the imagination of the multitude a mean or miserable
God. Those oratories that resemble poorly-furnished offices or inns, and
those worthy ministers clad like notaries or lawyer's clerks, do they not
necessarily cause religion to be regarded as a mere puritanic formality,
and God as a Justice of the Peace?
We scoff at the Augurs. It is so easy to scoff, and so difficult well to
comprehend. Did the Deity leave the whole world without Light for two
score centuries, to illuminate only a little corner of Palestine and a brutal,
ignorant, and ungrateful people? Why always calumniate God and the
Sanctuary ? Were there never any others than rogues among the priests?
Could no honest and sincere men be found among the Hierophants of
Ceres or Diana, of Dionusos or Apollo, of Hermes or Mithras ? Were
these, then, all deceived, like the rest? Who, then, constantly deceived
them, without betraying themselves, during a series of centuries?--for the
cheats are not immortal ! Arago said, that outside of the pure mathematics,


--- PAGE 107 ---
he who utters the word "impossible," is wanting in prudence and good
sense.
The true name of Satan, the Kabalists say, is that of Yahveh reversed; for
Satan is not a black god, but the negation of God. The Devil is the
personification of Atheism or Idolatry.
For the Initiates, this is not a Person, but a Force, created for good, but
which may serve for evil. It is the instrument of Liberty or Free Will. They
represent this Force, which presides over the physical generation, under
the mythologic and horned form of the God PAN; thence came the he-goat
of the Sabbat, brother of the Ancient Serpent, and the Light-bearer or
Phosphor, of which the poets have made the false Lucifer of the legend.
Gold, to the eyes of the Initiates, is Light condensed. They style the sacred
numbers of the Kabalah "golden numbers," and the moral teachings of
Pythagoras his "golden verses." For the same reason, a mysterious book of
Apuleius, in which an ass figures largely, was called "The Golden Ass."
The Pagans accused the Christians of worshipping an ass, and they did not
invent this reproach, but it came from the Samaritan Jews, who, figuring
the data of the Kabalah in regard to the Divinity by Egyptian symbols, also
represented the Intelligence by the figure of the Magical Star adored under
the name of Remphan, Science under the emblem of Anubis, whose name
they changed to Nibbas, and the vulgar faith or credulity under the figure
of Thartac, a god represented with a book, a cloak, and the head of an ass.
According to the Samaritan Doctors, Christianity was the reign of Thartac,
blind Faith and vulgar credulity erected into a universal oracle, and
preferred to Intelligence and Science.
Synesius, Bishop of Ptolemais, a great Kabalist, but of doubtful
orthodoxy, wrote:
"The people will always mock at things easy to be misunderstood; it must
needs have impostures."
"A Spirit," he said, "that loves wisdom and contemplates the Trufh close at
hand, is forced to disguise it, to induce the multitudes to accept it....
Fictions are necessary to the people, and the Truth becomes deadly to


--- PAGE 108 ---
those who are not strong enough to contemplate it in all its brilliance. If
the sacerdotal laws allowed the reservation of judgments and the allegory
of words, I would accept the proposed dignity on condition that I might be
a philosopher at home, and abroad a narrator of apologues and parables.....
In fact, what can there be in common between the vile multitude and
sublime wisdom? The truth must be kept secret, and the masses need a
teaching proportioned to their imperfect reason."
Moral disorders produce physical ugliness, and in some sort realize those
frightful faces which tradition assigns to the demons.
The first Druids were the true children of the Magi, and their initiation
came from Egypt and Chaldaea, that is to say, from the pure sources of the
primitive Kabalah. They adored the Trinity under the names of Isis or
Hesus, the Supreme Harmony; of Belerl or Bel, which in Assyrian means
Lord, a name corresponding to that of ADONAI; and of Camul or Camael,
a name that in the Kabalah personifies the Divine Justice. Below this
triangle of Light they supposed a divine reflection, also composed of three
personified rays: first, Teutates or Teuth, the same as the Thoth of the
Egyptians, the Word, or the Intelligence formulated; then Force and
Beauty, whose names varied like their emblems. Finally, they completed
the sacred Septenary by a mysterious image that represented the progress
of the dogma and its future realizations. This was a young girl veiled,
holding a child in her arms; and they dedicated this image to "The Virgin
who will become a mother;--Virgini pariturae."
Hertha or Wertha, the young Isis of Gaul, Queen of Heaven, the Virgin
who was to bear a child, held the spindle of the Fates, filled with wool
half white and half black; because she presides over all forms and all
symbols, and weaves the garment of the Ideas.
One of the most mysterious pantacles of the Kabalah, contained in the
Enchiridion of Leo III., represents an equilateral triangle reversed,
inscribed in a double circle. On the triangle are written, in such manner as
to form the prophetic Tau, the two Hebrew words so often found appended
to the Ineffable Name, and ALOHAYIM, or the Powers, and TSABAOTH,
or the starry Armies and their guiding spirits; words also which symbolize
the Equilibrium of the Forces of Nature and the Harmony of Numbers. To
the three sides of the triangle belong the three great Names IAHAVEH,
ADONAI, and AGLA. Above the first is written in Latin, Formatio, above
the second Reformatio, and above the third, Transformatio. So Creation is


--- PAGE 109 ---
ascribed to the FATHER, Redemption or Reformation to the SON, and
Sanctification or Transformation to the HOLY SPIRIT, answering unto the
mathematical laws of Action, Reaction, and Equilibrium. IAHAVEH is
also, in effect, the Genesis or Formation of dogma, by the elementary
signification of the four letters of the Sacred Tetragram; ADONAI; is the
realization of this dogma in the Human Form, in the Visible LORD, who is
the Son of God or the perfect Man; and AGLA (formed of the initials of
the four words Ath Gebur Laulaim Adonai) expresses the synthesis of the
whole dogma and the totality of the Kabali.stic science, clearly indicating
by the hieroglyphics of which this admirable name is formed the Triple
Secret of the Great Work.
Masonry, like all the Religions, all the Mysteries, Hermeticism and
Alchemy, conceals its secrets from all except the Adepts and Sages, or the
Elect, and uses false explanations and misinterpretations of its symbols to
mislead those who deserve only to be misled; to conceal the Truth, which
it calls Light, from tl1em, and todraw them away from it. Truth is not for
those who are unworthy or unable to receive it, or would pervert it. So
God Himself incapacitates many men, by color-blindness, to distinguish
colors, and leads the masses away from the highest Truth, giving them the
power to attain only so much of it as it is profitable to them to know.
Every age has had a religion suited to its capacity.
The Teachers, even of Christianity, are, in general, the most ignorant of
the true meaning of that which they teach. There is no book of which so
little is known as the Bible. To most who read it, it is as incomprehensible
as the Sohar.
So Masonry jealously conceals its secrets, and intentionally leads
conceited interpreters astray. There is no sight under the sun more pitiful
and ludicrous at once, than the spectacle of the Prestons and the Webbs,
not to mention the later incarnations of Dullness and Commonplace,
undertaking to "explain" the old symbols of Masonry, and adding to and
"improving" them, or inventing new ones.
To the Circle inclosing the central point, and itself traced between two
parallel lines, a figure purely Kabalistic, these persons have added the
superimposed Bible, and even reared on that the ladder with three or nine


--- PAGE 110 ---
rounds, and then given a vapid interpretation of the whole, so profoundly
absurd as actually to excite admiration.
 MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
4º - Secret Master, 5º - Perfect Master, 6º - Intimate Secretary
7º - Provost and Judge, 8º - Intendant of the Building, 9º - Elu of the Nine
IV. SECRET MASTER.
MASONRY is a succession of allegories, the mere vehicles of great
lessons in morality and philosophy. You will more fully appreciate its
spirit, its object, its purposes, as you advance in the different Degrees,
which you will find to constitute a great, complete, and harmonious
system.
If you have been disappointed in the first three Degrees, as you have
received them, and if it has seemed to you that the performance has not
come up to the promise, that the lessons of morality are not new, and the
scientific instruction is but rudimentary, and the symbols are imperfectly
explained, remember that the ceremonies and lessons of those Degrees
have been for ages more and more accommodating themselves, by
curtailment and sinking into commonplace, to the often limited memory
and capacity of the Master and Instructor, and to the intellect and needs of
the Pupil and Initiate; that they have come to us from an age when
symbols were used, not to reveal but to conceal; when the commonest
learning was confined to a select few, and the simplest principles of
morality seemed newly discovered truths; and that these antique and


--- PAGE 111 ---
simple Degrees now stand like the broken columns of a roofless Druidic
temple, in their rude and mutilated greatness; in many parts, also,
corrupted by time, and disfigured by modern additions and absurd
interpretations. They are but the entrance to the great Masonic Temple, the
triple columns of the portico.
You have taken the first step over its threshold, the first step toward the
inner sanctuary and heart of the temple. You are in the path that leads up
the slope of the mountain of Truth; and it depends upon your secrecy,
obedience, and fidelity, whether you will advance or remain stationary.
Imagine not that you will become indeed a Mason by learning what is
commonly called the "work," or even by becoming familiar with our
traditions. Masonry has a history, a literature, a philosophy. Its allegories
and traditions will teach you much; but much is to be sought elsewhere.
The streams of learning that now flow full and broad must be followed to
their heads in the springs that well up in the remote past, and you will
there find the origin and meaning of Masonry.
A few rudimentary lessons in architecture, a few universally admitted
maxims of morality, a few unimportant traditions, whose real meaning is
unknown or misunderstood, will no longer satisfy the earnest inquirer
after Masonic truth. Let whoso is content with these, seek to climb no
higher. He who desires to understand the harmonious and beautiful
proportions of Freemasonry must read, study, reflect, digest, and
discriminate. The true Mason is an ardent seeker after knowledge; and he
knows that both books and the antique symbols of Masonry are vessels
which come down to us full-freighted with the intellectual riches of the
Past; and that in the lading of these argosies is much that sheds light on
the history of Masonry, and proves its claim to be acknowledged the
benefactor of mankind, born in the very cradle of the race.
Knowledge is the most genuine and real of human treasures; for it is
Light, as Ignorance is Darkness. It is the development of the human soul,
and its acquisition the growth of the soul, which at the birth of man knows
nothing, and therefore, in one sense, may be said to be nothing. It is the
seed, which has in it the power to grow, to acquire, and by acquiring to be
developed, as the seed is developed into the shoot, the plant, the tree. "We
need not pause at the common argument that by learning man excelleth
man, in that wherein man excelleth beasts; that by learning man ascendeth
to the heavens and their motions, where in body he cannot come, and the


--- PAGE 112 ---
like. Let us rather regard the dignity and excellency of knowledge and
learning in that whereunto man's nature doth most aspire, which is
immortality or continuance. For to this tendeth generation, and raising of
Houses and Families; to this buildings, foundations, and monuments; to
this tendeth the desire of memory, fame, and celebration, and in effect the
strength of all other human desires." That our influences shall survive us,
and be living forces when we are in our graves; and no merely that our
names shall be remembered; but rather that our works shall be read, our
acts spoken of, our names recollected an mentioned when we are dead, as
evidences that those influences live and rule, sway and control some
portion of mankind and of the world,--this is the aspiration of the human
soul. "We see then how far the monuments of genius and learning are more
durable than monuments of power or of the hands. For have not the verses
of Homer continued twenty-five hundred years or more, without the loss of
a syllable or letter, during which time infinite palaces, temples, castles,
cities, have decayed and been demolished? It is no possible to have the
true pictures or statues of Cyrus, Alexander Caesar, no, nor of the Kings
or great personages of much late years; for the originals cannot last, and
the copies cannot but lose of the life and truth. But the images of men's
genius and knowledge remain in books, exempted from the wrong of time,
and capable of perpetual renovation. Neither are they fitly to be called
images, because they generate still, and cast their seeds in the minds of
others, provoking and causing infinite actions and opinions in succeeding
ages; so that if the invention of the ship was thought so noble, which
carrieth riches and commodities from place to place, and consociateth the
most remote regions in participation of their fruits, how much more are
letters to be magnified which, as ships, pass through the vast seas of time,
and make age so distant to participate of the wisdom, illumination, and
inventions, the one of the other."
To learn, to attain knowledge, to be wise, is a necessity for ever truly
noble soul; to teach, to communicate that knowledge, to share that wisdom
with others, and not churlishly to lock up his exchequer, and place a
sentinel at the door to drive away the needy, is equally an impulse of a
noble nature, and the worthies work of man.
"There was a little city," says the Preacher, the son of David "and few men
within it; and there came a great King against it and besieged it, and built
great bulwarks against it. Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and
he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered that same
poor man. Then said I, wisdom is better than strength nevertheless, the
poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard." If it should


--- PAGE 113 ---
chance to you, my brother, to do mankind good service, and be rewarded
with indifference and forgetfulness only, still be not discouraged, but
remember the further advice of the wise King. "In the morning sow the
seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand; for thou knowest not
which shall prosper, this or that, or whether both shall be alike good."
Sow you the seed, whoever reaps. Learn, that you may be enabled to do
good; and do so because it is right, finding in the act itself ample reward
and recompense.
To attain the truth, and to serve our fellows, our country, and mankind--
this is the noblest destiny of man. Hereafter and all your life it is to be
your object. If you desire to ascend to that destiny, advance! If you have
other and less noble objects, and are contented with a lower flight, halt
here ! let others scale the heights, and Masonry fulfill her mission.
If you will advance, gird up your loins for the struggle ! for the way is
long and toilsome. Pleasure, all smiles, will beckon you on the one hand,
and Indolence will invite you to sleep among the flowers, upon the other.
Prepare, by secrecy, obedience, and fidelity, to resist the allurements of
both !
Secrecy is indispensable in a Mason of whatever Degree. It is the first and
almost the only lesson taught to the Entered Apprentice. The obligations
which we have each assumed toward every Mason that lives, requiring of
us the performance of the most serious and onerous duties toward those
personally unknown to us until they demand our aid,-- duties that must be
performed, even at the risk of life, or our solemn oaths be broken and
violated, and we be branded as false Masons and faithless men, teach us
how profound a folly it would be to betray our secrets to those who, bound
to us by no tie of common obligation, might, by obtaining them, call on us
in their extremity, when the urgency of the occasion should allow us no
time for inquiry, and the peremptory mandate of our obligation compel us
to do a brother's duty to a base impostor.
The secrets of our brother, when communicated to us, must be sacred, if
they be such as the law of our country warrants us to keep. We are
required to keep none other, when the law that we are called on to obey is
indeed a law, by having emanated from the only source of power, the
People. Edicts which emanate from the mere arbitrary will of a despotic
power, contrary to the law of God or the Great Law of Nature, destructive
of the inherent rights of man, violative of the right of free thought, free


--- PAGE 114 ---
speech, free conscience, it is lawful to rebel against and strive to
abrogate.
For obedience to the Law does not mean submission to tyranny nor that,
by a profligate sacrifice of every noble feeling, we should offer to
despotism the homage of adulation. As every new victim falls, we may lift
our voice in still louder flattery. We may fall at the proud feet, we may
beg, as a boon, the honour of kissing that bloody hand which has been
lifted against the helpless. We may do more we may bring the altar and the
sacrifice, and implore the God not to ascend too soon to Heaven. This we
may do, for this we have the sad remembrance that beings of a human
form and soul have done. But this is all we can do. We can constrain our
tongues to be false, our features to bend themselves to the semblance of
that passionate adoration which we wish to express, our knees to fall
prostrate; but our heart we cannot constrain. There virtue must still have a
voice which is not to be drowned by hymns and acclamations; there the
crimes which we laud as virtues, are crimes still, and he whom we have
made a God is the most contemptible of mankind; if, indeed, we do not
feel, perhaps, that we are ourselves still more contemptible.
But that law which is the fair expression of the will and judgment of the
people, is the enactment of the whole and of every individual. Consistent
with the law of God and the great law of nature, consistent with pure and
abstract right as tempered by necessity and the general interest, as contra-
distinguished from the private interest of individuals, it is obligatory upon
all, because it is the work of all, the will of all, the solemn judgment of
all, from which there is no appeal.
In this Degree, my brother, you are especially to learn the duty of
obedience to that law. There is one true and original law, conformable to
reason and to nature, diffused over all, invariable, eternal, which calls to
the fulfillment of duty and to abstinence from injustice, and calls with that
irresistible voice which is felt l in all its authority wherever it is heard.
This law cannot be abrogated or diminished, or its sanctions affected, by
any law of man. A whole senate, a whole people, cannot dissent from its
paramount obligation. It requires no commentator to render it distinctly
intelligible nor is it one thing at Rome, another at Athens; one thing now,
and another in the ages to come; but in all times and in all nations, it is,
and has been, and will be, one and everlasting;--one as that God, its great
Author and Promulgator, who is the Common Sovereign of all mankind, is
Himself One. No man can disobey it without flying, as it were, from his
own bosom, and repudiating his nature; and in this very act he will inflict


--- PAGE 115 ---
on himself the severest of retributions, even though he escape what is
regarded as punishment.
It is our duty to obey the laws of our country, and to be careful that
prejudice or passion, fancy or affection, error and illusion, be not
mistaken for conscience. Nothing is more usual than to pretend conscience
in all the actions of man which are public and cannot be concealed. The
disobedient refuse to submit to the laws, and they also in many cases
pretend conscience; and so disobedience and rebellion become conscience,
in which there is neither knowledge nor revelation, nor truth nor charity,
nor reason nor religion. Conscience is tied to laws. Right or sure
conscience is right reason reduced to practice, and conducting moral
actions, while perverse conscience is seated in the fancy or affections--a
heap of irregular principles and irregular defects-- and is the same in
conscience as deformity is in the body, or peevishness in the affections. It
is not enough that the conscience be taught by nature; but it must be
taught by God, conducted by reason, made operative by discourse, assisted
by choice, instructed by laws and sober principles; and then it is right, and
it may be sure. All the general measures of justice, are the laws of God,
and therefore they constitute the general rules of government for the
conscience; but necessity also hath a large voice in the arrangement of
human affairs, and the disposal of human relations, and the dispositions of
human laws; and these general measures, like a great river into little
streams, are deduced into little rivulets and particularities, by the laws
and customs, by the sentences and agreements of men, and by the absolute
despotism of necessity, that will not allow perfect and abstract justice and
equity to be the sole rule of civil government in an imperfect world; and
that must needs be law which is for the greatest good of the greatest
number.
When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it. It is better thou
shouldest not vow than thou shouldest vow and not pay. Be not rash with
thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter anything before God
for God is in Heaven, and thou art upon earth; therefore let thy words be
few. Weigh well what it is you promise; but once the promise and pledge
are given remember that he who is false to his obligation will be false to
his family, his friends, his country, and his God.
Fides servailda est Faith plighted is ever to be kept, was a maxim and an
axiom even among pagans. The virtuous Roman said, either let not that
which seems expedient be base, or if it be base, let it not seem expedient.
What is there which that so-called expediency can bring, so valuable as


--- PAGE 116 ---
that which it takes away, if it deprives you of the name of a good man and
robs you of your integrity and honour? In all ages, he who violates his
plighted word has been held unspeakably base. The word of a Mason, like
the word of a knight in the times of chivalry, once given must be sacred;
and the judgment of his brothers, upon him who violates his pledge,
should be stern as the judgments of the Roman Censors against him who
violated his oath. Good faith is revered among Masons as it was among the
Romans, who placed its statue in the capitol, next to that of Jupiter
Maximus Optimus; and we, like them, hold that calamity should always be
chosen rather than baseness; and with the knights of old, that one should
always die rather than be dishonoured.
Be faithful, therefore, to the promises you make, to the pledges you give,
and to the vows that you assume, since to break either is base and
dishonourable.
Be faithful to your family, and perform all the duties of a good father, a
good son, a good husband, and a good brother.
Be faithful to your friends; for true friendship is of a nature not only to
survive through all the vicissitudes of life, but to continue through an
endless duration; not only to stand the shock of conflicting opinions, and
the roar of a revolution that shakes the world, but to last when the heavens
are no more, and to spring fresh from the ruins of the universe.
Be faithful to your country, and prefer its dignity and honour to any degree
of popularity and honour for yourself; consulting its interest rather than
your own, and rather than the pleasure and gratification of the people,
which are often at variance with their welfare.
Be faithful to Masonry, which is to be faithful to the best interests of
mankind. Labour, by precept and example, to elevate the standard of
Masonic character, to enlarge its sphere of influence, to popularize its
teachings, and to make all men know it for the Great Apostle of Peace,
Harmony, and Good-will on earth among men; of Liberty, Equality, and
Fraternity.
Masonry is useful to all men to the learned, because it affords them the
opportunity of exercising their talents upon subjects eminently worthy of
their attention; to the illiterate, because it offers them important


--- PAGE 117 ---
instruction; to the young, because it presents them with salutary precepts
and good examples, and accustoms them to reflect on the proper mode of
living; to the man of the world, whom it furnishes with noble and useful
recreation; to the traveller, whom it enables to find friends and brothers in
countries where else he would be isolated and solitary; to the worthy man
in misfortune, to whom it gives assistance; to the afflicted, on whom it
lavishes consolation; to the charitable man, whom it enables to do more
good, by uniting with those who are charitable like himself; and to all who
have souls capable of appreciating its importance, and of enjoying the
charms of a friendship founded on the same principles of religion,
morality, and philanthropy.
A Freemason, therefore, should be a man of honour and of conscience,
preferring his duty to everything beside, even to his life; independent in
his opinions, and of good morals, submissive to the laws, devoted to
humanity, to his country, to his family; kind and indulgent to his brethren,
friend of all virtuous men, and ready to assist his fellows by all means in
his power.
Thus will you be faithful to yourself, to your fellows, and to God, and thus
will you do honour to the name and rank of SECRET MASTER; which,
like other Masonic honours, degrades if it is not deserved.
 
 V. PERFECT MASTER.
The Master Khurum was an industrious and an honest man. What he was
employed to do he did diligently, and he did it well and faithfully. He
received no wages that were not his due. Industry and honesty are the


--- PAGE 118 ---
virtues peculiarly inculcated in this Degree. They are common and homely
virtues; but not for that beneath our notice. As the bees do not love or
respect the drones, so Masonry neither loves nor respects the idle and
those who live by their wits; and least of all those parasitic acari that live
upon themselves. For those who are indolent are likely to become
dissipated and vicious; and perfect honesty, which ought to be the common
qualification of all, is more rare than diamonds. To do earnestly and
steadily, and to do faithfully and honestly that which we have to do--
perhaps this wants but little, when looked at from every point of view, of
including the whole body of the moral law; and even in their commonest
and homeliest application, these virtues belong to the character of a
Perfect Master.
Idleness is the burial of a living man. For an idle person is so useless to
any purposes of God and man, that he is like one who is dead,
unconcerned in the changes and necessities of the world; and he only lives
to spend his time, and eat the fruits of the earth. Like a vermin or a wolf,
when his time comes, he dies and perishes, and in the meantime is nought.
He neither ploughs nor carries burdens: all that he does is either
unprofitable or mischievous.
It is a vast work that any man may do, if he never be idle: and it is a huge
way that a man may go in virtue, if he never go out of his way by a vicious
habit or a great crime: and he who perpetually reads good books, if his
parts be answerable, will have a huge stock of knowledge.
St. Ambrose, and from his example, St. Augustine, divided every day into
these tertias of employment: eight hours they spent in the necessities of
nature and recreation: eight hours in charity, in doing assistance to others,
dispatching their business, reconciling their enmities, reproving their
vices, correcting their errors, instructing their ignorance, and in
transacting the affairs of their dioceses; and the other eight hours they
spent in study and prayer.


--- PAGE 119 ---
We think, at the age of twenty, that life is much too long for that which we
have to learn and do; and that there is an almost fabulous distance
between our age and that of our grandfather. But when, at the age of sixty,
if we are fortunate enough to reach it, or unfortunate enough, as the case
may be, and according as we have profitably invested or wasted our time,
we halt, and look back along the way we have come, and cast up and
endeavour to balance our accounts with time and opportunity, we find that
we have made life much too short, and thrown away a huge portion of our
time. Then we, in our mind, deduct from the sum total of our years the
hours that we have needlessly passed in sleep; the working-hours each day,
during which the surface of the mind's sluggish pool has not been stirred
or ruffied by a single thought; the days that we have gladly got rid of, to
attain some real or fancied object that lay beyond, in the way between us
and which stood irksomely the intervening days; the hours worse than
wasted in follies and dissipation, or misspent in useless and unprofitable
studies; and we acknowledge, with a sigh, that we could have learned and
done, in half a score of years well spent, more than we have done in all
our forty years of manhood.
To learn and to do !--this is the soul's work here below. The soul grows as
truly as an oak grows. As the tree takes the carbon of the air, the dew, the
rain, and the light, and the food that the earth supplies to its roots, and by
its mysterious chemistry transmutes them into sap and fibre, into wood
and leaf, and flower and fruit, and colour and perfume, so the soul imbibes
knowledge and by a divine alchemy changes what it learns into its own
substance, and grows from within outwardly with an inherent force and
power like those that lie hidden in the grain of wheat.
The soul hath its senses, like the body, that may be cultivated, enlarged,
refined, as itself grows in stature and proportion; and he who cannot
appreciate a fine painting or statue, a noble poem, a sweet harmony, a
heroic thought, or a disinterested action, or to whom the wisdom of
philosophy is but foolishness and babble, and the loftiest truths of less
importance than the price of stocks or cotton, or the elevation of baseness


--- PAGE 120 ---
to once, merely lives on the level of commonplace, and fitly prides
himself upon that inferiority of the soul's senses, which is the inferiority
and imperfect development of the soul itself.
To sleep little, and to study much; to say little, and to hear and think
much; to learn, that we may be able to do, and then to do, earnestly and
vigorously, whatever may be required of us by duty, and by the good of
our fellows, our country, and mankind,-- these are the duties of every
Mason who desires to imitate the Master Khurum.
The duty of a Mason as an honest man is plain and easy. It requires of us
honesty in contracts, sincerity in arming, simplicity in bargaining, and
faithfulness in performing. Lie not at all, neither in a little thing nor in a
great, neither in the substance nor in the circumstance, neither in word nor
deed: that is, pretend not what is false; cover not what is true; and let the
measure of your affirmation or denial be the understanding of your
contractor; for he who deceives the buyer or the seller by speaking what is
true, in a sense not intended or understood by the other, is a liar and a
thief. A Perfect Master must avoid that which deceives, equally with that
which is false.
Let your prices be according to that measure of good and evil which is
established in the fame and common accounts of the wisest and most
merciful men, skilled in that manufacture or commodity; and the gain
such, which, without scandal, is allowed to persons in all the same
circumstances.
In intercourse with others, do not do all which thou mayest lawfully do;
but keep something within thy power; and, because there is a latitude of
gain in buying and selling, take not thou the utmost penny that is lawful,


--- PAGE 121 ---
or which thou thinkest so; for although it be lawful, yet it is not safe; and
he who gains all that he can gain lawfully, this year, will possibly be
tempted, next year, to gain something unlawfully.
Let no man, for his own poverty, become more oppressing and cruel in his
bargain; but quietly, modestly, diligently, and patiently recommend his
estate to God, and follow his interest, and leave the success to Him.
Detain not the wages of the hireling; for every degree of detention of it
beyond the time, is injustice and uncharitableness, and grinds his face till
tears and blood come out; but pay him exactly according to covenant, or
according to his needs.
Religiously keep all promises and covenants, though made to your
disadvantage, though afterward you perceive you might have done better;
and let not any precedent act of yours be altered by any after-accident. Let
nothing make you break your promise, unless it be unlawful or impossible;
that is, either out of your nature or out of your civil power, yourself being
under the power of another; or that it be intolerably inconvenient to
yourself, and of no advantage to another; or that you have leave expressed
or reasonably presumed.
Let no man take wages or fees for a work that he cannot do, or cannot with
probability undertake; or in some sense profitably, and with ease, or with
advantage manage. Let no man appropriate to his own use, what God, by a
special mercy, or the Republic, hath made common; for that is against both
Justice and Charity.


--- PAGE 122 ---
That any man should be the worse for us, and for our direct act, and by our
intention, is against the rule of equity, of justice, and of charity. We then
do not that to others, which we would have done to ourselves; for we grow
richer upon the ruins of their fortune.
It is not honest to receive anything from another without returning him an
equivalent therefor. The gamester who wins the money of another is
dishonest. There should be no such thing as bets and gaming among
Masons: for no honest man should desire that for nothing which belongs to
another. The merchant who sells an inferior article for a sound price, the
speculator who makes the distresses and needs of others fill his exchequer
are neither fair nor honest, but base, ignoble, unfit for immortality.
It should be the earnest desire of every Perfect Master so to live and deal
and act, that when it comes to him to die, he may be able to say, and his
conscience to adjudge, that no man on earth is poorer, because he is
richer; that what he hath he has honestly earned, and no man can go before
God, and claim that by the rules of equity administered in His great
chancery, this house in which we die, this land we devise to our heirs this
money that enriches those who survive to bear our name, is his and not
ours, and we in that forum are only his trustees. For it is most certain that
God is just, and will sternly enforce every such trust; and that to all whom
we despoil, to all whom we defraud, to all from whom we take or win
anything whatever, without fair consideration and equivalent, He will
decree a full and adequate compensation.
Be careful, then, that thou receive no wages, here or elsewhere, that are
not thy due ! For if thou doest, thou wrongst some one, by taking that
which in God's chancery belongs to him; and whether that which thou
takest thus be wealth, or rank, or influence, or reputation or affection,
thou wilt surely be held to make full satisfaction.


--- PAGE 123 ---
VI. INTIMATE SECRETARY. (Confidential Secretary.)
You are especially taught in this Degree to be zealous and faithful; to be
disinterested and benevolent; and to act the peacemaker, in case of
dissensions, disputes, and quarrels among the brethren.
Duty is the moral magnetism which controls and guides the true Mason's
course over the tumultuous seas of life. Whether the stars of honour,
reputation, and reward do or do not shine, in the light of day or in the
darkness of the night of trouble and adversity, in calm or storm, that
unerring magnet still shows him the true course to steer, and indicates
with certainty where-away lies the port which not to reach involves
shipwreck and dishonour. He follows its silent bidding, as the mariner,
when land is for many days not in sight, and the ocean without path or
landmark spreads out all around him, follows the bidding of the needle,
never doubting that it points truly to the north. To perform that duty,
whether the performance be rewarded or unrewarded, is his sole care. And
it doth not matter, though of this performance there may be no witnesses,
and though what he does will be forever unknown to all mankind.


--- PAGE 124 ---
A little consideration will teach us that Fame has other limits than
mountains and oceans; and that he who places happiness in the frequent
repetition of his name, may spend his life in propagating it, without any
danger of weeping for new worlds, or necessity of passing the Atlantic
sea.
If, therefore, he who imagines the world to be filled with his actions and
praises, shall subduct from the number of his encomiasts all those who are
placed below the flight of fame, and who hear in the valley of life no
voice but that of necessity; all those who imagine themselves too
important to regard him, and consider the mention of his name as a
usurpation of their time; all who are too much or too little pleased with
themselves to attend to anything external; all who are attracted by
pleasure, or chained down by pain to unvaried ideas; all who are withheld
from attending his triumph by different pursuits; and all who slumber in
universal negligence; he will find his renown straitened by nearer bounds
than the rocks of Caucasus; and perceive that no man can be venerable or
formidable, but to a small part of his fellow-creatures. And therefore, that
we may not languish in our endeavors after excellence, it is necessary
that, as Africanus counsels his descendants, we raise our eyes to higher
prospects, and contemplate our future and eternal state, without giving up
our hearts to the praise of crowds, or fixing our hopes on such rewards as
human power can bestow.
We are not born for ourselves alone; and our country claims her share, and
our friends their share of us. As all that the earth produces is created for
the use of man, so men are created for the sake of men, that they may
mutually do good to one another. In this we ought to take nature for our
guide, and throw into the public stock the ounces of general utility, by a
reciprocation of duties; sometimes by receiving, sometimes by giving, and
sometimes to cement human society by arts, by industry, and by our
resources.


--- PAGE 125 ---
Suffer others to be praised in thy presence, and entertain their good and
glory with delight; but at no hand disparage them, or lessen the report, or
make an objection; and think not the advancement of thy brother is a
lessening of thy worth. Upbraid no man's weakness to him to discomfit
him, neither report it to disparage him, neither delight to remember it to
lessen him, or to set thyself above him; nor ever praise thyself or dispraise
any man else, unless some sufficient worthy end do hallow it.
Remember that we usually disparage others upon slight grounds and little
instances; and if a man be highly recommended, we think him sufficiently
lessened, if we can but charge one sin of folly or inferiority in his
account. We should either be more severe to ourselves, or less so to
others, and consider that whatsoever good any one can think or say of us,
we can tell him of many unworthy and foolish and perhaps worse actions
of ours, any one of which, done by another, would be enough, with us, to
destroy his reputation.
If we think the people wise and sagacious, and just and appreciative, when
they praise and make idols of us, let us not call them unlearned and
ignorant, and ill and stupid judges, when our neighbour is cried up by
public fame and popular noises.
Every man hath in his own life sins enough, in his own mind trouble
enough, in his own fortunes evil enough, and in performance of his offices
failings more than enough, to entertain his own inquiry; so that curiosity
after the affairs of others can not be without envy and an ill mind. The
generous man will be solicitous and inquisitive into the beauty and order
of a well-governed family, and after the virtues of an excellent person; but
anything for which men keep locks and bars, or that blushes to see the
light, or that is either shameful in manner or private in nature, this thing
will not be his care and business.


--- PAGE 126 ---
It should be objection sufficient to exclude any man from the society of
Masons, that he is not disinterested and generous, both in his acts, and in
his opinions of men, and his constructions of their conduct. He who is
selfish and grasping, or censorious and ungenerous, will not long remain
within the strict limits of honesty and truth, but will shortly commit
injustice. He who loves himself too much must needs love others too
little; and he who habitually gives harsh judgment will not long delay to
give unjust judgment.
The generous man is not careful to return no more than he receives; but
prefers that the balances upon the ledgers of benefits shall be in his
favour. He who hath received pay in full for all the benefits and favours
that he has conferred, is like a spendthrift who has consumed his whole
estate, and laments over an empty exchequer. He who requites my favours
with ingratitude adds to, instead of diminishing, my wealth; and he who
cannot return a favour is equally poor, whether his inability arises from
poverty of spirit, sordidness of soul, or pecuniary indigence.
If he is wealthy who hath large sums invested, and the mass of whose
fortune consists in obligations that bind other men to pay him money, he is
still more so to whom many owe large returns of kindnesses and favours.
Beyond a moderate sum each year, the wealthy man merely invests his
means: and that which he never uses is still like favours unreturned and
kindnesses unreciprocated, an actual and real portion of his fortune.
Generosity and a liberal spirit make men to be humane and genial, open-
hearted, frank, and sincere, earnest to do good, easy and contented, and
well-wishers of mankind. They protect the feeble against the strong, and
the defenceless against rapacity and craft. They succour and comfort the
poor, and are the guardians, under God, of his innocent and helpless
wards. They value friends more than riches or fame, and gratitude more
than money or power. They are noble by God's patent, and their
escutcheons and quarterings are to be found in heaven's great book of
heraldry. Nor can any man any more be a Mason than he can be a


--- PAGE 127 ---
gentleman, unless he is generous, liberal, and disinterested. To be liberal,
but only of that which is our own; to be generous, but only when we have
first been just; to give, when to give deprives us of a luxury or a comfort,
this is Masonry indeed.
He who is worldly, covetous, or sensual must change before he can be a
good Mason. If we are governed by inclination and not by duty; if we are
unkind, severe, censorious, or injurious, in the relations or intercourse of
life; if we are unfaithful parents or undutiful children; if we are harsh
masters or faithless servants; if we are treacherous friends or bad
neighbours or bitter competitors or corrupt unprincipled politicians or
overreaching dealers in business, we are wandering at a great distance
from the true Masonic light.
Masons must be kind and affectionate one to another. Frequenting the
same temples, kneeling at the same altars, they should feel that respect
and that kindness for each other, which their common relation and
common approach to one God should inspire. There needs to be much
more of the spirit of the ancient fellowship among us; more tenderness for
each other's faults, more forgiveness, more solicitude for each other's
improvement and good fortune; somewhat of brotherly feeling, that it be
not shame to use the word "brother."
Nothing should be allowed to interfere with that kindness and affection:
neither the spirit of business, absorbing, eager, and overreaching,
ungenerous and hard in its dealings, keen and bitter in its competitions,
low and sordid in its purposes; nor that of ambition, selfish, mercenary,
restless, circumventing, living only in the opinion of others, envious of
the good fortune of others, miserably vain of its own success, unjust,
unscrupulous, and slanderous.


--- PAGE 128 ---
He that does me a favour, hath bound me to make him a return of
thankfulness. The obligation comes not by covenant, nor by his own
express intention; but by the nature of the thing; and is a duty springing
up within the spirit of the obliged person, to whom it is more natural to
love his friend, and to do good for good, than to return evil for evil;
because a man may forgive an injury, but he must never forget a good turn.
He that refuses to do good to them whom he is bound to love, or to love
that which did him good, is unnatural and monstrous in his affections, and
thinks all the world born to minister to him; with a greediness worse than
that of the sea, which, although it receives all rivers into itself, yet it
furnishes the clouds and springs with a return of all they need. Our duty to
those who are our benefactors is, to esteem and love their persons, to
make them proportionable returns of service, or duty, or profit, according
as we can, or as they need, or as opportunity presents itself; and according
to the greatness of their kindnesses.
The generous man cannot but regret to see dissensions and disputes among
his brethren. Only the base and ungenerous delight in discord. It is the
poorest occupation of humanity to labour to make men think worse of each
other, as the press, and too commonly the pulpit, changing places with the
hustings and the tribune, do. The duty of the Mason is to endeavour to
make man think better of his neighbour; to quiet, instead of aggravating
difficulties; to bring together those who are severed or estranged; to keep
friends from becoming foes, and to persuade foes to become friends. To do
this, he must needs control his own passions, and be not rash and hasty,
nor swift to take offence, nor easy to be angered.
For anger is a professed enemy to counsel. It is a direct storm, in which no
man can be heard to speak or call from without; for if you counsel gently,
you are disregarded; if you urge it and be vehement, you provoke it more.
It is neither manly nor ingenuous. It makes marriage to be a necessary and
unavoidable trouble; friendships and societies and familiarities, to be
intolerable. It multiplies the evils of drunkenness, and makes the levities
of wine to run into madness. It makes innocent jesting to be the beginning
of tragedies. It turns friendship into hatred; it makes a man lose himself,
and his reason and his argument, in disputation. It turns the desires of
knowledge into an itch of wrangling. It adds insolency to power. It turns


--- PAGE 129 ---
justice into cruelty, and judgment into oppression. It changes discipline
into tediousness and hatred of liberal institution. It makes a prosperous
man to be envied, and the unfortunate to be unpitied.
See, therefore, that first controlling your own temper, and governing your
own passions, you fit yourself to keep peace and harmony among other
men, and especially the brethren. Above all remember that Masonry is the
realm of peace, and that "among Masons there must be no dissension, but
only that noble emulation., which can best work and best agree." Wherever
there is strife and hatred among the brethren, there is no Masonry; for
Masonry is Peace, and Brotherly Love, and Concord.
Masonry is the great Peace Society of the world. Wherever it exists, it
struggles to prevent international difficulties and disputes; and to bind
Republics, Kingdoms, and Empires together in one great band of peace
and amity. It would not so often struggle in vain, if Masons knew their
power and valued their oaths.
Who can sum up the horrors and woes accumulated in a single war?
Masonry is not dazzled with all its pomp and circumstance, all its glitter
and glory. War comes with its bloody hand into our very dwellings. It
takes from ten thousand homes those who lived there in peace and
comfort, held by the tender ties of family and kindred. It drags them away,
to die untended, of fever or exposure, in infectious climes; or to be
hacked, torn, and mangled in the fierce fight; to fall on the gory field, to
rise no more, or to be borne away, in awful agony, to noisome and horrid
hospitals. The groans of the battle-field are echoed in sighs of
bereavement from thousands of desolated hearths. There is a skeleton in
every house, a vacant chair at every table. Returning, the soldier brings
worse sorrow to his home, by the infection which he has caught, of camp-
vices. The country is demoralized. The national mind is brought down,
from the noble interchange of kind offices with another people, to wrath
and revenge, and base pride, and the habit of measuring brute strength
against brute strength, in battle. Treasures are expended, that would


--- PAGE 130 ---
suffice to build ten thousand churches, hospitals, and universities, or rib
and tie together a continent with rails of iron. If that treasure were sunk in
the sea, it would be calamity enough; but it is put to worse use; for it is
expended in cutting into the veins and arteries of human life, until the
earth is deluged with a sea of blood.
Such are the lessons of this Degree. You have vowed to make them the
rule, the law, and the guide of your life and conduct. If you do so, you will
be entitled, because fitted, to advance in Masonry. If you do not, you have
already gone too far.
 
 
VII. PROVOST AND JUDGE.
THE lesson which this Degree inculcates is JUSTICE, in decision and
judgment, and in our intercourse and dealing with other men.
In a country where trial by jury is known, every intelligent man is liable to
be called on to act as a judge, either of fact alone, or of fact and law
mingled; and to assume the heavy responsibilities which belong to that
character.


--- PAGE 131 ---
Those who are invested with the power of judgment should judge the
causes of all persons uprightly and impartially, without any personal
consideration of the power of the mighty, or the bribe of the rich, or the
needs of the poor. That is the cardinal rule, which no one will dispute;
though many fail to observe it. But they must do more. They must divest
themselves of prejudice and preconception. They must hear patiently,
remember accurately, and weigh carefully the facts and the arguments
offered before them. They must not leap hastily to conclusions, nor form
opinions before they have heard all. They must not presume crime or
fraud. They must neither be ruled by stubborn pride of opinion, nor be too
facile and yielding to the views and arguments of others. In deducing the
motive from the proven act, they must not assign to the act either the best
or the worst motives, but those which they would think it just and fair for
the world to assign to it, if they themselves had done it; nor must they
endeavour to make many little circumstances, that weigh nothing
separately, weigh much together, to prove their own acuteness and
sagacity. These are sound rules for every juror, also, to observe.
In our intercourse with others, there are two kinds of injustice: the first,
of those who offer an injury; the second, of those who have it in their
power to avert an injury from those to whom it is offered, and yet do it
not. So active injustice may be done in two ways--by force and by fraud,--
of which force is lion-like, and aud fox-like,--both utterly repugnant to
social duty, but fraud the more detestable.
Every wrong done by one man to another, whether it affect his person, his
property, his happiness, or his reputation, is an offense against the law of
justice. The field of this Degree is therefore a wide and vast one; and
Masonry seeks for the most impressive mode of enforcing the law of
justice, and the most effectual means of preventing wrong and injustice.


--- PAGE 132 ---
To this end it teaches this great and momentous truth: that wrong and
injustice once done cannot be undone; but are eternal in their
consequences; once committed, are numbered with the irrevocable Past;
that the wrong that is done contains its own retributive penalty as surely
and as naturally as the acorn contains the oak. Its consequences are its
punishment; it needs no other, and can have no heavier; they are involved
in its commission, and cannot be separated from it. A wrong done to
another is an injury done to our own Nature, an offence against our own
souls, a disfiguring of the image of the Beautiful and Good. Punishment is
not the execution of a sentence, but the occurrence of an effect. It is
ordained to follow guilt, not by the decree of God as a judge, but by a law
enacted by Him as the Creator and Legislator of the Universe. It is not an
arbitrary and artificial annexation, but an ordinary and logical
consequence; and therefore must be borne by the wrong-doer, and through
him may flow on to others. It is the decision of the infinite justice of God,
in the form of law.
There can be no interference with, or remittance of, or protection from,
the natural effects of our wrongful acts. God will not interpose between
the cause and its consequence; and in that sense there can be no
forgiveness of sins. The act which has debased our soul may be repented
of, may be turned from; but the injury is done. The debasement may be
redeemed by after-efforts, the stain obliterated by bitterer struggles and
severer sufferings; but the efforts and the endurance which might have
raised the soul to the loftiest heights are now exhausted in merely
regaining what it has lost. There must always be a wide difference between
him who only ceases to do evil, and him who has always done well.
He will certainly be a far more scrupulous watcher over his conduct, and
far more careful of his deeds, who believes that those deeds will
inevitably bear their natural consequences, exempt from after intervention,
than he who believes that penitence and pardon will at any time unlink the
chain of sequences. Surely we shall do less wrong and injustice, if the
conviction is fixed and embedded in our souls that everything done is
done irrevocably, that even the Omnipotence of God cannot uncommit a
deed, cannot make that undone which has been done; that every act of ours


--- PAGE 133 ---
must bear its allotted fruit, according to the everlasting laws, --must
remain forever ineffaceably inscribed on the tablets of Universal Nature.
If you have wronged another, you may grieve, repent, and resolutely
determine against any such weakness in future. You may, so far as it is
possible, make reparation. It is well. The injured party may forgive you,
according to the meaning of human language; but the deed is done; and all
the powers of Nature, were they to conspire in your behalf, could not make
it undone; the consequences to the body, the consequences to the soul,
though no man may perceive them, are there, are written in the annals of
the Past, and must reverberate throughout all time.
Repentance for a wrong done, bears, like every other act, its own fruit, the
fruit of purifying the heart and amending the Future, but not of effacing
the Past. The commission of the wrong is an irrevocable act; but it does
not incapacitate the soul to do right for the future. Its consequences
cannot be expunged; but its course need not be pursued. Wrong and evil
perpetrated, though ineffaceable, call for no despair, but for efforts more
energetic than before. Repentance is still as valid as ever; but it is valid to
secure the Future, not to obliterate the Past.
Even the pulsations of the air, once set in motion by the human voice,
cease not to exist with the sounds to which they gave rise. Their quickly-
attenuated force soon becomes inaudible to human ears. But the waves of
air thus raised perambulate the surface of earth and ocean, and in less than
twenty hours, every atom of the atmosphere takes up the altered movement
due to that infinitesimal portion of primitive motion which has been
conveyed to it through countless channels, and which must continue to
influence its path throughout its future existence. The air is one vast
library, on whose pages is forever written all that man has ever said or
even whispered. There, in their mutable, but unerring characters, mixed
with the earliest, as well as the latest signs of mortality, stand forever
recorded, vows unredeemed, promises unfulfilled; perpetuating, in the


--- PAGE 134 ---
movements of each particle, all in unison, the testimony of man's
changeful will. God reads that book, though we cannot.
So earth, air, and ocean are the eternal witnesses of the acts that we have
done. No motion impressed by natural causes or by human agency is ever
obliterated. The track of every keel which has ever disturbed the surface
of the ocean remains forever registered in the future movements of all
succeeding particles which may occupy its place. Every criminal is by the
laws of the Almighty irrevocably chained to the testimony of his crime;
for every atom of his mortal frame, through whatever changes its particles
may migrate, will still retain, adhering to it through every combination,
some movement derived from that very muscular effort by which the crime
itself was perpetrated.
What if our faculties should be so enhanced in a future life as to enable us
to perceive and trace the ineffaceable consequences of our idle words and
evil deeds, and render our remorse and grief as eternal as those
consequences themselves? No more fearful punishment to a superior
intelligence can be conceived, than to see still in action, with the
consciousness that it must continue in action forever, a cause of wrong put
in motion by itself ages before.
Masonry, by its teachings, endeavours to restrain men from the
commission of injustice and acts of wrong and outrage. Though it does not
endeavour to usurp the place of religion, still its code of morals proceeds
upon other principles than the municipal law; and it condemns and
punishes offences which neither that law punishes nor public opinion
condemns. In the Masonic law, to cheat and overreach in trade, at the bar,
in politics, are deemed no more venial than theft; nor a deliberate lie than
perjury; nor slander than robbery; nor seduction than murder.


--- PAGE 135 ---
Especially it condemns those wrongs of which the doer induces another to
partake. He may repent; he may, after agonizing struggles, regain the path
of virtue; his spirit may reachieve its purity through much anguish, after
many strifes; but the weaker fellow-creature whom he led astray, whom he
made a sharer in his guilt, but whom he cannot make a sharer in his
repentance and amendment, whose downward course (the first step of
which he taught) he cannot check, but is compelled to witness,-- what
forgiveness of sins can avail him there? There is his perpetual, his
inevitable punishment, which no repentance can alleviate, and no mercy
can remit.
Let us be just, also, in judging of other men's motives. We know but little
of the real merits or demerits of any fellow creature. We can rarely say
with certainty that this man is more guilty than that, or even that this man
is very good or very wicked. Often the basest men leave behind them
excellent reputations. There is scarcely one of us who has not, at some
time in his life, been on the edge of the commission of a crime. Every one
of us can look back, and shuddering see the time when our feet stood upon
the slippery crags that overhung the abyss of guilt; and when, if
temptation had been a little more urgent, or a little longer continued, if
penury had pressed us a little harder, or a little more wine had further
disturbed our intellect, dethroned our judgment, and aroused our passions,
our feet would have slipped, and we should have fallen, never to rise
again.
We may be able to say--"This man has lied, has pilfered, has forged, has
embezzled moneys intrusted to him; and that man has gone through life
with clean hands." But we cannot say that the former has not struggled
long, though unsuccessfully, against temptations under which the second
would have succumbed without an effort. We can say which has the
cleanest hands before man; but not which has the cleanest soul before
God. We may be able to say, this man has committed adultery, and that
man has been ever chaste; but we cannot tell but that the innocence of one
may have been due to the coldness of his heart, to the absence of a motive,
to the presence of a fear, to the slight degree of the temptation; nor but
that the fall of the other may have been preceded by the most vehement
self-contest, caused by the most over-mastering frenzy, and atoned for by


--- PAGE 136 ---
the most hallowing repentance. Generosity as well as niggardliness may be
a mere yielding to native temperament; and in the eye of Heaven, a long
life of beneficence in one man may have cost less effort, and may indicate
less virtue and less sacrifice of interest, than a few rare hidden acts of
kindness wrung by duty out of the reluctant and unsympathizing nature of
the other. There may be more real merit, more self-sacrificing effort, more
of the noblest elements of moral grandeur, in a life of failure, sin, and
shame, than in a career, to our eyes, of stainless integrity.
When we condemn or pity the fallen, how do we know that, tempted like
him, we should not have fallen like him, as soon, and perhaps with less
resistance ? How can we know what we should do if we were out of
employment, famine crouching, gaunt, and hungry, on our fireless hearth,
and our children wailing for bread ? We fall not because we are not
enough tempted! He that hath fallen may be at heart as honest as we. How
do we know that our daughter, sister, wife, could resist the abandonment,
the desolation, the distress, the temptation, that sacrificed the virtue of
their poor abandoned sister of shame? Perhaps they also have not fallen,
because they have not been sorely tempted! Wisely are we directed to pray
that we may not be exposed to temptation.
Human justice must be ever uncertain. How many judicial murders have
been committed through ignorance of the phenomena of insanity ! How
many men hung for murder who were no more murderers at heart than the
jury that tried and the judge that sentenced them! It may well be doubted
whether the administration of human laws, in every country, is not one
gigantic mass of injustice and wrong. God seeth not as man seeth; and the
most abandoned criminal, black as he is before the world, may yet have
continued to keep some little light burning in a corner of his soul, which
would long since have gone out in that of those who walk proudly in the
sunshine of immaculate fame, if they had been tried and tempted like the
poor outcast.


--- PAGE 137 ---
We do not know even the outside life of men. We are not competent to
pronounce even on their deeds. We do not know half the acts of
wickedness or virtue, even of our most immediate fellows. We cannot say,
with certainty, even of our nearest friend, that he has not committed a
particular sin, and broken a particular commandment. Let each man ask his
own heart ! Of how many of our best and of our worst acts and qualities
are our most intimate associates utterly unconscious ! How many virtues
does not the world give us credit for, that we do not possess; or vices
condemn us for, of which we are not the slaves ! It is but a small portion
of our evil deeds and thoughts that ever comes to light; and of our few
redeeming goodnesses, the largest portion is known to God alone.
We shall, therefore, be just in judging of other men, only when we are
charitable; and we should assume the prerogative of judging others only
when the duty is forced upon us; since we are so almost certain to err, and
the consequences of error are so serious. No man need covet the office of
judge; for in assuming it he assumes the gravest and most oppressive
responsibility. Yet you have assumed it; we all assume it; for man is ever
ready to judge, and ever ready to condemn his neighbour, while upon the
same state of case he acquits himself See, therefore, that you exercise
your once cautiously and charitably, lest, in passing judgment upon the
criminal, you commit a greater wrong than that for which you condemn
him, and the consequences of which must be eternal.
The faults and crimes and follies of other men are not unimportant to us;
but form a part of our moral discipline. War and bloodshed at a distance,
and frauds which do not affect our pecuniary interest, yet touch us in our
feelings, and concern our moral welfare. They have much to do with all
thoughtful hearts. The public eye may look unconcernedly on the
miserable victim of vice, and that shattered wreck of a man may move the
multitude to laughter or to scorn. But to the Mason, it is the form of
sacred humanity that is before him; it is an erring fellow-being; a
desolate, forlorn, forsaken soul; and his thoughts, enfolding the poor
wretch, will be far deeper than those of indifference, ridicule, or
contempt. All human offences, the whole system of dishonesty, evasion,
circumventing, forbidden indulgence, and intriguing ambition, in which
men are struggling with each other, will be looked upon by a thoughtful


--- PAGE 138 ---
Mason, not merely as a scene of mean toils and strifes, but as the solemn
conflicts of immortal minds, for ends vast and momentous as their own
being. It is a sad and unworthy strife, and may well be viewed with
indignation; but that indignation must melt into pity. For the stakes for
which these gamesters play are not those which they imagine, not those
which are in sight. For example, this man plays for a petty once, and gains
it; but the real stake he gains is sycophancy, uncharitableness, slander, and
deceit.
Good men are too proud of their goodness. They are respectable;
dishonour comes not near them; their countenance has weight and
influence; their robes are unstained; the poisonous breath of calumny as
never been breathed upon their fair name. How easy it is for them to look
down with scorn upon the poor degraded offender; to pass him by with a
lofty step; to draw up the folds of their garment around them, that they
may not be soiled by his touch ! Yet the Great Master of Virtue did not so;
but descended to familiar intercourse with publicans and sinners, with the
Samaritan woman, with the outcasts and the Pariahs of the Hebrew world.
Many men think themselves better, in proportion as they can detect sin in
others! When they go over the catalogue of their neighbour's unhappy
derelictions of temper or conduct, they often, amidst much apparent
concern, feel a secret exultation, that destroys all their own pretensions to
wisdom and moderation, and even to virtue. Many even take actual
pleasure in the sins of others; and this is the case with every one whose
thoughts are often employed in agreeable comparisons of his own virtues
with his neighbours' faults.
The power of gentleness is too little seen in the world; the subduing
influences of pity, the might of love, the control of mildness over passion,
the commanding majesty of that perfect character which mingles grave
displeasure with grief and pity for the offender. So it is that a Mason
should treat his brethren who go astray. Not with bitterness; nor yet with
good-natured easiness, nor with worldly indifference, nor with the


--- PAGE 139 ---
philosophic coldness, nor with a laxity of conscience, that accounts
everything well, that passes under the seal of public opinion; but with
charity, with pitying loving-kindness.
The human heart will not bow willingly to what is infirm and wrong in
human nature. If it yields to us, it must yield to what is divine in us. The
wickedness of my neighbour cannot submit to my wickedness; his
sensuality, for instance, to my anger against his vices. My faults are not
the instruments that are to arrest his faults. And therefore impatient
reformers, and denouncing preachers, and hasty reprovers, and angry
parents, and irritable relatives generally fail, in their several departments,
to reclaim the erring.
A moral offence is sickness, pain, loss, dishonour, in the immortal part of
man. It is guilt, and misery added to guilt. It is itself calamity; and brings
upon itself, in addition, the calamity of God's disapproval, the abhorrence
of all virtuous men, and the soul's own abhorrence. Deal faithfully, but
patiently and tenderly, with this evil ! It is no matter for petty
provocation, nor for personal strife, nor for selfish irritation.
Speak kindly to your erring brother ! God pities him: Christ has died for
him: Providence waits for him: Heaven's mercy yearns toward him; and
Heaven's spirits are ready to welcome him back with joy. Let your voice
be in unison with all those powers that God is using for his recovery!
If one defrauds you, and exults at it, he is the most to be pitied of human
beings. He has done himself a far deeper injury than he has done you. It is
he, and not you, whom God regards with mingled displeasure and
compassion; and His judgment should be your law. Among all the


--- PAGE 140 ---
benedictions of the Holy Mount there is not one for this man; but for the
merciful, the peacemakers, and the persecuted they are poured out freely.
We are all men of like passions, propensities, and exposures. There are
elements in us all, which might have been perverted, through the
successive processes of moral deterioration, to the worst of crimes. The
wretch whom the execration of the thronging crowd pursues to the
scaffold, is not worse than any one of that multitude might have become
under similar circumstances. He is to be condemned indeed, but also
deeply to be pitied.
It does not become the frail and sinful to be vindictive toward even the
worst criminals. We owe much to the good Providence of God, ordaining
for us a lot more favourable to virtue. We all had that within us, that
might have been pushed to the same excess: Perhaps we should have fallen
as he did, with less temptation. Perhaps we have done acts, that, in
proportion to the temptation or provocation, were less excusable than his
great crime. Silent pity and sorrow for the victim should mingle with our
detestation of the guilt. Even the pirate who murders in cold blood on the
high seas, is such a man as you or I might have been. Orphanage in
childhood, or base and dissolute and abandoned parents; an unfriended
youth; evil companions; ignorance and want of moral cultivation; the
temptations of sinful pleasure or grinding poverty; familiarity with vice; a
scorned and blighted name; seared and crushed affections; desperate
fortunes; these are steps that might have led any one among us to unfurl
upon the high seas the bloody flag of universal defiance; to wage war with
our kind; to live the life and die the death of the reckless and remorseless
free-booter. Many affecting relationships of humanity plead with us to pity
him. His head once rested on a mother's bosom. He was once the object of
sisterly love and domestic endearment. Perhaps his hand, since often red
with blood, once clasped another little loving hand at the altar. Pity him
then; his blighted hopes and his crushed heart! It is proper that frail and
erring creatures like us should do so; should feel the crime, but feel it as
weak, tempted, and rescued creatures should. It may be that when God
weighs men's crimes, He will take into consideration the temptations and
the adverse circumstances that led to them, and the opportunities for
moral culture of the offender; and it may be that our own offences will


--- PAGE 141 ---
weigh heavier than we think, and the murderer's lighter than according to
man's judgment.
On all accounts, therefore, let the true Mason never forget the solemn
injunction, necessary to be observed at almost every moment of a busy
life: 'JUDGE NOT, LEST YOU YOURSELVES BE JUDGED FOR
WHATSOEVER JUDGMENT YOU MEASURE UNTO OTHERS, THE
SAME SHALL IN TURN BE MEASURED UNTO YOU. Such is the lesson
taught the Provost and Judge.
of man.
 
 
VIII. INTENDANT OF THE BUILDING.
IN this Degree you have been taught the important lesson, that none are
entitled to advance in the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, who have
not by study and application made themselves familiar with Masonic
learning and jurisprudence. The Degrees of this Rite are not for those who
are content with the mere work and ceremonies, and do not seek to explore
the mines of wisdom that lie buried beneath the surface. You still advance
toward the Light, toward that star, blazing in the distance, which is an
emblem of the Divine Truth, given by God to the first men, and preserved
amid all the vicissitudes of ages in the traditions and teachings of
Masonry. How far you will advance, depends upon yourself alone. Here, as


--- PAGE 142 ---
everywhere in the world, Darkness struggles with Light, and clouds and
shadows intervene between you and the Truth.
When you shall have become imbued with the morality of Masonry, with
which you yet are, and for some time will be exclusively occupied,--when
you shall have learned to practice all the virtues which it inculcates; when
they become familiar to you as your Household Gods; then will you be
prepared to receive its lofty philosophical instruction, and to scale the
heights upon whose summit Light and Truth sit enthroned. Step by step
men must advance toward Perfection; and each Masonic Degree is meant
to be one of those steps. Each is a development of a particular duty; and in
the present you are taught charity and benevolence; to be to your brethren
an example of virtue; to correct your own faults; and to endeavour to
correct those of your brethren.
Here, as in all the degrees, you meet with the emblems and the names of
Deity, the true knowledge of whose character and attributes it has ever
been a chief object of Masonry to perpetuate. To appreciate His infinite
greatness and goodness, to rely implicitly upon His Providence, to revere
and venerate Him as the Supreme Architect, Creator, and Legislator of the
universe, is the first of Masonic duties.
The Battery of this Degree, and the five circuits which you made around
the Lodge, allude to the five points of fellowship, and are intended to
recall them vividly to your mind. To go upon a brother's errand or to his
relief, even barefoot and upon flinty ground; to remember him in your
supplications to the Deity; to clasp him to your heart, and protect him
against malice and evil speaking; to uphold him when about to stumble
and fall; and to give him prudent, honest, and friendly counsel, are duties
plainly written upon the pages of God's great code of law, and first among
the ordinances of Masonry.


--- PAGE 143 ---
The first sign of the Degree is expressive of the diffidence and humility
with which we inquire into the nature and attributes of the Deity; the
second, of the profound awe and reverence with which we contemplate His
glories; and the third, of the sorrow with which we reflect upon our
insufficient observance of our duties, and our imperfect compliance with
His statutes.
The distinguishing property of man is to search for and follow after truth.
Therefore, when relaxed from our necessary cares and concerns, we then
covet to see, to hear, and to learn somewhat; and we esteem knowledge of
things, either obscure or wonderful, to be the indispensable means of
living happily. Truth, Simplicity, and Candor are most agreeable to the
nature of mankind. Whatever is virtuous consists either in Sagacity, and
the perception of Truth; or in the preservation of Human Society, by
giving to every man his due, and observing the faith of contracts; or in the
greatness and firmness of an elevated and unsubdued mind; or in
observing order and regularity in all our words and in all our actions; in
which consist Moderation and Temperance.
Masonry has in all times religiously preserved that enlightened faith from
which flow sublime Devotedness, the sentiment of Fraternity fruitful of
good works, the spirit of indulgence and peace, of sweet hopes and
effectual consolations; and inflexibility in the accomplishment of the most
painful and arduous duties. It has always propagated it with ardor and
perseverance; and therefore it labours at the present day more zealously
than ever. Scarcely a Masonic discourse is pronounced, that does not
demonstrate the necessity and advantages of this faith, and especially
recall the two constitutive principles of religion, that make all religion,--
love of God, and love of neighbour. Masons carry these principles into the
bosoms of their families and of society. While the Sectarians of former
times enfeebled the religious spirit, Masonry, forming one great People
over the whole globe, and marching under the great banner of Charity and
Benevolence, preserves that religious feeling, strengthens it, extends it in
its purity and simplicity, as it has always existed in the depths of the
human heart, as it existed even under the dominion of the most ancient
forms of worship, but where gross and debasing superstitions forbade its
recognition.


--- PAGE 144 ---
A Masonic Lodge should resemble a bee-hive, in which all the members
work together with ardor for the common good. Masonry is not made for
cold souls and narrow minds, that do not comprehend its lofty mission and
sublime apostolate. Here the anathema against lukewarm souls applies. To
comfort misfortunes to popularize knowledge, to teach whatever is true
and pure in religion and philosophy, to accustom men to respect order and
the proprieties of life, to point out the way to genuine happiness, to
prepare for that fortunate period, when all the factions of the Human
Family, united by the bonds of Toleration and Fraternity, shall be but one
household,--these are labours that may well excite zeal and even
enthusiasm.
We do not now enlarge upon or elaborate these ideas. We but utter them to
you briefly, as hints, upon which you may at your leisure reflect.
Hereafter, if you continue to advance, they will be unfolded, explained,
and developed.
Masonry utters no impracticable and extravagant precepts, certain,
because they are so, to be disregarded. It asks of its initiates nothing that
it is not possible and even easy for them to perform. Its teachings are
eminently practical; and its statutes can be obeyed by every just, upright,
and honest man, no matter what his faith or creed. Its object is to attain
the greatest practical good, without seeking to make men perfect. It does
not meddle with the domain of religion, nor inquire into the mysteries of
regeneration. It teaches those truths that are written by the finger of God
upon the heart of man, those views of duty which have been brought out
by the meditations of the studious, confirmed by the allegiance of the
good and wise, and stamped as sterling by the response they find in every
uncorrupted mind. It does not dogmatize, nor vainly imagine dogmatic
certainty to be attainable.


--- PAGE 145 ---
Masonry does not occupy itself with crying down this world, with its
splendid beauty, its thrilling interests, its glorious works, its noble and
holy affections; nor exhort us to detach our hearts from this earthly life,
as empty, fleeting, and unworthy, and fix them upon Heaven, as the only
sphere deserving the love of the loving or the meditation of the wise. It
teaches that man has high duties to perform, and a high destiny to fulfill,
on this earth; that this world is not merely the portal to another; and that
this life, though not our only one, is an integral one, and the particular
one with which we are here meant to be concerned; that the Present is our
scene of action, and the Future for speculation and for trust; that man was
sent upon the earth to live in it, to enjoy it, to study it, to love it, to
embellish it, to make the most of it. It is his country, on which he should
lavish his affections and his efforts. It is here his influences are to
operate. It is his house, and not a tent; his home, and not merely a school.
He is sent into this world, not to be constantly hankering after, dreaming
of, preparing for another; but to do his duty and fulfill his destiny on this
earth; to do all that lies in his power to improve it, to render it a scene of
elevated happiness to himself, to those around him, to those who are to
come after him. His life here is part of his immortality; and this world,
also, is among the stars.
And thus, Masonry teaches us, will man best prepare for that Future which
he hopes for. The Unseen cannot hold a higher place in our affections than
the Seen and the Familiar. The law of our being is Love of Life, and its
interests and adornments; love of the world in which our lot is cast,
engrossment with the interests and affections of earth. Not a low or
sensual love, not love of wealth, of fame, of ease, of power, of splendour.
Not low worldliness; but the love of Earth as the garden on which the
Creator has lavished such miracles of beauty; as the habitation of
humanity, the arena of its conflicts, the scene of its illimitable progress,
the dwelling-place of the wise, the good, the active, the loving, and the
dear; the place of opportunity for the development by means of sin and
suffering and sorrow, of the noblest passions the loftiest virtues, and the
tenderest sympathies.
They take very unprofitable pains, who endeavour to persuade men that
they are obliged wholly to despise this world, and all that is in it, even


--- PAGE 146 ---
whilst they themselves live here. God hath not taken all that pains in
forming and framing and furnishing and adorning the world, that they who
were made by Him to live in it should despise it. It will be enough, if they
do not love it too immoderately. It is useless to attempt to extinguish all
those affections and passions which are and always will be inseparable
from human nature. As long as he world lasts, and honour and virtue and
industry have reputation in the world, there will be ambition and
emulation and appetite in the best and most accomplished men in it; and if
there were not, more barbarity and vice and wickedness would cover every
nation of the world, than it now suffers under.
Those only who feel a deep interest in, and affection for, this world, will
work resolutely for its amelioration. Those who undervalue this rife,
naturally become querulous and discontented, and lose their interest in the
welfare of their fellows. To serve them, and so to do our duty as Masons,
we must feel that the object is worth the exertion; and be content with this
world in which God has placed us, until He permits us to remove to a
better one. He is here with us, and does not deem this an unworthy world.
It a serious thing to defame and belie a whole world; to speak of it as the
abode of a poor, toiling, drudging, ignorant, contemptible race. You would
not so discredit your family, your friendly circle, your village, your city,
your country. The world is not a wretched and a worthless one; nor is it a
misfortune, but a thing to be thankful for, to be a man. If life is worthless,
so also is immortality.
In society itself, in that living mechanism of human relationships that
spreads itself over the world, there is a finer essence within, that as truly
moves it, as any power, heavy or expansive, moves the sounding
manufactory or the swift-flying car. The man-machine hurries to and fro
upon the earth, stretches out its hands on every side, to toil, to barter, to
unnumbered labours and enterprises; and almost always the motive, that
which moves it, is something that takes hold of the comforts, affections,
and hopes of social existence. True, the mechanism often works with


--- PAGE 147 ---
difficulty, drags heavily, grates and screams with harsh collision. True, the
essence of finer motive, becoming intermixed with baser and coarser
ingredients, often clogs, obstructs, jars, and deranges the free and noble
action of social life. But he is neither grateful nor wise, who looks
cynically on all this, and loses the fine sense of social good in its
perversions. That I can be a friend, that I can have a friend, though it were
but one in the world; that fact, that wondrous good fortune, we may set
against all the sufferings of our social nature. That there is such a place on
earth as a home, that resort and sanctuary of in-walled and shielded joy,
we may set against all the surrounding desolations of life. That one can be
a true, social man, can speak his true thoughts, amidst all the Tanglings of
controversy and the warring of opinions; that fact from within, outweighs
all facts from without.
In the visible aspect and action of society, often repulsive and annoying,
we are apt to lose the due sense of its invisible blessings. As in Nature it
is not the coarse and palpable, not soils and rains, nor even fields and
flowers, that are so beautiful, as the invisible spirit of wisdom and beauty
that pervades it; so in society, it is the invisible, and therefore
unobserved, that is most beautiful.
What nerves the arm of toil? If man minded himself alone, he would fling
down the spade and axe, and rush to the desert; or roam through the world
as a wilderness, and make that world a desert. His home, which he sees
not, perhaps, but once or twice in a day, is the invisible bond of the world.
It is the good, strong, and noble faith that men have in each other, which
gives the loftiest character to business, trade, and commerce. Fraud occurs
in the rush of business; but it is the exception. Honesty is the rule; and all
the frauds in the world cannot tear the great bond of human confidence. If
they could, commerce would furl its sails on every sea, and all the cities
of the world would crumble into ruins. The bare character of a man on the
other side of the world, whom you never saw, whom you never will see,
you hold good for a bond of thousands. The most striking feature of the
political state is not governments, nor constitutions, nor laws, nor
enactments, nor the judicial power, nor the police; but the universal will
of the people to be governed by the common weal. Take off that restraint,
and no government on earth could stand for an hour.


--- PAGE 148 ---
Of the many teachings of Masonry, one of the most valuable is, that we
should not depreciate this life. It does not hold, that when we reflect on
the destiny that awaits man on earth, we ought to bedew his cradle with
our tears; but, like the Hebrews, it hails the birth of a child with joy, and
holds that his birthday should be a festival.
It has no sympathy with those who profess to have proved this life, and
found it little worth; who have deliberately made up their minds that it is
far more miserable than happy; because its employments are tedious, and
their schemes often baffled, their friendships broken, or their friends dead,
its pleasures palled, and its honours faded, and its paths beaten, familiar,
and dull.
Masonry deems it no mark of great piety toward God to disparage, if not
despise, the state that He has ordained for us. It does not absurdly set up
the claims of another world, not in comparison merely, but in competition,
with the claims of this. It looks upon both as parts of one system. It holds
that a man may make the best of this world and of another at the same
time. It does not teach its initiates to think better of other works and
dispensations of God, by thinking meanly of these. It does not look upon
life as so much time lost; nor regard its employments as trifles unworthy
of immortal beings; nor tell its followers to fold their arms, as if in
disdain of their state and species; but it looks soberly and cheerfully upon
the world, as a theatre of worthy action, of exalted usefulness, and of
rational and innocent enjoyment.
It holds that, with all its evils, life is a blessing. To deny that is to destroy
the basis of all religion, natural and revealed. The very foundation of all
religion is laid on the firm belief that God is good; and if this life is an
evil and a curse, no such belief can be rationally entertained. To level our
satire at humanity and human existence, as mean and contemptible; to look


--- PAGE 149 ---
on this world as the habitation of a miserable race, fit only for mockery
and scorn; to consider this earth as a dungeon or a prison, which has no
blessing to offer but escape from it, is to extinguish the primal light of
faith and hope and happiness, to destroy the basis of religion, and Truth's
foundation in the goodness of God. If it indeed be so, then it matters not
what else is true or not true; speculation is vain and faith is vain; and all
that belongs to man's highest being is buried in the ruins of misanthropy,
melancholy, and despair.
Our love of life; the tenacity with which, in sorrow and suffering, we cling
to it; our attachment to our home, to the spot that gave us birth, to any
place, however rude, unsightly, or barren, on which the history of our
years has been written, all show how dear are the ties of kindred and
society. Misery makes a greater impression upon us than happiness;
because the former is not the habit of our minds. It is a strange, unusual
guest, and we are more conscious of its presence. Happiness lives with us,
and we forget it. It does not excite us, nor disturb the order and course of
our thoughts. A great agony is an epoch in our life. We remember our
afflictions, as we do the storm and earthquake, because they are out of the
common course of things. They are like disastrous events, recorded
because extraordinary; and with whole and unnoticed periods of prosperity
between. We mark and signalize the times of calamity; but many happy
days and unnoted periods of enjoyment pass, that are unrecorded either in
the book of memory, or in the scanty annals of our thanksgiving. We are
little disposed and less able to call up from the dim remembrances of our
past years, the peaceful moments, the easy sensations, the bright thoughts,
the quiet reveries, the throngs of kind affections in which life flowed on,
bearing us almost unconsciously upon its bosom, because it bore us calmly
and gently.
Life is not only good; but it has been glorious in the experience of
millions. The glory of all human virtue clothes it. The splendours of
devotedness, beneficence, and heroism are upon it; the crown of a
thousand martyrdoms is upon its brow. The brightness of the soul shines
through this visible and sometimes darkened life; through all its
surrounding cares and labours. The humblest life may feel its connection
with its Infinite Source. There is something mighty in the frail inner man;


--- PAGE 150 ---
something of immortality in this momentary and transient being. The mind
stretches away, on every side, into infinity. Its thoughts flash abroad, far
into the boundless, the immeasurable, the infinite; far into the great, dark,
teeming future; and become powers and influences in other ages. To know
its wonderful Author, to bring down wisdom from the Eternal Stars, to
bear upward its homage, gratitude, and love, to the Ruler of all worlds, to
be immortal in our influences projected far into the slow-approaching
Future, makes life most worthy and most glorious.
Life is the wonderful creation of God. It is light, sprung from void
darkness; power, waked from inertness and impotence; being created from
nothing; and the contrast may well enkindle wonder and delight. It is a rill
from the infinite, overflowing goodness; and from the moment when it
first gushes up into the light, to that when it mingles with the ocean of
Eternity, that Goodness attends it and ministers to it. It is a great and
glorious gift. There is gladness in its infant voices; joy in the buoyant step
of its youth; deep satisfaction in its strong maturity; and peace in its quiet
age. There is good for the good; virtue for the faithful; and victory for the
valiant. There is, even in this humble life, an infinity for those whose
desires are boundless. There are blessings upon its birth; there is hope in
its death; and eternity in its prospect. Thus earth, which binds many in
chains, is to the Mason both the starting-place and goal of immortality,
Many it buries in the rubbish of dull cares and wearying vanities; but to
the Mason it is the lofty mount of meditation, where Heaven, and Infinity
and Eternity are spread before him and around him. To the lofty-minded,
the pure, and the virtuous, this life is the beginning of Heaven, and a part
of immortality.
God hath appointed one remedy for all the evils in the world; and that is a
contented spirit. We may be reconciled to poverty and a low fortune, if we
suffer contentedness and equanimity to make the proportions. No man is
poor who doth not think himself so; but if, in a full fortune, with
impatience he desires more, he proclaims his wants and his beggarly
condition. This virtue of contentedness was the sum of all the old moral
philosophy, and is of most universal use in the whole course of our lives,
and the only instrument to ease the burdens of the world and the enmities
of sad chances. It is the great reasonableness of complying with the Divine


--- PAGE 151 ---
Providence, which governs all the world, and hath so ordered us in the
administration of His great family. It is fit that God should dispense His
gifts as He pleases; and if we murmur here, we may, at the next
melancholy, be troubled that He did not make us to be angels or stars.
We ourselves make our fortunes good or bad; and when God lets loose a
Tyrant upon us, or a sickness, or scorn, or a lessened fortune, if we fear to
die, or know not how to be patient, or are proud, or covetous, then the
calamity sits heavy on us. But if we know how to manage a noble
principle, and fear not death so much as a dishonest action, and think
impatience a worse evil than a fever, and pride to be the greatest disgrace
as well as the greatest folly, and poverty far preferable to the torments of
avarice, we may still bear an even mind and smile at the reverses of
fortune and the ill-nature of Fate.
If thou hast lost thy land, do not also lose thy constancy; and if thou must
die sooner than others, or than thou didst expect, yet do not die
impatiently. For no chance is evil to him who is content, and to a man
nothing is miserable unless it be unreasonable. No man can make another
man to be his slave, unless that other hath first enslaved himself to life
and death, to pleasure or pain, to hope or fear; command these passions,
and you are freer than the Parthian Kings.
When an enemy reproaches us, let us look on him as an impartial relator
of our faults; for he will tell us truer than our fondest friend will, and we
may forgive his anger, whilst we make use of the plainness of his
declamation. The ox, when he is weary, treads truest; and if there be
nothing else in abuse, but that it makes us to walk warily, and tread sure
for fear of our enemies, that is better than to be flattered into pride and
carelessness.


--- PAGE 152 ---
If thou fallest from thy employment in public, take sanctuary in an honest
retirement, being indifferent to thy gain abroad, or thy safety at home.
When the north wind blows hard, and it rains sadly, we do not sit down in
it and cry; but defend ourselves against it with a warm garment, or a good
fire and a dry roof. So when the storm of a sad mischance beats upon our
spirits, we may turn it into something that is good, if we resolve to make
it so; and with equanimity and patience may shelter ourselves from its
inclement pitiless pelting. If it develop our patience, and give occasion for
heroic endurance, it hath done us good enough to recompense us
sufficiently for all the temporal affliction; for so a wise man shall
overrule his stars; and have a greater influence upon his own content, than
all the constellations and planets of the firmament.
Compare not thy condition with the few above thee, but to secure thy
content, look upon those thousands with whom thou wouldst not, for any
interest, change thy fortune and condition. A soldier must not think
himself unprosperous, if he be not successful as Alexander or Wellington;
nor any man deem himself unfortunate that he hath not the wealth of
Rothschild; but rather let the former rejoice that he is not lessened like
the many generals who went down horse and man before Napoleon, and the
latter that he is not the beggar who, bareheaded in the bleak winter wind
holds out his tattered hat for charity. There may be many who are richer
and more fortunate; but many thousands who are very miserable, compared
to thee.
After the worst assaults of Fortune, there will be something left to us,--a
merry countenance, a cheerful spirit, and a good conscience, the
Providence of God, our hopes of Heaven, our charity for those who have
injured us; perhaps a loving wife, and many friends to pity, and some to
relieve us; and light and air, and all the beauties of Nature; we can read,
discourse, and meditate; and having still these blessings, we should be
much in love with sorrow and peevishness to lose them all, and prefer to
sit down on our little handful of thorns.


--- PAGE 153 ---
Enjoy the blessings of this day, if God sends them, and the evils of it bear
patiently and calmly; for this day only is ours: we are dead to yesterday,
and we are not yet born to the morrow. When our fortunes are violently
changed, our spirits are unchanged, if they always stood in the suburbs
and expectation of sorrows and reverses. The blessings of immunity,
safeguard, liberty, and integrity deserve the thanksgiving of a whole life.
We are quit from a thousand calamities, every one of which, if it were
upon us, would make us insensible of our present sorrow, and glad to
receive it in exchange for that other greater affliction.
Measure your desires by your fortune and condition, not your fortunes by
your desires: be governed by your needs, not by your fancy; by nature, not
by evil customs and ambitious principles. It is no evil to be poor, but to be
vicious and impatient. Is that beast better, that hath two or three
mountains to graze on, than the little bee that feeds on dew or manna, and
lives upon what falls every morning from the store-houses of Heaven,
clouds and Providence ?
There are some instances of fortune and a fair condition that cannot stand
with some others; but if you desire this, you must lose that, and unless you
be content with one, you lose the comfort of both. If you covet learning,
you must have leisure and a retired life; if honours of State and political
distinctions, you must be ever abroad in public, and get experience, and
do all men's business, and keep all company, and have no leisure at all. If
you will be rich, you must be frugal; if you will be popular, you must be
bountiful; if a philosopher, you must despise riches. If you would be
famous as Epaminondas, accept also his poverty, for it added lustre to his
person, and envy to his fortune, and his virtue without it could not have
been so excellent. If you would have the reputation of a martyr, you must
needs accept his persecution; if of a benefactor of the world, the world's
injustice; if truly great, you must expect to see the mob prefer lesser men
to yourself.


--- PAGE 154 ---
God esteems it one of His glories, that He brings good out of evil; and
therefore it were but reason we should trust Him to govern His own world
as He pleases; and that we should patiently wait until the change cometh,
or the reason is discovered.
A Mason's contentedness must by no means be a mere contented
selfishness, like his who, comfortable himself, is indifferent to the
discomfort of others. There will always be in this world wrongs to forgive,
suffering to alleviate, sorrow asking for sympathy, necessities and
destitution to relieve, and ample occasion for the exercise of active
charity and beneficence. And he who sits unconcerned amidst it all,
perhaps enjoying his own comforts and luxuries the more, by contrasting
them with the hungry and ragged destitution and shivering misery of his
fellows, is not contented, but selfish and unfeeling.
It is the saddest of all sights upon this earth, that of a man lazy and
luxurious, or hard and penurious, to whom want appeals in vain, and
suffering cries in an unknown tongue. The man whose hasty anger hurries
him into violence and crime is not half so unworthy to live. He is the
faithless steward, that embezzles what God has given him in trust for the
impoverished and suffering among his brethren. The true Mason must be
and must have a right to be content with himself; and he can be so only
when he lives not for himself alone, but for others also, who need his
assistance and have a claim upon his sympathy.
"Charity is the great channel," it has been well said, "through which God
passes all His mercy upon mankind. For we receive absolution of our sins
in proportion to our forgiving our brother. This is the rule of our hopes
and the measure of our desire in this world; and on the day of death and
judgment, the great sentence upon mankind shall be transacted according
to our alms, which is the other part of charity. God himself is love; and
very degree of charity that dwells in us is the participation of the divine
nature."


--- PAGE 155 ---
These principles Masonry reduces to practice. By them it expects you to
be hereafter guided and governed. It especially inculcates them upon him
who employs the labour of others, forbidding him to discharge them, when
to want employment is to starve; or to contract for the labour of man or
woman at so low a price that by over-exertion they must sell him their
blood and life at the same time with the labour of their hands.
These Degrees are also intended to teach more than morals. The symbols
and ceremonies of Masonry have more than one meaning. They rather
conceal than disclose the Truth. They hint it only, at least; and their varied
meanings are only to be discovered by reflection and study. Truth is not
only symbolized by Light, but as the ray of light is separable into rays of
different colours, so is truth separable into kinds. It is the province of
Masonry to teach all truths--not moral truth alone, but political and
philosophical, and even religious truth, so far as concerns the great and
essential principles of each. The sphynx was a symbol. To whom has it
disclosed its inmost meaning? Who knows the symbolic meaning of the
pyramids?
You will hereafter learn who are the chief foes of human liberty
symbolized by the assassins of the Master Khurum; and in their fate you
may see foreshadowed that which we earnestly hope will hereafter
overtake those enemies of humanity, against whom Masonry has struggled
so long.


--- PAGE 156 ---
IX. ELECT OF THE NINE.
[Elu of the Nine.]
ORIGINALLY created to reward fidelity, obedience, and devotion, this
Degree was consecrated to bravery, devotedness, and patriotism; and your
obligation has made known to you the duties which you have assumed.
They are summed up in the simple mandate, "Protect the oppressed against
the oppressor; and devote yourself to the honour and interests of your
Country."
Masonry is not "speculative," nor theoretical, but experimental; not
sentimental, but practical. It requires self-renunciation and self-control. It
wears a stern face toward men's vices, and interferes with many of our
pursuits and our fancied pleasures. It penetrates beyond the region of
vague sentiment; beyond the regions where moralizers and philosophers
have woven their fine theories and elaborated their beautiful maxims, to
the very depths of the heart, rebuking our littlenesses and meannesses,
arraigning our prejudices and passions, and warring against the armies of
our vices.
It wars against the passions that spring out of the bosom of a world of fine
sentiments, a world of admirable sayings and foul practices, of good
maxims and bad deeds; whose darker passions are not only restrained by
custom and ceremony, but hidden even from itself by a veil of beautiful
sentiments. This terrible solecism has existed in all ages. Romish
sentimentalism has often covered infidelity and vice; Protestant
straightness often lauds spirituality and faith, and neglects homely truth,
candor, and generosity; and ultra-liberal Rationalistic refinement
sometimes soars to heaven in its dreams, and wallows in the mire of earth
in its deeds.


--- PAGE 157 ---
There may be a world of Masonic sentiment; and yet a world of little or no
Masonry. In many minds there is a vague and general sentiment of
Masonic charity, generosity, and disinterestedness, but no practical, active
virtue, nor habitual kindness, self sacrifice, or liberality. Masonry plays
about them like the cold though brilliant lights that flush and eddy over
Northern skies. There are occasional flashes of generous and manly
feeling, transitory splendours, and momentary gleams of just and noble
thought, and transient coruscations, that light the Heaven of their
imagination; but there is no vital warmth in the heart; and it remains as
cold and sterile as the Arctic or Antarctic regions. They do nothing; they
gain no victories over themselves; they make no progress; they are still in
the Northeast corner of the Lodge, as when they first stood there as
Apprentices; and they do not cultivate Masonry, with a cultivation,
determined, resolute, and regular, like their cultivation of their estate,
profession, or knowledge. Their Masonry takes its chance in general and
inefficient sentiment, mournfully barren of results; in words and formulas
and fine professions.
Most men have sentiments, but not principles. The former are temporary
sensations, the latter permanent and controlling impressions of goodness
and virtue. The former are general and involuntary, and do not rise to the
character of virtue. Every one feels them. They flash up spontaneously in
every heart. The latter are rules of action, and shape and control our
conduct; and it is these that Masonry insists upon.
We approve the right; but pursue the wrong. It is the old story of human
deficiency. No one abets or praises injustice, fraud, oppression,
covetousness, revenge, envy or slander; and yet how many who condemn
these things, are themselves guilty of them. It is no rare thing for him
whose indignation is kindled at a tale of wicked injustice, cruel
oppression base slander, or misery inflicted by unbridled indulgence;
whose anger flames in behalf of the injured and ruined victims of wrong;
to be in some relation unjust, or oppressive, or envious, or self-indulgent,


--- PAGE 158 ---
or a careless talker of others. How wonderfully indignant the penurious
man often is, at the avarice or want of public spirit of another!
A great Preacher well said, "Therefore thou art inexcusable. O Man,
whosoever thou art, that judgest; for wherein thou judgest another, thou
condemnest thyself: for thou that judgest, doest the same things." It is
amazing to see how men can talk of virtue and honour, whose life denies
both. It is curious to see with what a marvellous facility many bad men
quote Scripture. It seems to comfort their evil consciences, to use good
words; and to gloze over bad deeds with holy texts, wrested to their
purpose. Often, the more a man talks about Charity and Toleration, the
less he has of either; the more he talks about Virtue, the smaller stock he
has of it. The mouth speaks out of the abundance of the heart; but often
the very reverse of what the man practises. And the vicious and sensual
often express, and in a sense feel, strong disgust at vice and sensuality.
Hypocrisy is not so common as is imagined.
Here, in the Lodge, virtue and vice are matters of reflection and feeling
only. There is little opportunity here, for the practice of either; and
Masons yield to the argument here, with facility and readiness; because
nothing is to follow. It is easy, and safe, here, too feel upon these matters.
But to-morrow, when they breathe the atmosphere of worldly gains and
competitions, and the passions are again stirred at the opportunities of
unlawful pleasure, all their fine emotions about virtue, all their generous
abhorrence of selfishness and sensuality, melt away like a morning cloud.
For the time, their emotions and sentiments are sincere and real. Men may
be really, in a certain way, interested in Masonry, while fatally deficient in
virtue. It is not always hypocrisy. Men pray most fervently and sincerely,
and yet are constantly guilty of acts so bad and base, so ungenerous and
unrighteous, that the crimes that crowd the dockets of our courts are
scarcely worse.


--- PAGE 159 ---
A man may be a good sort of man in general, and yet a very bad man in
particular: good in the Lodge and bad in the world; good in public, and
bad in his family; good at home, and bad on a journey or in a strange city.
Many a man earnestly desires to be a good Mason. He says so, and is
sincere. But if you require him to resist a certain passion, to sacrifice a
certain indulgence, to control his appetite at a particular feast, or to keep
his temper in a dispute, you will find that he does not wish to be a good
Mason, in that particular case; or, wishing, is not able to resist his worst
impulses. 
The duties of life are more than life. The law imposeth it upon every
citizen, that he prefer the urgent service of his country before the safety of
his life. If a man be commanded, saith a great writer, to bring ordnance or
munition to relieve any of the King's towns that are distressed, then he
cannot for any danger of tempest justify the throwing of them overboard;
for there it holdeth which was spoken by the Roman, when the same
necessity of weather was alleged to hold him from embarking: "Necesse
est ut eam, non ut vivam :" it needs that I go: it is not necessary I should
live.
How ungratefully he slinks away, who dies, and does nothing to reflect a
glory to Heaven ! How barren a tree he is, who lives, and spreads, and
cumbers the ground, yet leaves not one seed, not one good work to
generate another after him ! All cannot leave alike; yet all may leave
something, answering their proportions and their kinds. Those are dead
and withered grains of corn, out of which there will not one ear spring. He
will hardly find the way to Heaven, who desires to go thither alone.
Industry is never wholly unfruitful. If it bring not joy with the incoming
profit, it will yet banish mischief from thy busied gates. There is a kind of
good angel waiting upon Diligence that ever carries a laurel in his hand to


--- PAGE 160 ---
crown her. How unworthy was that man of the world who never did aught,
but only lived and died! That we have liberty to do anything, we should
account it a gift from the favouring Heavens; that we have minds
sometimes inclining us to use that liberty well, is a great bounty of the
Deity.
Masonry is action, and not inertness. It requires its Initiates to WORK,
actively and earnestly, for the benefit of their brethren, their country, and
mankind. It is the patron of the oppressed, as it is the comforter and
consoler of the unfortunate and wretched. It seems to it a worthier honour
to be the instrument of advancement and reform, than to enjoy all that
rank and office and lofty titles can bestow. It is the advocate of the
common people in those things which concern the best interests of
mankind. It hates insolent power and impudent usurpation. It pities the
poor, the sorrowing, the disconsolate; it endeavours to raise and improve
the ignorant, the sunken, and the degraded.
Its fidelity to its mission will be accurately evidenced, by the extent of the
efforts it employs, and the means it sets on foot, to improve the people at
large and to better their condition; chiefest of which, within its reach, is
to aid in the education of the children of the poor. An intelligent people,
informed of its rights, will soon come to know its power, and cannot long
be oppressed; but if there be not a sound and virtuous populace, the
elaborate ornaments at the top of the pyramid of society will be a
wretched compensation for the want of solidity at the base. It is never safe
for a nation to repose on the lap of ignorance: and if there ever was a time
when public tranquillity was insured by the absence of knowledge, that
season is past. Unthinking stupidity cannot sleep, without being appalled
by phantoms and shaken by terrors. The improvement of the mass of the
people is the grand security for popular liberty; in the neglect of which,
the politeness, refinement, and knowledge accumulated in the higher
orders and wealthier classes will some day perish like dry grass in the hot
fire of popular fury.


--- PAGE 161 ---
It is not the mission of Masonry to engage in plots and conspiracies
against the civil government. It is not the fanatical propagandist of any
creed or theory; nor does it proclaim itself the enemy of kings. It is the
apostle of liberty, equality, and fraternity; but it is no more the high-priest
of republicanism than of constitutional monarchy. It contracts no
entangling alliances with any sect of theorists, dreamers, or philosophers.
It does not know those as its Initiates who assail the civil order and all
lawful authority, at the same time that they propose to deprive the dying of
the consolations of religion. It sits apart from all sects and creeds, in its
own calm and simple dignity, the same under every government. It is still
that which it was in the cradle of the human race, when no human foot had
trodden the soil of Assyria and Egypt, and no colonies had crossed the
Himalayas into Southern India, Media, or Etruria.
It gives no countenance to anarchy and licentiousness; and no illusion of
glory, or extravagant emulation of the ancients inflames it with an
unnatural thirst for ideal and Utopian liberty. It teaches that in rectitude of
life and sobriety of habits is the only sure guarantee for the continuance of
political freedom, and it is chiefly the soldier of the sanctity of the laws
and the rights of conscience.
It recognizes it as a truth, that necessity, as well as abstract right and ideal
justice, must have its part in the making of laws, the administration of
affairs, and the regulation of relations in society. It sees, indeed, that
necessity rules in all the affairs of man. It knows that where any man, or
any number or race of men, are so imbecile of intellect, so degraded, so
incapable of self control, so inferior in the scale of humanity, as to be
unfit to be intrusted with the highest prerogatives of citizenship, the great
law of necessity, for the peace and safety of the community and country,
requires them to remain under the control of those of larger intellect and
superior wisdom. It trusts and believes that God will, in his own good
time, work out his own great and wise purposes; and it is willing to wait,
where it does not see its own way clear to some certain good.


--- PAGE 162 ---
It hopes and longs for the day when all the races of men, even the lowest,
will be elevated, and become fitted for political freedom; when, like all
other evils that afflict the earth, pauperism, and bondage or abject
dependence, shall cease and disappear. But it does not preach revolution
to those who are fond of kings, nor rebellion that can end only in disaster
and defeat, or in substituting one tyrant for another, or a multitude of
despots for one.
Wherever a people is fit to be free and to govern itself, and generously
strives to be so, there go all its sympathies. It detests the tyrant, the
lawless oppressor, the military usurper, and him who abuses a lawful
power. It frowns upon cruelty, and a wanton disregard of the rights of
humanity. It abhors the selfish employer, and exerts its influence to
lighten the burdens which want and dependence impose upon the
workman, and to foster that humanity and kindness which man owes to
even the poorest and most unfortunate brother.
It can never be employed, in any country under Heaven, to teach a
toleration for cruelty, to weaken moral hatred for guilt, or to deprave and
brutalize the human mind. The dread of punishment will never make a
Mason an accomplice in so corrupting his countrymen, and a teacher of
depravity and barbarity. If anywhere, as has heretofore happened, a tyrant
should send a satirist on his tyranny to be convicted and punished as a
libeller, in a court of justice, a Mason, if a juror in such a case, though in
sight of the scaffold streaming with the blood of the innocent, and within
hearing of the clash of the bayonets meant to overawe the court, would
rescue the intrepid satirist from the tyrant's fangs, and send his officers
out from the court with defeat and disgrace.
Even if all law and liberty were trampled under the feet of Jacobinical
demagogues or a military banditti, and great crimes were perpetrated with
a high hand against all who were deservedly the objects of public
veneration; if the people, overthrowing law, roared like a sea around the
courts of justice, and demanded the blood of those who, during the


--- PAGE 163 ---
temporary fit of insanity and drunken delirium, had chanced to become
odious to it, for true words manfully spoken, or unpopular acts bravely
done, the Masonic juror, unawed alike by the single or the many-headed
tyrant, would consult the dictates of duty alone, and stand with a noble
firmness between the human tigers and their coveted prey.
The Mason would much rather pass his life hidden in the recesses of the
deepest obscurity, feeding his mind even with the visions and imaginations
of good deeds and noble actions, than to be placed on the most splendid
throne of the universe, tantalized with a denial of the practice of all which
can make the greatest situation any other than the greatest curse. And if he
has been enabled to lend the slightest step to any great and laudable
designs; if he has had any share in any measure giving quiet to private
property and to private conscience, making lighter the yoke of poverty and
dependence, or relieving deserving men from oppression; if he has aided
in securing to his countrymen that best possession, peace; if he has joined
in reconciling the different sections of his own country to each other, and
the people to the government of their own creating; and in teaching the
citizen to look for his protection to the laws of his country, and for his
comfort to the good-will of his countrymen; if he has thus taken his part
with the best of men in the best of their actions, he may well shut the
book, even if he might wish to read a page or two more. It is enough for
his measure. He has not lived in vain.
Masonry teaches that all power is delegated for the good, and not for the
injury of the People; and that, when it is perverted from the original
purpose, the compact is broken, and the right ought to be resumed; that
resistance to power usurped is not merely a duty which man owes to
himself and to his neighbour, but a duty which he owes to his God, in
asserting and maintaining the rank which He gave him in the creation.
This principle neither the rudeness of ignorance can stifle nor the
enervation of refinement extinguish. It makes it base for a man to suffer
when he ought to act; and, tending to preserve to him the original
destinations of Providence, spurns at the arrogant assumptions of tyrants
and vindicates the independent quality of the race of which we are a part.


--- PAGE 164 ---
The wise and well-informed Mason will not fail to be the votary of Liberty
and Justice. He will be ready to exert himself in their defence, wherever
they exist. It cannot be a matter of indifference to him when, his own
liberty and that of other men, with whose merits and capacities he is
acquainted, are involved in the event of the struggle to be made; but his
attachment will be to the cause, as the cause of man; and not merely to the
country. Wherever there is a people that understands the value of political
justice, and is prepared to assert it, that is his country; wherever he can
most contribute to the diffusion of these principles and the real happiness
of mankind, that is his country. Nor does he desire for any country any
other benefit than justice.
The true Mason identifies the honour of his country with his own. Nothing
more conduces to the beauty and glory of one's country than the
preservation against all enemies of its civil and religious liberty. The
world will never willingly let die the names of those patriots who in her
different ages have received upon their own breasts the blows aimed by
insolent enemies at the bosom of their country.
But also it conduces, and in no small measure, to the beauty and glory of
one's country, that justice should always be administered there to all alike,
and neither denied, sold, nor delayed to any one; that the interest of the
poor should be looked to, and none starve or be houseless, or clamor in
vain for work; that the child and the feeble woman should not be
overworked, or even the apprentice or slave be stinted of food or
overtasked or mercilessly scourged; and that God's great laws of mercy,
humanity, and compassion should be everywhere enforced, not only by the
statutes, but also by the power of public opinion. And he who labours,
often against reproach and obloquy, and oftener against indifference and
apathy, to bring about that fortunate condition of things when that great
code of divine law shall be everywhere and punctually obeyed, is no less a


--- PAGE 165 ---
patriot than he who bares his bosom to the hostile steel in the ranks of his
country's soldiery.
For fortitude is not only seen resplendent on the field of battle and amid
the clash of arms, but he displays its energy under every difficulty and
against every assailant. He who wars against cruelty, oppression, and
hoary abuses, fights for his country's honour, which these things soil; and
her honour is as important as her existence. Often, indeed, the warfare
against those abuses which disgrace one's country is quite as hazardous
and more discouraging than that against her enemies in the field; and
merits equal, if not greater reward.
For those Greeks and Romans who are the objects of our admiration
employed hardly any other virtue in the extirpation of tyrants, than that
love of liberty, which made them prompt in seizing the sword, and gave
them strength to use it. With facility they accomplish the undertaking,
amid the general shout of praise and joy; nor did they engage in the
attempt so much as an enterprise of perilous and doubtful issue, as a
contest the most glorious in which virtue could be signalized; which
infallibly led to present recompense; which bound their brows with
wreaths of laurel, and consigned their memories to immortal fame.
But he who assails hoary abuses, regarded perhaps with a superstitious
reverence, and around which old laws stand as ramparts and bastions to
defend them; who denounces acts of cruelty and outrage on humanity
which make every perpetrator thereof his personal enemy, and perhaps
make him looked upon with suspicion by the people among whom he lives,
as the assailant of an established order of things of which he assails only
the abuses, and of laws of which he attacks only the violations,--he can
scarcely look for present recompense, nor that his living brows will be
wreathed with laurel. And if, contending against a dark array of long-
received opinions, superstitions, obloquy, and fears, which most men
dread more than they do an army terrible with banners, the Mason
overcomes, and emerges from the contest victorious; or if he does not


--- PAGE 166 ---
conquer, but is borne down and swept away by the mighty current of
prejudice, passion, and interest; in either case, the loftiness of spirit
which he displays merits for him more than a mediocrity of fame.
e has already lived too long who has survived the ruin of his country; and
he who can enjoy life after such an event deserves not to have lived at all.
Nor does he any more deserve to live who looks contentedly upon abuses
that disgrace, and cruelties that dishonour, and scenes of misery and
destitution and brutalization that disfigure his country; or sordid meanness
and ignoble revenges that make her a by-word and a scoff among all
generous nations; and does not endeavour to remedy or prevent either.
Not often is a country at war; nor can every one be allowed the privilege
of offering his heart to the enemy's bullets. But in these patriotic labours
of peace, in preventing, remedying, and reforming evils, oppressions,
wrongs, cruelties, and outrages, every Mason can unite; and every one can
effect something, and share the honour and glory of the result.
For the cardinal names in the history of the human mind are few and easily
to be counted up; but thousands and tens of thousands spend their days in
the preparations which are to speed the predestined change, in gathering
and amassing the materials which are to kindle and give light and warmth,
when the fire from heaven shall have descended on them. Numberless are
the sutlers and pioneers, the engineers and artisans, who attend the march
of intellect. Many move forward in detachments, and level the way over
which the chariot is to pass, and cut down the obstacles that would impede
its progress; and these too have their reward. If they labour diligently and
faithfully in their calling, not only will they enjoy that calm contentment
which diligence in the lowliest task never fails to win; not only will the
sweat of their brows be sweet, and the sweetener of the rest that follows;
but, when the victory is at last achieved, they will come in for a share in
the glory; even as the meanest soldier who fought at Marathon or at King's
Mountain became a sharer in the glory of those saving days; and within his
own household circle, the approbation of which approaches the nearest to
that of an approving conscience, was looked upon as the representative of
all his brother-heroes; and could tell such tales as made the tear glisten on


--- PAGE 167 ---
the cheek of his wife, and ]it up his boy'.s eyes with an unwonted
sparkling eagerness. Or, if he fell in the fight, and his place by the fireside
and at the table at home was thereafter vacant, that place was sacred; and
he was often talked of there in the long winter evenings; and his family
was deemed fortunate in the neighbourhood, because it had had a hero in
it, who had fallen in defence of his country.
Remember that life's length is not measured by its hours and days but by
that which we have done therein for our country and kind. A useless life is
short. if it last a century; but that of Alexander was long as the life of the
oak, though he died at thirty-five. We may do much in a few years, and we
may nothing in a lifetime. If we but eat and drink and sleep, and
everything go on around us as it pleases; or if we live but amass wealth or
gain office or wear titles, we might as well not have lived at all; nor have
we any right to expect immortality.
Forget not, therefore, to what you have devoted yourself in this Degree:
defend weakness against strength, the friendless against the great, the
oppressed against the oppressor ! Be ever vigilant and watchful of the
interests and honour of your country! and may the Grand Architect of the
Universe give you that strength and wisdom which shall enable you well
and faithfully to perform these high duties!
 MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
10º - Elu of the Fifteen, 11º - Elu of the Twelve, 12º - Master Architect


--- PAGE 168 ---
13º - Royal Arch of Solomon, 14º - Perfect Elu
X. ILLUSTRIOUS ELECT OF THE FIFTEEN.
[Elu of the Fifteen ]
THIS Degree is devoted to the same objects as those of the Elu of Nine;
and also to the cause of Toleration and Liberality against Fanaticism and
Persecution, political and religious; and to that of Education, Instruction,
and Enlightenment against Error, Barbarism, and Ignorance. To these
objects you have irrevocably and forever devoted your hand, your heart,
and your intellect; and whenever in your presence a Chapter of this
Degree is opened, you will be most solemnly reminded of your vows here
taken at the altar.
Toleration, holding that every other man has the same right to his opinion
and faith that we have to ours; and liberality, holding that as no human
being can with certainty say, in the clash and conflict of hostile faiths and
creeds, what is truth, or that he is surely in possession of it, so every one
should feel that it is quite possible that another equally honest and sincere


--- PAGE 169 ---
with himself, and yet holding the contrary opinion, may himself be in
possession of the truth, and that whatever one firmly and conscientiously
believes, is truth, to him - these are the mortal enemies of that fanaticism
which persecutes for opinion's sake, and initiates crusades against
whatever it, in its imaginary holiness, deems to be contrary to the law of
God or verity of dogma. And education, instruction, and enlightenment are
the most certain means by which fanaticism and intolerance can be
rendered powerless.
No true Mason scoffs at honest convictions and an ardent zeal in the
cause of what one believes to be truth and justice. But he
does absolutely deny the right of any man to assume the prerogative of
Deity, and condemn another's faith and opinions as deserving to be
punished because heretical. Nor does he approve the course of those who
endanger the peace and quiet of great nations, and the best interest of
their own race by indulging in a chimerical and visionary philanthropy - a
luxury which chiefly consists in drawing their robes around them to avoid
contact with their fellows, and proclaiming themselves holier than they.


--- PAGE 170 ---
For he knows that such follies are often more calamitous than the ambition
of kings; and that intolerance and bigotry have been infinitely greater
curses to mankind than ignorance and error. Better any error than
persecution! Better any opinion than the thumb-screw, the rack, and the
stake! And he knows also how unspeakably absurd it is, for a creature to
whom himself and everything around him are mysteries, to torture and
slay others, because they cannot think as he does in regard to the
profoundest of those mysteries, to understand which is utterly beyond the
comprehension of either the persecutor or the persecuted.
Masonry is not a religion. He who makes of it a religious belief, falsifies
and denaturalizes it. The Brahmin, the Jew, the Mahometan, the Catholic,
the Protestant, each professing his peculiar religion, sanctioned by the
laws, by time, and by climate, must needs retain it, and cannot have two
religions; for the social and sacred laws adapted to the usages, manners,
and prejudices of particular countries, are the work of men.
But Masonry teaches, and has preserved in their purity, the cardinal tenets
of the old primitive faith, which underlie and are the foundation of all


--- PAGE 171 ---
religions. All that ever existed have had a basis of truth; and all have
overlaid that truth with errors. The primitive truths taught by the
Redeemer
were sooner corrupted, and intermingled and alloyed with fictions than
when taught to the first of our race. Masonry is the universal morality
which is suitable to the inhabitants of every clime, to the man of every
creed. It has taught no doctrines, except those truths that tend directly to
the well-being of man; and those who have attempted to direct it toward
useless vengeance, political ends, and Jesuitism, have merely perverted it
to purposes foreign to its pure spirit and real nature.
Mankind outgrows the sacrifices and the mythologies of the childhood of
the world. Yet it is easy for human indolence to
linger near these helps, and refuse to pass further on. So the
unadventurous Nomad in the Tartarian wild keeps his flock in the same
close-cropped circle where they first learned to browse, while the
progressive man roves ever forth "to fresh fields and pastures new."
The latter is the true Mason; and the best and indeed the only good


--- PAGE 172 ---
Mason is he who with the power of business does the work of life; the
upright mechanic, merchant, or farmer, the man with the power of thought,
of justice, or of love, he whose whole life is one great act of performance
of Masonic duty. The natural case of the strength of a strong man or the
wisdom of a wise one, is to do the work of a strong man or a wise one.
The natural work of Masonry is practical life; the use of all the faculties
in
their proper spheres, and for their natural function. Love of Truth, justice,
and generosity as attributes of God, must appear in a life marked by these
qualities; that is the only effectual ordinance of Masonry. A profession of
one's convictions, joining the Order, assuming the obligations, assisting at
the ceremonies, are of the same value in science as in Masonry; the
natural form of Masonry is goodness, morality, living a true, just,
affectionate, self-faithful life, from the motive of a good man. It is loyal
obedience to God's law.
The good Mason does the good thing which comes in his way, and
because it comes in his way; from a love of duty, and not merely because


--- PAGE 173 ---
a law, enacted by man or God, commands his will to do it. He is true to his
mind, his conscience, heart, and soul, and feels small temptation to do to
others what he would not wish to receive from them. He will deny himself
for the sake of his brother near at hand. His desire attracts in the line of
his duty, both being in conjunction. Not in vain does the poor or the
oppressed look up to him. You find such men in all Christian sects,
Protestant and Catholic, in all the great religious parties of the civilized
world, among Buddhists, Mahometans, and Jews. They are kind fathers,
generous citizens, unimpeachable in their business, beautiful in their daily
lives. You see their Masonry in their work and in their play. It appears in
all
the forms of their activity, individual, domestic, social, ecclesiastical, or
political. True Masonry within must be morality without. It must become
eminent morality, which is philanthropy. The true Mason loves not only
his
kindred and his country, but all mankind; not only
the good, but also the evil, among his brethren. He has more goodness
than the channels of his daily life will hold. It runs over the banks, to
water


--- PAGE 174 ---
and to feed a thousand thirsty plants. Not content with the duty that lies
along his track, he goes out to seek it; not only willing, he has a salient
longing to do good, to spread his truth, his justice, his generosity, his
Masonry over all the world. His daily life is a profession of his Masonry,
published in perpetual good-will to men. He can not be a persecutor.
Not more naturally does the beaver build or the mocking-bird sing his own
wild, gushing melody, than the true Mason lives in this beautiful outward
life. So from the perennial spring swells forth the stream, to quicken the
meadow with new access of green, and perfect beauty bursting into
bloom. Thus Masonry does the work it was meant to do. The Mason does
not sigh and weep, and make grimaces. He lives right on. If his life is, as
whose is not, marked with errors, and with sins, he ploughs over the
barren spot with his remorse, sows with new seed, and the old desert
blossoms like a rose. He is not confined to set forms of thought, of action,
or of feeling. He accepts what his mind regards as true, what his
conscience decides is right, what his heart deems generous and noble;
and all else he puts far from him. Though the ancient and the honorable of


--- PAGE 175 ---
the Earth bid him bow down to them, his stubborn knees bend only at the
bidding of his manly soul. His Masonry is his freedom before God, not his
bondage unto men. His mind acts after the universal law of the intellect,
his conscience according to the universal moral law, his affections and his
soul after the universal law of each, and so he is strong with the strength
of God, in this four-fold way communicating with Him.
The old theologies, the philosophies of religion of ancient times, will not
suffice us now. The duties of life are to be done; we are to do them,
consciously obedient to the law of God, not atheistically, loving only our
selfish gain. There are sins of trade to be corrected. Everywhere morality
and philanthropy are needed. There are errors to be made way with, and
their place supplied with new truths, radiant with the glories of Heaven.
There are great wrongs and evils, in Church and State, in domestic,
social, and public life, to be righted and outgrown. Masonry cannot in our
age forsake the broad way of life. She must journey on in the open street,
appear in the crowded square, and teach men by her deeds, her life more
eloquent than any lips.


--- PAGE 176 ---
This Degree is chiefly devoted to TOLERATION; and it inculcates in the
strongest manner that great leading idea of the Ancient Art, that a belief in
the one True God, and a moral and virtuous life, constitute the only
religious requisites needed to enable a man to be a Mason.
Masonry has ever the most vivid remembrance of the terrible and artificial
torments that were used to put down new forms of religion or extinguish
the old. It sees with the eye of memory the ruthless extermination of all
the
people of all sexes and ages, because it was their misfortune not to know
the God of the Hebrews, or to worship Him under the wrong name, by the
savage troops of Moses and Joshua. It sees the thumb-screws and the
racks, the whip, the gallows, and the stake, the victims of Diocletian and
Alva, the miserable Covenanters, the Non-Conformists, Servetus burned,
and the unoffending Quaker hung. It sees Cranmer hold his arm, now no
longer erring, in the flame until the hand drops off in the consuming heat.
It
sees the persecutions of Peter and Paul, the martyrdom of Stephen, the
trials of Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin, and Irenæus; and then in turn the


--- PAGE 177 ---
sufferings of the wretched Pagans under the Christian Emperors, as of the
Papists in Ireland and under Elizabeth and the bloated Henry. The Roman
Virgin naked before the hungry lions; young Margaret Graham tied to a
stake at low-water mark, and there left to drown, singing hymns to God
until the savage waters broke over her head; and all that in all ages have
suffered by hunger and nakedness, peril and prison, the rack, the stake,
and the sword, - it sees them all, and shudders at the long roll of human
atrocities. And it sees also the oppression still practised in the name of
religion - men shot in a Christian jail in Christian Italy for reading the
Christian Bible; in almost every Christian State, laws forbidding freedom
of
speech on matters relating to Christianity; and the gallows reaching its
arm over the pulpit.
The fires of Moloch in Syria, the harsh mutilations in the name of Astarte,
Cybele, Jehovah; the barbarities of imperial Pagan Torturers; the still
grosser torments which Roman-Gothic Christians in Italy and Spain
heaped on their brother-men; the fiendish cruelties to which Switzerland,


--- PAGE 178 ---
France, the Netherlands, England, Scotland, Ireland, America, have been
witnesses, are none too powerful to warn man of the unspeakable evils
which follow from mistakes and errors in the matter of religion, and
especially from
investing the God of Love with the cruel and vindictive passions of erring
humanity, and making blood to have a sweet savor in his nostrils, and
groans of agony to be delicious to his ears.
Man never had the right to usurp the unexercised prerogative of God, and
condemn and punish another for his belief. Born in a Protestant land, we
are of that faith. If we had opened our eyes to the light under the shadows
of St. Peter's at Rome, we should have been devout Catholics; born in the
Jewish quarter of Aleppo, we should have contemned Christ as an
imposter; in Constantinople, we should have cried "Allah il Allah, God is
great and Mahomet is his prophet!" Birth, place, and education give us our
faith. Few believe in any religion because they have examined the
evidences of its authenticity, and made up a formal judgment, upon
weighing the testimony. Not one man in ten thousand knows anything


--- PAGE 179 ---
about the proofs of his faith. We believe what we are taught; and those are
most fanatical who know least of the evidences on which their creed is
based. Facts and testimony are not, except in very rare instances, the
ground-work of faith. It is an imperative law of God's Economy,
unyielding
and inflexible as Himself, that man shall accept without question the
belief
of those among whom he is born and reared; the faith so made a part of
his nature resists all evidence to the contrary; and he will disbelieve even
the evidence of his own senses, rather than yield up the religious belief
which has grown up in him, flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone.
What is truth to me is not truth to another. The same arguments and
evidences that convince one mind make no impression on another. This
difference is in men at their birth. No man is entitled positively to assert
that he is right, where other men, equally intelligent and equally
wellinformed,
hold directly the opposite opinion. Each thinks it impossible for
the other 'to be sincere, and each, as to that, is equally in error. "What is
truth?" was a profound question, the most suggestive one ever put to man.


--- PAGE 180 ---
Many beliefs of former and present times seem incomprehensible. They
startle us with a new glimpse into the human soul, that mysterious thing
more mysterious the more we note its workings. Here is a man superior to
myself in intellect and learning; and yet he sincerely believes what seems
to me too absurd to merit confutation; and I cannot conceive, and
sincerely do not believe,that he is both sane and honest. 
And yet he is both. His reason is as perfect as mine, and he is as honest as
I.
The fancies of a lunatic are realities, to him. Our dreams are realities
while
they last; and, in the Past, no more unreal than what we have acted in our
waking hours. No man can say that he hath as sure possession of the
truth as of a chattel. When men entertain opinions diametrically opposed
to each other, and each is honest, who shall decide which hath the Truth;
and how can either say with certainty that he hath it? We know not what is
the truth. That we ourselves believe and feel absolutely certain that our
own belief is true, is in reality not the slightest proof of the fact, seem it
never so certain and incapable of doubt to us. No man is responsible for


--- PAGE 181 ---
the rightness of his faith; but only for the uprightness of it.
Therefore no man hath or ever had a right to persecute another for his
belief; for there cannot be two antagonistic rights; and if one can
persecute another, because he himself is satisfied that the belief of that
other is erroneous, the other has, for the same reason, equally as certain
a right to persecute him.
The truth comes to us tinged and colored with our prejudices and our
preconceptions, which are as old as ourselves, and strong with a divine
force. It comes to us as the image of a rod comes to us through the water,
bent and distorted. An argument sinks into and convinces the mind of one
man, while from that of another it rebounds like a ball of ivory dropped on
marble. It is no merit in a man to have a particular faith, excellent and
sound and philosophic as it may be, when he imbibed it with his mother's
milk. It is no more a merit than his prejudices and his passions.
The sincere Moslem has as much right to persecute us, as we to
persecute him; and therefore Masonry wisely requires no more than a
belief in One Great All-Powerful Deity, the Father and Preserver of the


--- PAGE 182 ---
Universe. Therefore it is she teaches her votaries that toleration is one of
the chief duties of every good Mason, a component part of that charity
without which we are mere hollow images of true Masons, mere sounding
brass and tinkling cymbals.
No evil hath so afflicted the world as intolerance of religious opinion. The
human beings it has slain in various ways, if once and together brought to
life, would make a nation of people; left to live and increase, would have
doubled the population of the civilized portion of the globe; among which
civilized portion it chiefly is that religious wars are waged. 
The treasure and the human labor
thus lost would have made the earth a garden, in which, but for his evil
passions, man might now be as happy as in Eden.
No man truly obeys the Masonic law who merely tolerates those whose
religious opinions are opposed to his own. Every man's opinions are his
own private property, and the rights of all men to maintain each his own
are perfectly equal. Merely to tolerate, to bear with an opposing opinion,
is


--- PAGE 183 ---
to assume it to be heretical; and assert the right to persecute, if we would;
and claim our toleration of it as a merit. The Mason's creed goes further
than that. No man, it holds, has any right in any way to, interfere with the
religious belief of another. It holds that each mat] is absolutely sovereign
as to his own belief, and that belief is a matter absolutely foreign to all
who
do not entertain the same belief; and that, if there were any right of
persecution at all, it would in all cases be a mutual right; because one
party has the same right as the other to sit as judge in his own case; and
God is the only magistrate that can rightfully decide between them. To
1hat great judge, Masonry refers the matter; and opening wide its portals,
it invites to enter there and live in peace and harmony, the Protestant, the
Catholic, the Jew, the Moslem; every man who will lead a truly virtuous
and moral life, love his brethren, sinister to the sick and distressed, and
believe in the ONE, All Powerful, All-Wise, everywhere - Present GOD,
Architect, Creator, and Preserver of all things, by whose universal law of
Harmony ever rolls on this universe, the great, vast, infinite circle of


--- PAGE 184 ---
successive Death and Life:- to whose INEFFABLE NAME let all true
Masons pay profoundest homage! for whose thousand blessings poured
upon us, let us feel the sincerest gratitude, now, henceforth, and forever!
We may well be tolerant of each other's creed; for in every faith there are
excellent moral precepts. Far in the South of Asia, Zoroaster taught this
doctrine: "On commencing a journey, the Faithful should turn his thoughts
toward Ormuzd, and confess him, in the purity of his heart, to be King of
the World; he should love him, do him homage, and serve him. He must
be upright and charitable, despise the pleasures of the body, and avoid
pride and haughtiness, and vice in all its forms, and especially 'falsehood,
one of the basest sins of which man can be guilty. He must forget injuries 
and not avenge himself. He must honor the memory of
his parents and relatives. At night, before retiring to sleep, he should
rigorously examine his conscience, and repent of the faults which
weakness or ill-fortune had caused him to commit." He was required to
pray for strength to persevere in the Good, and to obtain forgiveness for
his errors. It was his duty to confess his faults to a Magus, or to a layman


--- PAGE 185 ---
renowned for his virtues, or to the Sun. Fasting and maceration were
prohibited; and, on the contrary, it was his duty suitably to nourish the
body and to maintain its vigor, that his soul might be strong to resist the
Genius of Darkness; that he might more attentively read the Divine Word,
and have more courage to perform noble deeds.
And in the North of Europe the Druids taught devotion to friends,
indulgence for reciprocal wrongs, love of deserved praise, prudence,
humanity, hospitality, respect for old age, disregard of the future,
temperance, contempt of death, and a chivalrous deference to woman.
Listen to these maxims from the Hava Maal, or Sublime Book of Odin:
"If thou hast a friend, visit him often; the path will grow over with grass,
and the trees soon cover it, if thou dost not constantly walk upon it. He is
a
faithful friend, who, having but two loaves, gives his friend one. Be never
first to break with thy friend; sorrow wrings the heart of him who has no
one save himself with whom to take counsel. There is no virtuous man
who has not some vice, no bad man who has not some virtue. Happy he


--- PAGE 186 ---
who obtains the praise and good-will of men; for all that depends on the
will of another is hazardous and uncertain. Riches flit away in the
twinkling
of an eye; they are the most inconstant of friends; flocks and herds perish,
parents die, friends are not immortal, thou thyself diest; I know but one
thing that doth not die, the judgment that is passed upon the dead. Be
humane toward those whom thou meetest on the road. If the guest that
cometh to thy house is a - cold, give him fire; the man who has journeyed
over the mountains needs food and dry garments. Mock not at the aged;
for words full of sense come often from the wrinkles of age. Be
moderately
wise, and not over-prudent. Let no one seek to know his destiny, if he
would sleep tranquilly. There is no malady more cruel than to be
discontented with our lot. The glutton eats his own death; and the wise
man laughs at the fool's greediness. Nothing is more injurious to the
young than excessive drinking; 
the more one drinks the more he loses his reason; the
bird of forgetfulness sings before those who intoxicate themselves, and


--- PAGE 187 ---
wiles away their souls. Man devoid of sense believes he will live always if
he avoids war; but, if the lances spare him, old age will give him no
quarter. Better live well than live long. When a man lights a fire in his
house, death comes before it goes out."
And thus said the Indian books: "Honor thy father and mother. Never
forget the benefits thou hast received. Learn while thou art young. Be
submissive to the laws of thy country. . Seek the company of virtuous
men. Speak not of God but with respect. Live on good terms with thy
fellow-citizens. Remain in thy proper place. Speak ill of no one. Mock at
the bodily infirmities of none. Pursue not unrelentingly a conquered
enemy. Strive to acquire a good reputation. Take counsel with wise men.
The more one learns, the more he acquires the faculty of learning,
Knowledge is the most permanent wealth. As well be dumb as ignorant.
The true use of knowledge is to distinguish good from evil. Be not a
subject of shame to thy parents. What one learns in youth endures like the
engraving upon a rock. He is wise who knows himself. Let thy books be
thy best friends. When thou attainest an hundred years, cease to learn.


--- PAGE 188 ---
Wisdom is solidly planted, even on the shifting ocean. Deceive no one, not
even thine enemy. Wisdom is a treasure that everywhere commands its
value. Speak mildly, even to the poor. It is sweeter to forgive than to take
vengeance. Gaming and quarrels lead to misery. There is no true merit
without the practice of virtue. To honor our mother is the most fitting
homage we can pay the Divinity. There is no tranquil sleep without a clear
conscience. He badly understands his interest who breaks his word."
Twenty-four centuries ago these were the Chinese Ethics:
"The Philosopher [Confucius] said, 'SAN! my doctrine is simple, and easy
to be understood.' THSENG-TSEU replied, 'that is certain.' The
Philosopher having gone out, the disciples asked what their master had
meant to say. THSENG--TSEU responded, 'The doctrine of our Master
consists solely in being upright of heart, and loving our neighbor as we
love ourself."'
About a century later, the Hebrew law said, "If any man hate his neighbor
... then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to
do unto his brother . . . Better is a neighbor that is near, than a. brother


--- PAGE 189 ---
afar off ... Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."
In the same fifth century before Christ, SOCRATES the Grecian said,
"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."
Three generations earlier, ZOROASTER had said to the Persians: "Offer
up thy grateful prayers to the Lord, the most just and pure Ormuzd, the
supreme and adorable God, who thus declared to his Prophet Zerdusht:
'Hold it not meet to do unto others what thou wouldst not desire done unto
thyself; do that unto the people, which, when done to thyself, is not
disagreeable unto thee."'
The same doctrine had been long taught in the schools of Babylon,
Alexandria, and Jerusalem. A Pagan declared to the Pharisee HILLEL that
he was ready to embrace the Jewish religion, if he could make known to
him in a few words a summary of the whole law of Moses. "That which
thou likest not done to thyself," said Hillel, "do it not unto thy neighbor.
Therein is all the law: the rest is nothing but the commentary upon it."
"Nothing is more natural," said CONFUCIUS, "nothing more simple, than
the principles of that morality which I endeavor, by salutary maxims, to


--- PAGE 190 ---
inculcate in you . . . It is humanity; which is to say, that universal charity
among all of our species, without distinction. It is uprightness ; that is,
that
rectitude of spirit and of heart, which make; one seek for truth in
everything, and desire it, without deceiving one's self or others. It is,
finally, sincerity or good faith; which is to say, that frankness, that
openness of heart, tempered by self-reliance, which excludes all feints
and all disguising, as much in speech as in action."
To diffuse useful information, to further intellectual refinement, sure
forerunner of moral improvement, to hasten the coming of the great day,
when the dawn of general knowledge shalt ,chase away the lazy, lingering
mists of ignorance and error, even from the base of the great social
pyramid, is indeed a high calling, in which the most splendid talents and
consummate virtue may well press onward, eager to bear a part. From the
Masonic ranks ought to go forth those whose genius and not their
ancestry ennoble them, to open to all ranks the temple of science, and by
their own example to make the humblest men emulous to climb steps no


--- PAGE 191 ---
longer inaccessible, and enter the unfolded gates burning in the sun.
The highest intellectual cultivation is perfectly compatible with
the daily cares and toils of working-men. A keen relish for the most
sublime truths of science belongs alike to every class of Mankind. And, as
philosophy was taught in the sacred groves of Athens, and under the
Portico, and in the old Temples of Egypt and India, so in our Lodges ought
Knowledge to be dispensed, the Sciences taught, and the Lectures
become like the teachings of Socrates and Plato, of Agassiz and Cousin.
Real knowledge never permitted either turbulence or unbelief; but its
progress is the forerunner of liberality and enlightened toleration. Whoso
dreads these may well tremble; for he may be well assured that their day
is at length come, and must put to speedy flight the evil spirits of tyranny
and persecution, which haunted the long night now gone down the sky.
And it is to be hoped that the time will soon arrive, when, as men will no
longer suffer themselves to be led blindfolded in ignorance, so will they
no
more yield to the vile principle of judging and treating their
fellowcreatures,


--- PAGE 192 ---
not according to the intrinsic merit of their actions, but
according to the accidental and involuntary coincidence of their opinions.
Whenever we come to treat with entire respect those who conscientiously
differ from ourselves, the only practical effect of a difference will be, to
make us enlighten the ignorance on one side or the other, from which it
springs, by instructing them, if it be theirs; ourselves, if it be our own; to
the end that the only kind of unanimity may be produced which is
desirable among rational beings, - the agreement proceeding from full
conviction after the freest discussion.
The Elu of Fifteen ought therefore to take the lead of his fellow-citizen,
not
in frivolous amusements, not in the degrading pursuits of the ambitious
vulgar; but in the truly noble task of enlightening the mass of his
countrymen, and of leaving his own name encircled, not with barbaric
splendor, or attached to courtly gewgaws, but illustrated by the honors
most worthy of our rational nature; coupled with the diffusion of
knowledge, and gratefully pronounced by a few, at least, whom his wise


--- PAGE 193 ---
beneficence has rescued from ignorance and vice.
We say to him, in the words of the great Roman: "Men in no respect so
nearly approach to the Deity, as when they confer benefits on men. To
serve and do good to as many as possible, - there is nothing greater in
your fortune than that you should be able,
and nothing finer in your nature, than that you should be desirous to do
this." This is the true mark for the aim of every man and Mason who either
prizes the enjoyment of pure happiness, or sets a right value upon a high
and unsullied renown. And if the benefactors of mankind, when they rest
from their noble labors, shall be permitted to enjoy hereafter, as an
appropriate reward of their virtue, the privilege of looking down upon the
blessings with which their exertions and charities, and perhaps their toils
and sufferings have clothed the scene of their former existence, it will not,
in a state of exalted purity and wisdom, be the founders of mighty
dynasties, the conquerors of new empires, the Cæsars, Alexanders, and
Tamerlanes; nor the mere Kings and Counsellors, Presidents and
Senators, who have lived for their party chiefly, and for their country only


--- PAGE 194 ---
incidentally, often sacrificing to their own aggrandizement or that of their
faction the good of their fellow-creatures; - it will not be they who will be
gratified by contemplating the monuments of their inglorious fame; but
those will enjoy that delight and march in that triumph, who can trace the
remote effects of their enlightened benevolence in the improved condition
of their species, and exult in the reflection, that the change which they at
last, perhaps after many years, survey, with eyes that age and sorrow can
make dim no more, - of Knowledge become Power, - Virtue sharing that
Empire, - Superstition dethroned, and Tyranny exiled, is, if even only in
some small and very slight degree, yet still in some degree, the fruit,
precious if costly, and though late repaid yet long enduring, of their own
self-denial and strenuous exertion, of their own mite of charity and aid to
education wisely bestowed, and of the hardships and hazards which they
encountered here below.
Masonry requires of its Initiates and votaries nothing that is
impracticable.
It does not demand that they should undertake to climb to those lofty and


--- PAGE 195 ---
sublime peaks of a theoretical and imaginary unpractical virtue, high and
cold and remote as the eternal snows that wrap the shoulders of
Chimborazo, and at least as inaccessible as they. It asks that alone to be
done which is easy to be done. It overtasks no one's strength, and asks no
one to go beyond his means and capacities. It does not expect one whose
business or profession yields him little more than the wants of himself and
his family require, and whose time is necessarily occupied by his daily
vocations, to abandon or neglect the business
by which he and his children live, and devote himself and his means to the
diffusion of knowledge among men. It does not expect him to publish
books for the people, or to lecture, to the ruin of his private affairs, or to
found academies and colleges, build up libraries, and entitle himself to
statues.
But it does require and expect every man of us to do something, within
and according to his means; and there is no Mason who cannot do some
thing, if not alone, then by combination and association.
If a Lodge cannot aid in founding a school or an academy it can still do


--- PAGE 196 ---
something. It can educate one boy or girl, at least, the child of some poor
or departed brother. And it should never be forgotten, that in the poorest
unregarded child that seems abandoned to ignorance and vice may
slumber the virtues of a Socrates, the intellect of a Bacon or a Bossuet,
the genius of a Shakespeare, the capacity to benefit mankind of a
Washington; and that in rescuing him from the mire in which he is
plunged, and giving him the means of education and development, the
Lodge that does it may be the direct and immediate means of conferring
upon the world as great a boon as that given it by John Faust the boy of
Mentz; may perpetuate the liberties of a country and change the destinies
of nations, and write a new chapter in the history of the world.
For we never know the importance of the act we do. The daughter of
Pharaoh little thought what she was doing for the human race, and the
vast unimaginable consequences that depended on her charitable act,
when she drew the little child of a Hebrew woman from among the rushes
that grew along the bank of the Nile, and determined to rear it as if it were
her own.


--- PAGE 197 ---
How often has an act of charity, costing the doer little, given to the world
a
great painter, a great musician, a great inventor! How often has such an
act developed the ragged boy into the benefactor of his race! On what
small and apparently unimportant circumstances have turned and hinged,
the fates of the world's great conquerors. There is no law that limits the
returns that shall be reaped from a single good deed. The widow's mite
may not only be as acceptable to God, but may produce as great results
as the rich man's costly offering. The poorest boy, helped by benevolence,
may come to lead armies, to control senates, to decide an peace and war,
to dictate to cabinets; and his magnificent thoughts and noble words may 
be law many years hereafter to millions of men yet unborn.
But the opportunity to effect a great good does not often occur to any one.
It is worse than folly for one to lie idle and inert, and expect the accident
to
befall him, by which his influences shall live forever. He can expect that
to
happen, only in consequence of one or many or all of a long series of acts.
He can expect to benefit the world only as men attain other results; by


--- PAGE 198 ---
continuance, by persistence, by a steady and uniform habit of laboring for
the enlightenment of the world, to the extent of his means and capacity.
For it is, in all instances, by steady labor, by giving enough of application
to our work, and having enough of time for the doing of it, by regular
pains-taking, and the plying of constant assiduities, and not by any
process of legerdemain, that we secure the strength and the staple of real
excellence. It was thus that Demosthenes, clause after clause, and
sentence after sentence, elaborated to the uttermost his immortal orations.
It was thus that Newton pioneered his way, by the steps of an ascending
geometry, to the mechanism of the Heavens, and Le Verrier added a
planet to our Solar System.
It is a most erroneous opinion that those who have left the most
stupendous monuments of intellect behind them, were not differently
exercised from the rest of the species, but only differently gifted; that they
signalized themselves only by their talent, and hardly ever by their
industry; for it is in truth to the most strenuous application of those
commonplace faculties which are diffused among all, that they are


--- PAGE 199 ---
indebted for the glories which now encircle their remembrance and their
name.
We must not imagine it to be a vulgarizing of genius, that it should be
lighted up in any other way than by a direct inspiration from Heaven nor
overlook the steadfastness of purpose, the devotion to some single but
great object, the unweariedness of labor that is given, not in convulsive
and preternatural throes, but by little and little as the strength of the mind
may bear it; the accumulation of many small efforts, instead of a few
grand
and gigantic, but perhaps irregular movements, on the part of energies
that are marvellous; by which former alone the great results are brought
out that write their enduring records on the face of the earth and in the
history of nations and of man.
We must not overlook these elements, to which genius owes the best and
proudest of her achievements; nor imagine that qualities so generally
possessed as patience and pains-taking, and resolute industry, have no
share in upholding a distinction so illustrious as that of the benefactor of


--- PAGE 200 ---
his kind.
We must not forget that great results are most ordinarily produced by an
aggregate of many contributions and exertions; as it is the invisible
particles of vapor, each separate and distinct from the other, that, rising
from the oceans and their bays and gulfs, from lakes and rivers, and wide
morasses and overflowed plains, float away as clouds, and distill upon the
earth in dews, and fall in showers and rain and snows upon the broad
plains and rude mountains, and make the great navigable streams that are
the arteries along which flows the life-blood of a country.
And so Masonry can do much, if each Mason be content to do his share,
and if their united efforts are directed by wise counsels to a common
purpose. "It is for God and for Omnipotency to do mighty things in a
moment; but by degrees to grow to greatness is the course that He hath
left for man."
If Masonry will but be true to her mission, and Masons to their promises
and obligations - if, re-entering vigorously upon a career of beneficence,
she and they will but pursue it earnestly and unfalteringly, remembering


--- PAGE 201 ---
that our contributions to the cause of charity and education then deserve
the greatest credit when it costs us something, the curtailing of a comfort
or the relinquishment of a luxury, to make them - if we will but give aid to
what were once Masonry's great schemes for human improvement, not
fitfully and spasmodically, but regularly and incessantly, as the vapors rise
and the springs run, and as the sun rises and the stars come up into the
heavens, then we may be sure that great results will be attained and a
great work done. And then it will most surely be seen that Masonry is not
effete or impotent, nor degenerated nor drooping to a fatal decay.
 
 
XI. SUBLIME ELECT OF THE TWELVE
OR
PRINCE AMETH.


--- PAGE 202 ---
[Elu of the Twelve.]
The duties of a Prince Ameth are, to be earnest, true, reliable, and
sincere; to protect the people against illegal impositions and exactions; to
contend for their political rights, and to see, as far as he may or can, that
those bear the burdens who reap the benefits of the Government.
You are to be true unto all men.
You are to be frank and sincere in all things.
You are to be earnest in doing whatever it is your duty to do.
And no man must repent that he has relied upon your resolve, your
profession, or your word.
The great distinguishing characteristic of a Mason is sympathy with his
kind. He recognizes in the human race one great family, all connected
with himself by those invisible links, and that mighty net-work of
circumstance, forged and woven by God.
Feeling that sympathy, it is his first Masonic duty to serve his fellow-man.


--- PAGE 203 ---
At his first entrance into the Order, he ceases to be isolated, and
becomes one of a great brotherhood, assuming now duties toward every
Mason that lives, as every Mason at the same moment assumes them
toward him.
Nor are those duties on his part confined to Masons alone. He assumes
many in regard to his country, and especially toward the great, suffering
masses of the common people; for they too are his brethren, and God
hears them, inarticulate as the moanings of their misery are. By all proper
means, of persuasion and influence, and otherwise, if the occasion 
and emergency require, he is bound to defend them against oppression, 
and tyrannical and illegal exactions.
He labors equally to defend and to improve the people. He does not
flatter them to mislead them, nor fawn upon them to rule them, nor
conceal his opinions to humor them, nor tell them that they can never err,
and that their voice is the voice of God. He knows that the safety of every
free government, and its continuance and perpetuity depend upon the


--- PAGE 204 ---
virtue and intelligence of the common people; and that, unless their
liberty
is of such a kind as arms can neither procure nor take away; unless it is
the fruit of manly courage, of justice, temperance, and generous virtue -
unless, being such, it has taken deep root in the minds and hearts of the
people at large, there will not long be wanting those who will snatch from
them by treachery what they have acquired by arms or institutions.
He knows that if, after being released from the toils of war, the people
neglect the arts of peace; if their peace and liberty be a state of warfare; if
war be their only virtue, and the summit of their praise, they will soon
find
peace the most adverse to their interests. It will be only a more
distressing war; and that which they imagined liberty will be the worst of
slavery. For, unless by the means of knowledge and morality, not frothy
and loquacious, but genuine, unadulterated, and sincere, they clear the
horizon of the mind from those mists of error and passion which arise
from
ignorance and vice, they will always have those who will bend their necks
to the yoke as if they were brutes; who, notwithstanding all their triumphs,


--- PAGE 205 ---
will put them up to the highest bidder, as if they were mere booty made in
war; and find an exuberant source of wealth and power, in the people's
ignorance, prejudice, and passions.
The people that does not subjugate the propensity of the wealthy to
avarice, ambition, and sensuality, expel luxury from them and their
families, keep down pauperism, diffuse knowledge among the poor, and
labor to raise the abject from the mire of vice and low indulgence, and to
keep the industrious from starving in sight of luxurious festivals, will find
that it has cherished, in that avarice, ambition, sensuality, selfishness,
and luxury of the one class, and that degradation, misery, drunkenness,
ignorance, and brutalization of the other, more stubborn and intractable
despots at home than it ever encountered in the field; and even its very 
bowels will be continually teeming with the intolerable progeny of tyrants.
These are the first enemies to be subdued; this constitutes the campaign
of Peace; these are triumphs, difficult indeed, but bloodless; and far more
honorable than those trophies which are purchased only by slaughter and
rapine; and if not victors in this service, it is in vain to have been


--- PAGE 206 ---
victorious over the despotic enemy in the field.
For if any people thinks that it is a grander; a more beneficial, or a wiser
policy, to invent subtle expedients by stamps and imposts, for increasing
the revenue and draining the life-blood of an impoverished people; to
multiply its naval and military force; to rival in craft the ambassadors of
foreign states; to plot the swallowing up of foreign territory; to make
crafty
treaties and alliances; to rule prostrate states and abject provinces by fear
and force; than to administer unpolluted justice to the people, to relieve
the condition and raise the estate of the toiling masses, redress the
injured and succor the distressed and conciliate the discontented, and
speedily restore to every one his own; then that people is involved in a
cloud of error, and will too late perceive, when the illusion of these
mighty
benefits has vanished, that in neglecting these, which it thought inferior
considerations, it has only been precipitating its own ruin and despair.
Unfortunately, every age presents its own special problem, most difficult
and often impossible to solve; and that which this age offers, and forces


--- PAGE 207 ---
upon the consideration of all chinking men, is this - how, in a populous
and wealthy country, blessed with free institutions and a constitutional
government, are the great masses of the manual-labor class to be
enabled to have steady work at fair wages, to be kept from starvation, and
their children from vice and debauchery, and to be furnished with that
degree, not of mere reading and writing, but of knowledge, that shall fit
them intelligently to do the duties and exercise the privileges of freemen;
even to be intrusted with the dangerous right of suffrage?
For though we do not know why God, being infinitely merciful as well as
wise, has so ordered it, it seems to be unquestionably his law, that even
in civilized and Christian countries, the large mass of the population shall
be fortunate, if, during their whole life, from infancy to old age, in health
and sickness, they have enough of the commonest and coarsest food to
keep themselves and their
children from the continual gnawing of hunger - enough of the commonest
and coarsest clothing to protect themselves and their little ones from
indecent exposure and the bitter cold; and if they have over their heads


--- PAGE 208 ---
the rudest shelter.
And He seems to have enacted this law - which no human community has
yet found the means to abrogate - that when a country becomes
populous, capital shall concentrate in the hands of a limited number of
persons, and labor become more and more at its mercy, until mere
manual labor, that of the weaver and ironworker, and other artisans,
eventually ceases to be worth more than a bare subsistence, and often, in
great cities and vast extents of country not even that, and goes or crawls
about in rags, begging, and starving for want of work.
While every ox and horse can find work, and is worth being fed, it is not
always so with man. To be employed, to have a chance to work at
anything like fair wages, becomes the great engrossing object of a man's
life. The capitalist can live without employing the laborer, and discharges
him whenever that labor ceases to be profitable. At the moment when the
weather is most inclement, provisions dearest, and rents highest, he turns
him off to starve. If the day-laborer is taken sick, his wages stop. When
old, he has no pension to retire upon. His children cannot be sent to


--- PAGE 209 ---
school; for before their bones are hardened they must get to work lest
they starve. The man, strong and able-bodied, works for a shilling or two
a day, and the woman shivering over her little pan of coals, when the
mercury drops far below zero, after her hungry children have wailed
themselves to sleep, sews by the dim light of her lonely candle, for a bare
pittance, selling her life to him who bargained only for the work of her
needle.
Fathers and mothers slay their children, to have the burial-fees, that with
the price of one child's life they may continue life in those that survive.
Little girls with bare feet sweep the street-crossings, when the winter wind
pinches them, and beg piteously for pennies of those who wear warm
furs. Children grow up in squalid misery and brutal ignorance; want
compels virgin and wife to prostitute themselves; women starve and
freeze, and lean up against the walls of workhouses, like bundles of foul
rags, all night long, and night after night, when the cold rain falls, and
there chances to be no room for them within; and hundreds of families are
crowded into a single building, rife with horrors and teeming


--- PAGE 210 ---
with foul air and pestilence; where men, women and children huddle
together
in their filth; all ages and all colors sleeping indiscriminately together;
while, in
a great, free, Republican State, in the full vigor of its youth and strength,
one
person in every seventeen is a pauper receiving charity.
How to deal with this apparently inevitable evil and mortal disease is by
far the
most important of all social problems. What is to be done with pauperism
and
over-supply of labor? How is the life of any country to last, when brutality
and
drunken semi-barbarism vote, and hold offices in their gift, and by fit
representatives of themselves control a government? How, if not wisdom
and
authority, but turbulence and low vice are to exalt to senatorships
miscreants
reeking with the odors and pollution of the hell, the prize-ring, the
brothel, and
the stock-exchange, where gambling is legalized and rascality is laudable?
Masonry will do all in its power, by direct exertion and cooperation, to
improve


--- PAGE 211 ---
and inform as well as to protect the people; to better their physical
condition,
relieve their miseries, supply their wants, and minister to their necessities.
Let
every Mason in this good work do all that may be in his power.
For it is true now, as it always was and always will be, that to be free is
the
same thing as to be pious, to be wise, to be temperate and just, to be
frugal
and abstinent, and to be magnanimous and brave; and to be the opposite of
all
these is the same as to be a slave. And it usually happens, by the
appointment, and, as it were, retributive justice of the Deity, that that
people
which cannot govern themselves, and moderate their passions, but crouch
under the slavery of their lusts and vices, are delivered up to the sway of
those
whom they abhor, and made to submit to an involuntary servitude.
And it is also sanctioned by the dictates of justice and by the constitution
of
Nature, that he who, from the imbecility or derangement of his intellect, is
incapable of governing himself, should, like a minor, be committed to the


--- PAGE 212 ---
government of another.
Above all things let us never forget that mankind constitutes one great
brotherhood; all born to encounter suffering and sorrow, and therefore
bound
to sympathize with each other.
For no tower of Pride was ever yet high enough to lift its possessor above
the
trials and fears and frailities of humanity. No human hand ever built the
wall,
nor ever shall, that will keep out
affliction, pain, and infirmity. Sickness and sorrow, trouble and death, are
dispensations that level everything. They know none, high nor low. The
chief wants of life, the great and grave necessities of the human soul, give
exemption to none. They make all poor, all weak. They put supplication in
the mouth of every human being, as truly as in that of the meanest
beggar.
But the principle of misery is not an evil principle. We err, and the
consequences teach us wisdom. All elements, all the laws of things
around us, minister to this end; and through the paths of painful error and


--- PAGE 213 ---
mistake, it is the design of Providence to lead us to truth and happiness. If
erring only taught us to err; if mistakes confirmed us in imprudence; if the
miseries caused by vicious indulgence had a natural tendency to make us
more abject slaves of vice, then suffering would be wholly evil. But, on
the
contrary, all tends and is designed to produce amendment and
improvement. Suffering is the discipline of virtue; of that which is
infinitely
better than happiness, and yet embraces in itself all essential happiness.
It nourishes, invigorates, and perfects it. Virtue is the prize of the
severely-contested race and hard-fought battle; and it is worth all the
fatigue and wounds of the conflict. Man should go forth with a brave and
strong heart, to battle with calamity. He is to master it, and not let it
become his master. He is not to forsake the post of trial and of peril; but
to
stand firmly in his lot, until the great word of Providence shall bid him
fly,
or bid him sink. With resolution and courage the Mason is to do the work
which it is appointed for him to do, looking through the dark cloud of


--- PAGE 214 ---
human calamity, to the end that rises high and bright before him. The lot
of sorrow is great and sublime. None suffer forever, nor for nought, nor
without purpose. It is the ordinance of God's wisdom, and of His Infinite
Love, to procure for us infinite happiness and glory.
Virtue is the truest liberty; nor is he free who stoops to passions; nor he in
bondage who serves a noble master. Examples are the best and most
lasting lectures; virtue the best example. He that hath done good deeds
and set good precedents, in sincerity, is happy. Time shall not outlive his
worth. He lives truly after death, whose good deeds are his pillars of
remembrance; and no day but adds some grains to his heap of glory.
Good works are seeds, that after sowing return us a continual harvest;
and the memory of noble actions is more enduring than monuments of
marble.
Life is a school. The world is neither prison nor penitentiary, nor a palace
of ease, nor an amphitheatre for games and spectacles; but a place of
instruction, and discipline. Life is given for moral and spiritual training;
and the entire course of the great school of life is an education for virtue,


--- PAGE 215 ---
happiness, and a future existence. The periods of Life are its terms; all
human conditions, its forms; all human employments, its lessons. Families
are the primary departments of this moral education; the various circles of
society, its advanced stages; Kingdoms and Republics, its universities.
Riches and Poverty, Gayeties and Sorrows, Marriages and Funerals, the
ties of life bound or broken, fit and fortunate, or untoward and painful, are
all lessons. Events are not blindly and carelessly flung together.
Providence does not school one man, and screen another from the fiery
trial of its lessons. It has neither rich favorites nor poor victims. One
event
happeneth to all. One end and one design concern and urge all men.
The prosperous man has been at school. Perhaps he has thought that it
was a great thing, and he a great personage; but he has been merely a
pupil. He thought, perhaps, that he was Master, and had nothing to do,
but to direct and command; but there was ever a Master above him, the
Master of Life. He looks not at our splendid state, or our many
pretensions, nor at the aids and appliances of our learning; but at our


--- PAGE 216 ---
learning itself. He puts the poor and the rich upon the same form; and
knows no difference between them, but their progress.
If from prosperity we have learned moderation, temperance, candor,
modesty, gratitude to God, and generosity to man, then we are entitled to
be honored and rewarded. If we have learned selfishness, selfindulgence,
wrong-doing, and vice, to forget and overlook our less
fortunate brother, and to scoff at the providence of God, then we are
unworthy and dishonored, though we have been nursed in affluence, or
taken our degrees from the lineage of an hundred noble descents; as truly
so, in the eye of Heaven, and of all right-thinking men, as though we lay,
victims of beggary and disease, in the hospital, by the hedge, or on the
dung-hill. The most ordinary human equity looks not at the school, but at
the scholar; and the equity of Heaven will not look beneath that mark.
The poor man also is at school. Let him take care that he
learn, rather than complain. Let him hold to his integrity, his candor, and
his kindness of heart. Let him beware of envy, and of bondage, and keep
his self-respect. The body's toil is nothing. Let him beware of the mind's


--- PAGE 217 ---
drudgery and degradation. While he betters his condition if he can, let
him be more anxious to better his soul. Let him be willing, while poor,
and
even if always poor, to learn poverty's great lessons, fortitude,
cheerfulness, contentment, and implicit confidence in God's Providence.
With these, and patience, calmness, self-command, disinterestedness,
and affectionate kindness, the humble dwelling may be hallowed, and
made more dear and noble than the loftiest palace. Let him, above all
things, see that he lose not his independence. Let him not cast himself, a
creature poorer than the poor, an indolent, helpless, despised beggar, oft
the kindness of others. Every man should choose to have God for his
Master, rather than man; and escape not from this school, either by
dishonesty or alms-taking, lest he fall into that state, worse than disgrace,
where he can have no respect for himself.
The ties of Society teach us to love one another. That is a miserable
society, where the absence of affectionate kindness is sought to be
supplied by punctilious decorum, graceful urbanity, and polished


--- PAGE 218 ---
insincerity; where ambition, jealousy, and distrust rule, in place of
simplicity, confidence, and kindness.
So, too, the social state teaches modesty and gentleness; and from
neglect, and notice unworthily bestowed on others, and injustice, and the
world's failure to appreciate us, we learn patience and quietness, to be
superior to society's opinion, not cynical and bitter, but gentle, candid,
and affectionate still.
Death is the great Teacher, stern, cold, inexorable, irresistible; whom the
collected might of the world cannot stay or ward off. The breath, that
parting from the lips of King or beggar, scarcely stirs the hushed air,
cannot be bought, or brought back for a moment, with the wealth of
Empires. What a lesson is this, teaching our frailty and feebleness, and
an Infinite Power beyond us! It is a fearful lesson, that never becomes
familiar. It walks through the earth in dread mystery, and lays it hands
upon all. It is a universal lesson, that is read everywhere and by all men.
Its message comes every year and every day. The past years are
crowded with its sad and solemn mementoes; and death's finger traces its


--- PAGE 219 ---
handwriting upon the walls of every human habitation.
It teaches us Duty; to act our part well; to fulfill the work assigned us.
When one is dying, and after he is dead, there is but one question: Has
he lived well? There is no evil in death but that which life makes.
There are hard lessons in the school of God's Providence; and yet the
school of life is carefully adjusted, in all its arrangements and tasks, to
man's powers and passions. There is no extravagance in its teachings;
nor is anything done for 'the sake of present effect. The whole course of
human life is a conflict with difficulties; and, if rightly conducted, a
progress in improvement. It is never too late for man to learn. Not part
only, but the whole, of life is a school. There never comes a time, even
amidst the decays of age, when it is fit to lay aside the eagerness of
acquisition, or the cheerfulness of endeavor. Man walks, all through the
course of life, in patience and strife, and sometimes in darkness; for, from
patience is to come perfection; from strife, triumph is to issue; from the
cloud of darkness the lightning is to flash that shall open the way to
eternity.


--- PAGE 220 ---
Let the Mason be faithful in the school of life, and to all its lessons! Let
him not learn nothing, nor care not whether he learns or not. Let not the
years pass over him, witnesses of only his sloth and indifference; or see
him zealous to acquire everything but virtue. Nor let him labor only for
himself; nor forget that the humblest man that lives is his brother, and
hath a claim on his sympathies and kind offices; and that beneath the
rough garments which labor wears may beat hearts as noble as throb
under the stars of princes.
God, who counts by souls, not stations,
Loves and pities you and me;
For to Him all vain distinctions
Are as pebbles on the sea.
Nor are the other duties inculcated in this Degree of less importance.
Truth, a Mason is early told, is a Divine attribute and the foundation of
every virtue; and frankness, reliability, sincerity, straightforwardness,
plain-dealing, are but different modes in which Truth develops itself. The
dead, the absent, the innocent, and those that trust him, no Mason will


--- PAGE 221 ---
deceive willingly. To all these he owes a nobler justice, in that they are
the most certain trials of human Equity. Only the most abandoned of men,
said Cicero, will deceive him, who would have remained uninjured if he
had not
trusted. All the noble deeds that have beat their marches through
succeeding ages have proceeded from men of truth and genuine courage.
The man who is always true is both virtuous and wise; and thus possesses
the greatest guards of safety: for the law has not power to strike the
virtuous; nor can fortune subvert the wise.
The bases of Masonry being morality and virtue, it is by studying one and
practising the other, that the conduct of a Mason becomes irreproachable.
The good of Humanity being its principal object, disinterestedness is one
of
the first virtues that it requires of its members; for that is the source of
justice and beneficence.
To pity the misfortunes of others; to be humble, but without meanness; to
be proud, but without arrogance; to abjure every sentiment of hatred and
revenge; to show himself magnanimous and liberal, without ostentation
and


--- PAGE 222 ---
without profusion; to be the enemy of vice; to pay homage to wisdom and
virtue; to respect innocence; to be constant and patient in adversity, and
modest in prosperity; to avoid every irregularity that stains the soul and
distempers the body - it is by following these precepts that a Mason will
become a good citizen, a faithful husband, a tender father, an obedient
son,
and a true brother; will honor friendship, and fulfill with ardor the duties
which virtue and the social relations impose upon him.
It is because Masonry imposes upon us these duties that it is properly and
significantly styled work; and he who imagines that he becomes a Mason
by
merely taking the first two or three Degrees, and that he may, having
leisurely stepped upon that small elevation, thenceforward worthily wear
the honors of Masonry, without labor or exertion, or self-denial or
sacrifice,
and that there is nothing to be done in Masonry, is strangely deceived.
Is it true that nothing remains to be done in Masonry?
Does one Brother no longer proceed by law against another Brother of his
Lodge, in regard to matters that could be easily settled within the Masonic


--- PAGE 223 ---
family circle?
Has the duel, that hideous heritage of barbarism, interdicted among
Brethren by our fundamental laws, and denounced by the municipal code,
yet disappeared from the soil we inhabit? Do Masons of high rank
religiously refrain from it; or do they not,
bowing to a corrupt public opinion, submit to its arbitrament, despite the
scandal which it occasions to the Order, and in violation of the feeble
restraint of their oath?
Do Masons no longer form uncharitable opinions of their Brethren, enter
harsh judgments against them, and judge themselves by one rule and their
Brethren by another?
Has Masonry any well-regulated system of charity? Has it done that which
it
should have done for the cause of education? Where are its schools, its
academies, its colleges, its hospitals, and infirmaries?
Are political controversies now conducted with no violence and
bitterness?
Do Masons refrain from defaming and denouncing their Brethren who
differ


--- PAGE 224 ---
with them in religious or political opinions?
What grand social problems or useful projects engage our attention at our
communications? Where in our Lodges are lectures habitually delivered
for
the real instruction of the Brethren? Do not our sessions pass in the
discussion of minor matters of business, the settlement of points of order
and questions of mere administration, and the admission and advancement
of Candidates, whom after their admission we take no pains to instruct?
In what Lodge are our ceremonies explained and elucidated; corrupted as
they are by time, until their true features can scarcely be distinguished;
and
where are those great primitive truths of revelation taught, which Masonry
has preserved to the world?
We have high dignities and sounding titles. Do their possessors qualify
themselves to enlighten the world in respect to the aims and objects of
Masonry? Descendants of those Initiates who governed empires, does your
influence enter into practical life and operate efficiently in behalf of
wellregulated
and constitutional liberty?


--- PAGE 225 ---
Your debates should be but friendly conversations. You need concord,
union, and peace. Why then do you retain among you men who excite
rivalries and jealousies; why permit great and violent controversy and
ambitious pretensions'? Now do your own words and acts agree? If your
Masonry is a nullity, how can you exercise any influence on others?
Continually you praise each other, and utter elaborate and high
wrought eulogies upon the Order. Everywhere you assume that you are
what you should be, and nowhere do you look upon yourselves as you
are. Is it true that all our actions are so many acts of homage to virtue?
Explore the recesses of your hearts; let us examine ourselves with an
impartial eye, and make answer to our own questioning! Can we bear to
ourselves the consoling testimony that we always rigidly perform our
duties; that we even half perform them?
Let us away with this odious self-flattery! Let us be men, if we cannot be
sages! The laws of Masonry, above others excellent, cannot wholly
change men's natures. They enlighten them, they point out the true way;
but they can lead them in it, only by repressing the fire of their passions,


--- PAGE 226 ---
and subjugating their selfishness. Alas, these conquer, and Masonry is
forgotten!
After praising each other all our lives, there are always excellent
Brethren,
who, over our coffins, shower unlimited eulogies. Every one of us who
dies, however useless his life, has been a model of all the virtues, a very
child of the celestial light. In Egypt, among our old Masters, where
Masonry was more cultivated than vanity, no one could gain admittance to
the sacred asylum of the tomb until he had passed under the most solemn
judgment. A grave tribunal sat in judgment upon all, even the kings. They
said to the dead, "Whoever thou art, give account to thy country of thy
actions! What hast thou done with thy time and life? The law interrogates
thee, thy country hears thee, Truth sits in judgment on thee!" Princes
came there to be judged, escorted only by their virtues and their vices. A
public accuser recounted the history of the dead man's life, and threw the
blaze of the torch of truth on all his actions. If it were adjudged that he
had led an evil life, his memory was condemned in the presence of the


--- PAGE 227 ---
nation, and his body was denied the honors of sepulture. What a lesson
the old Masonry taught to the sons of the people!
Is it true that Masonry is effete; that the acacia, withered, affords no
shade; that Masonry no longer marches in the advance-guard of Truth?
No. Is freedom yet universal? Have ignorance and prejudice disappeared
from the earth? Are there no longer enmities among men? Do cupidity
and falsehood no longer exist? Do toleration and harmony prevail among
religious and political sects? There are works yet left for Masonry to
accomplish, greater than the twelve labors of Hercules: to advance ever
resolutely and steadily; to enlighten the minds of the people, to
reconstruct society, to reform the laws, and to improve the public morals.
The eternity in front of it is as infinite as the one behind. And Masonry
cannot cease to labor in the cause of social progress, without ceasing to
be true to itself, Masonry.


--- PAGE 228 ---
XII. GRAND MASTER ARCHITECT. 
[Master Architect.] 
THE great duties that are inculcated by the lessons taught by the
workinginstruments 
of a Grand Master Architect, demanding so much of us, and 
taking for granted the capacity to perform them faithfully and fully, bring
us 
at once to reflect upon the dignity of human nature, and the vast powers 
and capacities of the human soul; and to that theme we invite your 
attention in this Degree. Let us begin to rise from earth toward the Stars. 
Evermore the human soul struggles toward the light, toward God, and the 
Infinite. It is especially so in its afflictions. Words go but a little way into
the 
depths of sorrow. The thoughts that writhe there in silence, that go into
the 
stillness of Infinitude and Eternity, have no emblems. Thoughts enough


--- PAGE 229 ---
come there, such as no tongue ever uttered. They do not so much want 
human sympathy, as higher help. There is a loneliness in deep sorrow 
which the Deity alone can relieve. Alone, the mind wrestles with the great 
problem of calamity, and seeks the solution from the Infinite Providence
of 
Heaven, and thus is led directly to God. 
There are many things in us of which we are not distinctly conscious. To 
waken that slumbering consciousness into life, and so to lead the soul up 
to the Light, is one office of every great ministration to human nature, 
whether its vehicle be the pen, the pencil, or the tongue. We are 
unconscious of the intensity and awfulness of the life within us. Health
and 
sickness, joy and sorrow, success and disappointment, life and death, 
love and loss, are familiar words upon our lips; and we do not know to
what 
depths they point within us. 
We seem never to know what any thing means or is worth until we have 
lost it. Many an organ, nerve, and fibre in our bodily frame performs its 
silent part for years, and we are quite unconscious of its value. It is not


--- PAGE 230 ---
until it is injured that we discover that value, and find how essential it
was 
to our happiness and comfort. We never know the full significance of the 
words “property," "ease," and "health;" the wealth of meaning in the fond 
epithets, "parent,” “child," "beloved," and "friend," until the thing or the 
person is taken away; until, in place of the bright, visible being, comes
the 
awful and desolate shadow, where nothing is: where we stretch out our 
hands in vain, and strain our eyes upon dark and dismal vacuity. Yet, in 
that vacuity, we do not lose the object that we loved. It becomes only the 
more real to us. Our blessings not only brighten when they depart, but are 
fixed in enduring reality; and love and friendship receive their everlasting 
seal under the cold impress of death. 
A dim consciousness of infinite mystery and grandeur lies beneath all the 
commonplace of life. There is an awfulness and a majesty around us, in 
all our little worldliness. The rude peasant from the Apennines, asleep at 
the foot of a pillar in a majestic Roman church, seems not to hear or see, 
but to, dream only of the herd he feeds or the ground he tills in the


--- PAGE 231 ---
mountains. But the choral symphonies fall softly upon his ear, and the 
gilded arches are dimly seen through his half-slumbering eyelids. 
So the soul, however given up to the occupations of daily life, cannot
quite 
lose the sense of where it is, and of what is above it and around it. The 
scene of its actual engagements may be small; the path of its steps, 
beaten and familiar; the objects it handles, easily spanned, and quite worn 
out with daily uses. So it may be, and amidst such things that we all live. 
So we live our little life; but Heaven is above us and all around and close 
to us; and Eternity is before us and behind us; and suns and stars are 
silent witnesses and watchers over us. We are enfolded by Infinity.
Infinite 
Powers and Infinite spaces lie all around us. The dread arch of Mystery 
spreads over us, and no voice ever pierced it. Eternity is enthroned amid 
Heaven's myriad starry heights; and no utterance or word ever came from 
those far-off and silent spaces. Above, is that awful majesty; around us, 
everywhere, it stretches off into infinity; and beneath it is this little
struggle 
of life, this poor day's conflict, this busy ant-hill of Time.


--- PAGE 232 ---
But from that ant-hill, not only the talk of the streets, the sounds of
music 
and revelling, the stir and tread of a multitude, the shout of joy and the 
shriek of agony go up into the silent and all-surrounding Infinitude; but 
also, amidst the stir and noise of visible life, from the inmost bosom of
the 
visible man, there goes up an imploring call, a beseeching cry, an asking, 
unuttered, and unutterable, for revelation, wailingly and in almost 
speechless agony praying the dread arch of mystery to break, and the 
stars that roll above the waves of mortal trouble, to speak; the enthroned 
majesty of those awful heights to find a voice; the mysterious and 
reserved heavens to come near; and all to tell us what they alone know; to 
give us information of the loved and lost; to make known to us what we 
are, and whither we are going. 
Man is encompassed with a dome of incomprehensible wonders. In him 
and about him is that which should fill his life with majesty and 
sacredness. Something of sublimity and sanctity has thus flashed down 
from heaven into the heart of every one that lives. There is no being so


--- PAGE 233 ---
base and abandoned but hath some traits of that sacredness left upon 
him; something, so much perhaps in discordance with his general repute, 
that he hides it from all around him; some sanctuary in his soul, where no 
one may enter; some sacred inclosure, where the memory of a child is, or 
the image of a venerated parent, or the remembrance of a pure love, or 
the echo of some word of kindness once spoken to him; an echo that will 
never die away. 
Life is no negative, or superficial or worldly existence. Our steps are 
evermore haunted with thoughts, far beyond their own range, which some 
have regarded as the reminiscences of a preexistent state. So it is with us 
all, in the beaten and worn track of this worldly pilgrimage. There is
more 
here, than the world we live in. It is not all of life to live. An unseen and 
infinite presence is here; a sense of something greater than we possess; a 
seeking, through all the void wastes of life, for a good beyond it; a crying 
out of the heart for interpretation; a memory of the dead, touching 
continually some vibrating thread in this great tissue of mystery.


--- PAGE 234 ---
We all not only have better intimations, but are capable of better things
than we know. The pressure of some great emergency would develop in 
us powers, beyond the worldly bias of our spirits; and Heaven so deals 
with us, from time to time, as to call forth those better things. There is 
hardly a family in the world go selfish, but that, if one in it were doomed
to 
die - one, to be selected by the others, - it would be utterly impossible for 
its members, parents and children, to choose out that victim; but that each 
would say, "I will die; but I cannot choose." And in how many, if that dire 
extremity had come, would not one and another step forth, freed from the 
vile meshes of ordinary selfishness, and say, like the Roman father and 
son, "Let the blow fall on me!" There are greater and better things in us
all, 
than the world takes account of, or than we take note of; if we would but 
find them out. And it is one part of our Masonic culture to find these
traits 
of power and sublime devotion, to revive these faded impressions of 
generosity and self-sacrifice, the almost squandered bequests of God's


--- PAGE 235 ---
love and kindness to our souls; and to induce us to yield ourselves to
their 
guidance and control. 
Upon all conditions of men presses down one impartial law. To all 
situations, to all fortunes, high or low, the mind gives their character.
They 
are, in effect, not what they are in themselves, but what they are to the 
feeling of their possessors. The King may be mean, degraded, miserable; 
the slave of ambition, fear, voluptuousness, and every low passion. The 
Peasant may be the real Monarch, the moral master of his fate, a free and 
lofty being, more than a Prince in happiness, more than a King in honor. 
Man is no bubble upon the sea of his fortunes, helpless and irresponsible 
upon the tide of events. Out of the same circumstances, different men 
bring totally different results. The same difficulty, distress, poverty, or 
misfortune, that breaks down one man, builds up another and makes him 
strong. It is the very attribute and glory of a man, that he can bend the 
circumstances of his condition to the intellectual and moral purposes of
his 
nature, and it is the power and mastery of his will that chiefly distinguish


--- PAGE 236 ---
him from the brute. 
The faculty of moral will, developed in the child, is a new element of his 
nature. It is a new power brought upon the scene, and a ruling power, 
delegated from Heaven. Never was a human being sunk so low that he 
had not, by God's gift, the power to rise, Because God commands him to 
rise, it is certain that he can rise.
Every man has the power, and should use it, to make all situations, trials, 
and temptations instruments to promote his virtue and happiness; and is 
so far from being the creature of circumstances, that he creates and 
controls them, making them to be all that they are, of evil or of good, to 
him as a moral being. 
Life is what we make it, and the world is what we make it. The eyes of
the 
cheerful and of the melancholy man are fixed upon the same creation; but 
very different are the aspects which it bears to them. To the one, it is all 
beauty and gladness; the waves of ocean roll in light, and the mountains 
are covered with day. Life, to him, flashes, rejoicing, upon every flower


--- PAGE 237 ---
and every tree that trembles in the breeze. There is more to him, 
everywhere, than the eye sees; a presence of profound joy on hill and 
valley, and bright, dancing water. The other idly or mournfully gazes at
the 
same scene, and everything wears a dull, dim, and sickly aspect. The 
murmuring of the brooks is a discord to him, the great roar of the sea has 
an angry and threatening emphasis, the solemn music of the pines sings 
the requiem of his departed happiness; the cheerful light shines garishly 
upon his eyes and offends him. The great train of the seasons passes 
before him like a funeral procession; and he sighs, and turns impatiently 
away. The eye makes that which it looks upon; the ear makes its own 
melodies and discords; the world without reflects the world within. 
Let the Mason never forget that life and the world are what we make them 
by our social character; by our adaptation, or want of adaptation to the 
social conditions, relationships, and pursuits of the world. To the selfish, 
the cold, and the insensible, to the haughty and presuming, to the proud, 
who demand more than they are likely to receive, to the jealous, ever


--- PAGE 238 ---
afraid they shall not receive enough, to those who are unreasonably 
sensitive about the good or ill opinions of others, to all violators of the 
social laws, the rude, the violent, the dishonest, and the sensual, - to all 
these, the social condition, from its very nature, will present annoyances, 
disappointments, and pains, appropriate to their several characters. The 
benevolent affections will not revolve around selfishness; the cold-
hearted 
must expect to meet coldness; the proud, haughtiness; the passionate, 
anger; and the violent, rudeness. Those who forget the rights of others, 
must not be surprised if their own are forgotten; and those who stoop to 
the lowest embraces of sense must not wonder, if others are not 
concerned to find their prostrate honor, and lift it up to the remembrance
and respect of the world. 
To the gentle, many will be gentle; to the kind, many will be kind. A good 
man will find that there is goodness in the world; an honest man will find 
that there is honesty in the world; and a man of principle will find
principle 
and integrity in the minds of others.


--- PAGE 239 ---
There are no blessings which the mind may not convert into the bitterest 
of evils; and no trials which it may not transform into the noblest and 
divinest blessings. There are no temptations from which assailed virtue 
may not gain strength, instead of falling before them, vanquished and 
subdued. It is true that temptations have a great power, and virtue often 
falls; but the might of these temptations lies not in themselves, but in the 
feebleness of our own virtue, and the weakness of our own hearts. We 
rely too much on the strength of our ramparts and bastions, and allow the 
enemy to make his approaches, by trench and parallel, at his leisure. The 
offer of dishonest gain and guilty pleasure makes the honest man more 
honest, and the pure man more pure. They raise his virtue to the height of 
towering indignation. The fair occasion, the safe opportunity, the
tempting 
chance become the defeat and disgrace of the tempter. The honest and 
upright man does not wait until temptation has made its approaches and 
mounted its batteries on the last parallel. 
But to the impure, the dishonest, the false-hearted, the corrupt, and the


--- PAGE 240 ---
sensual, occasions come every day, and in every scene, and through 
every avenue of thought and imagination. He is prepared to capitulate 
before the first approach is commenced; and sends out the white flag 
when the enemy's advance comes in sight of his walls. He makes 
occasions; or, if opportunities come not, evil thoughts come, and he 
throws wide open the gates of his heart and welcomes those bad visitors, 
and entertains them with a lavish hospitality. 
The business of the world absorbs, corrupts, and degrades one mind, 
while in another it feeds and nurses the noblest independence, integrity, 
and generosity. Pleasure is a poison to some, and a healthful refreshment 
to others. To one, the world is a great harmony, like a noble strain of 
music with infinite modulations; to another, it is a huge factory, the clash 
and clang of whose machinery jars upon his ears and frets him to 
madness. Life is substantially
the same thing to all who partake of its lot. Yet some rise to virtue and 
glory; while others, undergoing the same discipline, and enjoying the 
same privileges, sink to shame and perdition.


--- PAGE 241 ---
Thorough, faithful, and honest endeavor to improve, is always successful, 
and the highest happiness. To sigh sentimentally over human misfortune, 
is fit only for the mind's childhood; and the mind's misery is chiefly its
own 
fault; appointed, under the good Providence of God, as the punisher and 
corrector of its fault. In the long run, the mind will be happy, just in 
proportion to its fidelity and wisdom. When it is miserable, it has planted 
the thorns in its own path; it grasps them, and cries out in loud
complaint;. 
and that complaint is but the louder confession that the thorns which grew 
there, it planted. 
A certain kind and degree of spirituality enter into the largest part of even 
the most ordinary life. You can carry on no business, without some faith
in 
man. You cannot even dig in the ground, without a reliance on the unseen 
result. You cannot think or reason or even step, without confiding in the 
inward, spiritual principles of your nature. All the affections and bonds,
and 
hopes and interests of life centre in the spiritual; and you know that if
that


--- PAGE 242 ---
central bond were broken, the world would rush to chaos. 
Believe that there is a God; that He is our father; that He has a paternal 
interest in our welfare and improvement; that He has given us powers, by 
means of which we may escape from sin and ruin; that He has destined us 
to a future life of endless progress toward perfection and a knowledge of 
Himself - believe this, as every Mason should, and you can live calmly, 
endure patiently, labor resolutely, deny yourselves cheerfully, hope 
steadfastly, and be conquerors in the great struggle of life. Take away any 
one of these principles, and what remains for us? Say that there is no 
God; or no way opened for hope and reformation and triumph, no heaven 
to come, no rest for the weary, no home in the bosom of God for the 
afflicted and disconsolate soul; or that God is but an ugly blind Chance 
that stabs in the dark; or a somewhat that is, when attempted to be 
defined, a nowhat, emotionless, passionless, the Supreme Apathy to 
which all things, good and evil, are alike indifferent; or a jealous God
who 
revengefully visits the sins of the fathers on the children, and when the


--- PAGE 243 ---
fathers have eaten
sour grapes, sets the children's teeth on edge; an arbitrary supreme Will, 
that has made it right to be virtuous, and wrong to lie and steal, because 
IT pleased to make it so rather than otherwise, retaining the power to 
reverse the law; or a fickle, vacillating, inconstant Deity, or a cruel, 
bloodthirsty, savage Hebrew or Puritanic one; and we are but the sport of 
chance and the victims of despair; hapless wanderers upon the face of a 
desolate, forsaken, or accursed and hated earth; surrounded by darkness, 
struggling with obstacles, toiling for barren results and empty purposes, 
distracted with doubts, and misled by false gleams of light; wanderers
with 
no way, no prospect, no home; doomed and deserted mariners on a dark 
and stormy sea, without compass or course, to whom no stars appear; 
tossing helmless upon the weltering, angry waves, with no blessed haven 
in the distance whose guiding-star invites us to its welcome rest. 
The religious faith thus taught by Masonry is indispensable to the 
attainment of the great ends of life; and must therefore have been


--- PAGE 244 ---
designed to be a part of it. We are made for this faith; and there must be 
something, somewhere, for us to believe in. We cannot grow healthfully, 
nor live happily, without it. It is therefore true. If we could cut off from
any 
soul all the principles taught by Masonry, the faith in a God, in
immortality, 
in virtue, in essential rectitude, that soul would sink into sin, misery, 
darkness, and ruin. If we could cut off all sense of these truths, the man 
would sink at once to the grade of the animal. 
No man can suffer and be patient, can struggle and conquer, can improve 
and be happy, otherwise than as the swine are, without conscience, 
without hope, without a reliance on a just, wise, and beneficent God. We 
must, of necessity, embrace the great truths taught by Masonry, and live 
by them, to live happily. "I put my trust in God," is the protest of
Masonry 
against the belief in a cruel, angry, and revengeful God, to be feared and 
not reverenced by His creatures. 
Society, in its great relations, is as much the creation of Heaven as is the


--- PAGE 245 ---
system of the Universe. If that bond of gravitation that holds all worlds
and 
systems together, were suddenly severed, the universe would fly into wild 
and boundless chaos. And if we were to sever all the moral bonds that 
hold society together; if we could cut off from it every conviction of
Truth 
and Integrity, of an authority above it, and of a conscience within it, it 
would immediately rush to disorder and frightful anarchy and ruin. 
The religion we teach is therefore as really a principle of things, and as 
certain and true, as gravitation. 
Faith in moral principles, in virtue, and in God, is as necessary for the 
guidance of a man, as instinct is for the guidance of an animal. And 
therefore this faith, as a principle of man's nature, has a mission as truly 
authentic in God's Providence, as the principle of instinct. The pleasures 
of the soul, too, must depend on certain principles. They must recognize a 
soul, its properties and responsibilities, a conscience, and the sense of an 
authority above us; and these are the principles of faith. No man can 
suffer and be patient, can struggle and conquer, can improve and be


--- PAGE 246 ---
happy, without conscience, without hope, without a reliance on a just, 
wise, and beneficent God. We must of necessity embrace the great truths 
taught by Masonry, and live by them, to live happily. Everything in the 
universe has fixed and certain laws and principles for its action;- the star
in 
its orbit, the animal in its activity, the physical man in his functions. And
he 
has likewise fixed and certain laws and principles as a spiritual being.
His 
soul does not die for want of aliment or guidance. For the rational soul 
there is ample provision. From the lofty pine, rocked in the darkening 
tempest, the cry of the young raven is heard; and it would be most strange 
if there were no answer for the cry and call of the soul, tortured by want 
and sorrow and agony. The total rejection of all moral and religious belief 
would strike out a principle from human nature, as essential to it as 
gravitation to the stars, instinct to animal life, the circulation of the blood
to 
the human body. 
God has ordained that life shall be a social state. We are members of a


--- PAGE 247 ---
civil community. The life of that community depends upon its moral 
condition. Public spirit, intelligence, uprightness, temperance, kindness, 
domestic purity, will make it a happy community, and give it prosperity
and 
continuance. Wide-spread selfishness, dishonesty, intemperance, 
libertinism, corruption, and crime, will make it miserable, and bring
about 
dissolution and speedy ruin. A whole people lives one life; one mighty 
heart heaves in its bosom; it is one great pulse of existence that throbs 
there. One stream of life flows there, with ten thousand intermingled 
branches and channels, through all the homes of human love. One sound 
as of many waters, a rapturous jubilee or a mournful sighing, comes up
from
the congregated dwellings of a whole nation. 
The Public is no vague abstraction; nor should that which is done against 
that Public, against public interest, law, or virtue, press but lightly on the 
conscience. It is but a vast expansion of individual life; an ocean of tears, 
an atmosphere of sighs, or a great whole of joy and gladness. It suffers


--- PAGE 248 ---
with the suffering of millions; it rejoices with the joy of millions. What a
vast 
crime does he commit, - private man or public man, agent or contractor, 
legislator or magistrate, secretary or president,-who dares, with indignity 
and wrong, to strike the bosom of the Public Welfare, to encourage 
venality and corruption, and shameful sale of the elective franchise, or of 
office; to sow dissension, and to weaken the bonds of amity that bind a 
Nation together! What a huge iniquity, he who, with vices like the
daggers 
of a parricide, dares to pierce that mighty heart, in which the ocean of 
existence is flowing! 
What an unequalled interest lies in the virtue of every one whom we love! 
In his virtue, nowhere but in his virtue, is garnered up the incomparable 
treasure. What care we for brother or friend, compared with what we care 
for his honor, his fidelity, his reputation, his kindness? How venerable is 
the rectitude of a parent! How sacred his reputation! No blight that can
fall 
upon a child, is like a parent's dishonor. Heathen or Christian, every 
parent would have his child do well; and pours out upon him all the


--- PAGE 249 ---
fullness of parental love, in the one desire that he may do well; that he 
may be worthy of his cares, and his freely bestowed pains; that he may 
walk in the way of honor and happiness. In that way he cannot walk one 
step without virtue. Such is life, in its relationships. A thousand ties 
embrace it, like the fine nerves of a delicate organization; like the strings 
of an instrument capable of sweet melodies, but easily put out of tune or 
broken, by rudeness, anger, and selfish indulgence. 
If life could, by any process, be made insensible to pain and pleasure; if 
the human heart were hard as adamant, then avarice, ambition, and 
sensuality might channel out their paths in it, and make it their beaten 
way; and none would wonder or protest. If we could be patient under the 
load of a mere worldly life; if we could bear that burden as the beasts
bear 
it; then, like beasts, we might bend all our thoughts to the earth; and no 
call from the great Heavens above us would startle us from our plodding 
and earthly course. 
But we art not insensible brutes, who can refuse the call of reason and


--- PAGE 250 ---
conscience. The soul is capable of remorse. When the great 
dispensations of life press down upon us, we weep, and suffer and 
sorrow. And sorrow and agony desire other companionships than 
worldliness and irreligion. We are not willing to bear those burdens of the 
heart, fear, anxiety, disappointment, and trouble, without any object or 
use. We are not willing to suffer, to be sick and afflicted, to have our
days 
and months lost to comfort and joy, and overshadowed with calamity and 
grief, without advantage or compensation; to barter away the dearest 
treasures, the very sufferings, of the heart; to sell the life-blood from
failing 
frame and fading cheek, our tears of bitterness and groans of anguish, for 
nothing. Human nature, frail, feeling, sensitive, and sorrowing, cannot
bear 
to suffer for nought. 
Everywhere, human life is a great and solemn dispensation. Man, 
suffering, enjoying, loving, hating, hoping, and fearing, chained to the 
earth and yet exploring the far recesses of the universe, has the power to 
commune with God and His angels. Around this great action of existence


--- PAGE 251 ---
the curtains of Time are drawn; but there are openings through them 
which give us glimpses of eternity. God looks down upon this scene of 
human probation. The wise and the good in all ages have interposed for it 
with their teachings and their blood. Everything that exists around us, 
every movement in nature every counsel of Providence, every 
interposition of God, centres upon one point - the fidelity of man. And
even 
if the ghosts of the departed and remembered could come at midnight 
through the barred doors of our dwellings, and the shrouded dead should 
glide through the aisles of our churches and sit in our Masonic Temples, 
their teachings would be no more eloquent and impressive than the Great 
realities of life; than those memories of misspent years, those ghosts of 
departed opportunities, that, pointing to our conscience and eternity cry 
continually in our ears, "Work while the day lasts! for the night of death 
cometh, in which no man can work.” 
There are no tokens of public mourning for the calamity of the soul. Men 
weep when the body dies; and when it is borne to its last rest, they follow


--- PAGE 252 ---
it with sad and mournful procession. But
for the dying soul there is no open lamentation; for the lost soul there are 
no obsequies. 
And yet the mind and soul of man have a value which nothing else has. 
They are worth a care which nothing else is worth; and to the single, 
solitary individual, they ought to possess an interest which nothing else 
possesses. The stored treasures of the heart, the unfathomable mines 
that are in the soul to be wrought, the broad and boundless realms of 
Thought, the freighted argosy of man's hopes and best affections, are 
brighter than gold and dearer than treasure. 
And yet the mind is in reality little known or considered. It is all which
man 
permanently is, his inward being, his divine energy, his immortal thought, 
his boundless capacity, his infinite aspiration; and nevertheless, few
value 
it for what it is worth. Few see a brother-mind in others, through the rags 
with which poverty has clothed it, beneath the crushing burdens of life, 
amidst the close pressure of worldly troubles, wants and sorrows. Few


--- PAGE 253 ---
acknowledge and cheer it in that humble blot, and feel that the nobility of 
earth, and the commencing glory of Heaven are there. 
Men do not feel the worth of their own souls. They are proud of their 
mental powers; but the intrinsic, inner, infinite worth of their own minds 
they do not perceive. The poor man, admitted to a palace, feels, lofty and 
immortal being as he is, like a mere ordinary thing amid the splendors
that 
surround him. He sees the carriage of wealth roll by him, and forgets the 
intrinsic and eternal dignity of his own mind in a poor and degrading
envy, 
and feels as an humbler creature, because others are above him, not in 
mind, but in mensuration. Men respect themselves, according as they are 
more wealthy, higher in rank or office, loftier in the world's opinion, able
to 
command more votes, more the favorites of the people or of Power. 
The difference among men is not so much in their nature and intrinsic 
power, as in the faculty of communication. Some have the capacity of 
uttering and embodying in words their thoughts. All men, more or less,
feel


--- PAGE 254 ---
those thoughts. The glory of genius and the rapture of virtue, when
rightly 
revealed, are diffused and shared among unnumbered minds. When 
eloquence and poetry speak; when those glorious arts, statuary, painting, 
and music, take audible or visible shape; when patriotism, charity, and 
virtue
speak with a thrilling potency, the hearts of thousands glow with a
kindred 
joy and ecstasy. If it were not so, there would be no eloquence; for 
eloquence is that to which other hearts respond; it is the faculty and
power 
of making other hearts respond. No one is so low or degraded, as not 
sometimes to be touched with the beauty of goodness. No heart is made 
of materials so common, or even base, as not sometimes to respond, 
through every chord of it, to the call of honor, patriotism, generosity, and 
virtue. The poor African Slave will die for the master. or mistress, or in 
defence of the children, whom he loves. The poor, lost, scorned, 
abandoned, outcast woman will, without expectation of reward nurse 
those who are dying on every hand, utter strangers to her, with a


--- PAGE 255 ---
contagious and horrid pestilence. The pickpocket will scale burning walls 
to rescue child or woman, unknown to him, from the ravenous flames. 
Most glorious is this capacity! A power to commune with God and His 
Angels; a reflection of the Uncreated Light; a mirror that can collect and 
concentrate upon itself all the moral splendors of the Universe. It is the 
soul alone that gives any value to the things of this world. and it is only
by 
raising the soul to its just elevation above all other things, that we can
look 
rightly upon the purposes of this earth. No sceptre nor throne, nor 
structure of ages, nor broad empire, can compare with the wonders and 
grandeurs of a single thought. That alone, of all things that have been 
made, comprehends the Maker of all. That alone is the key which unlocks 
all the treasures of the Universe; the power that reigns over Space, Time, 
and Eternity. That, under God, is the Sovereign Dispenser to man of all 
the blessings and glories that lie within the compass of possession, or the 
range of possibility. Virtue, Heaven, and Immortality exist not, nor ever
will 
exist for us except as they exist and will exist, in the perception, feeling,


--- PAGE 256 ---
and thought of the glorious mind. 
My Brother, in the hope that you have listened to and understood the 
Instruction and Lecture of this Degree, and that you feel the dignity of
your 
own nature and the vast capacities of your own soul for good or evil, I 
proceed briefly to communicate to you the remaining instruction of this 
Degree. 
The Hebrew word, in the old Hebrew and Samaritan character, suspended 
in the East, over the five columns, is ADONAÏ, one of the names of God, 
usually translated Lord; and which the
Hebrews, in reading, always substitute for the True Name, which is for
them 
ineffable. 
The five columns, in the five different orders of architecture, are
emblematical to 
us of the five principal divisions of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish
Rite: 
1. - The Tuscan, of the three blue Degrees, or the primitive Masonry. 
2. - The Doric, of the ineffable Degrees, from the, fourth to the
fourteenth,


--- PAGE 257 ---
inclusive. 
3. - The Ionic, of the fifteenth and sixteenth, or second temple Degrees. 
4. - The Corinthian, of the seventeenth and eighteenth Degrees, or those of
the 
new law. 
5. - The Composite, of the philosophical and chivalric Degrees
intermingled, from 
the nineteenth to the thirty-second, inclusive. 
The North Star, always fixed and immutable for us, represents the point in
the 
centre of the circle, or the Deity in the centre of the Universe. It is the
especial 
symbol of duty and of faith. To it, and the seven that continually revolve
around it, 
mystical meanings are attached, which you will learn hereafter, if you
should be 
permitted to advance, when you are made acquainted with the
philosophical 
doctrines of the Hebrews. 
The Morning Star, rising in the East, Jupiter, called by the Hebrews
Tsadõc or


--- PAGE 258 ---
Tsydyk, Just, is an emblem to us of the ever approaching dawn of
perfection and 
Masonic light. 
The three great lights of the Lodge are symbols to us of the Power,
Wisdom, and 
Beneficence of the Deity. They are also symbols of the first three
Sephiroth, or 
Emanations of the Deity, according to the Kabalah, Kether, the omnipotent
divine 
will; Chochmah, the divine intellectual power to generate thought, and
Binah, the 
divine intellectual capacity to produce it - the two latter, usually
translated 
Wisdom and Understanding, being the active and the passive, the positive
and 
the negative, which we do not yet endeavor to explain to you. They are
the 
columns Jachin and Boaz, that stand at the entrance to the Masonic
Temple. 
In another aspect of this Degree, the Chief of the Architects [ , Rab
Banaim,] 
symbolizes the constitutional executive head and chief of a free
government; and 
the Degree teaches us that no free government can long endure, when the


--- PAGE 259 ---
people cease
to select for their magistrates the best and the wisest of their statesmen; 
when, passing these by, they permit factions or sordid interests to select 
for them the small, the low, the ignoble, and the obscure, and into such 
hands commit the country's destinies. There is, after all, a "divine right"
to 
govern; and it is vested in the ablest, wisest, best, of every nation. 
"Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding: I am power: by 
me kings do reign, and princes decree justice; by me princes rule, and 
nobles, even all the magistrates of the earth." 
For the present, my Brother, let this suffice. We welcome you among us, 
to this peaceful retreat of virtue, to a participation in our privileges, to a 
share in our joys and our sorrows.


--- PAGE 260 ---
XIII. ROYAL ARCH OF SOLOMON. 
WHETHER the legend and history of this Degree are historically true, or 
but an allegory, containing in itself a deeper truth and a profounder 
meaning, we shall not now debate. If it be but a legendary myth, you must 
find out for yourself what it means. It is certain that the word which the 
Hebrews are not now permitted to pronounce was in common use by 
Abraham, Lot, Isaac, Jacob, Laban, Rebecca, and even among tribes 
foreign to the Hebrews, before the time of Moses; and that it recurs a 
hundred times in the lyrical effusions of David and other Hebrew poets. 
We know that for many centuries the Hebrews have been forbidden to 
pronounce the Sacred Name; that wherever it occurs, they have for ages 
read the word Adonaï instead; and that under it, when the masoretic 
points, which represent the vowels, came to be used, they placed those 
which belonged to the latter word. The possession of the true 
pronunciation was deemed to confer on him who had it extraordinary and


--- PAGE 261 ---
supernatural powers; and the Word itself, worn upon the person, was 
regarded as an amulet, a protection against personal danger, sickness, 
and evil spirits. We know that all this was a vain superstition, natural to a 
rude people, necessarily disappearing as the intellect of man became 
enlightened; and wholly unworthy of a Mason. 
It is noticeable that this notion of the sanctity of the Divine Name or 
Creative Word was common to all the ancient nations. The Sacred Word 
HOM was supposed by the ancient Persians (who were among the 
earliest emigrants from Northern India) to
be pregnant with a mysterious power; and they taught that by its utterance 
the world was created. In India it was forbidden to pronounce the word 
AUM or OM, the Sacred Name of the One Deity, manifested as Brahma, 
Vishna, and Seeva. 
These superstitious notions in regard to the efficacy of the Word, and the 
prohibition against pronouncing it, could, being errors, have formed no 
part of the pure primitive religion, or of the esoteric doctrine taught by 
Moses, and the full knowledge of which was confined to the Initiates;


--- PAGE 262 ---
unless the whole was but an ingenious invention for the concealment of 
some other Name or truth, the interpretation and meaning whereof was 
made known only to the select few. If so, the common notions in regard to 
the Word grew up in the minds of the people, like other errors and fables 
among all the ancient nations, out of original truths and symbols and 
allegories misunderstood. So it has always been that allegories, intended 
as vehicles of truth, to be understood by the sages, have become or bred 
errors, by being literally accepted. 
It is true, that before the masoretic points were invented (which was after 
the beginning of the Christian era), the pronunciation of a word in the 
Hebrew language could not be known from the characters in which it was 
written. It was, therefore, possible for that of the name of the Deity to
have 
been forgotten and lost. It is certain that its true pronunciation is not that 
represented by the word Jehovah; and therefore that that is not the true 
name of Deity, nor the Ineffable Word. 
The ancient symbols and allegories always had more than one


--- PAGE 263 ---
interpretation. They always had a double meaning, and sometimes more 
than two, one serving as the envelope of the other. Thus the pronunciation 
of the word was a symbol; and that pronunciation and the word itself
were 
lost, when the knowledge of the true nature and attributes of God faded 
out of the minds of the Jewish people. That is one interpretation - true,
but 
not the inner and profoundest one. 
Men were figuratively said to forget the name of God, when they lost that 
knowledge, and worshipped the heathen deities, and burned incense to 
them on the high places, and passed their children through the fire to 
Moloch. 
Thus the attempts of the ancient Israelites and of the Initiates to ascertain 
the True Name of the Deity, and its pronunciation, and the loss of the
True 
Word, are an allegory, in which are
represented the general ignorance of the true nature and attributes of 
God, the proneness of the people of Judah and Israel to worship other 
deities, and the low and erroneous and dishonoring notions of the Grand


--- PAGE 264 ---
Architect of the Universe, which all shared except a few favored persons; 
for even Solomon built altars and sacrificed to Astarat, the goddess of the 
Tsidumm, and Malcüm, the Aamünite god, and built high places for 
Kamüs, the Moabite deity, and Malec the god of the Beni-Aamün. The
true 
nature of God was unknown to them, like His name; and they worshipped 
the calves of Jeroboam, as in the desert they did that made for them by 
Aarün. 
The mass of the Hebrews did not believe in the existence of one only God 
until a late period in their history. Their. early and popular ideas of the 
Deity were singularly low and unworthy. Even while Moses was receiving 
the law upon Mount Sinai, they forced Aarün to make them an image of 
the Egyptian god Apis, and fell down and adored it. They were ever ready 
to return to the worship of the gods of the Mitzraim; and soon after the 
death of Joshua they became devout worshippers of the false gods of all 
the surrounding nations. "Ye have borne," Amos, the prophet, said to 
them, speaking of their forty years' journeying in the desert, under Moses,


--- PAGE 265 ---
"the tabernacle of your Malec and Kaiün your idols, the star of your god, 
which ye made to yourselves." 
Among them, as among other nations, the conceptions of God formed by 
individuals varied according to their intellectual and spiritual capacities; 
poor and imperfect, and investing God with the commonest and coarest 
attributes of humanity, among the ignorant and coarse; pure and lofty 
among the virtuous and richly gifted. These conceptions gradually 
improved and became purified and ennobled, as the nation advanced in 
civilization - being lowest in the historical books, amended in the
prophetic 
writings, and reaching their highest elevation among the poets. 
Among all the ancient nations there was one faith and one idea of Deity 
for the enlightened, intelligent, and educated, and another for the
common 
people. To this rule the Hebrews were no exception. Yehovah, to the 
mass of the people, was like the gods of the nations around them, except 
that he was the peculiar God, first of the family of Abraham, of that of 
Isaac, and of that of Jacob, and afterward the National God; and, as they


--- PAGE 266 ---
believed, more powerful than the other gods of the same nature 
worshipped
by their neighbors - "Who among the Baalim is like unto thee, O 
Yehovah?" - expressed their whole creed. 
The Deity of the early Hebrews talked to Adam and Eve in the garden of 
delight, as he walked in it in the cool of the day; he conversed with
Kayin; 
he sat and ate with Abraham in his tent; that patriarch required a visible 
token, before he would believe in his positive promise; he permitted 
Abraham to expostulate with him, and to induce him to change his first 
determination in regard to Sodom; he wrestled with Jacob; he showed 
Moses his person, though not his face; he dictated the minutest police 
regulations and the dimensions of the tabernacle and its furniture, to the 
Israelites; he insisted on and delighted in sacrifices and burnt-offerings;
he 
was angry, jealous, and revengeful, as well as wavering and irresolute; he 
allowed Moses to reason him out of his fixed resolution utterly to destroy 
his people; he commanded the performance of the most shocking and


--- PAGE 267 ---
hideous acts of cruelty and barbarity. He hardened the heart of Pharaoh; 
he repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto the people of 
Nineveh; and he did it not, to the disgust and anger of Jonah. 
Such were the popular notions of the Deity; and either the priests had 
none better, or took little trouble to correct these notions; or the popular 
intellect was not enough enlarged to enable them to entertain any higher 
conceptions of the Almighty. 
But such were not the ideas of the intellectual and enlightened few among 
the Hebrews. It is certain that they possessed a knowledge of the true 
nature and attributes of God; as the same class of men did among the 
other nations - Zoroaster, Menu, Confucius, Socrates, and Plato. But their 
doctrines on this subject were esoteric; they did not communicate them to 
the people at large, but only to a favored few; and as they were 
communicated in Egypt and India, in Persia and Phoenicia, in Greece and 
Samothrace, in the greater mysteries, to the Initiates. 
The communication of this knowledge and other secrets, some of which 
are perhaps lost, constituted, under other names, what we now call


--- PAGE 268 ---
Masonry, or Free or Frank-Masonry. That knowledge was, in one sense, 
the Lost Word, which was made known to the Grand Elect, Perfect, and 
Sublime Masons. It would be folly to pretend that the forms of Masonry 
were the same in those ages as they are now. The present name of the 
Order, and its titles, and the names of the Degrees now in use, were not 
then known.
Even Blue Masonry cannot trace back its authentic history, with its
present 
Degrees, further than the year 1700, if so far. But, by whatever name it 
was known in this or the other country, Masonry existed as it now exists, 
the same in spirit and at heart, not only when Solomon builded the
temple, 
but centuries before - before even the first colonies emigrated into 
Southern India, Persia, and Egypt, from the cradle of the human race. 
The Supreme, Self-existent, Eternal, All-wise, All-powerful, Infinitely
Good, 
Pitying, Beneficent, and Merciful Creator and Preserver of the Universe 
was the same, by whatever name he was called, to the intellectual and


--- PAGE 269 ---
enlightened men of all nations. The name was nothing, if not a symbol
and 
representative hieroglyph of his nature and attributes. The name AL 
represented his remoteness above men, his inaccessibility; BAL and 
BALA, his might; ALOHIM, his various potencies; IHUH, existence and
the 
generation of things. None of his names, among the Orientals, were the 
symbols of a divinely infinite love and tenderness, and all-embracing 
mercy. As MOLOCH or MALEK he was but an omnipotent monarch, a 
tremendous and irresponsible Will; as ADONAÏ, only an arbitrary LORD 
and Master; as AL Shadaï, potent and a DESTROYER. 
To communicate true and correct ideas in respect of the Deity was one 
chief object of the mysteries. In them, Khürüm the King, and Khürüm the 
Master, obtained their knowledge of him and his attributes; and in them 
that knowledge was taught to Moses and Pythagoras. 
Wherefore nothing forbids you to consider the whole legend of this 
Degree, like that of the Master's, an allegory, representing the 
perpetuation of the knowledge of the True God in the sanctuaries of


--- PAGE 270 ---
initiation. By the subterranean vaults you may understand the places of 
initiation, which in the ancient ceremonies were generally under ground. 
The Temple of Solomon presented a symbolic image of the Universe; and 
resembled, in its arrangements and furniture, all the temples of the
ancient 
nations that practised the mysteries. The system of numbers was 
intimately connected with their religions and worship, and has come down 
to us in Masonry; though the esoteric meaning with which the numbers 
used by us are pregnant is unknown to the vast majority of those who use 
them. Those numbers were especially employed that had a reference to 
the Deity, represented his attributes, or figured in the
frame-work of the world, in time and space, and formed more or less the 
bases of that frame-work. These were universally regarded as sacred, 
being the expression of order and intelligence, the utterances of Divinity 
Himself. 
The Holy of Holies of the Temple formed a cube; in which, drawn on a 
plane surface, there are 4 + 3 + 2 = 9 lines visible, and three sides or


--- PAGE 271 ---
faces. It corresponded with the number four, by which the ancients 
presented Nature, it being the number of substances or corporeal forms, 
and of the elements, the cardinal points and seasons, and the secondary 
colors. The number three everywhere represented the Supreme Being. 
Hence the name of the Deity, engraven upon the triangular plate, and that 
sunken into the cube of agate, taught the ancient Mason, and teaches us, 
that the true knowledge of God, of His nature and His attributes is written 
by Him upon the leaves of the great Book of Universal Nature, and may
be 
read there by all who are endowed with the requisite amount of intellect 
and intelligence. This knowledge of God, so written there, and of which 
Masonry has in all ages been the interpreter, is the Master Mason's Word. 
Within the Temple, all the arrangements were mystically and symbolically 
connected with the same system. The vault or ceiling, starred like the 
firmament, was supported by twelve columns, representing the twelve 
months of the year. The border that ran around the columns represented 
the zodiac, and one of the twelve celestial signs was appropriated to each


--- PAGE 272 ---
column. The brazen sea was supported by twelve oxen, three looking to 
each cardinal point of the compass. 
And so in our day every Masonic Lodge represents the Universe. Each 
extends, we are told, from the rising to the setting sun, from the South to 
the North, from the surface of the Earth to the Heavens, and from the 
same to the centre of the globe. In it are represented the sun, moon, and 
stars; three great torches in the East, West, and South, forming a triangle, 
give it light: and, like the Delta or Triangle suspended in the East, and 
inclosing the Ineffable Name, indicate, by the mathematical equality of
the 
angles and sides, the beautiful and harmonious proportions which govern 
in the aggregate and details of the Universe; while those sides and angles 
represent, by their number, three, the Trinity of Power, Wisdom, and 
Harmony, which presided at the building of this marvellous work These 
three great lights also represent the
great mystery of the three principles, of creation, dissolution or
destruction, 
and reproduction or regeneration, consecrated by all creeds in their
numerous


--- PAGE 273 ---
Trinities. 
The luminous pedestal, lighted by the perpetual flame within, is a symbol
of 
that light of Reason, given by God to man, by which he is enabled to read
in 
the Book of Nature the record of the thought, the revelation of the
attributes of 
the Deity. 
The three Masters, Adoniram, Joabert, and Stolkin, are types of the True 
Mason, who seeks for knowledge from pure motives, and that he may be
the 
better enabled to serve and benefit his fellow-men; while the discontented 
and presumptuous Masters who were buried in the ruins of the arches 
represent those who strive to acquire it for unholy purposes, to gain
power 
over their fellows, to gratify their pride, their vanity, or their ambition. 
The Lion that guarded the Ark and held in his mouth the key wherewith to 
open it, figuratively represents Solomon, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
who 
preserved and communicated the key to the true knowledge of God, of His 
laws, and of the profound mysteries of the moral and physical Universe.


--- PAGE 274 ---
ENOCH [ Khanõc], we are told, walked with God three hundred years, 
after reaching the age of sixty-five - "walked with God, and he was no
more, 
for God had taken him." His name signified in the Hebrew, INITIATE or 
INITIATOR. The legend of the columns, of granite and brass or bronze, 
erected by him, is probably symbolical. That of bronze, which survived
the 
flood, is supposed to symbolize the mysteries, of which Masonry is the 
legitimate successor - from the earliest times the custodian and depository
of 
the great philosophical and religious truths, unknown to the world at
large, 
and handed down from age to age by an unbroken current of tradition, 
embodied in symbols, emblems, and allegories. 
The legend of this Degree is thus, partially, interpreted. It is of little 
importance whether it is in anywise historical. For its value consists in
the 
lessons which it inculcates, and the duties which it prescribes to those
who 
receive it. The parables and allegories of the Scriptures are not less
valuable


--- PAGE 275 ---
than history. Nay, they are more so, because ancient history is little 
instructive, and truths are concealed in and symbolized by the legend and
the 
myth. 
There are profounder meanings concealed in the symbols of this Degree, 
connected with the philosophical system of the Hebrew
Kabalists, which you will learn hereafter, if you should be so fortunate as 
to advance. They are unfolded in the higher Degrees. The lion [ 
Arai, Araiah, which also means the altar] still holds in his mouth the key
of 
the enigma of the sphynx. 
But there is one application of this Degree, that you are now entitled to 
know; and which, remembering that Khürüm, the Master, is the symbol of 
human freedom, you would probably discover for yourself. 
It is not enough for a people to gain its liberty. It must secure it. It must
not 
intrust it to the keeping, or hold it at the pleasure, of any one man. The 
keystone of the Royal Arch of the great Temple of Liberty is a
fundamental


--- PAGE 276 ---
law, charter, or constitution; the expression of the fixed habits of thought
of 
the people, embodied in a written instrument, or the result of the slow 
accretions and the consolidation of centuries; the same in war as in 
peace; that cannot be hastily changed, nor be violated with impunity, but
is 
sacred, like the Ark of the Covenant of God, which none could touch and 
live. 
A permanent constitution, rooted in the affections, expressing the will
and 
judgment, and built upon the instincts and settled habits of thought of the 
people, with an independent judiciary, an elective legislature of two 
branches, an executive responsible to the people, and the right of trial by 
jury, will guarantee the liberties of a people, if it be virtuous and
temperate, 
without luxury, and without the lust of conquest and dominion, and the 
follies of visionary theories of impossible perfection. 
Masonry teaches its Initiates that the pursuits and occupations of this life, 
its activity, care, and ingenuity, the predestined developments of the


--- PAGE 277 ---
nature given us by God, tend to promote His great design, in making the 
world; and are not at war with the great purpose of life. It teaches that 
everything is beautiful in its time, in its place, in its appointed office;
that 
everything which man is put to do, if rightly and faithfully done,
naturally 
helps to work out his salvation; that if he obeys the genuine principles of 
his calling, he will be a good man: and that it is only by neglect and
nonperformance 
of the task set for him by Heaven, by wandering into idle 
dissipation, or by violating their beneficent and lofty spirit, that he
becomes 
a bad man. The appointed action of life is the great training of
Providence; 
and if man yields himself
to it, he will need neither churches nor ordinances, except for the 
expression of his religious homage and gratitude. 
For there is a religion of toil. It is not all drudgery, a mere stretching of
the 
limbs and straining of the sinews to tasks. It has a meaning and an intent. 
A living heart pours life-blood into the toiling arm; and warm affections


--- PAGE 278 ---
inspire and mingle with man's labors. They are the home affections. Labor 
toils a-field, or plies its task in cities, or urges the keels of commerce
over 
wide oceans; but home is its centre; and thither it ever goes with its 
earnings, with the means of support and comfort for others; offerings 
sacred to the thought of every true man, as a sacrifice at a golden shrine. 
Many faults there are amidst the toils of life; many harsh and hasty words 
are uttered; but still the toils go on, weary and hard and exasperating as 
they often are. For in that home is age or sickness, or helpless infancy, or 
gentle childhood, or feeble woman, that must not want. If man had no 
other than mere selfish impulses, the scene of labor which we behold 
around us would not exist. 
The advocate who fairly and honestly presents his case, with feeling of 
true self-respect, honor, and conscience, to help the tribunal on towards 
the right conclusion, with a conviction that God's justice reigns there, is 
acting a religious part, leading that day religious life; or else right and 
justice are no part of religion Whether, during all that day, he has once


--- PAGE 279 ---
appealed, in form or in terms, to his conscience, or not; whether he has 
once spoken of religion and God, or not; if there has been the inward 
purpose, the conscious intent and desire, that sacred justice should 
triumph, he has that day led a good and religious life, and made most a 
essential contribution to that religion of life and of society, the cause of 
equity between man and man, and of truth and right action in the world. 
Books, to be of religious tendency in the Masonic sense, need not be 
books of sermons, of pious exercises, or of prayers. Whatever inculcates 
pure, noble, and patriotic sentiments, or touches the heart with the beauty 
of virtue, and the excellence of an upright life, accords with the religion
of 
Masonry, and is the Gospel of literature and art. That Gospel is preached 
from many a book and painting, from many a poem and fiction, and
review 
and newspaper; and it is a painful error and miserable narrowness, not to 
recognize these wide-spread agencies of Heaven's providing; not
to see and welcome these many-handed coadjutors, to the great and good 
cause. The oracles of God do not speak from the pulpit alone.


--- PAGE 280 ---
There is also a religion of society. In business, there is much more than 
sale, exchange, price, payment; for there is the sacred faith of man in 
man. When we repose perfect confidence in the integrity of another; when 
we feel that he will not swerve from the right, frank, straightforward, 
conscientious course, for any temptation; his integrity and 
conscientiousness are the image of God to us; and when we believe in it, 
it is as great and generous an act, as when we believe in the rectitude of 
the Deity. 
In gay assemblies for amusement, the good affections of life gush and 
mingle. If they did not, these gathering-places would be as dreary and 
repulsive as the caves and dens of outlaws and robbers. When friends 
meet, and hands are warmly pressed, and the eye kindles and the 
countenance is suffused with gladness, there is a religion between their 
hearts; and each loves and worships the True and Good that is in the 
other. It is not policy, or self-interest, or selfishness that spreads such a 
charm around that meeting, but the halo of bright and beautiful affection.


--- PAGE 281 ---
The same splendor of kindly liking, and affectionate regard, shines like
the 
soft overarching sky, over all the world; over all places where men meet, 
and walk or toil together; not over lovers' bowers and marriage-altars 
alone, not over the homes of purity and tenderness alone; but over all 
tilled fields, and busy workshops, and dusty highways, and paved streets. 
There is not a worn stone upon the sidewalks, but has been the altar of 
such offerings of mutual kindness; nor a wooden pillar or iron railing 
against which hearts beating with affection have not leaned. How many 
soever other elements there are in the stream of life flowing through these 
channels, that is surely here and everywhere; honest, heartfelt, 
disinterested, inexpressible affection. 
Every Masonic Lodge is a temple of religion; and its teachings are 
instruction in religion. For here are inculcated disinterestedness,
affection, 
toleration, devotedness, patriotism, truth, a generous sympathy with those 
who suffer and mourn, pity for the fallen, mercy for the erring, relief for 
those in want, Faith, Hope, and Charity. Here we meet as brethren, to


--- PAGE 282 ---
learn to know and love each other. Here we greet each other gladly, are 
lenient to each other's faults, regardful of each other's feelings, ready to 
relieve
each other's wants. This is the true religion revealed to the ancient 
patriarchs; which Masonry has taught for many centuries, and which it
will 
continue to teach as long as time endures. If unworthy passions, or 
selfish, bitter, or revengeful feelings, contempt, dislike, hatred, enter
here, 
they are intruders and n t welcome, strangers uninvited, and not guests. 
Certainly there are many evils and bad passions, and much hate and 
contempt and unkindness everywhere in the world. We cannot refuse to 
see the evil -that is in life. But all is not evil. We still see God in the
world. 
There is good amidst the evil. The hand of mercy leads wealth to the 
hovels of poverty and sorrow. Truth and simplicity live amid many wiles 
and sophistries. There are good hearts underneath gay robes, and under 
tattered garments also. 
Love clasps the hand of love, amid all the envyings and distractions of


--- PAGE 283 ---
showy competition; fidelity, pity, and sympathy hold the long night-watch 
by the bedside of the suffering neighbor, amidst the surrounding poverty 
and squalid misery. Devoted men go from city to city to nurse those 
smitten down by the terrible pestilence that renews at intervals its 
mysterious marches. Women well-born and delicately nurtured nursed the 
wounded soldiers in hospitals, before it became fashionable to do so; and 
even poor lost women, whom God alone loves and pities, tend the
plaguestricken 
with a patient and generous heroism. Masonry and its kindred 
Orders teach men to love each other, feed the hungry, clothe the naked, 
comfort the sick, and bury the friendless dead. Everywhere God finds and 
blesses the kindly office, the pitying thought, and the loving heart. 
There is an element of good in all men's lawful pursuits and a divine
spirit 
breathing in all their lawful affections. The ground on which they tread is 
holy ground. There is a natural religion of life, answering, with however 
many a broken tone, to the religion of nature. There is a beauty and glory 
in Humanity., in man, answering, with however many a mingling shade, to


--- PAGE 284 ---
the loveliness of soft landscapes and swelling hills, and the wondrous 
Men may be virtuous, self-improving, and religious in their employments. 
Precisely for that, those employments were made. All their social
relations, 
friendship, love , the ties of family, were made to be holy. They may be 
religious, not by a kind of protest
and resistance against their several vocations; but by conformity to their 
true spirit. Those vocations do not exclude religion; but demand it, for
their 
own perfection. They may be religious laborers, whether in field or
factory; 
religious physicians, lawyers, sculptors, poets, painters, and musicians. 
They may be religious in all the toils and in all the amusements of life. 
Their life may be a religion; the broad earth its altar; its incense the very 
breath of life; its fires ever kindled by the brightness of Heaven. 
Bound up with our poor, frail life, is the mighty thought that spurns the 
narrow span of all visible existence. Ever the soul reaches outward, and 
asks for freedom. It looks forth from the narrow and grated windows of 
sense, upon the wide immeasurable creation; it knows that around it and


--- PAGE 285 ---
beyond it lie outstretched the infinite and everlasting paths. 
Everything within us and without us ought to stir our minds to admiration 
and wonder. We are a mystery encompassed with mysteries. The 
connection of mind with matter is a mystery; the wonderful telegraphic 
communication between the brain and every part of the body, the power 
and action of the will. Every familiar step is more than a story in a land
of 
enchantment. The power of movement is as mysterious as the power of 
thought. Memory, and dreams that are the indistinct echoes of dead 
memories are alike inexplicable. Universal harmony springs from infinite 
complication. The momentum of every step we take in our dwelling 
contributes in part to the order of the Universe. We are connected by ties 
of thought, and even of matter and its forces, with the whole boundless 
Universe and all the past and coming generations of men. 
The humblest object beneath our eye as completely defies our scrutiny as 
the economy of the most distant star. Every leaf and every blade of grass 
holds within itself secrets which no human penetration will ever fathom.
No


--- PAGE 286 ---
man can tell what is its principle of life. No man can know what his
power 
of secretion is. Both are inscrutable mysteries. Wherever we place our 
hand we lay it upon the locked bosom of mystery. Step where we will, we 
tread upon wonders. The sea-sands, the clods of the field, the water-worn 
pebbles on the hills, the rude masses of rock, are traced over and over, in 
every direction, with a handwriting older and more significant and
sublime 
than all the ancient ruins, and all the overthrown and buried cities that
past 
generations
have left upon the earth; for it is the handwriting of the Almighty. 
A Mason's great business with life is to read the book of its teaching; to 
find that life is not the doing of drudgeries, but the hearing of oracles.
The 
old mythology is but a leaf in that book; for it peopled the world with 
spiritual natures; and science, many-leaved, still spreads before us the 
same tale of wonder. 
We shall be just as happy hereafter, as we are pure and upright, and no


--- PAGE 287 ---
more, just as happy as our character prepares us to be, and no more. Our 
moral, like our mental character, is nut formed in a moment; it is the
habit 
of our minds; the result of many thoughts and feelings and efforts, bound 
together by many natural and strong ties. The great law of Retribution is, 
that all coming experience is to be affected by every present feeling;
every 
future moment of being must answer for every present moment; one 
moment, sacrificed to vice, or lost to improvement, is forever sacrificed 
and lost; an hour's delay to enter the right path, is to put us back so far,
in 
the everlasting pursuit of happiness; and every sin, even of the best men, 
is to be thus answered for, if not according to the full measure of its
illdesert, 
yet according to a rule of unbending rectitude and impartiality. 
The law of retribution presses upon every m an, whether he thinks of it or 
not. It pursues him through all the courses of life, with a step that never 
falters nor tires, and with an eye that never sleeps. If it were not so,
God's 
government would not be impartial; 'there would be no discrimination; no


--- PAGE 288 ---
moral dominion; no light shed upon the mysteries of Providence. 
Whatsoever a man soweth, that, and not something else, shall he reap. 
That which we are doing, good or evil, grave or gay, that which we do
today 
and shall do to-morrow; each thought, each feeling, each action, each 
event; every passing hour, every breathing moment; all are contributing to 
form the character according to which we are to be judged. Every particle 
of influence that goes to form that aggregate, - our character, - will, in
that 
future scrutiny, be sifted out from the mass; and, particle by particle, with 
ages perhaps intervening, fall a distinct contribution to the sum of our
joys 
or woes. Thus every idle word and idle hour will give answer in the 
judgment. 
Let us take care, therefore, what we sow. An evil temptation comes upon 
us; the opportunity of unrighteous gain, or of unhallowed
indulgence, either in the sphere of business or pleasure, of society or 
solitude. We yield; and plant a seed of bitterness and sorrow. To-morrow
it


--- PAGE 289 ---
will threaten discovery. Agitated and alarmed, we cover the sin, and bury
it 
deep in falsehood and hypocrisy. In the bosom where it lies concealed, in 
the fertile soil of kindred vices, that sin dies not, but thrives and grows;
and 
other and still other germs of evil gather around the accursed root; until, 
from that single seed of corruption, there springs up in the soul all that is 
horrible in habitual lying, knavery, or vice. Loathingly, often, we take
each 
downward step; but a frightful power urges us onward; and the hell of 
debt, disease, ignominy, or remorse gathers its shadows around Our 
steps even on earth; and are yet but the beginnings of sorrows. The evil 
deed may be done in a single moment; but conscience never dies, 
memory never sleeps; guilt never can become innocence; and remorse 
can never whisper peace. 
Beware, thou who art tempted to evil! Beware what thou layest up for the 
future! Beware what thou layest up in the archives of eternity! Wrong not 
thy neighbor! lest the thought of him thou injurest, and who suffers by
thy


--- PAGE 290 ---
act, be to thee a pang which years will not deprive of its bitterness! Break 
not into the house of innocence, to rifle it of its treasure; lest when many 
years have passed over thee, the moan of its distress may not have died 
away from thine ear! Build not the desolate throne of ambition in thy
heart; 
nor be busy with devices, and circumventings, and selfish schemings; lest 
desolation and loneliness be on thy path, as it stretches into the long 
futurity! Live not a useless, an impious, or an injurious life! for bound up 
with that life is the immutable principle of an endless retribution, and 
elements of God's creating, which will never spend their force, but 
continue ever to unfold with the ages of eternity. Be not deceived! God 
has formed thy nature, thus to answer to the future. His law can never be 
abrogated, nor His justice eluded; and forever and ever it will be true,
that 
"Whatsoever a man soweth, that also he shall reap.”


--- PAGE 291 ---
XIV.  GRAND ELECT, PERFECT, AND SUBLIME
MASON.
[Perfect Elu.]
It is for each individual Mason to discover the secret of Ma-
sonry, by reflection upon its symbols and a wise consideration and
analysis of what is said and done in the work. Masonry does not
inculcate her truths. She states them, once and briefly; or hints
them, perhaps, darkly; or interposes a cloud between them and
eyes that would be dazzled by them. "Seek, and ye shall find,"
knowledge and the truth.
The practical object of Masonry is the physical and moral
amelioration and the intellectual and spiritual improvement of
individuals and society. Neither can be effected, except by the
dissemination of truth. It is falsehood in doctrines and fallacy


--- PAGE 292 ---
in principles, to which most of the miseries of men and the mis-
fortunes of nations are owing. Public opinion is rarely right on
any point; and there are and always will be important truths to
be substituted in that opinion in the place of many errors and
absurd and injurious prejudices. There are few truths that public
opinion has not at some time hated and persecuted as heresies;
and few errors that have not at some time seemed to it truths radi-
ant from the immediate presence of God. There are moral mala-
dies, also, of man and society, the treatment of which requires not
only boldness, but also, and more, prudence and discretion; since
they are more the fruit of false and pernicious doctrines, moral,
political, and religious, than of vicious inclinations.
Much of the Masonic secret manifests itself, without speech
revealing it to him who even partially comprehends all the De-
grees in proportion as he receives them; and particularly to those
who advance to the highest Degrees of the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite. That Rite raises a corner of the veil, even in the


--- PAGE 293 ---
Degree of Apprentice; for it there declares that Masonry is a
worship.
Masonry labors to improve the social order by enlightening
men's minds, warming their hearts with the love of the good, in-
spiring them with the great principle of human fraternity, and
requiring of its disciples that their language and actions shall con-
form to that principle, that they shall enlighten each other, con-
trol their passions, abhor vice, and pity the vicious man as one
afflicted with a deplorable malady.
It is the universal, eternal, immutable religion, such as God
planted it in the heart of universal humanity. No creed has ever
been long-lived that was not built on this foundation. It is the
base, and they are the superstructure. "Pure religion and unde-
filed before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and
widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the
world." "Is not this the fast that I have chosen ? to loose the
bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the


--- PAGE 294 ---
oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke ?" The ministers
of this religion are all Masons who comprehend it and are devoted
to it; its sacrifices to God are good works, the sacrifices of the
base and disorderly passions, the offering up of self-interest on
the altar of humanity, and perpetual efforts to attain to all the
moral perfection of which man is capable.
To make honor and duty the steady beacon-lights that shall
guide your life-vessel over the stormy seas of time; to do that
which it is right to do, not because it will insure you success, or
bring with it a reward, or gain the applause of men, or be "the
best policy," more prudent or more advisable; but because it is
right, and therefore ought to be done; to war incessantly against
error, intolerance, ignorance, and vice, and yet to pity those who
err, to be tolerant even of intolerance, to teach the ignorant, and
to labor to reclaim the vicious, are some of the duties of a Mason.
A good Mason is one that can look upon death, and see its face
with the same countenance with which he hears its story; that


--- PAGE 295 ---
can endure all the labors of his life with his soul supporting his
body, that can equally despise riches when he hath them and
when he hath them not;that is, not sadder if they are in his neigh-
bor's exchequer, nor more lifted up if they shine around about his
own walls; one that is not moved with good fortune coming to
him, nor going from him; that can look upon another man's lands
with equanimity and pleasure, as if they were his own; and yet
look upon his own, and use them too, just as if they were another
man's; that neither spends his goods prodigally and foolishly, nor
yet keeps them avariciously and like a miser; that weighs not
benefits by weight and number, but by the mind and circumstances
of him who confers them; that never thinks his charity expen-
sive, if a worthy person be the receiver; that does nothing for
opinion's sake, but everything for conscience, being as careful of
his thoughts as of his acting in markets and theatres, and in as
much awe of himself as of a whole assembly; that is, bountiful
and cheerful to his friends, and charitable and apt to forgive his


--- PAGE 296 ---
enemies; that loves his country, consults its honor, and obeys its
laws, and desires and endeavors nothing more than that he may
do his duty and honor God. And such a Mason may reckon his
life to be the life of a man, and compute his months, not by
the course of the sun, but by the zodiac and circle of his vir-
tues.
The whole world is but one republic, of which each nation is a
family, and every individual a child. Masonry, not in anywise
derogating from the differing duties which the diversity of states
requires, tends to create a new people, which, composed of men of
many nations and tongues, shall all be bound together by the
bonds of science, morality, and virtue.
Essentially philanthropic, philosophical, and progressive, it has
for the basis of its dogma a firm belief in the existence of God
and his providence, and of the immortality of the soul; for its
object, the dissemination of moral, political, philosophical, and
religious truth, and the practice of all the virtues. In every age,


--- PAGE 297 ---
its device has been, "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity," with constitu-
tional government, law, order, discipline, and subordination to
legitimate authority--government and not anarchy.
But it is neither a political party nor a religious sect. It
braces all parties and all sects, to form from among them all a vast
fraternal association. It recognizes the dignity of human nature,
and man's right to such freedom as he is fitted for; and it
knows nothing that should place one man below another, except
ignorance, debasement, and crime, and the necessity of subordina-
tion to lawful will and authority.
It is philanthropic; for it recognizes the great truth that all
men are of the same origin, have common interests, and should
co-operate together to the same end.
Therefore it teaches its members to love one another, to give to
each other mutual assistance and support in all the circumstances
of life, to share each other's pains and sorrows, as well as their
joys and pleasures; to guard the reputations, respect the opinions,


--- PAGE 298 ---
and be perfectly tolerant of the errors, of each other, in matters
of faith and beliefs.
It is philisophical because it teaches the great Truths concern-
ing the nature and existence of one Supreme Deity, and the exist-
ence and immortality of the soul. It revives the Academy of
Plato and the wise teachings of Socrates. It reiterates the max-
ims of Pythagoras, Confucius, and Zoroaster, and reverentially
enforces the sublime lessons of Him who died upon the Cross.
The ancients thought that universal humanity acted under the
influence of two opposing Principles, the Good and the Evil: of
which the Good urged men toward Truth, Independence, and De-
votedness and the Evil toward Falsehood, Servility, and Selfish-
ness. Masonry represents the Good Principle and constantly wars
against the evil one. It is the Hercules, the Osiris, the Apollo, the
Mithras, and the Ormuzd, at everlasting and deadly feud with
the demons of ignorance, brutality, baseness, falsehood, slavish-
ness of soul, intolerance, superstition, tyranny, meanness, the in-


--- PAGE 299 ---
solence of wealth, and bigotry.
When despotism and superstition, twin-powers of evil and dark-
ness, reigned everywhere and seemed invincible and immortal, it
invented, to avoid persecution, the mysteries, that is to say, the
allegory, the symbol, and the emblem, and transmitted its doc-
trines by the secret mode of initiation. Now, retaining its ancient
symbols, and in part its ancient ceremonies, it displays in every
civilized country its banner, on which in letters of living light its
great principles are written; and it smiles at the puny efforts of
kings and popes to crush it out by excommunication and inter-
diction.
Man's views in regard to God, will contain only so much posi-
tive truth as the human mind is capable of receiving; whether
that truth is attained by the exercise of reason, or communicated
by revelation. It must necessarily be both limited and alloyed, to
bring it within the competence of finite human intelligence. Be-
ing finite, we can form no correct or adequate idea of the Infinite;


--- PAGE 300 ---
being material, we can form no clear conception of the Spiritual.
We do believe in and know the infinity of Space and Time, and
the spirituality of the Soul; but the idea of that infinity and
spirituality eludes us. Even Omnipotence cannot infuse infinite
conceptions into finite minds; nor can God, without first entirely
changing the conditions of our being, pour a complete and full
knowledge of His own nature and attributes into the narrow
capacity of a human soul. Human intelligence could not grasp
it, nor human language express it. The visible is, necessarily, the
measure of the invisible.
The consciousness of the individual reveals itself alone. His
knowledge cannot pass beyond the limits of his own being. His
conceptions of other things and other beings are only his concep-
tions. They are not those things or beings themselves. The living
principle of a living Universe must be INFINITE; while all our
ideas and conceptions are finite, and applicable only to finite beings.
The Deity is thus not an object of knowledge, but of faith; not


--- PAGE 301 ---
to be approached by the understanding, but by the moral sense;
not to be conceived, but to be felt. All attempts to embrace the
Infinite in the conception of the Finite are, and must be only ac-
commodations to the frailty of man. Shrouded from human com-
prehension in an obscurity from which a chastened imagination is
awed back, and Thought retreats in conscious weakness, the
Divine Nature is a theme on which man is little entitled to dog-
matize. Here the philosophic Intellect becomes most painfully
aware of its own insufficiency.
And yet it is here that man most dogmatizes, classifies and de-
scribes God's attributes, makes out his map of God's nature, and
his inventory of God's qualities, feelings, impulses, and passions;
and then hangs and burns his brother, who, as dogmatically as he,
makes out a different map and inventory. The common under-
standing has no humility. Its God is an incarnate Divinity. Im-
perfection imposes its own limitations on the Illimitable, and
clothes the Inconceivable Spirit of the Universe in forms that


--- PAGE 302 ---
come within the grasp of the senses and the intellect, and are
derived from that infinite and imperfect nature which is but God's
creation.
We are all of us, though not all equally, mistaken. The cher-
ished dogmas of each of us are not, as we fondly suppose, the pure
truth of God; but simply our own special form of error, our
guesses at truth, the refracted and fragmentary rays of light that
have fallen upon our own minds. Our little systems have their
day, and cease to be; they are but broken lights of God; and He
is more than they. Perfect truth is not attainable anywhere. We
style this Degree that of Perfection; and yet what it teaches is
imperfect and defective. Yet we are not to relax in the pursuit
of truth, nor contentedly acquiesce in error. It is our duty always
to press forward in the search; for though absolute truth is unat-
tainable, yet the amount of error in our views is capable of pro-
gressive and perpetual diminution; and thus Masonry is a con-
tinual struggle toward the light.


--- PAGE 303 ---
All errors are not equally innocuous. That which is most in-
jurious is to entertain unworthy conceptions of the nature and
attributes of God; and it is this that Masonry symbolizes by igno-
rance of the True Word. The true word of a Mason is, not the
entire, perfect, absolute truth in regard to God; but the highest
and noblest conception of Him that our minds are capable of
forming; and this word is Ineffable, because one man cannot
communicate to another his own conception of Deity; since every
man's conception of God must be proportioned to his mental cul-
tivation and intellectual powers, and moral excellence. God is, as
man conceives Him, the reflected image of man himself.
For every man's conception of God must vary with his mental
cultivation and mental powers. If any one contents himself with
any lower image than his intellect is capable of grasping, then he
contents himself with that which is false to him, as well as false in
fact. If lower than he can reach, he must needs feel it to be false.
And if we, of the nineteenth century after Christ, adopt the con-


--- PAGE 304 ---
ceptions of the nineteenth century before Him; if our conceptions
of God are those of the ignorant, narrow-minded, and vindictive
Israelite; then we think worse of God, and have a lower, meaner,
and more limited view of His nature, than the faculties which He
has bestowed are capable of grasping. The highest view we can
form is nearest to the truth. If we acquiesce in any lower one,
we acquiesce in an untruth. We feel that it is an affront and an
indignity to Him, to conceive of Him as cruel, short-sighted, ca-
pricious, and unjust; as a jealous, an angry, a vindictive Being.
When we examine our conceptions of His character, if we can
conceive of a loftier, nobler, higher, more beneficent, glorious, and
magnificent character, then this latter is to us the true conception
of Deity; for nothing can be imagined more excellent than He.
Religion, to obtain currency and influence with the great mass
of mankind, must needs be alloyed with such an amount of error
as to place it far below the standard attainable by the higher
human capacities. A religion as pure as the loftiest and most cul-


--- PAGE 305 ---
tivated human reason could discern, would not be comprehended
by, or effective over, the less educated portion of mankind. What
is Truth to the philosopher, would not be Truth, nor have the
effect of Truth, to the peasant. The religion of the many must
necessarily be more incorrect than that of the refined and reflective
few, not so much in its essence as in its forms, not so much in the
spiritual idea which lies latent at the bottom of it, as in the sym-
bols and dogmas in which that idea is embodied. The truest
religion would, in many points, not be comprehended by the igno-
rant, nor consolatory to them, nor guiding and supporting for
them. The doctrines of the Bible are often not clothed in the
language of strict truth, but in that which was fittest to convey
to a rude and ignorant people the practical essentials of the doc-
trine. A perfectly pure faith, free from all extraneous admixtures,
a system of noble theism and lofty morality, would find too little
preparation for it in the common mind and heart, to admit of
prompt reception by the masses of mankind; and Truth might


--- PAGE 306 ---
not have reached us, if it had not borrowed the wings of Error.
The Mason regards God as a Moral Governor, as well as an
Original Creator; as a God at hand, and not merely one afar off
in the distance of infinite space, and in the remoteness of Past
or Future Eternity. He conceives of Him as taking a watchful
and presiding interest in the affairs of the world, and as influenc-
ing the hearts and actions of men.
To him, God is the great Source of the World of Life and Mat-
ter; and man, with his wonderful corporeal and mental frame,
His direct work. He believes that God has made men with differ-
ent intellectual capacities, and enabled some, by superior intellect-
ual power, to see and originate truths which are hidden from the
mass of men. He believes that when it is His will that mankind
should make some great step forward, or achieve some pregnant
discovery, He calls into being some intellect of more than ordi-
nary magnitude and power, to give birth to new ideas, and
grander conceptions of the Truths vital to Humanity.


--- PAGE 307 ---
We hold that God has so ordered matters in this beautiful and
harmonious, but mysteriously-governed Universe, that one great
mind after another will arise, from time to time, as such are
needed, to reveal to men the truths that are wanted, and the
amount of truth than can be borne. He so arranges, that nature
and the course of events shall send men into the world, endowed
with that higher mental and moral organization, in which grand
truths, and sublime gleams of spiritual light will spontaneously
and inevitably arise. These speak to men by inspiration.
Whatever Hiram really was, he is the type, perhaps an imag-
inary type, to us, of humanity in its highest phase; an exemplar
of what man may and should become, in the course of ages, in his
progress toward the realization of his destiny; an individual gifted
with a glorious intellect, a noble soul, a fine organization, and a
perfectly balanced moral being; an earnest of what humanity may
be, and what we believe it will hereafter be in God's good time;
the possibility of the race made real.


--- PAGE 308 ---
The Mason believes that God has arranged this glorious but per-
plexing world with a purpose, and on a plan. He holds that every
man sent upon this earth, and especially every man of superior
capacity, has a duty to perform, a mission to fulfill, a baptism to
be baptized with; that every great and good man possesses some
portion of God's truth, which he must proclaim to the world, and
which must bear fruit in his own bosom. In a true and simple
sense, he believes all the pure, wise, and intellectual to be inspired,
and to be so for the instruction, advancement, and elevation of
mankind. That kind of inspiration, like God's omnipresence, is
not limited to the few writers claimed by Jews, Christians, or
Moslems, but is co-extensive with the race. It is the consequence
of a faithful use of our faculties. Each man is its subject, God is
its source, and Truth its only test. It differs in degrees, as the
intellectual endowments, the moral wealth of the soul, and the de-
gree of cultivation of those endowments and faculties differ. It is
limited to no sect, age, or nation. It is wide as the world and


--- PAGE 309 ---
common as God. It was not given to a few men, in the infancy
of mankind, to monopolize inspiration, and bar God out of the
soul. We are not born in the dotage and decay of the world. The
stars are beautiful as in their prime; the most ancient Heavens
are fresh and strong. God is still everywhere in nature. Wher-
ever a heart beats with love, wherever Faith and Reason utter
their oracles, there is God, as formerly in the hearts of seers and
prophets. No soil on earth is so holy as the good man's heart;
nothing is so full of God. This inspiration is not given to the
learned alone, not alone to the great and wise, but to every faithful
child of God. Certain as the open eye drinks in the light, do the
pure in heart see God; and he who lives truly, feels Him as a pres-
ence within the soul. The conscience is the very voice of Deity.
Masonry, around whose altars the Christian, the Hebrew, the
Moslem, the Brahmin, the followers of Confucius and Zoroaster,
can assemble as brethren and unite in prayer to the one God who
is above all the Baalim, must needs leave it to each of its Initiates


--- PAGE 310 ---
to look for the foundation of his faith and hope to the written
scriptures of his own religion. For itself it finds those truths
definite enough, which are written by the finger of God upon the
heart of man and on the pages of the book of nature. Views of
religion and duty, wrought out by the meditations of the studious,
confirmed by the allegiance of the good and wise, stamped as
sterling by the response they find in every uncorrupted mind, com-
mend themselves to Masons of every creed, and may well be ac-
cepted by all.
The Mason does not pretend to dogmatic certainty, nor vainly
imagine such certainty attainable. He considers that if there
were no written revelation, he could safely rest the hopes that ani-
mate him and the principles that guide him, on the deductions of
reason and the convictions of instinct and consciousness. He can
find a sure foundation for his religious belief, in these deductions
of the intellect and convictions of the heart. For reason proves
to him the existence and attributes of God; and those spiritual


--- PAGE 311 ---
instincts which he feels are the voice of God in his soul, infuse
into his mind a sense of his relation to God, a conviction of the
beneficence of his Creator and Preserver, and a hope of future ex-
istence; and his reason and conscience alike unerringly point to
virtue as the highest good, and the destined aim and purpose of
man's life.
He studies the wonders of the Heavens, the frame-work and
revolutions of the Earth, the mysterious beauties and adaptations
of animal existence, the moral and material constitution of the
human creature, so fearfully and wonderfully made; and is satis-
fied that God IS; and that a Wise and Good Being is the author
of the starry Heavens above him, and of the moral world within
him; and his mind finds an adequate foundation for its hopes, its
worship, its principles of action, in the far-stretching Universe, in
the glorious firmament, in the deep, full soul, bursting with un-
utterable thoughts.
These are truths which every reflecting mind will unhesitatingly


--- PAGE 312 ---
receive, as not to be surpassed, nor capable of improvement; and
fitted, if obeyed, to make earth indeed a Paradise, and man only a
little lower than the angels. The worthlessness of ceremonial
observances, and the necessity of active virtue; the enforcement
of purity of heart as the security for purity of life, and of the
government of the thoughts, as the originators and forerunners of
action; universal philanthropy, requiring us to love all men, and
to do unto others that and that only which we should think it
right, just, and generous for them to do unto us; forgiveness of
injuries; the necessity of self-sacrifice in the discharge of duty;
humility; genuine sincerity, and being that which we seem to be;
all these sublime precepts need no miracle, no voice from the
clouds, to recommend them to our allegiance, or to assure us of
their divine origin. They command obedience by virtue of their
inherent rectitude and beauty; and have been, and are, and will
be the law in every age and every country of the world. God
revealed them to man in the beginning.


--- PAGE 313 ---
To the Mason, God is our Father in Heaven, to be Whose
especial children is the sufficient reward of the peacemakers, to see
Whose face the highest hope of the pure in heart; Who is ever at
hand to strengthen His true worshippers; to Whom our most fer-
vent love is due, our most humble and patient submission; Whose
most acceptable worship is a pure and pitying heart and a benefi-
cent life; in Whose constant presence we live and act, to Whose
merciful disposal we are resigned by that death which, we hope
and believe, is but the entrance to a better life; and Whose wise
decrees forbid a man to lap his soul in an elysium of mere indolent
content.
As to our feelings toward Him and our conduct toward man,
Masonry teaches little about which men can differ, and little from
which they can dissent. He is our Father; and we are all breth-
ren. This much lies open to the most ignorant and busy, as fully
as to those who have most leisure and are most learned. This
needs no Priest to teach it, and no authority to indorse it; and if


--- PAGE 314 ---
every man did that only which is consistent with it, it would exile
barbarity, cruelty, intolerance, uncharitableness, perfidy, treach-
ery, revenge, selfishness, and all their kindred vices and bad pas-
sions beyond the confines of the world.
The true Mason, sincerely holding that a Supreme God created
and governs this world, believes also that He governs it by laws,
which, though wise, just, and beneficent, are yet steady, unwaver-
ing, inexorable. He believes that his agonies and sorrows are or-
dained for his chastening, his strengthening, his elaboration and
development; because they are the necessary results of the opera-
tion of laws, the best that could be devised for the happiness and
purification of the species, and to give occasion and opportunity
for the practice of all the virtues, from the homeliest and most
common, to the noblest and most sublime; or perhaps not even
that, but the best adapted to work out the vast, awful, glorious,
eternal designs of the Great Spirit of the Universe. He believes
that the ordained operations of nature, which have brought misery


--- PAGE 315 ---
to him, have, from the very unswerving tranquility of their
career, showered blessings and sunshine upon many another path;
that the unrelenting chariot of Time, which has crushed or maimed
him in its allotted course, is pressing onward to the accomplish-
ment of those serene and mighty purposes, to have contributed to
which, even as a victim, is an honor and a recompense. He takes
this view of Time and Nature and God, and yet bears his lot with-
out murmur or distrust; because it is a portion of a system, the
best possible, because ordained by God. He does not believe that
God loses sight of him, while superintending the march of the
great harmonies of the Universe; nor that it was not foreseen,
when the Universe was created, its laws enacted, and the long suc-
cession of its operations pre-ordained, that in the great march of
those events, he would suffer pain and undergo calamity. He be-
lieves that his individual good entered into God's consideration, as
well as the great cardinal results to which the course of all things
is tending.


--- PAGE 316 ---
Thus believing, he has attained an eminence in virtue, the high-
est, amid passive excellence, which humanity can reach. He finds
his reward and his support in the reflection that he is an unreluc-
tant and self-sacrificing co-operator with the Creator of the Uni-
verse; and in the noble consciousness of being worthy and capable
of so sublime a conception, yet so sad a destiny. He is then truly
entitled to be called a Grand Elect, Perfect, and Sublime Mason.
He is content to fall early in the battle, if his body may but form
a stepping-stone for the future conquests of humanity.
It cannot be that God, Who, we are certain, is perfectly good,
can choose us to suffer pain, unless either we are ourselves to re-
ceive from it an antidote to what is evil in ourselves, or else as
such pain is a necessary part in the scheme of the Universe, which
as a whole is good. In either case, the Mason receives it with
submission. He would not suffer unless it was ordered so. What-
ever his creed, if he believes that God is, and that He cares for
His creatures, he cannot doubt that; nor that it would not have


--- PAGE 317 ---
been so ordered, unless it was either better for himself, or for
some other persons, or for some things. To complain and lament
is to murmur against God's will, and worse than unbelief.
The Mason, whose mind is cast in a nobler mould than those of
the ignorant and unreflecting, and is instinct with a diviner life,-
who loves truth more than rest, and the peace of Heaven rather
than the peace of Eden,--to whom a loftier being brings severer
cares,--who knows that man does not live by pleasure or content
alone, but by the presence of the power of God,--must cast be-
hind him the hope of any other repose or tranquillity, than that
which is the last reward of long agonies of thought; he must re-
linquish all prospect of any Heaven save that of which trouble is
the avenue and portal; he must gird up his loins, and trim his
lamp, for a work that must be done, and must not be negligently
done. If he does not like to live in the furnished lodgings of tra-
dition, he must build his own house, his own system of faith and
thought, for himself.


--- PAGE 318 ---
The hope of success, and not the hope of reward, should be our
stimulating and sustaining power. Our object, and not ourselves,
should be our inspiring thought. Selfishness is a sin, when tem-
porary, and for time. Spun out to eternity, it does not become
celestial prudence. We should toil and die, not for Heaven or
Bliss, but for Duty.
In the more frequent cases, where we have to join our efforts to
those of thousands of others, to contribute to the carrying forward
of a great cause; merely to till the ground or sow the seed for a
very distant harvest, or to prepare the way for the future advent
of some great amendment; the amount which each one contrib-
utes to the achievement of ultimate success, the portion of the
price which justice should assign to each as his especial produc-
tion, can never be accurately ascertained. Perhaps few of those
who have ever labored, in the patience of secrecy and silence, to
bring about some political or social change, which they felt con-
vinced would ultimately prove of vast service to humanity, lived


--- PAGE 319 ---
to see the change effected, or the anticipated good flow from it.
Fewer still of them were able to pronounce what appreciable
weight their several efforts contributed to the achievement of the
change desired. Many will doubt, whether, in truth, these exer-
tions have any influence whatever; and, discouraged, cease all
active effort.
Not to be thus discouraged, the Mason must labor to elevate
and purify his motives, as well as sedulously cherish the convic-
tion, assuredly a true one, that in this world there is no such thing
as effort thrown away; that in all labor there is profit; that all
sincere exertion, in a righteous and unselfish cause, is necessarily
followed, in spite of all appearance to the contrary, by an appro-
priate and proportionate success; that no bread cast upon the
waters can be wholly lost; that no seed planted in the ground can
fail to quicken in due time and measure; and that, however we
may, in moments of despondency, be apt to doubt, not only
whether our cause will triumph, but whether, if it does, we shall


--- PAGE 320 ---
have contributed to its triumph,--there is One, Who has not
only seen every exertion we have made, but Who can assign
the exact degree in which each soldier has assisted to gain the
great victory over social evil. No good work is done wholly in
vain.
The Grand Elect, Perfect, and Sublime Mason will in nowise
deserve that honorable title, if he has not that strength, that will,
that self-sustaining energy; that Faith, that feeds upon no earthly
hope, nor ever thinks of victory, but, content in its own consum-
mation, combats, because it ought to combat, rejoicing fights, and
still rejoicing falls.
The Augean Stables of the World, the accumulated uncleanness
and misery of centuries, require a mighty river to cleanse them
thoroughly away; every drop we contribute aids to swell that
river and augment its force, in a degree appreciable by God,
though not by man; and he whose zeal is deep and earnest, will
not be over-anxious that his individual drops should be distin-


--- PAGE 321 ---
guishable amid the mighty mass of cleansing and fertilizing
waters; far less that, for the sake of distinction, it should flow in
ineffective singleness away.
The true Mason will not be careful that his name should be
inscribed upon the mite which he casts into the treasury of God.
It suffices him to know that if he has labored, with purity of pur-
pose, in any good cause, he must have contributed to its success;
that the degree in which he has contributed is a matter of infi-
nitely small concern; and still more, that the consciousness of
having so contributed, however obscurely and unnoticed, is his
sufficient, even if it be his sole, reward. Let every Grand Elect,
Perfect, and Sublime Mason cherish this faith. It is a duty. It
is the brilliant and never-dying light that shines within and
through the symbolic pedestal of alabaster, on which reposes the
perfect cube of agate, symbol of duty, inscribed with the divine
name of God. He who industriously sows and reaps is a good
laborer, and worthy of his hire. But he who sows that which


--- PAGE 322 ---
shall be reaped by others, by those who will know not of and care
not for the sower, is a laborer of a nobler order, and, worthy of a
more excellent reward.
The Mason does not exhort others to an ascetic undervaluing
of this life, as an insignificant and unworthy portion of existence;
for that demands feelings which are unnatural, and which, there-
fore, if attained, must be morbid, and if merely professed, insin-
cere; and teaches us to look rather to a future life for the com-
pensation of social evils, than to this life for their cure; and so
does injury to the cause of virtue and to that of social progress.
Life is real, and is earnest, and it is full of duties to be performed.
It is the beginning of our immortality. Those only who feel a
deep interest and affection for this world will work resolutely for
its amelioration; those whose affections are transferred to Heaven,
easily acquiesce in the miseries of earth, deeming them hopeless,
befitting, and ordained; and console themselves with the idea of
the ammends which are one day to be theirs. It is a sad truth, that


--- PAGE 323 ---
those most decidedly given to spiritual contemplation, and to
making religion rule in their hearts, are often most apathetic to-
ward all improvement of this world's systems, and in many cases
virtual conservatives of evil, and hostile to political and social re-
form, as diverting men's energies from eternity.
The Mason does not war with his own instincts, macerate the
body into weakness and disorder, and disparage what he sees to be
beautiful, knows to be wonderful, and feels to be unspeakably
dear and fascinating. He does not put aside the nature which
God has given him, to struggle after one which He has not be-
stowed. He knows that man is sent into the world, not a spir-
itual, but a composite being, made up of body and mind, the body
having, as is fit and needful in a material world, its full, rightful,
and allotted share. His life is guided by a full recognition of this
fact. He does not deny it in bold words, and admit it in weak-
nesses and inevitable failings. He believes that his spirituality
will come in the next stage of his being, when he puts on the spir-


--- PAGE 324 ---
itual body; that his body will be dropped at death; and that, until
then, God meant it to be commanded and controlled, but not neg-
lected, despised, or ignored by the soul, under pain of heavy con-
sequences. 
Yet the Mason is not indifferent as to the fate of the soul, after
its present life, as to its continued and eternal being, and the char-
acter of the scenes in which that being will be fully developed.
These are to him topics of the proroundest interest, and the most
ennobling and refining contemplation. They occupy much of his
leisure; and as he becomes familiar with the sorrows and calami-
ties of this life, as his hopes are disappointed and his visions of
happiness here fade away; when life has wearied him in its
race of hours; when he is harassed and toil-worn, and the bur-
den of his years weighs heavy on him, the balance of attraction
gradually inclines in favor of another life; and he clings to his
lofty speculations with a tenacity of interest which needs no in-
junction, and will listen to no prohibition. They are the consol-


--- PAGE 325 ---
ing privilege of the aspiring, the wayworn, the weary, and the
bereaved.
To him the contemplation of the Future lets in light upon the
Present, and develops the higher portions of his nature. He en-
deavors rightly to adjust the respective claims of Heaven and
earth upon his time and thought, so as to give the proper propor-
tions thereof to performing the duties and entering into the inter-
ests of this world, and to preparation for a better; to the cultiva-
tion and purification of his own character, and to the public service
of his fellow-men.
The Mason does not dogmatize, but entertaining and uttering
his own convictions, he leaves every one else free to do the same;
and only hopes that the time will come, even if after the lapse of
ages, when all men shall form one great family of brethren, and
one law alone, the law of love, shall govern God's whole Uni-
verse.
Believe as you may, my brother; if the Universe is not, to you,


--- PAGE 326 ---
without a God, and if man is not like the beast that perishes, but
hath an immortal soul, we welcome you among us, to wear, as we
wear, with humility, and conscious of your demerits and short-
comings, the title of Grand Elect, Perfect, and Sublime Mason.
It is not without a secret meaning, that twelve was the num-
ber of the Apostles of Christ, and seventy-two that of his Dis-
ciples: that John addressed his rebukes and menaces to the Seven
churches, the number of the Archangels and the Planets. At
Babylon were the Seven Stages of Bersippa, a pyramid of Seven
stories, and at Ecbatana Seven concentric inclosures, each of a
different color. Thebes also had Seven gates, and the same num-
ber is repeated again and again in the account of the flood. The
Sephiroth, or Emanations, ten in number, three in one class, and
seven in the other, repeat the mystic numbers of Pythagoras.
Seven Amschaspands or planetary spirits were invoked with
Ormuzd: Seven inferior Rishis of Hindustan were saved with the
head of their family in an ark: and Seven ancient personages


--- PAGE 327 ---
alone returned with the British just man, Hu, from the dale of
the grievous waters. There were Seven Heliadae, whose father
Helias, or the Sun, once crossed the sea in a golden cup; Seven
Titans, children of the older Titan, Kronos or Saturn; Seven
Corybantes; and Seven Cabiri, sons of Sydyk; Seven primeval
Celestial spirits of the Japanese, and Seven Karlesters who
escaped from the deluge and began to be the parents of a new
race, on the summit of Mount Albordi. Seven Cyclopes, also,
built the walls of Tiryus.
Celus, as quoted by Origen, tells us that the Persians repre-
sented by symbols the two-fold motion of the stars, fixed and
planetary, and the passage of the Soul through their successive
spheres. They erected in their holy caves, in which the mystic
rites of the Mithriac Initiations were practised, what he denomi-
nates a high ladder, on the Seven steps of which were Seven
gates or portals, according to the number of the Seven principal
heavenly bodies. Through these the aspirants passed, until they


--- PAGE 328 ---
reached the summit of the whole; and this passage was styled a
transmigration through the spheres.
Jacob saw in his dream a ladder planted or set on the earth,
and its top reaching to Heaven, and the Malaki Alohim ascending
and descending on it, and above it stood IHUH, declaring Himself
to be Ihuh-Alhi Abraham. The word translated ladder, is
Salam, from Salal, raised, elevated, reared up, exalted, piled
up into a heap, Aggeravit. Salalah, means a heap, rampart,
or other accumulation of earth or stone, artificially made; and
Salaa or Salo, is a rock or cliff or boulder, and the name of
the city of Petra. There is no ancient Hebrew word to designate
a pyramid.
The symbolic mountain Meru was ascended by Seven steps or
stages; and all the pyramids and artificial tumuli and hillocks
thrown up in flat countries were imitations of this fabulous and
mystic mountain, for purposes of worship. These were the "High
Places" so often mentioned in the Hebrew books, on which the


--- PAGE 329 ---
idolaters sacrificed to foreign gods.
The pyramids were sometimes square, and sometimes round.
The sacred Babylonian tower [Magdol], dedicated to the
great Father Bal, was an artificial hill, of pyramidal shape, and
Seven stages, built of brick, and each stage of a different color,
representing the Seven planetary spheres by the appropriate color
of each planet. Meru itself was said to be a single mountain, ter-
minating in three peaks, and thus a symbol of the Trimurti. The
great Pagoda at Tanjore was of six stories, surmounted by a tem-
ple as the seventh, and on this three spires or towers. An ancient
pagoda at Deogur was surmounted by a tower, sustaining the
mystic egg and a trident. Herodotus tells us that the Temple of
Bal at Babylon was a tower composed of Seven towers, resting on
an eighth that served as basis, and successively diminishing in
size from the bottom to the top; and Strabo tells us it was a
pyramid.
Faber thinks that the Mithriac ladder was really a pyramid with


--- PAGE 330 ---
Seven stages, each provided with a narrow door or aperture,
through each of which doors the aspirant passed, to reach the
summit, and then descended through similar doors on the opposite
side of the pyramid; the ascent and descent of the Soul being
thus represented.
Each Mithriac cave and all the most ancient temples were
tended to symbolize the Universe, which itself was habitually
called the Temple and habitation of Deity. Every temple was
the world in miniature; and so the whole world was one grand
temple. The most ancient temples were roofless; and therefore
the Persians, Celts, and Scythians strongly disliked artificial cov-
ered edifices. Cicero says that Xerxes burned the Grecian tem-
ples, on the express ground that the whole world was the Magnifi-
cent Temple and Habitation of the Supreme Deity. Macrobius
says that the entire Universe was judiciously deemed by many the
Temple of God. Plato pronounced the real Temple of the Deity
to be the world; and Heraclitus declared that the Universe, varie-


--- PAGE 331 ---
gated with animals and plants and stars was the only genuine
Temple of the Divinity.
How completely the Temple of Solomon was symbolic, is
manifest, not only from the continual reproduction in it of
the sacred numbers and of astrological symbols in the histor-
ical descriptions of it; but also, and yet more, from the de-
tails of the imaginary reconstructed edifice, seen by Ezekiel
in his vision. The Apocalypse completes the demonstration,
and shows the kabalistic meanings of the whole. The Sym-
bola Architectonica are found on the most ancient edifices;
and these mathematical figures and instruments, adopted by
the Templars, and identical with those on the gnostic seals and
abraxae, connect their dogma with the Chaldaic, Syriac, and
Egyptian Oriental philosophy. The secret Pythagorean doc-
trines of numbers were preserved by the monks of Thibet, by
the Hierophants of Egypt and Eleusis, at Jerusalem, and in
the circular Chapters of the Druids; and they are especially


--- PAGE 332 ---
consecrated in that mysterious book, the Apocalypse of Saint
John.
All temples were surrounded by pillars, recording the number
of the constellations, the signs of the zodiac, or the cycles of the
planets; and each one was a microcosm or symbol of the Universe,
having for roof or ceiling the starred vault of Heaven.
All temples were originally open at the top, having for roof the
sky. Twelve pillars described the belt of the zodiac. Whatever
the number of the pillars, they were mystical everywhere. At
Abury, the Druidic temple reproduced all the cycles by its col-
umns. Around the temples of Chilminar in Persia, of Baalbec,
and of Tukhti Schlomoh in Tartary, on the frontier of China,
stood forty pillars. On each side of the temple at Paestum were
fourteen, recording the Egyptian cycle of the dark and light sides
of the moon, as described by Plutarch; the whole thirty-eight
that surrounded them recording the two meteoric cycles so often
found in the Druidic temples.


--- PAGE 333 ---
The theatre built by Scaurus, in Greece, was surrounded by
360 columns; the Temple at Mecca, and that at Iona in Scotland,
by 360 stones.
 MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
15º - Knight of the East, 16º - Prince of Jerusalem
17º - Knight of the East and West, 18º - Knight Rose Croix .
XV. KNIGHT OF THE EAST OR OF THE SWORD
[Knight of the East, of the Sword, or of the Eagle.]


--- PAGE 334 ---
This Degree, like all others in Masonry, is symbolical. Based
upon historical truth and authentic tradition, it is still an alle-
gory. The leading lesson of this Degree is Fidelity to obligation,
and Constancy and Perseverance under difficulties and discour-
agement.
Masonry is engaged in her crusade,--against ignorance, intoler-
ance, fanaticism, superstition, uncharitableness, and error. She
does not sail with the trade-winds, upon a smooth sea, with a
steady free breeze, fair for a welcoming harbor; but meets and
must overcome many opposing currents, baffling winds, and dead
calms.
The chief obstacles to her success are the apathy and faithless-
ness of her own selfish children, and the supine indifference of
the world. In the roar and crush and hurry of life and business,
and the tumult and uproar of politics, the quiet voice of Masonry
is unheard and unheeded. The first lesson which one learns, who
engages in any great work of reform or beneficence, is, that men


--- PAGE 335 ---
are essentially careless, lukewarm, and indifferent as to every-
thing that does not concern their own personal and immediate
welfare. It is to single men, and not to the united efforts of
many, that all the great works of man, struggling toward perfec-
tion, are owing. The enthusiast, who imagines that he can in-
spire with his own enthusiasm the multitude that eddies around
him, or even the few who have associated themselves with him as
co-workers, is grievously mistaken; and most often the conviction
of his own mistake is followed by discouragement and disgust.
To do all, to pay all, and to suffer all, and then, when despite all
obstacles and hindrances, success is accomplished, and a great
work done, to see those who opposed or looked coldly on it, claim
and reap all the praise and reward, is the common and almost uni-
versal lot of the benefactor of his kind.
He who endeavors to serve, to benefit, and improve the world,
is like a swimmer, who struggles against a rapid current, in a river
lashed into angry waves by the winds. Often they roar over his


--- PAGE 336 ---
head, often they beat him back and baffle him. Most men yield
to the stress of the current, and float with it to the shore, or are
swept over the rapids; and only here and there the stout, strong
heart and vigorous arms struggle on toward ultimate success.
It is the motionless and stationary that most frets and impedes
the current of progress; the solid rock or stupid dead tree, rested
firmly on the bottom, and around which the river whirls and
eddies: the Masons that doubt and hesitate and are discouraged;
that disbelieve in the capability of man to improve; that are not
disposed to toil and labor for the interest and well-being of gen-
eral humanity; that expect others to do all, even of that which
they do not oppose or ridicule; while they sit, applauding and
doing nothing, or perhaps prognosticating failure.
There were many such at the rebuilding of the Temple. There
were prophets of evil and misfortune--the lukewarm and the in-
different and the apathetic; those who stood by and sneered; and
those who thought they did God service enough if they now and


--- PAGE 337 ---
then faintly applauded. There were ravens croaking ill omen,
and murmurers who preached the folly and futility of the attempt.
The world is made up of such; and they were as abundant then
as they are now.
But gloomy and discouraging as was the prospect, with luke-
warmness within and bitter opposition without, our ancient breth-
ren persevered. Let us leave them engaged in the good work,
and whenever to us, as to them, success is uncertain, remote, and
contingent, let us still remember that the only question for us to
ask, as true men and Masons, is, what does duty require; and not
what will be the result and our reward if we do our duty. Work
on, the Sword in one hand, and the Trowel in the other!
Masonry teaches that God is a Paternal Being, and has an in-
terest in his creatures, such as is expressed in the title Father; an
interest unknown to all the systems of Paganism, untaught in all
the theories of philosophy; an interest not only in the glorious
beings of other spheres, the Sons of Light, the dwellers in Heav-


--- PAGE 338 ---
enly worlds, but in us, poor, ignorant, and unworthy; that He
has pity for the erring, pardon for the guilty, love for the pure,
knowledge for the humble, and promises of immortal life for
those who trust in and obey Him.
Without a belief in Him, life is miserable, the world is dark, the
Universe disrobed of its splendors, the intellectual tie to nature
broken, the charm of existence dissolved, the great hope of being
lost; and the mind, like a star struck from its sphere, wanders
through the infinite desert of its conceptions, without attraction,
tendency, destiny, or end.
Masonry teaches, that, of all the events and actions, that take
place in the universe of worlds and the eternal succession of ages,
there is not one, even the minutest, which God did not forever
forsee with all the distinctness of immediate vision, combining
all, so that man's free will should be His instrument, like all the
other forces of nature.
It teaches that the soul of man is formed by Him for a pur-


--- PAGE 339 ---
pose; that, built up in its proportions, and fashioned in every
part, by infinite skill, an emanation from His spirit, its nature,
necessity, and design are virtue. It is so formed, so moulded, so
fashioned, so exactly balanced, so exquisitely proportioned in every
part, that sin introduced into it is misery; that vicious thoughts
fall upon it like drops of poison; and guilty desires, breathing on
its delicate fibres, make plague-spots there, deadly as those of pes-
tilence upon the body. It is made for virtue, and not for vice;
for purity, as its end, rest, and happiness. Not more vainly would
we attempt to make the mountain sink to the level of the valley,
the waves of the angry sea turn back from its shores and cease to
thunder upon the beach, the stars to halt in their swift courses,
than to change any one law of our own nature. And one of those
laws, uttered by God's voice, and speaking through every nerve
and fibre, every force and element, of the moral constitution He
has given us, is that we must be upright and virtuous; that if
tempted we must resist; that we must govern our unruly pas-


--- PAGE 340 ---
sions, and hold in hand our sensual appetites. And this is not the
dictate of an arbitrary will, nor of some stern and impracticable
law; but it is part of the great firm law of harmony that binds
the Universe together: not the mere enactment of arbitrary will;
but the dictate of Infinite Wisdom.
We know that God is good, and that what He does is right.
This known, the works of creation, the changes of life, the desti-
nies of eternity, are all spread before us, as the dispensations and
counsels of infinite love. This known, we then know that the
love of God is working to issues, like itself, beyond all thought
and imagination good and glorious; and that the only reason
why we do not understand it, is that it is too glorious for us to un-
derstand. God's love takes care for all, and nothing is neglected.
It watches over all, provides for all, makes wise adaptations for
all; for age, for infancy, for maturity, for childhood; in every
scene of this or another world; for want, weakness, joy, sorrow,
and even for sin. All is good and well and right; and shall be so


--- PAGE 341 ---
forever. Through the eternal ages the light of God's beneficence
shall shine hereafter, disclosing all, consummating all, rewarding
all that deserve reward. Then we shall see, what now we can only
believe. The cloud will be lifted up, the gate of mystery be
passed, and the full light shine forever; the light of which that
of the Lodge is a symbol. Then that which caused us trial shall
yield us triumph; and that which made our heart ache shall fill
us with gladness; and we shall then feel that there, as here, the
only true happiness is to learn, to advance, and to improve; which
could not happen unless we had commenced with error, ignorance,
and imperfection. We must pass through the darkness, to reach
the light.


--- PAGE 342 ---
XVI. PRINCE OF JERUSALEM.
We no longer expect to rebuild the Temple at Jerusalem. To
us it has become but a symbol. To us the whole world is God's
Temple, as is every upright heart. To establish all over the world
the New Law and Reign of Love, Peace, Charity, and Toleration,
is to build that Temple, most acceptable to God, in erecting which
Masonry is now engaged. No longer needing to repair to Jerusa-
lem to worship, nor to offer up sacrifices and shed blood to propi-
tiate the Deity, man may make the woods and mountains his
Churches and Temples, and worship God with a devout gratitude,
and with works of charity and beneficence to his fellow-men.
Wherever the humble and contrite heart silently offers up its
adoration, under the overarching trees, in the open, level meadows,
on the hill-side, in the glen, or in the city's swarming streets; there


--- PAGE 343 ---
is God's House and the New Jerusalem.
The Princes of Jerusalem no longer sit as magistrates to judge
between the people; nor is their number limited to five. But
their duties still remain substantially the same, and their insignia
and symbols retain their old significance. Justice and Equity
are still their characteristics. To reconcile disputes and heal dis-
sensions, to restore amity and peace, to soothe dislikes and soften,
prejudices, are their peculiar duties; and they know that the
peacemakers are blessed.
Their emblems have been already explained. They are part of
language of Masonry; the same now as it was when Moses
learned it from the Egyptian Hierophants. .
Still we observe the spirit of the Divine law, as thus enunciated
to our ancient brethren, when the Temple was rebuilt, and the
book of the law again opened:
"Execute true judgment; and show mercy and compassion
every man to his brother. Oppress not the widow nor the father-


--- PAGE 344 ---
less, the stranger nor the poor; and let none of you imagine evil
against his brother in his heart. Speak ye every man the truth
to his neighbor; execute the judgment of Truth and Peace in
your gates; and love no false oath; for all these I hate, saith the
Lord.
"Let those who have power rule in righteousness, and Princes
in judgment. And let him that is a judge be as an hiding-place
from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water
in a dry place; as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.
Then the vile person shall no more be called liberal; nor the
churl bountiful; and the work of justice shall be peace; and the
effect of justice, quiet and security; and wisdom and knowledge
shall be the stability of the times. Walk ye righteously and speak
uprightly; despise the gains of oppression, shake from your hands
the contamination of bribes; stop not your ears against the cries
of the oppressed, nor shut your eyes that you may not see the
crimes of the great; and you shall dwell on high, and your place


--- PAGE 345 ---
of defence be like munitions of rocks."
Forget not these precepts of the old Law; and especially do
not forget, as you advance, that every Mason, however humble, is
your brother, and the laboring man your peer! Remember always
that all Masonry is work, and that the trowel is an emblem of the
Degrees in this Council. Labor, when rightly understood, is both
noble and ennobling, and intended to develop man's moral and
spiritual nature, and not to be deemed a disgrace or a misfortune.
Everything around us is, in its bearings and influences, moral.
The serene and bright morning, when we recover our conscious
existence from the embraces of sleep; when, from that image of
Death God calls us to a new life, and again gives us existence, and
His mercies visit us in every bright ray and glad thought, and
call for gratitude and content; the silence of that early dawn, the
hushed silence, as it were, of expectation; the holy eventide, its
cooling breeze, its lengthening shadows, its falling shades, its still
and sober hour; the sultry noontide and the stern and solemn


--- PAGE 346 ---
midnight; and Spring-time, and chastening Autumn; and Sum-
mer, that unbars our gates, and carries us forth amidst the ever-
renewed wonders of the world; and Winter, that gathers us
around the evening hearth :--all these, as they pass, touch by turns
the springs of the spiritual life in us, and are conducting that life
to good or evil. The idle watch-hand often points to something
within us; and the shadow of the gnomon on the dial often falls
upon the conscience.
A life of labor is not a state of inferiority or degradation. The
Almighty has not cast man's lot beneath the quiet shades, and
amid glad groves and lovely hills, with no task to perform; with
nothing to do but to rise up and eat, and to lie down and rest.
He has ordained that Work shall be done, in all the dwellings of
life, in every productive field, in every busy city, and on every
wave of every ocean. And this He has done, because it has
plrased Him to give man a nature destined to higher ends than
indolent repose and irresponsible profitless indulgence; and be-


--- PAGE 347 ---
cause, for developing the energies of such a nature, work was the
necessary and proper element. We might as well ask why He
could not make two and two be six, as why He could not develop
these energies without the instrumentality of work. They are
equally impossibilities.
This Masonry teaches, as a great Truth; a great moral land-
mark, that ought to guide the course of all mankind. It teaches
its toiling children that the scene of their daily life is all spiritual,
that the very implements of their toil, the fabrics they weave, the
merchandise they barter, are designed for spiritual ends; that so
believing, their daily lot may be to them a sphere for the noblest
improvement. That which we do in our intervals of relaxation,
our church-going, and our book-reading, are especially designed to
prepare our minds for the action of Life. We are to hear and read
and meditate, that we may act well; and the action of Life is itself
the great field for spiritual improvement. There is no task of in-
dustry or business, in field or forest, on the wharf or the ship's


--- PAGE 348 ---
deck, in the office or the exchange, but has spiritual ends. There
is no care or cross of our daily labor, but was especially ordained
to nurture in us patience, calmness, resolution, perseverance, gen-
tleness, disinterestedness, magnanimity. Nor is there any tool or
implement of toil, but is a part of the great spiritual instrumen-
tality.
All the relations of life, those of parent, child, brother, sister,
friend, associate, lover and beloved, husband, wife, are moral,
throughout every living tie and thrilling nerve that blnd them
together. They cannot subsist a day nor an hour without putting
the mind to a trial of its truth, fidelity, forbearance, and disinter-
estedness.
A great city is one extended scene of moral action. There is
blow struck in it but has a purpose, ultimately good or bad,
and therefore moral. There is no action performed, but has a
motive; and motives are the special jurisdiction of morality.
Equipages, houses, and furniture are symbols of what is moral,


--- PAGE 349 ---
and they in a thousand ways minister to right or wrong feeling.
Everything that belongs to us, ministering to our comfort or lux-
ury, awakens in us emotions of pride or gratitude, of selfishness
or vanity; thoughts of self-indulgence, or merciful remembrances
of the needy and the destitute.
Everything acts upon and influences us. God's great law of
sympathy and harmony is potent and inflexible as His law of
gravitation. A sentence embodying a noble thought stirs our
blood; a noise made by a child frets and exasperates us, and influ-
ences our actions.
A world of spiritual objects, influences, and relations lies around
us all. We all vaguely deem it to be so; but he only lives a
charmed life, like that of genius and poetic inspiration, who com-
munes with the spiritual scene around him, hears the voice of the
spirit in every sound, sees its signs in every passing form of
things, and feels its impulse in all action, passion, and being.
Very near to us lies the mines of wisdom; unsuspected they lie all


--- PAGE 350 ---
around us. There is a secret in the simplest things, a wonder in
the plainest, a charm in the dullest.
We are all naturally seekers of wonders. We travel far to see
the majesty of old ruins, the venerable forms of the hoary moun-
tains, great water-falls, and galleries of art. And yet the world-
wonder is all around us; the wonder of setting suns, and evening
stars, of the magic spring-time, the blossoming of the trees, the
strange transformations of the moth; the wonder of the Infinite
Divinity and of His boundless revelation. There is no splendor
beyond that which sets its morning throne in the golden East; no,
dome sublime as that of Heaven; no beauty so fair as that of the
verdant, blossoming earth; no place, however invested with the
sanctities of old time, like that home which is hushed and folded
within the embrace of the humblest wall and roof.
And all these are but the symbols of things far greater and
higher. All is but the clothing of the spirit. In this vesture of
time is wrapped the immortal nature: in this show of circum-


--- PAGE 351 ---
stance and form stands revealed the stupendous reality. Let man
but be, as he is, a living soul, communing with himself and with
God, and his vision becomes eternity; his abode, infinity; his
home, the bosom of all-embracing love.
The great problem of Humanity is wrought out in the humblest
abodes; no more than this is done in the highest. A human heart
throbs beneath the beggar's gabardine; and that and no more stirs
with its beating the Prince's mantle. The beauty of Love, the
charm of Friendship, the sacredness of Sorrow, the heroism of
Patience, the noble Self-sacrifice, these and their like, alone, make
life to be life indeed, and are its grandeur and its power. They
are the priceless treasures and glory of humanity; and they are
not things of condition. All places and all scenes are alike clothed
with the grandeur and charm of virtues such as these.
The million occasions will come to us all, in the ordinary paths
of our life, in our homes, and by our firesides, wherein we may
act as nobly, as if, all our life long, we led armies, sat in senates,


--- PAGE 352 ---
or visited beds of sickness and pain. Varying every hour, the
million occasions will come in which we may restrain our pas-
sions, subdue our hearts to gentleness and patience, resign our
own interst for another's advantage, speak words of kindness and
wisdom, raise the fallen, cheer the fainting and sick in spirit, and
soften and assuage the weariness and bitterness of their mortal lot.
To every Mason there will be opportunity enough for these. They
cannot be written on his tomb;but they will be written deep in
the hearts of men, of friends, of children, of kindred all around
him, in the book of the great account, and, in their eternal influ-
ences, on the great pages of the Universe.
To such a destiny, at least, my Brethren, let us all aspire ! These
laws of Masonry let us all strive to obey! And so may our hearts
become true temples of the Living God! And may He encourage
our zeal, sustain our hopes, and assure us of success!


--- PAGE 353 ---
XVII. KNIGHT OF THE EAST AND WEST.
This is the first of the Philosophical Degrees of the Ancient
and Accepted Scottish Rite; and the beginning of a course of in-
struction which will fully unveil to you the heart and inner mys-
teries of Masonry. Do not despair because you have often seemed
on the point of attaining the inmost light, and have as often been
disappointed. In all time, truth has been hidden under symbols,
and often under a succession of allegories: where veil after veil
had to be penetrated before the true Light was reached, and the
essential truth stood revealed. The Human Light is but an im-
perfect reflection of a ray of the Infinite and Divine.


--- PAGE 354 ---
We are about to approach those ancient Religions which once
ruled the minds of men, and whose ruins encumber the plains of
the great Past, as the broken columns of Palmyra and Tadmor lie
bleaching on the sands of the desert. They rise before us, those
old, strange, mysterious creeds and faiths, shrouded in the mists
of antiquity, and stalk dimly and undefined along the line which
divides Time from Eternity; and forms of strange, wild, startling
beauty mingled in the vast throngs of figures with shapes mon-
strous, grotesque, and hideous.
The religion taught by Moses, which, like the laws of Egypt,
enuciated the principle of exclusion, borrowed, at every period
of its existence, from all the creeds with which it came in contact.
While, by the studies of the learned and wise, it enriched itself
with the most admirable principles of the religions of Egypt and
Asia, it was changed, in the wanderings of the People, by every-
thing that was most impure or seductive in the pagan manners
and superstitions. It was one thing in the times of Moses and


--- PAGE 355 ---
Aaron, another in those of David and Solomon, and still another
in those of Daniel and Philo.
At the time when John the Baptist made his appearance in the
desert, near the shores of the Dead Sea, all the old philosophical
and religious systems were approximating toward each other. A
general lassitude inclined the minds of all toward the quietude of
that amalgamation of doctrines for which the expeditions of Alex-
ander and the more peaceful occurrences that followed, with the
establishment in Asia and Africa of many Grecian dynasties and
a great number of Grecian colonies, had prepared the way. After
the intermingling of different nations, which resulted from the
wars of Alexander in three-quarters of the globe, the doctrines of
Greece, of Egypt, of Persia, and of India, met and intermingled
everywhere. All the barriers that had formerly kept the nations
apart, were thrown down; and while the People of the West
readily connected their faith with those of the East, those of the
Orient hastened to learn the traditions of Rome and the legends


--- PAGE 356 ---
of Athens. While the Philosophers of Greece, all (except the dis-
ciples of Epicurus) more or less Platonists, seized eargerly upon
the beliefs and doctrines of the East,--the Jews and Egyptians, be-
fore then the most exclusive of all peoples, yielded to that eclecti-
cism which prevailed among their masters, the Greeks and Romans.
Under the same influences of toleration, even those who em-
braced Christianity, mingled together the old and the new, Chris-
tianity and Philosophy, the Apostolic teachings and the traditions
of Mythology The man of intellect, devotee of one system,
rarely displaces it with another in all its purity. The people take
such a creed as is offered them. Accordingly, the distinction be-
tween the esoteric and the exoteric doctrine, immemorial in other
creeds, easily gained a foothold among many of the Christians;
and it was held by a vast number, even during the preaching of
Paul, that the writings of the Apostles were incomplete; that they
contained only the germs of another doctrine, which must receive
from the hands of philosophy, not only the systematic arrange-


--- PAGE 357 ---
ment which was wanting, but all the development which lay con-
cealed therein. The writings of the Apostles, they said, in address-
ing themselves to mankind in general, enunciated only the articles
of the vulgar faith; but transmitted the mysteries of knowledge to
superior minds, to the Elect,--mysteries handed down from gen-
eration to generation in esoteric traditions; and to this science of
the mysteries they gave the name of Gnosis.
The Gnostics derived their leading doctrines and ideas from
Plato and Philo, the Zend-avesta and the Kabalah, and the Sacred
books of India and Egypt; and thus introduced into the bosom
of Christianity the cosmological and theosophical speculations,
which had formed the larger portion of the ancient religions of
the Orient, joined to those of the Egyptian, Greek, and Jewish
doctrines, which the Neo-Platonists had equally adopted in the
Occident.
Emanation from the Deity of all spiritual beings, progressive
degeneration of these beings from emanation to emanation, re-


--- PAGE 358 ---
demption and return of all to the purity of the Creator; and,
after the re-establishment of the primitive harmony of all, a for-
tunate and truly divine condition of all, in the bosom of God;
such were the fundamental teachings of Gnosticism. The genius
of the Orient, with its contemplations, irradiations, and intuitions,
dictated its doctrines. Its language corresponded to its origin.
Full of imagery, it had all the magnificence, the inconsistencies,
and the mobility of the figurative style.
Behold, it said, the light, which emanates from an immense
centre of Light, that spreads everywhere its benevolent rays; so
do the spirits of Light emanate from the Divine Light. Behold,
all the springs which nourish, embellish, fertilize, and purify the
Earth; they emanate from one and the same ocean; so from the
bosom of the Divinity emanate so many streams, which form and
fill the universe of intelligences. Behold numbers, which all
emanate from one primitive number, all resemble it, all are com-
posed of its essence, and still vary infinitely; and utterances, de-


--- PAGE 359 ---
composable into so many syllables and elements, all contained in
the primitive Word, and still infinitely various; so the world of
Intelligences emanated from a Primary Intelligence, and they all
resemble it, and yet display an infinite variety of existences.
It revived and combined the old doctrines of the Orient and the
Occident; and it found in many passages of the Gospels and the
Pastoral letters, a warrant for doing so. Christ himself spoke in
parables and allegories, John borrowed the enigmatical language
of the Platonists, and Paul often indulged in incomprehensible
rhapsodies, the meaning of which could have been clear to the
Initiates alone.
It is admitted that the cradle of Gnosticism is probably to be
looked for in Syria, and even in Palestine. Most of its expound-
ers wrote in that corrupted form of the Greek used by the Hellen-
istic Jews, and in the Septuagint and the New Testament; and
there is a striking analogy between their doctrines and those of
the Judaeo-Egyptian Philo, of Alexandria; itself the seat of three


--- PAGE 360 ---
schools, at once philosophic and religious--the Greek, the Egyp-
tian, and the Jewish.
Pythagoras and Plato, the most mystical of the Grecian Philos-
ophers (the latter heir to the doctrines of the former), and who
had travelled, the latter in Egypt, and the former in Phoenicia,
India, and Persia, also taught the esoteric doctrine and the distinc-
tion between the initiated and the profane. The dominant doc-
trines of Platonism were found in Gnosticism. Emanation of
Intelligences from the bosom of the Deity; the going astray in
error and the sufferings of spirits, so long as they are remote from
God, and imprisoned in matter; vain and long-continued efforts
to arrive at the knowledge of the Truth, and re-enter into their
primitive union with the Supreme Being; alliance of a pure and
divine soul with an irrational soul, the seat of evil desires; angels
or demons who dwell in and govern the planets, having but an
imperfect knowledge of the ideas that presided at the creation;
regeneration of all beings by their return to the kosmos


--- PAGE 361 ---
noetos, the world of Intelligences, and its Chief, the
Supreme Being; sole possible mode of re-establishing that primi-
tive harmony of the creation, of which the music of the spheres
of Pythagoras was the image; these were the analogies of the two
systems; and we discover in them some of the ideas that form a
part of Masonry; in which, in the present mutilated condition of
the symbolic Degrees, they are disguised and overlaid with fiction
and absurdity, or present themselves as casual hints that are pass-
ed by wholly unnoticed.
The distinction between the esoteric and exoteric doctrines (a
distinction purely Masonic), was always and from the very earliest
times preserved among the Greeks. It remounted to the fabulous
times of Orpheus; and the mysteries of Theosophy were found in
all their traditions and myths. And after the time of Alexander,
they resorted for instruction, dogmas, and mysteries, to all the
schools, to those of Egypt and Asia, as well as those of Ancient
Thrace, Sicily, Etruria, and Attica.


--- PAGE 362 ---
The Jewish-Greek School of Alexandria is known only by two
of its Chiefs, Aristobulus and Philo, both Jews of Alexandria in
Egypt. Belonging to Asia by its origin, to Egypt by its residence,
to Greece by its language and studies, it strove to show that all
truths embedded in the philosophies of other countries were trans-
planted thither from Palestine. Aristobulus declared that all the
facts and details of the Jewish Scriptures were so many allegories,
concealing the most profound meanings, and that Plato had bor-
rowed from them all his finest ideas. Philo, who lived a century
after him, following the same theory, endeavored to show that the
Hebrew writings, by their system of allegories, were the true
source of all religious and philosophical doctrines. According to
him, the literal meaning is for the vulgar alone. Whoever has
meditated on philosophy, purified himself by virtue, and raised
himself by contemplation, to God and the intellectual world, and
received their inspiration, pierces the gross envelope of the letter,
discovers a wholly different order of things, and is initiated into


--- PAGE 363 ---
mysteries, of which the elementary or literal instruction offers but
an imperfect image. A historical fact, a figure, a word, a letter, a
number, a rite, a custom, the parable or vision of a prophet, veils
the most profound truths; and he who has the key of science will
interpret all according to the light he possesses.
Again we see the symbolism of Masonry, and the search of the
Candidate for light. "Let men of narrow minds withdraw," he
says, "with closed ears. We transmit the divine mysteries to
those who have received the sacred initiation, to those who prac-
tise true piety and who are not enslaved by the empty trappings
of words or the preconceived opinions of the pagans."
To Philo, the Supreme Being was the Primitive Light, or the
Archetype of Light, Source whence the rays emanate that illumi-
nate Souls. He was also the Soul of the Universe, and as such
acted in all its parts. He Himself fills and limits His whole Being.
His Powers and Virtues fill and penetrate all. These Powers
(dunameis) are Spirits distinct from God, the "Ideas"


--- PAGE 364 ---
of Plato personified. He is without beginning, and lives in the
prototype of Time (aion).
His image is THE WORD, a form more brilliant than
fire; that not being the pure light. This LOGOS dwells in God;
for the Supreme Being makes to Himself within His Intelligence
the types or ideas of everything that is to become reality in this
World. The LOGOS is the vehicle by which God acts on the Uni-
verse, and may be compared to the speech of man.
The LOGOS being the World of Ideas, by means
whereof God has created visible things, He is the most ancient
God, in comparison with the World, which is the youngest pro-
duction. The LOGOS, Chief of Intelligence, of which He is the
general representative, is named Archangel, type and representa-
tive of all spirits, even those of mortals. He is also styled the
man-type and primitive man, Adam Kadmon.
God only is Wise. The wisdom of man is but the reflection and
image of that of God. He is the Father, and His WISDOM the


--- PAGE 365 ---
mother of creation: for He united Himself with WISDOM (Sophia),
and communicated to it the germ of creation, and it
brought forth the material world. He created the ideal world
only, and caused the material world to be made real after its type,
by His LOGOS, which is His speech, and at the same time the Idea
of Ideas, the Intellectual World. The Intellectual City was but
the Thought of the Architect, who meditated the creation, accord-
ing to that plan of the Material City.
The Word is not only the Creator, but occupies the place of the
Supreme Being. Through Him all the Powers and Attributes of
God act. On the other side, as first representative of the Human
Family, He is the Protector of men and their Shepherd.
God gives to man the Soul or Intelligence, which exists before
the body, and which he unites with the body. The reasoning
Principle comes from God through the Word, and communes with
God and with the Word; but there is also in man an irrational
Principle, that of the inclinations and passions which produce


--- PAGE 366 ---
disorder, emanating from inferior spirits who fill the air as
ministers of God. The body, taken from the Earth, and the
irrational Principle that animates it concurrently with the rational
Principle, are hated by God, while the rational soul which He
has given it, is, as it were, captive in this prison, this coffin, that
encompasses it. The present condition of man is not his primi-
tive condition, when he was the image of the Logos. He has
fallen from his first estate. But he may raise himself again, by
following the directions of WISDOM and of the Angels
which God has commissioned to aid him in freeing himself from
the bonds of the body, and combating Evil, the existence whereof
God has permitted, to furnish him the means of exercising his
liberty. The souls that are purified, not by the Law but by light,
rise to the Heavenly regions, to enjoy there a perfect felicity.
Those that persevere in evil go from body to body, the seats of
passions and evil desires. The familiar lineaments of these doc-
trines will be recognized by all who read the Epistles of St. Paul,


--- PAGE 367 ---
who wrote after Philo, the latter living till the reign of Caligula,
and being the contemporary of Christ.
And the Mason is familiar with these doctrines of Philo: that
the Supreme Being is a centre of Light whose rays or emanations
pervade the Universe; for that is the Light for which all Masonic
journeys are a search, and of which the sun and moon in our
Lodges are only emblems: that Light and Darkness, chief enemies
from the beginning of Time, dispute with each other the empire
of the world; which we symbolize by the candidate wandering in
darkness and being brought to light: that the world was created,
not by the Supreme Being, but by a secondary agent, who is but
His WORD, and by types which are but his ideas,
aided by an INTELLIGENCE, or WISDOM, which gives one
of His Attributes; in which we see the occult meaning of the ne-
cessity of recovering "the Word"; and of our two columns of
STRENGTH and WISDOM, which are also the two parallel lines that
bound the circle representing the Universe: that the visible world


--- PAGE 368 ---
is the image of the invisible world; that the essence of the Human
Soul is the image of God, and it existed before the body; that the
object of its terrestrial life is to disengage itself of its body or its
sepulchre; and that it will ascend to the Heavenly regions when-
ever it shall be purified; in which we see the meaning, now almost
forgotten in our Lodges, of the mode of preparation of the candi-
date for apprenticeship, and his tests and purifications in the first
Degree, according to the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.
Philo incorporated in his eclecticism neither Egyptian nor
Oriental elements. But there were other Jewish Teachers in Alex-
andria who did both. The Jews of Egypt were slightly jealous of,
and a little hostile to, those of Palestine, particularly after the
erection of the sanctuary at Leontopolis by the High-Priest Onias;
and therefore they admired and magnified those sages, who, like
Jeremiah, had resided in Egypt. "The wisdom of Solomon" was
written at Alexandria, and, in the time of St. Jerome, was attrib-
uted to Philo; but it contains principles at variance with his.


--- PAGE 369 ---
It personifies Wisdom, and draws between its children and the
Profane, the same line of demarcation that Egypt had long before
taught to the Jews. That distinction existed at the beginning of
the Mosaic creed. Moshah himself was an Initiate in the mysteries
of Egypt, as he was compelled to be, as the adopted son of the
daughter of Pharaoh, Thouoris, daughter of Sesostris-Ramses;
who, as her tomb and monuments show, was, in the right of her
infant husband, Regent of Lower Egypt or the Delta at the time
of the Hebrew Prophet's birth, reigning at Heliopolis. She was
also, as the reliefs on her tomb show, a Priestess of HATHOR and
NEITH, the two great primeval goddesses. As her adopted son,
living in her Palace and presence forty years, and during that
time scarcely acquainted with his brethren the Jews, the law of
Egypt compelled his initiation: and we find in many of his enact-
ments the intention of preserving, between the common people
and the Initiates, the line of separation which he found in Egypt.
Moshah and Aharun his brother, the whole series of High-Priests,


--- PAGE 370 ---
the Council of the 70 Elders, Salomoh and the entire succession
of Prophets, were in possession of a higher science; and of that
science Masonry is, at least, the lineal descendant. It was famili-
arly known as THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORD.
AMUN, at first the God of Lower Egypt only, where Moshah
was reared (a word that in Hebrew means Truth), was the Su-
preme God. He was styled "the Celestial Lord, who sheds Light
on hidden things." He was the source of that divine life, of which
the crux ansata is the symbol; and the source of all power. He
united all the attributes that the Ancient Oriental Theosophy
assigned to the Supreme Being. He was the Pleroma,
or "Fullness of things," for He comprehended in Himself every-
thing; and the LIGHT; for he was the Sun-God. He was un-
changeable in the midst of everything phenomenal in his worlds.
He created nothing; but everything emanated from Him; and of
Him all the other Gods were but manifestations.
The Ram was His living symbol; which you see reproduced in


--- PAGE 371 ---
this Degree, lying on the book with seven seals on the tracing-
board. He caused the creation of the world by the Primitive
Thought (Ennoia), or Spirit (Pneuma), that
issued from him by means of his Voice or the WORD; and which
Thought or Spirit was personified as the Goddess NEITH. She,
too, was a divinity of Light, and mother of the Sun; and the Feast
of Lamps was celebrated in her honor at Sais. The Creative
Power, another manifestation of Deity, proceeding to the creation
conceived of in her, the Divine Intelligence, produced with its
Word the Universe, symbolized by an egg issuing from the mouth
of KNEPH; from which egg came PHTHA, image of the Supreme
Intelligence as realized in the world, and the type of that mani-
fested in man; the principal agent, also, of Nature, or the creative
and productive Fire. PHRE or RS, the Sun, or Celestial Light,
whose symbol was the point within a circle, was the son of
PHTHA; and TIPHE, his wife, or the celestial firmament, with the
seven celestial bodies, animated by spirits of genii that govern


--- PAGE 372 ---
them, was represented on many of the monuments, clad in blue
or yellow, her garments sprinkled with stars, and accompanied by
the sun, moon, and five planets; and she was the type of Wisdom,
and they of the Seven Planetary Spirits of the Gnostics, that with
her presided over and governed the sublunary world.
In this Degree, unknown for a hundred years to those who have
practised it, these emblems reproduced refer to these old doctrines.
The lamb, the yellow hangings strewed with stars, the seven
columns, candlesticks, and seals all recall them to us.
The Lion was the symbol of ATHOM-RE, the Great God of
Upper Egypt; the Hawk, of RA or PHRE; the Eagle, of MENDES;
the Bull, of APIS; and three of these are seen under the platform
on which our altar stands.
The first HERMES was the INTELLIGENCE, or WORD of God.
Moved with compassion for a race living without law, and wishing
to teach them that they sprang from His bosom, and to point out
to them the way that they should go (the books which the first


--- PAGE 373 ---
Hermes, the same with Enoch, had written on the mysteries of
divine science, in the sacred characters, being unknown to those
who lived after the flood), God sent to man OSIRIS and ISIS, ac-
accompanied by THOTH, the incarnation or terrestrial repetition of
the first Hermes; who taught men the arts, science, and the cer-
emonies of religion; and then ascended to Heaven or the Moon.
OSIRIS was the Principle of Good. TYPHON, like AHRIMAN, was
the principle and source of all that is evil in the moral and physi-
cal order. Like the Satan of Gnosticism, he was confounded
with Matter.
From Egypt or Persia the new Platonists borrowed the idea,
and the Gnostics received it from them, that man, in his terres-
trial career, is successively under the influence of the Moon, of
Mercury, of Venus, of the Sun, of Mars, of Jupiter, and of
Saturn, until he finally reaches the Elysian Fields; an idea again
symbolized in the Seven Seals.
The Jews of Syria and Judea were the direct precursors of


--- PAGE 374 ---
Gnosticism; and in their doctrines were ample oriental elements.
These Jews had had with the Orient, at two different periods, inti-
mate relations, familiarizing them with the doctrines of Asia, and
especially of Chaldea and Persia;--their forced residence in Cen-
tral Asia under the Assyrians and Persians; and their voluntary
dispersion over the whole East, when subjects of the Seleucidae
and the Romans. Living near two-thirds of a century, and many
of them long afterward, in Mesopotamia, the cradle of their race;
speaking the same language, and their children reared with those
of the Chaldeans, Assyrians, Medes, and Persians, and receiving
from them their names (as the case of Danayal, who was called
Baeltasatsar, proves), they necessarily adopted many of the doc-
trines of their conquerors. Their descendants, as Azra and Na-
hamaiah show us, hardly desired to leave Persia, when they were
allowed to do so. They had a special jurisdiction, and governors
and judges taken from their own people; many of them held high
office, and their children were educated with those of the highest


--- PAGE 375 ---
nobles. Danayal was the friend and minister of the King, and
the Chief of the College of the Magi at Babylon; if we may be-
lieve the book which bears his name, and trust to the incidents
related in its highly figurative and imaginative style. Mordecai,
too, occupied a high station, no less than that of Prime Minister,
and Esther or Astar, his cousin, was the Monarch's wife.
The Magi of Babylon were expounders of figurative writings,
interpreters of nature, and of dreams,--astronomers and divines;
and from their influences arose among the Jews, after their rescue
from captivity, a number of sects, and a new exposition, the mys-
tical interpretation, with all its wild fancies and infinite caprices.
The Aions of the Gnostics, the Ideas of Plato, the Angels of the
Jews, and the Demons of the Greeks, all correspond to the
Ferouers of Zoroaster.
A great number of Jewish families remained permanently in
their new country; and one of the most celebrated of their schools
was at Babylon. They were soon familiarized with the doctrine


--- PAGE 376 ---
of Zoroaster, which itself was more ancient than Kuros. From
the system of the Zend-Avesta they borrowed, and subsequently
gave large development to, everything that could be reconciled
with their own faith; and these additions to the old doctrine were
soon spread, by the constant intercourse of commerce, into Syria
and Palestine.
In the Zend-Avesta, God is Illimitable Time. No origin can be
assigned to Him: He is so entirely enveloped in His glory, His
nature and attributes are so inaccessible to human Intelligence,
that He can be only the object of a silent Veneration. Creation
took place by emanation from Him. The first emanation was the
primitive Light, and from that the King of Light, ORMUZD. By
the "WORD," Ormuzd created the world pure. He is its pre-
server and Judge; a Being Holy and Heavenly; Intelligence and
Knowledge; the First-born of Time without limits; and invested
with all the Powers of the Supreme Being.
Still he is, strictly speaking, the Fourth Being. He had a


--- PAGE 377 ---
Ferouer, a pre-existing Soul (in the language of Plato, a type or
ideal); and it is said of Him, that He existed from the beginning,
in the primitive Light. But, that Light being but an element,
and His Ferouer a type, he is, in ordinary language, the First-born
of ZEROUANE-AKHERENE. Behold again "THE WORD"
of Masonry; the Man, on the Tracing-Board of this Degree; the
LIGHT toward which all Masons travel.
He created after his own image, six Genii called Amshaspands,
who surround his Throne, are his organs of communication with
inferior spirits and men, transmit to Him their prayers, solicit for
them His favors, and serve them as models of purity and perfec-
tion. Thus we have the Demiourgos of Gnosticism, and the six
Genii that assist him. These are the Hebrew Archangels of the
Planets.
The names of these Amshaspands are Bahman, Ardibehest,
Schariver, Sapandomad, Khordad, and Amerdad.
The fourth, the Holy SAPANDOMAD, created the first man and


--- PAGE 378 ---
woman.
Then ORMUZD created 28 Iseds, of whom MITHERAS is the chief.
They watch, with Ormuzd and the Amshaspands, over the happi-
ness, purity, and preservation of the world, which is under their
government; and they are also models for mankind and interpre-
ters of men's prayers. With Mithras and Ormuzd, they make a
pleroma (or complete number) of 30, corresponding to the thirty
Aions of the Gnostics, and to the ogdoade, dodecade, and decade
of the Egyptians. Mithras was the Sun-God, invoked with, and
soon confounded with him, becoming the object of a special wor-
ship, and eclipsing Ormuzd himself.
The third order of pure spirits is more numerous. They are
the Ferouers, the THOUGHTS of Ormuzd, or the IDEAS which he
conceived before proceeding to the creation of things. They too
are superior to men. They protect them during their life on earth;
they will purify them from evil at their resurrection. They are
their tutelary genii, from the fall to the complete regeneration.


--- PAGE 379 ---
AHRIMAN, second-born of the Primitive Light, emanated from
it, pure like ORMUZD; but, proud and ambitious, yielded to jeal-
ousy of the First-born. For his hatred and pride, the Eternal
condemned him to dwell, for 12,000 years, in that part of space
where no ray of light reaches; the black empire of darkness. In
that period the struggle between Light and Darkness, Good and
Evil will be terminated.
AHRIMAN scorned to submit, and took the field against OR-
MUZD. To the good spirits created by his Brother, he opposed an
innumerable army of Evil Ones. To the seven Amshaspands he
opposed seven Archdevs, attached to the seven Planets; to the
Izeds and Ferouers an equal number of Devs, which brought
upon the world all moral and physical evils. Hence Poverty,
Maladies, Impurity, Envy, Chagrin, Drunkenness, Falsehood,
Calumny, and their horrible array.
The image of Ahriman was the Dragon, confounded by the
Jews with Satan and the Serpent-Tempter. After a reign of 3000


--- PAGE 380 ---
years, Ormuzd had created the Material World, in six periods,
calling successively into existence the Light, Water, Earth, plants,
animals, and Man. But Ahriman concurred in creatmg the earth
and water; for darkness was already an element, and Ormuzd
could not exclude its Master. So also the two concurred in pro-
ducing Man. Ormuzd produced, by his Will and Word, a Being
that was the type and source of universal life for everything that
exists under Heaven. He placed in man a pure principle, or Life,
proceeding from the Supreme Being. But Ahriman destroyed
that pure principle, in the form wherewith it was clothed; and
when Ormuzd had made, of its recovered and purified essence, the
first man and woman, Ahriman seduced and tempted them with
wine and fruits; the woman yielding first.
Often, during the three latter periods of 3000 years each, Ahri-
man and Darkness are, and are to be, triumphant. But the pure
souls are assisted by the Good Spirits; the Triumph of Good is
decreed by the Supreme Being, and the period of that triumph


--- PAGE 381 ---
will infallibly arrive. When the world shall be most afflicted with
the evils poured out upon it by the spirits of perdition, three
Prophets will come to bring relief to mortals. SOSIOSCH, the
principal of the Three, will regenerate the earth, and restore to it
its primitive beauty, strength, and purity. He will judge the good
and the wicked. After the universal resurrection of the good, he
will conduct them to a home of everlasting happiness. Ahriman,
his evil demons, and all wicked men, will also be purified in a tor-
rent of melted metal. The law of Ormuzd will reign everywhere;
all men will be happy; all, enjoying unalterable bliss, will sing
with Sosiosch the praises of the Supreme Being.
These doctrines, the details of which were sparingly borrowed
by the Pharisaic Jews, were much more fully adopted by the
Gnostics; who taught the restoration of all things, their return to
their original pure condition, the happiness of those to be saved,
and their admission to the feast of Heavenly Wisdom.
The doctrines of Zoroaster came originally from Bactria, an


--- PAGE 382 ---
Indian Province of Persia. Naturally, therefore, it would include
Hindu or Buddhist elements, as it did. The fundamental idea of
Buddhism was, matter subjugating the intelligence, and intelli-
gence freeing itself from that slavery. Perhaps something came
to Gnosticism from China. "Before the chaos which preceded
the birth of Heaven and Earth," says Lao-Tseu, "a single Being
existed, immense and silent, immovable and ever active--the
mother of the Universe. I know not its name: but I designate it
by the word Reason. Man has his type and model in the Earth;
Earth in Heaven; Heaven in Reason; and Reason in Itself."
Here again are the Ferouers, the Ideas, the Aions--the REASON
or INTELLIGENCE, SILENCE, WORD, and
WISDOM of the Gnostics.
The dominant system among the Jews after their captivity was
that of the Pharoschim or Pharisees. Whether their name was
derived from that of the Parsees, or followers of Zoroaster, or
from some other source, it is certain that they had borrowed much


--- PAGE 383 ---
of their doctrine from the Persians. Like them they claimed to
have the exclusive and mysterious knowledge, unknown to the
mass. Like them they taught that a constant war was waged be-
tween the Empire of Good and that of Evil. Like them they at-
tributed the sin and fall of man to the demons and their chief; and
like them they admitted a special protection of the righteous by
inferior beings, agents of Jehovah. All their doctrines on these
subjects were at bottom those of the Holy Books; but singularly
developed and the Orient was evidently the source from which
those developments came.
They styled themselves Interpreters; a name indicating their
claim to the exclusive possession of the true meaning of the Holy
Writings, by virtue of the oral tradition which Moses had re-
ceived on Mount Sinai, and which successive generations of Ini-
tiates had transmitted, as they claimed, unaltered, unto them.
Their very costume, their belief in the influences of the stars, and
in the immortality and transmigration of souls, their system of


--- PAGE 384 ---
angels and their astronomy, were all foreign.
Sadduceeism arose merely from an opposition essentially Jewish,
to these foreign teachings, and that mixture of doctrines, adopted
by the Pharisees, and which constituted the popular creed.
We come at last to the Essenes and Therapeuts, with whom
this Degree is particularly concerned. That intermingling of
oriental and occidental rites, of Persian and Pythagorean opinions,
which we have pointed out in the doctrines of Philo, is unmistak-
able in the creeds of these two sects.
They were less distinguished by metaphysical speculations than
by simple meditations and moral practices. But the latter always
partook of the Zoroastrian principle, that it was necessary to free
the soul from the trammels and influences of matter; which led
to a system of abstinence and maceration entirely opposed to the
ancient Hebrai cideas, favorable as they were to physical pleasures.
In general, the life and manners of these mystical associa-
tions, as Philo and Josephus describe them, and particularly their


--- PAGE 385 ---
prayers at sunrise, seem the image of what the Zend-Avesta pre-
scribes to the faithful adorer or Ormuzd; and some of their
observances cannot otherwise be explained.
The Therapeuts resided in Egypt, in the neighborhood of Alex-
andria; and the Essenes in Palestine, in the vicinity of the Dead
Sea. But there was nevertheless a striking coincidence in their
ideas, readily explained by attributing it to a foreign influence.
The Jews of Egypt, under the influence of the School of Alexan-
dria, endeavored in general to make their doctrines harmonize
with the traditions of Greece; and thence came, in the doctrines
of the Therapeuts, as stated by Philo, the many analogies between
the Pythagorean and Orphic ideas, on one side, and those of Ju-
daism on the other: while the Jews of Palestine, having less com-
munication with Greece, or contemning its teachings, rather im-
bibed the Oriental doctrines, which they drank in at the source
and with which their relations with Persia made them familiar.
This attachment was particularly shown in the Kabalah, which


--- PAGE 386 ---
belonged rather to Palestine than to Egypt, though extensively
known in the latter; and furnished the Gnostics with some of
their most striking theories.
It is a significant fact, that while Christ spoke often of the
Pharisees and Sadducees, He never once mentioned the Essenes,
between whose doctrines and His there was so great a resem-
blance, and, in many points, so perfect an identity. Indeed, they
are not named, nor even distinctly alluded to, anywhere in the
New Testament.
John, the son of a Priest who ministered in the Temple at
Jerusalem, and whose mother was of the family of Aharun, was
in the deserts until the day of his showing unto Israel. He drank
neither wine nor strong drink. Clad in hair-cloth, and with a
girdle of leather, and feeding upon such food as the desert afford-
ed, he preached, in the country about Jordan, the baptism of re-
pentance, for the remission of sins; that is, the necessity of repent-
ance proven by reformation. He taught the people charity and


--- PAGE 387 ---
liberality; the publicans, justice, equity, and fair dealing; the
soldiery peace, truth, and contentment; to do violence to none,
accuse none falsely, and be content with their pay. He incul-
cated necessity of a virtuous life, and the folly of trusting to
their descent from Abraham.
He denounced both Pharisees and Sadducees as a generation of
vipers threatened with the anger of God. He baptized those who
confessed their sins. He preached in the desert; and therefore in
the country where the Essenes lived, professing the same doctrines.
He was imprisoned before Christ began to preach. Matthew men-
tions him without preface or explanation; as if, apparently, his
history was too well known to need any. "In those days," he
says, "came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of
Judea." His disciples frequently fasted; for we find them with
the Pharisees coming to Jesus to inquire why His Disciples did
not fast as often as they; and He did not denounce them, as His
habit was to denounce the Pharisees; but answered them kindly


--- PAGE 388 ---
and gently.
From his prison, John sent two of his disciples to inquire of
Christ: "Art thou he that is to come, or do we look for another ?"
Christ referred them to his miracles as an answer; and declared
to the people that John was a prophet, and more than a prophet,
and that no greater man had ever been born; but that the hum-
blest Christian was his superior. He declared him to be Elias,
who was to come.
John had denounced to Herod his marriage with his brother's
wife as unlawful; and for this he was imprisoned, and finally exe-
cuted to gratify her. His disciples buried him; and Herod and
others thought he had risen from the dead and appeared again in
the person of Christ. The people all regarded John as a prophet;
and Christ silenced the Priests and Elders by asking them whether
he was inspired. They feared to excite the anger of the people by
saying that he was not. Christ declared that he came "in the way
of righteousness"; and that the lower classes believed him, though


--- PAGE 389 ---
the Priests and Pharisees did not.
Thus John, who was often consulted by Herod, and to whom
that monarch showed great deference and was often governed by
his advice; whose doctrine prevailed very extensively among the
people and the publicans, taught some creed older than Chris-
tianity. That is plain: and it is equally plain, that the very large
body of the Jews that adopted his doctrines, were neither Phari-
sees nor Sadducees, but the humble, common people. They must,
therefore, have been Essenes. It is plain, too, that Christ applied
for baptism as a sacred rite, well known and long practiced. It
was becoming to him, he said, to fulfill all righteousness.
In the 18th chapter of the Acts of the Apostles we read thus:
"And a certain Jew, named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an elo-
quent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, came to Ephesus. This
man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and, being fervent in
spirit, he spake and taught diligently the things of the Lord, know-
ing only the baptism of John; and he began to speak boldly in


--- PAGE 390 ---
the synagogue; whom, when Aquilla and Priscilla had heard, they
took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God
more perfectly."
Translating this from the symbolic and figurative language
into the true ordinary sense of the Greek text, it reads thus: "And
a certain Jew, named Apollos, an Alexandrian by birth, an eloquent
man, and of extensive learning, came to Ephesus. He had learned
in the mysteries the true doctrine in regard to God; and, being a
zealous enthusiast, he spoke and taught diligently the truths in
regard to the Deity, having received no other baptism than that
of John." He knew nothing in regard to Christianity; for he
had resided in Alexandria, and had just then come to Ephesus;
being, probably, a disciple of Philo, and a Therapeut.
"That, in all times," says St. Augustine, "is the Christian re-
ligion, which to know and follow is the most sure and certain
health, called according to that name, but not according to the
thing itself, of which it is the name; for the thing itself, which


--- PAGE 391 ---
is now called the Christian religion, really was known to the An-
cients, nor was wanting at any time from the beginning of the
human race, until the time when Christ came in the flesh; from
whence the true religion, which had previously existed, began to
be called Christian; and this in our days is the Christian religion,
not as having been wanting in former times, but as having, in
later times, received this name." The disciples were first called
"Christians," at Antioch, when Barnabas and Paul began to
preach there.
The Wandering or Itinerant Jews or Exorcists, who assumed
to employ the Sacred Name in exorcising evil spirits, were no
doubt Therapeutae or Essenes.
"And it it came to pass," we read in the 19th chapter of the Acts,
verses 1 to 4, "that while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, having
passed through the upper parts of Asia Minor, came to Ephesus;
and finding certain disciples, he said to them, 'Have ye received
the Holy Ghost since ye became Believers ?' And they said unto


--- PAGE 392 ---
him, 'We have not so much as heard that there is any Holy
Ghost.' And he said to them, 'In what, then, were you baptized ?'
And they said 'In John's baptism.' Then said Paul, 'John in-
deed baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people
that they should believe in Him who was to come after him, that
is, in Jesus Christ. When they heard this, they were baptized in
the name of the Lord Jesus."
This faith, taught by John, and so nearly Christianity, could
have been nothing but the doctrine of the Essenes; and there can
be no doubt that John belonged to that sect. The place where he
preached, his macerations and frugal diet, the doctrines he taught,
all prove it conclusively. There was no other sect to which he
could have belonged; certainly none so numerous as his, except
the Essenes.
We find, from the two letters written by Paul to the brethren at
Corinth, that City of Luxury and Corruption, that there were
contentions among them. Rival sects had already, about the 57th


--- PAGE 393 ---
year of our era, reared their banners there, as followers, some of
Paul, some of Apollos, and some of Cephas. Some of them de-
nied the resurrection. Paul urged them to adhere to the doctrines
taught by himself, and had sent Timothy to them to bring them
afresh to their recollection.
According to Paul, Christ was to come again. He was to put
an end to all other Principalities and Powers, and finally to Death,
and then be Himself once more merged in God; who should then
be all in all.
The forms and ceremonies of the Essenes were symbolical.
They had, according to Philo the Jew, four Degrees; the members
being divided into two Orders, the Practici and Therapeutici;
the latter being the contemplative and medical Brethren; and the
former the active, practical, business men. They were Jews by
birth; and had a greater affection for each other than the mem-
bers of any other sect. Their brotherly love was intense. They
fulfilled the Christian law, "Love one another." They despised


--- PAGE 394 ---
riches. No one was to be found among them, having more than
another. The possessions of one were intermingled with those of
the others; so that they all had but one patrimony, and were
brethren. Their piety toward God was extraordinary. Before
sunrise they never spake a word about profane matters; but put
up certain prayers which they had received from their forefathers.
At dawn of day, and before it was light, their prayers and hymns
ascended to Heaven. They were eminently faithful and true, and
the Ministers of Peace. They had mysterious ceremonies, and
initiations into their mysteries; and the Candidate promised that
he would ever practise fidelity to all men, and especially to those
in authority, "because no one obtains the government without
God's assistance."
Whatever they said, was firmer than an oath; but they avoided
swearing, and esteemed it worse than perjury. They were simple
in their diet and mode of living, bore torture with fortitude, and
despised death. They cultivated the science of medicine and were


--- PAGE 395 ---
very skillful. They deemed it a good omen to dress in white robes.
They had their own courts, and passed righteous judgments. They
kept the Sabbath more rigorously than the Jews.
Their chief towns were Engaddi, near the Dead Sea, and
Hebron. Engaddi was about 30 miles southeast from Jerusalem,
and Hebron about 20 miles south of that city. Josephus and
Eusebius speak of them as an ancient sect; and they were no
doubt the first among the Jews to embrace Christianity: with
whose faith and doctrine their own tenets had so many points of
resemblance, and were indeed in a great measure the same. Pliny
regarded them as a very ancient people.
In their devotions they turned toward the rising sun; as the
Jews generally did toward the Temple. But they were no idola-
ters; for they observed the law of Moses with scrupulous fidelity.
They held all things in common, and despised riches, their wants
being supplied by the administration of Curators or Stewards.
The Tetractys, composed of round dots instead of jods, was re-


--- PAGE 396 ---
vered among them. This being a Pythagorean symbol, evidently
shows their connection with the school of Pythagoras; but their
peculiar tenets more resemble those of Confucius and Zoroaster;
and probably were adopted while they were prisoners in Persia;
which explains their turning toward the Sun in prayer.
Their demeanor was sober and chaste. They submitted to the
superintendence of governors whom they appointed over them-
selves. The whole of their time was spent in labor, meditation,
and prayer; and they were most sedulously attentive to every call
of justice and humanity, and every moral duty. They believed
in the unity of God. They supposed the souls of men to have
fallen, by a disastrous fate, from the regions of purity and light,
into the bodies which they occupy; during their continuance in
which they considered them confined as in a prison. Therefore
they did not believe in the resurrection of the body; but in that
of the soul only. They believed in a future state of rewards and
punishments; and they disregarded the ceremonies or external


--- PAGE 397 ---
forms enjoined in the law of Moses to be observed in the worship
og God; holding that the words of that lawgiver were to be un-
derstood in a mysterious and recondite sense, and not according to
their literal meaning. They offered no sacrifices, except at home;
and by meditation they endeavored, as far as possible, to isolate
the soul from the body, and carry it back to God.
Eusebius broadly admits "that the ancient Therapeutae were
Christians; and that their ancient writings were our Gospels and
Epistles."
The ESSENES were of the Eclectic Sect of Philosophers, and
held PLATo in the highest esteem; they believed that true philos-
ophy, the greatest and most salutary gift of God to mortals, was
scattered, in various portions, through all the different Sects; and
that it was, consequently, the duty of every wise man to gather it
from the several quarters where it lay dispersed, and to employ
it, thus reunited, in destroying the dominion of impiety and
vice.


--- PAGE 398 ---
The great festivals of the Solstices were observed in a distin-
guished manner by the Essenes; as would naturally be supposed,
from the fact that they reverenced the Sun, not as a god, but as a
symbol of light and fire; the fountain of which, the Orientals
supposed God to be. They lived in continence and abstinence,
and had establislments similar to the monasteries of the early
Christians.
The writings of the Essenes were full of mysticism, parables,
enigmas, and allegories. They believed in the esoteric and exote-
ric meanings of the Scriptures; and, as we have already said, they
had a warrant for that in the Scriptures themselves. They found
it in the Old Testament, as the Gnostics found it in the New.
The Christian writers, and even Christ himself, recognized it as a
truth, that all Scripture had an inner and an outer meaning. Thus
we find it said as follows, in one of the Gospels:
"Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the Kingdom of
God; but unto men that are without, all these things are done in


--- PAGE 399 ---
parables; that seeing, they may see and not perceive, and hearing
they may hear and not understand .... And the disciples came
and said unto him, 'Why speakest Thou the truth in parables ?'--
He answered and said unto them, 'Because it is given unto you to
know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is
not given.'"
Paul, in the 4th chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians, speak-
ing of the simplest facts of the Old Testament, asserts that they
are an allegory. In the 3d chapter of the second letter to the
Corinthians, he declares himself a minister of the New Testament,
appointed by God; "Not of the letter, but of the spirit; for the
letter killeth." Origen and St. Gregory held that the Gospels
were not to be taken in their literal sense; and Athanasius ad-
monishes us that "Should we understand sacred writ according to
the letter, we should fall into the most enormous blasphemies."
Eusebius said, "Those who preside over the Holy Scriptures,
philosophize over them, and expound their literal sense by alle-


--- PAGE 400 ---
gory."
The sources of our knowledge of the Kabalistic doctrines, are
the books of Jezirah and Sohar, the former drawn up in the second
century, and the latter a little later; but containing materials
much older than themselves. In their most characteristic ele-
ments, they go back to the time of the exile. In them, as in the
teachings of Zoroaster, everything that exists emanated from a
source of infinite LiGHT. Before everything, existed THE AN-
CIENT OF DAYS, the KING OF LIGHT; a title often given to the
Creator in the Zend-Avesta and the code of the Sabaeans. With
the idea so expressed is connected the pantheism of India.
KING OF LIGHT, THE ANCIENT, is ALL THAT IS. He is not only
the real cause of all Existences; he is Infinite (AINSOPH). He is
HIMSELF: there is nothing in Him that We can call Thou.
In the Indian doctrine, not only is the Supreme Being the real
cause of all, but he is the only real Existence: all the rest is illu-
sion. In the Kabalah, as in the Persian and Gnostic doctrines,


--- PAGE 401 ---
He is the Supreme Being unknown to all, the "Unknown Father."
The world is his revelation, and subsists only in Him. His attri-
butes are reproduced there, with different modifications, and in
different degrees, so that the Universe is His Holy Splendor:it
is but His Mantle; but it must be revered in silence. All beings
have emanated from the Supreme Being: The nearer a being is
to Him, the more perfect it is; the more remote in the scale, the
less its purity.
A ray of Light, shot from the Deity, is the cause and principle
of all that exists. It is at once Father and Mother of All, in the
sublimest sense. It penetrates everything; and without it nothing
can exist an instant. From this double FORCE, designated by the
two parts of the word I.ù. H.ù. U.ù. H.ù. emanated the FIRST-BORN
of God, the Universal Form, in which are contained all beings;
the Persian and Platonic Archetype of things, united with the
Infinite by the primitive ray of Light.
This First-Born is the Creative Agent, Conservator, and ani-


--- PAGE 402 ---
mating Principle of the Universe. It is THE LIGHT OF LIGHT. It
possesses the three Primitive Forces of the Divinity, LIGHT,
SPIRIT and LIFE. As it has received
what it gives, Light and Life, it is equally considered as the gen-
erative and conceptive Principle, the Primitive Man, ADAM
KADMON. As such, it has revealed itself in ten emanations or
Sephiroth, which are not ten different beings, nor even beings at
all; but sources of life, vessels of Omnipotence, and types of Cre-
ation. They are Sovereignty or Will, Wisdom, Intelligence,
Benignity, Severity, Beauty, Victory, Glory, Permanency, and
Empire. These are attributes of God; and this idea, that God re-
veals Himself by His attributes, and that the human mind cannot
perceive or discern God Himself, in his works, but only his mode
of manifesting Himself, is a profound Truth. We know of the
Invisible only what the Visible reveals.
Wisdom was called NOUS and LOGOS, lN-
TELLECT or the WORD. Intelligence, source of the oil of anoint-


--- PAGE 403 ---
ing, responds to the Holy Ghost of the Christian Faith.
Beauty is represented by green and yellow. Victory is YA-
HOVAH-TSABAOTH, the column on the right hand, the column
Jachin: Glory is the column Boaz, on the left hand. And thus
our symbols appear again in the Kabalah. And again the LIGHT,
the object of our labors, appears as the creative power of Deity.
The circle, also, was the special symbol of the first Sephirah,
Kether, or the Crown.
We do not further follow the Kabalah in its four Worlds of
Spirits, Aziluth, Briah, Yezirah, and Asiah, or of emanation, crea-
tion, formation, and fabrication, one inferior to and one emerging
from the other, the superior always enveloping the inferior;its
doctrine that, in all that exists, there is nothing purely material;
that all comes from God, and in all He proceeds by irradiation;
that everything subsists by the Divine ray that penetrates crea-
tion; and all is united by the Spirit of God, which is the life of
life; so that all is God; the Existences that inhabit the four


--- PAGE 404 ---
worlds, inferior to each other in proportion to their distance from
the Great King of Light: the contest between the good and evil
Angels and Principles, to endure until the Eternal Himself comes
to end it and re-establish the primitive harmony; the four distinct
parts of the Soul of Man; and the migrations of impure souls,
until they are sufficiently purified to share with the Spirits of
Light the contemplation of the Supreme Being whose Splendor
fills the Universe.
The WORD was also found in the Phoenician Creed. As in all
those of Asia, a WORD of God, written in starry characters, by the
planetary Divinities, and communicated by the Demi-Gods, as a
profound mystery, to the higher classes of the human race, to be
communicated by them to mankind, created the world. The faith
of the Phoenicians was an emanation from that ancient worship of
the Stars, which in the creed of Zoroaster alone, is connected with
a faith in one God. Light and Fire are the most important agents
in the Phoenician faith. There is a race of children of the Light.


--- PAGE 405 ---
They adored the Heaven with its Lights, deeming it the Supreme
God.
Everything emanates from a Single Principle, and a Primitive
Love, which is the Moving Power of All and governs all. Light,
by its union with Spirit, whereof it is but the vehicle or symbol,
is the Life of everything, and penetrates everything. It should
therefore be respected and honored everywhere; for everywhere
it governs and controls.
The Chaldaic and Jerusalem Paraphrasts endeavored to render
the phrase, DEBAR-YAHOVAH, the Word of God, a
personalty, wherever they met with it. The phrase, "And God
created man," is, in the Jerusalem Targum, "And the Word of
IHUH created man."
So, in xxviii. Gen. 20,21, where Jacob says: "If God
(IHIH ALHIM) will be with me... then shall IHUH be my ALHIM;
UHIH IHUH LI LALHIM; and this stone
shall be God's House (IHIH BITH ALHIM):


--- PAGE 406 ---
Onkelos paraphrases it, "If the word of IHUH will be my help
. . . . then the word of IHUH shall be my God."
So, in iii. Gen. 8, for "The Voice of the Lord God" 
(IHUH ALHIM), we have, "The Voice of the Word of IHUH."
In ix. Wisdom, 1, "O God of my Fathers and Lord of Mercy!
who has made all things with thy word."
And in xviii. Wisdom, 15, "Thine Almighty Word leap-
ed down from Heaven."
Philo speaks of the Word as being the same with God. So in
several places he calls it the Second Di-
vinity; the Image of God: the Divine Word that
made all things: substitute, of God; and the like.
Thus when John commenced to preach, had been for ages
agitated, by the Priests and Philosophers of the East and West,
the great questions concerning the eternity or creation of matter:
immediate or intermediate creation of the Universe by the Su-
preme God; the origin, object, and final extinction of evil; the


--- PAGE 407 ---
relations between the intellectual and material worlds, and be-
tween God and man; and the creation, fall, redemption, and
restoration to his first estate, of man.
The Jewish doctrine, differing in this from all the other Oriental
creeds, and even from the Alohayistic legend with which the book
of Genesis commences, attributed the creation to the immediate
action of the Supreme Being. The Theosophists of the other
Eastern Peoples interposed more than one intermediary between
God and the world. To place between them but a single Being,
to suppose for the production of the world but a single inter-
mediary, was, in their eyes, to lower the Supreme Majesty. The
interval between God, who is perfect Purity, and matter, which is
base and foul, was too great for them to clear it at a single step.
Even in the Occident, neither Plato nor Philo could thus im-
poverish the Intellectual World.
Thus, Cerinthus of Ephesus, with most of the Gnostics, Philo,
the Kabalah, the Zend-Avesta, the Puranas, and all the Orient,


--- PAGE 408 ---
deemed the distance and antipathy between the Supreme Being
and the material world too great, to attribute to the former the
creation of the latter. Below, and emanating from, or created
by, the Ancient of Days, the Central Light, the Beginning, or
First Principle, one, two, or more Principles, Existences,
or Intellectual Beings were imagined, to some one or more of
whom (without any immediate creative act on the part of the
Great Immovable, Silent Deity), the immediate creation of the
material and mental universe was due.
We have already spoken of many of the speculations on this
point. To some, the world was created by the LOGOS or WORD,
first manifestation of, or emanation from, the Deity. To others,
the beginning of creation was by the emanation of a ray of
Light, creating the principle of Light and Life. The Primitive
THOUGHT, creating the inferior Deities, a succession of INTELL-
GENCES, the Iynges of Zoroaster, his Amshaspands, Izeds, and
Ferouers, the Ideas of Plato, the Aions of the Gnostics, the


--- PAGE 409 ---
Angels of the Jews, the Nous, the Demiourgos, the DIVINE REA-
SON, the Powers or Forces of Philo, and the Alohayim, Forces or
Superior Gods of the ancient legend with which Genesis begins,-
to these and other intermediaries the creation was owing. No re-
straints were laid on the Fancy and the Imagination. The veriest
Abstractions became Existences and Realities. The attributes of
God, personified, became Powers, Spirits, Intelligences.
God was the Light of Light, Divine Fire, the Abstract Intellec-
tuality, the Root or Germ of the Universe. Simon Magus, founder
of the Gnostic faith, and many of the early Judaizing Christians,
admitted that the manifestations of the Supreme Being, as
FATHER, or JEhOVAh, SON or CHRIST, and HOLY SPIRIT, were only
so many different modes of Existence, or Forces of the
same God. To others they were, as were the multitude of Sub-
ordinate Intelligences, real and distinct beings.
The Oriental imagination revelled in the creation of these In-
ferior Intelligences, Powers of Good and Evil, and Angels. We


--- PAGE 410 ---
have spoken of those imagined by the Persians and the Kabalists.
In the Talmud, every star, every country, every town, and almost
every tongue has a Prince of Heaven as its Protector. JEHUEL, is
the guardian of fire, and MICHAEL of water. Seven spirits assist
each; those of fire being Seraphiel, Gabriel, Nitriel, Tammael,
Tchimschiel, Hadarniel, and Sarniel. These seven are represented
by the square columns of this Degree, while the columns JACHIN
and BOAZ represent the angels of fire and water. But the col-
umns are not representatives of these alone.
To Basilides, God was without name, uncreated, at first contain-
ing and concealing in Himself the Plenitude of His Perfections;
and when these are by Him displayed and nianifested, there result
as many particular Existences, all analogous to Him, and still and
always Him. To the Essenes and the Gnostics, the East and the
West both devised this faith; that the Ideas, Conceptions, or
Manifestations of the Deity were so many Creations, so many Be-
ings, all God, nothing without Him, but more than what we now


--- PAGE 411 ---
understand by the word ideas. They emanated from and were
again merged in God. They had a kind of middle existence be-
tween our modern ideas, and the intelligences or ideas, elevated to
the rank of genii, of the Oriental mythology.
These personified attributes of Deity, in the theory of Basilides,
were the First-born, Nous or Mind: from
it emanates Logos, or THE WORD from it :
Phronesis, Intellect :from it Sophia, Wisdom :from it
Dunamis, Power: and from it Dikaiosune,
Righteousness: to which latter the Jews gave the name of 
Eirene, Peace, or Calm, the essential characteristics of Divinity,
and harmonious effect of all His perfections. The whole number
of successive emanations was 365, expressed by the Gnostics, in
Greek letters, by the mystic word Abraxas; desig-
nating God as manifested, or the aggregate of his manifestations;
but not the Supreme and Secret God Himself. These three hun-
dred and sixty-five Intelligences compose altogether the Fullness


--- PAGE 412 ---
or Plenitude of the Divine Emanations.
With the Ophites, a sect of the Gnostics, there were seven infe-
rior spirits (inferior to Ialdabaoth, the Demiourgos or Actual Cre-
ator : Michael, Suriel, Raphael, Gabriel, Thauthabaoth, Erataoth,
and Athaniel, the genii of the stars called the Bull; the Dog, the
Lion, the Bear, the Serpent, the Eagle, and the Ass that formerly
figured in the constellation Cancer, and symbolized respectively
by those animals; as Ialdabaoth, Iao, Adonai, Eloi, Orai, and As-
taphai were the genii of Saturn, the Moon, the Sun, Jupiter,
Venus, and Mercury.
The WORD appears in all these creeds. It is the Ormuzd of
Zoroaster, the Ainsoph of the Kabalah, the Nous of Platonism
and Philonism, and the Sophia or Demiourgos of the Gnostics.
And all these creeds, while admitting these different manifesta-
tions of the Supreme Being, held that His identity was immutable
and permanent. That was Plato's distinction between the Being
always the same and the perpetual flow of things inces-


--- PAGE 413 ---
santly changing, the Genesis.
The belief in dualism in some shape, was universal. Those
who held that everything emanated from God, aspired to God, and
re-entered into God, believed that, among those emanations were
two adverse Principles, of Light and Darkness, Good and Evil.
This prevailed in Central Asia and in Syria; while in Egypt it
assumed the form of Greek speculation. In the former, a second
Intellectual Principle was admitted, active in its Empire of Dark-
ness, audacious against the Empire of Light. So the Persians and
Sabeans understood it. In Egypt, this second Principle was Mat-
ter, as the word was used by the Platonic School, with its sad at-
tributes, Vacuity, Darkness, and Death. In their theory, matter
could be animated only by the low communication of a principle
of divine life. It resists the influences that would spiritualize it.
That resisting Power is Satan, the rebellious Matter, Matter that
does not partake of God.
To many there were two Principles; the Unknown Father, or


--- PAGE 414 ---
Supreme and Eternal God, living in the centre of the Light,
happy in the perfect purity of His being; the other, eternal Mat-
ter, that inert, shapeless, darksome mass, which they considered as
the source of all evils, the mother and dwelling-place of Satan.
To Philo and the Platonists, there was a Soul of the world, cre-
ating visible things, and active in them, as agent of the Supreme
Intelligence; realizing therein the ideas communicated to Him by
that Intelligence, and which sometimes excel His conceptions, but
which He executes without comprehending them.
The Apocalypse or Revelations, by whomever written, belongs
to the Orient and to extreme antiquity. It reproduces what is far
older than itself. It paints, with the strongest colors that the Ori-
ental genius ever employed, the closing scenes of the great strug-
gle of Light, and Truth, and Good, against Darkness, Error, and
Evil; personified in that between the New Religion on one side,
and Paganism and Judaism on the other. It is a particular appli-
cation of the ancient myth of Ormuzd and his Genii against Ahri-


--- PAGE 415 ---
man and his Devs; and it celebrates the final triumph of Truth
against the combined powers of men and demons. The ideas and
imagery are borrowed from every quarter; and allusions are found
in it to the doctrines of all ages. We are continually reminded
of the Zend-Avesta, the Jewish Codes, Philo, and the Gnosis.
The Seven Spirits surrounding the Throne of the Eternal, at the
opening of the Grand Drama, and acting so important a part
throughout, everywhere the first instruments of the Divine Will
and Vengence, are the Seven Amshaspands of Parsism; as the
Twenty-four Ancients, offering to the Supreme Being the first
supplications and the first homage, remind us of the Mysterious
Chiefs of Judaism, foreshadow the Eons of Gnosticism, and re-
produce the twenty-four Good Spirits created by Ormuzd and in-
closed in an egg.
The Christ of the Apocalypse, First-born of Creation and of the
Resurrection is invested with the characteristics of the Ormuzd
and Sosiosch of the Zend-Avesta, the Ainsoph of the Kabalah


--- PAGE 416 ---
and the Carpistes of the Gnostics. The idea that the
true Initiates and Faithful become Kings and Priests, is at once
Persian, Jewish, Christian, and Gnostic. And the definition of
the Supreme Being, that He is at once Alpha and Omega, the be-
ginning and the end--He that was, and is, and is to come,
i.e., Time illimitable, is Zoroaster's definition of Zerouane-Ak-
herene.
The depths of Satan which no man can measure; his triumph
for a time by fraud and violence; his being chained by an angel;
his reprobation and his precipitation into a sea of metal; his
names of the Serpent and the Dragon; the whole conflict of the
Good Spirits or celestial armies against the bad; are so many
ideas and designations found alike in the Zend-Avesta, the Ka-
balah, and the Gnosis.
We even find in the Apocalypse that singular Persian idea,
which regards some of the lower animals as so many Devs or ve-
hicles of Devs.


--- PAGE 417 ---
The guardianship of the earth by a good angel, the renewing of
the earth and heavens, and the final triumph of pure and holy
men, are the same victory of Good over Evil, for which the whole
Orient looked.
The gold, and white raiments of the twenty-four Elders are, as
in the Persian faith, the signs of a lofty perfection and divine
purity.
Thus the Human mind labored and struggled and tortured itself
for ages, to explain to itself what it felt, without confessing it, to
be inexplicable. A vast crowd of indistinct abstractions, hovering
in the imagination, a train of words embodying no tangible mean-
ing, an inextricable labyrinth of subtleties, was the result.
But one grand idea ever emerged and stood prominent and un-
changeable over the weltering chaos of confusion. God is great,
and good, and wise. Evil and pain and sorrow are temporary,
and for wise and beneficent purposes. They must be consistent
with God's goodness, purity, and infinite perfection; and there


--- PAGE 418 ---
must be a mode of explaining them, if we could but find it out;
as, in all ways we will endeavor to do. Ultimately, Good will pre-
vail, and Evil be overthrown. God, alone can do this, and He will
do it, by an Emanation from Himself, assuming the Human form
and redeeming the world.
Behold the object, the end, the result, of the great speculations
and logomachies of antiquity; the ultimate annihilation of evil,
and restoration of Man to his first estate, by a Redeemer, a Ma-
sayah, a Christos, the incarnate Word, Reason, or Power of Deity.
This Redeemer is the Word or Logos, the Ormuzd of Zoroaster,
the Ainsoph of the Kabalah, the Nous of Platonism and Philon-
ism; He that was in the Beginning with God, and was God, and
by Whom everything was made. That He was looked for by all
the People of the East is abundantly shown by the Gospel of John
and the Letters of Paul; wherein scarcely anything seemed neces-
sary to be said in proof that such a Redeemer was to come;but
all the energies of the writers are devoted to showing that Jesus


--- PAGE 419 ---
was that Christos whom all the nations were expecting; the
"Word," the Masayah, the Anointed or Consecrated One.
In this Degree the great contest between good and evil, in antici-
pation of the appearance and advent of the Word or Redeemer is
symbolized; and the mysterious esoteric teachings of the Essenes
and the Cabalists. Of the practices of the former we gain but
glimpses in the ancient writers; but we know that, as their doc-
trines were taught by John the Baptist, they greatly resembled
those of greater purity and more nearly perfect, taught by Jesus;
and that not only Palestine was full of John's disciples, so that the
Priests and Pharisees did not dare to deny John's inspiration; but
his doctrine had extended to Asia Minor, and had made converts
in luxurious Ephesus, as it also had in Alexandria in Egypt; and
that they readily embraced the Christian faith, of which they had
before not even heard.
These old controversies have died away, and the old faiths have
faded into oblivion. But Masonry still survives, vigorous and


--- PAGE 420 ---
strong, as when philosophy was taught in the schools of Alexan-
dria and under the Portico; teaching the same old truths as the
Essenes taught by the shores of the Dead Sea, and as John the
Baptist preached in the Desert; truths imperishable as the Deity,
and undeniable as Light. Those truths were gathered by the
Essenes from the doctrines of the Orient and the Occident, from
the Zend-Avesta and the Vedas, from Plato and Pythagoras, from
India, Persia, Phoenicia, and Syria, from Greece and Egypt, and
from the Holy Books of the Jews. Hence we are called Knights
of the East and West, because their doctrines came from both.
And these doctrines, the wheat sifted from the chaff, the Truth
seperated from Error, Masonry has garnered up in her heart of
hearts, and through the fires of persecution, and the storms of
calamity, has brought them and delivered them unto us. That
God is One, immutable, unchangeable, infinitely just and good;
that Light will finally overcome Darkness,--Good conquer Evil,
and Truth be victor over Error ;--these, rejecting all the wild and


--- PAGE 421 ---
useless speculations of the Zend-Avesta, the Kabalah, the Gnostics,
and the Schools, are the religion and Philosophy of Masonry.
Those speculations and fancies it is useful to study; that know-
ing in what worthless and unfruitful investigations the mind may
engage, you may the more value and appreciate the plain, simple,
sublime, universally-acknowledged truths, which have in all ages
been the Light by which Masons have been guided on their way;
the Wisdom and Strength that like imperishable columns have
sustained and will continue to sustain its glorious and magnificent
Temple.
 
 
XVIII. KNIGHT ROSE CROIX.
[Prince Rose Croix.]


--- PAGE 422 ---
Each of us makes such applications to his own faith and creed,
of the symbols and ceremonies of this Degree, as seems to him
proper. With these special interpretations we have here nothing
to do. Like the legend of the Master Khurum, in which some
see figured the condemnation and sufferings of Christ; others
those of the unfortunate Grand Master of the Templars; others
those of the first Charles, King of England; and others still the
annual descent of the Sun at the winter Solstice to the regions of
darkness, the basis of many an ancient legend; so the ceremonies
of this Degree receive different explanations; each interpreting
them for himself, and being offended at the interpretation of no
other.
In no other way could Masonry possess its character of Univer-
sality; that character which has ever been peculiar to it from its
origin; and which enables two Kings, worshippers of different
Deities, to sit together as Masters, while the walls of the first tem-


--- PAGE 423 ---
ple arose; and the men of Gebal, bowing down to the Phoenician
Gods, to work by the side of the Hebrews to whom those Gods
were abomination; and to sit with them in the same Lodge as
brethren.
You have already learned that these ceremonies have one gen-
eral significance, to every one, of every faith, who believes in God,
and the soul's immortality.
The primitive men met in no Temples made with human hands.
"God," said Sthe existence of a single uncreated
God, in whose bosom everything grows, is developed and trans-
formed. The worship of this God reposed upon the obedience of
all the beings He created. His feasts were those of the Solstices.
The doctrines of Buddha pervaded India, China, and Japan. The
Priests of Brahma, professing a dark and bloody creed, brutalized
by Superstition, united together against Buddhism, and with the
aid of Despotism, exterminated its followers. But their blood


--- PAGE 424 ---
fertilized the new docfirst falling themselves, and plunged in misery and
darkness,
tempted man to his fall, and brought sin into the world. All be-
lieved in a future life, to be attained by purification and trials; in
a state or successive states of reward and punishment; and in a
Mediator or Redeemer, by whom the Evil Principle was to be
overcome, and the Supreme Deity reconciled to His creatures.
The belief was general, that He was to be born of a Virgin, and
suffer a painful death. The Indians called him Chrishna; the
Chinese, Kioun-tse;the Persians, Sosiosch; the Chaldeans, Dhou-
vanai; the Egyptians, Har-Oeri; Plato, Love; and the Scandina-
vians, Balder.
Chrishna,the Hindoo Redeemer, was cradled and educated
among Shepherds. A Tyrant, at the time of his birth, ordered
all male children to be slain. He performed miracles, say his
legends, even raising the dead. He washed the feet of the Brah-
mins, and was meek and lowly of spirit. He was born of a Vir-


--- PAGE 425 ---
gin; descended to Hell, rose again, ascended to Heaven, charged
his disciples to teach his doctrines, and gave them the gift of mir-
acles.
The first Masonic Legislator whose memory is preserved to us
by history, was Buddha, who, about a thousand years before the
Christian era, reformed the religion of Manous. He called to the
Priesthood all men, without distinction of caste, who felt them-
selves inspired by God to instruct men. Those who so associated
themselves formed a Society of Prophets under the name of Sa-
maneans. They recognized the existence of a single uncreated
God, in whose bosom everything grows, is developed and trans-
formed. The worship of this God reposed upon the obedience of
all the beings He created. His feasts were those of the Solstices.
The doctrines of Buddha pervaded India, China, and Japan. The
Priests of Brahma, professing a dark and bloody creed, brutalized
by Superstition, united together against Buddhism, and with the
aid of Despotism, exterminated its followers. But their blood


--- PAGE 426 ---
fertilized the new doctrine, which produced a new Society under
the name of Gymnosophists; and a large number, fleeing to
Ireland, planted their doctrines there, and there erected the round
towers, some of which still stand, solid and unshaken as at first,
visible monuments of the remotest ages.
The Phoenician Cosmogony, like all others in Asia, was the
Word of God, written in astral characters, by the planetary Divin-
ities, and communicated by the Demi-gods, as a profound mystery,
to the brighter intelligences of Humanity, to be propagated by
them among men. Their doctrines resembled the Ancient Sabe-
ism, and being the faith of Hiram the King and his namesake the
Artist, are of interest to all Masons. With them, the First Prin-
ciple was half material, half spiritual, a dark air, animated and
impregnated by the spirit; and a disordered chaos, covered with
thick darkness. From this came the Word, and thence creation
and generation; and thence a race of men, children of light, who
adored Heaven and its Stars as the Supreme Being; and whose


--- PAGE 427 ---
different gods were but incarnations of the Sun, the Moon, the
Stars, and the Ether. Chrysor was the great igneous power of
Nature, and Baal and Malakarth representations of the Sun and
Moon, the latter word, in Hebrew, meaning Queen.
Man had fallen, but not by the tempting of the serpent. For,
with the Phoenicians, the serpent was deemed to partake of the
Divine Nature, and was sacred, as he was in Egypt. He was
deemed to be immortal, unless slain by violence, becoming young
again in his old age, by entering into and consuming himself.
Hence the Serpent in a circle, holding his tail in his mouth, was
an emblem of eternity. With the head of a hawk he was of a
Divine Nature, and a symbol of the sun. Hence one Sect of the
Gnostics took him for their good genius, and hence the brazen ser-
pent reared by Moses in the Desert, on which the Israelites looked
and lived.
"Before the chaos, that preceded the birth of Heaven and
Earth," said the Chinese Lao-Tseu, "a single Being existed, im-


--- PAGE 428 ---
mense and silent, immutable and always acting;the mother of
the Universe. I know not the name of that Being, but I designate
it by the word Reason. Man has his model in the earth, the
earth in Heaven, Heaven in Reason, and Reason in itself."
"I am," says Isis, "Nature;parent of all things, the sovereign
of the Elements, the primitive progeny of Time, the most exalted
of the Deities, the first of the Heavenly Gods and Goddesses, the
Queen of the Shades, the uniform countenance; who dispose
with my rod the numerous lights of Heaven, the salubrious breezes
of the sea, and the mournful silence of the dead; whose single
Divinity the whole world venerates in many forms, with various
rites and by many names. The Egyptians, skilled in ancient lore,
worship me with proper ceremonies, and call me by my true name,
Isis the Queen."
The Hindu Vedas thus define the Deity:
"He who surpasses speech, and through whose power speech is
expressed, know thou that He is Brahma; and not these perish-


--- PAGE 429 ---
able things that man adores.
"He whom Intelligence cannot comprehend, and He alone, say
the sages, through whose Power the nature of Intelligence can be
understood, know thou that He is Brahma; and not these perish-
able things that man adores.
"He who cannot be seen by the organ of sight, and through
whose power the organ of seeing sees, know thou that He is
Brahma; and not these perishable things that man adores.
"He who cannot be heard by the organ of hearing, and through
whose power the organ of hearing hears, know thou that He is
Brahma; and not these perishable things that man adores.
"He who cannot be perceived by the organ of smelling, and
through whose power the organ of smelling smells, know thou that
He is Brahma; and not these perishable things that man adores."
"When God resolved to create the human race," said Arius,
"He made a Being that He called The WORD, The Son, Wisdom,
to the end that this Being might give existence to men." This


--- PAGE 430 ---
WORD is the Ormuzd of Zoroaster, the Ainsoph of the Kabalah,
the Nous of Plato and Philo, the Wisdom or Demiourgos of the
Gnostics.
That is the True Word, the knowledge of which our ancient
brethren sought as the priceless reward of their labors on the
Holy Temple: the Word of Life, the Divine Reason, "in whom
was Life, and that Life the Light of men";"which long shone in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not;" the Infinite
Reason that is the Soul of Nature, immortal, of which the Word
of this Degree reminds us; and to believe wherein and revere it, is
the peculiar duty of every Mason.
"In the beginning," says the extract from some older work,
with which John commences his Gospel, "was the Word, and the
Word was near to God, and the Word was God. All things were
made by Him, and without Him was not anything made that was
made. In Him was Life, and the life was the Light of man; and
the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness did not contain it."


--- PAGE 431 ---
It is an old tradition that this passage was from an older work.
And Philostorgius and Nicephorus state, that when the Emperor
Julian undertook to rebuild the Temple, a stone was taken up,
that covered the mouth of a deep square cave, into which one of
the laborers, being let down by a rope, found in the centre of
the floor a cubical pillar, on which lay a roll or book, wrapped in
a fine linen cloth, in which, in capital letters, was the foregoing
passage.
However this may have been, it is plain that John's Gospel is a
polemic against the Gnostics; and, stating at the outset the current
doctrine in regard to the creation by the Word, he then addresses
himself to show and urge that this Word was Jesus Christ.
And the first sentence, fully rendered into our language, would
read thus:"When the process of emanation, of creation or evolu-
tion of existences inferior to the Supreme God began, the Word
came into existence and was: and this word was
near to God; i.e. the immediate or first emanation from God:and


--- PAGE 432 ---
it was God Himself, developed or manifested in that particular
mode, and in action. And by that Word everything that is was
created."-And thus Tertullian says that God made the World out
of nothing, by means of His Word, Wisdom, or Power.
To Philo the Jew, as to the Gnostics, the Supreme Being was
the Primitive Light, or Archetype of Light,-Source whence the
rays emanate that illuminate Souls. He is the Soul of the World,
and as such acts everywhere. He himself fills and bounds his
whole existence, and his forces fill and penetrate everything. His
Image is the WORD [LOGOS], a form more brilliant than fire, which
is not pure light. This WORD dwells in God; for it is within His
Intelligence that the Supreme Being frames for Himself the
Types of Ideas of all that is to assume reality in the Universe.
The WORD is the Vehicle by which God acts on the Universe; the
World of Ideas by means whereof God has created visible things;
the more Ancient God, as compared with the Material World;
Chief and General Representative of all Intelligences; the Arch-


--- PAGE 433 ---
angel and representative of all spirits, even those of Mortals;
the type of Man; the primitive man himself. These ideas are
borrowed from Plato. And this Word is not only the Creator ["by
Him was everything made that was made"], but acts in the place
of God and through him act all the Powers and Attributes of
God. And also, as first representative of the human race, he is
the protector of Men and their Shepherd, the "Ben H'Adam," or
Son of Man.
The actual condition of Man is not his primitive condition, that
in which he was the image of the Word. His unruly passions
have caused him to fall from his original lofty estate. But he may
rise again, by following the teachings of Heavenly Wisdom, and
the Angels whom God commissions to aid him in escaping from
the entanglements of the body; and by fighting bravely against
Evil, the existence of which God has allowed solely to furnish him
with the means of exercising his free will.
The Supreme Being of the Egyptians was Amun, a secret and


--- PAGE 434 ---
concealed God, the Unknown Father of the Gnostics, the Source
of Divine Life, and of all force, the Plenitude of all, comprehend-
ing all things in Himself, the original Light. He creates nothing;
but everything emanates from Him: and all other Gods are but
his manifestations. From Him, by the utterance of a Word, ema-
nated Neith, the Divine Mother of all things, the Primitive
THOUGHT, the FORCE that puts everything in movement, the
SPIRIT everywhere extended, the Deity of Light and Mother of
the Sun.
Of this Supreme Being, Osiris was the image, Source of all
Good in the moral and physical world, and constant foe of
Typhon, the Genius of Evil, the Satan of Gnosticism, brute mat-
ter, deemed to be always at feud with the spirit that flowed from
the Deity; and over whom Har-Oeri, the Redeemer, Son of Isis
and Osiris, is finally to prevail.
In the Zend-Avesta of the Persians the Supreme Being is
Time without limit, ZERUANE AKHERENE.--No origin could be


--- PAGE 435 ---
assigned to Him; for He was enveloped in His own Glory, and
His Nature and Attributes were so inaccessible to human Intelli-
gence, that He was but the object of a silent veneration. The com-
mencement of Creation was by emanation from Him. The first
emanation was the Primitive Light, and from this Light emerged
Ormuzd, the King o[ Light, who, by the WORD, created the World
in its purity, is its Preserver and Judge, a Holy and Sacred Be-
ing, Intelligence and Knowledge, Himself Time without limit,
and wielding all the powers of the Supreme Being.
In this Persian faith, as taught many centuries before our era,
and embodied in the Zend-Avesta, there was in man a pure Prin-
ciple, proceeding from the Supreme Being, produced by the Will
and Word of Ormuzd. To that was united an impure principle,
proceeding from a foreign influence, that of Ahriman, the Dragon,
or principle of Evil. Tempted by Ahriman, the first man and
woman had fallen; and for twelve thousand years there was to be
war between Ormuzd and the Good Spirits created by him, and


--- PAGE 436 ---
Ahrirnan and the Evil ones whom he had called into existence.
But pure souls are assisted by the Good Spirits, the Triumph of
the Good Principle is determined upon in the decrees of the Su-
preme Being, and the period of that triumph will infallibly arrive.
At the moment when the earth shall be most afflicted with the
evils brought upon it by the Spirits of perdition, three Prophets
will appear to bring assistance to mortals. Sosiosch, Chief of the
Three, will regenerate the world, and restore to it its primitive
Beauty, Strength, and Purity. He will judge the good and the
wicked. After the universal resurrection of the Good, the pure
Spirits will conduct them to an abode of eternal happiness. Ahri-
man, his evil Demons, and all the world, will be purified in a tor-
rent of liquid burning metal. The Law of Ormuzd will rule
everywhere: all men will be happy: all, enjoying an unalterable
bliss, will unite with Sosiosch in singing the praises of the Su-
preme Being.
These doctrines, with some modifications, were adopted by the


--- PAGE 437 ---
Kabalists and afterward by the Gnostics.
Apollonius of Tyana says:"We shall render the most appropri-
ate worship to the Deity, when to that God whom we call the
First, who is One, and separate from all, and after whom we recog-
nize the others, we present no offerings whatever, kindle to Him
no fire, dedicate to Him no sensible thing; for he needs nothing,
even of all that natures more exalted than ours could give. The
earth produces no plant, the air nourishes no animal, there is in
short nothing, which would not be impure in his sight. In ad-
dressing ourselves to Him, we must use only the higher word, that,
I mean, which is not expressed by the mouth,--the silent inner
word of the spirit ..... From the most Glorious of all Beings, we
must seek for blessings, by that which is most glorious in our-
selves; and that is the spirit, which needs no organ."
Strabo says: "This one Supreme Essence is that which embraces
us all, the water and the land, that which we call the Heavens,
the World, the Nature of things. This Highest Being should be


--- PAGE 438 ---
worshipped, without any visible image, in sacred groves. In such
retreats the devout should lay themselves down to sleep, and
expect signs from God in dreams."
Aristolte says:"It has been handed down in a mythical form,
from the earliest times to posterity, that there are Gods, and that
The Divine compasses entire nature. All besides this has been
added, after the mythical style, for the purpose of persuading the
multitude, and for the interest of the laws and the advantage of
the State. Thus men have given to the Gods human forms, and
have even represented them under the figure of other beings, in
the train of which fictions followed many more of the same sort.
But if, from all this, we separate the original principle, and con-
sider it alone, namely, that the first Essences are Gods, we shall
find that this has been divinely said; and since it is probable that
philosophy and the arts have been several times, so far as that is
possible, found and lost, such doctrines may have been preserved
to our times as the remains of ancient wisdom."


--- PAGE 439 ---
Porphyry says: "By images addressed to sense, the ancients
represented God and his powers--by the visible they typified the
invisible for those who had learned to read, in these types, as in
a book, a treatise on the Gods. We need not wonder if the igno-
rant consider the images to be nothing more than wood or stone;
for just so, they who are ignorant of writing see nothing in monu-
ments but stone, nothing in tablets but wood, and in books but a
tissue of papyrus."
Apollonius of Tyana held, that birth and death are only in ap-
pearance; that which separates itself from the one substance (the
one Divine essence), and is caught up by matter, seems to be born;
that, again, which releases itself from the bonds of matter, and is
reunited with the one Divine Essence, seems to die. There is, at
most, an alteration between becoming visible and becoming in-
visible. In all there is, properly speaking, but the one essence,
which alone acts and suffers, by becoming all things to all;the
Eternal God, whom men wrong, when they deprive Him of what


--- PAGE 440 ---
properly can be attributed to Him only, and transfer it to other
names and persons.
The New Platonists substituted the idea of the Absolute, for
the Supreme Essence itself;--as the first, simplest principle, ante-
rior to all existence; of which nothing determinate can be predi-
cated; to which no consciousness, no self-contemplation can be
ascribed; inasmuch as to do so, would immediately imply a qual-
ity, a distinction of subject and object. This Supreme Entity can
be known only by an intellectual intuition of the Spirit, trans-
scending itself, and emancipating itself from its own limits.
This mere logical tendency, by means of which men thought to
arrive at the conception of such an absolute, the ov, was united
with a certain mysticism, which, by a transcendent state of feel-
ing, communicated, as it were, to this abstraction what the mind
would receive as a reality. The absorption of the Spirit into that
superexistence, so as to be entirely
identified with it, or such a revelation of the latter to the spirit


--- PAGE 441 ---
raised above itself, was regarded as the highest end which the
spiritual life could reach.
The New Platonists' idea of God, was that of One Simple Origi-
nal Essence, exalted akes a distinction between those who are in the
proper sense Sons of God, having by means of contemplation
raised themselves to the highest Being, or attained to a knowledge
of Him, in His immediate self-manifestation, and those who know
God only in his mediate revelation through his operation--such as
He declares Himself in creation--in the revelation still veiled in
the letter of Scripture--those, in short, who attach themselves
simply to the Logos, and consider this to be the Supreme God;
who aren; and after it has rid itself
from all that pertains to sense-from all manifoldness. They are
the mediators between man (amazed and stupefied by manifold-
ness) and the Supreme Unity.
Philo says:"He who disbelieves the miraculous, simply as the
miraculous, neither knows God, nor has he ever sought after Him;


--- PAGE 442 ---
for otherwise he would have understood, by looking at that truly
great and awe-inspiring sight, the miracle of the Universe, that
these miracles (in God's providential guidance of His people) are
but child's play for the Divine Power. But the truly miraculous
has become despised through familiarity. The universal, on the
contrary, although in itself insignificant, yet, through our love of
novelty, transports us with amazement."
In opposition to the anthropopathism of the Jewish Scriptures,
the Alexandrian Jews endeavored to purify the idea of God from
all admixture of the Human. By the exclusion of every human
passion, it was sublimated to a something devoid of all attributes,
and wholly transcendental; and the mere Being, the Good,
in and by itself, the Absolute of Platonism, was substituted for
the personal Deity of the Old Testament. By soaring up-
ward, beyond all created existence, the mind, disengaging itself
from the Sensible, attains to the intellectual intuition of this Ab-
solute Being; of whom, however, it can predicate nothing but


--- PAGE 443 ---
existence, and sets aside all other determinations as not answering
to the exalted nature of the Supreme Essence.
Thus Philo makes a distinction between those who are in the
proper sense Sons of God, having by means of contemplation
raised themselves to the highest Being, or attained to a knowledge
of Him, in His immediate self-manifestation, and those who know
God only in his mediate revelation through his operation--such as
He declares Himself in creation--in the revelation still veiled in
the letter of Scripture--those, in short, who attach themselves
simply to the Logos, and consider this to be the Supreme God;
who are the sons of the Logos, rather than of the True Being.
"God," says Pythagoras, "is neither the object of sense, nor
subject to passion, but invisible, only intelligible, and supremely
intelligent. In His body He is like the light, and in His soul He re-
sembles truth. He is the universal spirit that pervades and dif-
fuseth itself over all nature. All beings receive their life from
Him. There is but one only God, who is not, as some are apt to


--- PAGE 444 ---
imagine, seated above the world, beyond the orb of the Universe;
but being Himself all in all, He sees all the beings that fill His
immensity; the only Principle, the Light of Heaven, the Father
of all. He produces everything; He orders and disposes every-
thing; He is the REASON, the LIFE, and the MOTION of all being."
"I am the LIGHT of the world;he that followeth Me shall not
walk in DARKNESS, but shall have the LIGHT of LIFE." So said
the Founder of the Christian Religion, as His words are reported
by John the Apostle.
God, say the sacred writings of the Jews, appeared to Moses in
a FLAME OF FIRE, in the midst of a bush, which was not consumed.
He descended upon Mount Sinai, as the smoke of a furnace; He
went before the children of Israel, by day, in a pillar of cloud,
and, by night, in a pillar of fire, to give them light. "Call you on
the name of your Gods," said Elijah the Prophet to the Priests
of Baal, "and I will call upon the name of ADONAI; and the God
that answereth by fire, let him be God."


--- PAGE 445 ---
According to the Kabalah, as according to the doctrines of
Zoroaster, everything that exists has emanated from a source of
infinite light. Before all things, existed the Primitive Being, THE
ANCIENT OF DAYS, the Ancient King of Light; a title the more
remarkable, because it is frequently given to the Creator in the
Zend-Avesta, and in the Code of the Sabeans, and occurs in the
Jewish Scriptures.
The world was His Revelation, God revealed; and subsisted
only in Him. His attributes were there reproduced with various
modifications and in different degrees; so that the Universe was
His Holy Splendor, His Mantle. He was to be adored in silence;
and perfection consisted in a nearer approach to Him.
Before the creation of worlds, the PRIMITIVE LIGHT filled all
space, so that there was no void. When the Supreme Being, ex-
isting in this Light, resolved to display His perfections, or mani-
fest them in worlds, He withdrew within Himself, formed around
Him a void space, and shot forth His first emanation, a ray of


--- PAGE 446 ---
light; the cause and principle of everything that exists, uniting
both the generative and conceptive power, which penetrates every-
thing, and without which nothing could subsist for an instant.
Man fell, seduced by the Evil Spirits most remote from the
Great King of Light; those of the fourth world of spirits, Asiah,
whose chief was Belial. They wage incessant war against the
pure Intelligences of the other worlds, who, like the Amshaspands,
Izeds, and Ferouers of the Persians are the tutelary guardians of
man. In the beginning, all was unison and harmony; full of the
same divine light and perfect purity. The Seven Kings of Evil
fell, and the Universe was troubled. Then the Creator took from
the Seven Kings the principles of Good and of Light, and divided
them among the four worlds of Spirits, giving to the first three
the Pure Intelligences, united in love and harmony, while to the
fourth were vouchsafed only some feeble glimmerings of light.
When the strife between these and the good angels shall have
continued the appointed time, and these Spirits enveloped in dark-


--- PAGE 447 ---
ness shall long and in vain have endeavored to absorb the Divine
light and life, then will the Eternal Himself come to correct them.
He will deliver them from the gross envelopes of matter that hold
them captive, will re-animate and strengthen the ray of light or
spiritual nature which they have preserved, and re-establish
throughout the Universe that primitive Harmony which was its
bliss.
Marcion, the Gnostic, said, "The Soul of the True Christian,
adopted as a child by the Supreme Being, to whom it has long
been a stranger, receives from Him the Spirit and Divine life. It
is led and confirmed, by this gift, in a pure and holy life, like that
of God; and if it so completes its earthly career, in charity,
chastity, and sanctity, it will one day be disengaged from its ma-
terial envelope, as the ripe grain is detached from the straw, and
as the young bird escapes from its shell. Like the angels, it will
share in the bliss of the Good and Perfect Father, re-clothed in an
aerial body or organ, and made like unto the Angels in Heaven."


--- PAGE 448 ---
You see, my brother, what is the meaning of Masonic "Light."
You see why the EAST of the Lodge, where the initial letter of the
Name of the Deity overhangs the Master, is the place of Light.
Light, as contradistinguished from darkness, is Good, as contradis-
tinguished from Evil: and it is that Light, the true knowledge of
Deity, the Eternal Good, for which Masons in all ages have sought.
Still Masonry marches steadily onward toward that Light that
shines in the great distance, the Light of that day when Evil,
overcome and vanquished, shall fade away and disappear forever,
and Life and Light be the one law of the Universe, and its eternal
Harmony.
The Degree of Rose Croix teaches three things;--the unity, im-
mutability and goodness of God; the immortality of the Soul;
and the ultimate defeat and extinction of evil and wrong and sor-
row, by a Redeemer or Messiah, yet to come, if he has not already
appeared.
It replaces the three pillars of the old Temple, with three that


--- PAGE 449 ---
have already been explained to you,--Faith [in God, mankind, and
man's self], Hope [in the victory over evil, the advancement of
Humanity, and a hereafter], and Charity [relieving the wants,
and tolerant of the errors and faults of others]. To be trustful,
to be hopeful, to be indulgent; these, in an age of selfishness, of ill
opinion of human nature, of harsh and bitter judgment, are the
most important Masonic Virtues, and the true supports of every
Masonic Temple. And they are the old pillars of the Temple
under different names. For he only is wise who judges others
charitably; he only is strong who is hopeful; and there is no
beauty like a firm faith in God, our fellows and ourself.
The second apartment, clothed in mourning, the columns of
the Temple shattered and prostrate, and the brethren bowed down
in the deepest dejection, represents the world under the tyranny of
the Principle of Evil; where virtue is persecuted and vice reward-
ed; where the righteous starve for bread, and the wicked live
sumptuously and dress in purple and fine linen; where insolent


--- PAGE 450 ---
ignorance rules, and learning and genius serve; where King and
Priest trample on liberty and the rights of conscience; where free-
dom hides in caves and mountains, and sycophancy and servility
fawn and thrive; where the cry of the widow and the orphan
starving for want of food, and shivering with cold, rises ever to
Heaven, from a million miserable hovels; where men, willing to
labor, and starving, they and their children and the wives of their
bosoms, beg plaintively for work, when the pampered capitalist
stops his mills; where the law punishes her who, starving, steals a
loaf, and lets the seducer go free; where the success of a party
justifies murder, and violence and rapine go unpunished; and
where he who with many years' cheating and grinding the faces of
the poor grows rich, receives office and honor in life, and after
death brave funeral and a splendid mausoleum:--this world,
where, since its making, war has never ceased, nor man paused in
the sad task of torturing and murdering his brother; and of which
ambition, avarice, envy, hatred, lust, and the rest of Ahriman's


--- PAGE 451 ---
and Typhon's army make a Pandemonium: this world, sunk in
sin, reeking with baseness, clamorous with sorrow and misery. If
any see in it also a type of the sorrow of the Craft for the death
of Hiram, the grief of the Jews at the fall of Jerusalem, the misery
of the Templars at the ruin of their order and the death of De
Molay, or the world's agony and pangs of woe at the death of the
Redeemer, it is the right of each to do so.
The third apartment represents the consequences of sin and
vice, and the hell made of the human heart, by its fiery passions.
If any see in it also a type of the Hades of the Greeks, the
Gehenna of the Hebrews, the Tartarus of the Romans, or the Hell
of the Christians, or only of the agonies of remorse and the tor-
tures of an upbraiding conscience, it is the right of each to do so.
The fourth apartment represents the Universe, freed from the
insolent dominion and tyranny of the Principle of Evil, and bril-
liant with the true Light that flows from the Supreme Deity;
when sin and wrong, and pain and sorrow, remorse and misery


--- PAGE 452 ---
shall be no more forever; when the great plans of Infinite Eternal
Wisdom shall be fully developed; and all God's creatures, seeing
that all apparent evil and individual suffering and wrong were
but the drops that went to swell the great river of infinite good-
ness, shall know that vast as is the power of Deity, His goodness
and beneficence are infinite as His power. If any see in it a type
of the peculiar mysteries of any faith or creed, or an allusion to
any past occurrences, it is their right to do so. Let each apply its
symbols as he pleases. To all of us they typify the universal rule
of Masonry,-- of its three chief virtues, Faith, Hope and Charity;
of brotherly love and universal benevolence. We labor here to
no other end. These symbols need no other interpretation.
The obligations of our Ancient Brethren of the Rose Croix were to
fulfill all the duties of friendship, cheerfulness, charity, peace, lib-
erality, temperance and chastity: and scrupulously to avoid im-
purity, haughtiness, hatred, anger, and every other kind of vice.
They took their philosophy from the old Theology of the Egyp-


--- PAGE 453 ---
tians, as Moses and Solomon had done, and borrowed its hiero-
glyphics and the ciphers of the Hebrews. Their principal rules
were to exercise the profession of medicine charitably and with-
out fee, to advance the cause of virtue, enlarge the sciences, and
induce men to live as in the primitive times of the world.
When this Degree had its origin, it is not important to inquire;
nor with what different rites it has been practised in different
countries and at various times. It is of very high antiquity. Its
ceremonies differ with the degrees of latitude and longitude, and
it receives variant interpretations. If we were to examine all the
different ceremonials, their emblems, and their formulas, we should
see that all that belongs to the primitive and essential elements
of the order, is respected in every sanctuary. All alike practise
virtue, that it may produce fruit. All labor, like us, for the ex-
tirpation of vice, the purification of man, the development of the
arts and sciences, and the relief of humanity.
None admit an adept to their lofty philosophical knowledge, and


--- PAGE 454 ---
mysterious sciences, until he has been purified at the altar of the
symbolic Degrees. Of what importance are differences of opinion
as to the age and genealogy of the Degree, or variance in the prac-
tice, ceremonial and liturgy, or the shade of color of the banner
under which each tribe of Israel marched, if all revere 'the Holy
Arch of the symbolic Degrees, first and unalterable source of Free-
Masonry; if all revere our conservative principles, and are with us
in the great purposes of our organization ?
If, anywhere, brethren of a particular religious belief have been
excluded from this Degree, it merely shows how gravely the pur-
poses and plan of Masonry may be misunderstood. For whenever
the door of any Degree is closed against him who believes in one
God and the soul's immortality, on account of the other tenets of
his faith, that Degree is Masonry no longer. No Mason has the
right to interpret the symbols of this Degree for another, or to re-
fuse him its mysteries, if he will not take them with the explana-
tion and commentary superadded.


--- PAGE 455 ---
Listen, my brother, to our explanation of the symbols of the
Degree, and then give them such further interpretation as you
think fit.
The Cross has been a sacred symbol from the earliest Antiquity.
It is found upon all the enduring monuments of the world, in
Egypt, in Assyria, in Hindostan, in Persia, and on the Buddhist
towers of Ireland. Buddha was said to have died upon it. The
Druids cut an oak into its shape and held it sacred, and built their
temples in that form. Pointing to the four quarters of the world,
it was the symbol of universal nature. It was on a cruciform tree,
that Chrishna was said to have expired, pierced with arrows. It
was revered in Mexico.
But its peculiar meaning in this Degree, is that given to it by
the Ancient Egyptians. Tltoth or Phika is represented on the old-
est monuments carrying in his hand the Crux Ansata, or Ankh,
[a Tau cross, with a ring or circle over it]. He is so seen on the
double tablet of Shufu and Nob Shufu, builders of the greatest of


--- PAGE 456 ---
the Pyramids, at Wady Meghara, in the peninsula of Sinai. It was
the hieroglyphic for life, and with a triangle prefixed meant life-
giving. To us therefore it is the symbol of Life--of that life
that emanated from the Deity, and of that Eternal Life for which
we all hope; through our faith in God's infinite goodness.
The ROSE was anciently sacred to Aurora and the Sun. It is
a symbol of Dawn, of the resurrection of Light and the renewal
of life, and therefore of the dawn of the first day, and more par-
ticularly of the resurrection: and the Cross and Rose together
are therefore hieroglyphically to be read, the Dawn of Eternal
Life which all Nations have hoped for by the advent of a Re-
deemer.
The Pelican feeding her young is an emblem of the large and
bountiful beneficence of Nature, of the Redeemer of fallen man,
and of that humanity and charity that ought to distinguish a
Knight of this Degree.
The Eagle was the living Symbol of the Egyptian God Mendes


--- PAGE 457 ---
or Menthra, whom Sesostris-Ramses made one with Amun-Re,
the God of Thebes and Upper Egypt, and the representative of
the Sun, the word RE meaning Sun or King.
The Compass surmounted with a crown signifies that notwith-
standing the high rank attained in Masonry by a Knight of the
Rose Croix, equity and impartiality are invariably to govern his
conduct.
To the word INRI, inscribed on the Crux Ansata over the
Master's Seat, many meanings have been assigned. The Christian
Initiate reverentially sees in it the initials of the inscription upon
the cross on which Christ suffered---Iesus Nazarenus Rex ludce-
orum. The sages of Antiquity connected it with one of the great-
est secrets of Nature, that of universal regeneration. They inter-
preted it thus, Igne Natura renovatur integra; [entire nature is
renovated by fire]: The Alchemical or Hermetic Masons framed
for it this aphorism, Igne nitrum roris invenitur. And the Jes-
uits are charged with having applied to it this odious axiom,


--- PAGE 458 ---
Justum necare reges impios. The four letters are the initials of
the Hebrew words that represent the four elements--lammim,
the seas or water; Nour, fire; Rouach, the air, and Iebeschah, the
dry earth. How we read it, I need not repeat to you.
The CROSS, X, was the Sign of the Creative Wisdom or Logos,
the Son of God. Plato says, "He expressed him upon the Uni-
verse in the figure of the letter X. The next Power to the Su-
preme God was decussated or figured in the shape of a Cross on
the Universe." Mithras signed his soldiers on the forehead with a 
Cross. X is the mark of 600, the mysterious cycle of the Incar-
nations.
We constantly see the Tau and the Resh united thus P . These
-|-
|
two letters, in the old Samaritan, as found in Arius, stand, the
first for 400, the second for 200=600. This is the Staff of Osiris, 
also, and his monogram, and was adopted by the Christians as a


--- PAGE 459 ---
Sign. On a medal P of Constanius is this inscription, "In hoc
X
|
signo victor eris." An inscription in the Duomo at Milan
reads, "X. et P. Christi. Nomina. Sancta. Tenei."
The Egyptians used as a Sign of their God Canobus, a T or a
-l- indifferently. The Vaishnavas of India have also the same
Sacred Tau, which they also mark with crosses, and with triangles.
The vestments of the ptiests of Horus were covered with these crosses.
So was the dress of the Lama of Thibet. The Sectarian marks of the Jains 
are similar. The distinctive badge of the Sect of Xac Jaonicus is the
swastica. It is the Sign of Fo, identical with the Cross of Christ. 
On the ruins of Mandore, in India, among other mystic emblems, are 
the mystic triangle, and the interlaced triangle. This is also found 
on ancient coins and medals, excavated from the ruins of Oojein and 
other ancient cities of India.
You entered here amid gloom and into shadow, and are clad in


--- PAGE 460 ---
the apparel of sorrow. Lament, with us, the sad condition of the
Human race, in this vale of tears! the calamities of men and the
agonies of nations! the darkness of the bewildered soul, oppressed
by doubt and apprehension!
There is no human soul that is not sad at times. There is no
thoughtful soul that does not at times despair. There is perhaps
none, of all that think at all of anything beyond the needs and in-
terests of the body, that is not at times startled and terrified by the
awful questions which, feeling as though it were a guilty thing for
doing so, it whispers to itself in its inmost depths. Some Demon
seems to torture it with doubts, and to crush it with despair, ask-
ing whether, after all, it is certain that its convictions are true,
and its faith well rounded: whether it is indeed sure that a God of
Infinite Love and Beneficence rules the Universe, or only some
great remorseless Fate and iron Necessity, hid in impenetrable
gloom, and to which men and their sufferings and sorrows. their
hopes and joys, their ambitions and deeds, are of no more interest


--- PAGE 461 ---
or importance than the motes that dance in the sunshine; or a
Being that amuses Himself with the incredible vanity and folly,
the writings and contortions of the insignificant insects that
compose Humanity, and idly imagine that they resemble the Om-
nipotent. "What are we," the Tempter asks, "but puppets in a
show-box ? O Omnipotent destiny, pull our strings gently ! Dance
us mercifully off our miserable little stage !"
"Is it not," the Demon whispers, "merely the inordinate vanity
of man that causes him now to pretend to himself that he is like
unto God in intellect, sympathies and passions, as it was that
which, at the beginning, made him believe that he was, in his bodily
shape and organs, the very image of the Deity ? Is not his God
merely his own shadow, projected in gigantic outlines upon the
clouds? Does he not create for himself a God out of himself, by
merely adding indefinite extension to his own faculties, powers,
and passions?"
"Who," the Voice that will not be always silent whispers, "has


--- PAGE 462 ---
ever thoroughly satisfied himself with his own arguments in re-
spect to his own nature ? Who ever demonstrated to himself, with
a conclusiveness that elevated the belief to certainty, that he was
an immortal spirit, dwelling only temporarily in the house and
envelope of the body, and to live on forever after that shall have
decayed? Who ever has demonstrated or ever can demonstrate
that the intellect of Man differs from that of the wiser animals,
otherwise than in degree ? Who has ever done more than to utter
nonsense and incoherencies in regard to the difference between
the instincts of the dog and the reason of Man ? The horse, the
dog, the elephant, are as conscious of their identity as we are.
They think, dream, remember, argue with themselves, devise,
plan, and reason. What is the intellect and intelligence of the man
but the intellect of the animal in a higher degree or larger quan-
tity ?" In the real explanation of a single thought of a dog, all
metaphysics will be condensed.
And with still more terrible significance, the Voice asks, in what


--- PAGE 463 ---
respect the masses of men, the vast swarms of the human race,
have proven themselves either wiser or better than the animals in
whose eyes a higher intelligence shines than in their dull, unintel-
lectural orbs; in what respect they have proven themselves worthy
of or suited for an immortal life. Would that be a prize of any
value to the vast majority? Do they show, here upon earth, any
capacity to improve, any fitness for a state of existence in which
they could not crouch to power, like hounds dreading the lash, or
tyrannize over defenceless weakness;in which they could not hate,
and persecute, and torture, and exterminate; in which they could
not trade, and speculate, and over-reach, and entrap the-unwary
and cheat the confiding and gamble and thrive, and sniff with self-
righteousness at the short-comings of others, and thank God that
they were not like other men? What, to immense numbers of
men, would be the value of a Heaven where they could not lie and
libel, and ply base avocations for profitable returns ?
Sadly we look around us, and read the gloomy and dreary rec-


--- PAGE 464 ---
ords of the old dead and rotten ages. More than eighteen centuries
have staggered away into the spectral realm of the Past, since
Christ, teaching the Religion of Love, was crucified, that it might
become a Religion of Hate; and His Doctrines are not yet even
nominally accepted as true by a fourth of mankind. Since His
death, what incalculable swarms of human beings have lived and
died in total unbelief of all that we deem essential to Salvation!
What multitudinous myriads of souls, since the darkness of idola-
trous superstition settled down, thick and impenetrable, upon the
earth, have flocked up toward the eternal Throne of God, to
receive His judgment ?
The Religion of Love proved to be, for seventeen long cen-
turies, as much the Religion of Hate, and infinitely more the Re-
ligion of Persecution, than Mahometanism, its unconquerable rival.
Heresies grew up before the Apostles died; and God hated the
Nicolaitans, while John, at Patmos, proclaimed His coming wrath.
Sects wrangled, and each, as it gained the power, persecuted


--- PAGE 465 ---
the other, until the soil of the whole Christian world was watered
with the blood, and fattened on the flesh, and whitened with the
bones, of martyrs, and human ingenuity was taxed to its utmost
to invent new modes by which tortures and agonies could be pro-
longed and made more exquisite.
"By what right," whispers the Voice, "does this savage, merci-
less, persecuting animal, to which the sufferings and writhings of
others of its wretched kind furnish the most pleasurable sensa-
tions, and the mass of which care only to eat, sleep, be clothed, and
wallow in sensual pleasures, and the best of which wrangle, hate,
envy, and, with few exceptions, regard their own interests alone,-
with what right does it endeavor to delude itself into the convic-
tion that it is not an animal, as the wolf, the hyena, and the tiger
are but a somewhat nobler, a spirit destined to be immortal, a
spark of the essential Light, Fire and Reason, which are God?
What other immortality than one of selfishness could this creature
enjoy? Of what other is it capable? Must not immortality com-


--- PAGE 466 ---
mence here and is not life a part of it? How shall death change
the base nature of the base soul ? Why have not those other ani-
mals that only faintly imitate the wanton, savage, human cruelty
and thirst for blood, the same right as man has, to expect a resur-
rection and an Eternity of existence, or a Heaven of Love?
The world improves. Man ceases to persecute,--when the per-
secuted become too numerous and strong, longer to submit to it.
That source of pleasure closed, men exercise the ingenuities of
their cruelty on the animals and other living things below them.
To deprive other creatures of the life which God gave them, and
this not only that we may eat their flesh for food, but out of mere
savage wantonness, is the agreeable employment and amusement
of man, who prides himself on being the Lord of Creation, and a
little lower than the Angels. If he can no longer use the rack, the
gibbet, the pincers, and the stake, he can hate, and slander,
and delight in the thought that he will, hereafter, luxuriously
enjoying the sensual beatitudes of Heaven, see with pleasure the


--- PAGE 467 ---
writhing agonies of those justly damned for daring to hold opin-
ions contrary to his own, upon subjects totally beyond the compre-
hension both of them and him.
Where the armies of the despots cease to slay and ravage, the
armies of "Freedom" take their place, and, the black and white
commingled, slaughter and burn and ravish. Each age re-enacts
the crimes as well as the follies of its predecessors, and still war
licenses outrage and turns fruitful lands into deserts, and God is
thanked in the Churches for bloody hutcheries, and the remorse-
less devastators, even when swollen by plunder, are crowned with
laurels and receive ovations.
Of the whole of mankind, not one in ten thousand has any aspi-
rations beyond the daily needs of the gross animal life. In this
age and in all others, all men except a few, in most countries, are
born to be mere beasts of burden, co-laborers with the horse and
the ox. Profoundly ignorant, even in "civilized" lands, they think
and reason like the animals by the side of which they toil. For


--- PAGE 468 ---
them, God, Soul, Spirit, Immortality, are mere words, without any
real meaning. The God of nineteen-twentieths of the Christian
world is only Bel, Moloch, Zeus, or at best Osiris, Mithras, or
Adonai, under another name, worshipped with the old Pagan cere-
monies and ritualistic formulas. It is the Statue of Olympian Jove,
worshipped as the Father, in the Christian Church that was a
Pagan Temple;it is the Statue of Venus, become the Virgin Mary.
For the most part, men do not in their hearts believe that God is
either just or merciful. They fear and shrink from His lightnings
and dread His wrath. For the most part, they only think they
believe that there is another life, a judgment, and a punishment
for sin. Yet they will none the less persecute as Infidels and Athe-
ists those who do not believe what they themselves imagine they
believe, and which yet they do not believe, because it is incompre-
hensible to them in their ignorance and want of intellect. To the
vast majority of mankind, God is but the reflected image, in infi-
nite space, of the earthly Tyrant on his Throne, only more power-


--- PAGE 469 ---
ful, more inscrutable, and more implacable. To curse Humanity,
the Despot need only be, what the popular mind has, in every age,
imagined God.
In the great cities, the lower strata of the populace are equally
without faith and without hope. The others have, for the most
part, a mere blind faith, imposed by education and circumstances,
and not as productive of moral excellence or even common honesty
as Mohammedanism. "Your property will be safe here," said the
Moslem; "There are no Christians here." The philosophical
and scientific world becomes daily more and more unbelieving.
Faith and Reason are not opposites, in equilibrium; but antago-
nistic and hostile to each other; the result being the darkness and
despair of scepticism, avowed, or half-veiled as rationalism.
Over more than three-fourths of the habitable globe, humanity
still kneels, like the camels, to take upon itself the burthens to be
tamely borne for its tyrants. If a Republic occasionally rises like a
Star, it hastens with all speed to set in blood. The kings need not


--- PAGE 470 ---
make war upon it, to crush it out of their way. It is only neces-
sary to let it alone, and it soon lays violent hands upon itself. And
when a people long enslaved shake off its fetters, it may well be
incredulously asked,
Shall the braggart shout
For some blind glimpse of Freedom, link itself,
Through madness, hated by the wise, to law,
System and Empire?
Everywhere in the world labor is, in some shape, the slave of
capital; generally, a slave to be fed only so long as he can work;
or, rather, only so long as his work is profitable to the owner of
the human chattel. There are famines in Ireland, strikes and
starvation in England, pauperism and tenement-dens in New
York, misery, squalor, ignorance, destitution, the brutality of vice
and the insensibility to shame, of despairing beggary, in all the


--- PAGE 471 ---
human cesspools and sewers everywhere. Here, a sewing-woman
famishes and freezes; there, mothers murder their children, that
those spared may live upon the bread purchased with the burial
allowances of the dead starveling; and at the next door young
girls prostitute themselves for food.
Moreover, the Voice says, this besotted race is not satisfied with
seeing its multitudes swept away by the great epidemics whose
causes are unknown, and of the justice or wisdom of which the
human mind cannot conceive. It must also be ever at war. There
has not been a moment since men divided into Tribes, when all
the world was at peace. Always men have been engaged in mur-
dering each other somewhere. Always the armies have lived by
the toil of the husbandman, and war has exhausted the resources,
wasted the energies, and ended the prosperity of Nations. Now it
loads unborn posterity with crushing debt, mortgages all estates,
and brings upon States the shame and infamy of dishonest re-
pudiation.


--- PAGE 472 ---
At times, the baleful fires of war light up half a Continent at
once; as when all the Thrones unite to compel a people to receive
again a hated and detestable dynasty, or States deny States the
right to dissolve an irksome union and create for themselves a
seperate government. Then again the flames flicker and die away,
and the fire smoulders in its ashes, to break out again, after a
time, with renewed and a more concentrated fury. At times, the
storm, revolving, howls over small areas only; at times its lights
are seen, like the old beacon-fires on the hills, belting the whole
globe. No sea, but hears the roar of cannon; no river, but runs
red with blood; no plain, but shakes, trampled by the hoofs of
charging squadrons; no field, but is fertilized by the blood of the
dead; and everywhere man slays, the vulture gorges, and the wolf
howls in the ear of the dying soldier. No city is not tortured
by shot and shell; and no people fail to enact the horrid blas-
phemy of thanking a God of Love for victories and carnage. Te
Deums are still sung for the Eve of St. Bartholomew and the


--- PAGE 473 ---
Sicilian Vespers. Man's ingenuity is racked, and all his inventive
powers are tasked, to fabricate the infernal enginery of destruc-
tion, by which human bodies may be the more expeditiously and
effectually crushed, shattered, torn, and mangled; and yet hypo-
critical Humanity, drunk with blood and drenched with gore, 
shrieks to Heaven at a single murder, perpetrated to gratify a re-
venge not more unchristian, or to satisfy a cupidity not more
ignoble, than those which are the promptings of the Devil in the
souls of Nations.
When we have fondly dreamed of Utopia and the Millennium,
when we have begun almost to believe that man is not, after all, a
tiger half tamed, and that the smell of blood will not wake the sav-
age within him, we are of a sudden startled from the delusive
dream, to find the thin mask of civilization rent in twain and
thrown contemptuously away. We lie down to sleep, like the peas-
ant on the lava-slopes of Vesuvius. The mountain has been so
long inert, that we believe its fires extinguished. Round us hang


--- PAGE 474 ---
the clustering grapes, and the green leaves of the olive tremble in
the soft night-air over us. Above us shine the peaceful, patient
stars. The crash of a new eruption wakes us, the roar of the sub-
terranean thunders, the stabs of the volcanic lightning into the
shrouded bosom of the sky; and we see, aghast, the tortured Titan
hurling up its fires among the pale stars, its great tree of smoke
and cloud, the red torrents pouring down its sides. The roar and
the shriekings of Civil War are all around us: the land is a pande-
monium: man is again a Savage. The great armies roll along their
hideous waves, and leave behind them smoking and depopulated
deserts. The pillager is in every house, plucking even the morsel
of bread from the lips of the starving child. Gray hairs are
dabbled in blood, and innocent girlhood shrieks in vain to Lust for
mercy. Laws, Courts, Constitutions, Christianity, Mercy, Pity,
disappear. God seems to have abdicated, and Moloch to reign in
His stead; while Press and Pulpit alike exult at universal murder,
and urge the extermination of the Conquered, by the sword and


--- PAGE 475 ---
the flaming torch; and to plunder and murder entitles the human
beasts of prey to the thanks of Christian Senates.
Commercial greed deadens the nerves of sympathy of Nations,
and makes them deaf to the demands of honor, the impulses of
generosity, the appeals of those who suffer under injustice. Else-
where, the universal pursuit of wealth dethrones God and pays
divine honors to Mammon and Baalzebub. Selfishness rules su-
preme: to win wealth becomes the whole business of life. The
villanies of legalized gaming and speculation become epidemic;
treacery is but evidence of shrewdness; office becomes the prey
of successful faction; the Country, like Actaeon, is torn by its own
hounds, and the villains it has carefully educated to their trade,
most greedily plunder it, when it is in extremis.
By what right, the Voice demands, does a creature always
engaged in the work of mutual robbery and slaughter, and who
makes his own interest his God, claim to be of a nature superior
to the savage beasts of which he is the prototype?


--- PAGE 476 ---
Then the shadows of a horrible doubt fall upon the soul that
would fain love, trust and believe; a darkness, of which this that
surrounded you was a symbol. It doubts the truth of Revelation,
its own spirituality, the very existence of a beneficent God. It
asks itself if it is not idle to hope for any great progress of
Humanity toward perfection, and whether, when it advances in
one respect, it does not retrogress in some other, by way of com-
pensation: whether advance in civilization is not increase of self-
ishness: whether freedom does not necessarily lead to license and
anarchy: whether the destitution and debasement of the masses
does not inevitably follow increase of population and commercial
and manufacturing prosperity. It asks itself whether man is not
the sport of blind, merciless Fate: whether all philosophies are
not delusions, and all religions the fantastic creations of human
vanity and self-conceit; and above all, whether, when Reason is
abandoned as a guide, the faith of Buddhist and Brahmin has not
the same claims to sovereignty and implicit, unreasoning credence,


--- PAGE 477 ---
as any other.
He asks himself whether it is not, after all, the evident and pal-
pable injustices of this life, the success and prosperity of the Bad,
the calamities, oppressions, and miseries of the Good, that are the
bases of all beliefs in a future state of existence? Doubting man's
capacity for indefinite progress here, he doubts the possibility of it
anywher; and if he does not doubt whether God exists, and is
just and beneficent, he at least cannot silence the constantly recur-
ring whisper, that the miseries and calamities of men, their lives
and deaths, their pains and sorrows, their extermination by war
and epidemics, are phenomena of no higher dignity, significance,
and importance, in the eye of God, than what things of the same
nature occur to other organisms of matter; and that the fish of
the ancient seas, destroyed by myriads to make room for other
species, the contorted shapes in which they are found as fossils
testifying to their agonies; the coral insects, the animals and
birds and vermin slain by man, have as much right as he to clamor


--- PAGE 478 ---
at the injustice of the dispensations of God, and to demand an
immortality of life in a new universe, as compensation for their
pains and sufferings and untimely death in this world.
This is not a picture painted by the imagination. Many a
thoughtful mind has so doubted and despaired. How many of us
can say that our own faith is so well grounded and complete that
we never hear those painful whisperings within the soul? Thrice
blessed are they who never doubt, who ruminate in patient con-
tentment like the kine, or doze under the opiate of a blind faith;
on whose souls never rests that Awful Shadow which is the ab-
sence of the Divine Light.
To explain to themselves the existence of Evil and Suffering,
the Ancient Persians imagined that there were two Principles or
Deities in the Universe, the one of Good and the other of Evil,
constantly in conflict with each other in struggle for the mastery,
and alternately overcoming and overcome. Over both, for the
SAGES, was the One Supreme; and for them Light was in the end


--- PAGE 479 ---
to prevail over Darkness, the Good over the Evil, and even Ahri-
man and his Demons to part with their wicked and vicious natures
and share the universal Salvation. It did not occur to them that
the existence of the Evil Principle, by the consent of the Omnipo-
tent Supreme, presented the same difficulty, and left the existence
of Evil as unexplained as before. The human mind is always
content, if it can remove a difficulty a step further off. It cannot
believe that the world rests on nothing, but is devoutly content
when taught that it is borne on the back of an immense elephant,
who himself stands on the back of a tortoise. Given the tortoise,
Faith is always satisfied; and it has been a great source of happi-
ness to multitudes that they could believe in a Devil who could
relieve God of the odium of being the Author of Sin.
But not to all is Faith sufficient to overcome this great diffi-
culty. They say, with the Suppliant, "Lord! I believe!"--but like
him they are constrained to add, "Help Thou my unbelief!"--Rea-
son must, for these, co-operate and coincide with Faith, or they


--- PAGE 480 ---
remain still in the darkness of doubt,--most miserable of all con-
ditions of the human mind.
Those only, who care for nothing beyond the interests and pur-
suits of this life, are uninterested in these great Problems. The
animals, also, do not consider them. It is the characteristic of an
immortal Soul, that it should seek to satisfy itself of its immor-
tality, and to understand this great enigma, the Universe. If the
Hottentot and the Papuan are not troubled and tortured by these
doubts and speculations, they are not, for that, to be regarded as
either wise or fortunate. The swine, also, are indifferent to the
great riddles of the Universe, and are happy in being wholly un-
aware that it is the vast Revelation and Manifestation, in Time
and Space, of a Single Thought of the Infinite God.
Exalt and magnify Faith as we will, and say that it begins
where Reason ends, it must, after all, have a foundation, either in
Reason, Analogy, the Consciousness, or human testimony. The
worshipper of Brahma also has implicit Faith in what seems to


--- PAGE 481 ---
us palpably false and absurd. His faith rests neither in Reason,
Analogy, or the Consciousness, but on the testimony of his Spirit-
ual teachers, and of the Holy Books. The Moslem also believes,
on the positive testimony of the Prophet; and the Mormon also
can say, "I believe this, because it is impossible." No faith, how-
ever absurd or degrading, has ever wanted these foundations,
testimony, and the books. Miracles, proven by unimpeachable
testimony have been used as a foundation for Faith, in every age;
and the modern miracles are better authenticated, a hundred
times, than the ancient ones.
So that, after all, Faith must flow out from some source within
us, when the evidence of that which we are to believe is not pre-
sented to our senses, or it will in no case be the assurance of the
truth of what is believed.
The Consciousness, or inhering and innate conviction, or the
instinct divinely implanted, of the verity of things, is the highest
possible evidence, if not the only real proof, of the verity of cer-


--- PAGE 482 ---
tain things, but only of truths of a limited class.
What we call the Reason, that is, our imperfect human reason,
not only may, but assuredly will, lead us away from the Truth in
regard to things invisible and especially those of the Infinite, if
we determine to believe nothing but that which it can demonstrate
or not to believe that which it can by its processes of logic prove
to be contradictory, unreasonable, or absurd. Its tape-line cannot
measure the arcs of Infinity. For example, to the Human reason,
an Infinite Justice and an Infinite Mercy or Love, in the same
Being, are inconsistent and impossible. One, it can demonstrate,
necessarily excludes the other. So it can demonstrate that as the
Creation had a beginning, it necessarily follows that an Eternity
had elapsed before the Deity began to create, during which He
was inactive.
When we gaze, of a moonless clear night, on the Heavens glit-
tering with stars, and know that each fixed star of all the myriads
is a Sun, and each probably possessing its retinue of worlds, all


--- PAGE 483 ---
peopled with living beings, we sensibly feel our own unimportance
in the scale of Creation, and at once reflect that much of what has
in different ages been religious faith, could never have been be-
lieved, if the nature, size, and distance of those Suns, and of our
own Sun, Moon, and Planets, had been known to the Ancients as
they are to us.
To them, all the lights of the firmament were created only to
give light to the earth, as its lamps or candles hung above it. The
earth was supposed to be the only inhabited portion of the Uni-
verse. The world and the Universe were synonymous terms. Of
the immense size and distance of the heavenly bodies, men had
no conception. The Sages had, in Chaldaea, Egypt, India, China,
and in Persia, and therefore the sages always had, an esoteric
creed, taught only in the mysteries and unknown to the vulgar.
No Sage, in either country, or in Greece or Rome, believed the
popular creed. To them the Gods and the Idols of the Gods were
symbols, and symbols of great and mysterious truths.


--- PAGE 484 ---
The Vulgar imagined the attention of the Gods to be continu-
ally centred upon the earth and man. The Grecian Divinities in-
habited Olympus, an insignificant mountain of the Earth. There
was the Court of Zeus, to which Neptune came from the Sea, and
Pluto and Persephone from the glooms of Tartarus in the un-
fathomable depths of the Earth's bosom. God came down from
Heaven and on Sinai dictated laws for the Hebrews to His servant
Moses. The Stars were the guardians of mortals whose fates and
fortunes were to be read in their movements, conjunctions, and
oppositions. The Moon was the Bride and Sister of the Sun, at
the same distance above the Earth, and, like the Sun, made for
the service of mankind alone.
If, with the great telescope of Lord Rosse, we examine the vast
nebulae of Hercules, Orion, and Andromeda, and find them re-
solvable into Stars more numerous than the sands on the sea-
shore; if we reflect that each of these Stars is a Sun, like and
even many times larger than ours,--each, beyond a doubt, with its


--- PAGE 485 ---
retinue of worlds swarming with life; --if we go further in imagi-
nation and endeavor to conceive of all the infinities of space,
filled with similar suns and worlds, we seem at once to shrink into
an incredible insignificance.
The Universe, which is the uttered Word of God, is infinite in
extent. There is no empty space beyond creation on any side.
The Universe, which is the Thought of God pronounced, never
was not, since God never was inert; nor WAS, without thinking
and creating. The forms of creation change, the suns and worlds
live and die like the leaves and the insects, but the Universe itself
is infinite and eternal, because God Is, Was, and Will forever Be,
and never did not think and create.
Reason is fain to admit that a Supreme Intelligence, infinitely
powerful and wise, must have created this boundless Universe;
but it also tells us that we are as unimportant in it as the zoophytes
and entozoa, or as the invisible particles of animated life that
float upon the air or swarm in the water-drop.


--- PAGE 486 ---
The foundations of our faith, resting upon the imagined inter-
est of God in our race, an interest easily supposable when man
believed himself the only intelligent created being, and therefore
eminently worthy the especial care and watchful anxiety of a God
who had only this earth to look after, and its house-keeping alone
to superintend, and who was content to create, in all the infinite
Universe, only one single being, possessing a soul, and not a mere
animal, are rudely shaken as the Universe broadens and expands
for us; and the darkness of doubt and distrust settles heavy upon
Soul.
The modes in which it is ordinarily endeavored to satisfy our
doubts, only increase them. To demonstrate the necessity for a
cause of the creation, is equally to demonstrate the necessity of a
cause for that cause. The argument from plan and design only
removes the difficulty a step further off. We rest the world on
the elephant, and the elephant on the tortoise, and the tortoise on
---nothing.


--- PAGE 487 ---
To tell us that the animals possess instinct only and that Rea-
son belongs to us alone, in no way tends to satisfy us of the radi-
cal difference between us and them. For if the mental phenomena
exhibited by animals that think, dream, remember, argue from
cause to effect, plan, devise, combine, and communicate their
thoughts to each other, so as to act rationally in concert,--if their
love, hate, and revenge, can be conceived of as results of the
organization of matter, like color and perfume, the resort to the
hypothesis of an immaterial Soul to explain phenomena of the
same kind, only more perfect, manifested by the human being, is
supremely absurd. That organized matter can think or even feel,
at all, is the great insoluble mystery. "Instinct" is but a word
without a meaning, or else it means inspiration. It is either the
animal itself, or God in the animal, that thinks, remembers, and
reasons; and instinct, according to the common acceptation of the
term, would be the greatest and most wonderful of mysteries,-
no less a thing than the direct, immediate, and continual prompt-


--- PAGE 488 ---
ings of the Deity,--for the animals are not machines, or automata
moved by springs, and the ape is but a dumb Australian.
Must we always remain in this darkness of uncertainty, of
doubt? Is there no mode of escaping from the labyrinth except
by means of a blind faith, which explains nothing, and in many
creeds, ancient and modern, sets Reason at defiance, and leads to
the belief either in a God without a Universe, a Universe without
a God, or a Universe which is itself a God ?
We read in the Hebrew Chronicles that Schlomoh the wise
King caused to be placed in front of the entrance to the Temple
two huge columns of bronze, one of which was called YAKAYIN
and the other BAHAZ; and these words are rendered in our ver-
sion Strength and Establishment. The Masonry of the Blue
Lodges gives no explanation of these symbolic columns; nor do
the Hebrew Books advise us that they were symbolic. If not so
intended as symbols, they were subsequently understood to be
such.


--- PAGE 489 ---
But as we are certain that everything within the Temple was
symbolic, and that the whole structure was intended to represent
the Universe, we may reasonably conclude that the columns of the
portico also had a symbolic signification. It would be tedious to
repeat all the interpretations which fancy or dullness has found
for them.
The key to their true meaning is not undiscoverable. The per-
fect and eternal distinction of the two primitive terms of the cre-
ative syllogism, in order to attain to the demonstration of their
harmony by the analogy of contraries, is the second grand prin-
ciple of that occult philosophy veiled under the name "Kabalah,"
and indicated by all the sacred hieroglyphs of the Ancient Sanctu-
aries, and of the rites, so little understood by the mass of the
Initiates, of the Ancient and Modern Free-Masonry.
The Sohar declares that everything in the Universe proceeds by
the mystery of "the Balance," that is, of Equilibrium. Of the
Sephiroth, or Divine Emanations, Wisdom and Understanding,


--- PAGE 490 ---
Severity and Benignity, or Justice and Mercy, and Victory and
Glory, constitute pairs.
Wisdom, or the Intellectual Generative Energy, and Under-
standing, or the Capacity to be impregnated by the Active Energy
and produce intellection or thought, are represented symbolically
in the Kabalah as male and female. So also are Justice and
Mercy. Strength is the intellectual Energy or Activity; Estab-
lishment or Stability is the intellectual Capacity to produce, a
Tpassivity. They are the POWER of generation and the CAPACITY
of production. By WISDOM, it is said, God creates, and by UN-
DERSTANDING establishes. These are the two Columns of the
Temple, contraries like the Man and Woman, like Reason and
Faith, Omnipotence and Liberty, Infinite Justice and Infinite
Mercy, Absolute Power or Strength to do even what is most un-
just and unwise, and Absolute Wisdom that makes it impossible to
do it; Right and Duty. They were the columns of the intellectual
and moral world, the monumental hieroglyph of the antinomy


--- PAGE 491 ---
necessary to the grand law of creation.
There must be for every Force a Resistance to support it, to
every light a shadow, for every Royalty a Realm to govern, for
every affirmative a negative.
For the Kabalists, Light represents the Active Principle, and
Darkness or Shadow is analogous to the Passive Principle. There-
fore it was that they made of the Sun and Moon emblems of the
two Divine Sexes and the two creative forces; therefore, that they
ascribed to woman the Temptation and the first sin, and then the
first labor, the maternal labor of the redemption, because it is
from the bosom of the darkness itself that we see the Light born
again. The Void attracts the Full; and so it is that the abyss of
poverty and misery, the Seeming Evil, the seeming empty noth-
ingness of life, the temporary rebellion of the creatures, eternally
attracts the overflowing ocean of being, of riches, of pity, and of
love. Christ completed the Atonement on the Cross by descend-
ing into Hell.


--- PAGE 492 ---
Justice and Mercy are contraries. If each be infinite, their co-
existence seems impossible, and being equal, one cannot even
annihilate the other and reign alone. The mysteries of the Divine
Nature are beyond our finite comprehension; but so indeed are
the mysteries of our own finite nature; and it is certain that in
all nature harmony and movement are the result of the equilibrium
of opposing or contrary forces.
The analogy of contraries gives the solution of the most inter-
esting and most difficult problem of modern philosophy,--the
definite and permanent accord of Reason and Faith, of Author-
ity and Liberty of examination, of Science and Belief, of Perfec-
tion in God and Imperfection in Man. If science or knowledge
is the Sun, Belief is the Man; it is a reflection of the day in the
night. Faith is the veiled Isis, the Supplement of Reason, in the
shadows which precede or follow Reason. It emanates from the
Reason, but can never confound it nor be confounded with it. The
encroachments of Reason upon Faith, or of Faith on Reason, are


--- PAGE 493 ---
eclipses of the Sun or Moon; when they occur, they make useless
both the Source of Light and its reflection, at once.
Science perishes by systems that are nothing but beliefs; and
Faith succumbs to reasoning. For the two Columns of the Tem-
ple to uphold the edifice, they must remain separated and be
parallel to each other. As soon as it is attempted by violence to
bring them together, as Samson did, they are overturned, and the
whole edifice falls upon the head of the rash blind man or the
revolutionist whom personal or national resentments have in ad-
vance devoted to death.
Harmony is the result of an alternating preponderance of
forces. Whenever this is wanting in government, government is
a failure, because it is either Despotism or Anarchy. All theoret-
ical governments, however plausible the theory, end in one or the
other. Governments that are to endure are not made in the closet
of Locke or Shaftesbury, or in a Congress or a Convention. In a
Republic, forces that seem contraries, that indeed are contraries,


--- PAGE 494 ---
alone give movement and life. The Spheres are field in their
orbits and made to revolve harmoniously and unerringly, by the
concurrence, which seems to be the opposition, of two contrary
forces. If the centripetal force should overcome the centrifugal,
the equilibrium of forces cease, the rush of the Spheres to the
central Sun would annihilate the system. Instead of consolida-
tion, the whole would be shattered into fragments.
Man is a free agent, though Omnipotence is above and all
around him. To be free to do good, he must be free to do evil.
The Light necessitates the Shadow. A State is free like an indi-
vidual in any government worthy of the name. The State is less
potent than the Deity, and therefore the freedom of the individual
citizen is consistent with its Sovereignty. These are opposites,
but not antagonistic. So, in a union of States, the freedom of the
states is consistent with the Supremacy of the Nation. When
either obtains the permanent mastery over the other, and they
cease to be in equilibrio, the encroachment continues with a ve-


--- PAGE 495 ---
locity that is accelerated like that of a falling body, until the
feebler is annihilated, and then, there being no resistance to sup-
port the stronger, it rushes into ruin. 
So, when the equipoise of Reason and Faith, in the individual
or the Nation, and the alternating preponderance cease, the result
is, according as one or the other is permanent victor, Atheism or
Superstition, disbelief or blind credulity; and the Priests either
of Unfaith or of Faith become despotic.
"Whomsoever God loveth, him he chasteneth," is an expression
that formulates a whole dogma. The trials of life are the bless-
ings of life, to the individual or the Nation, if either has a Soul
that is truly worthy of salvation. "Light and darkness," said
ZOROASTER, "are the world's eternal ways." The Light and the
Shadow are everywhere and always in proportion; the Light being
the reason of being of the Shadow. It is by trials only, by the
agonies of sorrow and the sharp discipline of adversities, that men
and Nations attain initiation. The agonies of the garden of Geth-


--- PAGE 496 ---
semane and those of the Cross on Calvary preceded the Resurrec-
tion and were the means of Redemption. It is with prosperity
that God afflicts Humanity.
The Degree of Rose is devoted to and symbolizes tne final
triumph of truth over falsehood, of liberty over slavery, of light
over darkness, of life over death, and of good over evil. The
great truth it inculcates is, that notwithstanding the existence of
Evil, God is infinitely wise, just, and good: that though the affairs
of the world proceed by no rule of right and wrong known to us
in the narrowness of our views, yet all is right, for it is the work of
God; and all evils, all miseries, all misfortunes, are but as drops in
the vast current that is sweeping onward, guided by Him, to a
great and magnificent result: that, at the appointed time, He will
redeem and regenerate the world, and the Principle, the Power,
and the existence of Evil will then cease; that this will be brought
about by such means and instruments as He chooses to employ;
whether by the merits of a Redeemer that has already appeared,


--- PAGE 497 ---
or a Messiah that is yet waited for, by an incarnation of Himself,
or by an inspired prophet, it does not belong to us as Masons to
decide. Let each judge and believe for himself.
In the mean time, we labor to hasten the coming of that day.
The morals of antiquity, of the law of Moses and of Christianity,
are ours. We recognize every teacher of Morality, every Reform-
er, as a brother in this great work. The Eagle is to us the symbol
of Liberty, the Compasses of Equality, the Pelican of Humanity.,
and our order of Fraternity. Laboring for these, with Faith,
Hope, and Charity as our armor, we will wait with patience for
the final triumph of Good and the complete manifestation of the
Word of God.
No one Mason has the right to measure for another, within the
walls of a Masonic Temple, the degree of veneration which he
shall feel for any Reformer, or the Founder of any Religion. We
teach a belief in no particular creed, as we teach unbelief in none.
Whatever higher attributes the Founder of the Christian Faith


--- PAGE 498 ---
may, in our belief, have had or not have had, none can deny that
He taught and practised a pure and elevated morality, even at the
risk and to the ultimate loss of His life. He was not only the
benefactor of a disinherited people, but a model for mankind. De-
votedly He loved the children of Israel. To them He came, and
to them alone He preached that Gospel which His disciples after-
ward carried among foreigners. He would fain have freed the
chosen People from their spiritual bondage of ignorance and deg-
radation. As a lover of all mankind, laying down His life for the
emancipation of His Brethren, He should be to all, to Christian, to
Jew, and to Mahometan, an object of gratitude and veneration.
The Roman world felt the pangs of approaching dissolution.
Paganism, its Temples shattered by Socrates and Cicero, had
spoken its last word. The God of the Hebrews was unknown be-
yond the limits of Palestine. The old religions had failed to give
happiness and peace to the world. The babbling and wrangling
philosophers had confounded all men's ideas, until they doubted of


--- PAGE 499 ---
everything and had faith in nothing: neither in God nor in his
goodness and mercy, nor in the virtue of man, nor in themselves.
Mankind was divided into two great classes,-- the master and the
slave; the powerful and the abject, the high and the low, the
tyrants and the mob; and even the former were satiated with the
servility of the latter, sunken by lassitude and despair to the low-
est depths of degradation.
When, lo, a voice, in the inconsiderable Roman Province of
Judea proclaims a new Gospel--a new "God's Word," to crushed,
suffering, bleeding humanity. Liberty of Thought, Equality of all
men in the eye of God, universal Fraternity! a new doctrine, a
new religion; the old Primitive Truth uttered once again!
Man is once more taught to look upward to his God. No longer
to a God hid in impenetrable mystery, and infinitely remote from
human sympathy, emerging only at intervals from the darkness to
smite and crush humanity: but a God, good, kind, beneficent, and
merciful; a Father, loving the creatures He has made, with a love


--- PAGE 500 ---
immeasurable and exhaustless; Who feels for us, and sympa-
thizes with us, and sends us pain and want and disaster only that
they may serve to develop in us the virtues and excellences that
befit us to live with Him hereafter.
Jesus of Nazareth, the "Son of man," is the expounder of the
new Law of Love. He calls to Him the humble, the poor, the
Paraihs of the world. The first sentence that He pronounces
blesses the world, and announces the new gospel:"Blessed are
they that mourn for they shall be comforted." He pours the oil
of consolation and peace upon every crushed and bleeding heart.
Every sufferer is His proselyte. He shares their sorrows, and
sypathizes with all their afflictions.
He raises up the sinner and the Samaritan woman, and teaches
them to hope for forgiveness. He pardons the woman taken in
adultery. He selects his disciples not among the Pharisees or the
Philosophers, but among the low and humble, even of the fisher-
men of Galilee. He heals the sick and feeds the poor. He lives


--- PAGE 501 ---
among the destitute and the friendless. "Suffer little children,"
He said, "to come unto me; for of such is the kingdom of Heaven !
Blessed are the humble-minded, for theirs is the kingdom of
Heaven; the meek, for they shall inherit the Earth; the merciful,
for they shall obtain mercy; the pure in heart, for they shall see
God; the peace-makers, for they shall be called the children of
God! First be reconciled to they brother, and then come and offer
thy gift at the altar. Give to him that asketh thee, and from him
that would borrow of thee turn not away! Love your enemies;
bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you; and
pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you! All
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye also
unto them; for this is the law and the Prophets! He that taketh
not his cross, and followeth after Me, is not worthy of Me. A
new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another: as
I have loved you, that ye also love one another: by this shall all
know that ye are My disciples. Greater love hath no man than


--- PAGE 502 ---
this, that a man lay down his life for his friend."
The Gospel of Love He sealed with His life. The cruelty of
the Jewish Priesthood, the ignorant ferocity of the mob, and the
Roman indifference to barbarian blood, nailed Him to the cross,
and He expired uttering blessings upon humanity.
Dying thus, He bequeathed His teachings to man as an ines-
timable inheritance. Perverted and corrupted, they have served as
a basis for many creeds, and been even made the warrant for in-
tolerance and persecution. We here teach them in their purity.
They are our Masonry; for to them good men of all creeds can
subscribe.
That God is good and merciful, and loves and sympathizes with
the creatures He has made; that His finger is visible in all the
movements of the moral, intellectual, and material universe; that
we are His children, the objects of His paternal care and regard;
that all men are our brothers, whose wants we are to supply, their
errors to pardon, their opinions to tolerate, their injuries to for-


--- PAGE 503 ---
give; that man has an immortal soul, a free will, a right to free-
dom of thought and action; that all men are equal in God's sight;
that we best serve God by humility, meekness, gentleness, kind-
ness, and the other virtues which the lowly can practise as well as
the lofty; this is "the new Law," the "WORD," for which the
world had waited and pined so long; and every true Knight of
the Rose + will revere the memory of Him who taught it, and
look indulgently even on those who assign to Him a character far
above his own conceptions or belief, even to the extent of deem-
ing Him Divine.
Hear Philo, the Greek Jew. "The contemplative soul, un-
equally guided, sometimes toward abundance and sometimes to-
ward barrenness, though ever advancing, is illuminated by the
primitive ideas, the rays that emanate from the Divine Intelli-
gence, whenever it ascends toward the Sublime Treasures. When,
on the contrary, it descends, and is barren, it falls within the do-
main of those Intelligences that are termed Angels... for, when


--- PAGE 504 ---
the soul is deprived of the light of God, which leads it to the
knowledge of things, it no longer enjoys more than a feeble and
secondary light, which gives it, not the understanding of things,
but that of words only, as in this baser world. "
". . Let the narrow-souled withdraw, having their ears sealed
up! We communicate the divine mysteries to those only who
have received the sacred initiation, to those who practise true
piety, and who are not enslaved by the empty pomp of words, or
the doctrines of the pagans. ."
"... O, ye Initiates, ye whose ears are purified, receive this in
your souls, as a mystery never to be lost! Reveal it to no Profane !
Keep and contain it within yourselves, as an incorruptible treas-
ure, not like gold or silver, but more precious than everything
besides; for it is the knowledge of the Great Cause, of Nature, and
of that which is born of both. And if you meet an Initiate, be-
siege him with your prayers, that he conceal from you no new
mysteries that he may know, and rest not until you have obtained


--- PAGE 505 ---
them! For me, although I was initiated in the Great Mysteries
by Moses, the Friend of God, yet, having seen Jeremiah, I recog-
nized him not only as an Initiate, but as a Hierophant; and I fol-
low his school."
We, like him, recognize all Initiates as our Brothers. We be-
long to no one creed or school. In all religions there is a basis of
Truth; in all there is pure Morality. All that teach the cardinal
tenets of Masonry we respect; all teachers and reformers of man-
kind we admire and revere.
Masonry also has her mission to perform. With her traditions
reaching back to the earliest times, and her symbols dating further
back than even the monumental history of Egypt extends, she in-
vites all men of all religions to enlist under her banners and to
war against evil, ignorance and wrong. You are now her knight,
and to her service your sword is consecrated. May you prove a
worthy soldier in a worthy cause!


--- PAGE 506 ---
MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
19º - Pontiff
20º - Master of the Symbolic Lodge
21º - Noachite or Prussian Knight
22º - Knight of the Royal Axe or Prince of Libanus
23º - Chief of the Tabernacle
XIX. GRAND PONTIFF.
The true Mason labors for the benefit of those who are to come
after him, and for the advancement and improvement of his race.
That is a poor ambition which contents itself within the limits of
a single life. All men who deserve to live, desire to survive their
funerals, and to live afterward in the good that they have done


--- PAGE 507 ---
mankind, rather than in the fading characters written in men's
memories. Most men desire to leave some work behind them that
may outlast their own day and brief generation. That is an in-
stinctive impulse, given by God, and often found in the rudest
human heart; the surest proof of the soul's immortality, and of
the fundamental difference between man and the wisest brutes.
To plant the trees that, after we are dead, shall shelter our chil-
dren, is as natural as to love the shade of those our fathers planted.
The rudest unlettered husbandman, painfully conscious of his own
inferiority, the poorest widowed mother, giving her life-blood to
those who pay only for the work of her needle, will toil and stint
themselves to educate their child, that he may take a higher sta-
tion in the world than they;--and of such are the world's greatest
benefactors.
In his influences that survive him, man becomes immortal, be-
fore the general resurrection. The Spartan mother, who, giving
her son his shield, said, "WITH IT, OR UPON IT!" afterward shared


--- PAGE 508 ---
the government of Lacedaemon with the legislation of Lycurgus;
for she too made a law, that lived after her; and she inspired the
Spartan soldiery that afterward demolished the walls of Athens,
and aided Alexander to conquer the Orient. The widow who gave
Marion the fiery arrows to burn her own house, that it might no
longer shelter the enemies of her infant country, the house where
she had lain upon her husband's bosom, and where her children
had been born, legislated more effectually for her State than Locke
or Shaftesbury, or than many a Legislature has done, since that
State won its freedom.
It was of slight importance to the Kings of Egypt and the
Monarchs of Assyria and Phcenicia, that the son of a Jewish
woman, a foundling, adopted by the daughter of Sesostris Ramses,
slew an Egyptian that oppressed a Hebrew slave, and fled into the
desert, to remain there forty years. But Moses, who might other-
wise have become Regent of Lower Egypt, known to us only by a
tablet on a tomb or monument, became the deliverer of the Jews,


--- PAGE 509 ---
and led them forth from Egypt to the frontiers of Palestine, and
made for them a law, out of which grew the Christian faith; and
so has shaped the destinies of the world. He and the old Roman
lawyers, with Alfred of England, the Saxon Thanes and Norman
Barons, the old judges and chancellors, and the makers of the
canons, lost in the mists and shadows of the Past,--these are our
legislators; and we obey the laws that they enacted.
Napoleon died upon the barren rock of his exile. His bones,
borne to France by the son of a King, rest in the Hopital des In-
valides, in the great city on the Seine. His Thoughts still govern
France. He, and not the People, dethroned the Bourbon, and
drove the last King of the House of Orleans into exile. He, in
his coffin, and not the People, voted the crown to the Third Napo-
leon; and he, and not the Generals of France and England, led
their united forces against the grim Northern Despotism.
Mahomet announced to the Arabian idolaters the new creed,
"There is but one God, and Mahomet, like Moses and Christ, is


--- PAGE 510 ---
His Apostle." For many years unaided, then with the help of his
family and a few friends, then with many disciples, and last of all
with an army, he taught and preached the Koran. The religion
of the wild Arabian enthusiast converting the fiery Tribes of the
Great Desert, spread over Asia, built up the Saracenic dynasties,
conquered Persia and India, the Greek Empire, Northern Africa,
and Spain, and dashed the surges of its fierce soldiery against the
battlements of Northern Christendom. The law of Mahomet still
governs a fourth of the human race; and Turk and Arab, Moor
and Persian and Hindu, still obey the Prophet, and pray with their
faces turned toward Mecca; and he, and not the living, rules and
reigns in the fairest portions of the Orient.
Confucius still enacts the law for China; and the thoughts and
ideas of Peter the Great govern Russia. Plato and the other great
Sages of Antiquity still reign as the Kings of Philosophy, and
have dominion over the human intellect. The great Statesmen
of the past still preside in the Councils of Nations. Burke still


--- PAGE 511 ---
lingers in the House of Commons; and Berryer's sonorous tones
will long ring in the Legislative Chambers of France. The in-
fluences of Webster and Calhoun, conflicting, rent asunder the
American States, and the doctrine of each is the law and the
oracle speaking from the Holy of Holies for his own State and all
consociated with it: a faith preached and proclaimed by each at
the cannon's mouth and consecrated by rivers of blood.
It has been well said, that when Tamerlane had builded his pyr-
amid of fifty thousand human skulls, and wheeled away with his
vast armies from the gates of Damascus, to find new conquests,
and build other pyramids, a little boy was playing in the streets
of Mentz, son of a poor artisan, whose apparent importance in the
scale of beings was, compared With that of Tamerlane, as that of
a grain of sand to the giant bulk of the earth; but Tamerlane
and all his shaggy legions, that swept over the East like a hurri-
cane, have passed away, and become shadows; while printing, the
wonderful invention of John Faust, the boy of Mentz, has exerted


--- PAGE 512 ---
a greater influence on man's destinies and overturned more thrones
and dynasties than all the victories of all the blood-stained con-
querors from Nimrod to Napoleon.
Long ages ago, the Temple built by Solomon and our Ancient
Brethren sank into ruin, when the Assyrian Armies sacked Jeru-
salem. The Holy City is a mass of hovels cowering under the
dominion of the Crescent; and the Holy Land is a desert. The
Kings of Egypt and Assyria, who were contemporaries of Solo-
mon, are forgotten, and their histories mere fables. The Ancient
Orient is a shattered wreck, bleaching on the shores of Time. The
Wolf and the Jackal howl among the ruins of Thebes and of
Tyre, and the sculptured images of the Temples and Palaces of
Babylon and Nineveh are dug from their ruins and carried into
strange lands. But the quiet and peaceful Order, of which the
Son of a poor Phcenician Widow was one of the Grand Masters,
with the Kings of Israel and Tyre, has continued to increase in
stature and influence, defying the angry waves of time and the


--- PAGE 513 ---
storms of persecution. Age has not weakened its wide founda-
tions, nor shattered its columns, nor marred the beauty of its har-
monious proportions. Where rude barbarians, in the time of Solo-
mon, peopled inhospitable howling wildernesses, in France and
Britain, and in that New World, not known to Jew or Gentile,
until the glories of the Orient had faded, that Order has builded
new Temples, and teaches to its millions of Initiates those lessons
of peace, good-will, and toleration, of reliance on God and confi-
dence in man, which it learned when Hebrew and Giblemite
worked side by side on the slopes of Lebanon, and the Servant of
Jehovah and the Phoenician Worshipper of Bel sat with the hum-
ble artisan in Council at Jerusalem.
It is the Dead that govern. The Living only obey. And if
the Soul sees, after death, what passes on this earth, and watches
over the welfare of those it loves, then must its greatest happi-
ness consist in seeing the current of its beneficent influences
widening out from age to age, as rivulets widen into rivers, and


--- PAGE 514 ---
aiding to shape the destinies of individuals, families, States, the
World; and its bitterest punishment, in seeing its evil influences
causing mischief and misery, and cursing and afflicting men, long
after the frame it dwelt in has become dust, and when both name
and memory are forgotten.
We know not who among the Dead control our destinies. The
universal human race is linked and bound together by those influ-
ences and sympathies, which in the truest sense do make men's
fates. Humanity is the unit, of which the man is but a fraction.
What other men in the Past have done, said, thought, makes the
great iron network of circumstance that environs and controls us
all. We take our faith on trust. We think and believe as the Old
Lords of Thought command us; and Reason is powerless before
Authority.
We would make or annul a particular contract; but the
Thoughts of the dead Judges of England, living when their ashes
have been cold for centuries, stand between us and that which we


--- PAGE 515 ---
would do, and utterly forbid it. We would settle our estate in a
particular way; but the prohibition of the English Parliament,
its uttered Thought when the first or second Edward reigned,
comes echoing down the long avenues of time, and tells us we
shall not exercise the power of disposition as we wish. We would
gain a particular advantage of another; and the thought of the
old Roman lawyer who died before Justinian, or that of Rome's
great orator Cicero, annihilates the act, or makes the intention in-
effectual. This act, Moses forbids;that, Alfred. We would sell
our land; but certain marks on a perishable paper tell us that our
father or remote ancestor ordered otherwise; and the arm of the
dead, emerging from the grave, with peremptory gesture prohibits
the alienation. About to sin or err, the thought or wish of our
dead mother, told us when we were children, by words that died
upon the air in the utterance, and many a long year were forgot-
ten, flashes on our memory, and holds us back with a power that
is resistless.


--- PAGE 516 ---
Thus we obey the dead; and thus shall the living, when we are
dead, for weal or woe, obey us. The Thoughts of the Past are the
Laws of the Present and the Future. That which we say and do,
if its effects last not beyond our lives, is unimportant. That
which shall live when we are dead, as part of the great body of
law enacted by the dead, is the only act worth doing, the only
Thought worth speaking. The desire to do something that shall
benefit the world, when neither praise nor obloquy will reach us
where we sleep soundly in the grave, is the noblest ambition en-
tertained by man.
It is the ambition of a true and genuine Mason. Knowing the
slow processes by which the Deity brings about great results, he
does not expect to reap as well as sow, in a single lifetime. It is
the inflexible fate and noblest destiny, with rare exceptions, of the
great and good, to work, and let others reap the harvest of their
labors. He who does good, only to be repaid in kind, or in thanks
and gratitude, or in reputation and the world's praise, is like him


--- PAGE 517 ---
who loans his money, that he may, after certain months, receive it
back with interest. To be repaid for eminent services with slan-
der, obloquy, or ridicule, or at best with stupid indifference or cold
ingratitude, as it is common, so it is no misfortune, except to those
who lack the wit to see or sense to appreciate the service, or the
nobility of soul to thank and reward with eulogy, the benefactor
of his kind. His influences live, and the great Future will obey;
whether it recognize or disown the lawgiver.
Miltiades was fortunate that he was exiled; and Aristides that
he was ostracized, because men wearied of hearing him called
"The Just." Not the Redeemer was unfortunate; but those only
who repaid Him for the inestimable gift He offered them, and for
a life passed in toiling for their good, by nailing Him upon the
cross, as though He had been a slave or malefactor. The perse-
cutor dies and rots, and Posterity utters his name with execration:
but his victim's memory he has unintentionally made glorious and
immortal.


--- PAGE 518 ---
If not for slander and persecution, the Mason who would bene-
benefit his race must look for apathy and cold indifference in those
whose good he seeks, in those who ought to seek the good of
others. Except when the sluggish depths of the Human Mind
are broken up and tossed as with a storm, when at the appointed
time a great Reformer comes, and a new Faith springs up and
grows with supernatural energy, the progress of Truth is slower
than the growth of oaks; and he who plants need not expect to
gather. The Redeemer, at His death, had twelve disciples, and
one betrayed and one deserted and denied Him. It is enough for
us to know that the fruit will come in its due season. When, or
who shall gather it, it does not in the least concern us to know.
It is our business to plant the seed. It is God's right to give the
fruit to whom He pleases; and if not to us, then is our action by
so much the more noble.
To sow, that others may reap; to work and plant for those who
are to occupy the earth when we are dead; to project our influ-


--- PAGE 519 ---
ences far into the future, and live beyond our time; to rule as the
Kings of Thought, over men who are yet unborn; to bless with
the glorious gifts of Truth and Light and Liberty those who will
neither know the name of the giver, nor care in what grave his
unregarded ashes repose, is the true office of a Mason and the
proudest destiny of a man.
All the great and beneficent operations of Nature are produced
by slow and often imperceptible degrees. The work of destruction
and devastation only is violent and rapid. The Volcano and the
Earthquake, the Tornado and the Avalanche, leap suddenly into
full life and fearful energy, and smite with an unexpected blow.
Vesuvius buried Pompeii and Herculaneum in a night; and Lis-
bon fell prostrate before God in a breath, when the earth rocked
and shuddered; the Alpine village vanishes and is erased at one
bound of the avalanche;and the ancient forests fall like grass be-
fore the mower, when the tornado leaps upon them. Pestilence
slays its thousands in a day; and the storm in a night strews the


--- PAGE 520 ---
sand with shattered navies.
The Gourd of the Prophet Jonah grew up, and was withered, in
a night. But many years ago, before the Norman Conqueror
stamped his mailed foot on the neck of prostrate Saxon England,
some wandering barbarian, of the continent then unknown to the
world, in mere idleness, with hand or foot, covered an acorn with
a little earth, and passed on regardless, on his journey to the dim
Past. He died and was forgotten; but the acorn lay there still,
the mighty force within it acting in the darkness. A tender shoot
stole gently up; and fed by the light and air and frequent dews,
put forth its little leaves, and lived, because the elk or buffalo
chanced not to place his foot upon and crush it. The years
marched onward, and the shoot became a sapling, and its green
leaves went and came with Spring and Autumn. And still the
years came and passed away again, and William, the Norman Bas-
tard, parcelled England out among his Barons, and still the sapling
grew, and the dews fed its leaves, and the birds builded their nests


--- PAGE 521 ---
among its small limbs for many generations. And still the years
came and went, and the Indian hunter slept in the shade of the
sapling, and Richard Lion-Heart fought at Acre and Ascalon, and
John's bold Barons wrested from him the Great Charter; and
the sapling had become a tree; and still it grew, and thrust its
great arms wider abroad, and lifted its head still higher toward
the Heavens; strong-rooted, and defiant of the storms that roared
and eddied through its branches; and when Columbus ploughed
with his keels the unknown Western Atlantic, and Cortez and
Pizarro bathed the cross in blood; and the Puritan, the Huguenot,
the Cavalier, and the follower of Penn sought a refuge and a rest-
ing-place beyond the ocean, the Great Oak still stood, firm-rooted,
vigorous, stately, haughtily domineering over all the forest, heed-
less of all the centuries that had hurried past since the wild Indian
planted the little acorn in the forest ;--a stout and hale old tree,
with wide circumference shading many a rood of ground; and fit
to furnish timbers for a ship, to carry the thunders of the Great


--- PAGE 522 ---
Republic's guns around the world. And yet, if one had sat and
watched it every instant, from the moment when the feeble shoot
first pushed its way to the light until the eagles built among its
branches, he would never have seen the tree or sapling grow.
Many long centuries ago, before the Chaldaean Shepherds
watched the Stars, or Shufu built the Pyramids, one could have
sailed in a seventy-four where now a thousand islands gem the sur-
face of the Indian Ocean; and the deep-sea lead would nowhere
have found any bottom. But below these waves were myriads
upon myriads, beyond the power of Arithmetic to number, of
minute existences, each a perfect living creature, made by the Al-
mighty Creator, and fashioned by Him for the work it had to do
There they toiled beneath the waters, each doing its allotted work,
and wholly ignorant of the result which God intended. They
lived and died, incalculable in numbers and almost infinite in the
succession of their generations, each adding his mite to the gigan-
tic work that went on there under God's direction. Thus hath He


--- PAGE 523 ---
chosen to create great Continents and Islands; and still the coral-
insects live and work, as when they made the rocks that underlie
the valley of the Ohio.
Thus God hath chosen to create. Where now is firm land, once
chafed and thundered the great primeval ocean. For ages upon
ages the minute shields of infinite myriads of infusoria, and the
stony stems of encrinites sunk into its depths, and there, under
the vast pressure of its waters, hardened into limestone. Raised
slowly from the Profound by His hand, its quarries underlie the
soil of all the continents, hundreds of feet in thickness; and we,
of these remains of the countless dead, build tombs and palaces,
as the Egyptians, whom we call ancient, built their pyramids.
On all the broad lakes and oceans the Great Sun looks earnestly
and lovingly, and the invisible vapors rise ever up to meet him.
No eye but God's beholds them as they rise. There, in the upper
atmospere, they are condensed to mist, and gather into clouds,
and float and swim around in the ambient air. They sail with its


--- PAGE 524 ---
currents, and hover over the ocean, and roll in huge masses round
the stony shoulders of great mountains. Condensed still more by
change of temperature, they drop upon the thirsty earth in gentle
showers, or pour upon it in heavy rains, or storm against its bosom
at the angry Equinoctial. The shower, the rain, and the storm
pass away, the clouds vanish, and the bright stars again shine
clearly upon the glad earth. The rain-drops sink into the ground,
and gather in subterranean reservoirs, and run in subterranean
channels, and bubble up in springs and fountains; and from the
mountain-sides and heads of valleys the silver threads of water
begin their long journey to the ocean. Uniting, they widen into
brooks and rivulets, then into streams and rivers; and, at last, a
Nile, Ganges, a Danube, an Amazon, or a Mississippi rolls be-
tween its banks, mighty, majestic, and resistless, creating vast allu-
vial valleys to be the granaries of the world, ploughed by the
thousand keels of commerce and serving as great highways, and
as the impassable boundaries of rival nations; ever returning to


--- PAGE 525 ---
the ocean the drops that rose from it in vapor, and descended in
rain and snow and hail upon the level plains and lofty moun-
tains; and causing him to recoil for many a mile before the
long rush of their great tide.
So it is with the aggregate of Human endeavor. As the invis-
ible particles of vapor combine and coalesce to form the mists and
clouds that fall in rain on thirsty continents, and bless the great
green forests and wide grassy prairies, the waving meadows and
the fields by which men live; as the infinite myriads of drops that
the glad earth drinks are gathered into springs and rivulets and
rivers, to aid in levelling the mountains and elevating the plains,
and to feed the large lakes and restless oceans; so all Human
Thought, and Speech and Action, all that is done and said and
thought and suffered upon the Earth combine together, and flow
onward in one broad resistless current toward those great results
to which they are determined by the will of God.
We build slowly and destroy swiftly. Our Ancient Brethren


--- PAGE 526 ---
who built the Temples at Jerusalem, with many myriad blows
felled, hewed, and squared the cedars, and quarried the stones, and
carved the intricate ornaments, which were to be the Temples.
Stone after stone, by the combined effort and long toil of Appren-
tice, Fellow-Craft, and Master, the walls arose; slowly the roof
was framed and fashioned; and many years elapsed before, at
length, the Houses stood finished, all fit and ready for the Worship
of God, gorgeous in the sunny splendors of the atmosphere of
Palestine. So they were built. A single motion of the arm of a
rude, barbarous Assyrian Spearman, or drunken Roman or Gothic
Legionary of Titus, moved by a senseless impulse of the brutal
will, flung in the blazing brand; and, with no further human
agency, a few short hours sufficed to consume and melt each Tem-
ple to a smoking mass of black unsightly ruin.
Be patient, therefore, my Brother, and wait!
The issues are with God: To do,


--- PAGE 527 ---
Of right belongs to us.
Therefore faint not, nor be weary in well-doing! Be not dis-
couraged at men's apathy, nor disgusted with their follies, nor
tired of their indifference! Care not for returns and results;but
see only what there is to do, and do it, leaving the results to God!
Soldier of the Cross! Sworn Knight of Justice, Truth, and Tol-
eration! Good Knight and True!be patient and work!
The Apocalypse, that sublime Kabalistic and prophetic Sum-
mary of all the occult figures, divides its images into three Sep-
tenaries, after each of which there is silence in Heaven. There
are Seven Seals to be opened, that is to say, Seven mysteries to
know, and Seven difficulties to overcome, Seven trumpets to
sound, and Seven cups to empty.
The Apocalypse is, to those who receive the nineteenth Degree,
the Apothesis of that Sublime Faith which aspires to God alone,
and despises all the pomps and works of Lucifer. LUCIFER, the


--- PAGE 528 ---
Light-bearer! Strange and mysterious name to give to the Spirit
of Darknesss! Lucifer, the Son of the Morning! Is it he who
bears the Light, and with its splendors intolerable blinds feeble,
sensual or selfish Souls ? Doubt it not! for traditions are full of
Divine Revelations and Inspirations: and Inspiration is not of
one Age nor of one Creed. Plato and Philo, also, were inspired.
The Apocalypse, indeed, is a book as obscure as the Sohar.
It is written hieroglyphically with numbers and images; and
the Apostle often appeals to the intelligence of the Initiated.
"Let him who hath knowledge, understand! let him who under-
stands, calculate !" he often says, after an allegory or the mention
of a number. Saint John, the favorite Apostle, and the Depositary
of all the Secrets of the Saviour, therefore did not write to be
undertood by the multitude.
The Sephar Yezirah, the Sohar, and the Apocalypse are the
completest embodiments of Occultism. They contain more mean-
ings than words; their expressions are figurative as poetry and


--- PAGE 529 ---
exact as numbers. The Apocalypse sums up, completes, and sur-
passes all the Science of Abraham and of Solomon. The visions
of Ezekiel, by the river Chebar, and of the new Symbolic Temple,
are equally mysterious expressions, veiled by figures of the enig-
matic dogmas of the Kabalah, and their symbols are as little un-
derstood by the Commentators, as those of Free Masonry.
The Septenary is the Crown of the Numbers, because it unites
the Triangle of the Idea to the Square of the Form.
The more the great Hierophants were at pains to conceal their
absolute Science, the more they sought to add grandeur to and
multiply its symbols. The huge pyramids, with their triangular
sides of elevation and square bases, represented their Metaphysics,
founded upon the knowledge of Nature. That knowledge of Na-
ture had for its symbolic key the gigantic form of that huge
Sphinx, which has hollowed its deep bed in the sand, while keep-
ing watch at the feet of the Pyramids. The Seven grand monu-
ments called the Wonders of the World, were the magnificent


--- PAGE 530 ---
Commentaries on the Seven lines that composed the Pyramids,
and on the Seven mystic gates of Thebes.
The Septenary philosophy of Initiation among the Ancients
may be summed up thus:
Three Absolute Principles which are but One Principle: four
elementary forms which are but one; all forming a Single Whole,
compounded of the Idea and the Form.
The three Principles were these:
1ø. BEING IS BEING.
In Philosophy, identity of the Idea and of Being or Verity;in
Religion, the first Principle, THE FATHER.
2ø. BEING IS REAL.
In Philosophy, identity of Knowing and of Being or Reality;
in Religion, the LOGOS of Plato, the Demiourgos, the WORD.
3ø. BEING IS LOGIC.
In Philosophy, identity of the Reason and Reality; in Religion,
Providence, the Divine Action that makes real the Good, that


--- PAGE 531 ---
which in Christianity we call THE HoLY SPIRIT.
The union of all the Seven colors is the White, the analogous
symbol of the GOOD: the absence of all is the Black, the analogous
symbol of the EVIL. There are three primary colors, Red, Yellow,
and Blue; and four secondary, Orange, Green, Indigo, and Vio-
let; and all these God displays to man in the rainbow; and they
have their analogies also in the moral and intellectual world. The
same number, Seven, continually reappears in the Apocalypse,
compounded of three and four; and these numbers relate to the
last Seven of the Sephiroth, three answering to BENIGNITY or
MERCY, SEVERITY or JUSTICE, and BEAUTY or HARMONY; and
four to Netzach, Hod, Yesod, and Malakoth, VICTORY, GLORY,
STABILITY, and DOMINATION. The same numbers also represent
the first three Sephiroth, KETNER, KHOKMAH, and BAINAH, or
Will, Wisdom, and Understanding, which, with DAATH or Intel-
lection or Thought, are also four, DAATH not being regarded as a
Sephirah, not as the Deity acting, or as a potency, energy, or at-


--- PAGE 532 ---
tribute, but as the Divine Action.
The Sephiroth are commonly figured in the Kabalah as consti-
tuting a human form, the ADAM, KADMON Or MACROCOSM. Thus
arranged, the universal law of Equipoise is three times exernpli-
fied. From that of the Divine Intellectual, Active, Masculine
ENERGY, and the Passive CAPACITY to produce Thought, the
action of THINKING results. From that of BENIGNITY and SE-
VERITY, HARMONY flows; and from that of VICTORY or an Infi-
nite overcoming, and GLORY, which, being Infinite, would seem to
forbid the existence of obstacles or opposition, results STABILITY
or PERMANENCE, which is the perfect DOMINION Of the Infinite
WILL.
The last nine Sephiroth are included in, at the same time that
they have flowed forth from, the first of all, KETHER, or the
CROWN. Each also, in succession flowed from, and yet still re-
mains included in, the one preceding it. The Will of God includes
His Wisdom, and His Wisdom is His Will specially developed and


--- PAGE 533 ---
acting. This Wisdom is the LOGOS that creates, mistaken and
personified by Simon Magus and the succeeding Gnostics. By
means of its utterance, the letter YOD, it creates the worlds, first
in the Divine Intellect as an Idea, which invested with form be-
came the fabricated World, the Universe of material reality. YOD
and HE, two letters of the Ineffable Name of the Manifested
Deity, represent the Male and the Female, the Active and the
Passive in Equilibrium, and the VAV completes the Trinity and
the Triliteral Name, the Divine Triangle, which with the
repetion of the He becomes the Tetragrammaton.
Thus the ten Sephiroth contain all the Sacred Numbers, three,
five, seven, and nine, and the perfect Number Ten, and correspond
with the Tetractys of Pythagoras.
BEING IS BEING, Ahayah Asar Ahayah. This
is the principle, the "BEGINNING."
In the Beginning was, that is to say, IS, WAS, and WILL BE,
the WORD, that is to say, the REASON that Speaks.


--- PAGE 534 ---
The Word is the reason of belief, and in it also is the expression
of the Faith which makes Science a living thing. The Word,
is the Source of Logic. Jesus is the Word Incarnate. The
accord of the Reason with Faith, of Knowledge with Belief, of
Authority with Liberty, has become in modern times the veritable
enigma of the Sphinx.
It is WISDOM that, in the Kabalistic Books of the Proverbs and
Ecclesiasticus, is the Creative Agent of God. Elsewhere in the
Hebrew writings it is Debar Iahavah, the Word of God.
It is by His uttered Word that God reveals Himself to us;
alone in the visible and invisible but intellectual creation, but
in our convictions, consciousness, and instincts. Hence it is that!
certain beliefs are universal. The conviction of all men that God
is good led to a belief in a Devil, the fallen Lucifer or Light-
bearer, Shaitan the Adversary, Ahriman and Tuphon, as an at-
tempt to explain the existence of Evil, and make it consistent with
the Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Benevolence of God.


--- PAGE 535 ---
Nothing surpasses and nothing equals, as a Summary of all the
doctrines of the Old World, those brief words engraven by
HERMES on a Stone, and known under the name of "The Tablet
of Emerald:" the Unity of Being and the Unity of the Harmonies,
ascending and descending, the progressive and proportional
scale of the Word; the immutable law of the Equilibrium, and
the proportioned progress of the universal analogies; the relation
of the Idea to the Word, giving the measure of the relation be-
tween the Creator and the Created, the necessary mathematics of
the Infinite, proved by the measures of a single corner of the
Finite ;--all this is expressed by this single proposition of the
Great Egyptian Hierophant:
"What is Superior is as that which is Inferior, and what is
Below is as that which is Above, to form the Marvels of the
Unity."


--- PAGE 536 ---
XX. GRAND MASTER OF ALL SYMBOLIC LODGES.
The true Mason is a practical Philosopher, who, under religious
emblems, in all ages adopted by wisdom, builds upon plans traced
by nature and reason the moral edifice of knowledge. He ought
to find, in the symmetrical relation of all the parts of this rational
edifice, the principle and rule of all his duties, the source of all
his pleasures. He improves his moral nature, becomes a better man,
and finds in the reunion of virtuous men, assembled with pure
views, the means of multiplying his acts of beneficence. Masonry
and Philosophy, without being one and the same thing, have the
same object, and propose to themselves the same end, the worship


--- PAGE 537 ---
of the Grand Architect of the Universe, acquaintance and familiar-
ity with the wonders of nature, and the happiness of humanity
attained by the constant practice of all the virtues.
As Grand Master of all Symbolic Lodges, it is your especial duty
to aid in restoring Masonry to its primitive purity. You have be-
come an instructor. Masonry long wandered in error. Instead
of improving, it degenerated from its primitive simplicity, and re-
trograded toward a system, distorted by stupidity and ignorance,
which, unable to construct a beautiful machine, made a compli-
cated one. Less than two hundred years ago, its organization was
simple, and altogether moral, its emblems, allegories, and ceremo-
nies easy to be understood, and their purpose and object readily to
be seen. It was then confined to a very small number of Degrees.
Its constitutions were like those of a Society of Essenes, written
in the first century of our era. There could be seen the primitive
Christianity, organized into Masonry, the school of Pythagoras
without incongruities or absurdities; a Masonry simple and signifi-


--- PAGE 538 ---
cant, in which it was not necessary to torture the mind to discover
reasonable interpretations; a Masonry at once religious and philo-
sophical, worthy of a good citizen and an enlightened philanthro-
pist.
Innovators and inventors overturned that primitive simplicity.
Ignorance engaged in the work of making Degrees, and trifles and
gewgaws and pretended mysteries, absurd or hideous, usurped the
place of Masonic Truth. The picture of a horrid vengeance, the
poniard and the bloody head, appeared in the peaceful Temple of
Masonry, without sufficient explanation of their symbolic meaning.
Oaths out of all proportion with their object, shocked the candi-
date, and then became ridiculous, and were wholly disregarded.
Acolytes were exposed to tests, and compelled to perform acts,
which, if real, would have been abominable; but being mere chi-
meras, were preposterous, and excited contempt and laughter only.
Eight hundred Degrees of one kind and another were invented:
Infidelity and even Jesuitry were taught under the mask of


--- PAGE 539 ---
Masonry. The rituals even of the respectable Degrees, copied and
mutilated by ignorant men, became nonsensical and trivial; and
the words so corrupted that it has hitherto been found impossible
to recover many of them at all. Candidates were made to degrade
themselves, and to submit to insults not tolerable to a man of
spirit and honor.
Hence it was that, practically, the largest portion of the Degrees
claimed by the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, and before
it by the Rite of Perfection, fell into disuse, were merely com-
municated, and their rituals became jejune and insignificant.
These Rites resembled those old palaces and baronial castles, the
different parts of which, built at different periods remote from
one another, upon plans and according to tastes that greatly
varied, formed a discordant and incongruous whole. Judaism and
chivalry, superstition and philosophy, philanthropy and insane
hatred and longing for vengeance, a pure morality and unjust and
illegal revenge, were found strangely mated and standing hand in


--- PAGE 540 ---
hand within the Temples of Peace and Concord; and the whole
system was one grotesque commingling of incongruous things, of
contrasts and contradictions, of shocking and fantastic extrava-
gances, of parts repugnant to good taste, and fine conceptions
overlaid and disfigured by absurdities engendered by ignorance,
fanaticism, and a senseless mysticism.
An empty and sterile pomp, impossible indeed to be carried out,
and to which no meaning whatever was attached, with far-fetched
explanations that were either so many stupid platitudes or them-
selves needed an interpreter; lofty titles, arbitrarily assumed, and
to which the inventors had not condescended to attach any expla-
nation that should acquit them of the folly of assuming temporal
rank, power, and titles of nobility, made the world laugh, and the
Initiate feel ashamed.
Some of these titles we retain;but they have with us meanings
entirely consistent with that Spirit of Equality which is the foun-
dation and peremptory law of its being of all Masonry. The


--- PAGE 541 ---
Knight, with us, is he who devotes his hand, his heart, his brain,
to the Science of Masonry, and professes himself the Sworn
Soldier of Truth: the Prince is he who aims to be Chief [Prin-
ceps], first, leader, among his equals, in virtue and good deeds:
the Sovereign is he who, one of an order whose members are all
Sovereigns, is Supreme only because the law and constitutions are
so, which he administers, and by which he, like every other
brother, is governed. The titles, Puissant, Potent, Wise, and Ven-
erable, indicate that power of Virtue, Intelligence, and Wisdom,
which those ought to strive to attain who are placed in high office
by the suffrages of their brethren: and all our other titles and
designations have an esoteric meaning, consistent with modesty
and equality, and which those who receive them should fully un-
derstand. As Master of a Lodge it is your duty to instruct your
Brethren that they are all so many constant lessons, teaching the
lofty qualifications which are required of those who claim them,
and not merely idle gewgaws worn in ridiculous imitation of the


--- PAGE 542 ---
times when the Nobles and Priests were masters and the people
slaves: and that, in all true Masonry, the Knight, the Pontiff, the
Prince, and the Sovereign are but the first among their equals: and
the cordon, the clothing, and the jewel but symbols and emblems
of the virtues required of all good Masons.
The Mason kneels, no longer to present his petition for ad-
mittance or to receive the answer, no longer to a man as his su-
perior, who is but his brother, but to his God;to whom he appeals
for the rectitude of his intentions, and whose aid he asks to enable
him to keep his vows. No one is degraded by bending his knee to
God at the altar, or to receive the honor of Knighthood as Bayard
and Du Guesclin knelt. To kneel for other purposes, Masonry
does not require. God gave to man a head to be borne erect, a port
upright and majestic. We assemble in our Temples to cherish and
inculcate sentiments that conform to that loftiness of bearing
which the just and upright man is entitled to maintain, and we do
not require those who desire to be admitted among us, ignomini-


--- PAGE 543 ---
ously to bow the head. We respect man, because we respect our-
selves that he may conceive a lofty idea of his dignity as a human
being free and independent. If modesty is a virtue, humility and
obsequiousness to man are base: for there is a noble pride which
is the most real and solid basis of virtue. Man should humble him-
self before the Infinite God; but not before his erring and imper-
fect brother.
As Master of a Lodge, you will therefore be exceedingly careful
that no Candidate, in any Degree, be required to submit to any
degradation whatever; as has been too much the custom in some
of the Degrees:and take it as a certain and inflexible rule, to
which there is no exception, that real Masonry requires of no man
anything to which a Knight and Gentleman cannot honorably, and
without feeling outraged or humiliated submit.
The Supreme Council for the Southern Jurisdiction of the
United States at length undertook the indispensable and long-de-
layed task of revising and reforming the work and rituals of the


--- PAGE 544 ---
Thirty Degrees under its jurisdiction. Retaining the essentials of
the Degrees and all the means by which the members recognize one
another, it has sought out and developed the leading idea of each
Degree, rejected the puerilities and absurdities with which many
of them were disfigured, and made of them a connected system of
moral, religious, and philosophical instruction. Sectarian of no
creed, it has yet thought it not improper to use the old allegories,
based on occurrences detailed in the Hebrew and Christian books,
and drawn from the Ancient Mysteries of Egypt, Persia, Greece,
India, the Druids and the Essenes, as vehicles to communicate the
Great Masonic Truths; as it has used the legends of the Crusades,
and the ceremonies of the orders of Knighthood.
It no longer inculcates a criminal and wicked vengeance. It
has not allowed Masonry to play the assassin: to avenge the death
either of Hiram, of Charles the 1st, or of Jaques De Molay and
the Templars. The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Ma-
sonry has now become, what Masonry at first was meant to be, a


--- PAGE 545 ---
Teacher of Great Truths, inspired by an upright and enlightened
reason, a firm and constant wisdom, and an affectionate and lib-
eral philanthropy.
It is no longer a system, over the composition and arrangement
of the different parts of which, want of reflection, chance, igno-
rance, and perhaps motives still more ignoble presided; a system
unsuited to our habits, our manners, our ideas, or the world-wide
philanthropy and universal toleration of Masonry; or to bodies
small in number, whose revenues should be devoted to the relief
of the unfortunate, and not to empty show; no longer a hetero-
geneous aggregate of Degrees, shocking by its anachronisms and
contradictions, powerless to disseminate light, information, and
moral and philosophical ideas.
As Master, you will teach those who are under you, and to whom
you will owe your office, that the decorations of many of the De-
grees are to be dispensed with, whenever the expense would inter-
fere with the duties of charity, relief, and benevolence; and to be


--- PAGE 546 ---
indulged in only by wealthy bodies that will thereby do no wrong
to those entitled to their assistance. The essentials of all the De-
grees may be procured at slight expense; and it is at the option
of every Brother to procure or not to procure, as he pleases, the
dress, decorations, and jewels of any Degree other than the 14th,
18th, 30th, and 32d.
We teach the truth of none of the legends we recite. They are
to us but parables and allegories, involving and enveloping
Masonic instruction; and vehicles of useful and interesting in-
formation. They represent the different phases of the human
mind, its efforts and struggles to comprehend nature, God, the
government of the Universe, the permitted existence of sorrow
and evil. To teach us wisdom, and the folly of endeavoring to ex-
plain to ourselves that which we are not capable of understanding,
we reproduce the speculations of the Philosophers, the Kabalists,
the Mystagogues and the Gnostics. Every one being at liberty to
apply our symbols and emblems as he thinks most consistent with


--- PAGE 547 ---
truth and reason and with his own faith, we give them such an in-
terpretation only as may be accepted by all. Our Degrees may be
conferred in France or Turkey, at Pekin, Ispahan, Rome, or Ge-
neva, in the city of Penn or in Catholic Louisiana, upon the subject
of an absolute government or the citizen of a Free State, upon Sec-
tarian or Theist. To honor the Deity, to regard all men as our
Brethren, as children, equally dear to Him, of the Supreme Creator
of the Universe, and to make himself useful to society and himself
by his labor, are its teachings to its Initiates in all the Degrees.
Preacher of Liberty, Fraternity, and Equality, it desires them to
be attained by making men fit to receive them, and by the moral
power of an intelligent and enlightened People. It lays no plots
and conspiracies. It hatches no premature revolutions; it encour-
ages no people to revolt against the constituted authorities; but
recognizing the great truth that freedom follows fitness for free-
dom as the corollary follows the axiom, it strives to prepare men
to govern themselves.


--- PAGE 548 ---
Where domestic slavery exists, it teaches the master humanity
and the alleviation of the condition of his slave, and moderate cor-
rection and gentle discipline; as it teaches them to the master of
the apprentice: and as it teaches to the employers of other men,
in mines, manufactories, and workshops, consideration and hu-
manity for those who depend upon their labor for their bread, and
to whom want of employment is starvation, and overwork is fever,
consumption, and death.
As Master of a Lodge, you are to inculcate these duties on your
brethren. Teach the employed to be honest, punctual, and faithful
as well as respectful and obedient to all proper orders: but also
teach the employer that every man or woman who desires to work,
has a right to have work to do; and that they, and those who from
sickness or feebleness, loss of limb or of bodily vigor, old age or
infancy, are not able to work, have a right to be fed, clothed, and
sheltered from the inclement elements: that he commits an awful
sin against Masonry and in the sight of God, if he closes his work-


--- PAGE 549 ---
shops or factories, or ceases to work his mines, when they do not
yield him what he regards as sufficient profit, and so dismisses his
workmen and workwomen to starve; or when he reduces the wages
of man or woman to so low a standard that they and their families
cannot be clothed and fed and comfortably housed; or by overwork
must give him their blood and life in exchange for the pittance
of their wages: and that his duty as a Mason and Brother per-
emptorily requires him to continue to employ those who else will
be pinched with hunger and cold, or resort to theft and vice: and
to pay them fair wages, though it may reduce or annul his profits
or even eat into his capital; for God hath but loaned him his
wealth, and made him His almoner and agent to invest it.
Except as mere symbols of the moral virtues and intellectual
qualities, the tools and implements of Masonry belong exclusively
to the first three Degrees. They also, however, serve to remind
the Mason who has advanced further, that his new rank is based
upon the humble labors of the symbolic Degrees, as they are im-


--- PAGE 550 ---
properly termed, inasmuch as all the Degrees are symbolic.
Thus the Initiates are inspired with a just idea of Masonry, to-
wit, that it is essentially WORK; both teaching and practising
LABOR; and that it is altogether emblematic. Three kinds of work
are necessary to the preservation and protection of man and soci-
ety: manual labor, specially belonging to the three blue Degrees;
labor in arms, symbolized by the Knightly or chivalric Degrees;
and intellectual labor, belonging particularly to the Philosophical
Degrees.
We have preserved and multiplied such emblems as have a true
and profound meaning. We reject many of the old and senseless
explanations. We have not reduced Masonry to a cold metaphy-
sics that exiles everything belonging to the domain of the imagina-
tion. The ignorant, and those half-wise in reality, but over-wise
in their own conceit, may assail our symbols with sarcasms; but
they are nevertheless ingenious veils that cover the Truth, respect-
ed by all who know the means by which the heart of man is reach-


--- PAGE 551 ---
ed and his feelings enlisted. The Great Moralists often had re-
course to allegories, in order to instruct men without repelling
them. But we have been careful not to allow our emblems to be
too obscure, so as to require far-fetched and forced interpreta-
tions. In our days, and in the enlightened land in which we live,
we do not need to wrap ourselves in veils so strange and impene-
trable, as to prevent or hinder instruction instead of furthering it;
or to induce the suspicion that we have concealed meanings which
we communicate only to the most reliable adepts, because they are
contrary to good order or the well-being of society.
The Duties of the Class of Instructors, that is, the Masons of
the Degrees from the 4th to the 8th, inclusive, are, particularly, to
perfect the younger Masons in the words, signs and tokens and
other work of the Degrees they have received; to explain to them
the meaning of the different emblems, and to expound the moral
instruction which they convey. And upon their report of pro-
ficiency alone can their pupils be allowed to advance and receive


--- PAGE 552 ---
an increase of wages.
The Directors of the Work, or those of the 9th, l0th, and 11th
Degrees are to report to the Chapters upon the regularity, activity
and proper direction of the work of bodies in the lower Degrees,
and what is needed to be enacted for their prosperity and useful-
ness. In the Symbolic Lodges, they are particularly charged to
stimulate the zeal of the workmen, to induce them to engage in
new labors and enterprises for the good of Masonry, their country
and mankind, and to give them fraternal advice when they fall
short of their duty; or, in cases that require it, to invoke against
them the rigor of Masonic law.
The Architects, or those of the 12th, 13th, and 14th, should be
selected from none but Brothers well instructed in the preceding
Degrees; zealous, and capable of discoursing upon that Masonry;
illustrating it, and discussing the simple questions of moral phil-
osophy. And one of them, at every communication, should be pre-
pared with a lecture, communicating useful knowledge or giving


--- PAGE 553 ---
good advice to the Brethren.
The Knights, of the 15th and 16th Degrees, wear the sword.
They are bound to prevent and repair, as far as may be in their
power, all injustice, both in the world and in Masonry; to protect
the weak and to bring oppressors to justice. Their works and lec-
tures must be in this spirit. They should inquire whether Masonry
fulfills, as far as it ought and can, its principal purpose, which is
to succor the unfortunate. That it may do so, they should pre-
pare propositions to be offered in the Blue Lodges calculated to
attain that end, to put an end to abuses, and to prevent or correct
negligence. Those in the Lodges who have attained the rank of
Knights, are most fit to be appointed Almoners, and charged to
ascertain and make known who need and are entitled to the charity
of the Order.
In the higher Degrees those only should be received who have
sufficient reading and information to discuss the great questions
of philosophy. From them the Orators of the Lodges should be


--- PAGE 554 ---
selected, as well as those of the Councils and Chapters. They are
charged to suggest such measures as are necessary to make Ma-
sonry entirely faithful to the spirit of its institution, both as to its
charitable purposes, and the diffusion of light and knowledge;
such as are needed to correct abuses that have crept in, and of-
fences against the rules and general spirit of the Order; and such
as will tend to make it, as it was meant to be, the great Teacher of
Mankind.
As Master of a Lodge, Council, or Chapter, it will be your duty
to impress upon the minds of your Brethren these views of the
general plan and separate parts of the Ancient and Accepted Scot-
tish Rite; of its spirit and design; its harmony and regularity; of
the duties of the officers and members;and of the particular les-
sons intended to be taught by each Degree.
Especially you are not to allow any assembly of the body over
which you may preside, to close, without recalling to the minds of
the Brethren the Masonic virtues and duties which are represented


--- PAGE 555 ---
upon the Tracing Board of this Degree. That is an imperative
duty. Forget not that, more than three thousand years ago, ZORO-
ASTER said:"Be good, be kind, be humane, and charitable; love
your fellows; console the afflicted; pardon those who have done
you wrong." Nor that more than two thousand three hundred
years ago CONFUCIUS repeated, also quoting the language of those
who had lived before himself: "Love thy neighbor as thyself: Do
not to others what thou wouldst not wish should be done to thy-
self: Forgive injuries. Forgive your enemy, be reconciled to him,
give him assistance, invoke God in his behalf!"
Let not the morality of your Lodge be inferior to that of the
Persian or the Chinese Philosopher.
Urge upon your Brethren the teaching and the unostentatious
practice of the morality of the Lodge, without regard to times,
places, religions, or peoples.
Urge them to love one another, to be devoted to one another, to
be faithful to the country, the government, and the laws: for to


--- PAGE 556 ---
serve the country is to pay a dear and sacred debt:
To respect all forms of worship, to tolerate all political and
religious opinions; not to blame, and still less to condemn the
religion of others: not to seek to make converts; but to be content
if they have the religion of Socrates; a veneration for the Creator,
the religion of good works, and grateful acknowledgment of God's
blessings:
To fraternize with all men; to assist all who are unfortunate;
and to cheerfully postpone their own interests to that of the Order:
To make it the constant rule of their lives, to think well, to
speak well, and to act well:
To place the sage above the soldier, the noble, or the prince:
and take the wise and good as their models:
To see that their professions and practice, their teachings and
conduct, do always agree:
To make this also their motto: Do that which thou oughtest
to do; let the result be what it will.


--- PAGE 557 ---
Such, my Brother, are some of the duties of that office which
you have sought to be qualified to exercise. May you perform
them well; and in so doing gain honor for yourself, and advance
the great cause of Masonry, Humanity, and Progress.
 
 
XXI. NOACHITE, OR PRUSSIAN KNIGHT.
You are especially charged in this Degree to be modest and
humble, and not vain-glorious nor filled with self-conceit. Be not
wiser in your own opinion than the Deity, nor find fault with His
works, nor endeavor to improve upon what He has done. Be


--- PAGE 558 ---
modest also in your intercourse with your fellows, and slow to
entertain evil thoughts of them, and reluctant to ascribe to them
evil intentions. A thousand presses, flooding the country with
their evanescent leaves, are busily and incessantly engaged in
maligning the motives and conduct of men and parties, and in
making one man think worse of another; while, alas, scarcely one
is found that ever, even accidentally, labors to make man think
better of his fellow.
Slander and calumny were never so insolently licentious in any
country as they are this day in ours. The most retiring disposition,
the most unobtrusive demeanor, is no shield against their poison-
ed arrows. The most eminent pulblic service only makes their
vituperation and invective more eager and more unscrupulous,
when he who has done such service presents himself as a candi-
date for the people's suffrages.
The evil is wide-spread and universal. No man, no woman, no
household, is sacred or safe from this new Inquisition. No act is


--- PAGE 559 ---
so pure or so praiseworthy, that the unscrupulous vender of lies
who lives by pandering to a corrupt and morbid public appetite
will not proclaim it as a crime. No motive is so innocent or so
laudable, that he will not hold it up as villainy. Journalism pries
into the interior of private houses, gloats over the details of do-
mestic tragedies of sin and shame, and deliberately invents and
industriously circulates the most unmitigated and baseless false-
hoods, to coin money for those who pursue it as a trade, or to
effect a temporary result in the wars of faction.
We need not enlarge upon these evils. They are apparent to all
and lamented over by all, and it is the duty of a Mason to do all
in his power to lessen, if not to remove them. With the errors
and even sins of other men, that do not personally affect us or
ours, and need not our condemnation to be odious, we have noth-
ing to do; and the journalist has no patent that makes him the
Censor of Morals. There is no obligation resting on us to trumpet
forth our disapproval of every wrongful or injudicious or im-


--- PAGE 560 ---
proper act that every other man commits. One would be ashamed
to stand on the street corners and retail them orally for pennies.
One ought, in truth, to write, or speak against no other one in
this world. Each man in it has enough to do, to watch and keep
guard over himself. Each of us is sick enough in this great
Lazaretto: and journalism and polemical writing constantly re-
mind us of a scene once witnessed in a little hospital; where it
was horrible to hear how the patients mockingly reproached each
other with their disorders and infirmities: how one, who was
wasted by consumption, jeered at another who was bloated by
dropsy: how one laughed at another's cancer of the face; and
this one again at his neighbor's lock-jaw or squint; until at last
the delirious fever-patient sprang out of his bed, and tore away
the coverings from the wounded bodies of his companions, and
nothing was to be seen but hideous misery and mutilation. Such
is the revolting work in which journalism and political partisan-
ship, and half the world outside of Masonry, are engaged.


--- PAGE 561 ---
Very generally, the censure bestowed upon men's acts, by those
who have appointed and commissioned themselves Keepers of the
Public Morals, is undeserved. Often it is not only undeserved,
but praise is deserved instead of censure, and, when the latter
is not undeserved, it is always extravagant, and therefore un-
just.
A Mason will wonder what spirit they are endowed withal, that
can basely libel at a man, even, that is fallen. If they had any
nobility of soul, they would with him condole his disasters, and
drop some tears in pity of his folly and wretchedness: and if they
were merely human and not brutal, Nature did grievous wrong to
human bodies, to curse them with souls so cruel as to strive to add
to a wretchedness already intolerable. When a Mason hears of
any man that hath fallen into public disgrace, he should have a
mind to commiserate his mishap, and not to make him more dis-
consolate. To envenom a name by libels, that already is openly
tainted, is to add stripes with an iron rod to one that is flayed with


--- PAGE 562 ---
whipping; and to every well-tempered mind will seem most in-
human and unmanly.
Even the man who does wrong and commits errors often has a
quiet home, a fireside of his own, a gentle, loving wife and inno-
cent children, who perhaps do not know of his past errors and
lapses--past and long repented of; or if they do, they love him
the better, because, being mortal, he hath erred, and being in the
image of God, he hath repented. That every blow at this husband
and father lacerates the pure and tender bosoms of that wife and
those daughters, is a consideration that doth not stay the hand of
the brutal journalist and partisan: but he strikes home at these
shrinking, quivering, innocent, tender bosoms; and then goes out
upon the great arteries of cities, where the current of life pulsates,
and holds his head erect, and calls on his fellows to laud him and
admire him, for the chivalric act he hath done, in striking
his dagger through one heart into another tender and trusting
one.


--- PAGE 563 ---
If you seek for high and strained carriages, you shall, for the
most part, meet with them in low men. Arrogance is a weed that
ever grows on a dunghill. It is from the rankness of that soil that
she hath her height and spreadings. To be modest and unaffected
with our superiors is duty; with our equals, courtesy; with our in-
feriors, nobleness. There is no arrogance so great as the pro-
claiming of other men's errors and faults, by those who under-
stand nothing but the dregs of actions, and who make it their
business to besmear deserving fames. Public reproof is like strik-
ing a deer in the herd: it not only wounds him, to the loss of
blood, but betrays him to the hound, his enemy.
The occupation of the spy hath ever been held dishonorable,
and it is none the less so, now that with rare exceptions editors
and partisans have become perpetual spies upon the actions of
ocher men. Their malice makes them nimble-eyed, apt to note a
fault and publish it, and, with a strained construction, to deprave
even those things in which the doer's intents were honest. Like


--- PAGE 564 ---
the crocodile, they slime the way of others, to make them fall;
and when that has happened, they feed their insulting envy on the
life-blood of the prostrate. They set the vices of other men on
high, for the gaze of the world, and place their virtues under-
ground, that none may note them. If they cannot wound upon
proofs, they will do it upon likelihoods: and if not upon them, they
manufacture lies, as God created the world, out of nothing; and
so corrupt the fair tempter of men's reputations; knowing that
the multitude will believe them, because affirmations are apter to
win belief, than negatives to uncredit them; and that a lie travels
faster than an eagle flies, while the contradiction limps after it at
a snail's pace, and, halting, never overtakes it. Nay, it is con-
trary to the morality of journalism, to allow a lie to be contra-
dicted in the place that spawned it. And even if that great favor
is conceded, a slander once raised will scarce ever die, or fail of
finding many that will allow it both a harbor and trust.
This is, beyond any other, the age of falsehood. Once, to be


--- PAGE 565 ---
suspected of equivocation was enough to soil a gentleman's escut-
cheon; but now it has become a strange merit in a partisan or
statesman, always and scrupulously to tell the truth. Lies are part
of the regular ammunition of all campaigns and controversies,
valued according as they are profitable and effective; and are
stored up and have a market price, like saltpetre and sulphur;
being even more deadly than they.
If men weighed the imperfections of humanity, they would
breathe less condemnation. Ignorance gives disparagement a
louder tongue than knowledge does. Wise men had rather know,
than tell. Frequent dispraises are but the faults of uncharitable
wit: and it is from where there is no judgment, that the heaviest
judgment comes; for self-examination would make all judgments
charitable. If we even do know vices in men, we can scarce
show ourselves in a nobler virtue than in the charity of concealing
them: if that be not a flattery persuading to continuance. And it
is the basest office man can fall into, to make his tongue the de-


--- PAGE 566 ---
famer of the worthy man.
There is but one rule for the Mason in this matter. If there be
virtues, and he is called upon to speak of him who owns them, let
him tell them forth impartially. And if there be vices mixed with
them, let him be content the world shall know them by some other
tongue than his. For if the evil-doer deserve no pity, his wife, his
parents, or his children, or other innocent persons who love him
may; and the bravo's trade, practised by him who stabs the de-
fenceless for a price paid by individual or party, is really no more
respectable now than it was a hundred years ago, in Venice.
Where we want experience, Charity bids us think the best, and
leave what we know not to the Searcher of Hearts; for mistakes,
suspicions, and envy often injure a clear fame; and there is least
danger in a charitable construction.
And, finally, the Mason should be humble and modest toward
the Grand Architect of the Universe, and not impugn His Wis-
dom, nor set up his own imperfect sense of Right against His


--- PAGE 567 ---
Providence and dispensations, nor attempt too rashly to explore
the Mysteries of God's Infinite Essence and inscrutable plans, and
of that Great Nature which we are not made capable to under-
stand.
Let him steer far away from all those vain philosophies, which
endeavor to account for all that is, without admitting that there is
a God, separate and apart from the Universe which is his work:
which erect Universal Nature into a God, and worship it alone:
which annihilate Spirit, and believe no testimony except that of
the bodily senses:which, by logical formulas and dextrous colloca-
tion of words, make the actual, living, guiding, and protecting God
fade into the dim mistiness of a mere abstraction and unreality,
itself a mere logical formula.
Nor let him have any alliance with those theorists who chide the
delays of Providence and busy themselves to hasten the slow
march which it has imposed upon events: who neglect the practi-
cal, to struggle after impossibilities: who are wiser than Heaven;


--- PAGE 568 ---
know the aims and purposes of the Deity, and can see a short and
more direct means of attaining them, than it pleases Him to em-
ploy: who would have no discords in the great harmony of the
Universe of things; but equal distribution of property, no subjec-
tion of one man to the will of another, no compulsory labor, and
still no starvation, nor destitution, nor pauperism.
Let him not spend his life, as they do, in building a new Tower
of Babel; in attempting to change that which is fixed by an in-
flexible law of God's enactment: but let him, yielding to the
Superior Wisdom of Providence, content to believe that the march
of events is rightly ordered by an Infinite Wisdom, and leads,
though we cannot see it, to a great and perfect result,--let him
be satisfied to follow the path pointed out by that Providence, and
to labor for the good of the human race in that mode in which
God has chosen to enact that that good shall be effected: and
above all, let him build no Tower of Babel, under the belief that
by ascending he will mount so high that God will disappear or be


--- PAGE 569 ---
superseded by a great monstrous aggregate of material forces, or
mere glittering, logical formula; but, evermore, standing humbly
and reverently upon the earth and looking with awe and confi-
dence toward Heaven, let him be satisfied that there is a real God;
a person, and not a formula; a Father and a protector, who loves,
and sympathizes, and compassionates; and that the eternal ways
by which He rules the world are infinitely wise, no matter how
far they may be above the feeble comprehension and limited vision
of man.
 
 
XXII. KNIGHT OF THE ROYAL AXE
OR
PRINCE OF LIBANUS.


--- PAGE 570 ---
SYMPATHY with the great laboring classes, respect for labor itself, and
resolution to do some good work in our day and generation, these are the
lessons of this Degree, and they are purely Masonic. Masonry has made a
working-man and his associates the Heroes of her principal legend, and
himself
the companion of Kings. The idea is as simple and true as it is sublime.
From
first to last, Masonry is work. It venerates the Grand Arckitrct of the
Universe. It commemorates the building of a Temple. Its principal
emblems are
the working fools of Masons and Artisans. It preserves the name of the
first
worker in brass and iron as one of its pass-words. When the Brethren meet
together, they are at labor. The Master is the overseer who sets the craft to
work and gives them proper instruction. Masonry is the apotheosis of
Work.
It is the hands of brave, forgotten men that have made this great,
populous,


--- PAGE 571 ---
cultivated world a world for us. It is all work, and forgotten work. The
real
conquerors, creators, and eternal proprietors of every great and civilized
land
are all the heroic souls that ever were in it, each in his degree: all the men
that ever felled a forest-tree or drained a marsh, or contrived a wise
scheme,
or did or said a true or valiant thing therein. Genuine work alone, done
faithfully, is eternal, even as the Almighty Founder and World-builder
Himself.
All work is noble: a life of ease is not for any man, nor for any God. The
Almighty Maker is not like one who, in old immemorial ages, having made
his
machine of a Universe, sits ever since, and sees it go. Out of that belief
comes Atheism. The faith in an Invisible, unnamable, Directing Deity,
present
everywhere in all that we see, and work, and suffer, is the essence of all
faith whatsoever.
The life of all Gods figures itself to us as a Sublime Earnest
ness,-of Infinite battle against Infinite labor Our highest religion is named


--- PAGE 572 ---
the Worship of Sorrow. For the Son of Man there is no noble crown, well-
worn,
or even ill-worn, but is a crown of thorns. Man's highest destiny is not to
be
happy, to love pleasant things and find them. His only true unhappiness
should
be that he cannot work, and get his destiny as a man fulfilled. The day
passes
swiftly over, our life passes swiftly over, and the night cometh, wherein
no
man can work. That nights once come, our happiness and unhappiness are
vanished, and become as things that never were. But our work is not
abolished,
and has not vanished. It remains, or the want of it remains, for endless
Times
and Eternities.
Whatsoever of morality and intelligence ; what of patience, perseverance,
faithfulness, of method, insight, ingenuity, energy; in a word, whatsoever
of
STRENGTH a man has in him, will lie written in the WORK he does. To
work is to
try himself against Nature and her unerring, everlasting laws : and they
will


--- PAGE 573 ---
return true verdict as to him. The noblest Epic is a mighty Empire slowly
built
together, a mighty series of heroic deeds, a mighty conquest over chaos.
Deeds
are greater than words. They have a life, mute, but undeniably ; and grow.
They
people the vacuity of Time, and make it green and worthy.
Labor is the truest emblem of God, the Architect and Eternal Maker; noble
Labor, which is yet to be the King of this Earth, and sit on the highest
Throne. Men without duties to do, are like trees planted on precipices ;
from
the roots of which all the earth has crumbled. Nature owns no man who is
not
also a Martyr. She scorns the man who sits screened from all work, from
want,
danger, hardship, the victory over which is work ; and has all his work and
battling done by other men; and yet there are men who pride themselves
that
they and theirs have done no work time out of mind. So neither have the
swine.
The chief of men is he who stands in the van of men, fronting the peril
which


--- PAGE 574 ---
frightens back all others, and if not vanquished would devour them.
Hercules
was worshipped for twelve labors. The Czar of Russia became a toiling
shipwright, and worked with his axe in the docks of Saardam ; and
something
came of that. Cromwell worked, and Napoleon; and effected somewhat.
There is a perennial nobleness and even sacredness in work. Be he never
so
benighted and forgetful of his high calling, there is always hope in a
man who actually and earnestly works : in Idleness alone is there
perpetual
Despair. Man perfects himself by working. Jungles are cleared away. Fair
seed-fields rise instead, and stately cities ; and withal, the man himself
first ceases to be a foul unwholesome jungle and desert thereby. Even in
the
meanest sort of labor, the whole soul of man is composed into a kind of
real
harmony, the moment he begins to work. Doubt, Desire, Sorrow, Remorse,
Indignation, and even Despair shrink murmuring far off into their caves,
whenever the man bends himself resolutely against his task. Labor is life.
From


--- PAGE 575 ---
the inmost heart of the worker rises his God-given Force, the Sacred
Celestial
life essence, breathed into him by Almighty God ; and awakens him to all
nobleness, as soon as work fitly begins. By it man learns Patience,
Courage,
Perseverance, Openness to light, readiness to own himself mistaken,
resolution
to do better and improve. Only by labor will man continually learn the
virtues.
There is no Religion in stagnation and inaction; but only in activity and
exertion. There was the deepest truth in that saying of the old monks,
"laborare est orare." "He prayeth best who liveth best all things both great
and small;" and can man love except by working earnestly to benefit that
being
whom he loves?
"Work; and therein have well-being," is the oldest of Gospels; unpreached,
inarticulate, but ineradicable, and enduring forever. To make Disorder,
wherever found, an eternal enemy; to attack and subdue him, and make
order of
him, the subject not of Chaos, but of Intelligence and Divinity, and of
ourselves ; to attack ignorance, stupidity and brute-mindedness, wherever


--- PAGE 576 ---
found, to smite it wisely and unweariedly, to rest not while we live and it
lives in the name of God, this is our duty as Masons; commanded us by the
Highest God. Even He, with his unspoken voice, more awful than the
thunders of
Sinai, or the syllabled speech of the Hurricane, speaks to us. The Unborn
Ages
; the old Graves, with their long-moldering dust speak to us. The deep
Death-Kingdoms, the Stars in their never-resting course, all Space and all
Time, silently and continually admonish us that we too must work whore it
is
called to-day. Labor, wide as the Earth, has its summit in Heaven. To toil,
whether with the sweat of the brow, or of the brain or heart, is worship,-
the
noblest thing yet discovered beneath the Stars. Let the weary cease to
think
that labor is a curse and doom pronounced by Deity. Without it there could
be
no true excellence in human nature. Without it, and pain, and sorrow,
where would be the human virtues? Where Patience, Perseverance,
Submission,
Energy, Endurance, Fortitude, Bravery, Disinterestedness, Self-Sacrifice,
the


--- PAGE 577 ---
noblest excellencies of the Soul?
Let him who toils complain not, nor feel humiliated ! Let him. look up,
and
see his fellow-workmen there, in God's Eternity, they alone surviving
there.
Even in the weak human memory they long survive, as Saints, as Heroes,
and as
Gods : they alone survive, and people the unmeasured solitudes of Time.
To the primeval man, whatsoever good came, descended on him (as in
mere fact,
it ever does) direct from God; whatsoever duty lay visible for him, this a
Supreme God had prescribed. For the primeval man, in whom dwelt
Thought, this
Universe was all a Temple, life everywhere a Worship.
Duty is with us ever; and evermore forbids us to be idle. To work with the
hands or brain, according to our requirements and our capacities, to do
that
which lies before us to do, is more honorable than rank and title.
Ploughers,
spinners and builders, inventors, and men of science, poets, advocates,
and


--- PAGE 578 ---
writers, all stand upon one common level, and form on grand, innumerable
host,
marching ever onward since the beginning of the world : each entitled to
our
sympathy and respect, each a man and our brother.
It was well to give the earth to man as a dark mass, whereon to labor. It
was
well to provide rude and uprightly materials in the ore-bed and the forest,
for
him to fashion into splendor and beauty. It was well, not because of that
splendor and beauty ; but because the act creating them is better than the
things themselves; because exertion is nobler than enjoyment; because the
laborer is greater and more worthy of honor than the idler. Masonry stands
up
for the nobility of labor. It is Heaven's great ordinance for human
improvement.. It has been broken down for ages ; and Masonry desires to
build
it up again. It has bean broken down, because men toil only because ihey
must,
submitting to it as, in some sort, a degrading necessity; and desiring
nothing


--- PAGE 579 ---
so much on earth as to escape from it. They fulfill the great law of labor
in
the letter, but break it in the spirit: they fulfill it with the muscles, but
break it with the mind.
Masonry teaches that every idler ought to hasten to some field of labor,
manual or mental, as a chosen and coveted theatre of improvement ; but he
is
not impelled to do so, under the teachings of an imperfect civilization.
On the contrary, he sits down, folds his hands, and blesses and glorifies
himself in his idleness. It is time that this opprobrium of toil were done
away. To be ashamed of toil; of the dingy workshop and dusty labor-field;
of
the hard hand, stained with service more honorable than that of war; of the
soiled and weather-stained garments, on which Mother Nature has
stamped, midst
sun and rain, midst fire and steam, her own heraldic honors; to be ashamed
of
these tokens and titles, and envious of the flaunting robes of imbecile
idleness and vanity, is treason to Nature, impiety to Heaven, a breach of
Heaven's great Ordinance. Toil,) of brain, heart, or hand, is the only true


--- PAGE 580 ---
manhood and genuine nobility.
Labor is a more beneficent ministration than man's ignorance
comprehends, or
his complaining will admit. Even when its end is hidden from him, it is
not
mere blind drudgery, It is all a training, a discipline, a development of
energies, a nurse of virtues, a school bf improvement. From the poor boy
who
gathers a few sticks for his mother's hearth, to the strong man who fells
the
oak or guides the ship or the steam-car, every human toiler, with every
weary
step and every urgent task, is obeying a wisdom far above his own
wisdom, and
fulfilling a design far beyond his own design.
The great law of human industry is this : that industry, working either with
the hand or the mind, the application of our powers to some task, to the
achievement of some result, lies at the foundation of all human
improvement. We
are not sent into the world like animals, to crop the spontaneous herbage
of


--- PAGE 581 ---
the field, and then to lie down in indolent repose: but we are sent to dig
the
soil and plough the sea; to do the business of cities and the world of
manufactories. The world is the great and appointed school of industry. In
an
artificial state of society, mankind is divided into the idle and the laboring
classes; but such was not the design of Providence.
Labor is man's great function, his peculiar distinction and his privilege.
From being an animal, that eats and drinks and sleeps only, to become a
worker,
and with the hand of ingenuity to pour his own thoughts into the moulds
of
Nature, fashioning ttorn into forms of grace and fabrics of convenience,
and
converting them to purposes of improvement and happiness, is the greatest
possible step in privilege.
The Earth and the Atmosphere are man's laboratory. With spade and
plough, with mining-shafts and furnaces and forges, with fire and steam ;
midst
the noise and whirl of swift and bright machinery, and abroad in the silent


--- PAGE 582 ---
fields, man was made to be ever working, ever experimenting. And while
he and
all his dwellings of care and toil are borne onward with the circling skies,
and the splendour of Heaven are around him, and their infinite depths
image and
invite his thought, still in all the worlds of philosophy, in the universe of
intellect, man must be a worker. He is nothing, he can be nothing, can
achieve
nothing, fulfill nothing, without working. Without it, he can gain neither
lofty improvement nor tolerable happiness. The idle must hunt down the
hours as
their prey. To them Time is an enemy, clothed with armor; and they must
kill
him, or :themselves die. It never yet did answer, and it never will answer
for
any man to do nothing, to be exempt from all care and effort to lounge, to
walk, to ride, and to feast alone. No man can live in that way. God made a
law
against it : which no human power can annul, no human ingenuity evade.
The idea that a property is to be acquired in the course of ten or twenty
years, which shall suffice for the rest of life; that by some prosperous


--- PAGE 583 ---
traffic or grand speculation, all the labor of a whole life is to be
accomplished in a brief portion of it; that by dexterous management, a
large
part of the term of human existence is to be exonerated from the cares of
industry and self- denial, is founded upon a grave mistake, upon a
misconception of the true nature and design of business, and of the
conditions
of human well being. The desire of accumulation for the sake of securing a
life
of ease and gratification, of escaping from exertion and self-denial, is
wholly
wrong, though very common.
It is better for the Mason to live while he lives, and enjoy life as it passes
to live richer and die poorer. It is best of all for him to banish from the
mind that empty dream of future indolence and indulgent ; to address
himself to
the business of life, as the school of his earthly education; to settle it with
himself now that independence, if he gains it, is not to give him
exemption
from employment It is best for him to know, that, in order to be a happy
man,


--- PAGE 584 ---
he must always be a laborer, with the mind or the body, or with both: and
that
the reasonable exertion of his powers, bodily and mental, is not to be
regarded
as mere drudgery, but as a good discipline, a wise ordination, a training in
this primary school of our being, for nobler endeavors, and spheres of
higher
activity hereafter
There are reasons why a Mason may lawfully and even earnestly desire a
fortune. If he can fill some fine palace, itself a work of art, with the
productions of lofty genius; if he can be the friend and helper of humble
worth; if he can seek it out, where failing health or adverse fortune
presses
it hard, and soften or stay the bitter hours that are hastening it to madness
or to the grave; if he can stand between the oppressor and his prey, and
bid
the fetter and the dungeon give up their victim ; if he can build up great
institutions of learning, and academies of art ; if he can open fountains of


--- PAGE 585 ---
knowledge for the people, and conduct its streams in the right channels; if
he
can do better for the poor thzn to bestow alms upon them-even to think of
them,
and devise plans for their elevation in knowledge and virtue, instead of
forever opening the , old reservoirs and resources for their improvidence;
if
he has sufficient heart and soul to do all this, or part of it; if wealth would
be ta him the handmaid of exertion; facilitating effort, and giving success
to
endeavor; then may he lawfully, and yet warily and modestly, desire it. But
if
it is to do nothing for him, but (o minister ease and indulgence, and to
place
his children in the same bad school, then there is no reason why he should
desire it.
What is there glorious in the world, that is not the product of labor, either
of the body or of the mind? What is history, but its record? What are the
treasures of genius and art, but its work? What are cultivated fields, but
its
toil? The busy marts, the rising cities, the enriched empires of the world
are


--- PAGE 586 ---
but the great treasure-houses of labor. The pyramids of Egypt, the' castles
and
towers and temples of Europe, the buried cities of Italy and Mexico, the
canals
and railroads of Christendom, are but tracks, all round the world, of the
mighty footsteps of labor. Without it antiquity would not have been.
Without
it, there would be no memory of the past, and no hope for the future.
Even utter indolence reposes on treasures that labor at some time gained
and
gathered. He that does nothing, and yet does not starve, has still his
significance ; for he is a standing proof that somebody has at some time
worked. But not to such does Masonry do honor. It honors the Worker, the
Toiler; him who produces and not alone consumes; him who puts forth his
hand to
add to the treasury of human comforts, and not alone to take away. " It
honors
him who goes forth amid the struggling elements to fight his battle, and
who
shrinks not, with cowardly effeminacy, behind pillows of ease. It honors
the strong muscle, and the manly nerve, and the resolute and brave heart,
the


--- PAGE 587 ---
sweating brow, and the toiling brain. It honors the great and beautiful
offices
of humanity, manhood's toil and woman's task; paternal industry and
maternal
watching and weariness ; wisdom teaching and patience learning; the brow
of
care that presides over the State, and many handed labor that toils in
workshop, field, and study, beneath its mild and beneficent sway.
God has not made a world of rich men; but rather a world
of poor men; or of men, at least, who must toil for a subsistence. That is,
then, the best condition for man, and the grand sphere of human
improvement.,
If the whole world could acquire wealth (and one man is as much entitled
to it
as another, when he is born) ; if the present generation could lay up a
complete provision for the next, as some men desire to do for their
children;
the world would be destroyed at a single blow. All industry would cease
with
the necessity for it; all improvement would stop with the demand for
exertion;


--- PAGE 588 ---
the dissipation of fortunes, the mischief of which are now countervailed
by the
healthful tone of society, would breed universal disease, and wreak out
into
universal license ; and the. world would sink, rotten as Herod, into the
grave
of its own loathsome vices.
Almost all the noblest things that have been achieved in
the world, have been achieved by poor men ; poor scholars, poor
professional
men, poor artisans and artists, poor philosophers, poets, and men of
genius. A
certain solidness and sobriety, a certain moderation and restraint, a certain
pressure of circumstances, are good for man. liis body was not made for
luxuries. It sickens, sinks, and dies under them. His mind was not made
for
indulgerice. It grows weak, effeminate, and dwarfish, under that condition.
And
he who pampers his body with luxuries and his mind with indulgence,
bequeaths
the consequences to the minds and bodies of his descendants, without the
wealth


--- PAGE 589 ---
which was their cause. For wealth, without a law of entail to help it, has
always lacked the energy even to keep its own treasures. They drop from
its
imbecile hand. The third generation almost inevitably goes down the
rolling
wheel of fortune, and there learns the energy necessary to rise again, if it
rises at all ; heir, as it is, to the bodily diseases, and mental weaknesses,
and the soul's vices of its andestors, and not heir to their wealth. And yet
we
are, almost all of us, anxious to put our children, or to insure that
our grandchildren shall be put, on this road to indulgence, luxury, vice,
degradation, and ruin ; this headship of hereditary disease, soul malady,
and
mental leprosy.
If wealth were employed in promoting mental culture at home and works
of
philanthropy abroad ; if it were multiplying studies of art, and building up
institutions of learning around us; if it were in every way raising the
intellectual character of the world, there could scarcely be too much of it.
But if the utmost aim, effort, and ambition of wealth be, to procure rich


--- PAGE 590 ---
furniture, and provide costly entertainments, and build luxurious houses,
and
minister to vanity, extravagance, and ostentation, there could scarcely be
too
little of it. To a certain extent it may laudably be the minister of
elegancies
and luxuries, and the servitor of hospitality and physical enjoyment: but
just
in proportion as its tendencies, divested of all higher aims and tastes, are
running that way, they are running to peril and evil.
Nor does that peril attach to individuals and families alone. It stands, a
fearful beacon, in the experience of Cities, Republics, and Empires. The
lessons of past times, on this subject, are emphatic and solemn. The
history of
wealth has always been a history of corruption and downfall. the people
never
existed that could stand the trial. Boundless profusion is too little likely
to
spread for any people the theatre of manly energy, rigid self-denial, and
lofty
virtue. You do not look for the bone and sinew and strength of a country,
its


--- PAGE 591 ---
loftiest talents and virtues, its martyrs to patriotism or religion, its men to
meet the days of peril and disaster, among the children of ease,
indulgence,
and luxury.
In the great march of the races of men over the earth, we have always seen
opulence and luxury sinking before poverty and toil and hardy nurture.
That is
the law which has presided over the great professions of empire. Sidon
and
Tyre, whose merchants possessed the wealth of princes ; Babylon and
Palmyra,
the seats of Asiatic luxury ; Rome, laden with the spoils of a world,
overwhelmed by her own vices more than by the hosts of her enemies ; all
these,
and many more, are examples of the destroytive tendencies of immense
and
unnatural accumulation : and men must become more generous and
benevolent, not
more selfish and effeminate, as they become more rich, or the history of
modern
wealth will follow in the sad train of all past examples. All men


--- PAGE 592 ---
desire distinction, and feel the need of some ennobling object in life.
Those
persons are usually most happy and satisfied in their pursuits, who have
the
loftiest ends in view. Artists, mechanics, and inventors, all who seek to
find
principles or develop beauty in their work, seem most to enjoy it. The
farmer
who labors for the beautifying and scientific cultivation of his estate, is
more happy in his labors than one who tills his own land for a mere
subsistence. This is one of the signal testimonies which all human
employments
give to the high demands of our nature. To gather wealth never gives such
satisfaction as to bring the humblest piece of machinery to perfection : at
least, when wealth is sought for display and ostentation, or mere luxury,
and
ease, and pleasure ; and not for ends of philanthropy, the relief of kindred,
or the payment of just debts, or as a means to attain some other great and
noble object.
With the pursuits of multitudes is connected a painful conviction that they
neither supply a sufficient object, nor confer any satisfactory honor. Why


--- PAGE 593 ---
work, if the world is soon not to know that such a being ever existed ; and
when one can perpetuate his name neither on canvas nor on marble, nor in
books,
nor by lofty eloquence, nor statesmanship ?
The answer is, that every man has a work to do in himself, greater and
sublimed than any work of genius ; and works upon a nobler material than
wood
or marble-upon his own soul and intellect, and may so attain the highest
nobleness and grandeur known on earth or in Heaven; may so be the
greatest of
artists, and of authors, and his life, which is far more than speech, may be
eloquent.
The great author or artist only portrays what every man should be. He
conceives, what we should do. He conceives, and represents moral beauty,
magnanimity, fortitude, love, devotion, forgiveness, the soul's greatness.
He
portrays virtues, commended to our admiration and imitations. To embody
these
portraitures in our lives is fhe practical realization of those great ideals of
art. The magnanimity of Heroes, celebrated on the historic or poetic page;
the


--- PAGE 594 ---
constancy and faith of Truth's martyrs ; the beauty of love and piety
glowing
on the canvas; the delineations of Truth and Right, that flash from the lips
of
the Eloquent, are, in their essence only that which every man may feel and
practice in the daily walks of life. The work of virtue is nobler than any
work
of genius ; for it is a nobler thing to be a hero than to describe one
to endure martyrdom than to paint it, to do right than to plead for it.
Action
is greater than writing. A good man is a nobler object of contemplation
than a
great author. There are but two things worth living for: to do what is
worthy
of being written; and to write what is worthy of being read; and the
greater of
these is the doing.
Every man has to do the noblest thing that any man can do or describe.
There is
a wide field for the courage, cheerfulness, energy, and dignity of human
existence. Let therefore no Mason deem his life doomed to mediocrity or


--- PAGE 595 ---
meanness, to vanity or unprofitable toil, or to any ends less than immortal.
No
one can truly say that the grand prizes of life are for others, and he can do
nothing. No matter how magnificent and noble an act the author can
describe or
the artist paint,' it will be still nobler for you to go and do that which one
describes, or be the model which the other draws.
The loftiest action that ever was described is not more magnatemous than
that
which we may find occasion to do, in the daily walks of life; in
temptation, in
distress, in bereavement, in the solemn approach to death. In the great
Providence of God, in the great ordinances of our being, there is opened to
every man a sphere for the noblest action. It is not even in extraordinary
situations, where all eyes are upon us, where all our energy is aroused, and
all our vigilance is awake that the highest efforts of virtue are usually
demanded of us ; but rather in silence and seclusion, amidst our
occupations
and our homes; in wearing sickness, that makes no complaint; in sorely-
tried
honesty, that asks no praise ; in simple disinterestedness, hiding the hand


--- PAGE 596 ---
that resigns its advantage to another.
Masonry seeks to ennoble common life. Its work is to go down into the
obscure
and researched records of daily conduct and feeling; and to portray, not
the
ordinary virtue of an extraordinary life; but the more extraordinary virtue
of
ordinary life. What is done and borne in the shades of privacy, in the hard
and
beaten pafh of daily care and toil, full of recelebrated sacrifices; in the
suffering, and sometimes insulted suffering, that wears to the world a
cheerful
brow ; in the Iong strife of the spirit, resisting pain, penury, and neglect,
carried on in the inmost depths of the heart;-what is done, and borne, and
wrought, and won there, is a higher glory, and shall inherit a brighter
crown.
On the volume of Masonic life one bright word is written from which on
every side blazes an ineffable splendor. That word is DUTY. To aid in
securing
to all labor permanent employment and its just reward: to help to hasten
the
coming of that time when no one shall suffer from hunger or destitution,


--- PAGE 597 ---
because, though willing and able to work, he can find no employment, or
because
he has been overtaken by sickness in the midst of his labor, are part of
your
duties as a Knight of the Royal Axe. And if we can succeed in making
some small
nook of God's creation a little more fruitful and cheerful, a little better
and
more worthy of Him,-or in making some one or two human hearts a little
wiser,
and more manful and hopeful and happy, we shall have done work, worthy
of
Masons, and acceptable to our Father in Heaven.
 
 
XXIII CHIEF OF THE TABERNACLE.


--- PAGE 598 ---
AMONG most of the Ancient Nations there was, in addition to their
public worship, a private one styled the Mysteries ; to which those only
were admitted who had been prepared by certain ceremonies called
initiations.
The most widely disseminated of the ancient worships were those of
Isis, Orpheus, Dionysus, Ceres and Mathias. Many barbarous nations
received the knowledge of the Mysteries in honor of these divinities
from the Egyptians, before they arrived in Greece; and even in the
British Isles the Druids celebrated those of Dionysus, learned by them
from the Egyptians.
The Mysteries of Eleusis, celebrated at Athens in honor of Ceres,
swallowed up as it were, all the others. All the neighboring nations
neglected their own, to celebrate those of Eleusis; and in a little
while all Greece and Asia Minor were filled with the Initiates. They
spread into the Roman Empire, and even beyond its limits, "those holy
and august Eleusinian Mysteries," said Cicero, "in which the people of
the remotest lands are initiated." Zosimus says that they embraced the


--- PAGE 599 ---
whole human race ; and Aristides termed them the common temple of the
whole world.
There were, in the Eleusinian feasts, two sorts of Mysteries, the
great, and the little. The latter were a kind of preparation for the
former ; and everybody was admitted to them. Ordinarily there was a
novitiate of three, and sometimes of four years. Clement of Alexandria
says that what was taught in the great Mysteries concerned the Universe,
and was the completion and perfection of all instruction; wherein things
were seen as they were, and nature and her works were made known.
The ancients said that the Initiates would be more happy after death
than other mortals ; and that, while the souls of the Profane on leaving
their bodies, would be plunged in the mire, and remain buried in
darkness, those of the Initiates would fly to the Fortunate Isles, the
abode of the Gods.
Plato said that the object of the Mysteries was to re-establish the
soul in its primitive purity, and in that state of perfection which it


--- PAGE 600 ---
had lost. Epictetus said, "whatever is met with therein has been
instituted by our Masters, for the instruction of man and the correction
of morals."
Process held that initiation elevated the soul, from a material,
sensual, and purely human life, to a communion and celestial intercourse
with the Gods ; and that a variety of things, forms, and species were
shown Initiates, representing the first generation of the Gods.
Purity of morals and elevation of soul were required of the, Initiates.
'Candidates were required to be of spotless reputation and
irreproachable virtue. Nero, after murdering his mother, did not dare to
be present at the celebration of the Mysteries: and Antony presented
himself to be initiated, as the most infallible mode of proving his
innocence of the death of Avidius Cassius.
The Initiates were regarded as the only fortunate men. "It is upon us
alone," says Aristophanes, "shineth the beneficent daystar. We alone
receive pleasure from the influence of his rays; we, who are initiated,
and who practice toward citizen and stranger every possible act of


--- PAGE 601 ---
justice and piety." And it is therefore not surprising that, in time,
initiation came to be considered as necessary as baptism afterward was
to the Christians ; and that not to have been admitted to the Mysteries
was held a dishonor.
"It seems to me," says the great orator, philosopher, and moralist,
Cicero, "that Athens, among many excellent inventions, divine and very
useful to the human family, has produced none comparable to the
Mysteries, which for a wild and ferocious life have substituted humanity
and urbanity of manners. ‘It is with good reason they use the term
initiation; for it is through them that we in reality have learned the
first principles of life; and they not only teach us to live in a manner
more consoling and agreeable, but they soften the pains of death by the
hope of a better life hereafter."
Where the Mysteries originated is not known. It. is supposed that they
came from India, by the way of Chaldaea, into Egypt, and thence were
carried into Greece. Wherever they arose, they were practiced among all
the ancient nations; and, as was usual, the Thracians, Cretins, and


--- PAGE 602 ---
Athenians each claimed the honor of  invention, and each insisted
that they had borrowed nothing from any other people.
In Egypt and the East, all religions even in its most poetical forms,
was more or less a mystery; and the chief reason why, in Greece, a
distinct name and office were assigned to the Mysteries, was because the
superficial popular theology left a want unsatisfied, which religion in
a wider sense alone could supply. They were practical acknowledgments of
the insufficiency of the popular religion to satisfy the deeper thoughts
and aspirations of the mind. The vagueness of symbolism might perhaps
reach what a more palpable and conventional creed could not. The former,
be its indefiniteness, acknowledged the abstruseness of its subject; it
treated a mysterious subject myopically ; it endeavored to illustrate
what it could not explain; to excite an appropriate feeling, if it could
not develop an adequate idea; and shade the image a mere subordinate
conveyance for the conception, which itself never became too obvious or
familiar.
The instruction now conveyed by books and letters was of old conveyed


--- PAGE 603 ---
by symbols; and the priest had to invent or to perpetuate a display of
rites and exhibitions, which were not only more attractive to the eye
than words, but often to the mind more suggestive and ~pregnant with
meaning.
Afterward, the institution became rather moral and political, than
religious. The civil magistrates shaped the ceremonies to political ends
in Egypt; the sages who carried them from that country to Asia, Greece;
and the North of Europe, were all kings or legislators. ,The chief
magistrate presided at those of Eleusis, represented by an officer
styled King: and the Priest played but a subordinate part.
The Powers revered in the Mysteries were all in reality Natured Gods;
none of whom could be consistently addressed as mere heroes, because
their nature was confessedly super-heroic. The Mysteries, only in fact a
more solemn expression of the religion of the ancient poetry, taught
that doctrine of the Theocracia or Divine Oneness, which even poetry
does not entirely conceal. They were not in any open hostility with the
popular religion, but only a more solemn exhibition of its symbols; or


--- PAGE 604 ---
rather a part of itself in a more impressive form. The essence of all
Mysteries, as of all polytheism, consists in this, that the conception
of an inapproachable Being, single, eternal, and unchanging, and that
 of a God of Nature, whose manifold power is immediately revealed to
the senses in the incessant round of movement, life, and. death, fell
asunder in the treatment, and were separately symbolized. They offered a
perpetual problem to excite curiosity, aqd contributed to satisfy the
all-pervading religious sentiment, which if it obtain no nourishment
among the scruple and intelligible, finds compensating excitement in a
reverential contemplation of the obscure.
Nature is as free from dogmatism as from tyranny; and
the earliest instructors of mankind not only adopted her
lessons, but as far as possible adhered to her method of imparting
them. They attempted to reach the understanding through the eye ; and
the greater part of all religious teaching was conveyed through this
ancient and most impressive mode of "exhibition" or demonstration. The
Mysteries were a sacred drama, exhibiting some legend significant of


--- PAGE 605 ---
Nature's change, of the visible Universe in
i which the divinity is revealed, and whose import was in many respects
as open to the Pagan, as to the Christian. Beyond the current traditions
or sacred recitals of the temple, few explanations were given to the
spectators, who were left, as in the school of nature, to make
inferences for themselves.
The method of indirect suggestion, by allegory or symbol, is a more
efficacious instrument of instruction than plain didactic "language ;
since we are habitually indifferent to that which is acquired without
effort : "The initiated are few, though many bear the thyrsus." And it
would have been impossible to provide a lesson suited to every degree of
cultivation and capacity, unless it were one framed after Nature's
example, or rather a representation of Nature herself, employing her
universal symbolism instead of technicalities of language, inviting
endless research, yet rewarding the humblest inquirer, and disclosing
its secrets to every one in proportion to his preparatory training and
power to comprehend them.


--- PAGE 606 ---
Even if destitute of any formal or official enunciation of those
important truths, which even in a cultivated age it was often found
inexpedient to assert except under a veil of allegory, and which
moreover lose their dignity and value in proportion as they are learned
mechanically as dogmas, the shows of the Mysteries certainly contained
suggestions if not lessons, which in the opinion not of one competent
witness only, but if many, were adapted to elevate the character of the
spectators, enabling them to augur  something of the purposes of
existence, as well as of the means of employing it, to live better and
to die happier.
Unlike the religion of books or creeds, these mystic shows performances
were not the reading of a lecture, but the opening of a problem,
implying neither exemption from research, nor hostility to philosophy :
for, on the contrary, philosophy is the great Mystagogue or
Arch-Expounder of symbolism : though the interpretations by the Grecian
Philosophy of the old myths and symbols were in many instances as
ill-founded, as in others they are correct.


--- PAGE 607 ---
No better means could be devised to rouse a dormant intellect than
those impressive exhibitions, which addressed it through the
imagination: which, instead of condemning it to a prescribed routine of
creed, invited it to seek, compare, and judge. The alteration from
symbol to dogma is as fatal to beauty of expression, as that from faith
to dogma is to truth and wholesomeness of thought
The first philosophy often reverted to the natural mode of teaching;
and Socrates, in particular, is said to have eschewed dogmas,
endeavoring, like the Mysteries, rather to awaken and develop in the
minds of his hearers the ideas with which they were already endowed or
pregnant, than to fill them with ready-made adventitious opinions.
So Masonry still follows the ancient manner of teaching. Her symbols
are the instruction she gives ; and the lectures are but often partial
and insufficient one-sided endeavors to interpret those symbols. He who
would become an accomplished Mason must not be content merely to hear
or
even to understand the lectures, but must, aided by them, and they


--- PAGE 608 ---
having as it were marked out the way for him, study, interpret, and
develop the symbols for himself.
The earliest speculation endeavored to express far more than it could
distinctly comprehend ; and the vague impressions if the mind found in
the mysterious analogies of phenomena their most apt and energetic
representations. The Mysteries, like the symbols of Masonry, were but an
image of the eloquent analogies of Nature; both those and these
revealing no new secret to such as were or are unprepared, or incapable
of interpreting their significance.
Everywhere in the old Mysteries, and in all the symbolisms and
ceremonial of the Hierophant was found the same mythical personage,
who,
like Hermes, or Zoroaster, unites Human Attributes  with Divine,
and is himself the God whose worship he introduced, teaching rude men
the commencements of civilization through the influence of song, and
connecting with the symbol of his death, emblematic of that of Nature,
the most essential consolations of religion.


--- PAGE 609 ---
The Mysteries embraced the three great doctrines of Ancient Theosophy.
They treated of God, Man, and Nature. Dionysus, whose Mysteries
Orpheus
is said to have founded, was the God of Nature, or of the moisture which
is the life of Nature, who prepares in darkness the return of life and
vegetation, or who is him- self the Light and Change evolving their
varieties. He was theologically one with Hermes, Prometheus, and
Poseidon. In the Aegean Islands he is Butes, Dardanus, Himeros, or
Imbros. In Crete he appears as Iasius or Zeus, whose worship remaining
unveiled by the usual forms of mystery, betrayed to profane curiosity
the symbols, which, if irreverently contemplated, were sure to be
misunderstood. In Asia he is the long-stoled Bassareus coalescing with
the Sabazius of the Phrygian Corybantes : the same with the mystic
Iacchus, nursling or son of Ceres, and with the dismembered Zagreus, son
of Persephone.
In symbolical forms the Mysteries exhibited THE ONE, of which THE
MANIFOLD Is an infinite illustration, containing a moral lesson,


--- PAGE 610 ---
calculated to guide the soul through life, and to cheer it in death. The
story of Dionysus was profoundly significant. He was not only creator of
the world, but guardian, liberator, and Savior of the soul. God of the
many-colored mantle, he was the resulting manifestation personified, the
all in the many, the varied year, life passing into innumerable forms.
The spiritual regeneration of man was typified in the Mysteries by the
second birth of Dionysus as offspring of the Highest ; and the agents
and symbols of that regeneration were the elements that affected
Nature's periodical purification-the air, indicated by the mystic fan or
winnow ; the fire, signified by the torch ; and the baptismal water, for
water is not only cleanser of all things, but the genesis or source of
all.
Those notions, clothed in ritual, suggested the soul's, reformation and
training, the moral purity formally proclaimed at Eleusis. He only was
invited to approach, who was "of clean hands and ingenuous speech, free
from all pollution, and with a clear
conscience." -"Happy the man," say the initiated in Euripides and


--- PAGE 611 ---
Aristophanes, "who purifies his life, and who reverently consecrates his
soul in the thirsts of the God. Let him take heed to his lips that he
utter no profane word; let him be just and kind to the stranger, and to
his neighbor; let him give way to no vicious excess, lest he make dull
and heavy the organs of the spirit. Far from the mystic dance of the
thirsts be the impure, the evil speaker, the seditious citizen, the
selfish hunter after gain, the traitor ; all those, in short, whose
practices are more akin to the riot of Titans than to the regulated life
of the Orphici, or the Curetan order of the Priests of Idaean Zeus."
The votary, elevated beyond the sphere of his ordinary faculties, and
unable to account for the agitation which overpowered him, seemed to
become divine. in proportion as he ceased to be human; to be a demon or
god. Already, in imagination, the initiated were numbered among the
beatified. They alone enjoyed the true life, the Sun's true lustre,
while they hymned their God beneath the mystic groves of a mimic
Elysium, and were really renovated or regenerated under the genial
influence of their dances.


--- PAGE 612 ---
"They whom Proserpine guides in her mysteries," it was said, "who
imbibed her instruction and spiritual nourishment, rest from their
labors and know strife no more. Happy they who witness and comprehend
these sacred ceremonies ! They are made to know the meaning of the
riddle of existence by observing its aim and termination as appointed by
Zeus ; they partake a benefit more valuable and enduring than the grain
bestowed by wares ; for they are exalted in the scale of intellectual
existence, and obtain sweet hopes to console them at their death."
No doubt the ceremonies of initiation were originally few and simple.
As the great truths of the primitive revelation faded out of the
memories of the masses of the People, and wickedness became rife upon
the earth, it became necessary to discriminate, to require longer
probation and satisfactory tests of the candi dates, and by spreading
around what at first were rather schools of instruction than mysteries,
the veil of secrecy, and the pomp of ceremony, to heighten the opinion
of their value and importance.
Whatever pictures later and especially Christian writers may draw of


--- PAGE 613 ---
the Mysteries, they must, not only originally, but for many ages, have
continued pure; and the doctrines of natural religion and morals there
taught, have been of the highest importance;  because both the
most virtuous as well as the most learned and philosophic of the
ancients speak of them in the loftiest terms. That they ultimately
became degraded from their high estate, and corrupted, we know.
The rites of initiation became progressively more complicated. Signs
and tokens were invented by which the Children of Light could with
facility make themselves known to each other. Differ. ant Degrees were
invented, as the number of Initiates enlarged, in order that there might
be in the inner apartment of the Temple a favored few, to whom alone the
more valuable secrets were entrusted, and who could wield effectually
the influence and power of the Order. Originally the Mysteries were
meant to be the beginning of a new life of reason and virtue. The
initiated or esoteric companions were taught the doctrine of the One
Supreme God, the theory of death and eternity, the hidden mysteries of
Nature, the prospect of the ultimate restoration of the soul to that


--- PAGE 614 ---
state of perfection from which it had fallen, its immortality, and the
states of reward and punishment after death. The uninitiated were deemed
Profane, unworthy of public employment or private confidence, sometimes
prescribed as Atheists, and certain of everlasting punishment beyond the
grave.
All persons were initiated into the lesser Mysteries; but few attained
the greater, in which the true spirit of them, and most of their secret
doctrines were hidden. The veil of secrecy was impenetrable, sealed by
oaths and penalties the most tremendous and appalling. It was by
initiation only, that a knowledge of the Hieroglyphics could be
obtained, with which the walls, columns, and ceilings of the Temples
were decorated, and which, believed to have been communicated to the
Priests by revelation from the celestial deities, the youth of all ranks
were laudably ambitious of deciphering.
The ceremonies were performed at dead of night, generally in apartments
under-ground, but sometimes in the centre of a vast pyramid, with every
appliance that could alarm and excite the candidate. Innumerable


--- PAGE 615 ---
ceremonies, wild and romantic, dreadful and appalling, had by degrees
been added to the few expressive symbols of primitive observances, under
which there were instances in which the terrified aspirant actually
expired with fear. The pyramids were probably used for the purposes of
initiation, 
as were caverns, pagodas, and labyrinths; for the ceremonies required
many apartments and cells, long passages and wells. In Egypt a principal
place for the Mysteries was the island of Philae on the Nile, where a
magnificent Temple of Osiris stood, and his relics were said to be
preserved.
With their natural proclivities, the Priesthood, that select and
exclusive class, in Egypt, India, Phoenicia, Judea and Greece, as well
as in Britain and Rome, and wherever else the Mysteries were known,
made
use of them to build wider and higher the fabric of their own power. The
purity of no religion continues long. Rank and dignities succeed to the
primitive simplicity. Unprincipled, vain, insolent, corrupt, and venal


--- PAGE 616 ---
men put on God's livery to serve the Devil withal ; and luxury, vice,
intolerance, and pride depose frugality, virtue, gentleness, and
humility, and change the altar where they should be servants, to a
throne on which they reign.
But the Kings, Philosophers, and Statesmen, the wise and great and good
who were admitted to the Mysteries, long postponed their ultimate
self-destruction, and restrained the natural tendencies of the
Priesthood. And accordingly Zosimus thought that the neglect of the
Mysteries after Diocletian abdicated, was the chief cause of the decline
of the Roman Empire ; and in the year 364, the Proconsul of Greece would
not close the Mysteries, notwithstanding a law of the Emperor
Valentinian, lest the people should be driven to desperation, if
prevented from performing them; upon which, as they believed, the
welfare of mankind wholly depended. They were practiced in Athens until
the 8th century in Greece and Rome for several centuries after Christ;
and in Wales and Scotland down to the 12th century.
The inhabitants of India originally practiced the Patriarchal religion.


--- PAGE 617 ---
Even the later worship of Vishnu was cheerful and social ; accompanied
with. the festive song, the sprightly dance, and the resounding cymbal,
with libations of milk and honey, garlands, and perfumes from aromatic
woods and gums. There perhaps the Mysteries commenced; and in them,
under allegories, were taught the primitive truths. We cannot, within
the limits of this lecture, detail the ceremonies of initiation; and
shall use general language, except where something from those old
Mysteries still remains in Masonry.
The Initiate was invested with a cord of three threads, so twined
 as to make three times three, and called zennar. Hence comes our
cable-tow. It was an emblem of their tri-une Deity, the remembrance of
whom we also preserve in the three chief officers of our Lodges,
presiding in the three quarters of that Universe which our Lodges
represent; in our three greater and three lesser lights, our three
movable and three immovable jewels, and the three pillars that support
our Lodges.
The Indian Mysteries were celebrated in subterranean cavern's and


--- PAGE 618 ---
grottos hewn in the solid rock; and the Initiates adored the Deity,
symbolized by the solar fire. The candidate, long wandering in darkness,
truly wanted Light, and the worship taught him was the worship of God,
the Source of Light. The vast Temple of Elephants, perhaps the oldest in
the world, hewn out of the rock, and 135 feet square, was used for
initiations ; as were the still vaster caverns of Salsette, with their
300 apartments.
The periods of initiation were regulated by the increase and decrease
of the moon. The Mysteries were divided into four steps or Degrees. The
candidate might receive the first at eight years of age, when he was
invested with the zennar. Each Degree dispensed something of perfection.
"Let the wretched man," says the Hitopadesa, "practice virtue, whenever
he enjoys one of the three or four religious Degrees ; let him be
even-minded with all created things, and that disposition will be the
source of virtue."
After various ceremonies, chiefly relating to the unity and trinity of
the Godhead, the candidate was clothed in a linen garment without a


--- PAGE 619 ---
seam, and remained under the care of a Brahmin until he was twenty years
of age, constantly studying and practising the most rigid virtue. Then
he underwent the severest probation for the second Degree, in which he
was sanctified by the sign of the cross, which, pointing to the four
quarters of the compass, was honored as a striking symbol of the
Universe by many nations of antiquity, and was imitated by the Indians
in the shape of their temples. Then he was admitted to the Holy Cavern,
blazing with light, where, in costly robes, sat, in the East, West, and
South, the three chief Hierophants, representing the Indian tri-une
Deity. The ceremonies there commenced with an anthem to the Great God
of
Nature; and then followed this apostrophe : "O mighty  primal
Creator! Eternal God of Gods! The World's Mansion! Thou art the
Incorruptible Being, distinct from all things transient! Thou art before
all Gods, the Ancient Absolute Existence, and the Supreme Supporter of
the Universe! Thou art the Supreme Mansion; and by Thee, O Infinite
Form, the Universe was spread abroad."


--- PAGE 620 ---
The candidate, thus taught the first great primitive truth, was called
upon to make a formal declaration, that he would be tractable and
obedient to his superiors; that he would keep his body pure ;. govern
his tongue, and observe a passive obedience in receiving the doctrines
and traditions of the Order ; and the firmest secrecy in maintaining
inviolable its hidden and abstruse mysteries. Then he was sprinkled with
water (whence our baptism) ;' certain words, now unknown, were
whispered
in his ear; and he was divested of his shoes, and made to go three times
around the cavern. Hence our three circuits ; hence we were neither
barefoot nor shod: and the words were the Pass-words of that Indian
Degree.
The Gymnosophist Priests came from the banks of the Euphrates into
Ethiopia, and brought with them their sciences and their doctrines.
Their principal College was at Meroe, and their Mysteries were
celebrated in the Temple of Amun, renowned for his oracle. Ethiopia was
then a powerful State, which preceded Egypt in civilization, and had a


--- PAGE 621 ---
theocratic government. Above the King was the Priest, who could put him
to death in the name of the Deity. Egypt was then composed of the
Thebaid only. Middle Egypt and the Delta were a gulf of the
Mediterranean. The Nile by degrees formed an immense marsh, which,
afterward drained by the labor of man, formed Lower Egypt; and was for
many centuries governed by the Ethiopian Sacerdotal Caste, of Arabic
origin ; afterward displaced by a dynasty of warriors. The magnificent
ruins of Axiom, with its obelisks and hieroglyphics, temples, vast tombs
and pyramids, around ancient Meroe, are far older than the pyramids near
Memphis.
The Priests, taught by Hermosa embodied in books the occult and
hermetic sciences, with their own discoveries and the revelations of the
Sibyls. They studied particularly the most abstract sciences, discovered
the famous geometrical theorems which Pythagoras afterward learned from
them, calculated eclipses, and regulated, nineteen centuries before
Caesar, the Julian year. They  descended to practical
investigations as to the necessities of life, and made known their


--- PAGE 622 ---
discoveries to the people ; they cultivated the fine arts, and inspired
the people with that enthusiasm which produced the avenues of Thebes,
the Labyrinth, the Temples of Karnac, Denderah, Edfou, and Philae, the
monolithic obelisks, and the great Lake Morris, the fertilizer of the
country.
The wisdom of the Egyptian Initiates, the high sciences and lofty
morality which they taught, and their immense knowledge, excited the
emulation of the most eminent men, whatever their rank and fortune ; and
led them, despite the complicated and terrible trials to be undergone,
to seek admission into the Mysteries of Osiris and Isis.
From Egypt, the Mysteries went to Phoenicia, and were celebrated at
Tyre. Osiris changed his name, and become Adoni or Dionysos, still the
representative of the Sun ; and afterward these Mysteries were
introduced successively into Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Greece, Sicily,
and Italy. In Greece and Sicily, Osiris took the name of Bacchus, and
Isis that of Ceres, Cybele, Rhea and Venus.
Bar Hebraeus says : "Enoch was the first who invented books and


--- PAGE 623 ---
different sorts of writing. The ancient Greeks declare that Enoch is the
same as Mercury Trismegistus [Hermes], and that he taught the sons of
men the art of building cities, and enacted some admirable laws... He
discovered the knowledge of the Zodiac, and the course of the Planets ;
and he pointed out to the sons of men, that they should worship God,
that they should fast, that they should pray, that they should give
aims, votive offerings, and tenths. He reprobated abominable foods and
drunkenness, and appointed festivals for sacrifices to the Sun, at each
of the 'Zodiacal Signs."
Manetho extracted his history from certain pillars which he discovered
in Egypt, whereon inscriptions had been made by Thoth, or the first
Mercury [or Hermes], in the sacred letters and dialect: but which were
after the flood translated from that dialect into the Greek tongue, and
laid up in the private recesses of the Egyptian Temples. These pillars
were found in subterranean caverns, near Thebes and beyond the Nile, not
far from the sounding statue of Memnon, it a place called Syringes ;
which are described to be certain winding apartments underground ; made,


--- PAGE 624 ---
it is said, by those who were skilled in ancient rites; who foreseeing
the coming of the deluge, and fearing lest memory of their cere-
monies should be obliterated, built and contrived vaults, dug with vast
labor, in several places.
From the bosom of Egypt sprang a man of consummate wisdom, initiated
in
the secret knowledge of India, of Persia, and of Ethiopia, named Thoth
or Phtha by his compatriots, Taaut by the Phoenicians, Hermes
Trismegistus by the Greeks, and Adris by the Rabbins. Nature seemed to
have chosen him for her favorite, and to have lavished on him all the
qualities necessary to enable him to study her and to know her
thoroughly. The Deity had, so to say, infused into him the sciences and
the arts, in order that' he might instruct the whole world.
He invented many things necessary for the uses of life, and gave them
suitable names ; he taught men how to write down their thoughts and
arrange their speech; he instituted the ceremonies to be observed in the
worship of each of the Gods; he observed the course of the stars; he


--- PAGE 625 ---
invented music, the different bodily exercises, arithmetic, medicine,
the art of working in metals, the lyre with three strings ; he regulated
the three tones of the voice, the sharp, taken from autumn, the grave
from winter, and the ,middle from spring, there being then but three
seasons. It was he who taught the Greeks the mode of interpreting terms
and things, whence they gave him the name of `Ee??? [Hermes], which
signifies Interpreter.
In Egypt he instituted hieroglyphics: he selected a certain number of
persons whom he judged fitted to be the depositaries of his secrets, of
such only as were capable of attaining the throne and the first offices
in the Mysteries; he united them in a body, created them Priests of the
Living God, instructed them in the sciences and arts, and explained to
them the symbols by which they were veiled. Egypt, 1500 years before the
time of Moses, revered in the Mysteries One SUPREME GOD, called the
ONLY
UNCREATED. Under Him it paid homage to seven principal deities, it is
to
Hermes, who lived at that period, that we must distribute the


--- PAGE 626 ---
concealment or veiling [velation] of the Indian worship, which Moses
unveiled or revealed, changing nothing of tbe laws of Hermes, except the
plurality of his mystic Gods.
The Egyptian Priests related that Hermes, dying, said : "Hitherto I
have lived an exile from my true country: now I return thither. Do not
weep for me : I return to that celestial country whither each goes in
his turn, There is God. This life is but a  death." This is
precisely the creed of the old Buddhists of Samaneans, who believed that
from time to time God sent Buddha’s on earth, to reform men, to wean
them from their vices, and lead them back into the paths of virtue.
Among the sciences taught by Hermes, there were secrets which he
communicated to the Initiates only upon condition that they should bind
themselves, by a terrible oath, never to divulge them, except to those
who, after long trial, should be found worthy to succeed them. The Kings
even prohibited the revelation of them on pain of death. This secret was
styled the Sacerdotal Art, and included alchemy, astrology, magnum
[magic], the science of spirits, etc. He gave them the key to the


--- PAGE 627 ---
Hieroglyphics of all these secret sciences, which were regarded as
sacred, and kept concealed in the roost secret places of the Temple.
The great secrecy observed by the initiated Priests, for many years,
and the lofty sciences which they professed, caused them to be honored
and respected throughout all Egypt, which was regarded by other nations
as the college, the sanctuary, of the sciences and arts. The mystery
which surrounded them strongly excited curiosity. Orpheus
metamorphosed
himself, so to say, into an Egyptian. He was initiated into. Theology
and Physics. And he so completely made the ideas and seasonings of his
teachers his own, that his Hymns rather bespeak an Egyptian Priest than
a Grecian Poet : and he was the first who carried into Greece the
Egyptian fables.
Pythagoras, ever thirsty for learning, consented even to be
circumcised, in order to become one of the Initiates: and the occult
sciences were revealed to him in the innermost part of the sanctuary.
The Initiates in a particular science, having been instructed by fables,


--- PAGE 628 ---
enigmas, allegories, and hieroglyphics, wrote mysteriously whenever in
their works they touched the subject of the Mysteries, and continued to
conceal science under a veil of fictions. When the destruction by
Cambyses of many cities, and the ruin of nearly all Egypt, in the year
528 before our era, dispersed most of the Priests into Greece and
elsewhere, they bore with them their sciences, which they continued to
teach enigmatically, that is to) say, ever enveloped in the obscurities
of fables and hieroglyphics ; to the end that' the vulgar herd, seeing,
might see nothing and hearing, might comprehend nothing. All the
writers  drew from this source: but these Mysteries, concealed
under so many unexplained envelopes, ended in giving birth to a swarm of
absurdities, which, from Greece, spread over the whole earth. In the
Grecian Mysteries, as established by Pythagoras, there
were three Degrees. A preparation of five years' abstinence and silence
was required. If the candidate was found to be passionate or
intemperate, contentious, or ambitious of worldly honors and
distinctions, he was rejected.


--- PAGE 629 ---
In his lectures, Pythagoras taught the mathematics, as a medium whereby
to prove the existence of God from observation and by means of reason ;
grammar, rhetoric, and logic, to cultivate and improve that reason,
arithmetic, because he conceived that the ultimate benefit of man
consisted in the science of numbers, and geometry, music, and astronomy,
because he conceived that man is indebted to them for a knowledge of
what is really good and useful.
He taught the true method of obtaining a knowledge of the Divine laws
of purifying the soul from its imperfections, of searching for truth,
and of practicing virtue; thus imitating the perfections of God. He
thought his system vain, if it did not contribute to expel vice and
introduce virtue into the mind. He taught that the two most excellent
things were, to speak the truth, and to render benefits to one another.
particularly he inculcated Silence, Temperance, Fortitude, Prudence, and
Justice. He taught' the immortality of the soul, the Omnipotence of God,
and the necessity of personal holiness to qualify a man for admission
into the Society of the Gods.


--- PAGE 630 ---
Thus we owe the particular mode of instruction in the Degree of
Fellow-Craft to Pythagoras ; and that Degree is but an imperfect
reproduction of his lectures. From him, too, we have many of our
explanations of the symbols. He arranged his assemblies due East and
West, because he held that Motion began in the East and proceeded to the
West. Our Lodges are said to be due East and West, because the Master
represents the rising Sun, and of course must be in the East. The
pyramids, too, were built precisely by the four cardinal points. And our
expression. that our Lodges extend upward to the Heavens, comes from the
Persian and Druidic custom of having to their Temples no roofs but the
sky.
Plato developed and spiritualized. the philosophy of Pythagoras 
Even Eusebius the Christian admits, that he reached to the vestibule of
Truth, and stood upon its threshold. The Druidical ceremonies
undoubtedly came from India; and the Druids were originally Buddhists.
The word Druid, like the word Magi, signifies wise or learned men ; and
they were at once philosophers, magistrates, and ,divines.


--- PAGE 631 ---
There was a surprising uniformity in the Temples, Priests, doctrines,
and worship of the Persian Magi and British Druids. The Gods of Britain
were the same as the Cabiri of Samothrace. Osiris and Isis appeared in
their Mysteries, under the names of Hu and Ceridwen; and like those of
the primitive Persians, their Temples were enclosures of huge unhewn
stones, some of which still remain, and are regarded by the common
people with fear and veneration. They were generally either circular or
oval. Some were in the shape of a circle to which a vast serpent was
attached. The circle was an Eastern symbol of the Universe, governed by
an Omnipotent Deity whose center is everywhere, and his circumference
nowhere : and the egg was an universal symbol of the world. Some of the
Temples were winged, and some in the shape of a cross; the winged ones
referring to Kneph, the winged Serpent-Deity of Egypt ; whence the name
of Navestock, where one of them stood. Temples in the shape of a cross
were also found in Ireland and Scotland. The length of one of these vast
structures, in the shape of a serpent, was nearly three miles..
The grand periods for initiation into the Druidical Mysteries, were


--- PAGE 632 ---
quarterly; at the equinoxes and solstices. In the remote times when they
originated, these were the times corresponding with the 13th of
February, 1st of May, 19th of August, and 1st of November. The time of
annual celebration was May-Eve, and the ceremonial preparations
commences at midnight, on the 29th of April. When the initiations were
over, on May-Eve, fires were kindled on all the cairns and cromlechs in
the island, which burned all night to introduce the sports of May-day.
The festival was in honor of the Sun. The initiations were performed at
midnight ; and there were three Degrees.
The Gothic Mysteries were carried Northward from the East, by Odin ;
who, being a great warrior, modeled and varied them to suit his purposes
and the genius of his people. He placed over their celebration twelve
Hierophants, who were alike Priests, Counselors of State, and Judges
from whose decision there was no appeal. He held the numbers three
and nine in peculiar veneration, and was probably himself the Indian
Buddha. Every thrice-three months, thrice-three victims were sacrificed
to the try-une God. The Goths had three great festivals; the most


--- PAGE 633 ---
magnificent of which commenced at the winter solstice, and was
celebrated in honor of Thor, the Prince of the Power of the Air. That
being the longest night in the year, and throne after which the Sun
comes Northward, it was commemorative of the Creation ; and they termed
it mother-night, as the one in which the creation of the world and light
from the primitive darkness took place. This was the Yule, Jitul, or
Yeof feast, which afterward became Christmas. At this feast the
initiations were celebrated. Thor was the Sun, the Egyptian Osiris and
Kneph, the Physician Bel or Baal. The initiations were had in
huge-intricate caverns, terminating, as all the Mithriac caverns did, in
a spacious vault, where the candidate was brought to light.
Joseph was undoubtedly initiated. After he had interpreted Pharaoh's
dream, that Monarch made him his Prime Minister, let him ride in his
second chariot, while they proclaimed before him, ABRSCHI (*An Egytian
word,meaning, "Bow down.") and set him over the land of Egypt. In
addition to this, the King gave hid a new name, Tsapanat-Paanakh, and
married him to Asanat, daughter of Potai Paring, a Priest of An or


--- PAGE 634 ---
Hieropolis, where was the Temple of Athom-Re, the Great God of Egypt;
thus completely naturalizing him. He could not have contracted this
marriage, nor have exercised that high dignity, without being first
initiated in the Mysteries. When his Brethren came to Egypt the second
time, the Egyptians of his court could not eat with them, as that would
have been abomination, though they ate with Joseph; who was therefore
regarded not as a foreigner, but as one of themselves: and when he sent
and brought his brethren back, and charged them with taking his cup, he
said, "Know ye not that a man like me practices divination?" thus
assuming the Egyptian of high rank initiated into the Mysteries, sad as
such conversant with the occult sciences.
So also must Moses have been initiated for he was not only brought up
in the court of the King, as the adopted son of the Kingly daughter,
until he was forty years of age ; but he was instructed in all the
learning of the Egyptians, and married after ward the daughter of
Yethru, a Priest of An likewise. Strobo and Diodorus both assert that he
was himself a Priest of Heliopolis. Before he went into the Desert,


--- PAGE 635 ---
there were intimate relations between him and the Priesthood ; and he
had successfully commanded, Josephus informs us, an army sent by the
King against the Ethiopians. Simplicius asserts that Moses received from
the Egyptians, in the Mysteries, the doctrines which he taught to the
Hebrews: and Clement of Alexandria and Philo say that he was a
Theologian and Prophet, and interpreter of the Sacred Laws. Manetho,
cited by Josephus, says he was a Priest of Heliopolis, and that his true
and original (Egyptian) name was Asersaph or Osarsiph.
And in the institution of the Hebrew Priesthood, in the powers and
privileges, as well as the immunities and sanctity which he conferred
upon them, he closely imitated the Egyptian institutions ; making public
the worship of that Deity whom the Egyptian Initiates worshipped in
private ; and strenuously endeavoring to keep the people from relapsing
into their old mixture of Chaldaic and Egyptian superstition and
idol-worship, as they were ever ready and inclined to do ; even Aharun,
upon their first clamorous discontent, restoring the worship of Apis; as
an image of which Egyptian God he made the golden calf.


--- PAGE 636 ---
The Egyptian Priests taught in their great Mysteries, that there was
one God, Supreme and inapproachable, who had conceived the Universe iy
His Intelligence, before He created it by His Power and Will. They were
no Materialists nor Pantheists ; but taught that Matter was not eternal
or co-existent with the great First Cause, but created by Him.
The early Christians, taught by the founder of their Religion, but in
greater perfection, those primitive truths that from the Egyptians had
passed to the Jews, and been preserved among the latter by the Essenes,
received also the institution of the Mysteries ; adopting as their
object the building of the symbolic Temple, preserving the old
Scriptures of the Jews as their sacred book, and as the fundamental law,
which furnished the new veil of initiation with the Hebraic words and
formulas, that, corrupted and disfigured by time and ignorance, appear
in many of our Degrees.
Such, my Brother, is the doctrine of the first Degree of the Mysteries,
or that of chief of the Tabernacle, to which you have  now been
admitted, and the moral lesson of which is, devotion to the service of


--- PAGE 637 ---
God, and disinterested zeal and constant endeavor for the welfare of
men. You have here received only hints of the true objects and purposes
of the Mysteries. Hereafter, if you are permitted to advance, you will
arrive at a more complete understanding of them and of the sublime
doctrines which they teach. Be content, therefore, with that which you
have seen and heard, and await patiently the advent of the greater
light.
 MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
24º - Prince of the Tabernacle
XXIV. PRINCE OF THE TABERNACLE.


--- PAGE 638 ---
SYMBOLS were the almost universal language of ancient theology. They
were the
most obvious method of instruction ; for, like nature herself, they
addressed
the understanding through the eye ; and the most ancient expressions
denoting
communication of religious knowledge, signify ocular exhibition. The first
teachers of mankind borrowed this method of instruction ; and it
comprised an
endless store of pregnant hieroglyphics. These lessons of the olden time
were
the riddles of the Sphynx, tempting the curious by their quaintness, but
involving the personal risk of the adventurous interpreter. "The Gods
themselves," it was said, "disclose their intentions to the wise, but to
fools
their teaching is unintelligible ;" and the King of the Delphic Oracle was
said
not to declare, nor onthe other hand to conceal; but emphatically to
"intimate
or signify."
The Ancient Sages, both barbarian and Greek, involved their meaning in
similar


--- PAGE 639 ---
indirections and enigmas ; their lessons were conveyed either in visible
symbols, or in those "parables and dark sayings of old," which the
Israelites
considered it a sacred duty to hand down unchanged to successive
generations.
The explanatory tokens employed by man, whether emblematical objects
or
actions, symbols or mystic ceremonies, were like the mystic signs and
portends
either in dreams or by the wayside, supposed to he significant of the
intentions of the Gods ; both required the aid of anxious thought and
skillful
interpretation. It was only by a conect appreciation of analogous problems
of
nature, that the will of Heaven could be understood iy the Diviner, or the
lessons of Wisdom become manifest to the Sage.
The Mysteries were a series of symbols ; and what was spoken there
consisted
wholly of accessory explanations of the act or image ; sacred
commentaries,
explanatory of established symbols; with little of those independent
traditions


--- PAGE 640 ---
embodying physical or moral speculation, in which the elements or planets
were
the Sage. actors, and the creation and revolutions of the world were
intermingled with recollections of ancient events: and yet with so much of
that
also, that nature became her own expositor through the medium of an
arbitrary
symbolical instruction; and the ancient views of the relation between the
human
and divine received dramatic forms.
There has ever been an intimate alliance between the two systems, the
symbolic
and the philosophical, in the allegories of the monuments of all ages, in
the
symbolic writings of the priests of all nations, in the rituals of all secret
and mysterious societies; there has been a constant series, an invariable
uniformity of principles, which come from an aggregate, vast imposing,
and
true, composed of parts that fit harmoniously only there.
Symbolical instruction is recommended by the constant and' uniform usage
of


--- PAGE 641 ---
antiquity, - and it has retained its influence throughout all ages, as a
system
of mysterious communication. The Deity, in his revelations to man,
adopted the
use of material images for the purpose of enforcing sublime truths; and
Christ
taught by symbols and parables. The mysterious knowledge of the Druids
was
embodied in signs and symbols. Taliesin, describing his initiation, says :
"The
secrets were imparted to me by the old Giantess (Ceridwen, or Isis),
without
the use of audible language." And again he says, "I am a silent proficient"
Initiation was ,a school, in which were taught the truths of primitive
revelation, the existence and attributes of one God, the immortality of the
Soul, rewards and punishments in a future life, the phenomena of Nature,
the
arts, the sciences, morality, regulation, philosophy, and philanthropy, and
what we now style psychology and metaphysics, with animal magnetism,
and the
other occult sciences.
All the ideas of the Priests of Hindustan, Persia, Syria, Arabia, Chaldaea,


--- PAGE 642 ---
Phoenicia, were known to the Egyptian Priests. The rational Indian
philosophy,
after penetrating Persia and Chaldaea, gave birth to the Egyptian
Mysteries. We
find that the use of Hieroglyphics was preceded in Egypt by that of the
easily
understood symbols and figures, from the mineral, animal, and vegetable
kingdoms, used by the Indians, Persians, and Chaldans to express their
thoughts; and this primitive philosophy was the basis of the modern
philosophy
of Pythagoras and Plato. - All the philosophers and legislators that made
Antiquity illustrious, were pupils of the initiation; and all the beneficent
modifications in the religions of the different people instructed by them
were
owing to their institution and extension of the Mysteries In the chaos of
popular superstitions, those Mysteries alone kept man from lapsing into
absolute brutishness. Zoroaster and Confucius drew their doctrines from
the
Mysteries. Clement of Alexandria, speaking of the Great Mysteries, says :
"Here
ends all instruction. Nature and all things are seen and known


--- PAGE 643 ---
moral truths alone been taught the Initiate, the Mysteries could never have
deserved nor received the magnificent eulogiums of the most enlightened
alien
of Antiquity,-of Pindar, Plutarch, Isocrates, Diodorus, Plato, Euripides,
Socrates, Aristophanes, Cicero, Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, and others
;-philosophers hostile to the Sacerdotal Spirit, or historians devoted to the
investigation of Truth. No : all the sciences were taught there ; and those
oral on written traditions briefly communicated, which reached back to the
first age of the world.
Socrates said, in the Phaedo of Plato: "It well appears that those who
established the Mysteries, or secret assemblies of the initiated, were no
contemptible personages, but men of great genius, who in the early ages
strove
to teach us, under enigmas, that he who shall go to the invisible regions
without being punfied, will be precipitated into the abyss ; while he who
arrives there, purged of the stains of this world, and accomplished in
virtue,
will be admitted to the dwelling-place of the Deity . The jnitiated are
certain


--- PAGE 644 ---
to attain the company of the Gods."
Pretextatus, Proconsul of Achaia, a man endowed with all the virtues,
said, in
the 4th century, that to deprive the Greeks of those Sacred Mysteries
which
bound together the whole human race, would make life insupportable.
Initiation was considered to be a mystical death ; a descent into the
infernal
regions, where every pollution, and the stains and imperfection's of a
corrupt
and evil life were purged away by fire and water ; and the perfect Epopt
was
then said to be regenerated, new-born, restored to a renovated existence of
life, light, and purity; and placed under the Divine Protection.
A new language was adapted to these celebrations, and also a language of
hieroglyphics, unknown to any but those who had received the highest
Degree.
And to them ultimately were confined the learning, the morality, and the
political power, of every people among which the Mysteries were
practiced. So
effectually was the knowledge of the hieroglyphics of the highest Degree
hidden


--- PAGE 645 ---
from all but a favored few, that in process of time their meaning was
entirely
lost, and none could interpret them. If the same hieroglyphics were
employed in
the higher as in the lower Degrees, they had a different and more abstruse
and
figurative meaning. It was pretended, in later times, that the sacred
hieroglyphics and language were the same that were used by the Celestial
Deities. Everything that could heighten the mystery of initiation was
added, until the very name of the ceremony possessed a strange charm, and
yet
conjured up the wildest fears. ache greatest rapture came to be expressed
by
the word that signified to pass through the Mysteries.
The Priesthood possessed one third of Egypt. They gained much of their
influence by means of the Mysteries, and spared no means to impress the
people
with a full sense of their importance. They represented them as the
beginning
of a new life of reason and virtue : the initiated, or esoteric companions
were
said to entertain the most agreeable anticipations respecting death and


--- PAGE 646 ---
eternity, to comprehend all the hidden mysteries of Nature, to have their
souls
restored to the original perfection from which man had fallen ; and at their
death to be borne to the celestial mansions of the Gods. The doctrines of a
future state of rewards and punishments formed a prominent feature in the
Mysteries; and they were also believed to assure much temporal happiness
and
good fortune, and afford absolute security against the most imminent
dangers by
land and sea. Public odium was cast of those who refused to be initiated.
They
were considered profane, unworthy of public employment or private
confidence;
and held to be doomed to eternal punishment as impious. To betray the
secrets
of the Mysteries, to wear on the stage the dress of an Initiate, or to hold
the
Mysteries up do derision, was to incur death at the hands of public
vengeance.
It is certain that up to the time of Cicero, the Mysteries still retained much
of their original character of sanctity and purity. And at a later day, as we


--- PAGE 647 ---
know, Nero, after committing a horrible crime, did not dare, even in
Greece, to
aid in the celebration of the Mysteries ; nor at a still later day was
Constantine, the Christian Emperor, allowed to do so, after his murder of
his
relatives.
Everywhere, and in all their forms, the Mysteries were funereal ;
and celebrated the mystical death and restoration to life of some divine or
heroic personage : and the details of the legend and the mode of the death
varied in the different Countries where the Mysteries were practiced.
heir explanation belongs both to astronomy and mythology, and the
Legend of
the Master's Degree is but another form of that of the Mysteries, reaching
back, in one shape or other, to the remotest antiquity.
Whether Egypt originated the legend, or borrowed it from India or
Chaldea, it
is now impossible to know. But the Hebrews received the Mysteries from
the
Egyptians; and of course were familiar with their legend,-known as it was
to
those Egyptian Initiates, Joseph and Moses. It was the fable (or rather the


--- PAGE 648 ---
truth clothed in allegory and figures) of Osiris, the Sun, Source of Light
and
Principle of good, and Typhon, the Principle of Darkness, and Evil. In all
the
histories of the Gods and Heroes lay couched and hidden astronomical
details
and the history of the operations of visible Nature; and those in their turn
were also symbols of higher and profounder truths. None but rude
uncultivated
intellects could long consider the Sun and Stars and the Powers of Nature
as
Divine, or as fit objects of Human Worship; and they will consider them
so
while the world lasts ; and ever. remain ignorant of the great Spiritual
Truths
of which these are the hieroglyphics and expressions.
A brief summary of the Egyptian legend will serve to show the leading
idea on
which the Mysteries among the Hebrews were based. Osiris, said to have
been an
ancient King of Egypt, was the Sun; and Isis, his wife, the Moon: and his
history recounts, in poetical and figurative style, the annual journey of the


--- PAGE 649 ---
Great Luminary of Heaven through the different Signs of the Zodiac. In
the
absence of Osiris, Typhon, his brother, filled with envy and malice, sought
to
usurp his throne ; but his plans were frustrated by Isis. Then he resolved
to
kill Osiris. This he did,. by persuading him to enter a coffin or
sarcophagus,
which he then flung into the Nile. Alter a Long search, Isis found the
body,
and concealed it in the depths of a forest ; but Typhon, finding it there, cut
it into fourteen pieces, and scattered them hither and thither. After tedious
search, Isis found thirteen pieces, the fishes having oaten the other (the
privates), which she replaced of wood, and buried the body at Philae;
where a
temple of surpassing magnificence was erected in honor of Osiris.
Isis, aided by her son Orus, Horus or Har-oeri, warred against Typhon,
slew
him, reigned gloriously, and at her death was reunited to her husband, in
the
same tomb. Typhon was represented as born of the earth ; the upper part of
his


--- PAGE 650 ---
body covered with feathers, in stature reaching the clouds, his arms and
legs
covered with scales, serpents darting from him on every side, and fire
flashing
from his mouth. Horus, who aided in slaying him, became the God of the
Sun,
answering to the Grecian Apollo; and Typhon is but the anagram of
Python, the
great serpent slain by Apollo.
The word Typhon, like Eve, signifies a serpent, and life. By its form the
serpent symbolizes life, which circulates through all nature. When, toward
the
end of autumn, the Woman (Virgo), in the constellations seems (upon the
Chaldean sphere) to crush with her heel the head of the serpent, this figure
foretells the coming of winter, during which life seems to retire from all
beings, and no longer to circulate through nature. This is why Typhon
signifies
also a serpent, the symbol of winter, which, in the Catholic Temples, is
represented surrounding the Terrestrial Globe, which surmounts the
heavenly
cross, emblem of redemption. If the word Typhon is derived from Tupoul)
it


--- PAGE 651 ---
signifies a tree which produces apples (mala) evils), the Jewish origin of
the
fall of man: Typhon means also one who supplants, and signifies the
human
passions, which expel from our hearts the lessons of wisdom. In the
Egyptian
Fable, Isis wrote the sacred word for the instruction of men, and Typhon
effaced it as fast as she wrote it. In morals, his name signifies Pride,
Ignorance and Falsehood.
When Isis first found the body, where it had floated ashore near Byblos, a
shrub of Erica or tamarisk near it had, by the virtue of the body, shot up
into
a tree around it, and protected it; and hence our sprig of acacia. Isis was
also aided in her search by Anubis, in the shape of a dog. He was Sirius or
the
Dog-Star, the friend and counselor of Osiris, and the inventor sf language,
grammar, astronomy, surveying, arithmetic, music, and medical science;
the
first maker of laws; and who taught the worship of the Gods, and the
building
of Temples.


--- PAGE 652 ---
In the Mysteries, the nailing up of the body of Osiris in the chest or ark
was
termed the aphanism) or disappearance [of the Sun at the Winter Solstice,
below
the Tropic of Capricorn], and the recovery of the different parts of his
body
by Isis, the Euresis, or finding. The candidate went through a ceremony
representing this, in all the Mysteries everywhere. The main facts in the
fable
were the same in all countries; and the prominent Deities were everywhere
a
male and a female.
In Egypt they were Osiris and Isis: in India, Mahadeva and Bhavani : in
Phoenicia, Thammuz (or Adonis) and Astarte: in Phrygia, Atys and Cybele:
in
Persia, Mithras and Asis: in Samothrace and Greece, Dionysus or Sabazeus
and
Rhea: in Britain, Hu and Ceridwen : and in Scandinavia, Woden and Frea:
and in
every instance these Divinities represented the Sun and the Moon.
The mysteries of Osiris, Isis, and Horus, seem to have been the model of
all


--- PAGE 653 ---
other ceremonies of initiation subsequently established among the
different
peoples of the world. Those of Atys and Cybele, celebrated in Phrygia;
those of
Ceres and Proserpine, at Eleusis and many other places in Greece, were
but
copies of them. This we learn from Plutarch, Diodorus Siculus, Lactantius,
and
other writers; and in the absence of direct testimony should necessarily
infer
it from the similarity of the adventures of these Deities ; for the ancients
held that the Ceres of he Greeks was the same as the Isis of the Egyptians;
and
Dionusos or Bacchus as Osiris.
In the legend of Osiris and Isis, as given by Plutarch, are many details and
circumstances other than those that we have briefly mentioned; and all of
which
we need not repeat here. Osiris married his sister Isis ; and labored
publicly
with her to ameliorate he lot of men. He taught them agriculture, while
Isis
invented laws. He built temples to the Gods, and established their
worship.


--- PAGE 654 ---
Both were the patrons of artists and their useful inventions: and .
introduced
the use of iron for defensive weapons and implements of agriculture, and
of
gold to adorn the temples of the Gods. He went forth with an army to
conquer
men to civilization, teaching he people whom he overcame to plant the
vine and
sow grain for food.
Typhon, his brother, slew him when the sun was in the sign of e Scorpion,
that
is to say, at the Autumnal Equinox. They had been rival claimants, says
Synesius, for the throne of Egypt, as Light and Darkness contend ever for
the
empire of the world. Plutarch adds, that at the time when Osiris was slain,
the
moon was at its full; and therefore it was in the sign opposite the
Scorpion,
that is, the Bull, the sign of the Vernal Equinox.
Plutarch assures us that it was to represent these events and details that
Isis established the Mysteries, in which they were reproduced by images,


--- PAGE 655 ---
symbols, and a religious ceremonial, whereby they were imitated : and in
which
lessons of piety were given, and consolations under the misfortunes that
afflict us here below. Those who instituted these Mysteries meant to
strengthen
religion and console men in their sorrows by the lofty hopes found in a
religious faith, whose principles were represented to them covered by a
pompous
ceremonial, and under the sacred veil of allegory.
Diodorus speaks of the famous columns erected near Nysa, in Arabia,
where, it
was said, were two of the tombs of Osiris and Isis. On one was this
inscription: "I am Isis, Queen of this country. I was instructed by Mercury.
No
one can destroy the laws which I have established. I am the eldest
daughter of
Saturn, most ancient of the Gods. I am the wife and sister of Osiris the
King.
I first made known tomortals the use of wheat. I am the mother of Orus the
King. In my honor was the city of Bubaste built. Rejoice, O Egypt, rejoice,
land that gave me birth!" ... And on the other was this: "I am Osiris the
King,


--- PAGE 656 ---
who led my armies into all parts of the world, to the most thickly
inhabited
countries of India, the North, the Danube, and the Ocean. I am the eldest
son
of Saturn : I was born of the brilliant and magnificent egg, and my
substance
is of the same nature as that which composes light. There is no place in
the
Universe where I have not appeared, to bestow my benefits and make
known my
discoveries." The rest was illegible.
To aid her in the search for the body of Osiris, and to nurse her infant
child
Horus, Isis sought out and took with her Anubis, son of Osiris, and his
sister
Nephte. He, as we have said, was Sirius, the brightest star in the Heavens.
After finding him, she went to Byblos, and seated herself near a fountain;
where she had learned that the sacred chest had stopped which contained
the
body of Osiris. There she sat, sad and silent, shedding a torrent of tears.
Thither came the women of the C6urt of Queen Astarte, and she spoke to
them,


--- PAGE 657 ---
and dressed their heir, pouring upon it deliciously perfumed ambrosia.
This
known to the Queen, Isis was engaged as nurse for her child, in the palace,
one
of the columns of which was made of the Erica or tamarisk, that had
grown up
over the chest containing Osiris, cut down by the King, and unknown to
him,
still enclosing the chest: which column Isis afterward demanded, and from
it
extracted the chest and the body, which, the latter wrapped in thin drapery
and
perfumed, she carried away with her.
Blue Masonry, ignorant of its import, still retains among its emblems one
of a
woman weeping over a broken column, holding in her hand a branch of
acacia,
myrtle, or tamarisk, while Time, we are told, stands behind her combing
out the
ringlets of her hair. We need not repeat the vapid and trivial explanation
there given, of this representation of Isis, weeping at Byblos, over the
column
torn from the palace of the living, that contained the body of Osiris, while


--- PAGE 658 ---
Horus, the God of Time, pours ambrosia on her hair.
Nothing of this recital was historical; but the whole was an allegory or
sacred fable, containing a meaning known only to those who were initiated
into
the Mysteries. All the incidents were astronomical, with a meaning still
deeper
lying behind that explanation, and so hidden by a double veil. The
Mysteries in
which these incidents were represented and explained, were like those of
Eleusis in their object, of which Pausanias, who was initiated, says that
the
Greeks, from the remotest antiquity, regarded them as the best calculated
of
all things to lead mental piety : and Aristotle says they were the most
valuable of all religious instillations, and thus were called mysteries par
excellence; and the Temple of Eleusis was regarded as, in some sort, the
common
sanctuary of the whole earth, where religion had brought together all that
was
most imposing and most august.
The object of all the Mysteries was to inspire men with piety, and to
console


--- PAGE 659 ---
them in the miseries of life. That consolation, so afforded, was the hope of
a
happier future, and of pasting, after death, to a state of eternal felicity.
Cicero says that the Initiates not only received lessons which made life
more
agreeable, but drew from the ceremonies happy hopes for the moment of
death.
Socrates says that those who were so fortunate as to be admitted to the
Mysteries, possessed, when dying, the most glorious hopes for eternity.
Aristides says that they not only procure the Initiates consolations in the
present life, and means of deliverance from the great weight of their evils,
but also the precious advantage of passing after death to a happier state.
Isis was the Goddess of Sais; and the famous Feast of Lights was
celebrated
there in her honor. There were celebrated the Mysteries, in which were
represented the death and subsequent restoration to life of the God Osiris,
in
a secret ceremony and scenic representation of his sufferings, called the
Mysteries of Night.
The Kings of Egypt often exercised the functions of the Priesthood; and
they


--- PAGE 660 ---
were initiated into the sacred science as soon as they attained the throne.
So
at Athens, the First Magistrate, or Archon-King, superintended the
Mysteries.'
This was an image of the union that existed between the Priesthood and
Royalty,
in those early times when legislators and kings sought in religion a potent
political instrument.
Herodotus says, speaking of the reasons why animals were deified in
Egypt: "If
I were to explain these reasons, I should be led to the disclosure of those
holy matters which I particularly wish to avoid, and which, but from
necessity,
I should not leave discussed at all." So he says, "The Egyptians have at
Sais
the tomb of a certain personage, whom I do not think myself permitted to
specify. It is behind the Temple of Minerva." [The latter, so called by the
Greeks, was really Isis, whose was the often-cited enigmatical inscription,
"I
am what was and is and is to come. No mortal hath yet unveiled me."] So
again


--- PAGE 661 ---
he says: "Upon this lake are represented by night the accidents which
happened
to him whom I dare not name. The Egyptians call them their Mysteries.
Concerning these, at the same time that I confess myself sufficiently
informed,
I feel myself compelled to be silent. Of the ceremonies also in honor of
Ceres
I may not venture to speak, further than the obligations of religion will
allow
me."
It is easy to see what was the great object of initiation and the Mysteries ;
whose first and greatest fruit was, as all the ancients testify, to civilize
savage hordes, to soften their ferocious manners, to introduce among them
social intercourse, and lead them into a way of life more worthy of men.
Cicero
considers the establishment of the EIeusiiiian Mysteries to be the greatest
of
all the benefits conferred by Athens on other commonwealths ; their
effects
381 having been, he says, to civilize men, soften their savage and
ferocious


--- PAGE 662 ---
manners, `and teach them the true principles of morals, which initiate man
into
the only kind of life worthy of him. The same philosophic orator, in a
passage
where he apostrophizes Ceres and Proserpine, says that mankind owes
these
Goddesses the first elements of moral life, as well as the first means of
sustenance of physical life ; knowledge of the laws, regulation of morals,
and
those examples of civilization which have improved the manners of men
and
cities.
Bacchus in Euripides says to Pentheus, that his new institution (the
Dionysian
Mysteries) deserved to be known, and that one of its great advantages was,
that
it prescribed all impurity : that these were the Mysteries of Wisdom, of
which
it would be imprudent to speak to persons not initiated : that they were
established among the Barbarians, who in that showed greater wisdom
than the
Greeks, who had not yet received them.


--- PAGE 663 ---
This double object, political and religious,-one teaching our duty to men,
and
the other what we owe to the Gods; or rather, respect for the Gods
calculated
to maintain that which we owe the laws, is found in that well-known verse
of
Virgil, borrowed by him from the ceremonies of initiation : "Teach me to
respect Justice and the Gods." This great lesson, which the Hierophant
impressed on the Initiates, after they had witnessed a representation of the
Infernal regions, the Poet places after his description of the different
punishments suffered by the wicked in Tartarus, and immediately after the
description of that of Sisyphus.
Pausanias, likewise, at the close of the representation of the punishments
of
Sisyphus and the daughters of Danaus, in the Temple at Delphi, makes this
reflection ; that the crime or impiety which in them had chiefly merited
this
punishment, was the contempt which they had shown for the Mysteries of
Eleusis.


--- PAGE 664 ---
From this reflection of Pausanias, who was an Initiate, it is easy to see
that
the Priests of Eleusis, who taught the dogma of punishment in Tartarus,
included among the great crimes deserving these punishments, contempt
for and
disregard of the Holy Mysteries; whose object was to lead men to piety,
and
thereby to respect for justice and the laws, chief object of their institution,
if not the only one, and to fvhich the needs and interest of religion itself
were subordinate; since the latter was but a means to lead more surely to
the
foyer ; for the whole force of religious opinions being in the hands of the
legislators to be wielded, they were sure of being better obeyed.
The Mysteries were not merely simple illustrations and the observation of
some
arbitrary formulas and ceremonies ; nor a means of reminding men of the
ancient
condition of the race prior to civilization: but they led men to piety by
instruction in morals and as to a future life; which at a very early day, if
not originally, formed the chief portion of the ceremonial.


--- PAGE 665 ---
Symbols were used in the ceremonies, which referred to agriculture, as
Masonry
has preserved the ear of wheat in a symbol and in one of her words; but
their
principal reference was to astronomical phenomena. Much was no doubt
said as to
the condition of brutality and degradation in which man was sunk before
the
institution of the Mysteries ; but the allusion was rather metaphysical, to
the
ignorance of the uninitiated, than to the wild life of the earliest men.
The great object of the Mysteries of Isis, and in general of all the
Mysteries, was a great and truly politic one. It was to ameliorate our race,
to
perfect, its manners and morals, and to restrain society by stronger bonds
than
those that human laws impose. They were the invention of that ancient
science
and wisdom which exhausted all its resources to make legislation perfect ;
and
of that philosophy which has ever sought to secure the happiness of man,
by
purifying his soul from the passions which can trouble it, and asia
necessary


--- PAGE 666 ---
consequence introduce social disorder. And that they were the work of
genius is
evident from their employment of all the sciences, a profound knowledge
of the
human heart, and the means of subduing it.
It is a still greater mistake to imagine that they were the inventions of
charlatanism, and means of deception. They may in the lapse of time have
degenerated into imposture and schools of false ideas; but they were not
so at
the beginning; or else the wisest and best men of antiquity have uttered
toe
most willful falsehoods. In process 0f time the very allegories of the
Mysteries themselves, Tantalus and its punishments, Minos and the other
judges
of the dead. came to be misunderstood, and to be false because they were
so;
while at first they were true, because they were recognized as merely the
arbitrary forms in which truths were enveloped.
The object of the Mysteries was to procure for man a real felicity on earth
by
the means of virtue; and to that end he was taught that his soul was
immortal ;


--- PAGE 667 ---
and that error, sin, and vice must needs, by an inflexible law, produce
their
consequences. The rude representations of physical torture in Tantalus was
but
an image of , the certain, unavoidable, eternal consequences that flow by
the
law of God's enactment from the sin committed and the vice indulged in.
The
poets and mystagogues labored to propagate these doctrines of the soul's
immortality and the certain punishment of sin and vice, and to accredit
them
with the people, by teaching them the former in their poems, and the latter
in
the sanctuaries; and they clothed them with the charms, the one of poetry,
and
the other of spectacles and magic illusions.
They painted, aided by all the resources of art, the virtuous man's happy
lif.e after death, and the horrors of the frightful prisons destined to punish
the vicious. In the shades of the sanctuaries, these delights and horrors
were
exhibited as spectacles, and the Initiates witnessed religious dramas,
under


--- PAGE 668 ---
the name of initiation and mysteries. Curiosity was excited by secrecy, by
tie
difficulty experienced in obtaining admission, and by the tests to be
undergone. The candidate was amused by the variety of the scenery, the
pomp of
the decorations, the appliances of machinery. Respect was inspired by the
gravity and dignity of the actors and the majesty of the ceremonial ; and
fear
and hope, sadness and delight, were in turns excited.
The Hierophants, men of intellect, and well understanding the disposition
of
the people and the art of controlling them, used every appliance to attain
that
object, and give importance and impressiveness to their ceremonies. As
they
covered those ceremonies with the veil of Secrecy, so they preferred that
Night
, should cover them with its wings. Obscurity adds to impressiveness, and
assists illusion; and they used it to produce an effect upon the astonished
Initiate. The ceremonies were conducted in caverns dimly lighted : thick
groves


--- PAGE 669 ---
were planted around the Temples, to produce that gloom that impresses the
mind
with a religious awe.
The very word mystery, according to Demetrius Phalereus, was a
metaphorical
expression that denoted the secret awe which darkness and gloom inspired.
The
night was almost always the time fixed for their celebration ; and they
were
ordinarily termed nocturnal ceremonies. Initiations into the Mysteries of
Samothrace tookplace at night ; as did those of Isis, of which Apuleius
speaks.
Euripides makes Bacchus say, that his Mysteries were celebrated at night,
because there is in night something august and imposing. Nothing excites
men's
curiosity so much as Mystery, concealing things which they desire to know
: and
nothing so much increases curiosity as obstacles that interpose to prevent
them


--- PAGE 670 ---
frown indulging in the gratification of their desires. Of this the
Legislators
and Hierophants took advantage, to attract the people to their sanctuaries,
and
to induce them to seek to obtain lessons from which they would perhaps
have
turned away with indifference, if they had been pressed upon them. In this
spirit of mystery they professed to imitate the Deity who hides Himself
from
our senses, and conceals from us the springs by which He moves the
Universe.
They admitted that they concealed the highest truths under the veil of
allegory, the more to excite the curiosity of men, and to urge them to
investigation. The secrecy in which they buried their Mysteries, had that
end.
Those to whom they were confided, bound themselves, by the most fearful
oaths,
never to reveal `them. They were not allowed even to speak of these
important
secrets with any others than the initiated ; and the penalty of death was
pronounced against any one indiscreet enough to reveal them, or found in
the


--- PAGE 671 ---
Temple without being an Initiate; and any one who had betrayed those
secrets,
was avoided by all, as excommunicated.
Aristotle was accused of impiety, by the Hierophant Eurymendon, for
having
sacrificed to the manes of his wife, according to the rite used in the
worship
of Ceres. He was compelled to flee to Chalcis ; and to purge his memory
from
this stain, he directed, by his will, the erection of a Statue to that
Goddess.
Socrates, dying, sacrificed to Esculapius, to exculpate himself from the
suspicion of Atheism. A price was set on the head of Diagoras because he
had
divulged the Secret of the Mysteries. Andocides was accused of the same
crime,
as was Alcibiades, and both were cited to answer the charge before the
inquisition at Athens, where the People were the Judges: Aeschylus the
Tragedian was accused of having represented the Mysteries on the. stage ;
and
was acquitted only on proving that he had never been initiated.
Seneca, comparing Philosophy to initiation, says that the most sacred


--- PAGE 672 ---
ceremonies could be known to the adapts alone : but that man of their
precepts
were known even to the Profane. Such 385 was the case with the doctrine
of a
future life, and a state of rewards and punishments beyond the grave. The
ancient legislators clothed this doctrine in the pomp of a mysterious
ceremony,
in mystic words and magical representations, to impress upon the mind the
truths they taught, by the strong influence of such scenic displays upon the
senses and imagination.
In the same way they taught the origin of the soul, its fall to the earth past
the spheres and through the elements, and its final return to the place of
its
origin, when, during the continuance of its union with earthly matter, the
sacred fire, which formed its essence, had contracted no stains, and its
brightness had not been marred by foreign particles, which, denaturalizing
it,
weighed it down and delayed its return. These metaphysical ideas, with
difficulty comprehended by the mass of the Initiates, were represented by
figures, by symbols, and by allegorical analogies; no idea being so
abstract


--- PAGE 673 ---
that men do not seek to give it expression by, and translate it into,
sensible
images.
The attraction of Secrecy was enhanced by the difficulty of obtaining
admission. Obstacles and suspense redoubled curiosity. Those who aspired
to the
initiation of the Sun and in the Mysteries of Mathias in Persia, underwent
many
trials. `rhey commenced by easy tests and arrived by degrees at those that
were
most cruel, in which the life of the candidate was often endangered.
Gregory
Nazianzen terms them tortures and mystic punishments. No one call be
initiated,
says Suidas, until after he has proven, by the most terrible trials, that he
possesses a virtuous soul, exempt from the sway of every passion, and at it
were impassible. There were twelve principal tests; and some make the
number
larger.
The trials of the Eleusinian initiations were not so terrible ; but they were
severe ; and the suspense, above all in which the aspirant was kept for
several


--- PAGE 674 ---
years [the memory of which is retained in Masonry by the ages of those of
the
different Degrees ], or the interval between admission to the inferior and
initiation in the great Mysteries, was a species of torture to the curiosity
which it was desired to excite. Thus the Egyptian Priests tried Pythagoras
before admitting him to know the secrets of the sacred science. He
succeeded,
by his incredible patience and the courage with which he surmounted all
obstacles, in obtaining admission to their society and receiving their
lessons.
Among the Jews, the Essenes admitted none among them, until they had
passed the
tests or several Degrees.
By initiation, those who before were fellow-citizens only, became
brothers,
connected by a closer bond than before, by means. of a religious fraternity,
which, bringing men nearer together, united them more strongly : and the
weak
and the poor could more readily appeal for assistance to the powerful and
the
wealthy, with whom religious association gave them a closer fellowship.


--- PAGE 675 ---
The Initiate was regarded as the favorite of the Gods. For him alone
Heaven
opened its treasures. Fortunate during life, he could, by virtue and the
favor
of Heaven, promise himself after death an eternal felicity.
The Priests of the Island of Samothrace promised favorable winds and
prosperous voyages to those who wer initiated. It was promised them that
the
CABIRI, and Castor and Pollux, the Dioscuri, should appear to them when
the
storm raged, and give them calms and smooth seas: and the Scholiast of
Aristophanes says that those initiated in the Mysteries there were just
men,
who were privileged to escape from great evils and tempests.
The Initiate in the Mysteries of Orpheus, after he was purified, was
considered as released from the empire of evil, and transferred to a
condition
of life which gave him the happiest hopes. "I have emerged from evils'? he
was
made to say, “and have attained good." Those initiated in the Mysteries of
Eleusis believed that the Sun blazed with a pure splendor for them alone.
And,


--- PAGE 676 ---
as we see in the case of Pericles, they flattered themselves that Ceres and
Proserpine inspired them and gave them wisdom and counsel.
Initiation dissipated errors and banished misfortune and after having filled
the heart of man with joy during life, it gave him the most blissful hopes
at
the moment of da We owe it to the Goddesses of Eleusis, says Socrates,
that we
do not lead the wild life of the earliest men : and to them are due the
flattering hopes which initiation gives us for the moment of death and for
all
eternity. The benefit which we reap from these august ceremonies, says
Aristides, is not only present joy, a deliverance and enfranchisement from
the
old ills ; but also the sweet hope which we have in` death of passing to a
more
fortunate state. And Theon says that participation of the Mysteries is the
finest of all things, and the source of the greatest blessings. The happiness
promised there was not limited to this mortal life ; but it extended beyond
the
grave. There a new life was to commence, during which the Initiate was to
enjoy


--- PAGE 677 ---
a bliss without alloy and without limit. The Corybantes promised eternal
life
to the Initiates of the Mysteries of Cybele and Atys.
Apuleius represents Lucius, while still in the form of an ass, as addressing
his prayers to Isis, whom be speaks of as the same as Ceres, Venus, Diana,
and
Proserpine, and as illuminating the walls of many cities simultaneously
with
her feminine lustre, and substituting her quivering light for the bright rays
of the Sun. She appears to him in his vision as a beautiful female, "over
whose
divine neck her long thick hair hung in graceful ringlets" Addressing him,
she
says, "The parent of Universal nature attends thy call. The mistress of the
Elements, initiative germ of generations, Supreme of Deities, Queen of
departed
spirits, first inhabitant of Heaven, and uniform type of all the Gods and
Goddesses, propitiated by thy prayers, is with thee. She governs with her
nod
the luminous heights of the firmament, the salubrious breezes of the
ocean; the


--- PAGE 678 ---
silent deplorable depths of the shades below ; one Sole Divintiy under
mazy
forms, worshipped by the different nations of the Earth under many titles,
and
with various a religious rites."
Directing him how to proceed, at her festival, to re-obtain his human
shape,
she says : "Throughout the entire course of the remainder of thy life, until
the very last breath has vanished from thy lips, thou art devoted to my
service
Under my protection will thy life be happy and glorious: and when, thy.
days
being spent, thou shall descend to the shades below, and inhabit
the Elysian fields, there also, even in the subterranean hemisphere, shall
thou
pay frequent worship fo me, thy propitious patron : and yet further : if
through sedulous obedience, religious devotion to my ministry, and
inviolable
chastity, thou shall prove thyself a worthy object of divine favor, then
shall
thou fell the influence of the power that I alone possess. The number of
thy


--- PAGE 679 ---
days shall be prolonged beyond the ordinary decrees of fate." In the
procession
of the festival, Lucius saw the image of the Goddess, on either side of
which
were female attendants, that, "with ivory combs in their hands, made
believe,
by the motion of their arms and the divesting of their fingers, to comb and
ornament the Goddess' royal hair." Afterward, clad in linen robes, came
the
initiated, "The hair of the women was moistened by perfume, and
enveloped in a transparent covering; but the men, terrestrial stars, as it
were, of the great religion, were thoroughly shaven, and their bald heads
shone
exceedingly." Afterward came the Priests, in robes of white linen. The
first
bore a lamp in the form of a boat, emitting flame from an orifice in the
middle
: the second, a small altar : the third, a golden palmtree : and the fourth
displayed the figure of a left hand, the palm open and expanded,
"representing
thereby a symbol of equity and fair-dealing, of which the left hand, as
slower


--- PAGE 680 ---
than the right hand, and more void of skill and craft, is therefore an
appropriate emblem."
After Lucius had, by the grace of Isis, recovered his human form, the
Priest
said to him, "Calamity hath no hold on those whom our Goddess hath
chosen for
her service, and whom her majesty hath vindicated." And the people
declared
that he was fortunate to be "thus after a manner born again, and at once
betrothed to the service of the Holy Ministry."
When he urged the Chief Priest to initiate him, he was answered that there
was
not "a single one among the initiated, of a mind so degraded, or so bent on
his
own destruction, as, without receiving a special command from Isis, to
dare to
undertake her ministry rashly and sacrilegiously, and thereby commit an
act
certain to bring upon himself a dreadful injury." "For" continued the Chief
Priest,.” the gates of the shades below, and the care of our life being in the
hands of the Goddess,-the ceremony of initiation into the Mysteries is, as
it


--- PAGE 681 ---
were, to suffer death, with the precarious chance of resuscitation.
Wherefore
the Goddess, in the wisdom of her divinity, hath been accustomed to select
as
persons to whom the secrets of her religion can with propriety be
entrusted,
those who, standing as it were on the utmost limit of the course of life
they
have completed, may through her Providence be in a manner born again,
and
commence the career of a new existence." When he was finally to be
initiated,
he was conducted to the nearest baths, and after having bathed, the Priest
first solicited forgiveness of the Gods, and then sprinkled him all over
with
the clearest and purest water, and conducted him back to the Temple;
"where,"
says Apuleius, "after giving me some instruction, that mortal tongue is not
permitted t0 reveal, he bade me for the succeeding ten days restrain my
appetite, eat no animal food, and drink no wine."
These ten days elapsed, the Priest led him into the inmost recesses of the


--- PAGE 682 ---
Sanctuary. "And here, studious reader," he continues "peradventure thou
wilt be
suffciently anxious to know all that was said and done, which, were it
lawful
to divulge, I would' tell thee; and, wert thou permitted to hear, thou
shouldst
know. Nevertheless, although the disclosure would affix the penalty of
rash
curiosity to my tongue as well as thy ears, yet will I, for fear thou shouldst
be too long tormented with religious longing, and suffer the pain of
protracted
suspense, tell the truth notwithstanding. Listen then to what I shall relate.
I approached the abode of death; with my foot I pressed the threshold of
Proserpine's Palace. I was transported through the elements, and
conducted back
again. At midnight I saw the bright light of the sun shining. I stood in the
presence of the Gods, the Gods of Heaven and of the Shades below; ay,
stood
clear and worskipped. And now have I told thee such things that, hearing,
thou
necessarily canst not understand ; and being beyond the comprehension of
the


--- PAGE 683 ---
Profane, I can enunciate without committing a crime." After night had
passed,
and the morning had dawned, the usual ceremonies were at an end. Then
he was
consecrated by twelve stoles being put upon him, clothed, crowned with
palmleaves, and exhibited to the people. The remainder of that day was
celebrated as his birthday and passed in festivities; and on the third day
afterward, the same religious ceremonies were repeated, including a
religious
breakfast, "followed by a final consummation of ceremonies."
A year afterward, he was warned to prepare. for initiation into the
Mysteries
of "the Great God, Supreme Parent of all the other Gods, the invincible
Osiris." "For," says Apuleius, "although there is a strict connection
between
the religions of both Deities, AND EVEN THE ESSENCE OF BOTH
DIVINITIES IS
IDENTICAL, the ceremonies of the respective initiations are considerably
different."
Compare with this hint the following language of the prayer of Lucius,
addressed to Isis ; and we may judge what doctrines were taught in the


--- PAGE 684 ---
Mysteries, in regard to the Deity: "O Holy and Perpetual Preserver of the
Human
Race ! ever ready to cherish mortals by Thy munificence, and to afford
Thy
sweet maternal affection to the wretched under misfortune ; Whose bounty
is
never at rest, neither by day nor by night, nor throughout the very minutest
particle of duration; Thou who stretchest forth Thy health-bearing right
hand
over the land and over the sea for the protection of mankind, to disperse
the
storms of life, to unravel the inextricable entanglement of the web of fate,
to
mitigate the tempests of fortune, and restrain the malignant infilences of
the
stars,-the Gods in Heaven adore Thee, the Gods in the shades below do
Thee
homage, tke stars obey Thee, the Divinities rejoice in Thee, the elements
and
the revolving seasons serve Thee! At Thy nod the Winds breathe, clouds
gather,
seeds grow, buds germinate; in obedience to Thee the Earth revolves AND
THE SUN


--- PAGE 685 ---
GIVES US LIGHT. IT IS THOU WHO GOVERNEST THE UNIVERSE
AND TREADEST TARTARUS
UNDER THY FEET."
Then he was initiated into the nocturnal Mysteries of Osiris and Serapis:
and
afterward into those of Ceres at Rome: but of the ceremonies in these
initiations, Apuleius says nothing. Under the Archonship of Euclid,
bastards
and slaves were excluded from initiation ; and the same exclusion
obtained
against the Materialists or Epicureans who denied Providence and
consequently
the utility of initiation. By a natural progress, it came at length to be
considered that the gates of Elysium would open only for the Initiates,
whose
souls had been purified and regenerated in the sanctuaries. But it was
never
held, on the other hand, that initiation alone sufficed. We learn from
Plato,
that it was also necessary for the soul to be purified from every stain: and
that the purification necessary was such as gave virtue, truth, wisdom,
strength, justice, and temperance.


--- PAGE 686 ---
Entrance to the Temples was forbidden to all who had committed
homicide, even
if it were involuntary. So it is stated by both Isocrates and Theon.
Magicians
and Charlatans who made trickery a trade, and impostors pretending to be
possessed by evil spirits, were excluded from the sanctuaries. Every
impious
person and criminal was rejected ; and Lampridius states that before the
celebration of the Mysteries, public notice was given, that none need
apply to
enter but those against whom their consciences uttered no reproach, and
who
were certain of their own innocence.
It was required of the Initiate that his heart and hands should be free from
any stain. Porphyry says that man's soul, at death, should be enfranchised
from
all the passions, from hate, envy, and the others; and, in a word, be as
pure
as it is required to be in the Mysteries. Of course it is not surprising that
parricides and perk jurors, and others who had committed crimes against
God or
man, could not be admitted.


--- PAGE 687 ---
In the Mysteries of Mithras, a lecture was repeated to the Initiate on the
subject of Justice. And the great moral. Lesson of the Mysteries, to which
all
their mystic ceremonial tended, expressed in a single line by Virgil, was to
practice Justice and revere the Deity, -thus recalling men to justice, by
connecting it with the justice of the Gods, who require it and punish its
infraction. The Initiate could aspire to the favors of the Gods, only
because
and while he respected the rights of society and those of humanity. "The
sun,"
says the chorus of Initiates in Aristophanes, "burns with a pure light for us
alone, who, admitted to the' Mysteries, observe the laws of piety in our
intercourse with strangers and our fellow-citizens." The rewards of
initiation
were attached to the practice of the, social virtues. It was not enough to be
initiated merely. It was necessary to be faithful to the laws of initiation,
which imposed on men duties in regard to their kind. Bacchus allowed
none to
participate in his Mysteries, but men who performed to the rules of piety
and


--- PAGE 688 ---
justice. Sensibility, above all, and compassion for the misfortunes of
others,
were precious virtues, which initiation strove to encourage. "Nature," says
Juvenal "has created us compassionate, since it has endowed us with tears.
Sensibility is the most admirable of our senses. What man is truly worthy
of
the torch of the Mysteries; who such as the Priest of Ceres requires him to
be,
if he regards the misfortunes of others as wholly foreign to himself?"
All who had not used their endeavors to defeat a conspiracy,
and those who had on the contrary fomented one; those citizens who had
betrayed
their country, who had surrendered an advantageous post or place, or the
vessels of the State, to the enemy; all who had supplied the enemy with
money;
and in general, all who had come short of their duties as honest men and
good
citizens., were excluded from the Mysteries of Eleusis. To be admitted
there,
one must have lived equitably, and with suffcient good fortune not to be
regarded as hated by the Gods.


--- PAGE 689 ---
Thus the Society of the Initiates was, in its principle, and according to the
true purpose of its institution, a society of virtuous men, who labored to
free
their souls from the tyranny of the passions, and to develop the germ of all
the social virtues, And this was the meaning of the idea, afterward
misunderstood, that entry into Elysium was only allowed to the Initiates :
because entrance to the sanctuaries was allowed to the virtuous only, and
Elysium was created for virtuous souls alone.
The precise nature and details of the doctrines as to a future life, and
rewards and punishments there, developed in the Mysteries, is in a
measure
uncertain. Little direct information in regard to it has corme down to us.
No
doubt, in the ceremonies, there was a scenic representation of Tantalus and
the
judgment of the dead, resembling that which we find in Virgil : but there
is as
little doubt ihat these representations were explained to be allegorical. It
is
not our purpose here to repeat the descriptions given We are only
concerned


--- PAGE 690 ---
with the great fact that the Mysteries taught the doctrine of the soul's
immortality, and that, in some shape, suffering, pain, remorse, and agony,
ever
follow sin as its consequences.
Human ceremonies are indeed but imperfect symbols; and the alternate
baptisms
in fire and iwater intended to purify us into immortality, are ever in, this
world interrupted at the moment of their anticipated completion. Life its a
mirror which reflects only to deceive, a tissue perpetually. Interrupted and
broken, an urn forever fed, yet never ful1.
All initiation is but introductory to the great change of death. Baptism,
anointing, embalming, obsequies by burial or fire, are preparatory
symbols,
like the initiation of Hercules before descending to the Shades, pointing
out
the mental change which ought to prece4e the renewal of existence. Death
is the
true initiation, to which sleep is the introductory or minor mystery. It is
the
final rite which united the Egyptian with his God, and which opens the
same


--- PAGE 691 ---
promise to all who are duly prepared for it.
The body was deemed a prison for the soul; but the latter was not
condemned to
eternal banishment and imprisonment. The Father of the Worlds permits its
chains to be broken, and has provided in the course of Nature the means of
its
escape. It was a doctrine of immemorial antiquity, shared alike by
Egyptians,
Pythagoreans, the Orphici, and by that characteristic Bacchus Sage, "the
Preceptor of the Soul," Silence, that death is far better than life; that the
real death belongs to those who on earth are immersed in the Lethe of its
passions and fascinations, and that the true life commences only when the
soul
is emancipated for its return.
And in this sense, as presiding over life and death, Dionysus is in the
highest sense the LIBERATOR : Since, like Osiris, he frees the soul, and
guides
it in its migrations beyond the grave, preserving it from the risk of again
falling under the slavery of matter or of some inferior animal form, the
purgatory of Metempsychosis ; and exalting and perfecting its nature
through


--- PAGE 692 ---
the purifying discipline of his Mysteries. "The great consummation of all
philosophy," said Socrates, professedly quoting from traditional and
mystic
sources, "is Death: He who pursues philosophy aright, is studying how to
die."
All soul is part of the Universal Soul, whose totality is Dionysus; and it is
therefore he who, as Spirit of Spirits, leads back the vagrant spirit to its
home, and accompanies it through the purifying processes, both real and
symbolical, of its earthly thansit. He is therefore emphatically the Mystic
or
Hierophant, the great Spiritual Mediator of Greek religion.
The human soul is itself demonios a God withers the mind, capable
through its
own power of rivaling the canonization of the Hero, of making itself
immortal
by the practice of the good, and the contemplation of the beautiful and
true.
The removal to the Happy Islands could only be understood mythically;
everything earthly must die; Man, like OEdipus, is wounded from his
birth, his
realm elysium can exist only beyond the grave. Dionysus died and
descended to


--- PAGE 693 ---
the shades. His passion was the great Secret of the Mysteries ; as Death is
the
Grand Mystery of existence. His death, typical of Nature's Death, or of her
periodical decay and restoration, eras one of the many symbols of the
palingenesia or second birth of man.
Man descended from the elemental Forces or Titans [Elohim], who fed on
the
body of the Pantheistic Deity creating the Universe by self-sacrifice,
commemorates in sacramental observance this mysterious passion ; and
while
partaking of the raw flesh of the victim, seems to be invigorated by a fresh
draught from the fountain of unversal life, to receive a new pledge of
regenerated existence. Death is the inseparable antecedent of life; the seed
lies in order to produce the plant, and earth ishelf is rent asunder and dies
at the birth of Dionusos. Hence the significancy of the phallus, or of its
inoffensive substitute, the obelisk, rising as an emblem of resurrection by
the
tomb of buried Deity at Lerna or it Sais.
Dionysus-Orpheus descended to the Shades to recover the lost Virgin of
the


--- PAGE 694 ---
Zodiac, to bring back his mother to the sky as Thyone; or what has the
same
meaning, to consummate his eventful marriage with Persephone, thereby
securing,
like the nuptials of his father with Semele or Danae, the perpetuity of
Nature.
His under-earth office is the depression of the year, the wintry aspect in
the
alternations of bull and serpent, whose united` series makes up the
continuity
of Time, and in whirls, physically speaking, the stash and dark are ever
the
parents of the beautiful and bright.
the Mysteries : the human sufferer was consoled by witnessing the severer
trials of the Gods; and the vicissitudes of life and death, expressed by
apposite symbols, such as the sacrifice or submission of the Bull, the
extinction and re-illumination of the torch, excited corresponding
emotions of
alternate grief and joy, that play of passion which was present at the origin
of Nature, and which accompanies all her changes.
The greater Eleusiniae were celebrated in the month Boedromion, when
the seed


--- PAGE 695 ---
was buried in the ground, and when the year, verging to its decline,
disposes
the mind to serious reflection. The first days of the ceremonial were
passed in
sorrow and anxious silence, in fasting and expiatory or lustral offices. On
a
sudden, the scene was changed : sorrow and lamentation were discarded,
the glad
name of Bacchus passed from mouth to mouth, the image of the God,
crowned with
myrtle and bearing a lighted torch, was borne in ,joyful procession from
the
Ceramicus to Eleusis, where, during thee ensuing night, the initiation was
completed by an imposing revelation. The first scene was in the paonaos,
or
outer court of the sacred enclosure, where amidst utter darkness, or while
the
meditating God, the star illuminating the Nocturnal Mystery, alone carried
an
unextinguished torch, the candidates were overawed with terrific sounds
and
noises, while they painfully groped their way, as in the gloomy cavern of
the
soul's sub lunar migration ; a scene justly compared to the passage of the


--- PAGE 696 ---
Valley of the Shadow of Death. For by the immutable law exemplified in
the
trials of Psyche, man must pass through the terrors of the under-world,
before
he can reach the height of Heaven. At length the gates of the adytum were
thrown open, a supernatural light streamed from the illuminated statue 395
of the Goddess, and enchanting sights and sounds, mingled with songs and
dances, exalted the communicant to a rapture of supreme felicity,
realizing, as
far as sensuous imagery could depict, the anticipated reunion with the
Gods.
In the dearth of direct evidence as to the detail of the ceremonies enacted,
or of the meanings connected with them, their tendency must be inferred
from
the characteristics of the contemplated deities with their accessory
symbols
and mythi, or from direct testimony as to the value of the
Mysteries generally. The ordinary phenomena of vegetation, the death of
the
seed in
giving birth to the plant, connecting the sublimest hopes with the plainest


--- PAGE 697 ---
occurrences, was the simple yet beautiful formula assumed by the great
mystery
in almost all religions, from the Zend-Avesta to the Gospel. As Proserpine,
the
divine power is as the seed decaying and destroyed; as Artemis, she is the
principle of its destruction ; but Artemis Proserpine is also Core Soteria,
the
Saviour, who leads the Spirits of Hercules and Hyacinthus to Heaven.
Many other
emblems were employed in the Mysteries,-as the dove, the myrtle-wreath,
and
others, all significant of life rising. out of death, and of the equivocal
condition of dying yet immortal man.
The horrors and punishments of Tantalus, as described in the Phaedo and
the
AEneid, with a11 the ceremonies of the judgments of Minos, Eacus, and
Rhadamanthus, were represented, sometimes more and sometimes less
fully, in the
Mysteries; in order to impress upon the minds of the Initiates this great
lesson,-that we should be ever prepared to appear before the Supreme
Judge,
with a heart pure and spotless ; as Socrates teaches in the Gorgias. For the


--- PAGE 698 ---
soul stained with crimes, he says, to descend to the Shades, is the bitterest
ill. To adhere to Justice and Wisdom, Plato holds, is our duty, that we may
some day take that lofty road that leads toward the heavens, and avoid
most of
. the evils to which the soul is exposed in its subterranean journey of a
thousand years. And so in the Phaedo, Socrates teaches that we should
seek here
below to free our soul of its passions, in order to be ready to enter our
appearance, whenever Destiny summons us to the Shades.
Thus the Mysteries inculcated a great moral truth, veiled with a fable of
huge
proportions and the appliances of an impressive spectacle, to ,which,
exhibited
in the sanctuaries art and natural magic lent all they had that was
imposing.
They sought to strengthen men against the horrors of death and the fearful
idea
of utter annihilation. Death, says the author of the dialogue, entitled
Axiochus, included in the works of Plato, is but a passage to a happier
state;
but one must have lived well, to attain that most fortunate result. So that
the


--- PAGE 699 ---
doctrine of the immortality of the soul was consoling to the virtuous and
religious man alone; while to all others it came with menaces and despair,
surrounding them with" terrors and alarms that disturbed their repose
during
all their life.
For the material horrors of Tantalus, allegorical to the Initiate, were real
to the mass of the Profane ; nor in latter times, did, perhaps many
Iiiitiates
read rightly the allebaory. The triple-walled prison, which the condemned
soul
first met, round which swelled and surged the fiery waves of Phlegethon,
wherein rolled roaring, huge, blazing rocks ; the great gate with columns
of
adamant, which none save the Gods could crush; Tisiphone, their warder,
with
her bloody robes ; the lash resounding on the mangled bodies of the
miserable
unfortunates, their plaintive groans, mingled in horrid 'harmony with the
clashing of their chains; the Furies, lashing the guilty with their snakes;
the
awful abyss where Hydra howls with its hundred heads, greedy to devour;
Tityus,


--- PAGE 700 ---
prostrate, and his entrails fed upon by the cruel vulture; Sisyphus, ever
rolling his rock; Ixion on his wheel; Tantalus tortured by eternal thirst and
hunger, in the midst of water and with delicious fruits touching his head ;
the
daughters, of Danaus at their eternal, fruitless task ; beasts biting and
venomous reptiles stinging ; and devouring flame eternally consuming
bodies
ever renewed in endless agony; all these sternly impressed upon the people
the
terrible consequences of sin and vice, and urged them to pursue the paths
of
honesty and virtue.
And if , in the ceremonies of the Mysteries, these material horrors were
explained to the Initiates as mere symbols of the unimaginable torture,
remorse, and agony that would rend the immaterial soul and rack the
immortal
spirit, they were feeble and insufficient in the same mode and measure
only, as
all material images and symbols fall short of that which is beyond the
cognizance of our senses : and the grave Hierophant, the imagery, the


--- PAGE 701 ---
paintings, the dramatic horrors, the funeral sacrifices, the august
rnysteries,
the solemn silence of the sanctuaries, were none the less impressive,
because
they were known to be but symbols, that` with material shows and images
made
the imagination to be the teacher of the intellect.
expiation; and the tests of water, air, and flre were represented ; by means
of which, during the march of many years, the soul could be purified, and
rise
toward the ethereal regions ; that ascent being more or less tedious and
laborious, according as each soul was more or less clogged by the gross
impediments ,of its sins and vices. Herein was shadowed forth, (how
distinctly
taught the Initiates we know not), the doctrine that pain and sorrow,
misfortune and remorse, are the inevitable consequences that flow from
sin and
vice, as effect flows from cause; that by each sin and every act of vice the
soul drops back and loses ground in its advance toward perfection : and
that
the ground so, lost is and will be in reality never so recovered as that the


--- PAGE 702 ---
sin shall be as if it never had been committed; but that throughout all the
eternity of its existence', each soul shall be conscious that every act of
vice
or baseness it did on earth has made the distance greater between itself
and
ultimate perfection.
We see this truth glimmering in the doctrine, taught in the Mysteries, that
though slight and ordinary offences could be expiated by penances,
repentance,
acts of beneficence, and prayers, grave crimes were mortal sins, beyond
the
reach of all such remedies. Eleusis closed her gates against Nero: and the
Pagan Priests told Constantine that among all their modes of expiation
there
was none so potent as could wash from his soul the dark spots left by the
murder of his wife, and his multiplied perjuries and assassinations.
The object of the ancient initiations being to ameliorate mankind and to
perfect the intellectual part of man, the nature of the human soul, its
origin,
its destination, its relations to the body and to universal nature, all formed
part of the mystic science; and to them in part the lessons given to the


--- PAGE 703 ---
Initiate were directed. For it was believed that initiation tended to his
perfection, and to preventing ,the divine part within him, overloaded with,
matter gross and earthy, from being plunged into gloom, and impeded in
its
return to the Deity. The soul, with them, was not a mere conception or
abstraction ; but a reality including in itself life and thought; or, rather,
of whose essence it was to live and think. It was material ; but not brute,
inert, inactive, lifeless, motionless, formless, lightless matter. -It was held
to be active, reasoning, thinking; its natural home in the highest regions of
the Universe, whence it descended to illuminate, give form and movement
to,
vivify, animate, and carry with itself the baser matter; and whither it
unceasingly tends to reascend, when and as soon as it can free itself from
its
connection with that matter. From that substance, divine, infinitely .
delicate
and active, essentially luminous, the souls of men were formed, and by it
alone, uniting with and organizing their bodies, men lived.
This was the doctrine of Pythagoras, who learned it when he received the


--- PAGE 704 ---
Egyptian Mysteries : and it was the doctrine of all who, by means of the
ceremonial of initiation, thought to purify the soul. Virgil makes the spirit
of Archives teach it to AEneas: and all the expiations and lustrations vised
in
the 113`steries were but symbols of those intellectual olies by which the
soul
was to be purged of its vice-spots and stains, and freed of the
encumbrance of
its earthly prison, so that it might rise unimpeded to the source from
which it
came.
Hence sprung the doctrine of the transmigration of souls; which
Pythagoras
taught as an allegory, and those who came after him received literally.
Plato,
like him, drew, his doctrines from the East and the Mysteries, and
undertook to
translate the language of the symbols used there, into that of Philosophy ;
and
to prove by argument and philosophical deduction, what, felt by the
consciousness, the Mysteries taught by Symbols as an indisputable fact,-
the


--- PAGE 705 ---
immortality of the soul. Cicero did the same ; and followed the Mysteries
in
teaching that the Gods were but mortal men, who for their great virtues
and
signal services had deserved that their souls should, after death, be raised
to
that lofty rank.
It being taught in the Mysteries, either by way of allegory, the meaning of
which was not made known except to a select few, or, perhaps only at a
later
day, as an actual reality, that the souls of the vicious dead passed into the
bodies of those animals to whose nature their vices had most affinity, it
was
also taught that the soul could avoid these transmigrations, often
successive
and numerous, by the practice of virtue, which would acquit it of thrum,
free
it from the circle of successive generations, and restore it at once to its
source. Hence nothing was so ardently prayed far by the Initiates, says
Proclus, as this happy fortune, which, delivering them from the empire of
Evil,


--- PAGE 706 ---
would restore them to their true life, and conduct them to the place of
final
rest. To this doctrine probably referred those figures of animals and
monsters
which were exhibited to the Initiate, before allowing him to see the sacred
light for which he sighed., Plato says, that souls will not reach the term of
their ills, until the revolutions of the world have restored them to their
primitive condition, and purified them from the stains which they have
contracted by the contagion of fire, earth, and air. And he held that they
could not be allowed to enter Heaven, until they had distinguished
themselves
by the practice of virtue in some one of three several bodies. The
Manicheans
allowed five: Pindar, the same. number as Plato; as did the Jews. And
Cicero
says, that the ancient soothsayers, and the interpolators of the will of the
Gods, in their religious ceremonies and initiations, taught that we expiate
here below the crimes committed in a prior life ; and for that are born. It
was
taught in these Mysteries, that the soul passes' through several states, and
that the pains and sorrows of this life are an expiation of prior faults.


--- PAGE 707 ---
This doctrine of transmigration of souls obtained, as Porphyry informs us,
among the Persians and Magi. It was held in the East and the West, and
that
from the remotest antiquity. Herodotus found, it among the Egyptians, who
made
the term of the circle of migrations from one human body, through
animals,
fishes, and birds, to another human body,' three thousand years.
Empedocles
even held that souls went into plants Of these, the laurel was the noblest,
as
of animals the lion; both being consecrated to the Sun, to which, it was
held
in the Orient, virtuous souls were to return. The Curds, the Chinese, the
Cabbalists, all held the same doctrine. So Origin held, and the Bishop
Synesius, the latter of whom had been initiated, and who thus prayed to
God :
"O Father, grant that my soul, reunited to the light, may not be plunged
again
into the defilements of earth," So the Gnostics held; and even the
Disciples of
Christ inquired if the man who was born blind, was not so punished for
some sin


--- PAGE 708 ---
that he had committed before his birth.
Virgil, in the celebrated allegory in which he develops the doctrines taught
in the Mysteries, enunciated the doctrine, held by" most of the ancient
philosophers, of the pre-existence of `souls, in the eternal fire from which
they emanate; that fire which animates the stars, and circulates in every
part
of Nature: and the purifications of the soul, by fire, water, and air, of
which
he speaks, and which three modes were employed in the Mysteries of
Bacchus,
were symbols of the passage of the soul into different bodies.
The relations of the human soul with the rest of nature were a chief object
of
the science of the Mysteries. The man was there brought face to face with
entire nature, The world, and the spherical envelope that surrounds it,
were
represented by a mystic egg, by the side of the image of the Sun-God
whose
Mysteries were celebrated. The famous Orphic egg was consecrated to
Bacchus in
his Mysteries. It was, says Plutarch, an. image of the Universe, which,


--- PAGE 709 ---
engenders everything, and contains everything in its bosom."`Consult,"
says
Macrobius, "the Initiates of the? Mysteries of Bacchus, who honor with
special
veneration the sacred egg." The rounded and almost spherical form of its
shell,
he says, which encloses it on every side, and confines within itself the
principles of life, is a symbolic image of the world ; and the world is the
universal principle of all things.
This symbol was borrowed from the Egyptians, who also consecrated the
egg to
Osiris, germ of Light, himself born, sans Diodorus, from that famous egg.
In
Thebes, in Upper Egypt, he was represented as emitting it from his mouth,
and
causing to issue from it the first principle of heat and light, or the
Fire-God, Vulcan, or Phtha. We find this egg even in Japan, between the
horns
of the famous Mithriac Bull,- whose attributes Osiris, Apis, and Bacchus
all
borrowed.
Orpheus, author of the Grecian Mysteries, which he carried from Egypt `to


--- PAGE 710 ---
Greece, consecrated this symbol : and taught that matter, untreated and
informers, existed from all eternity, unorganized, as chaos ; containing in
itself the Principles of all Existences confused and intermingled, light
with
darkness, the dry with the humid, heat with cold; from which, it after long
ages :eking the shape of an immense egg, issued the purest matter, or First
substance, and the residue was divided into the four elements, From which
proceeded heaven and earth and all things else. This Grand Cosmogonic
idea he
taught in the Mysteries; and thus the Hierophant explained the meaning of
the
mystic egg, seen by the initiates in the Sanctuary.
Thus entire Nature, in her primitive organization, was presented 401 to
him
whom it was wished to instruct in her secrets and initiate in her
mysteries ;
and Clement of Alexandria might well say that initiation was a real
physiology.


--- PAGE 711 ---
So Phanes, the Light-God, in the Mysteries of the New Orphics, emerged
from
the egg of chaos: and the Persians had the great egg of Ormuzd. And
Sanchoniathon tells us that in the Phoenician theology, the matter of chaos
took the form of an egg; and he adds: "Such ,are the lessons which the Son
of
Thabion~ first Hierophant of the Phoenicians,. turned into allegories, in
which
physics and astronomy intermingled, and which he taught to the other
Hierophants, whose duty it was to preside at orgies and initiations ; and
who,
seeking to excite the astonishment and admiration of mortals, faithfully
transmitted these things to their successors and the Initiates."
In the Mysteries was also taught the division of the Universal Cause into
an
Active and a Passive cause; of which two, Osiris and Isis,-the heavens and
the
earth were symbols. These two .First Causes, into which it was held that
the
great Universal First Cause at the beginning of things divided itself, were
the


--- PAGE 712 ---
two great Divinities, whose worship was, according to Varro, inculcated
upon
the Initiates at Samothrace. "As is taught," he says, "in the initiation into
the Mysteries at Samothrace, Heaven and Earth are regarded as the two
first
Divinities. They are the potent Gods worshipped in that Island, and whose
narr4es are consecrated in the books of our Augurs. One of them is male
and the
other female; and they bear the same relation to each other as the soul
does to
the body, humidity to dryness." The Curates, in Crete, had built an altar to
Heaven and to Earth; whose Mysteries they celebrated at Gnossus, in a
cypress
grove.
These two Divinities, the Active and Passive Principles of the
Universe, were commonly symbolized by the generative pasts of man and
woman ;
to which, in remote ayes, no idea of indecency was attached ; the Phallus
and
Cteis, emblems of generation and production, and which, as such,
appeared in


--- PAGE 713 ---
the Mysteries. The Indian Lingam was the union of both, as were the boat
and
mast and the point within a circle: all of which expressed the same
philosophical idea as to the Union of the two great Causes of Nature,
which
concur, one actively and the other passively, in the generation of all
beings :
which were symbolized by what we now term Gemini, the Twos, at that
remote
period when the Sun was in that Sign at the Vernal Equinox, and when
they were
Male and Female; and of which the Phallus was perhaps taken from the
generative
organ of the Bull, when about twenty-five hundred years before our era he
opened that equinox, and became to the Ancient World the symbol of the
creative
and generative Power.
The Initiates at Eleusis, commenced, Process says, by invoking the two
great
causes of nature, the Heavens and the Earth, on which in succession they
fixed
their eyes, addressing to each a prayer. And they deemed it their duty to do


--- PAGE 714 ---
so, he adds, because they saw in them the Father and Mother of all
generations.
The concourse of these two agents of the Universe was termed in
theological
language a marriage. Tertullian, accusing the Valentinians of having
borrowed
these symbols from the Mysteries of Eleusis, yet admits that in those
Mysteries
they were explained in a manner consistent with decency, as representing
the
powers of nature. He was too little of a philosopher to comprehend the
sublime
esoteric meaning of these embalms, which will, if you advance, in other
Degrees
be unfolded to you.
` The Christian Fathers contented themselves with reviling and ridiculing
the
use of these emblems. But as they in the earlier' times created no indecent
ideas, and were worn alike by the most innocent youths and virtuous
women, it
will be far wiser for us to seek to penetrate their meaning. Not only the
Egyptians, says Diodorus Sinuous, but every other people that consecrate
this


--- PAGE 715 ---
symbol (the Phallus), deem that they thereby do honor to the Active ,Force
of
the universal generation of all living things. For the same reason, as we
learn
from the geographer Ptolemy, it was revered among the Assyrians and
Persians.
Proclus remarks that , in the distribution of the Zodiac among she twelve
great
Divinities, by ancient astrology, six signs were assigned to the male and
six
to the female principle.
There is another division of nature, which has in all ages struck all men,
and
which was not forgotten in the Mysteries; that of Light and Darkness, Day
and
Night, Good and Evil ; which mingle with, and clash against, and pursue
or are
pursued by eaeh other throughout the Universe. The Great Symbolic Egg
distinctly reminded the Initiates of this great division of the world.
plutarch, treating of the dogma of a Providence, and of that of the two
principles of Light and Darkness, which he regarded as the basis of the
Ancient


--- PAGE 716 ---
Theology, of the Orgies and the Mysteries, as well among the Greeks as
the
Barbarians,-a doctrine whose origin, according to him, is lost in the night
of
time,-cites, in support of his opinion, the famous Mystic Egg of the
disciples
of Zoroaster and the Initiates in the Mysteries of Mithras.
To the Initiates in the Mysteries of Eleusis was exhibited the spectacle of
these two principles, in the successive scenes of Darkness and Light which
passed before their eyes. To the profoundest darkness, accompanied with
illusions and horrid phantoms, succeeded the most brilliant light, whose
splendor blazed round the statue of the Goddess. The candidate, says Dion
Chrysostomus, passed into a 'mysterious temple, of astonishing magnitude
and
beauty, where were exhibited to him many mystic scenes; where his ears
were
stunned with many voices ; and where Darkness and Light successively
passed
before him. And Themistius in like manner describes the Initiate, when
about to
enter into that part of the sanctuary tenanted by the Goddess, as filled
with


--- PAGE 717 ---
fear and religious awe, wavering, uncertain in what direction to advance
through the profound darkness that envelopes him. But when the
Hierophant has
opened the entrance to the inmost sanctuary, and removed the robe that
hides
the Goddess, he exhibits her to the Initiate, resplendent with divine light.
The thick `shadow and gloomy atmosphere which had enthroned the
candidate
vanish ; he is filled with a vivid and glowing enthusiasm, that lifts his
soul
out of the profound dejection in which it was , plunged ; ant the purest
light
succeeds to the thickest darkness.
In a fragment of the same writer, preserved by Stobaeus, we learn that the
Initiate, up to the moment when his initiation is to be consummated, is
alarmed
by every kind of sight: that astonishment and terror take his soul captive;
he
trembles; cold sweat flows from his body; until the moment when the
Light is
shown him,-a most astoundihg Light,-th? brilliant scene of Elysium, where
he


--- PAGE 718 ---
sees charming meadows overarched by a clear sky, and festivals celebrated
by
dances ; where he hears harmonious voices, and the majestic chants of the
Hierophants; and views the sacred spectacles. Then, absolutely free, and
enfranchised from the dominion of all ills, he mingles with the crowd of
Initiates, and, crowned with flowers, celebrates with them the holy orgies,'
in
the brilliant realms of ether, and the dwelling-place of Ormuzd.
In the Mysteries of Isis, the candidate first passed through the dark valley
of the shadow of death; then into a place representing the elements or
sublunary world, where the two principles clash and contend ; and was
finally
admitted to a luminous region, where the sun, with his most brilliant light,
put to rout the shades of night. Then he himself put on the costume of the
Sun-God, or the Visible Source o'f Ethereal Light, in whose Mysteries he
was
initiated ; and passed from the empire of darkness to that of light. After
having set his feet on the threshold of the palace of Pluto, he ascended to
the
Empyrean, to the bosom of the Eternal Principle of Light of the Universe,
from


--- PAGE 719 ---
which all souls and intelligences emanate.
Plutarch admits that this theory of two Principles was the basis of all the
Mysteries, and consecrated in the religious ceremonies and Mysteries of
Greece.
Osiris and Typhon, Ormuzd and Ahriman, Bacchus and the Titans and
Giants, all
represented these principles. Phanes, the luminous God that issued from
the
Sacred Egg, and Night, bore the scepters in the Mysteries of the New
Bacchus.
Night and Day were two of the eight Gods adored in the Mysteries of
Osiris. The
sojourn of Proserpine and also of Adonis, during six months of each year
in the
upper world, abode of light, and six months in the lower or abode of
darkness,
allegorically represented the same division of the Universe.
The connection of the-different initiations with the Equinoxes which
separate
the Empire of the Nights from that of the Days, and fix the moment when
one of
these principles begins to prevail over the other, shows that the Mysteries


--- PAGE 720 ---
referred to the continual contest between the two principles of light and
darkness, each alternately victor and vanquished. The very object
proposed by
them shows that their basis was the theory of the two principles and their
relations with the soul. "We celebrate the august Mysteries of Ceres and
Proserpine," says the Emperor Julian, "at the Autumnal Equinox, to obtain
of
the Gods that the soul may not experience the malignant action of the
Power,of
Darkness that is then about to have sway and rule in Nature." Sallust the
Philosopher makes almost the same remark as to the relations of the soul
with
the periodical march of light and darkness, during an annual revolution ;
and
assures us that the mysterious festivals of Greece related to the same. And
in
all the explanations given by Macrobius of the Sacred Fables in regard to
the
sun, adored under the names of Osiris, Horus, Adonis, Atys, Bacchus, etc..
we
invariably see that they refer to the theory of the two Principles, Light and
Darkness, and the triumphs gained by one over the other. In April was


--- PAGE 721 ---
celebrated the first triumph obtained by the light of day over the length of
the nights ; and the ceremonies of mourning and rejoicing had, Macrobius
says,
as their object the vicissitudes of the annual administration of the world.
This brings us naturally to the tragic portion of these religious' scenes,
and
to the allegorical history of the different adventures of the Principle,
Light,
victor and vanquished by turns, in the combats waged with Darkness
during each
annual period. Here we reach the most mysterious part of the ancient
initiations, and that most interesting to the Mason who laments the death
of
his Grand Master Khir-Om. Over it Herodotus throws the august veil of
mystery
and silence. Speaking of the Temple of Minerva, or of that Isis who was
styled
the Mother of the Sun-God, and whose Mysteries were termed Isiac, at
Sais, he
specks of a Tomb in the Temple, in the rear of the Chapel and against the
well
; and says, "It is the tomb of a man, whose name respect requires me to


--- PAGE 722 ---
conceal. Within the Temple were great obelisks of stone [phalli], and a
circular lake paved with stones and revetted with a parapet. It seemed to
me as
large as that at Delos" [there the Mysteries of Apollo were celebrated]. "In
this lake the Egyptians celebrate, during the night, what they style the
Mysteries, in which are represented the sufferings of the God of whom I
have
spoken above." . This God was Osiris, put to death by Typhon, and who
descended
to the Shades and was restored to life; of which he had spoken before.
We are reminded, by this passage, of the Tomb of Khir-Om, his death, and
his
rising from the grave, symbolical of restoration of life ; and also of the
brazen Sea in the Temple at Jerusalem. Herodotus adds : "I impose upon
myself a
profound, silence in regard to these Mysteries, with most of which I am
acquainted. As little will I speak of the initiations of Ceres, known among
the
Greeks as Thesmophoria. What I shall say will not violate the respect
which I
owe to religion."


--- PAGE 723 ---
Athenagoras quotes this passage to show that not only the Statue but the
Tomb
of Osiris was exhibited in Egypt, and a tragic representation of his
sufferings; and remarks that the Egyptians had mourning ceremonies in
honor of
their Gods, whose deaths they, Lamented ; and to whom they afterward
sacrificed
as having It is, however, not difficult, combining the different rays of
light
that emanate from the different Sanctuaries, to learn the genius and the
object
of these secret ceremonies. We have hints, and not details.
We know that the Egyptians worshipped the Sun, under the name of Osiris.
The
misfortunes and tragical death of this God . were an allegory relating to
the
Sun. Typhon, like Ahriman, represented Darkness. The sufferings and
death of
Osiris in the Mysteries of the Night were a mystic image of the phenomena
of
Nature, and the conflict of the two great Principle which share the empire
of
Nature, and most infilenced our souls. the sun is neither born, dies, nor is


--- PAGE 724 ---
raised to life: and the recital of these events was but an allegory, veiling a.
higher truth Horus, son of Isis, and the same as Apollo or the Sun, also
died
and was restored again to, life~ and to his mother; and the priests ,of Isis
celebrated these great events by mourning and joyous festival succeeding
each
other.
In the Mysteries of Phoenicia, established in honor of Thammuz or
Adonis, also
the Sun, the spectacle of his death and resurrection was exhibited to the
Initiates. As we learn from Meursius and Plutarch, a figure was exhibited
representing the corpse of a young man. Flowers were strewed upon his
body, the
women mourned for him ; a tomb was erected to him. And these feasts, as
we
learn from Plutarch and Ovid, passed into Greece.
God was lamented, and his resurrection was celebrated with the most
enthusiastic expressions of joy. A corpse, we. learn from Julian , was
shown
the Initiates, representing Mithras dead; and afterward his resurrection
was


--- PAGE 725 ---
announced; and they were then invited to rejoice that the dead God was
restored
to life, and had by means of his sufferings secured their salvation. Three
months before, his birth had been celebrated, under the emblem of an
infant,
born on the.25th of December, or the eighth day before the Calends of
January.
In Greece, in the mysteries of the same God, honored under the name of
Bacchus, a representation was given of his death, slain by the Titans ; of
his
descent into hell, his ,subsequent resurrection, and his return toward his
Principle or the pure abode whence he had descended to unite himself with
matter. In the islands of Chios and Tenedos, his death was represented by
the
sacrifice of a man,` actually immolated.
The mutilation and sufferings of the same Sun-God, honored in Phrygia
under
the name of Atys, caused the tragic scenes that were, as we learn from
Diodorus
Siculus, represented annually in the Mysteries of Cybele, mother of the
Gods.


--- PAGE 726 ---
An image was borne there, representing the corpse of a young man, over
whose
tomb tears were shed, and to whom funeral honors were paid.
At Samothrace, in the Mysteries of the Cabiri or great Gods, a
representation
was given of the death of one if them. This name was given to the Sun,
because
the Ancient Astronomers gave the name of Gods Cabiri, and of Samothrace
to the
two Gods in the Constellation Gemini; whom others term Apollo and
Hercules, two
names of the Sun.. Athenion says that the young Cabirus so slain was the
same
as the Dionysus or Bacchus of the Greeks. The Pelasgi, ancient inhabitants
of
Greece, and who settled Samothrace, celebrated these Mysteries, whose
origin is
unknown : and they worshipped Castor and Pollux as patrons of
navigation.
The tomb of Apollo was at Delphi, where his body was laid, after Python,
the
Polar Serpent that annually heralds the coming of autumn, cold, darkness,
and


--- PAGE 727 ---
winter, had slain him, and over whom. the God triumphs, on the 25th of
March,
on his return to the lamb of the Vernal Equinox.
In Crete, Jupiter Ammon, on the Sun in Aries, painted with the attributes
of
that equinoctial sign, the Ram or Lamb ;-that Ammon who, Martianus
Copella
says, is the same as Osiris, Adoni, Adonis, Atys, and the other Sun-Gods,-
had
also a tomb, and a religious initiation ; one of the principal ceremonies of
whi`ch consisted in clothing the Initiate with the skin of a white lamb.
And in
this we see the origin of the apron of white sheep-skin, used in Masonry.
All these deaths and resurrections, these funeral emblems, these
anniversaries
of mourning and joy, these cenotaphs raised in different places to the Sun-
God,
honored under different names, had but a single object, the allegorical
narration of the events which happened here below-to the Light of Nature,
that
sacred fire from which our souls were deemed to emanate, warring with
matter


--- PAGE 728 ---
and the dark Principle resident therein, ever at variance with the Principle
of
Good and Light poured upon itself by the Supreme Divinity. All these
Mysteries,
says Clement of Alexandria, displaying to us murders and tombs alone, all
these
religious tragedies, had a common basis, variously ornamented : and that
basis
was the fictitious death and resurrection of the Sun, Soul of the World,
principle of life and movement in the Sublunary World, and source of our
intelligences, which are but a portion of the Eternal Light blazing in that
Star, their chief center.
It was in the Sun that Souls, it was said, were purified: and to it they
repaired. It was one of the gates of the soul, through which the
theologians,
says Porphyry, say that it re-ascends toward the home of Light and the
Good.
Wherefore, in the Mysteries of Eleusis, the Dadoukos (the first officer
after
the Hierophant, who represented the Grand Demiourgos or Maker of the
Universe),
who was casted in the interior of the Temple, and there received the


--- PAGE 729 ---
candidates, represented the Sun.
It was also held that the vicissitudes experienced by the Father of Light
had
an influence on the destiny of souls; which, of the same substance as he,
shared his fortunes. This we learn from the Emperor Julian and Sallust the
Philosopher. They are afflicted when he suffers : they rejoice when he
triumphs
over the Power of Darkness which opposes his sway and hinders the
happiness of
Souls, to whom nothing is so terrible as darkness. The fruit of the
sufferings
of the God, father of light and $ouls, slain.by the Chief of the Powers of
Darkness, and again restored to life, was received in the Mysteries. "His
death
works your Salvation ;" said the High Priest of Mithras. That was the great
secret of this religious tragedy, and its expected fruit ;-the resurrection of
a God, who, repossessing Himself of His dominion over Darkness, should
associate with Him in His triumph those virtuous Souls that by their purity
were worthy to share His glory; and that strove not against the divine
force
that drew them to Him, when, He had thus conquered.


--- PAGE 730 ---
To the Initiate were also displayed the spectacles of the chief agents of the
Universal Cause, and of the distribution of the world, in the detail of its
parts arranged in most regular order. The Universe itself supplied man
with the
model of the first Temple reared to the Divinity. The arrangement of the
Temple
of Solomon, the symbolic ornaments which formed its chief decorations,
and the
dress of the High Priest,-all, as Clement of Alexandria, Josephus and Philo
state, had reference to ,the order of the world. Clement informs us that the
Temple contained many emblems of the Seasons, the Sun, the Moon, the
planets,
the constellations Ursa Major and Minor, the zodiac, the elements, and the
other parts of the world.'
Josephus, in his description of the High Priest's Vestments, protesting
against the charge of impiety brought against the He brews by other
nati~ons,
for condemning the Heathen Divinities, declares it false, because, in the
construction of the Tabernacle, in the vestments of the Sacrificers, and in
the


--- PAGE 731 ---
Sacred vessels, the whole World was in some sort represented. Of the
three
parts, he says, into which the Temple was divided, two represent Earth and
Sea,
open to all men, and the third, Heaven, God's dwelling-place, reserved for
Him
alone. The twelve loaves of Shew-bread signify the twelve months of the
year.
The Candlestick represented the twelve signs through which the Seven
Planets
run their courses; and the seven lights, those planets; the veils, of four
colors, the four elements; the tunic of the High Priest, the earth; the
Hyacinth, nearly blue, the Heavens ; the. aphid, of four colors, the whole
of
nature; the gold, Light; the breast-plate, in the middle, this earth in the
center of the world ; the two Sardonyxes, used as clasps, the Sun and
Moon ;
and the twelve precious stones of the breast-plate arranged by threes, like
the
Seasons, the twelve months, and the twelve signs of the zodiac. Even the
loaves
were arranged in two groups of six, like the zodiacal signs above and
below the


--- PAGE 732 ---
Equator. Clement, the learned Bishop of Alexandria, and Philo, adopt all
these
explanations.
Hermes calls the Zodiac, the Grent Tent,-Tabernaculum. In the Royal Arch
Degree of the American Rite, the Tabernacle has four veils, of different
colors, to each of which. Belongs a banner. the colors of the four are
White,
Blue, Crimson, and Purple, and the banners bear the images of the Bull,
the
Lion, the Man, ant the Eagle, the Constellations answering 2500 years
before
our era to the Equinoctial and Solstitial points : to which belong four
stars,
aldebaran, Regulus, Fomalhaut, and Antares. At each of these veils there
are
three words : and to each division of the Zodiac, belonging to each of
these
Stars, are three Signs. The four signs,
Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius, were termed the fixed signs, and are
appropriately assigned to the four veils.
`SO the Cherubim, according to Clement and Philo,- represented the two


--- PAGE 733 ---
hemispheres ; their wings, the rapid course of the firmament, and of time
which
revolves in the Zodiac. "For the Heavens fly;" says Philo, speaking of the
wings of the Cherubim : which were winged representations of the Lion,
the
Bull, the Eagle, and the Man; of two of which, the human-headed, winged
bulls
and lions, so many have been found at Nimrod ; adopted as beneficent
symbols,
when the Sun entered Taurus at the Vernal Equinox and Leo at the Summer
Solstice : and when, also, he entered Scorpio, far which, on account of its
malignant influences, Aquila, the eagle was substituted, at the autumnal
equinox; and Aquarius (the water-bearer) at the Winter Solstice.
So, Clement says, the candlestick with seven branches represented the
seven
planets, like which the seven branches were arranged and regulated,
preserving
that musical proportion and system of harmony of which the sun was the
centre
and connection. They were arranged, says Philo, by threes, like the planets
above and those below the sun; between which two groups was the branch
that


--- PAGE 734 ---
represented him, the mediator or moderator of the celestial harmony. He
is, in
fact, the fourth in the musical scale, as Philo remarks, and Martianus
Capella
in his hymn to the Sun.
Near the candlestick were other emblems representing the heavens, earth,
and
the vegetative matter out of whose bosom the vapors arise. The whole
temple was
an abridged image of the world. There were candlesticks with four
branches,
symbols of the elements and the seasons ; with twelve, symbols of the
signs;
and even with three hundred and sixty, the number of days in the year,
without
the supplementary days. Imitating the famous Temple of Tyre, where were
the
great columns consecrated to the winds and fire, the Tyrian artist placed
two
columns of bronze at the entrance of the porch of the temple. The
hemispherical
brazen sea, supported by four groups of bulls, of three each, looking to the
four cardinal points of the compass, represented the bull of the Vernal


--- PAGE 735 ---
Equinox, and at Tyre were consecrated to Astarte; to whom Hiram,
Josephus says,
had built a temple, and who wore on her head a helmet bearing the image
of a
bull. And the throne of Solomon, with bulls adopting its arms, and
supported on
lions, like those of Horus in Egypt and of the Sun at Tyre; likewise
referred
to the Vernal Equinox and Summer Solstice. Those who in Thrice adored
the sun,
under the name of Saba Zeus, the Grecian Bacchus, blinded to him, says
Macrobius, a temple on Mount Zelmisso, its round form representing the
world
and the sun. A circular aperture in the roof admitted the light, and
introduced
the image of the sun into the body of the sanctuary, where he seemed to
blaze
as in the heights of Heaven, and to dissipate the darkness within that
temple
which was a representation symbol of the world. There the passion, death,
and
resurrection of Bacchus were represented.
So the Temple of Eleusis was lighted by a window in the roof. The
sanctuary so


--- PAGE 736 ---
lighted, Dion compares to the Universe, from which he says it differed in
size
alone; and in it the great lights of nature played a great part and were
myopically represented. The images of the Sun, Moon, and Mercury were
represented there, (the latter the same as Anubis who accompanied Isis) ;
and
they are still the three lights of a Masonic Lodge ; except that for
Mercury,
the Master of the Lodge has been absurdly substituted.
Eusebius names as the principal Ministers in the Mysteries of Eleusis,
first,
the Hierophant, clothed with the attributes of the Grand Architect
(Demiourgos)
of the Universe. After him came the Dadoukos, or torch-bearer,
representative
of the Sun : then the altar-bearer, representing the Moon : and last, the
Hieroceryx, bearing the caduceus, and representing Mercury. It was not
permissible to reveal the different emblems and the mysterious pageantry
of
initiation to the Profane; and therefore we do not. know the attributes,
emblems, and ornaments of these and other officers ; of which Apuleius
and


--- PAGE 737 ---
Pausanias dared not speak.
We know only that everything recounted there was marvelous; everything
done
there tended to astonish the Initiate: and that eyes and ears were equally
astounded. The Hierophant, of lofty height, and noble features, with long
hair,
of a great age, grave and dignified, with a voice sweet and sonorous, sat
upon
a throne, clad in a long trailing robe; as the Motive-God of Nature was
held to
be enveloped in His work and hidden under a veil which no mortal can
raise.
even his name was concealed, like that of the Demiourgos, whose name
was
ineffable.
The Dadoukos also wore a long robe, his hair long, and a bandeau on his
forehead. Callias, when holding that office, fighting on the great day of
Marathon, clothed with the insignia of his office, was taken by the
Barbarians
to be a King. The Dadoukos led the procession of the Initiates, and was
charged
with the purification.


--- PAGE 738 ---
WE do set know the functions of the Epibomos or assistant at the altar,
who
represented the moon. That planet was one of the two homes of souls, and
one of
the two great gates by which they descended and reascended. Mercury was
charged
with the conducting of souls through the two great gates; and in going
from the
sun to the moon they passed immediately by him. He admitted or rejected
them as
they were more or less pure, and therefore the Hieroceryx or Sacred
Herald, who
represented Mercury, was charged with the duty of excluding the Profane
from
the Mysteries.
The same offsets are found in the procession of Initiates of Isis, described
by Apuleius. All clad in robes of white linen, drawn tight across the
breast,
and close-fitting down to the very feet, came, first, one bearing a lamp in
the
shape of a boat; second, one carrying an altar; and third, one carrying a
golden palm-tree and the caduceus. These are ihe same as the three
officers at


--- PAGE 739 ---
Eleusis, after the Hierophant. Then one carrying an open hand, and
pouring milk
on the ground from a golden vessel in the shape of a woman's breast. The
hand
was that of justice: and the milk alluded to the Galaxy or Milky Way,
along
which souls descended and remounted. Two others followed, one bearing a
winnowing fan, and the other a water-vase; symbols of the purification of
souls
by air and water; and the third purification, by earth, was represented by
an
image of the animal that cultivates it, the cow or ox, borne by another
officer.
Then followed a chest or ark, magnificently ornamented, containing an
image of
the organs of generation of Osiris, or perhaps of both sexes ; emblems of
the
original generating and producing Powers. When Typhon, said the
Egyptian fable,
cut up the body of Osiris into pieces, he flung his genitals into the Nile,
where a fish devoured them. Atys mutilated himself, as his Priests
afterward


--- PAGE 740 ---
did in imitation of him; and Adonis was in that part of his body wounded
by the
boar: all of which represented the loss by the Sun of his vivifying and
generative power, when he reached the Autumnal Equinox (the Scorpion
that on
old monuments bites those parts of the Vernal Bull), and descended toward
the
region of darkness and Winter.
Then, says Apuleius, came "one who carried in his bosom an object that
rejoiced the heart of the bearer, a venerable effigy of the Supreme Deity,
neither bearing resemblance to man, cattle, bird, beast, or any living
creature
: an exquisite invention, venerable from the novel originality of the
fashioning; a wonderful, ineffable symbol of religious mysteries, to'be
looked
upon in profound silence. Such as it was, its figure was that of a small urn
of
burnished gold, hollowed very ,artistically, rounded at the bottom, and
covered
all over the outside with the wonderful hieroglyphics of the Egyptians.
The


--- PAGE 741 ---
spout was not elevated, but extended laterally, projecting like a long
rivulet;
while on the opposite side was the handle, which, with similar lateral
extension, bore on its summit an asp, curling its body into folds, and
stretching upward, its wrinkled, scaly, swollen throat."
The salient basilisk, ,or royal ensign of the Pharaohs, often occurs on the
monuments-a serpent in folds, with his head raised erect above the folds.
The
basilisk was the Phoenix of the serpent-tribe; and the vase or urn was
probably
the vessel, shaped like a cucumber, with a projecting spout, out of which,
on
the monuments of Egypt, the priests are represented pouring streams of the
Cruz
ansasta or Tau Cross, and of scepters, over the kings.
In the Mysteries of Mithras, a sacred cave, representing the whole
arrangement
of the world, was used for the reception of the Initiates. Zoroaster, says
Eubulus, first introduced this custom of consecrating caves. They were
also
consecrated, in Crete, to Jupiter; in Arcadia, to, the Moon and Pan; and in
the


--- PAGE 742 ---
Island of Naxos, to Bacchus. The Persians, in the cave where the
Mysteries of
Mithras were celebrated, fixed the seat of . that God, Father of
Generation, or
Demiourgos, near the equinoctial point of Spring, with the Northern
portion of
the world on his right, and the Southern on his left.
Mithras, says Porphyry, presided over the Equinoxes, seated on a Bull the
symbolical animal of the Demiourgos, and bearing a sword. The equinoxes
were
the gates through which souls passed to and fro, between the hemisphere
of
light and that of darkness. The milky way was also represented, passing
near
each of these gates: and it was, in the old theology, termed the pathway of
souls. It is, according to Pythagoras, vast troops of souls that form that
luminous belt. The route followed by souls, according to Porphyry, or
rather
their progressive march in the world, lying through the fixed stars and
planets, the Mithriac cave not only displayed the zodiacal and other
constellations, and marked gates at the four equinoctial and Solstitial
points


--- PAGE 743 ---
of the zodiac, whereat souls enter into and escape from the world of
generational and through which they pass to and fro between the realms of
light
and darkness; but it represented the seven planetary spheres which they
needs
must traverse, in descending from the heaven of the fixed stars to the
elements
that envelop the earth ; and seven gates were marked, one for each. planet,
through which they pass, in descending or returning.
We learn this from Celsus, in Origen; who says that the symbolical image
of
this passage among the stars, used in the Mithriac Mysteries, was a ladder,
reaching from earth to Heaven, divided into seven steps or stages, to each
of
which was a gate, and at the summit an eighth, that of the fixed stars. The
first gate, says Celsus, was that of Saturn, and of lead, by the heavy nature
whereof his dull slow progress was symbolized. The second, of tin, was
that of
Venus, symbolizing her soft splendor and easy flexibility. The third, of
brass,
was that of Jupiter, emblem of his solidity and dry nature. The fourth, of


--- PAGE 744 ---
iron, was that of Mercury, expressing his indefatigable activity and
sagacity.
The ,fifth, of copper, was that of Mars, expressive of his inequalities and
variable nature. The sixth, of silver, was that of the Moon: and the
seventh,
of gold, that of the Sun. This order is not the real order ,of these Planet's
but a mysterious one, like that of the days of the Week consecrated to
them,
commencing with Saturday, and retrograding to Sunday. It was dictated,
Celsus
says, by certain harmonic relations, those of the fourth.
Thus there was an intimate connection between the Sacred Science of the
Mysteries, and ancient astronomy and physics ; and the grand spectacle of
the
Sanctuaries was that of the order of the renown Universe, or the spectacle
of
Nature itself, surrounding the soul of the Initiate, as it surrounded it when
it first descended through the planetary gates, and by the equinoctial and
Solstitial doors, along the Milky Way, to be for the first time immured in
its
prison-house of matter. But the Mysteries also represented to the
candidate, by


--- PAGE 745 ---
sensible symbols, the invisible forces which move this visible Universe,
and
the virtues, qualities, and powers attached to matter, and which maintain
the
marvellous order observed therein. Of this Porphyry informs us.
The world, according to the philosophers of antiquity, was not a purely
material and mechanical machine. A great Soul, diffused everywhere,
vivified
all the members of the immense body of the Universe ; and an
Intelligence,
equally great, directed all its movements, and maintained the eternal
harmony
that resulted therefrom. Thus the Unity of the Universe, represented bv the
symbolic egg, contained in itself two units the Soul and the Intelligence,
which pervaded all its parts : and they were to the Universe,' considered as
an
animated and intelligent being, what intelligence and the soul of life are
to
the individuality of man.
The doctrine of the Unity of God, in this sense, was taught by Orpheus. Of
this his hymn or palinode is a proof ; fragments of which are quoted by
many of


--- PAGE 746 ---
the Fathers, as Justin, Tatian, Clemens of Alexandria, Cyril, and
Theodoret,
and the whole by Eusebius, quoting from Aristobulus. The doctrine of the
Locos
(word) or the Noos (intellect), his incarnation, death, resurrection or
transfiguration ; of his union with matter, his division in the visible
world,
which he pervades, his return to the original Unity, and the whole theory
relative to the origin of the soul and its destiny, were taught in the
Mysteries, if which they were the , great object.
The Emperor Julian explains the Mysteries of Atys and Cybele by the same
metaphysical principles, respecting the demiurgical Intelligence, its
descent
into matter, and its return to its origin: and extends this explanation to
those of Ceres. And so likewise does Sallust the Philosopher, who admits
in God
a secondary intelligent Force, which descends into the generative matter to
organize it. These mystical ideas naturally formed a part of the sacred
doctrine and of the ceremonies of initiations the object of which, Sallust
remarks, was to unite man with the World and the Deity, and the final term
of


--- PAGE 747 ---
perfection whereof was, according to Clemens, the contemplation of
nature, of
real beings, and of causes. The definition of Sallust is correct. The
Mysteries
were practiced as a means of perfecting the souls of making it to know its
own
dignity, of reminding. It of its noble origin and immortality, and
consequently
of its relations with the Universe and the Deity.
What was meant by real beings, was invisible beings, genii, the faculties
or
powers of nature ; everything not a part of the visible world, which was
called, by way of opposition, apparent existence. The theory of Genii, or
Powers of Nature, and its Forces, personified, made part of the Sacred
Science
of initiation, and of that religious spectacle of different beings exhibited
in
the Sanctuary. It resulted from that belief in the providence and
superintendence of the Gods, which was one of the primary bases of
initiation.
The administration of the Universe by Subaltern Genii, to vihom it is
confided,


--- PAGE 748 ---
and by whom good and evil are dispensed in the world, was a consequence
of this
dogma, taught in the Mysteries of Mithias, where was shown that famous
egg,
shared between Ormuzd and Ahriman, each ,of whom commissioned
twenty-four Genii
to dispense the good and evil found therein; they being under twelve
Superior
Gods, six on the side of Light and Good, and six on that of Darkness and
Evil.
This doctrine of the Genii, depositaries of the Universal Provedence, was
intimately connected with the Ancient Mysteries, and adopted in the
sacrifices
and initiations 'both of Greeks and Barbarians. Plutarch says that the
Gods, by
means of Genii, who are intermediates between them and men, draw near
to
mortals in the , ceremonies of initiation, at which the Gods charge them to
assist, and to distribute punishment and blessing. Thus not the Deity, but
His
ministers, or a Principle and Power of Evil, were deemed the authors of
vice
and sin and suffering: and thus the Genii or angels differed in character
like


--- PAGE 749 ---
men, some being good and some evil; some Celestial Gods, Archangels,
Angels,
and some Infernal Gods, Demons and fallen Angels.
At the head of the latter was their Chief, Typhon, Ahriman, or Shaitan, the
Evil Principle ; who, having wrought disorder in nature, brought troubles
on
men by land and sea, and caused the greatest ills, is at last punished for
his
crimes. It was these events and incidents, says Plutarch, which Isis desired
to
represent in the ceremonial ,of the Mysteries, established by her in
memory of
her sorrows and wanderings, whereof she exhibited an image and
representation
in her Sanctuaries, where also were afforded encouragements to piety and
consolation in misfortune. The dogma of a Providence, he says,
administering
the Universe by means of intermediary Powers, who maintain the
connection of
man with the Divinity, was eonsecrated in the hlysteries of the Egyptians,
Phrygians, and Thracians, of the Magi and the Disciples of Zoroaster; as is


--- PAGE 750 ---
plain by their initiations, in which mournful and funereal ceremonies
mingled.
It was an essential part of the lessons given the Initiates, to teach them the
relations of their own souls with Universal Nature, the greatest lessons of
all, meant to dignify man in his own eyes, and teach him his place in the
Universe of things.
Thus the whole system of the Universe was displayed in all its parts to
the eyes of the Initiate ; and the symbolic cave which reps resented it was
adorned and clothed with all the attributes of that Universe. To this world
so
organized, endowed with a double force, active and passive, divided
between
light and darkness, moved by a living and intelligent Force, governed by
Genii
or Angels who preside over its different parts, and whose nature and
character
are more lofty or low i# proportion as they possess a greater or less
portion
of dark matter,-to this world descends the soul, emanation of the ethereal
fire, and exiled from the luminous region above the world. It enters into
this


--- PAGE 751 ---
dark matter, wherein the hostile principles, each seconded by his troops of
Genii, are ever in convict, there to submit to one or more organizations in
the
body which is its prison, until it shall at last return to its place of origin,
its true native country, from which daring this life it is an exile.
But one thing remained,-to represent its return, through the constellations
and planetary spheres, to its original home. The celestial fire, the
philosophers said, soul of the world and of fire, an universal principle,
circulating above the Heavens, in a region infinitely pure and wholly
luminous,
itself pure, simple, and unmixed, is above the world by its specific
lightness.
If any part of it (say a human soul) descends, it acts against its nature in
doing so, urged by an inconsiderate desire of the intelligence, a perfidious
love for matter which causes it to descend, to know what passes here
below,
where good and evil are in conflict. The Soul, a simple substance, when
unconnected with matter, a ray or partscle of the Divine Fire, whose home
is in
Heaven, ever turns toward that home, while united with the body, and


--- PAGE 752 ---
struggles to return thither.
Teaching this, the Mysteries strove to recall man to his divine origin, and
point out to him the means of returning thither. The grist science acquired
in
the Mysteries was knowledge of man's self, of the nobleness of his origin,
the
grandeur of his destiny, and his superiority over the animals, which can
never
acquire this knowledge, and whom he resembles so long as he does not
reject
upon his existence and sound the depths of his own nature.
By doing and suffering, by virtue and piety and good deeds, the soul was
enabled at length to free itself from the body, and ascend along the path of
the Milky Way, by the gate of Capricorn and by the seven spheres. to the
place
whence by many graduations and successive lapses and enthrallments it
had
descended. And thus the theory of the spheres, and of the signs and
intelligences which preside there, and the whole system of astronomy,
were
connected with that of the soul and its destiny; and so were taught in the


--- PAGE 753 ---
Mysteries, in which were developed the great principles of physics and
metaphysics as to the origin of the soul, its condition here below, its
destination, and its future fate.
The Greeks fix the date of the establishment of the Mysteries of Eleusis at
the year 1423 B. C., during the reign of Erechtheus at Athens. According
to
some authors, they were instituted by Ceres herself; and according to
others,
by that Monarch, who brought them from Egypt, where, according to
Diodorus of
Sicily, he was born. Another tradition was, that Orpheus introduced them
into
Greece, together with the Dionysian ceremonies, copying the latter from
the
Mysteries of Osiris, and the former from those of Isis.
Nor was it at Athens only, that the worship and Mysteries of Isis,
metamorphosed into Ceres, were established. The Boeotians worshipped
the Great
or Cabiric Ceres, in the recesses of a sacred grove, into which none but
Initiates could enter; and the ceremonies there observed, and the sacred
traditions of their Mysteries, were connected with those of the Cabiri in


--- PAGE 754 ---
Samothrace.
So in Argos, Phocis, Arcadia, Achaia, Messenia, Corinth, and many other
parts
of Greece, the Mysteries were practiced, revealing everywhere their
Egyptian
origin and everywhere having the same general features; but those of
Eleusis,
in Attica, Pausanias informs us, had been regarded by the Greeks, from the
earliest times, as being as far superior to all the others, as the Gods are to
mere Heroes.
Similar to these were the Mysteries of Bona Dea, the Good Goddess,
whose name,
say Cicero and Plutarch, it was not permitted to any man to know,
celebrated at
Rome frorm the earliest times of that city. It was these Mysteries,
practiced
by women alone, the secrecy of which was impiously violated by Claudius.
They
were held at the Kalends of May; and, according to Plutarch, much of the
ceremonial greatly resembled that of the Mysteries of Bacchus.
The Mysteries of Venus and Adonis belonged principally to Syria and
Phoenicia,


--- PAGE 755 ---
whence they passed into Greece and Sicily. Venus or Astarte was the Great
Female Deity of the Phoenicians, as Hercules, Melkarth or Adoni was their
Chief
God. Adoni, called by the Greeks Adonis, was the lover of Venus. Slain by
a
wound in the thigh inflicted by a wild boar in the chase, the flower called
anemone sprang from his blood. Venus received the corpse and obtained
from
Jupiter the boon that her lover should thereafter pass six months of each
year
with her, and the other six in the Shades with Proserpine; an allegorical
description of the alternate residence of the Sun in the two hemispheres.
In
these Mysteries his death was represented and mounted, and after this
maceration and mourning were concluded, his resurrection and ascent to
Heaven
were announced.
Ezekiel speaks of the festivals of Adonis under the name of those of
Thammuz,
an Assyrian Deity, whom every year the women mourned, seated at the
doors of
their dwellings. These Mysteries, like the others, were celebrated in the


--- PAGE 756 ---
Spring, at the Vernal Equinox, when he was restored to life; at which time,
when they-were instituted, the Sun (Adoni, Lord, or Master) was in the
Sign
Taurus, the domicile of Venus. He was represented with horns, and the
hymn of
Orpheus in his honor styles him "the two-horned God ;" as in Argos
Bacchus was
represented with the feet of a bull.
Plutarch says that Adonis and Bacchus were regarded as one' and the same
Deity; and that this opinion was founded on the great similarity in very
many
respects between the Mysteries of
these two Gods.
The Mysteries of Bacchus were known as the Sabazian, Orphic and
Dionysian
Festivals. They went back to the remotest antiquity among the Greeks, and
were
attributed by some to Bacchus himself, and by others to Orpheus. The
resemblance in ceremonial between the observances established in honor
of
Osiris in Egypt, and those in honor of Bacchus in Greece, the
mythological


--- PAGE 757 ---
traditions of the two Gods, and the symbols used in the festivals of each,
amply prove their identity. Neither the name of Bacchus, nor the word
orgies
applied to his feasts, nor the sacred words used in his Mysteries, are
Greek,
but of foreign origin. Bacchus was an Oriental Deity, worshipped in the
East,
and his orgies celebrated there, long before the Greeks adopted them. In
the
earliest times he was worshipped in India, Arabia, and Bavaria.
He was honored in Greece with public festivals, and in simple or
complicated
Mysteries, varying in ceremonial in various places, as was natural,
because his
worship had come thither from different countries and at different periods,
The
people who celebrated the complicated Mysteries were ignorant of the
meaning
of. many words which they used, and of many embalms which they
revered. In the
Sabazian Feasts, for example [from Saba-Zeus, an oriental name of this
Deity],
the words EVOI, SABOI, Were used, which are in nowise Greek; and a
serpent of


--- PAGE 758 ---
gold was thrown into the bosom of the Initiate, in allusion to the fable that
Jupiter had, in the form of a serpent, had connection with Proserpine, and
begotten Bakchos, the bull ; whence the enigmatical saying, repeated to
the
Initiates, that a bull engendered a dragon or serpent, and the serpent in
turn
engendered the bull, who became Bakchos : the meaning if which was, that
the
bull [Taurus, which then opened the Vernal Equinox, and the Sun in which
Sign,
figuratively represented by the Sign itself, was Bakchos, Dionysus, Saba-
Zeus,
Osiris, etc.], and the Serpent, another constellation, occupied such relative
positions in the Heavens, that when one rose the other set, and vice versa.
The serpent was a familiar symbol in the Mysteries of Bakchos. The
Initiates
grasped them with their hands, as Orphiucus does on the celestial globe,
and
the Orpheo-telestes, or purifier of candidates did the same, crying, as
Demosthenes taunted. AEschines with doing in public at the head of the
women


--- PAGE 759 ---
whom his mother was to imitate, EVOI, SAB0I, HYES ATTE, ANTE,
HYES!
The Initiates in these Mysteries had preserved the ritual and ceremonies
that
accorded with the simplicity of the earliest ages, and the manners of the
first
men. The rules of Pythagoras were followed there. Like the Egyptians,
who held
wool unclean, they buried no Initiate in woolen garments. They abstained
from
bloody sacrifices; and lived on fruits or vegetables or inanimate things.
They
imitated the life of the contemplative Sects of the Orient; thus
approximating
to the tranquility of the first men, who lived exempt from trouble and
crimes
in the bosom of a profound peace. One of the most precious advantages
promised
by their initiation was, to put a man in communion with the Gods, by
purifying
his soul of all the passions that interfere with that enjoyment, and dim the
rays of divine light that are communicated to every soul capable of
receiving
them, and that imitate their purity. One of the degrees of initiation was the


--- PAGE 760 ---
state of inspiration to which the adapts were claimed to attain. The
Initiates
in the Mysteries of the Lamb, at Pepuza, in Phrygia, professed to be
inspired,
and prophesied and it was claimed that the soul, by means of these
religious
ceremonies, purified of any stain, could see the Gods in this life, and
certainly, in all cases, after death. The sacred gates of the Temple, where
the
ceremonies of initiation were performed, were opened but once in each
year, and
no stranger was ever allowed to enter. It. night threw her veil over these
august Mysteries, which could be revealed to no, one. There the sufferings
of
Bakchos were represented, who, like Osiris, died, descended to hell and
rose to
life again; and raw flesh was distributed to the Initiates, which each ate,
in
memory of the death df the Deity, torn in pieces by the Titans.
These Mysteries also were celebrated at the Vernal Equinox; and the
emblem of
generation, to express the active energy and generative power of the
Divinity,


--- PAGE 761 ---
was a principal symbol. The Initiates wore garlands and crowns of myrtle
and
laurel.
In these Mysteries, the aspirant was kept in terror and darkness to perform
the three days and nights; and was then made Afa?ismos , Of Ceremony
representing the death of Bakchos, the same mythological personage with
Osiris.
This was effected by coffining him in a close cell, that he might seriously
reflect, in solitude and darkness, on the business he was engaged in : and
his
mind be prepared for the reception of the sublime and mysterious truths of
primitive revelation and philosophy. This was a symbolic death ; the
deliverance from it, regeneration ; after which he was called difn?s or
twin-born. While confined in the cell, the pursuit of Typhon after the
mangled
body of Osiris, and the search of Rhea or Isis for the same, were enacted
in
his hearing; the initiated crying aloud the names, of that Deity derived
from
the Sanskrit. Then it was announced that the body was found ; and the
aspirant


--- PAGE 762 ---
was liberated amid shoots of joy and exultation.
Then he passed through a representation of Hell and Elysium. "Then," said
an
ancient writer, "they are entertained with hymns and dances, with the
sublime
doctrines of sacred knowledge, and with wonderful and holy visions. And
now
become perfect and initiated, they are FREE, and no longer under restraint
;
but, crowned, and triumphant, they walk up and down the regions of the
blessed,
converse with pure and holy men, and celebrate the sacred Mysteries at
pleasure." They were taught the nature and objects of the Mysteries, and
the
means of making themselves known, and received the name of Epopts;
were fully
instructed ie the nature and attributes of the Divinity, and the doctrine of a
future state; and made acquainted with the unity and attributes of the
Grand
Architect of the Universe, and the true meaning of the fables in regard to
the
Gods of Paganism: the great Truth being often proclaimed, that "Zeus is
the


--- PAGE 763 ---
primitive Source of all things; there is one God; one power, and one rule
over
all." And after full explanation of the many symbols and emblems that
surrounded them, they were dismissed with the barbarous words Kog?
Ompa?,
corruptions of the Sanskrit words, Kanska Aom Pakscha; meaning, object
of our
wishes, God, Silence, or Worship the Deity in Silence.
. Among the emblems used was the rod of Bakchos; which once, it was
said, he
cast on the ground, and it became a serpent; and at another time he struck
the
rivers Orontes and Hydaspes with it,. and the waters receded and he
passed over
dry-shod. Water was obtained, during the ceremonies, by striking a rock
with
it. The Bakchae crowned their heads with serpents, carried them in vases
and
baskets, and at the Evehois, or finding, of the body of Osiris, cast one,
alive, into the aspirant's bosom.
The Mysteries of Atys in Phrygia, and those of Cybele his mistress, like
their


--- PAGE 764 ---
worship, much resembled those of Adonis and Bakchos, Osiris and Isis.
Their
Asiatic origin is universally admitted, and was with great plausibility
claimed
by Phrygia, which contested the palm of antiquity with Egypt. They, more
than
any other people, mingled allegory with their. religious worship, and were
great inventors of fables ; and their sacred traditions as to Cybele and
Atys,
whom all admit to be Phrygian Gods, were very various. In all, as we learn
irom
Julius Firmicus, they represented by allegory the phenomena ,of nature,
and the
succession of physical facts, under the veil of a marvelous history.
Their feasts occurred at the equinoxes, commencing with lamentation,
mourning,
groans, and pitiful cries for the heath of Atys; and ending with rejoicings
at
his restoration to life.
We shall not recite the different versions of the legend of Atys and Cybele,
given by Julius Firmicus, Diodorus, Arnobius, Lactantius, Servius, Saint
Augustine, and Pausanias. It is enough to say that it is in substance this:


--- PAGE 765 ---
that Cybele, a Phrygian Princess, who invented musical instruments and
dances,
was enamored of Atys, a youth; that either he in a fit of frenzy mutilated
himself or was mutilated by her in a paroxysm of jealousy ; that he died,
and
afterward, like Adonis, was restored to life.' It is the Phoenician fiction as
to the Sun-God, expressed in other terms, under other 'forms, and with
other
names.' Cybele was worshipped in Syria, under the name of Rhea.
Lucian says that the Lydian Atys there established her worship and built
her
temple. The name of Rhea is also found in the ancient cosmogony of the
Phoenicians by Sanchoniathon. It was' Atys the Lydian, says Lucian, who,
having
been mutilated, first established the Mysteries of Rhea, and taught the
Phrygians, the Lydians, and the people of Samothrace to celebrate them.
Rhea,
like Cybele, was represented drawn by lions, bearing a drum, and crowned
with
flowers. - According to Varro, Cybele represented the earth. She partook
of the


--- PAGE 766 ---
characteristics of Minerva, Venus, the Moon, Diana, Nemesis, and the
Furies ;
was clad in precious stones ; and her High Priest wore a robe of purple
and a
tiara of gold.
`The Grand Feast of the Syrian Goddess, like that of the Mother of the
Gods at
Rome, was celebrated at the Vernal Equinox. Precisely at that equinox the
Mysteries of Atys were celebrated,' in which thi Initiates were taught to
expect the rewards of a future life, and the flight of Atys from the jealous
fury of Cybele was described, his concealment in the mountains and in a
cave,
and. His self-mutilation in a fit of delirium ; in which act his priests
imitated him. The feast of the passion of Atys continued three days; the
first
of which was passed in mourning and tears; to which afterward clamorous
rejoicings succeeded ; by which, Macrobius says, the Sun was adored
under the
name of Atys. The ceremonies were all allegorical, some of which,
according to
the Emperor Julian, could be explained, but more remained covered with
the veil


--- PAGE 767 ---
of mystery. Thus it is that symbols outlast their explanations, as many
have
done in Masonry, and ignorance and rashness substitute new ones.
In another legend, given by Pausanias, Atys dies, wounded like Adonis by
a
wild boar in the `organs of generation ; a mutilation with which all the
legends ended. The pine tree under which he was said to have died, was
sacred
to him; and, was found upon many monuments, with a bull and a ram near
it; one
the sign of exaltation of the Sun, and the other of that of the Moon.
The worship of the Sun under the name of Mithras belonged to Persia,
whence
that name came, as did the erudite symbols of that worship. The Persians,
adorers of Fire, regarded the Sun as; the most brilliant abode of the
fecundating energy of that element, which gives life to the earth, and
circulates in every part of the Universe, of which it is, as it were, the soul.
This worship passed from Persia into Armenia, Cappadocia, and Cilicia,
long
before it was known at Rome. The Mysteries of Mithras flurished more
than any


--- PAGE 768 ---
others in the imperial city. The worship of Mithras commenced to prevail
there
under Trojan. Hadrian prohibited these Mysteries, on account of the cruel
scenes represented in their ceremonial : for human victims were
immolated
therein, and the events of futurity looked for in their palpitatirig entrails.
They reappeared in greater splendor than ever under Commodus, who with
his own
hand sacrificed a victim to Mithras : and they were still more practiced
under
Constantine and his successors, when the Priests of Mithras were found
everywhere in the Roman Empire, and the monuments of his worship
appeared even
in Britain.
Caves were consecrated to Mithras, in which were collected a multitude of
astronomical emblems ; and cruel tests were required of the Initiates. The
Persians built no temples ; but worshipped upon the summits of hills, in
enclosures of unhewn stones. They abominated images, and made the Sun
and Fire
emblems of the Deity. The Jews borrowed this from them, and represented
God as


--- PAGE 769 ---
appearing to Abraham in a flame of fire, and to Moses as a fire at Horeb
and on
Sinai.
With the Persians, Mithras, typified in the Sun, was the invisible Deity,
the
Parent of the Universe, the Mediator. In Zoroaster's cave of initiation, the'
Sun and Planets were represented overhead, in gems and gold, as also was
the
Zodiac. The Sun appeared emerging from the back of Taurus. Three great
pillars,
Eternity, Fecundity, and Authority, supported the roof; and the whole was
at
emblem of the Universe.
Zoroaster, like Moses, claimed to have conversed face to face, as man with
man, with the Deity; and to have received from Him a system of pure
worship, to
be communicated only to the virtue ous, and those who would devote
themselves
to the study of Philosophy.- His fame spread over the world, and pupils
came to
hi~n from every country. Even Pythagoras was his scholar.
After his novitiate, the candidate entered the cavern of initiation, and was


--- PAGE 770 ---
received on the point of a sword presented to his 425 naked left breast, by
which he was slightly wounded. Being crowned with olive, anointed with
balsam
of benzoin, and other wise prepared, he was purified with fire and. Water,
and
went through seven stages of initiation, The symbol of these stages was a
high
ladder with seven rounds or steps. In them, he went through many fearful
trial's in which darkness displayed a principal part. He saw a
representation
of the wicked in Hides ; and finally emerged from darkness into light.
Received
it a place representing Elysium, in the brilliant assembly of the initiated,
where the Arch magus presided, robed in blue, he assumed the obligations
of
secrecy, and was entrusted with the Sacred Words, of which the Ineffable
Name
of God was the chief.
Then all the incidents of his initiation were explained to him: he was
taught
that these ceremonies brought him nearer the Deity; and that he should
adore


--- PAGE 771 ---
the consecrated Fire, the gift of that Deity and His visible residence. He
was
taught the sacred characters known only to the initiated; and instructed in
regard to the creation of . the world, and the true philosophical meaning of
the vulgar mythology ; and especially of the legend of Ormuzd and
Ahriman, and
the symbolic meaning of the six Amshaspands created by the former :
Bahman, the
Lord of Light; Ardibehest, the Genius of Fire ; Shariver, the Lord of
Splendor
and Metals; Stapandomad, the Source of Fruitfulness; Kkordad, the Genius
of
Water. and Time ; and Amerdad, the protector of the Vegetable World, and
the
prime cause of growth. And finally he was taught the true nature of the
Supreme
Being, Creator of Ormuzd and Ahriman, the' Absolute First 'Cause, styled
Zeruane
Akherene.
In the Mithriac initiation were several Degrees. The first, Tertullian says,
was that of Soldier of Mithras. The ceremony oi reception consisted in


--- PAGE 772 ---
presenting the candidate a crown, supported by a sword. It was placed near
his
head, and he repelled it, saying, "Mithras is my ,crown." Then he was
declared
the soldier of Mithras, and had the right to call the other Initiates fellow
soldiers or companions in arms. Hence the title Companions in the Royal
Arch
Degree of the American Rite.
Then he passed, Porphyry says, through. the Degree of the Lion, the
constellation Leo, domicile of the Sun and symbol of Mithras,. found on
his
monuments. These ceremonies were termed at Rome Leontic and Helium ;
and
Coracia or Hiero-Coracia, of 426 Heavens below the Lion, with the Hydra,
and also appearing on the Mithras monuments.
Thence he passed to a higher Degree, where the Initiates were 'called
Perses
and children of the - Sun. Above them were the Fathers, whose chief or
Patriarch was styled Father of Fathers, or Pater Patratus. The Initiates also
bore the title of Eagles and Hawks, birds consecrated to the Sun in Egypt,
the


--- PAGE 773 ---
former sacred to the God Mendes, and the latter the emblem of the Sun
and
Royalty.
The little island of Samothrace was long the depositary of certain august
Mysteries, and many went thither from all parts of Greece to be initiated.
It
was said to have been settled by the ancient Pelasgi, early Asiatic
colonists
in Greece. The Gods adored in the Mysteries of this island were termed
CABIRI,
an oriental word, from Caber, great. Varro calls the Gods of Samothrace,
Potent
(Gods. In Arabic, Venus is called Caber. Varro says thai the Great Deities
whose Mysteries were practiced there, were Heaven and Earth. These were
but
symbols of the Active and Passive Powers or Principles of universal
generation.
The two Twin, Castor and Pollux, or the Dioscuri, were also called the
Gods of
Samothrace; and the Scholiast of Apollonius, citing Mnaseas, gives the
names of
Ceres, Proserpine, Pluto, and Mercury, as the four Cabiric Divinities


--- PAGE 774 ---
worshipped at Samothrace, as Axieros, Axiocersa, Axiocersus, and
Casmillus.
Mercury was, there as everywhere, the minister and messenger of the Gods
; and
the young servitors of the altars and the children employed in the Temples
were
called Mercuries or Casmillus, as they were in Tuscany, by the Etrusci and
Pelasgi, who worshipped the Great Gods.
Tarquin the Etruscan was an Initiate of the mysteries of Samothrace; and
Etruria had its Cabiri as Samothrace had. For the worship of the Cabiri
spread
from that island into Etruria, Phrygia, and Asia Minor : and it probably
came
from Phoenicia into Samothrace : for the Cabiri are mentioned by
Sanchoniathon;
and the word Caber belongs to the Hebrew, Phoenician, and Arabic
languages.
The Dioscuri, tutelary Deities of Navigation, with Venus, were invoked in
the
Mysteries of Samothrace. The constellation Auriga, or Phaeton, was also
honored
there with imposing ceremonies. Upon the Aeronautic expedition,
Orpheus, an


--- PAGE 775 ---
Initiate of these 427 Mysteries, a storm arising, counseled his companions
to put into Samothrace. They did so, the storm ceased, and they
were initiated into the Mysteries there, and sailed again with the
assurance of a fortunate voyage, under the auspices of the Dioscuri,
patrons
of sailors and navigation.
But much more than that was promised the Initiates. The
Hierophants of Samothrace made something infinitely greater to be the
object of
their initiations ; to wit, the consecration of men to the Deity, by
pledging them to virtue ; and the assurance of those rewards which
the justice of the Gods reserves for Initiates after death. This,
above all else, made these ceremonies august, and inspired
everywhere so great a respect for them, and so great a desire to
be admitted to them. `that originally caused the island to be
styled Sacred. It was respected by all nations. The Romans, when
masters of the world, left it its liberty and laws. It was an


--- PAGE 776 ---
asylum for the unfortunates and a sanctuary inviolable.
There men were absolved of the crime of homicide, if not
committed in a temple. Children of tender age were initiated there, and
invested with the sacred robe, the purple tincture, and the crown of olive,
and
seated upon a throne, like other Initiates. In the ceremonies was
represented the death if the youngest of the Cabiri, slain by his
brothers, who fled into Etruria, carrying with them the chest or
ark that contained, his genitals: and there the Phallus and the
sacred ark were adored.. Herodotus says that the Samothracian
Initiates understood the object and origin of this reverence paid
the Phallus, and why it was exhibited in the Mysteries. Clement
of Alexandria says that the Cabiri taught the Tuscany to revere
it. It was consecrated at Heliopolis in Syria, where the mysteries of a
Divinity having many points of resemblance with. Atys and Cybele were
represented. The Pelasgi connected it with Mercury ;and it appears
on the monuments of Mathias ; always and every-where a symbol of


--- PAGE 777 ---
the life-giving power of the Sun at the Vernal Equinox.
In the Indian Mysteries, as the candidate made his three circuits, he
paused
each time he reached the South, and said, "I copy the example of the
Sun, and follow his beneficent course." Blue Masonry has renamed
the Circuits, but has utterly lost the explanation; which is, that in
the Mysteries the candidate invariably represented the Sun, descending
Southward' toward the reign of. 428 the Evil Principle, Ahriman,
Sita, or Typhon (darkness and winter) ; there figuratively to be slain, and
after a few days to rise again from the dead, and commence to ascend to
the
Northward. Then the death of Sita was bewailed ; or that of Cama, slain by
Iswara, aid committed to the waves on a chest, like Osiris and Bacchus;
during
which the candidate was terrified by phantoms and horrid noises.
Then he was made to personify Vishnu, and perform his avatars, or labors.
In
the first two he was taught in allegories the legend of the Deluge: in the
first he took three steps at right angles, representing the three huge steps


--- PAGE 778 ---
taken by Vishnu in that avatar; and hence the three steps in the Master's
Degree ending at right angles.
The nine avatars finished, he was taught the necessity of faith, as superior
to sacrifices, acts of charity, or mortifications of the flesh. Then he was
admonished against five crimes, and took a solemn obligation never to
commit
them. He was then introduced into a representation of Paradise; the
Company of
the Members of the Order, magnificently arrayed, and the Altar with a fire
blazing upon it, as an emblem of the Deity.
Then a new name was given him, and he was invested in a white robe and
tiara,
and received the signs, tokens, and lectures. A cross was marked on his
forehead, and an inverted level, or the Tau Cross, on his breast. He
received
the sacred cord, and divers amulets or talismans; and was then invested
with
the sacred Word or Sublime Name, known only to the initiated, the
Trilateral A.
U. M.


--- PAGE 779 ---
Then the multitude of emblems was explained to the candidate ; the arcana
of
science hidden under them, and the different virtues of which the
mythological
figures were more personifications. And he thus learne4 the meaning of
those
symbols, which, to the uninitiated, were but a maze of unintelligible
figures. 429 Godhead, the happiness of the patriarchs, the destruction by
the Deluge, the depravity of the heart, and the necessity of a mediator, the
instability of life, the final destruction of all created things, and the
restoration of the world in a more perfect form. They inculcated the
Eternity
of the Soul, explained the meaning of the doctrine of the Metempsychosis,
and
held the-doctrine of a state of future rewards and punishments: and they
also
earnestly urged that sins could only be atoned for by repentance,
reformation,
and voluntary penance; and not by mere ceremonies and sacrifices.
The Mysteries among the Chinese and Japanese came frown India, and
were


--- PAGE 780 ---
founded on the same principles and with similar rites. The word given to
the
new Initiate was O-Mi-To Fo, in which we recognize the original name A.
U. M.,
coupled at a much later time with that of Fo, the Indian Buddha, to show
that
he was the Great Deity Himself.
The equilateral triangle was one of their symbols; and so was the mystical
Y;
both alluding to the Triune God, and the latter being the ineffable name of
the
Deity. A ring supported by two serpents was emblematical of the world,
protected by the power and wisdom of the Creator; and that is the origin
of the
two parallel lines (into which time has changed the two serpents), that
support
the circle in our Lodges.
Among the Japanese, the term of probation for the highest Degree was
twenty
years.
The main features of the Druidical Mysteries resembled those of the
Orient.


--- PAGE 781 ---
The ceremonies commenced with a hymn to the sun. The candidates were
arranged
in ranks of threes, fives, and sevens, according to their qualifications; and
conducted nine times around the Sanctuary, from East to West. The
candidate
underwent many trials, one of which had direct reference to the legend of
Osiris. He was placed in a boat, and sent out to sea alone, having to rely
on
his own skill and presence of mind to reach the opposite shore in safety.
The
death of Hu was represented in his hearing, with every external mark of
sorrow,
while he was in utter darkness. He met with many obstacles, had to prove
his
courage, and expose his life against armed enemies; represented various
animals, and at last, attaining the permanent light, he was instructed by
the
Arch-Druid in regard to the Mysteries, and in the morality of the third
Degree
was a life of seclusion, after the Initiate's children were capable of
providing for themselves ; passed in the forest, in the practice of prayers
and


--- PAGE 782 ---
ablutions, and living only on vegetables. He was then said to be born
again.
The fourth was absolute renunciation of the world, self-contemplation add
self-torture ; by which Perfection was thought to be attained, and the soul
merged in the Deity.
In the second Degree, the Initiate was taught the Unity of the 430 Order,
incited to act bravely in war, taught the great truths of the immortality of
the soul and a future state, solemnly enjoined not to neglect the worship
of
the Deity, nor the practice of rigid morality; and to avoid' sloth,
contention,
and folly.
The aspirant attained only the exoteric knowledge in the first two Degrees.
The third was attained only by a few, and they persons of rank and
consequence,
and after long purification, and study of all the arts and sciences known to
the Druids, in solitude, for nine months. This was the symbolical death
and
burial of these` Mysteries.
The dangerous voyage upon the actual open sea, in a small boat covered
with a


--- PAGE 783 ---
skin, on the evening of the 29th of April, was the last trial, and closing
scene, of initiation. If he declined this trial, he was dismissed with
contempt. If he made it and succeeded, he was termed thrice-born, was
eligible
to all the dignities of the State, and received complete instruction in the
philosophy= cal and religious doctrines of the Druids.
The Greeks also styled the ,Epopihz T?ig??o?, thrice-born; and in India
perfection was assigned to the Yogi who had accomplished many births.
The general features of the initiations among the Goths were the same as
in
all the Mysteries. A long probation, of fasting and mortification, circular
processions, representing the march of the celestial bodies, many fearful
tests
and trials, a descent into the infernal regions, the killing of the God
Balder
by the Evil Principle, Lok, the placing of his body in a boat and sending it
abroad upon the waters ; and, in short, the Eastern Legend, under different
names, and with some variations.
The Egyptian Anubis appeared there, as the dog guarding the gates of
death.


--- PAGE 784 ---
The candidate was immured in the representation of a tomb; and when
released,
goes in search of the body of Balder, and finds him, at length, restored to
life, and seated upon a throne. He was obligated upon a naked sword (as is
still the custom in the Rit Moderne), and sealed his obligation by drinking
mead out of a human skull.
Then all the ancient primitive truths were made known to him, so far as
they
had survived the assaults of time: and he was informed as to the
generation of
the Gods, the creation of the world, the deluge, and the resurrection, of
which
that of Balder was a type. He was marked with the sign of the cross and a
ring
was given 431 to him as a symbol of the Divine Protection; and also as an
emblem of Perfection; from which comes the custom of giving a ring to
the
Aspirant in the 14th Degree.
The point within Circle, and the Cube, emblem of Odin, were explained to
him;
and lastly, the nature of the Supreme God, "the author of everything that


--- PAGE 785 ---
existeth, the Eternal, the Ancient, the Living and Awful Being, the
Searcher
into concealed things', the Being that never changeth ;" with whom Odin
the
Conqueror was by the vulgar confounded : and the Triune God of the
Indians was
reproduced, as Odin, the Almighty FATHER, FREA, (Rhea or Phre), his
wife
(emblem of universal matter), and Thor his son (the Mediator). Here we
recognize Osiris, Isis, and Hor or Horus. Around the head of Thor, as if to
show his eastern origin, twelve stars were arranged in a circle.
He was also taught the ultimate destruction of the world, and the rising of
a
new one, in which the brave and virtuous shall enjoy everlasting happiness
and
delight: as the means of securing which happy fortune, he was taught to
practise the strictest morality and virtue. The Initiate was prepared to
receive the great lessons of all the Mysteries, by long trials, or by
abstinence and chastity. For many days he was required to fast and be
continent, and to drink liquids calculated to diminish his passions and
keep


--- PAGE 786 ---
him chaste. Ablutions were also required, symbolical of the purity
necessary to
enable the soul to escape from its bondage in matter. Sacred butts and
preparatory baptisms were used, lustrations, immersions, lustral
sprinklings,
and purifications of every kind. At Athens they bathed in the Ilissus,
which
thence became a sacred river; and before enteringthe Temple of Eleusis,
all
were required to wash their hands in a vase of lustral water placed near
the
entrance. Clean hands and a pure heart were required of the candidates.
Apuleius bathed seven times in the sea, symbolical of the Seven Spheres
through
which the Soul must reascend ; add the Hindus must bathe in the sacred
river
Ganges.
Clement of Alexandria cites a passage of Meander, who speaks of a
purification
by sprinkling three times with salt and water Sulphur, resin, and the laurel
also served for purification as did air, earth, water, and fire. The Initiates
at Heliopolis, in Syria, says Lucian, sacrificed the sacred lamb, symbol of


--- PAGE 787 ---
Aries, then the sign of the Vernal Equinox ; ate his flesh, as the Israelites.
did at the Passover; and then touched his head and feet to theirs, and knelt
upon the fleece. Then they bathed in warm water, drank of the same, and
slept
upon the ground.
There was a distinction between the lesser and greater Mysteries. One
must
have been for some years admitted to the former,' before he could receive
the
latter, which were but a preparation for them, the Vestibule of the temple,
of
which those of Eleusis were the Sanctuary. There, in the lesser Mysteries,
they
were prepared to receive the holy truths taught in the greater. The Initiates
in the lesser were called simply Mystic, or Initiates ; but those in the
greater, Epopts) or Seers. An ancient poet says that the former were an
imperfect shadow of the latter, as sleep is of Death. After admission to the
former, the Initiate was taught lessons of morality, and the rudiments of
the
sacred science, the most sublime and secret part of which was reserved for
the


--- PAGE 788 ---
Epopt, who saw the Truth in its nakedness, while the Mystic only viewed
it
through a veil and under emblems fitter to excite than to satisfy his
curiosity.
Before communicating the first secrets and primary dogmas of initiation,
the
priests required the candidate to take a fearful oath never to divulge the
secrets. Then he made his vows, prayers, and sacrifices to the Gods. The
skins
of the victims consecrated to Jupiter were spread on the ground, and he
was
made to set his feet upon them. He was then taught some enigmatic
formulas, as
answers to questions, by which to make himself known. He was then
enthroned,
invested with a purple tincture, and crowned with flowers, or branches of
palm
or olive.
We do not certainly know the time that was required to elapse between the
admission to the Lesser and Greater Mysteries of Eleusis. Most writers fix
it


--- PAGE 789 ---
at five years. It was a singular mark of favor when Demetrius was made
Mystic
and Epopt in one and the same ceremony. When at length admitted to the
Degree
of perfection, the Initiate was brought face to face with entire nature, and
learned that the soul was the whole of man; that earth was but his place of
exile; that Heaven was his native country; that for the soul to be born is
really to die; and that death was for it the return to a new life. Then he
entered the sanctuary; but he did not receive the whole instruction at once.
It
continued through several years. There were, as it were, many apartments,
through which be advanced by degrees, and between which thick veils
intervened.
There were Statues and Paintings, says Proclus, in the inmost sanctuary,
showing the forms assumed by the Gods. Finally the last veil fell, the
sacred
covering dropped from the image of the Goddess, and she stood revealed
in all
her splendor, -surrounded by a divine light, which, filling the whole
sanctuary, dazzled the eyes and penetrated the soul of the Initiate. Thus is


--- PAGE 790 ---
symbolized the final revelation of the true doctrine as to the nature of
Deity
and of the soul, and of the relations of each to matter. This was preceded
by
frightful scenes, alternations of fear and joy, of light and darkness; by
glittering lightning and the crashed thunder, and apparitions of specters,
or
magical illusions, impressing at once the eyes and ears. This Claudian
describes, in his poem on the rape of Proserpine, where he alludes to what
passed in her Mysteries. "The temple is shaken," he cries; “fiercely gleams
the
lightning, by which the Deity announces his presence. Earth trembles ; and
a
terrible noise is heard in the midst of these terrors. The Temple of the Son
of
Cecrops resounds with long-continued roars; Eleusis uplifts her sacred
torches
; the serpents of Triptolemus are heard to hiss ; and fearful Hecate appears
afar."
The celebration of the Greek Mysteries continued, according to the better
opinion, for nine days. On the first the Initiates met. It was the day of the


--- PAGE 791 ---
full moon, of the month Boedromion ; when the moon was full at the end
of the
sign Aries, near the Pleiades and the place of her exaltation in Taurus.
The second day there was a procession to the sea, for purification by
bathing.
The third was occupied with offerings, expiatory sacrifices, and other
religious rites, such as fasting, mourning, continence, etc.A mullet was
immolated, and offerings of grain and living animals made. On the fourth
they
carried in procession the mystic wreath of flowers, representing that which
Proserpine dropped when seized by Pluto, and the Crown of Ariadne in the
Heavens. It was borne on a triumphal car drawn by oxen; and women
followed
bearing mystic chests or boxes, wrapped with purple clothe, captaining
grains
of sesame, pyramidal biscuits, salt, pomegranates and the mysterious
serpent,
and perhaps the mystic phallus. On the fifth was the superb procession of
torches, commemorative of the search for Proserpine by Ceres ; the
Initiates
marching by trios, and each bearing a torch; while at the head of the


--- PAGE 792 ---
procession marched the Dadoukos.
The sixth was consecrated to Iakchos, the young Light-God, son of Ceres,
reared in the sanctuaries and bearing the torch of the Sun-God. The chorus
in
Aristophanes terms him the luminous star that lights the nocturnal
initiation.
He was brought from the sanctuary, his head crowned with myrtle, and
borne from
the gate of the Ceramicus to Eleusis, along the sacred way, amid dances,
sacred
songs, every mark of joy, and mystic cries of Iakchos.
On the seventh there were gymnastic exercises and combats, the victors in
which were crowned and rewarded.
On the eighth was the feast of AEsculapius.
On the ninth the famous libation was made for the souls of the departed.
The
Priests, according to Athenaus, filled two vases, placed one in the East
and
one in the West, toward the gates of day and night, and overturned them,
pronouncing a formula of mysterious prayers. Thus they invoked Light and
Darkness, the two great' principles of nature.


--- PAGE 793 ---
During all these days no one could be arrested, nor any suit brought, on
pain
of death, or at least a heavy fine: and no one was allowed, by the display
of
unusual wealth or magnificence, to
endeavor to rival this sacred pomp. Everything was for religion. Such were
the
Mysteries ; and such the Old Thought, as in scattered and widely separated
fragments it has come down to us.
The human mind still speculates upon the great mysteries of nature, and
still
finds its ideas anticipated by the ancients, whose profoundest thoughts are
to
be looked for, not in `their philosophies, but in their symbols, by which
they
endeavored to express the great ideas that vainly struggled for utterance in
words, as they viewed fhe great circle of phenomena,-Birth, Life, Death,
or
Decomposition, and New Life out of Death and Rottenness,- to them the
greatest
of mysteries. Remember, while you study their symbols, that they had a


--- PAGE 794 ---
profounder sense of these wonders than we have. To them the
transformations of
the worm were a greater wonder than the stars; and hence the poor dumb
scarabaeus or beetle was sacred to them. Thus their faiths are condensed
into
symbols or expanded into allegories, which they understood, but were not
always
able to explain in language; for there are thoughts and ideas which no
language
ever spoken by man has words to express
 MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
25º - Knight of the Brazen Serpent ( Part 1 )
XXV  NIGHT OF THE BRAZEN SERPENT. 
This Degree is both philosophical and moral. While it teaches the


--- PAGE 795 ---
necessity of reformation as well as repentance, as a means of 
obtaining mercy and forgiveness, it is also devoted to an explanation of 
the symbols of Masonry; and especially to those which are connected 
with that ancient and universal legend, of which that of Khir-Om Abi is 
but a variation; that legend which, representing a murder or a death, 
and a restoration to life, by a drama in which figure Osiris, Isis and 
Horus, Atys and Cybele, Adonis and Venus, the Cabiri, Dionusos, and 
many another representative of the active and passive Powers of 
Nature, taught the Initiates in the Mysteries that the rule of Evil and 
Darkness is but temporary, and that that of Light and Good will be 
eternal. 
Maimonides says: "In the days of Enos, the son of Seth, men fell into 
grievous errors, and even Enos himself partook of their infatuation. 
Their language was, that since God has placed on high the heavenly 
bodies, and used them as His ministers, it was evidently His will that 
they should receive from man the same
veneration as the servants of a great prince justly claim from the


--- PAGE 796 ---
subject multitude. Impressed with this notion, they began to build 
temples to the Stars, to sacrifice to them, and to worship them, in the 
vain expectation that they should thus please the Creator of all things. 
At first, indeed. they did not suppose the Stars to be the only Deities, 
but adored in conjunction with them the Lord God Omnipotent. In 
process of time, however, that great and venerable Name was totally 
forgotten, and the whole human race retained no other religion than the 
idolatrous worship of the Host of Heaven." 
The first learning in the world consisted chiefly in symbols. The wisdom 
of the Chaldæans, Phœnicians, Egyptians, Jews; of Zoroaster, 
Sanchoniathon, Pherecydes, Syrus, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, of all 
the ancients, that is come to our hand, is symbolic. It was the mode, 
says Serranus on Plato's Symposium, of the Ancient Philosophers, to 
represent truth by certain symbols and hidden images. 
"All that can be said concerning the Gods," says Strabo, "must be by 
the exposition of old opinions and fables; it being the custom of the 
ancients to wrap up in enigma and allegory their thoughts and


--- PAGE 797 ---
discourses concerning Nature; which are therefore not easily 
explained." 
As you learned in the 24th Degree, my Brother, the ancient 
Philosophers regarded the soul of man as having had its origin in 
Heaven. That was, Macrobius says, a settled opinion among them all; 
and they held it to be the only true wisdom, for the soul, while united 
with the body, to look ever toward its source, and strive to return to the 
place whence it came. Among the fixed stars it dwelt, until, seduced by 
the desire of animating a body, it descended to be imprisoned in 
matter. Thenceforward it has no other resource than recollection, and 
is ever attracted to toward its birth-place and home. The means of 
return are to be sought for in itself. To re-ascend to its source, it must 
do and suffer in the body. 
Thus the Mysteries taught the great doctrine of the divine nature and 
longings after immortality of the soul, of the nobility of its origin, the 
grandeur of its destiny, its superiority over the animals who have no 
aspirations heavenward. If they struggled in vain to express its nature,


--- PAGE 798 ---
by comparing it to Fire and Light, - if they erred as to its original place 
of abode, and the mode of it
descent, and the path which, descending and ascending, it pursued 
among the stars and spheres, these were the accessories of the Great 
Truth, and mere allegories designed to make the idea more impressive, 
and, as it were, tangible, to the human mind. 
Let us, in order to understand this old Thought, first follow the soul in 
its descent. The sphere or Heaven of the fixed stars was that Holy 
Region, and those Elysian Fields, that were the native domicile of 
souls, and the place to which they re-ascended, when they had 
recovered their primitive purity and simplicity. From that luminous 
region the soul set forth, when it journeyed toward the body; a 
destination which it did not reach until it had undergone three 
degradations, designated by the name of Deaths; and until it had 
passed through the several spheres and the elements. All souls 
remained in possession of Heaven and of happiness, so long as they 
were wise enough to avoid the contagion of the body, and to keep


--- PAGE 799 ---
themselves from any contact with matter. But those who, from that lofty 
abode, where they were lapped in eternal light, have looked longingly 
toward the body, and toward that which we here below call life, but 
which is to the soul a real death; and who have conceived for it a 
secret desire,- those souls, victims of their concupiscence, are 
attracted by degrees toward the inferior regions of the world, by the 
mere weight of thought and of that terrestrial desire. The soul, perfectly 
incorporeal, does not at once invest itself with the gross envelope of 
the body, but little by little, by successive and insensible alterations, 
and in proportion as it removes further and further from the simple and 
perfect substance in which it dwelt at first. It first surrounds itself with a 
body composed of the substance of the stars; and afterward, as it 
descends through the several spheres, with ethereal matter more and 
more gross, thus by degrees descending to an earthly body; and its 
number of degradations or deaths being the same as that of the 
spheres which it traverses. 
The Galaxy, Macrobius says, crosses the Zodiac in two opposite


--- PAGE 800 ---
points, Cancer and Capricorn, 'the tropical points in the sun's course, 
ordinarily called the Gates of the Sun. These two tropics, before his 
time, corresponded with those constellations, but in his day with 
Gemini and Sagittarius, in consequence of the precession of the 
equinoxes; but the signs of the Zodiac remained unchanged; and the 
Milky Way crossed at the signs Cancer and Capricorn, though not at 
those constellations.
Through these gates souls were supposed to descend to earth and reascend 
to Heaven. One, Macrobius says, in his dream of Scipio, was 
styled the Gate of Men; and the other, the Gate of the Gods. Cancer 
was the former, because souls descended by it to the earth; and 
Capricorn the latter, because by it they reascended to their seats of 
immortality, and became Gods. From the Milky Way, according to 
Pythagoras, diverged the route to the dominions of Pluto. Until they left 
the Galaxy, they were not deemed to have commenced to descend 
toward the terrestrial bodies. From that they departed, and to that they 
returned. Until they reached the sign Cancer, they had not left it, and


--- PAGE 801 ---
were still Gods. When they reached Leo, they commenced their 
apprenticeship for their future condition; and when they were at 
Aquarius, the sign opposite Leo, they were furthest removed from 
human life. 
The soul, descending from the celestial limits, where the Zodiac and 
Galaxy unite, loses its spherical shape, the shape of all Divine Nature, 
and is lengthened into a cone, as a point is lengthened into a line; and 
then, an indivisible monad before, it divides itself and becomes a duad 
- that is, unity becomes division, disturbance, and conflict. Then it 
begins to experience the disorder which reigns in matter, to which it 
unites itself, becoming, as it were, intoxicated by draughts of grosser 
matter: of which inebriation the cup of Bakchos, between Cancer and 
Leo, is a symbol. It is for them the cup of forgetfulness. They assemble, 
says Plato, in the fields of oblivion, to drink there the water of the river 
Ameles, which causes men to forget everything. This fiction is also 
found in Virgil. "If souls," says Macrobius, "carried with them into the 
bodies they occupy all the knowledge which they had acquired of


--- PAGE 802 ---
divine things, during their sojourn in the Heavens, men would not differ 
in opinion as to the Deity; but some of them forget more, and some 
less, of that which they had learned." 
We smile at these notions of the ancients; but we must learn to look 
through these material images and allegories, to the ideas, struggling 
for utterance, the great speechless thoughts which they envelop: and it 
is well for us to consider whether we ourselves have yet found out any 
better way of representing to ourselves the soul's origin and its advent 
into this body, so entirely foreign to it; if, indeed, we have ever thought 
about it at all; or have not ceased to think, in despair.
The highest and purest portion of matter, which nourishes and 
constitutes divine existences, is what the poets term nectar, the 
beverage of the Gods. The lower, more disturbed and grosser portion, is 
what intoxicates souls. The ancients symbolized it as the River Lethe, 
dark stream of oblivion. How de we explain the soul's forgetfulness of its 
antecedents, or reconcile that utter absence of remembrance of its 
former condition, with its essential immortality? In truth, we for the most


--- PAGE 803 ---
part dread and shrink from any attempt at explanation of it to ourselves. 
Dragged down by the heaviness produced by this inebriating draught, 
the soul falls along the zodiac and the milky way to the lower spheres, 
and in its descent not only takes, in each sphere, a new envelope of the 
material composing the luminous bodies of the planets, but receives 
there the different faculties which it is to exercise while it inhabits the 
body. 
In Saturn, it acquires the power of reasoning and intelligence, or what is 
termed the logical and contemplative faculty. From Jupiter it receives the 
power of action. Mars gives it valor, enterprise, and impetuosity. From 
the Sun it receives the senses and imagination, which produce 
sensation, perception, and thought. Venus inspires it with desires. 
Mercury gives it the faculty of expressing and enunciating what it thinks 
and feels. And, on entering the sphere of the Moon, it acquires the force 
of generation and growth. This lunary sphere, lowest and basest to 
divine bodies, is first and highest to terrestrial bodies. And the lunary 
body there assumed by the soul, while, as it were, the sediment of


--- PAGE 804 ---
celestial matter, is also the first substance of animal matter. 
The celestial bodies, Heaven, the Stars, and the other Divine elements, 
ever aspire to rise. The soul reaching the region which mortality inhabits, 
tends toward terrestrial bodies, and is deemed to die. Let no one, says 
Macrobius, be surprised that we so frequently speak of the death of this 
soul, which yet we call immortal. It is neither annulled nor destroyed by 
such death: but merely enfeebled for a time; and does not thereby forfeit 
its prerogative of immortality; for afterward, freed from the body, when it 
has been purified from the vice-stains contracted during that connection, 
it is re-established in all its privileges, and returns to the luminous abode 
of its immortality. 
On its return, it restores to each sphere through which it ascends, the 
passions and earthly faculties received from them: to
the Moon, the faculty of increase and diminution of the body; to 
Mercury, fraud, the architect of evils; to Venus, the seductive love of 
pleasure; to the Sun, the passion for greatness and empire; to Mars, 
audacity and temerity; to Jupiter, avarice; and to Saturn, falsehood and


--- PAGE 805 ---
deceit: and at last, relieved of all, it enters naked and pure into the 
eighth sphere or highest Heaven. 
All this agrees with the doctrine of Plato, that the soul cannot re-enter 
into Heaven, until the revolutions of the Universe shall have restored it 
to its primitive condition, and purified it from the effects of its contact 
with the four elements. 
This opinion of the pre-existence of souls, as pure and celestial 
substances, before their union with our bodies, to put on and animate 
which they descend from Heaven, is one of great antiquity. A modern 
Rabbi, Manasseh Ben Israel, says it was always the belief of the 
Hebrews. It was that of most philosophers who admitted the immortality 
of the soul: and therefore it was taught in the Mysteries; for, as 
Lactantius says, they could not see how it was possible that the soul 
should exist after the body, if it had and not existed before it, and if its 
nature was not independent of that of the body. The same doctrine was 
adopted by the most learned of the Greek Fathers, and by many of the 
Latins: and it would probably prevail largely at the present day, if men


--- PAGE 806 ---
troubled themselves to think upon this subject at all, and to inquire 
whether the soul's immortality involved its prior existence. 
Some philosophers held that the soul was incarcerated in the body, by 
way of punishment for sins committed by it in a prior state. How they 
reconciled this with the same soul's unconsciousness of any such prior 
state, or of sin committed there, does not appear. Others held that 
God, of his mere will, sent the soul to inhabit the body. The Kabalists 
united the two opinions. They held that there are four worlds, Aziluth, 
Briarth, Jezirath, and Aziath; the world of emanation, that of creation, 
that of forms, and the material world; one above and more perfect than 
the other, in that order, both as regards their own nature and that of the 
beings who inhabit them. All souls are originally in the world Aziluth, 
the Supreme Heaven, abode of God, and of pure and immortal spirits. 
Those who descend from it without fault of their own, by God's order, 
are gifted with a divine fire, which preserves them from the contagion of 
matter, and restores them to Heaven so soon as their mission is ended. 
Those who descend through


--- PAGE 807 ---
their own fault, go from world to world, insensibly losing their love of 
Divine things, and their self-contemplation; until they reach the world 
Aziath, falling by their own weight. This is a pure Platonism, clothed 
with the images and words peculiar to the Kabalists. It was the doctrine 
of the Essenes, who, says Porphyry, "believe that souls descend from 
the most subtile ether, attracted to bodies by the seductions of matter." 
It was in substance the doctrine of Origen; and it came from the 
Chaldæans, who largely studied the theory of the Heavens, the 
spheres, and the influences of the signs and constellations. 
The Gnostics made souls ascend and descend through eight Heavens, 
in each of which were certain Powers that opposed their return, and 
often drove them back to earth, when not sufficiently purified. The last 
of these Powers, nearest the luminous abode of souls, was a serpent 
or dragon. 
In the ancient doctrine, certain Genii were charged with the duty of 
conducting souls to the bodies destined to receive them, and of 
withdrawing them from those bodies. According to Plutarch, these were


--- PAGE 808 ---
the functions of Proserpine and Mercury. In Plato, a familiar Genius 
accompanies man at his birth, follows and watches him all his life, and at 
death conducts him to the tribunal of the Great judge. These Genii are 
the media of communication between man and the Gods; and the soul is 
ever in their presence. This doctrine is taught in the oracles of Zoroaster: 
and these Genii were the Intelligences that resided in the planets. 
Thus the secret science and mysterious emblems of initiation were 
connected with the Heavens, the Spheres, and the Constellations: and 
this connection must be studied by whomsoever would understand the 
ancient mind, and be enabled to interpret the allegories, and explore the 
meaning of the symbols, in which the old sages endeavored to delineate 
the ideas that struggled within them for utterance, and could be but 
insufficiently and inadequately expressed by language, whose words are 
images of those things alone that can be grasped by and are within the 
empire of the senses. 
It is not possible for us thoroughly to appreciate the, feelings with which 
the ancients regarded the Heavenly bodies, and the ideas to which their


--- PAGE 809 ---
observation of the Heavens gave rise, because we cannot put ourselves 
in their places, look at the stars with their eyes in the world's youth, and 
divest ourselves of the knowledge
which even the commonest of us have, that makes us regard the Stars and 
Planets and all the Universe of Suns and Worlds, as a mere inanimate 
machine and aggregate of senseless orbs, no more astonishing, except in 
degree, than a clock or an orrery. We wonder and are amazed at the Power 
and Wisdom (to most men it seems only a kind of Infinite Ingenuity) of
the 
MAKER: they wondered at the Work, and endowed it with Life and Force 
and mysterious Powers and mighty Influences. 
Memphis, in Egypt, was in Latitude 29º 5" North, and in Longitude 30º
18' 
East. Thebæ, in Upper Egypt, in Latitude 25º 45' North, and Longitude
32º 
43' East. Babylon was in Latitude 32º 30' North, and Longitude 44º 23' 
East: while Saba, the ancient with Sabæan capital of Ethiopia, was about
in 
Latitude 15º North.


--- PAGE 810 ---
Through Egypt ran the great River Nile, coming from beyond Ethiopia, its 
source in regions wholly unknown, in the abodes of heat and fire, and its 
course from South to North. Its inundations had formed the alluvial lands
of 
Upper and Lower Egypt, which they continued to raise higher and higher, 
and to fertilize by their deposits. At first, as in all newly-settled
countries, 
those inundations, occurring annually and always at the same period of
the 
year, were calamities: until, by means of levees and drains and artificial 
lakes for irrigation, they became blessings, and were looked for with
joyful 
anticipation, as they had before been awaited with terror. Upon the
deposit 
left by the Sacred River, as it withdrew into its banks, the husbandman 
sowed his seed; and the rich soil and the genial sun insured him an 
abundant harvest. 
Babylon lay on the Euphrates, which ran from Southeast to Northwest, 
blessing, as all rivers in the Orient do, the arid country through which it 
flowed; but its rapid and uncertain overflows bringing terror and disaster.


--- PAGE 811 ---
To the ancients, as yet inventors of no astronomical instruments, and 
looking at the Heavens with the eyes of children, this earth was a level 
plain of unknown extent. About its boundaries there was speculation, but
no 
knowledge. The inequalities of its surface were the irregularities of a
plane. 
That it was a globe, or that anything lived on its under surface, or on what
it 
rested they had no idea. Every twenty-four hours the sun came up from 
beyond the Eastern rim of the world, and travelled across the sky, over
the 
earth, always South of, but sometimes nearer and sometimes further from 
the point over-head; and sunk below the
world's Western rim. With him went light, and after him followed 
darkness. 
And every twenty-four hours appeared in the Heavens another body, 
visible chiefly at night, but sometimes even when the sun shone, which 
likewise, as if following the sun at a greater or less distance, travelled 
across the sky; sometimes as a thin crescent, and thence increasing to a


--- PAGE 812 ---
full orb resplendent with silver light; and sometimes more and sometimes 
less to the Southward of the point overhead, within the same limits as the 
Sun. 
Man, enveloped by the thick darkness of profoundest night, when 
everything around him has disappeared, and he seems alone with 
himself and the black shades that surround him, feels his existence a 
blank and nothingness, except so far as memory recalls him the glories 
and splendors of light. Everything is dead to him, and he, as it were, to 
Nature. How crushing and overwhelming the thought, the fear, the dread, 
that perhaps that darkness may be eternal, and that day may possibly 
never return; if it ever occurs to his mind, while the solid gloom closes
up 
against him like a wall! What then can restore him to like, to energy, to 
activity, to fellowship and communion with the great world which God
has 
spread around him, and which perhaps in the darkness may be passing 
away? LIGHT restores him to himself and to nature which seemed lost to 
him. Naturally, therefore, the primitive men regarded light as the
principle


--- PAGE 813 ---
of their real existence, without which life would be but one continued 
weariness and despair. This necessity for light, and its actual creative 
energy, were felt by all men: and nothing was more alarming to them 
than its absence. It became their first Divinity, a single ray of which, 
flashing into the dark tumultuous bosom of chaos, caused man and all 
the Universe to emerge from it. So all the poets sung who imagined 
Cosmogonies; such was the first dogma of Orpheus, Moses, and the 
Theologians. Light was Ormuzd, adored by the Persians, and Darkness 
Ahriman, origin of all evils. Light was the life of the Universe, the friend
of 
man, the substance of the Gods and of the Soul. 
The sky was to them a great, solid, concave arch; a hemisphere of 
unknown material, at an unknown distance above the flat level earth; and 
along it journeyed in their courses the Sun, the Moon, the Planets, and 
the Stars. 
The Sun was to them a great globe of fire, of unknown dimen
sions, at an unknown distance. The Moon was a mass of softer light; the


--- PAGE 814 ---
stars and planets lucent bodies, armed with unknown and supernatural 
influences. 
It could not fail to be soon observed, that at regular intervals the days and 
nights were equal; and that two of these intervals measured the same 
space of time as elapsed between the successive inundations, and 
between the returns of spring-time and harvest. Nor could it fail to be 
perceived that the changes of the moon occurred regularly; the same 
number of days always elapsing between the first appearance of her 
silver crescent in the West at evening and that of her full orb rising in the 
East at the same hour; and the same again, between that and the new 
appearance of the crescent in the West. 
It was also soon observed that the Sun crossed the Heavens in a different 
line each day, the days being longest and the nights shortest when the 
line of his passage was furthest North, and the days shortest and nights 
longest when that line was furthest South: that his progress North and 
South was perfectly regular, marking four periods that were always the 
same, - those when the days and nights were equal, or the Vernal and


--- PAGE 815 ---
Autumnal Equinoxes; that when the days were longest, or the Summer 
Solstice; and that when they were shortest, or the Winter Solstice. 
With the Vernal Equinox, or about the 25th of March of our Calendar,
they 
found that there unerringly came soft winds, the return of warmth, caused 
by the Sun turning back to the Northward from the middle ground of his 
course, the vegetation of the new year, and the impulse to amatory action 
on the part of the animal creation. Then the Bull and the Ram, animals 
most valuable to the agriculturist, and symbols themselves of vigorous 
generative power, recovered their vigor, the birds mated and builded their 
nests, the seeds germinated, the grass grew, and the trees put forth 
leaves. With the Summer Solstice, when the Sun reached the extreme 
northern limit of his course, came great heat, and burning winds, and 
lassitude and exhaustion; then vegetation withered, man longed for the 
cool breezes of Spring and Autumn, and the cool water of the wintry Nile 
or Euphrates, and the Lion sought for that element far from his home in 
the desert.


--- PAGE 816 ---
With the Autumnal Equinox came ripe harvests, and fruits of the tree and 
vine, and falling leaves, and cold evenings presaging wintry frosts; and 
the Principle and Powers of Darkness, pre
vailing over those of Light, drove the Sun further to the South, so that 
the nights grew longer than the days. And at the Winter Solstice the 
earth was wrinkled with frost, the trees were leafless, and the Sun, 
reaching the most Southern point in his career, seemed to hesitate 
whether to continue descending, to leave the world to darkness and 
despair, or to turn upon his steps and retrace his course to the 
Northward, bringing back seed-time and Spring, and green leaves and 
flowers, and all the delights of love. 
Thus, naturally and necessarily, time was divided, first into days, and 
then into moons or months, and years; and with these divisions and the 
movements of the Heavenly bodies that marked them, were associated 
and connected all men's physical enjoyments and privations. Wholly 
agricultural, and in their frail habitations greatly at the mercy of the 
elements and the changing seasons, the primitive people of the Orient


--- PAGE 817 ---
were most deeply interested in the recurrence of the periodical 
phenomena presented by the two great luminaries of Heaven, on 
whose regularity all their prosperity depended. 
And the attentive observer soon noticed that the smaller lights of 
Heaven were, apparently, even more regular than the Sun and Moon, 
and foretold with unerring certainty, by their risings and settings, the 
periods of recurrence of the different phenomena and seasons on 
which the physical well-being of all men depended. They soon felt the 
necessity of distinguishing the individual stars, or groups of stars, and 
giving them names, that they might understand each other, when 
referring to and designating them. Necessity produced designations at 
once natural and artificial. Observing that, in the circle of the year, the 
renewal and periodical appearance of the productions of the earth 
were constantly associated, not only with the courses of the Sun, but 
also with the rising and setting of certain Stars, and with their position 
relatively to the Sun, the centre to which they referred the whole starry 
host, the mind naturally connected the celestial and terrestrial objects


--- PAGE 818 ---
that were in fact connected: and they commenced by giving to 
particular Stars or groups of Stars the names of those terrestrial 
objects which seemed connected with them and for those which still 
remained unnamed by this nomenclature, they, to complete a system, 
assumed arbitrary and fanciful names. 
Thus the Ethiopian of Thebes or Saba styled those Stars under
which the Nile commenced to overflow, Stars of Inundation, or that
poured out water 
(AQUARIUS). 
Those Stars among which the Sun was, when he had reached the Northern
Tropic 
and began to retreat Southward, were termed, from his retrograde motion,
the Crab 
(CANCER). 
As he approached, in Autumn, the middle point between the Northern and
Southern 
extremes of his journeying, the days and nights became equal; and the
Stars among 
which he was then found were called Stars of the Balance (LIBRA). 
Those stars among which the Sun was, when the Lion, driven from the
Desert by


--- PAGE 819 ---
thirst, came to slake it at the Nile, were called Stars of the Lion (LEO). 
Those among which the Sun was at harvest, were called those of the
Gleaning Virgin, 
holding a Sheaf of Wheat (VIRGO). 
Those among which he was found in February, when the Ewes brought
forth their 
young, were called Stars of the Lamb (ARIES). 
Those in March, when it was time to plough, were called Stars of the Ox
(TAURUS). 
Those under which hot and burning winds came from the desert, venomous
like 
poisonous reptiles, were called Stars of the Scorpion (SCORPIO). 
Observing that the annual return of the rising of the Nile was always
accompanied by 
the appearance of a beautiful Star, which at that period showed itself in
the direction 
of the sources of that river, and seemed to warn the husbandman to be
careful not to 
be surprised by the inundation, the Ethiopian compared this act of that
Star to that of 
the Animal which by barking gives warning of danger, and styled it the
Dog (SIRIUS).


--- PAGE 820 ---
Thus commencing, and as astronomy came to be more studied, imaginary
figures 
were traced all over the Heavens, to which the different Stars were
assigned. Chief 
among them were those that lay along the path which the Sun travelled as
he climbed 
toward the North and descended to the South: lying within certain limits
and 
extending to an equal distance on each side of the line of equal nights and
days. This 
belt, curving like a Serpent, was termed the Zodiac, and divided into
twelve Signs. 
At the Vernal Equinox, 2455 years before our Era, the Sun was entering
the sign and 
constellation Taurus, or the Bull; having passed through, since he
commenced, at the 
Winter Solstice, to ascend Northward. the Signs Aquarius, Pisces and
Aries; on 
entering the first of which he reached the lowest limit of his journey
Southward.
From TAURUS, he passed through Gemini and Cancer, and reached LEO 
when he arrived at the terminus of his journey Northward. Thence,
through 
Leo, Virgo, and Libra, he entered SCORPIO at the Autumnal Equinox, and


--- PAGE 821 ---
journeyed Southward through Scorpia, Sagittarius, and Capricornus to 
AQUARIUS, the terminus of his journey South. 
The path by which he journeyed through these signs became the Ecliptic;
and 
that which passes through the two equinoxes, the Equator. 
They knew nothing of the immutable laws of nature; and whenever the
Sun 
commenced to tend Southward, they feared lest he might continue to do
so, 
and by degrees disappear forever, leaving the earth to be ruled forever by 
darkness, storm, and cold. 
Hence they rejoiced when he commenced to re-ascend after the Winter 
Solstice, struggling against the malign influences of Aquarius and Pisces,
and 
amicably received by the Lamb. And when at the Vernal Equinox he
entered 
Taurus, they still more rejoiced at the assurance that the days would again
be 
longer than the nights, that the season of seed-time had come, and the 
Summer and harvest would follow.


--- PAGE 822 ---
And they lamented when, after the Autumnal Equinox, the malign
influence of 
the venomous Scorpion, and vindictive Archer, and the filthy and ill-
omened 
He-Goat dragged him down toward the Winter Solstice. 
Arriving there, they said he had been slain, and had gone to the realm of 
darkness. Remaining there three days, he rose again, and again ascended 
Northward in the heavens, to redeem the earth from the gloom and
darkness of 
Winter, which soon became emblematical of sin, and evil, and suffering;
as the 
Spring, Summer, and Autumn became emblems of happiness and
immortality. 
Soon they personified the Sun, and worshipped him under the name of 
OSIRIS, and transmuted the legend of his descent among the Winter
Signs, 
into a fable of his death, his descent into the infernal regions, and his 
resurrection. 
The Moon became Isis, the wife of Osiris; and Winter, as well as the
desert or 
the ocean into which the Sun descended, became TYPHON, the Spirit or


--- PAGE 823 ---
Principle of Evil, warring against and destroying Osiris. 
From the journey of the Sun through the twelve signs came the legend of
the
twelve labors of Hercules, and the incarnations of Vishnu and Buddha. 
Hence came the legend of the murder of Khürüm, representative of the
Sun, 
by the three Fellow-crafts, symbols of the three Winter signs,
Capricornus, 
Aquarius, and Pisces, who assailed him at the three gates of Heaven and 
slew him at the Winter Solstice. Hence the search for him by the nine
Fellowcrafts, 
the other nine signs, his finding, burial, and resurrection. 
The celestial Taurus, opening the new year, was the Creative of Bull of
the 
Hindus and Japanese, breaking with his horn the egg out of which the
world 
is born. Hence the bull APIS was worshipped by the Egyptians, and 
reproduced as a golden calf by Aaron in the desert. Hence the cow was 
sacred to the Hindus. Hence, from the sacred and beneficent signs of
Taurus 
and Leo, the human-headed winged lions and bulls in the palaces at


--- PAGE 824 ---
Kouyounjik and Nimroud, like which were the Cherubim set by Solomen
in his 
Temple: and hence the twelve brazen or bronze oxen, on which the layer
of 
brass was supported. 
The Celestial Vulture or Eagle, rising and setting with the Scorpion, was 
substituted in its place, in many cases, on account of the malign
influences of 
the latter: and thus the four great periods the of the year were mailed by
the 
Bull, the Lion, the Man (Aquarius) and the Eagle; which were upon the 
respective standards of Ephraim, Judah, Reuben, and Dan; and still
appear 
on the shield of American Royal Arch Masonry. 
Afterward the Ram or Lamb became an object of adoration, when, in his
turn, 
he opened the equinox, to deliver the world from the wintry reign of
darkness 
and evil. 
Around the central and simple idea of the annual death and resurrection
of 
the Sun a multitude of circumstantial details soon clustered. Some were


--- PAGE 825 ---
derived from other astronomical phenomena; while many were merely 
poetical ornaments and inventions. 
Besides the Sun and Moon, those ancients also saw a beautiful Star,
shining 
with a soft, silvery light, always following the Sun at no great distance
when 
he set, or preceding him when he rose. Another of a red and angry color,
and 
still another more kingly and brilliant than all, early attracted their
attention, 
by their free movements among the fixed hosts of Heaven: and the latter
by 
his unusual brilliancy, and the regularity with which he rose and set,
These 
were Venus, Mars, and Jupiter. Mercury and Saturn 
could scarcely have been noticed in the world's infancy, or until
astronomy began to assume the proportions of a science. 
In the projection of the celestial sphere by the astronomical priests, the 
zodiac and constellations, arranged in a circle, presented their halves 
in diametrical opposition; and the hemisphere of Winter was said to be 
adverse, opposed, contrary, to that of slew him Summer. Over the


--- PAGE 826 ---
angels of the latter ruled a king (OSIRIS or ORMUZD), enlightened, 
intelligent, creative, and beneficent. Over the fallen angels or evil genii 
of the former, the demons or Devs of the subterranean empire of 
darkness and sorrow, and its stars, ruled also a chief. In Egypt the 
Scorpion first ruled, the sign next the Balance, and long the chief of the 
Winter signs; and then the Polar Bear or Ass, called Typhon, that is, 
deluge, on account of the rains which inundated the earth while that 
constellation domineered. In Persia, at a later day, it was the serpent, 
which, personified as Ahriman, was the Evil Principle of the religion of 
Zoroaster. 
The Sun does not arrive at the same moment in each year at the 
equinoctial point on the equator. The explanation of his anticipating 
that point belongs to the science of astronomy; and to that we refer you 
for it. The consequence is, what is termed the precession of the 
equinoxes, by means of which the Sun is constantly changing his place 
in the zodiac, at each vernal equinox; so that now, the signs retaining 
the names which they had 300 years before Christ, they and the


--- PAGE 827 ---
constellations do not correspond; the Sun being, now in the 
constellation Pisces, when he is in the sign Aries. 
The annual amount of precession is 50 seconds and a little over [50" 
1.]. The period of a complete Revolution of the Equinoxes, 25,856 
years. The precession amounts to 30º or a sign, in 2155.6 years. So 
that, as the sun now enters Pisces at the Vernal Equinox, he entered 
Aries at that period, 300 years B.C., and Taurus 2455 B.C. And the 
division of the Ecliptic, now called Taurus, lies in the Constellation 
Aries; while the sign Gemini is in the Constellation Taurus. Four 
thousand six hundred and ten years before Christ, the sun entered 
Gemini at the Vernal Equinox. 
At the two periods, 2455 and 300 years before Christ and now, the 
entrances of the sun at the Equinoxes and Solstices into the signs, 
were and are as follows:- 
B.C. 2455.
Leo 
Scorpio


--- PAGE 828 ---
Aquarius 
Vern. Equinox, he entered Taurus 
Summer Solstice 
Autumnal Equinox 
Winter Solstice 
B.C. 300. 
Aries 
Cancer 
Libra 
Capricornus 
Vern. Eq 
Summer Sols 
Autumn Eq 
Winter Sols 
1872. 
Pisces 
Gemini


--- PAGE 829 ---
Virgo 
Sagittarius 
Vern. Eq 
Sum. Sols 
Aut. Eq 
Winter Sols 
From confounding signs with causes came the worship of the sun and
stars. "If," 
says job, "I beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon progressive in
brightness; 
and my heart hath been secretly enticed, or my mouth hath kissed my
hand, this 
were an iniquity to be punished by the judge; for I should have denied the
God 
that is above." 
Perhaps we are not, on the whole, much wiser than those simple men of
the old 
time. For what do we know of effect and cause, except that one thing
regularly or 
habitually follows another?


--- PAGE 830 ---
So, because the heliacal rising of Sirius preceded the rising of the Nile, it
was 
deemed to cause it; and other stars were in like manner held to cause
extreme 
heat, bitter cold, and watery storm. 
A religious reverence for the zodiacal Bull [TAURUS] appears, from a
very early 
period, to have been pretty general, - perhaps it was universal, throughout
Asia; 
from that chain or region of Caucasus to which it gave name; and which is
still 
known under the appellation of Mount Taurus, to the Southern extremities
of the 
Indian Peninsula; extending itself also into Europe, and through the
Eastern parts 
of Africa. 
This evidently originated during those remote ages of the world, when the 
colure of the vernal equinox passed across the stars in the head of the
sign 
from Aries. 
from Cancer. 
from Libra.


--- PAGE 831 ---
from Capricornus. 
from Pisces. 
from Gemini. 
from Virgo. 
from Sagittarius. 
from Aquarius. 
from Taurus. 
from Leo. 
from Scorpio.
Taurus [among which was Aldebarán]; a period when, as the most ancient 
monuments of all the oriental nations attest, the light of arts and letters
first 
shone forth. 
The Arabian word AL-DE-BARÁN, means the foremost, or leading star:
and it 
could only have been so named, when it did precede, or lead, all others.
The 
year then opened with the sun in Taurus; and the multitude of ancient


--- PAGE 832 ---
sculptures, both in Assyria and Egypt, wherein the bull appears with
lunette or 
crescent horns, and the disk of the sun between them, are direct allusions
to 
the important festival of the first new moon of the year: and there was 
everywhere an annual celebration of the festival of the first new moon,
when 
the year opened with Sol and Luna in Taurus. 
David sings: "Blow the trumpet in the New Moon; in the time appointed;
on our 
solemn feast-day: for this is a statute unto Israel, and a law of the God of 
Jacob. This he ordained to Joseph, for a testimony, when he came out of
the 
land of Egypt." 
The reverence paid to Taurus continued long after, by the precession of
the 
Equinoxes, the colure of the vernal equinox had come to pass through
Aries. 
The Chinese still have a temple, called "The Palace of the horned Bull"
and the 
same symbol is worshipped in Japan and all over Hindostan. The
Cimbrians


--- PAGE 833 ---
carried a brazen bull with them, as the image of their God, when they
overran 
Spain and Gaul; and the representation of the Creation, by the Deity in
the 
shape of a bull, breaking the shell of an egg with his horns, meant Taurus, 
opening the year, and bursting the symbolical shell of the annually-
recurring 
orb of the new year. 
Theophilus says that the Osiris of Egypt was supposed to be dead or
absent 
fifty days in each year. Landseer thinks that this was because the Sabæan 
priests were accustomed to see, in the lower latitudes of Egypt and
Ethiopia, 
the first or chief stars of the Husbandman [BOÖTES] sink achronically
beneath 
the Western horizon; and then to begin their lamentations, or hold forth
the 
signal for others to weep: and when his prolific virtues were supposed to
be 
transferred to the vernal sun, bacchanalian revelry became devotion. 
Before the colure of the Vernal Equinox had passed into Aries, and after it
had


--- PAGE 834 ---
left Aldebarán and the Hyades, the Pleiades were, for seven or eight
centuries, 
the leading stars of the Sabæan year. And thus we see, on the monuments,
the 
disk and crescent, symbols of the sun and moon in conjunction, appear 
successively, - first on the head, and then on the neck and back of the
Zodiacal Bull, and more recently on the forehead of the Ram. 
The diagrammatical character or symbol, still in use to denote Taurus, , is 
this very crescent and disk: a symbol that has come down to us from those 
remote ages when this memorable conjunction in Taurus, by marking the 
commencement, at once of the Sabæan year and of the cycle of the 
Chaldean Saros, so pre-eminently distinguished that sign as to become its 
characteristic symbol. On a bronze bull from China, the crescent is
attached 
to the back of the Bull, by means of a cloud, and a curved groove is
provided 
for the occasional introduction of the disk of the sun, when solar and
lunar 
time were coincident and conjunctive, at the commencement of the year,
and


--- PAGE 835 ---
of the lunar cycle. When that was made, the year did not open with the
stars 
in the head of the Bull, but when the colure of the vernal equinox passed 
across the middle or later degrees of the asterism Taurus, and the Pleiades 
were, in China, as in Canaan, the leading stars of the year. 
The crescent and disk combined always represent the conjunctive Sun and 
Moon; and when placed on the head of the Zodiacal Bull, the
commencement 
of the cycle termed SAROS by the Chaldeans, and Metonic by the Greeks; 
and supposed to be alluded to in job, by the phrase, "Mazzaroth in his 
season"; that is to say, when the first new Moon and new Sun of the year 
were coincident, which happened once in eighteen years and a fraction. 
On the sarcophagus of Alexander, the same symbol appears on the head of 
a Ram, which, in the time of that monarch, was the leading sign. So too in
the 
sculptured temples of the Upper Nile, the crescent and disk appear, not on 
the head of Taurus, but on the forehead of the Ram or the Ram-headed
God, 
whom the Grecian Mythologists called Jupiter Ammon, really the Sun in


--- PAGE 836 ---
Aries. 
If we now look for a moment at the individual stars which composed and
were 
near to the respective constellations, we may find something that will
connect 
itself with the symbols of the Ancient Mysteries and of Masonry. 
It is to be noticed that when the Sun is in a particular constellation, no
part of 
that constellation will be seen, except just before sunrise and just after 
sunset; and then only the edge of it: but the constellations opposite to it
will 
be visible. When the Sun is in Taurus, for example, that is, when Taurus
sets 
with the Sun, 
Scorpio rises as he sets, and continues visible throughout the night. And
if 
Taurus rises and sets with the Sun to-day, he will, six months hence, rise
at
sunset and set at sunrise; for the stars thus gain on the Sun two hours a
month. 
Going back to the time when, watched by the Chaldean shepherds, and the 
husbandmen of Ethiopia and Egypt,


--- PAGE 837 ---
"The milk-white Pull with golden horns 
"Led on the new-born year," 
we see in the neck of TAURUS, the Pleiades, and in his face the Hyades,
"which 
Grecia from their showering names," and of whom the brilliant Aldebarán
is the 
chief ; while to the southwestward is that most splendid of all the
constellations, 
Orion, with Betelgueux in his right shoulder, Bellatrix in his left shoulder,
Rigel 
on the left foot, and in his belt the three stars known as the Three Kings,
and 
now as the Yard and Ell. Orion, ran the legend, persecuted the Pleiades;
and to 
save them from his fury, Jupiter placed them in the Heavens, where he
still 
pursues them, but in vain. They, with Arcturus and the Bands of Orion,
are 
mentioned in the Book of Job. They are usually called the Seven Stars, and
it is 
said there were seven, before the fall of Troy; though now only six are
visible. 
The Pleiades were so named from a Greek word signifying to sail. In all
ages


--- PAGE 838 ---
they have been observed for signs and seasons. Virgil says that the sailors
gave 
names to "the Pleiades, Hyades, and the Northern Car: Pleiadas, Hyadas, 
Claramque Lycaonis Arcton." And Palinurus, he says, 
Arcturum, pluviasque Hyadas, Geminosque Triones, 
Armatumque auro circumspicit Oriona - 
studied Arcturus and the rainy Hyades and the Twin Triones, and Orion 
cinctured with gold. 
Taurus was the prince and leader of the celestial host for more than two 
thousand years; and when his head set with the Sun about the last of May,
the 
Scorpion was seen to rise in the Southeast. 
The Pleiades were sometimes called Vergiliœ, or the Virgins of Spring;
because 
the Sun entered this cluster of stars in the season of blossoms. Their
Syrian 
name was Succoth, or Succothbeneth, derived from a Chaldean word
signifying 
to speculate or observe. 
The Hyades are five stars in the form of a V, 11º southeast of


--- PAGE 839 ---
the Pleiades. The Greeks counted them as seven. When the Vernal
Equinox 
was in Taurus, Aldebarán led up the starry host; and as he rose in the East,
Aries was about 27º high. 
When he was close upon the meridian, the Heavens presented their most 
magnificent appearance. Capella was a little further from the meridian, to
the 
north; and Orion still further from it to the southward. Procyon, Sirius,
Castor 
and Pollux had climbed about half-way from the horizon to the meridian. 
Regulus had just risen upon the ecliptic. The Virgin still lingered below
the 
horizon. Fomalhaut was half-way to the meridian in the Southwest; and to
the 
Northwest were the brilliant constellations, Perseus, Cepheus, Cassiopeia,
and 
Andromeda; while the Pleiades had just passed the meridian. 
ORION is visible to all the habitable world. The equinoctial line passes
through 
the centre of it. When Aldebarán rose in the East, the Three Kings in
Orion 
followed him; and as Taurus set, the Scorpion, by whose sting it was said


--- PAGE 840 ---
Orion died, rose in the East. 
Orion rises at noon about the 9th of March. His rising was accompanied
with 
great rains and storms, and it became very terrible to mariners. 
In Boötes, called by the ancient Greeks Lycaon, from lukos, a wolf, and by
the 
Hebrews, Caleb Anubach, the Barking Dog, is the Great Star ARCTURUS, 
which, when Taurus opened the year, corresponded with a season
remarkable 
for its great heat. 
Next comes GEMINI, the Twins, two human figures, in the heads of which
are 
the bright Stars CASTOR and POLLUX, the Dioscuri, and the Cabiri of 
Samothrace, patrons of navigation; while South of Pollux are the brilliant
Stars 
SIRIUS and PROCYON, the greater and lesser Dog: and still further
South, 
Canopus, in the Ship Argo. 
Sirius is apparently the largest and brightest Star in the Heavens. When
the 
Vernal Equinox was in Taurus, he rose heliacally, that is, just before the
Sun,


--- PAGE 841 ---
when, at the Summer Solstice, the Sun entered Leo, about the 21st of
June, 
fifteen days previous to the swelling of the Nile. The heliacal rising of
Canopus 
was also a precursor of the rising of the Nile. Procyon was the forerunner
of 
Sirius, and rose before him. 
There are no important Stars in CANCER. In the Zodiacs of Esne and 
Dendera, and in most of the astrological remains of 
Egypt, the sign of this constellation was a beetle (Scarabœus), which 
thence became sacred, as an emblem of the gate through which souls
descended from Heaven. In the crest of Cancer is a cluster of Stars 
formerly called Prœsepe, the Manger, on each side of which is a small 
Star, the two of which were called Aselli little asses. 
In Leo are the splendid Stars, REGULUS, directly on the ecliptic, and 
DENEBOLA in the Lion's tail. Southeast of Regulus is the fine Star COR 
HYDRÆ. 
The combat of Hercules with the Nemæan lion was his first labor. It was 
the first sign into which the Sun passed, after falling below the Summer


--- PAGE 842 ---
Solstice; from which time he struggled to re-ascend. 
The Nile overflowed in this sign. It stands first in the Zodiac of Dendera, 
and is in all the Indian and Egyptian Zodiacs. 
In the left hand of VIRGO (Isis or Ceres) is the beautiful Star SPICA 
Virginis, a little South of the ecliptic. VINDEMIATRIX, of less
magnitude, 
is in the right arm; and Northwest of Spica, in Boötes (the husbandman, 
Osiris), is the splendid star ARCTURUS. 
The division of the first Decan of the Virgin, Aben Ezra says, represents a 
beautiful Virgin with flowing hair, sitting in a chair, with two ears of corn
in 
her hand, and suckling an infant. In an Arabian MS. in the Royal Library 
at Paris, is a picture of the Twelve Signs. That of Virgo is a young girl
with 
an infant by her side. Virgo was Isis; and her representation carrying a 
child (Horus) in her arms, exhibited in her temple, was accompanied by 
this inscription: "I AM ALL THAT IS, THAT WAS, AND THAT SHALL
BE; 
and the fruit which I brought forth is the Sun."


--- PAGE 843 ---
Nine months after the Sun enters Virgo, he reaches the Twins. When 
Scorpio begins to rise, Orion sets: when Scorpio comes to the meridian, 
Leo begins to set, Typhon reigns, Osiris is slain, and Isis (the Virgin) his 
sister and wife, follows him to the tomb, weeping. 
The Virgin and Boötes, setting heliacally at the Autumnal Equinox, 
delivered the world to the wintry constellations, and introduced into it the 
genius of Evil, represented by Ophiucus, the Serpent. 
At the moment of the Winter Solstice, the Virgin rose heliacally (with the 
Sun), having the Sun (Horus) in her bosom. 
In LIBRA are four Stars of the second and third magnitude, which we
shall 
mention hereafter. They are Zuben-es-Chamali, Zuben-el-Gemabi, Zuben-
hak-rabi, and Zuben-el-Gubi. Near the last of these is the brilliant and 
malign Star, ANTARES in Scorpio. 
In SCORPIO, ANTARES, of the 1st magnitude, and remarkably red, was 
one of the four great Stars, FOMALHAUT, in Cetus, ALDEBARAN in 
Taurus, REGULUS in Leo, and ANTARES, that formerly answered to the


--- PAGE 844 ---
Solstitial and Equinoctial points, and were much noticed by astronomers. 
This sign was sometimes represented by a Snake, and sometimes by a 
Crocodile, but generally by a Scorpion, which last is found on the
Mithriac 
Monuments, and on the Zodiac of Dendera. It was considered a sign 
accursed, and the entrance of the Sun into it commenced the reign of 
Typhon. 
In Sagittarius, Capricornus, and Aquarius there are no Stars of
importance. 
Near Pisces is the brilliant Star FOMALHAUT. No sign in the Zodiac is 
considered of more malignant influence than this. It was deemed
indicative 
of Violence and Death. Both the Syrians and Egyptians abstained from 
eating fish, out of dread and abhorrence; and when the latter would 
represent anything as odious, or express hatred by Hieroglyphics, they 
painted a fish. 
In Auriga is the bright Star CAPELLA, which to the Egyptians never set. 
And, circling ever round the North Pole are Seven Stars, known as Ursa 
Major, or the Great Bear, which have been an object of universal


--- PAGE 845 ---
observation in all ages of the world. They were venerated alike by the 
Priests of Bel, the Magi of Persia, the Shepherds of Chaldea, and the 
Phœnician navigators, as well as by the astronomers of Egypt. Two of 
them, MERAK and DUBHE, always point to the North Pole. 
The Phœnician and Egyptians, says Eusebius, were the first who ascribed 
divinity to the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and regarded them as the sole
causes 
of the production and destruction of all beings. From them went abroad 
over all the world all known opinions as to the generation and descent of 
the Gods. Only the Hebrews looked beyond the visible world to an
invisible 
Creator. All the rest of the world regarded as Gods those luminous bodies 
that blaze in the firmament, offered them sacrifices, bowed down 
before them, and raised neither their souls nor their worship above the 
visible heavens.
The Chaldeans, Canaanites, and Syrians, among whom Abraham lived, 
did the same. The Canaanites consecrated horses and chariots to the


--- PAGE 846 ---
Sun. The inhabitants of Emesa in Phœnician adored him under the name 
of Elagabalus; and the Sun, as Hercules, was the great Deity of the 
Tyrians. The Syrians worshipped, with fear and dread, the Stars of the 
Constellation Pisces, and consecrated images of them in their temples. 
The Sun as Adonis was worshipped in Byblos and about Mount Libanus. 
There was a magnificent Temple of the Sun at Palmyra, which was 
pillaged by the soldiers of Aurelian, who rebuilt it and dedicated it anew. 
The Pleiades, under the name of Succoth-Beneth, were worshipped by 
the Babylonian colonists who settled in the country of the Samaritans. 
Saturn, under the name of Remphan, was worshipped among the Copts. 
The planet Jupiter was worshipped as Bel or Baal; Mars as Malec, 
Melech, or Moloch; Venus as Ashtaroth or Astarte, and Mercury as Nebo, 
among the Syrians, Assyrians, Phœnicians, and Canaanites. ' 
Sanchoniathon says that the earliest Phoenicians adored the Sun, whom 
they deemed sole Lord of the Heavens; and honored him under the name 
of BEEL-SAMIN, signifying King of Heaven. They raised columns to the 
elements, fire, and air or wind, and worshipped them; and Sabæism, or


--- PAGE 847 ---
the worship of the Stars, flourished everywhere in Babylonia. The Arabs, 
under a sky always clear and serene, adored the Sun, Moon, and Stars. 
Abulfaragius so informs us, and that each of the twelve Arab Tribes 
invoked a particular Star as its Patron. The Tribe Hamyar was 
consecrated to the Sun, the Tribe Cennah to the Moon; the Tribe Misa 
was under the protection of the beautiful Star in Taurus, Aldebarán; the 
Tribe Tai under that of Canopus; the Tribe Kais, of Sirius; the Tribes 
Lachamus and Idamus, of Jupiter; the Tribe Asad, of Mercury; and so on. 
The Saracens, in the time of Heraclius, worshipped Venus, whom they 
called CABAR, or The Great; and they swore by the Sun, Moon, and 
Stars. Shahristan, an Arabic author, says that the Arabs and Indians 
before his time had temples dedicated to the seven Planets. Abulfaragius 
says that the seven great primitive nations, from whom all others 
descended, the Persians, Chaldæans, Greeks, Egyptians, Turks, Indians, 
and Chinese, all originally were Sabæists, and worshipped the Stars. 
They all, he says, like the Chaldæans, prayed turning toward the North 
Pole


--- PAGE 848 ---
three times a day, at Sunrise, Noon, and Sunset, bowing themselves 
three times before the Sun. They invoked the Stars and the Intelligences
which inhabited them, offered them sacrifices, and called the fixed stars 
and planets gods. Philo says that the Chaldæans regarded the stars as 
sovereign arbiters of the order of the world, and did not look beyond the 
visible causes to any invisible and intellectual being. They regarded 
NATURE as the great divinity, that exercised its powers through the 
action of its parts, the Sun, Moon, Planets, and Fixed Stars, the 
successive revolutions of the seasons, and the combined action of 
Heaven and Earth. The great feast of the Sabæans was when the Sun 
reached the Vernal Equinox: and they had five other feasts, at the times 
when the five minor planets entered the signs in which they had their 
exaltation. 
Diodorus Siculus informs us that the Egyptians recognized two great 
Divinities, primary and eternal, the Sun and Moon, which they thought 
governed the world, and from which everything receives its nourishment 
and growth: that on them depended all and the great work of generation,


--- PAGE 849 ---
and the perfection of all effects produced in nature. We know that the 
two great Divinities of Egypt were Osiris and Isis, the greatest agents of 
nature; according to some, the Sun and Moon, and according to others, 
Heaven and Earth, or the active and passive principles of generation, 
And we learn from Porphyry that Chæremon, a learned priest of Egypt, 
and many other learned men of that nation, said that the Egyptians 
recognized as gods the stars composing the zodiac, and all those that by 
their rising or setting marked its divisions; the subdivisions of the signs 
into decans, the horoscope and the stars that presided therein, and 
which were called Potent Chiefs Heaven: that considering the Sun as the 
Great God, Architect, and Ruler of the World, they explained not only the 
fable of Osiris and Isis, but generally all their sacred legends, by the 
stars, by their appearance and disappearance, by their ascension, by the 
phases of the moon, and the increase and diminution of her, light; by the 
march of the sun, the division of time and the heavens into two parts, one 
assigned to darkness and the other to light; by the Nile and, in fine, by 
the whole round of physical causes.


--- PAGE 850 ---
Lucian tells us that the bull Apis, sacred to the Egyptians, was the image 
of the celestial Bull, or Taurus; and that Jupiter Ammon, horned like a 
ram, was an image of the constellation Aries. And Clemens of Alexandria 
assures us that the four principal 
sacred animals, carried in their processions, were emblems of the 
four signs or cardinal points which fixed the seasons at the equinoxes
and solstices, and divided into four parts the yearly march of the sun. 
They worshipped fire also, and water, and the Nile, which river they 
styled Father, Preserver of Egypt, sacred emanation from the Great God 
Osiris; and in their hymns in which they called it the god crowned with 
millet (which grain, represented by the pschent, was part of the headdress 
of their kings), bringing with him abundance. The other elements 
were also revered by them: and the Great Gods, whose names are 
found inscribed on an ancient column, are the Air, Heaven, the Earth, 
the Sun, the Moon, Night, and Day. And, in fine, as Eusebius says, they 
regarded the Universe as a great Deity, composed of a great number of 
gods, the different parts of itself.


--- PAGE 851 ---
The same worship of the Heavenly Host extended into every part of 
Europe, into Asia Minor, and among the Turks, Scythians, and Tartars. 
The ancient Persians adored the Sun as Mithras, and also the Moon, 
Venus, Fire, Earth, Air, and Water; and, having no statues or altars, 
they sacrificed on high places to the Heavens and to the Sun. On seven 
ancient pyrea they burned incense to the Seven Planets, and 
considered the elements to be divinities. In the Zend-Avesta we find 
invocations addressed to Mithras, the stars, the elements, trees, 
mountains, and every part of nature. The Celestial Bull is invoked there, 
to which the Moon unites herself; and the four great stars, Taschter, 
Satevis, Haftorang, and Venant, the great Star Rapitan, and the other 
constellations which watch over the different portions of the earth. 
The Magi, like a multitude of ancient nations, worshipped fire, above all 
the other elements and powers of nature. In India, the Ganges and the 
Indus were worshipped, and the Sun was the Great Divinity. They 
worshipped the Moon also, and kept up the sacred fire. In Ceylon, the 
Sun, Moon, and other planets were worshipped: in Sumatra, the Sun,


--- PAGE 852 ---
called Iri, and the Moon, called Handa. And the Chinese built Temples 
to Heaven, the Earth, and genii of the air, of the water, of the mountains, 
and of the stars, to the sea-dragon, and to the planet Mars. 
The celebrated Labyrinth was built in honor of the Sun; and its twelve 
palaces, like the twelve superb columns of the Temple is, at Hieropolis, 
covered with symbols relating to the twelve signs and the occult 
qualities of the elements, were consecrated to the twelve gods or 
tutelary genii of the signs of the Zodiac. The 
figure of the pyramid and that of the obelisk, resembling the shape of a 
flame, caused these monuments to be consecrated to the Sun and to
Fire. And Timæus of Locria says: "The equilateral triangle enters into 
the composition of the pyramid, which has four equal faces and equal 
angles, and which in this is like fire, the most subtle and mobile of the 
elements." They and the obelisks were erected in honor of the Sun, 
termed in an inscription upon one of the latter, translated by the 
Egyptian Hermapion, and to be found in Ammianus Marcellinus, "Apollo 
the strong, Son of God, he who made the world, true Lord of the


--- PAGE 853 ---
diadems, who possesses Egypt and fills it with His glory." 
The two most famous divisions of the Heavens, by seven, which is that 
of the planets, and by twelve, which is that of the signs, are found on 
the religious monuments of all the people of the ancient world. The 
twelve Great Gods of Egypt are met with everywhere. They were 
adopted by the Greeks and Romans; and the latter assigned one of 
them to each sign of the Zodiac. Their images were seen at Athens, 
where an altar was erected to each; and they were painted on the 
porticos. The People of the North had their twelve Azes, or Senate of 
twelve great gods, of whom Odin was chief. The Japanese had the 
same number, and like the Egyptians divided them into classes, seven, 
who were the most ancient, and five, afterward added: both of which 
numbers are well known and consecrated in Masonry. 
There is no more striking proof of the universal adoration paid the stars 
and constellations, than the arrangement of the Hebrew camp in the 
Desert, and the allegory in regard to the twelve Tribes of Israel, 
ascribed in the Hebrew legends to Jacob. The Hebrew camp was a


--- PAGE 854 ---
quadrilateral, in sixteen divisions, of which the central four were 
occupied by images of the four elements. The four divisions at the four 
angles of the quadrilateral exhibited the four signs that the astrologers 
called fixed, and which they regard as subject to the influence of the 
four great Royal Stars, Regulus in Leo, Aldebaran in Taurus, Antares 
in Scorpio, and Fomalhaut in the mouth of Pisces, on which falls the 
water poured out by Aquarius; of which constellations the Scorpion was 
represented in the Hebrew blazonry by the Celestial Vulture or Eagle, 
that rises at the same time with it and is its paranatellon. The other 
signs were arranged on the four faces of the quadilateral, and in the 
parallel and interior divisions. 
There is an astonishing coincidence between the characteristics assigned
by 
Jacob to his sons, and those of the signs of the Zodiac, or the planets that
have
their domicile in those signs. 
Reuben is compared to running water, unstable, and that cannot excel; and
he


--- PAGE 855 ---
answers to Aquarius, his ensign being a man. The water poured out by
Aquarius 
flows toward the South Pole, and it is the first of the four Royal Signs,
ascending 
from the Winter Solstice. 
The Lion (Leo) is the device of Judah; and Jacob compares him to that
animal, 
whose constellation in the Heavens is the domicile of the Sun; the Lion of
the 
Tribe of Judah; by whose grip, when that of apprentice and that of fellow-
craft, - 
of Aquarius at the Winter Solstice and of Cancer at the Vernal Equinox, -
had not 
succeeded in raising him, Khürüm was lifted out of the grave. 
Ephraim, on whose ensign appears the Celestial Bull, Jacob compares to
the ox. 
Dan, bearing as his device a Scorpion, he compares to the Cerastes or
horned 
Serpent, synonymous in astrological language with the vulture or
pouncing 
eagle; and which bird was often substituted on the flag of Dan, in place of
the 
venomous scorpion, on account of the terror which that reptile inspired, as
the


--- PAGE 856 ---
symbol of Typhon and his malign influences; wherefore the Eagle, as its 
paranatellon, that is, rising and setting at the same time with it, was
naturally 
used in its stead. Hence the four famous figures in the sacred pictures of
the 
Jews and Christians, and in Royal Arch Masonry, of the Lion, the Ox, the
Man, 
and the Eagle, the four creatures of the Apocalypse, copied there from
Ezekiel, 
in whose reveries and rhapsodies they are seen revolving around blazing 
circles. 
The Ram, domicile of Mars, chief of the Celestial Soldiery and of the
twelve 
Signs, is the device of Gad, whom Jacob characterizes as a warrior, chief
of his 
army. 
Cancer, in which are the stars termed Aselli, or little asses, is the device
of the 
flag of Issachar, whom Jacob compares to an ass. 
Capricorn, of old represented with the tail of a fish, and called by
astronomers


--- PAGE 857 ---
the Son of Neptune, is the device of Zebulon, of whom Jacob says that he
dwells 
on the shore of the sea. 
Sagittarius, chasing the Celestial Wolf, is the emblem of Benjamin, whom
Jacob 
compares to a hunter: and in that constellation the Romans placed the
domicile 
of Diana the huntress. Virgo, 
the domicile of Mercury, is borne on the flag of Naphtali, whose
eloquence 
and agility Jacob magnifies, both of which are attributes of the Courier of
the Gods. And of Simeon and Levi he speaks as united, as are the two 
fishes that make the Constellation Pisces, which is their armorial
emblem. 
Plato, in his Republic, followed the divisions of the Zodiac and the 
planets. So also did Lycurgus at Sparta, and Cecrops in the Athenian 
Commonwealth. Chun, the Chinese legislator, divided China into twelve 
Tcheou, and specially designated twelve mountains. The Etruscans 
divided themselves into twelve Cantons. Romulus appointed twelve 
Lictors. There were twelve tribes of Ishmael and twelve disciples of the


--- PAGE 858 ---
Hebrew Reformer. The New Jerusalem of the Apocalypse has twelve 
gates. 
The Souciet, a Chinese book, speaks of a palace composed of four 
buildings, whose gates looked toward the four corners of the world. That 
on the East was dedicated to the new moons of the months of Spring; that 
on the West to those of Autumn; that on the South to those of Summer; 
and that on the North to those of Winter: and in this, palace the Emperor 
and his grandees sacrificed a lamb, the animal that represented the Sun 
at the Vernal Equinox. 
Among the Greeks, the march of the Choruses in their theatres 
represented the movements of the Heavens and the planets, and the 
Strophe and Anti-Strophe imitated, Aristoxenes says, the movements of 
the Stars. The number five was sacred among the Chinese, as that of the 
planets other than the Sun and Moon. Astrology consecrated the numbers 
twelve, seven, thirty, and three hundred and sixty; and everywhere seven, 
the number of the planets, was as sacred as twelve, that of the signs, the 
months, the oriental cycles, and the sections of the horizon. We shall


--- PAGE 859 ---
speak more at large hereafter, in another Degree, as to these and other 
numbers, to which the ancients ascribed mysterious powers. 
The Signs of the Zodiac and the Stars appeared on many of the ancient 
coins and medals. On the public seal of the Locrians, Ozoles was 
Hesperus, or the planet Venus. On the medals of Antioch on the Orontes 
was the ram and crescent; and the Ram was the special Deity of Syria, 
assigned to it in the division of the earth among the twelve signs. On the 
Cretan coins was the Equinoctial Bull; and he also appeared on those of 
the Mamertins and of Athens. Sagittarius appeared on those of the 
Persians. In 
India the twelve signs appeared upon the ancient coins. The Scorpion 
was engraved on the medals of the Kings of Comagena, and Capricorn
on those of Zeugnia, Anazorba, and other cities. On the medals of 
Antoninus are found nearly all the signs of the Zodiac. 
Astrology was practised among all the ancient nations. In Egypt, the 
book of Astrology was borne reverentially in the religious processions; 
in which the few sacred animals were also carried, as emblems of the


--- PAGE 860 ---
equinoxes and solstices. The same science flourished among the 
Chaldeans, and over the whole of Asia and Africa. When Alexander 
invaded India, the astrologers of the Oxydraces came to him to 
disclose the secrets of their science of Heaven and the Stars. The 
Brahimins whom Apollonius consulted, taught him the secrets of 
Astronomy, with the ceremonies and prayers whereby to appease the 
gods and learn the future from the stars. In China, astrology taught the 
mode of governing the State and families. In Arabia it was deemed the 
mother of the sciences; and old libraries are full of Arabic books on this 
pretended science. It flourished at Rome. Constantine had his 
horoscope drawn by the astrologer Valens. It was a science in the 
middle ages, and even to this day is neither forgotten nor unpractised. 
Catherine de Medici was fond of it. Louis XIV. consulted his horoscope, 
and the learned Casini commenced his career as an astrologer. 
The ancient Sabæans established feasts in honor of each planet, on 
the day, for each, when it entered its place of exaltation, or reached the 
particular degree in the particular sign of the zodiac in which astrology


--- PAGE 861 ---
had fixed the place of its exaltation; that is, the place in the Heavens 
where its influence was supposed to be greatest, and where it acted on 
Nature with the greatest energy. The place of exaltation of the Sun was 
in Aries, because, reaching that point, he awakens all Nature, and 
warms into life all the germs of vegetation; and therefore his most 
solemn feast among all nations, for many years before our Era, was 
fixed at the time of his entrance into that sign. In Egypt, it was called 
the Feast of Fire and Light. It was the Passover, when the Paschal 
Lamb was slain and eaten, among the Jews, and Neurouz among the 
Persians. The Romans preferred the place of domicile to that of 
exaltation; and celebrated the feasts of the planets under the signs that 
were their houses. The Chaldeans, whom and not the Egyptians, the 
Sabæans followed in this, preferred the places of exaltation. 
Saturn, from the length of time required for his apparent revolution, was 
considered the most remote, and the Moon the nearest planet. After
the Moon came Mercury and Venus, then the Sun, and then Mars, 
Jupiter, and Saturn.


--- PAGE 862 ---
So the risings and settings of the Fixed Stars, and their conjunctions 
with the Sun, and their first appearance as they emerged from his rays, 
fixed the epochs for the feasts instituted in their honor; and the Sacred 
Calendars of the ancients were regulated accordingly. 
In the Roman games of the circus, celebrated in honor of the Sun and 
of entire Nature, the Sun, Moon, Planets, Zodiac, Elements, and the 
most apparent parts and potent agents of Nature were personified and 
represented, and the courses of the Sun in the Heavens were imitated 
in the Hippodrome; his chariot being drawn by four horses of different 
colors, representing the four elements and seasons. The courses were 
from East to West, like the circuits round the Lodge, and seven in 
number, to correspond with the number of planets. The movements of 
the Seven Stars that revolve around the pole were also represented, as 
were those of Capella, which by its heliacal rising at the moment when 
the Sun reached the Pleiades, in Taurus, announced the 
commencement of the annual revolution of the Sun. 
The intersection of the Zodiac by the colures at the Equinoctial and


--- PAGE 863 ---
Solstitial points, fixed four periods, each of which has, by one or more 
nations, and in some cases by the same nation at different periods, 
been taken for the commencement of the year. Some adopted the 
Vernal Equinox, because then day began to prevail over night, and 
light gained a victory over darkness. Sometimes the Summer Solstice 
was preferred; because then day attained its maximum of duration, and 
the acme of its glory and perfection. In Egypt, another reason was, that 
then the Nile began to overflow, at the heliacal rising of Sirius. Some 
preferred the Autumnal Equinox, because then the harvests were 
gathered, and the hopes of a new crop were deposited in the bosom of 
the earth. And some preferred the Winter Solstice, because then, the 
shortest day having arrived, their length commenced to increase, and 
Light began the career destined to end in victory at the Vernal Equinox. 
The Sun was figuratively said to die and be born again at the Winter 
Solstice; the games of the Circus, in honor of the invincible God-Sun, 
were then celebrated, and the Roman year estab 
lished or reformed by Numa, commenced. Many peoples of Italy


--- PAGE 864 ---
commenced their year, Macrobius says, at that time; and represented by
the four ages of man the gradual succession of periodical increase and 
diminution of day, and the light of the Sun; likening him to an infant born 
at the Winter Solstice, a young man at the Vernal Equinox, a robust man 
at the Summer Solstice, and an old man at the Autumnal Equinox. 
This idea was borrowed from the Egyptians, who adored the Sun at the 
Winter Solstice, under the figure of an infant. 
The image of the Sign in which each of the four seasons commenced, 
became the form under which was figured the Sun of that particular 
season. The Lion's skin was worn by Hercules; the horns of the Bull 
adorned the forehead of Bacchus; and the autumnal serpent wound its 
long folds round the Statue of Serapis, 2500 years before our era; when 
those Signs corresponded with the commencement of the Seasons. 
When other constellations replaced them at those points, by means of 
the precession of the Equinoxes, those attributes were changed. Then 
the Ram furnished the horns for the head of the Sun, under the name of 
Jupiter Ammon. He was no longer born exposed to the waters of


--- PAGE 865 ---
Aquarius, like Bacchus, nor enclosed in an urn like the God Canopus; 
but in the Stables of Augeas or the Celestial Goat. He then completed 
his triumph, mounted on an ass, in the constellation Cancer, which then 
occupied the Solstitial point of Summer. 
Other attributes the images of the Sun borrowed from the constellations 
which, by their rising and setting, fixed the points of departure of the 
year, and the commencements of its four principal divisions. 
First the Bull and afterward the Ram (called by the Persians the Lamb), 
was regarded as the regenerator of Nature, through his union with the 
Sun. Each, in his turn, was an emblem of the Sun overcoming the winter 
darkness, and repairing the disorders of Nature, which every year was 
regenerated under these Signs, after the Scorpion and Serpent of 
Autumn had brought upon it barrenness, disaster, and darkness. 
Mithras was represented sitting on a Bull; and that animal was an image 
of Osiris: while the Greek Bacchus armed his front with its horns, and 
was pictured with its tail and feet. 
The Constellations also became noteworthy to the husbandman, which


--- PAGE 866 ---
by their rising or setting, at morning or evening, indicated 
the coming of this period of renewed fruitfulness and new life. Capella,
or 
the kid Amalthea, whose horn is called that of abundance, awl whose
place is over the equinoctial point, or Taurus; and the Pleiades, that long 
indicated the Seasons, and gave rise to a multitude of poetic fables, were 
the most observed and most celebrated in antiquity. 
The original Roman year commenced at the Vernal Equinox. July was 
formerly called Quintilis, the 5th month, and August Sextilis, the 6th, as 
September is still the 7th month, October the 8th, and so on. The 
Persians commenced their year at the same time, and celebrated their 
great feast of Neurouz when the Sun entered Aries and the Constellation 
Perseus rose, - Perseus, who first brought down to earth the heavenly fire 
consecrated in their temples: and all the ceremonies then practised 
reminded men of the renovation of Nature and the triumph of Ormuzd, the 
Light-God, over the powers of Darkness and Ahriman their Chief. 
The Legislator of the Jews fixed the commencement of their year in the


--- PAGE 867 ---
month Nisan, at the Vernal Equinox, at which season the Israelites 
marched out of Egypt and were relieved of their long bondage; in 
commemoration of which Exodus, they ate the Paschal Lamb at that 
Equinox. And when Bacchus and his army had long marched in burning 
deserts, they were led by a Lamb or Ram into beautiful meadows, and to 
the Springs that watered the Temple of Jupiter Ammon. For, to the Arabs 
and Ethiopians, whose great Divinity Bacchus was, nothing was so 
perfect a type of Elysium as a Country abounding in springs and rivulets. 
Orion, on the same meridian with the Stars of Taurus, died of the sting of 
the celestial Scorpion, that rises when he sets; as dies the Bull of Mithras 
in Autumn: and in the Stars that correspond with the Autumnal Equinox 
we find those malevolent genii that ever war against the Principle of
good, 
and that take from the Sun and the Heavens the fruit-producing power 
that they communicate to the earth. 
With the Vernal Equinox, dear to the sailor as to the husbandman, came 
the Stars that, with the Sun, open navigation, and rule the stormy Seas.


--- PAGE 868 ---
Then the Twins plunge into the solar fires, or disappear at setting, going 
down with the Sun into the bosom of the waters. And these tutelary 
Divinities of mariners, the Dioscuri or Chief Cahiri of Samothrace, sailed 
with Jason to possess themselves of the golden-fleeced ram, or Aries, 
whose rising in the 
morning announced the Sun's entry into Taurus, when the Serpentbearer 
Jason rose in the evening, and, in aspect with the Dioscuri, was
deemed their brother. And Orion, son of Neptune, and most potent 
controller of the tempest-tortured ocean, announcing sometimes calm 
and sometimes tempest, rose after Taurus, rejoicing in the forehead of 
the new year. 
The Summer Solstice was not less an important point in the Sun's 
march than the Vernal Equinox, especially to the Egyptians, to whom it 
not only marked the end and term of the increasing length of the days 
and of the domination of light, and the maximum of the Sun's elevation; 
but also the annual recurrence of that phenomenon peculiar to Egypt, 
the rising of the Nile, which, ever accompanying the Sun in his course,


--- PAGE 869 ---
seemed to rise and fall as the days grew longer and shorter, being 
lowest at the Winter Solstice, and highest at that of Summer. Thus the 
Sun seemed to regulate its swelling; and the time of his arrival at the 
solstitial point being that of the first rising of the Nile, was selected by 
the Egyptians as the beginning of a year which they called the Year of 
God, and of the Sothiac Period, or the period of Sothis, the Dog-Star, 
who, rising in the morning, fixed that epoch, so important to the people 
of Egypt. This year was also called the Heliac, that is the Solar year, 
and the Canicular year; and it consisted of three hundred and sixty-five 
days, without intercalation; so that at the end of four years, or of four 
times three hundred and sixty-five days, making 1460 days, it needed 
to add a day, to make four complete revolutions of the Sun. To correct 
this, some Nations made every fourth year consist, as we do now, of 
366 days: but the Egyptians preferred to add nothing to the year of 365 
days, which, at the end of 120 years, or of 30 times 4 years, was short 
30 days or a month; that is to say, it required a month more to complete 
the 120 revolutions of the Sun, though so many were counted, that is,


--- PAGE 870 ---
so many years. Of course the commencement of the 121st year would 
not correspond with the Summer Solstice, but would precede it by a 
month: so that, when the Sun arrived at the Solstitial point whence he 
at first set out, and whereto he must needs return, to make in reality 
120 years, or 120 complete revolutions, the first month of the 121st 
year would have ended. 
Thus, if the commencement of the year went back 30 days every 120 
years, this commencement of the year, continuing to 
recede, would, at the end of 12 times 120 years, or of 1460 years, get 
back to the Solstitial point, or primitive point of departure of the period.
The Sun would then have made but 1459 revolutions, though 1460 
were counted; to make up which, a year more would need to be added. 
So that the Sun would not have made his 1460 revolutions until the end 
of 1461 years of 365 days each, - each revolution being in reality not 
365 days exactly, but 365 ¼. 
This period of 1461 years, each of 365 days, bringing back the 
commencement of the Solar year to the Solstitial point, at the rising of


--- PAGE 871 ---
Sirius, after 1460 complete Solar revolutions, was called in Egypt the 
Sothiac period, the point of departure whereof was the Summer 
Solstice, first occupied by the Lion and afterward by Cancer, under 
which sign is Sirius, which opened the period. It was, says Porphyry, at 
this Solstitial New Moon, accompanied by the rising of Seth or the Dog- 
Star, that the beginning of the year was fixed, and that of the 
generation of all things, or, as it were, the natal hour of the world. 
Not Sirius alone determined the period of the rising of the Nile, 
Aquarius, his urn, and the stream flowing from it, in opposition to the 
sign of the Summer Solstice then occupied by the Sun, opened in the 
evening the march of Night, and received the full Moon in his cup. 
Above him and with him rose the feet of Pegasus, struck wherewith the 
waters flow forth that the Muses drink. The Lion and, the Dog, 
indicating, were supposed to cause the inundation, and so were 
worshipped. While the Sun passed through Leo, the waters doubled 
their depth; and the sacred fountains poured their streams through the 
heads of lions. Hydra, rising between Sirius and Leo, extended under


--- PAGE 872 ---
three signs. Its 'head rose with Cancer, and its tail with the feet of the 
Virgin and the beginning of Libra; and the inundation continued while 
the Sun passed along its whole extent. 
The successive contest of light and darkness for the possession of the 
lunar disk, each being by turns victor and vanquished, exactly 
resembled what passed upon the earth by he action of the Sun and his 
journeys from one Solstice to the other. The lunary revolution 
presented the same periods of light and darkness as the year, and was 
the object of the same religious fictions. Above the Moon, Pliny said, 
everything is pure, and filled with eternal light. There ends the cone of 
shadow which the earth projects, and which produces night; there ends 
the sojourn of night and 
darkness; to it the air extends; but there we enter the pure substance.
The Egyptians assigned to the Moon the demiurgic or creative force of 
Osiris, who united himself to her in the spring, when the Sun 
communicated to her the principles of generation which she afterward 
disseminated in the air and all the elements. The Persians considered


--- PAGE 873 ---
the Moon to have been impregnated by the Celestial Bull, first of the 
signs of spring. In all ages, the Moon has been supposed to have great 
influence upon vegetation, and the birth and growth of animals; and the 
belief is as widely entertained now as ever, and that influence regarded 
as a mysterious and inexplicable one. Not the astrologers alone, but 
Naturalists like Pliny, Philosophers like Plutarch and Cicero, 
Theologians like the Egyptian Priests, and Metaphysicians like Proclus, 
believed firmly in these lunar influences. 
"The Egyptians," says Diodorus Siculus, "acknowledged two great 
gods, the Sun and Moon, or Osiris and Isis, who govern the world and 
regulate its administration by the dispensation of the seasons . . . . 
Such is the nature of these two great Divinities, that they impress an 
active and fecundating force, by which the generation of beings in 
effected; the Sun, by heat and that spiritual principle that forms the 
breath of the winds; the Moon by humidity and dryness; and both by 
the forces of the air which they share in common. By this beneficial 
influence everything is born, grows, and vegetates. Wherefore this


--- PAGE 874 ---
whole huge body, in which nature resides, is maintained by the 
combined action of the Sun and Moon, and their five qualities, - the 
principles spiritual, fiery, dry, humid, and airy." 
So five primitive powers, elements, or elementary qualities, are united 
with the Sun and Moon in the Indian theology, - air, spirit, fire, water, 
and earth: and the same five elements are recognized by the Chinese. 
The Phœnicians, like the Egyptians, regarded the Sun and Moon and 
Stars as sole causes of generation and destruction here below. 
The Moon, like the Sun, changed continually the track in which she 
crossed the Heavens, moving ever to and fro between the upper and 
lower limits of the Zodiac; and her different places, phases, and 
aspects there, and her relations with the Sun and the constellations, 
have been a fruitful source of mythological fables. 
All the planets had what astrology termed their houses, in the 
Zodiac. The House of the Sun was in Leo, and that of the Moon in 
Cancer. Each other planet had two, signs; Mercury had Gemini and
Virgo; Venus, Taurus and Libra; Mars, Aries and Scorpio; Jupiter,


--- PAGE 875 ---
Pisces and Sagittarius; and Saturn, Aquarius and Capricornus. From 
this distribution of the signs also came many mythological emblems 
and fables; as also many came from the places of exaltation of the 
planets. Diana of Ephesus, the Moon, wore the image of a crab on her 
bosom, because in that sign was the Moon's domicile; and lions bore 
up the throne of Horus, the Egyptian Apollo, the Sun personified, for a 
like reason: while the Egyptians consecrated the tauriforn scarabæs to 
the Moon, because she had her place of exaltation in Taurus; and for 
the same reason Mercury is said to have presented Isis with a helmet 
like a bull's head. 
A further division of the Zodiac was of each sign into three parts of 10º 
each, called Decans, or, in the whole Zodiac, 36 parts, among which 
the seven planets were apportioned anew, each planet having an 
equal number of Decans, except the first, which, opening and closing 
the series of planets five times repeated, necessarily had one Decan 
more than the others. This subdivision was not invented until after 
Aries opened the Vernal Equinox; and accordingly Mars, having his


--- PAGE 876 ---
house in Aries, opens the series of decans and closes it; the planets 
following each other, five times in succession, in the following order, 
Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, etc.; 
so that to each sign are assigned three planets, each occupying 10 
degrees. To each Decan a God or Genius was assigned, making thirtysix 
in all, one of whom, the Chaldeans said, came down upon earth 
every ten days, remained so many days, and re-ascended to Heaven. 
This division is found on the Indian sphere, the Persian, and that 
Barbaric one which Aben Ezra describes. Each genius of the Decans 
had a name and special characteristics. They concur and aid in the 
effects produced by the Sun, Moon, and other planets charged with the 
administration of the world: and the doctrine in regard to them, secret 
and august as it was held, was considered of the gravest importance; 
and its principles, Firmicus says, were not entrusted by the ancients, 
inspired as they were by the Deity, to any but the Initiates, and to them 
only with great reserve, and a kind of fear, and when cautiously 
enveloped with an obscure veil, that they might not come to be known


--- PAGE 877 ---
by the profane. 
With these Decans were connected the paranatellons or those stars 
outside of the Zodiac, that rise and set at the same moment with the
several divisions of 10º of each sign. As there were anciently only
fortyeight 
celestial figures or constellations, of which twelve were in the 
Zodiac, it follows that there were, outside of the Zodiac, thirty-six other 
asterisms, paranatellons of the several thirty-six Decans. For example, 
as when Capricorn set, Sirius and Procyon, or Canis Major and Canis 
Minor, rose, they were the Paranatellons of Capricorn, though at a 
great distance from it in the heavens. The rising of Cancer was known 
from the setting of Corona Borealis and the rising of the Great and 
Little Dog, its three paranatellons. 
The risings and settings of the Stars are always spoken of as 
connected with the Sun. In that connection there are three kinds of 
them, cosmical, achronical, and heliacal, important to be distinguished 
by all who would understand this ancient learning.


--- PAGE 878 ---
When any Star rises or sets with the same degree of the same sign of 
the Zodiac that the Sun occupies at the time, it rises and sets 
simultaneously with the Sun, and this is termed rising or setting 
cosmically; but a star that so rises and sets can never be seen, on 
account of the light that precedes, and is left behind by the Sun. It is 
therefore necessary, in order to know his place in the Zodiac, to 
observe stars that rise just before or set just after him. 
A Star that is in the Fast when night commences, and in the West when 
it ends, is said to rise and set achronically. A Star so rising or setting 
was in opposition to the Sun, rising at the end of evening twilight, and 
setting at the beginning of morning twilight, and this happened to each 
Star but once a year, because the Sun moves from West to Fast, with 
reference to the Stars, one degree a day. 
When a Star rises as night ends in the morning, or sets as night 
commences in the evening, it is said to rise or set heliacally, because 
the Sun (Helios) seems to touch it with his luminous atmosphere. A 
Star thus re-appears after a disappearance, often, of several months,


--- PAGE 879 ---
and thenceforward it rises an hour earlier each day, gradually 
emerging from the Sun's rays, until at the end of three months it 
precedes the Sun six hours, and rises at midnight. A Star sets 
heliacally, when no longer remaining visible above the western horizon 
after sunset, the day arrives when they cease to 
be seen setting in the West. They so remain invisible, until the Sun 
passes so far to the Eastward as not to eclipse them with his light; and
then they re-appear, but in the East, about an hour and a half before 
sunrise: and this is their heliacal rising. In this interval, the cosmical 
rising and setting take place. 
Besides the relations of the constellations and their paranatelIons with 
the houses and places of exaltation of the Planets, and with their places 
in the respective Signs and Decans, the Stars were supposed to 
produce different effects according as they rose or set, and according 
as they did so either cosmically, achronicany, or heliacally; and also 
according to the different seasons of the year in which these 
phenomena occurred; and these differences were carefully marked on


--- PAGE 880 ---
the old Calendars; and many things in the ancient allegories are 
referable to them. 
Another and most important division of the Stars was into good and bad, 
beneficent and malevolent. With the Persians, the former, of the 
Zodiacal Constellations, were from Aries to Virgo, inclusive; and the 
latter from Libra to Pisces, inclusive. Hence the good Angels and Genii, 
and the bad Angels, Devs, Evil Genii, Devils, Fallen Angels, Titans, and 
Giants of the Mythology. The other thirty-six Constellations were equally 
divided, eighteen on each side, or, with those of the Zodiac, twenty-four. 
Thus the symbolic Egg, that issued from the mouth of the invisible 
Egyptian God KNEPH; known in the Grecian Mysteries as the Orphic 
Egg; from which issued the God CHUMONG of the Coresians, and the 
Egyptian OSIRISS, and PHANES, God and Principle of Light; from 
which, broken by the Sacred Bull of the Japanese, the world emerged; 
and which the Greeks placed at the feet of BACCHUS TAURI-CORNUS; 
the Magian Egg of ORMUZD, from which came the Amshaspands and 
Devs; was divided into two halves, and equally apportioned between the


--- PAGE 881 ---
Good and Evil Constellations and Angels. Those of Spring, as for 
example Aries and Taurus, Auriga and Capella, were the beneficent 
stars; and those of Autumn, as the Balance, Scorpio, the Serpent of 
Ophiucus, and the Dragon of the Hesperides, were types and subjects 
of the Evil Principle, and regarded as malevolent causes of the ill effects 
experienced in Autumn and Winter. Thus are explained the mysteries of 
the journeyings of the human soul through the spheres, when it 
descends to the earth by the Sign of the Serpent, and returns to the 
Empire of light by that of the Lamb or Bull. 
The creative action of Heaven was manifested, and all its demiurgic 
energy developed, most of all at the Vernal Equinox, to which refer all
the fables that typify the victory of Light over Darkness, by the triumphs 
of Jupiter, Osiris, Ormuzd, and Apollo. Always the triumphant god 
takes the form of the Bull, the Ram, or the Lamb. Then Jupiter wrests 
from Typhon his thunderbolts, of which that malignant Deity had 
possessed himself during the Winter. Then the God of Light 
overwhelms his foe, pictured as a huge Serpent. Then Winter ends; the


--- PAGE 882 ---
Sun, seated on the Bull and accompanied by Orion, blazes in the 
Heavens. All nature rejoices at the victory; and Order and Harmony are 
everywhere re-established, in place of the dire confusion that reigned 
while gloomy Typhon domineered, and Ahriman prevailed against 
Ormuzd. 
The universal Soul of the World, motive power of Heaven and of the 
Spheres, it was held, exercises its creative energy chiefly through the 
medium of the Sun, during his revolution along the signs of the Zodiac, 
with which signs unite the paranatellons that modify their influence, and 
concur in furnishing the symbolic attributes of the Great Luminary that 
regulates Nature and is the depository of her greatest powers. The 
action of this Universal Soul of the World is displayed in the 
movements of the Spheres, and above all in that of the Sun, in the 
successions of the risings and settings of the Stars, and in their 
periodical returns. By these are explainable all the metamorphoses of 
that Soul, personified as Jupiter, as Bacchus, as Vishnu, or as Buddha, 
and all the various attributes ascribed to it; and also the worship of


--- PAGE 883 ---
those animals that were consecrated in the ancient Temples, 
representatives on earth of the Celestial Signs, and supposed to 
receive by transmission from them the rays and emanations which in 
them flow from the Universal Soul. 
All the old Adorers of Nature, the Theologians, Astrologers, and Poets, 
as well as the most distinguished Philosophers, supposed that the 
Stars were so many animated and intelligent beings, or eternal bodies, 
active causes of effect here below, animated by a living principle, and 
directed by an intelligence that was itself but an emanation from and a 
part of the life and universal intelligence of the world: and we find in the 
hierarchical order and distribution of their eternal and divine 
Intelligences, known by the names of Gods, Angels, and Genii, the 
same distributions and 
the same divisions as those by which the ancients divided the visible 
Universe and distributed its parts. And the famous divisions by seven
and by twelve, appertaining to the planets and the signs of the zodiac, 
is everywhere found in the hierarchical order of the Gods, and Angels,


--- PAGE 884 ---
and the other Ministers that are the depositaries of that Divine Force 
which moves and rules the world. 
These, and the other Intelligences assigned to the other Stars, have 
absolute dominion over all parts of Nature; over the elements, the 
animal and vegetable kingdoms, over man and all his actions, over his 
virtues and vices, and over good and evil, which divide between them 
his life. The passions of his soul and the maladies of his body, - these 
and the entire man are dependent on the heavens and the genii that 
there inhabit, who preside at his birth, control his fortunes during life, 
and receive his soul or active and intelligent part when it is to be reunited 
to the pure life of the lofty Stars. And all through the great body 
of the world are disseminated portions of the universal Soul, 
impressing movement on everything that seems to move of itself, giving 
life to the plants and trees, directing by a regular and settled plan the 
organization and development of their germs, imparting constant 
mobility to the running waters and maintaining their eternal motion, 
impelling the winds and changing their direction or stilling them,


--- PAGE 885 ---
calming and arousing the ocean, unchaining the storm pouring out the 
fires of volcanoes, or with earthquakes shaking the roots of huge 
mountains and the foundations of vast continents; by means of a force 
that, belonging to Nature, is a mystery to man. 
And these invisible Intelligences, like the stars, are marshalled in two 
great divisions, under the banners of the two Principles of Good and 
Evil, Light and Darkness; under Ormuzd and Ahriman, Osiris and 
Typhon. The Evil Principle was the motive power of brute matter; and 
it, personified as Ahriman and Typhon, had its hosts and armies of 
Devs and Genii, Fallen Angels and Malevolent Spirits, who waged 
continual wage with the Good Principle, the Principle of Empyreal Light 
and Splendor, Osiris, Ormuzd, Jupiter or Dionusos, with his bright 
hosts of Amshaspands, Izeds, Angels, and Archangels; a warfare that 
goes on from birth until death, in the soul of every man that lives. 
We have heretofore, in the 24th Degree recited the principal incidents 
in the legend of Osiris and Isis, and it remains but to point 
out the astronomical phenomena which it has converted into mythological


--- PAGE 886 ---
facts.
The Sun, at the Vernal Equinox, was the fruit-compelling star that by his 
warmth provoked generation and poured upon the sublunary world all the 
blessings of Heaven; the beneficent god, tutelary genius of universal 
vegetation, that communicates to the dull earth new activity, and stirs her 
great heart, long chilled by Winter and his frosts, until from her bosom
burst 
all the greenness and perfume of spring, making her rejoice in leafy
forests 
and grassy lawns and flower-enamelled meadows, and the promise of 
abundant crops of grain and fruits and purple grapes in their due season. 
He was then called Osiris, Husband of Isis, God of Cultivation and 
Benefactor of Men, pouring on them and on the earth the choicest 
blessings within the gift of the Divinity. Opposed to him was Typhon, his 
antagonist in the Egyptian mythology, as Ahriman was the foe of Ormuzd, 
the Good Principle, in the theology of the Persians. 
The first inhabitants of Egypt and Ethiopia, as Diodorus Siculus informs
us, 
saw in the Heavens two first eternal causes of things, or great Divinities,


--- PAGE 887 ---
one the Sun, whom they called Osiris, and the other the Moon, whom they 
called Isis; and these they considered the causes of all the generations of 
earth. This idea, we learn from Eusebius, was the same as that of the 
Phœnicians. On these two great Divinities the administration of the world 
depended. All sublunary bodies received from them their nourishment and 
increase, during the annual revolution which they controlled, and the 
different seasons into which it was divided. 
To Osiris and Isis, it was held, were owing civilization, the discovery of 
agriculture, laws, arts of all kinds, religious worship, temples, the
invention 
of letters, astronomy, the gymnastic arts, and music; and thus they were
the 
universal benefactors. Osiris travelled to civilize the countries which he 
passed through, and communicate to them his valuable discoveries. He 
built cities, and taught men to cultivate the earth. Wheat and wine were
his 
first presents to men. Europe, Asia, and Africa partook of the blessings 
which he communicated, and the most remote regions of India
remembered


--- PAGE 888 ---
him, and claimed him as one of their great gods. 
You have learned how Typhon, his brother, slew him. His body was cut
into 
pieces, all of which were collected by Isis, except his 
organs of generation, which had been thrown into and devoured in the 
waters of the river that every year fertilized Egypt. The other portions
were
buried by Isis, and over them she erected a tomb. Thereafter she remained 
single, loading her subjects with blessings. She cured the sick, restored 
sight to the blind, made the paralytic whole, and even raised the dead. 
From her Horus or Apollo learned divination and the science of medicine. 
Thus the Egyptians pictured the beneficent action of the two luminaries 
that, from the bosom of the elements, produced all animals and men, and 
all bodies that are born, grow, and die in the eternal circle of generation 
and destruction here below. 
When the Celestial Bull opened the new year at the Vernal Equinox,
Osiris, 
united with the Moon, communicated to her the seeds of fruitfulness
which


--- PAGE 889 ---
she poured upon the air, and therewith impregnated the generative 
principles which gave activity to universal vegetation. Apis, represented
by 
a bull, was the living and sensible image of the Sun or Osiris, when in
union 
with Isis or the Moon at the Vernal Equinox, concurring with her in 
provoking everything that lives to generation. This conjunction of the Sun 
with the Moon at the Vernal Equinox, in the constellation Taurus,
required 
the Bull Apis to have on his shoulder a mark resembling the Crescent 
Moon. And the fecundating influence of these two luminaries was 
expressed by images that would now be deemed gross and indecent, but 
which then were not misunderstood. 
Everything good in Nature comes from Osiris, - order, harmony, and the 
favorable temperature of the seasons and celestial periods. From Typhon 
come the stormy passions and irregular impulses that agitate the brute and 
material part of man; maladies of the body, and violent shocks that injure 
the health and derange the system; inclement weather, derangement of the


--- PAGE 890 ---
seasons, and eclipses. Osiris and Typhon were the Ormuzd and Ahriman
of 
the Persians; principles of good and evil, of light and darkness, ever at
war 
in the administration of the Universe. 
Osiris was the image of generative power. This was expressed by his 
symbolic statues, and by the sign into which he entered at the Vernal 
Equinox. He especially dispensed the humid principle of Nature,
generative 
element of all things; and the Nile and all moisture were regarded as 
emanations from him, without which there could be no vegetation. 
That Osiris and Isis were the Sun and Moon, is attested by 
many ancient writers; by Diogenes Laertius, Plutarch, Lucian, Suidas, 
Macrobius, Martianus Capella, and others. His power was symbolized
by an Eye over a Sceptre. The Sun was termed by the Greeks the Eye 
of Jupiter, and the Eye of the World; and his is the All-Seeing Eye in 
our Lodges. The oracle of Claros styled him King of the Stars and of 
the Eternal Fire, that engenders the year and the seasons, dispenses 
rain and winds, and brings about daybreak and night. And Osiris was


--- PAGE 891 ---
invoked as the God that resides in the Sun and is enveloped by his 
rays, the invisible and eternal force that modifies the sublunary world 
by means of the Sun. 
Osiris was the same God known as Bacchus, Dionusos, and Serapis. 
Serapis is the author of the regularity and harmony of the world. 
Bacchus, jointly with Ceres (identified by Herodotus with Isis) presides 
over the distribution of all our blessings; and from the two emanates 
everything beautiful and good in Nature. One furnishes the germ and 
principle of every good; the other receives and preserves it as a 
deposit; and the latter is the function of the Moon in the theology of the 
Persians. In each theology, Persian and Egyptian, the Moon acts 
directly on the earth; but she is fecundated, in one by the Celestial Bull 
and in the other by Osiris, with whom she is united at the Vernal 
Equinox, in the sign Taurus, the place of her exaltation or greatest 
influence on the earth. The force of Osiris, says Plutarch, is exercised 
through the Moon. She is the passive cause relatively to him, and the 
active cause relatively to the earth, to which she transmits the germs of


--- PAGE 892 ---
fruitfulness received from him. 
In Egypt the earliest movement in the waters of the Nile began to 
appear at the Vernal Equinox, when the new Moon occurred at the 
entrance of the Sun into the constellation Taurus; and thus the Nile 
was held to receive its fertilizing power from the combined action of the 
equinoctial Sun and the new Moon, meeting in Taurus. Osiris was often 
confounded with the Nile, and Isis with the earth; and Osiris was 
deemed to act on the earth, and to transmit to it his emanations, 
through both the Moon and the Nile; whence the fable that his 
generative organs were thrown into that river. Typhon, on the other 
hand, was the principle of aridity and barrenness; and by his mutilation 
of Osiris was meant that. drought which caused the Nile to retire within 
his bed and shrink up in Autumn. 
Elsewhere than in Egypt, Osiris was the symbol of the refreshing rains 
that descend to fertilize the earth; and Typhon the burning winds of
Autumn; the stormy rains that rot the flowers, the plants, and leaves; 
the short, cold days; and everything injurious in Nature, and that


--- PAGE 893 ---
produces corruption and destruction. 
In short, Typhon is the principle of corruption, of darkness, of the lower 
world from which come earthquakes, tumultuous commotions of the air, 
burning heat, lightning, and fiery meteors, and plague and pestilence. 
Such too was the Ahriman of the Persians; and this revolt of the Evil 
Principle against the Principle of Good and Light, has been 
represented in every cosmogony, under many varying forms. Osiris, on 
the contrary, by the intermediation of Isis, fills the material world with 
happiness, purity, and order, by which the harmony of Nature is 
maintained. t was said that he died at the Autumnal Equinox, when 
Taurus or the Pleiades rose in the evening, and that he rose to life 
again in "lie Spring, when vegetation was inspired with new activity. 
Of course the two signs of Taurus and Scorpio will figure most largely 
in the mythological history of Osiris, for they marked the two equinoxes, 
2500 years before our Era; and next to them the other constellations, 
near the equinoxes, that fixed the limits of the duration of the fertilizing 
action of the Sun; and it is also to be remarked that Venus, the


--- PAGE 894 ---
Goddess of Generation, has her domicile in Taurus, as the Moon has 
there her place of exaltation. 
When the Sun was in Scorpio, Osiris lost his life, and that fruitfulness 
which, under the form of the Bull, he had communicated, through the 
Moon, to the Earth. Typhon, his hands and feet horrid with serpents, 
and whose habitat in the Egyptian planisphere was under Scorpio, 
confined him in a chest and flung him into the Nile, under the 17th 
degree of Scorpio. Under that sign he lost his life and virility; and he 
recovered them in the Spring, when he had connection with the Moon. 
When he entered Scorpio, his light diminished, Night reassumed her 
dominion, the Nile shrunk within its banks, and the earth lost her 
verdure and the trees their leaves. Therefore it is that on the Mithriac 
Monuments, the Scorpion bites the testicles of the Equinoctial Bull, on 
which sits Mithras, the Sun of Spring and God of Generation; and that, 
on the same monuments, we see two trees, one covered with young 
leaves, and at its foot a little bull and a torch burning; and the 
other loaded with fruit, and at its foot a Scorpion, and a torch reversed


--- PAGE 895 ---
and extinguished.
Ormuzd or Osiris, the beneficent Principle that gives the world light, 
was personified by the Sun, apparent source of light. Darkness, 
personified by Typhon or Ahriman, was his natural enemy. The Sages 
of Egypt described the necessary and eternal rivalry or opposition of 
these principles, ever pursuing one the other, and one dethroning the 
other in every annual revolution, and at a particular period, one in the 
Spring under the Bull, and the other in Autumn under the Scorpion, by 
the legendary history of Osiris and Typhon, detailed to us by Diodorus 
and Synesius; in which history were also personified the Stars and 
constellations Orion, Capella, the Twins, the Wolf, Sirius, and 
Hercules, whose risings and settings noted the advent of one or the 
other equinox. 
Plutarch gives us the positions in the Heavens of the Sun and Moon, at 
the moment when Osiris was murdered by Typhon. The Sun, he says, 
was in the Sign of the Scorpion, which he then entered at the Autumnal 
Equinox. The Moon was full, he adds; and consequently, as it rose at


--- PAGE 896 ---
sunset, it occupied Taurus, which, opposite to Scorpio, rose as it and 
the Sun sank together, so that she was then found alone in the sign 
Taurus, where, six months before, she had been in union or 
conjunction with Osiris, the Sun, receiving from him those germs of 
universal fertilization which he communicated to her. It was the sign 
through which Osiris first ascended into his empire of light and good. It 
rose with the Sun on the day of the Vernal Equinox; it remained six 
months in the luminous hemisphere, ever preceding the Sun and above 
the horizon during the day; until in Autumn, the Sun arriving at Scorpio, 
Taurus was in complete opposition with him, rose when he set, and 
completed its entire course above the horizon during the night; 
presiding, by rising in the evening, over the commencement of the long 
nights. Hence in the sad ceremonies commemorating the death of 
Osiris, there was borne in procession a golden bull covered with black 
crape, image of the darkness into which the familiar sign of Osiris was 
entering, and which was to spread over the Northern regions, while the 
Sun, prolonging the nights, was to be absent, and each to remain


--- PAGE 897 ---
under the dominion of Typhon, Principle of Evil and Darkness. 
Setting out from the sign Taurus, Isis, as the Moon, went seeking for 
Osiris through all the superior signs, in each of which she 
became full in the successive months from the Autumnal to the Vernal 
Equinox, without finding him in either. Let us follow her in her allegorical
wanderings. 
Osiris was slain by Typhon his rival, with whom conspired a Queen of 
Ethiopia, by whom, says Plutarch, were designated the winds. The 
paranatellons of Scorpio, the sign occupied by the Sun when Osiris was 
slain, were the Serpents, reptiles which supplied the attributes of the Evil 
Genii and of Typhon, who himself bore the form of a serpent in the 
Egyptian planisphere. And in the division of Scorpio is also found 
Cassiopeia, Queen of Ethiopia, whose setting brings stormy winds. 
Osiris descended to the shades or infernal regions. There he took the 
name of Serapis, identical with Pluto, and assumed his nature. He was 
then in conjunction with Serpentarius, identical with Æsculapius, whose 
form he took in his passage to the lower signs, where he takes the names


--- PAGE 898 ---
of Pluto and Ades. 
Then Isis wept for the death of Osiris, and the golden bull covered with 
crape was carried in procession. Nature mourned the impending loss of 
her Summer glories, and the advent of the empire of night, the
withdrawing 
of the waters, made fruitful by the Bull in Spring, the cessation of the
winds 
that brought rains to swell the Nile, the shortening of the days, and the 
despoiling of the earth. Then Taurus, directly opposite the Sun, entered 
into the cone of shadow which the earth projects, by which the Moon is 
eclipsed at full, and with which, making night, the Bull rises and
descends 
as if covered with a veil, while he remains above our horizon. 
The body of Osiris, enclosed in a chest or coffin, was cast into the Nile. 
Pan and the Satyrs, near Chemmis, first discovered his death, announced 
it by their cries, and everywhere created sorrow and alarm. Taurus, with 
the full Moon, then entered into the cone of shadow, and under him was 
the Celestial River, most properly called the Nile, and below, Perseus, the 
God of Chemmis, and Auriga, leading a she-goat, himself identical with


--- PAGE 899 ---
Pan, whose wife Aiga the she-goat was styled. 
Then Isis went in search of the body. She first met certain children who 
had seen it, received from them their information, and gave them in
return 
the gift of divination. The second full Moon occurred in Gemini, the
Twins, 
who presided over the oracles of Didymus, and one of whom was Apollo, 
the God of Divination. 
She learned that Osiris had, through mistake, had connection with her 
sister Nephte, which she discovered by a crown of leaves of the melilot,
which he had left behind him. Of this connection a child was born, whom 
Isis, aided by her dogs, sought for, found, reared, and attached to 
herself, by the name of Anubis, her faithful guardian. The third full Moon 
occurs in Cancer, domicile of the Moon. The paranatellons of that sign 
are, the crown of Ariadne or Proserpine, made of leaves of the melilot, 
Procyon and Canis Major, one star of which was called the Star of Isis, 
while Sirius himself was honored in Egypt under the name of Anubis. 
Isis repaired to Byblos, and seated herself near a fountain, where she


--- PAGE 900 ---
was found by the women of the Court of a King. She was induced to visit 
his Court, and became the nurse of his son. The fourth full Moon was in 
Leo, domicile of the Sun, or of Adonis, King of Byblos. The 
paranatellons of this sign are the flowing water of Aquarius, and 
Cephens, King of Ethiopia, called Regulus, or simply The King. Behind 
him rise Cassiopeia his wife, Queen of Ethiopia, Andromeda his 
daughter, and Perseus his son-in-law, all paranatellons in part of this 
sign, and in part of Virgo. 
Isis suckled the child, not at her breast, but with the end of her finger, at 
night. She burned all the mortal parts of its body, and then, taking the 
shape of a swallow, she flew to the great column of the palace, made of 
the tamarisk-tree that grew up round the coffin containing the body of 
Osiris, and within which it was still enclosed. The fifth full Moon 
occurred in Virgo, the true image of Isis, and which Eratosthenes calls 
by that name. It pictured a woman suckling an infant, the son of Isis, 
born near the Winter Solstice. This sign has for paranatellons the mast 
of the Celestial Ship, and the swallow-tailed fish or swallow above it,


--- PAGE 901 ---
and a portion of Perseus, son-in-law of the King of Ethiopia. 
Isis, having recovered the sacred coffer, sailed from Byblos in a vessel 
with the eldest son of the King, toward Boutos, where Anubis was, 
having charge of her son Horus; and in the morning dried up a river, 
whence arose a strong wind. Landing, she hid the coffer in a forest. 
Typhon, hunting a wild boar by moonlight, discovered it, recognized the 
body of his rival, and cut it into fourteen pieces, the number of days 
between the full and new Moon, and in every one of which days the 
Moon loses a portion of the light that at the commencement filled her 
whole disk. The sixth full Moon occurred in Libra over the divisions 
separating which 
from Virgo are the Celestial Ship, Perseus, son of the King of Ethiopia 
and Boötes, said to have nursed Horus. The river of Orion that sets in
the morning is also a paranatellon of Libra, as are Ursa Major, the 
Great Bear or Wild Boar of Erymanthus, and the Dragon of the North 
Pole or the celebrated Python from which the attributes of Typhon were 
borrowed. All these surround the full Moon of Libra, last of the Superior


--- PAGE 902 ---
Signs, and the one that precedes the new Moon of Spring, about to be 
reproduced in Taurus, and there be once more in conjunction with the 
Sun. 
Isis collects the scattered fragments of the body of Osiris, buries them, 
and consecrates the phallus, carried in pomp at the Pamylia, or feasts 
of the Vernal Equinox, at which time the congress of Osiris and the 
Moon was celebrated. Then Osiris had returned from the shades, to aid 
Horus his son and Isis his wife against the forces of Typhon. He thus 
reappeared, say some, under the form of a wolf, or, others say, under 
that of a horse. The Moon, fourteen days after she is full in Libra, 
arrives at Taurus and unites herself to the Sun, whose fires she 
thereafter for fourteen days continues to accumulate on her disk from 
new Moon to full. Then she unites with herself all the months in that 
superior portion of the world where light always reigns, with harmony 
and order, and she borrows from him the force which is to destroy the 
germs of evil that Typhon had, during the winter, planted everywhere in 
nature. This passage of the Sun into Taurus, whose attributes he


--- PAGE 903 ---
assumes on his return from the lower hemisphere or the shades, is 
marked by the rising in the evening of the Wolf and the Centaur, and 
by the heliacal setting of Orion, called the Star of Horus, and which 
thenceforward is in conjunction with the Sun of Spring, in his triumph 
over the darkness or Typhon. 
Isis, during the absence of Osiris, and after she had hidden the coffer 
in the place where Typhon found it, had rejoined that malignant enemy; 
indignant at which, Horus her son deprived her of her ancient diadem 
when she rejoined Osiris as lie was about to attack Typhon: but 
Mercury gave her in its place a helmet shaped like the head of a bull. 
Then Horus, as a mighty warrior, such as Orion was described, fought 
with and defeated Typhon; who, in the shape of the Serpent or Dragon 
of the Pole, had assailed his father. So, in Ovid, Apollo destroys the 
same Python, when Io, fascinated by Jupiter, is metamorphosed into a 
cow, and placed in the sign of the Celestial Bull, where she becomes 
Isis. The equi 
noctial year ends at the moment when the Sun and Moon, at the Vernal


--- PAGE 904 ---
Equinox, are united with Orion, the Star of Horns, placed of in the
Heavens under Taurus. The new Moon becomes young again in 
Taurus, and shows herself as a crescent, for the first time, in the next 
sign, Gemini, the domicile of Mercury. Then Orion, in conjunction with 
the Sun, with whom he rises, precipitates the Scorpion, his rival, into 
the shades of night, causing him to set he whenever he himself reappears 
on the eastern horizon, with the Sun. Day lengthens and the 
germs of evil are by degrees eradicated: and Horus (from Aur, Light) 
reigns triumphant, symbolizing, by his succession to the characteristics 
of Osiris, the eternal renewal of the Sun's youth and creative vigor at 
the Vernal of Equinox.
 MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
25º - Knight of the Brazen Serpent ( Part 2 )


--- PAGE 905 ---
Such are the coincidences of astronomical phenomena with the legend 
of Osiris and Isis; sufficing to show the origin of the he legend, 
overloaded as it became at length with all the ornamentation natural to 
the poetical and figurative genius of the Orient. 
Not only into this legend, but into those of all the ancient nations, enter 
the Bull, the Lamb, the Lion, and the Scorpion or the Serpent; and 
traces of the worship of the Sun yet linger in all religions. Everywhere, 
even in our Order, survive the equinoctial and solstitial feasts. Our 
ceilings still glitter with the greater and lesser luminaries of the 
Heavens, and our lights, in their number and arrangement, have 
astronomical references. In all churches and chapels, as in all Pagan 
temples and pagodas, the altar is in the East; and the ivy over the east 
windows of old churches is the Hedera Helix of Bacchus. Even the 
cross had an astronomical origin; and our Lodges are full of the ancient 
symbols. 
The learned author of the Sabæan Researches, Landseer, advances 
another theory in regard to the legend of Osiris; in which he makes the


--- PAGE 906 ---
constellation Boötes play a leading part. He observes that, as none of 
the stars were visible at the same time with the Sun, his actual place in 
the Zodiac, at any given could only be ascertained by the Sabæan 
astronomers by their observations of the stars, and of their heliacal and 
achronical risings and is settings. There were many solar festivals 
among the Sabæans, and part of them agricultural ones; and the 
concomitant signs of those festivals were the risings and settings of the 
stars of the Husbandman, Bear-driver, or Hunter, BOÖTES. His stars 
were, among the Hierophants, the established nocturnal indices or signs 
of the Sun's place in the ecliptic at different seasons of the year, and the
festivals were named, one, that of the Aphanism or disappearance; 
another, that of the Zetesis, or search, etc., of Osiris or Adonis, that is, 
of Boötes. 
The returns of certain stars, as connected with their concomitant 
seasons of spring (or seed-time) and harvest, seemed to the ancients, 
who had not yet discovered that gradual change, resulting from the 
apparent movement of the stars in longitude, which bas been termed the


--- PAGE 907 ---
precession of the equinoxes, to be eternal and immutable; and those 
periodical returns were to the initiated, even more than to the vulgar, 
celestial oracles, announcing the approach of those important changes, 
upon which the prosperity, and even the very existence of man must 
ever depend; and the oldest of the Sabæan constellations seem to have 
been, an astronomical Priest, a King, a Queen, a Husbandman, and a 
Warrior; and these more frequently recur on the Sabæan cylinders than 
any other constellations whatever. The King was Cepheus or Chepheus 
of Ethiopia: the Husbandman, Osiris, Bacchus, Sabazeus, Noah or 
Boötes. To the latter sign, the Egyptians were nationally, traditionally 
and habitually grateful; for they conceived that from Osiris all the 
greatest of terrestrial enjoyments were derived. The stars of the 
Husbandman were the signal for those successive agricultural labors on 
which the annual produce of the soil depended; and they came in 
consequence to be considered and hailed, in Egypt and Ethiopia, as the 
genial stars of terrestrial productiveness; to which the oblations, 
prayers, and vows of the pious Sabæan were regularly offered up.


--- PAGE 908 ---
Landseer says that the stars in Boötes, reckoning down to those of the 
5th magnitude inclusive, are twenty-six, which, seeming achronically to 
disappear in succession, produced the fable of the cutting of Osiris into 
twenty-six pieces by Typhon. There are more stars than this in the 
constellation; but no more that the ancient votaries of Osiris, even in the 
clear atmosphere of the Sabæan climates, could observe without 
telescopes. 
Plutarch says Osiris was cut into fourteen pieces: Diodorus, into
twentysix; 
in regard to which, and to the whole legend, Landseer's ideas, 
varying from those commonly entertained, are as follows: 
Typhon, Landseer thinks, was the ocean, which the ancients 
fabled or believed surrounded the Earth, and into which all the stars in 
their turn appear successively to sink; [perhaps it was DARKNESS
personified, which the ancients called TYPHON. He was hunting by 
moonlight, says the old legend, when he met with Osiris]. 
The ancient Saba must have been near latitude 15º' north. Axoum is


--- PAGE 909 ---
nearly in 14º, and the Western Saba or Meroë is to the north of that. 
Forty-eight centuries ago, Aldebaran the leading star of the year, had, 
at the Vernal Equinox, attained at daylight in the morning, an elevation 
of about 14 degrees, sufficient for him to have ceased to be combust, 
that is, to have emerged from the Sun's rays, so as to be visible. The 
ancients allowed twelve days for a star of the first magnitude to emerge 
from the solar rays and there is less twilight, the further South we go. 
At the same period, too, Cynosura was not the pole-star, but Alpha 
Draconis was; and the stars rose and set with very different degrees of 
obliquity from those of their present risings and settings. By having a 
globe constructed with circumvolving poles, capable of any adjustment 
with regard to the colures, Mr. Landseer ascertained that, at that 
remote period, in lat. 15º north, the 26 stars in Boötes, or 27, including 
Arcturus, did not set anchronically in succession; but several set 
simultaneously in couples, and six by threes simultaneously; so that, in 
all, there were but fourteen separate settings or disappearances, 
corresponding with the fourteen pieces into which Osiris was cut,


--- PAGE 910 ---
according to Plutarch. Kappa, Iota, and Theta, in the uplifted western 
hand, disappeared together, and last of all. They really skirted the 
horizon; but were invisible in that low latitude, for the three or four days 
mentioned in some of the versions; while the Zetesis or search was 
proceeding, and the women of Phœnicia and Jerusalem sat weeping 
for the Wonder, Thammuz; after which they immediately reappeared, 
below and to the eastward of a Draconis. 
And, on the very morning after the achronical departure of the last star 
of the Husbandman, Aldebaran rose heliacally, and became visible in 
the East in the morning before day. 
And precisely at the moment of the heliacal rising of Arcturus, also rose 
Spica Virginis. One is near the middle of the Husbandman, and the 
other near that of the Virgin; and Arcturus may have been the part of 
Osiris which Isis did not recover with the other pieces of the body. 
At Dedan and Saba it was thirty-six days, from the beginning of the 
aphanism, i.e., the disappearances of these stars, to the heliacal rising
of Aldebaran. During these days, or forty at Medina, or a few more at


--- PAGE 911 ---
Babylon and Byblos, the stars of the Husbandman successively sank 
out of sight, during the crepusculum or short-lived morning twilight of 
those Southern climes. They disappear during the glancings of the 
dawn, the special season of ancient sidereal observation. 
Thus the forty days of mourning for Osiris were measured out by the 
period of the departure of his Stars. When the last had sunken out of 
sight, the vernal season was ushered in; and the Sun arose with the 
splendid Aldebaran, the Tauric leader of the whole Hosts of Heaven; 
and the whole East rejoiced and kept holiday. 
With the exception of the Stars and , Boötes did not begin to 
reappear in the Eastern quarter of the Heavens till after the lapse of 
about four months. Then the Stars of Taurus had declined Westward, 
and Virgo was rising heliacally. In that latitude, also, the Stars of Ursa 
Major [termed anciently the Ark of Osiris] set; and Benetnasch, the last 
of them, returned to the Eastern horizon, with those in the head of Leo, 
a little before the Summer Solstice. In about a month, followed the 
Stars of the Husbandman; the chief of them, Ras, Mirach, and Arcturus


--- PAGE 912 ---
being very nearly simultaneous in their heliacal rising. 
Thus the Stars of Boötes rose in the East immediately after 
Vindemiatrix, and as if under the genial influence of its rays; he had his 
annual career of prosperity; he revelled orientally for a quarter of a 
year, and attained his meridian altitude with Virgo; and then, as the 
Stars of the Water-Urn rose, and Aquarius began to pour forth his 
annual deluge, he declined Westward, preceded by the Ark of Osiris. 
In the East, he was the sign of that happiness in which Nature, the 
great Goddess of passive production, rejoiced. Now, in the West, as he 
declines toward the Northwestern horizon, his generative vigor 
gradually abates; the Solar year grows old; and as his Stars descend 
beneath the Western Wave, Osiris dies, and the world mourns. 
The Ancient Astronomers saw all the great Symbols of Masonry in the 
Stars. Sirius still glitters in our Lodges as the Blazing Star, (I'Etoile 
Flamboyante). The Sun is still symbolized by the point within a Circle; 
and, with the Moon and Mercury or Anubis, in the three Great Lights of 
the Lodge. Not only to these, but


--- PAGE 913 ---
to the figures and numbers exhibited by the Stars, were ascribed 
peculiar and divine powers. The veneration paid to numbers had its
source there. The three Kings in Orion are in a straight line, and 
equidistant from each other, the two extreme Stars being 3º apart, and 
each of the three distant from the one nearest it 1º 30'. And as the 
number three is peculiar to apprentices, so the straight line is the first 
principle of Geometry, having length but no breadth, and being but the 
extension of a point, and an emblem of Unity, and thus of Good, as the 
divided or broken line is of Duality or Evil. Near these Stars are the 
Hyades, five in number, appropriate to the Fellow-Craft; and close to 
them the Pleiades, of the master's number, seven; and thus these three 
sacred numbers, consecrated in Masonry as they were in the 
Pythagorean philosophy, always appear together in the Heavens, when 
the Bull, emblem of fertility and production, glitters among the Stars, 
and Aldebaran leads the Hosts of Heaven (Tsbauth). 
Algenib in Perseus and Almaach and Algol in Andromeda form a
rightangled


--- PAGE 914 ---
triangle, illustrate the 47th problem, and display the Grand 
Master's square upon the skies. Denebola in Leo, Arcturus in Boötes, 
and Spica in Virgo form an equilateral triangle, universal emblem of 
Perfection, and the Deity with His Trinity of Infinite Attributes, Wisdom, 
Power, and Harmony; and that other, the generative, preserving, and 
destroying Powers. The Three Kings form, with Rigel in Orion, two 
triangles included in one: and Capella and Menkalina in Auriga, with 
Bellatrix and Betelgueux in Orion, form two isosceles triangles with ß 
Tauri, that is equidistant from each pair; while the first four make a 
right-angled parallelogram, - the oblong square so often mentioned in 
our Degrees. 
Julius Firmicus, in his description of the Mysteries, says, "But in those 
funerals and lamentations which are annually celebrated in honor of 
Osiris, their defenders pretend a physical reason. They call the seeds 
of fruit, Osiris; the Earth, Isis; the natural heat, Typhon: and because 
the fruits are ripened by the natural heat, and collected for the life of 
man, and are separated from their marriage to the earth, and are sown


--- PAGE 915 ---
again when Winter approaches, this they would have to be the death of 
Osiris: but when the fruits, by the genial fostering of the earth, begin 
again to be generated by a new procreation, this is the finding of 
Osiris." 
No doubt the decay of vegetation and the falling of the leaves. 
emblems of dissolution and evidences of the action of that Power that 
changes Life into Death, in order to bring Life again out of Death, were
regarded as signs of that Death that seemed coming upon all Nature; as 
the springing of leaves and buds and flowers in the spring was a sign of 
restoration to life: but these were all secondary, and referred to the Sun
as 
first cause. It was his figurative death that was mourned, and not theirs;
and 
that with that death, as with his return to life, many of the stars were 
connected. 
We have already alluded to the relations which the twelve signs of the 
Zodiac bear to the legend of the Master's Degree. Some other
coincidences 
may have sufficient interest to warrant mention.


--- PAGE 916 ---
Khir-Om was assailed at the East, West, and South Gates of the Temple. 
The two equinoxes were called, we have seen, by all the Ancients, the 
Gates of Heaven, and the Syrians and Egyptians considered the Fish (the 
Constellation near Aquarius, and one of the Stars whereof is Fomalhaut)
to 
be indicative of violence and death. 
Khir-Om lay several days in the grave; and, at the Winter Solstice, for
five 
or six days, the length of the days did not perceptibly increase. Then, the 
Sun commencing again to climb Northward, as Osiris was said to arise
from 
the dead, so Khir-Om was raised, by the powerful attraction of the Lion 
(Leo), who waited for him at the Summer Solstice, and drew him to
himself. 
The names of the three assassins may have been adopted from three Stars 
that we have already named. We search in vain in the Hebrew or Arabic
for 
the names Jubelo, Jubela, and Jubelum. They embody an utter absurdity, 
and are capable of no explanation in those languages. Nor are the names 
Gibs, Gravelot, Hobhen, and the like, in the Ancient and Accepted Rite,
any


--- PAGE 917 ---
more plausible, or better referable to any ancient language. But when, by 
the precession of the Equinoxes, the Sun was in Libra at the Autumnal 
Equinox, he met in that sign, where the reign of Typhon commenced,
three 
Stars forming a triangle, - Zuben-es Chamali in the West, Zuben-Hak-
Rabi 
in the East, and Zuben-EI-Gubi in the South, the latter immediately below 
the Tropic of Capricorn, and so within the realm of Darkness. From these 
names, those of the murderers have perhaps been corrupted. In Zuben- 
Hak-Rabi we may see the original of Jubelum Akirop; and in Zuben-
WGubi, 
that of Jubelo Gibs: and time and ignorance may even have 
transmuted the words Es Chamali into one as little like them as Gravelot. 
Isis, the Moon personified, sorrowing sought for her husband. Nine or 
twelve Fellow-Crafts (the Rites vary as to the number), in white aprons,
were sent to search for Khir-Om, in the Legend of the Master's Degree; 
or, in this Rite, the Nine Knights Elu. Along the path that the Moon 
travels are nine conspicuous Stars, by which nautical men determine 
their longitude at Sea; - Arietis, Aldebaran, Pollux, Regulus, Spica


--- PAGE 918 ---
Virginis, Antares, Altair, Fomalhaut, and Markab. These might well be 
said to accompany Isis in her search. 
In the York Rite, twelve Fellow-Crafts were sent to search for the body 
of Khir-Om and the murderers. Their number corresponds with that of 
the Pleiades and Hyades in Taurus, among which Stars the Sun was 
found when Light began to prevail over Darkness, and the Mysteries 
were held. These Stars, we have shown, received early and particular 
attention from the astronomers and poets. The Pleiades were the Stars 
of the ocean to the benighted mariner; the Virgins of Spring, heralding 
the season of blossoms. 
As six Pleiades only are now visible, the number twelve may have been 
obtained by them, with Aldebaran, and five far more brilliant Stars than 
any other of the Hyades, in the same region of the Heavens, and which 
were always spoken of in connection with the Pleiades; - the Three 
Kings in the belt of Orion. and Bellatrix and Betelgueux on his 
shoulders; brightest of the flashing starry hosts. 
"Canst thou," asks job, "bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades or


--- PAGE 919 ---
loose the bands of Orion?" And in the book of Amos we find these 
Stars connected with the victory of Light over Darkness: "Seek Him," 
says that Seer, "that maketh the Seven Stars (the familiar name of the 
Pleiades), and Orion, AND TURNETH THE SHADOW OF DEATH 
INTO MORNING." 
An old legend in Masonry says that a dog led the Nine Elus to the 
cavern where Abiram was hid. Boötes was anciently called Caleb 
Anubach, a Barking Dog; and was personified in Anubis, who bore the 
head of a dog, and aided Isis in her search. Arcturus, one of his Stars, 
fiery red, as if fervent and zealous, is also connected by job with the 
Pleiades and Orion. When Taurus opened the year, Arcturus rose after 
the Sun, at the time of the Winter Solstice, and seemed searching him 
through the darkness, until. sixty days afterward, he rose at the same 
hour. Orion then
also, at the Winter Solstice, rose at noon, and at night seemed to be in 
search of the Sun. 
So, referring again to the time when the Sun entered the Autumnal


--- PAGE 920 ---
Equinox, there are nine remarkable Stars that come to the meridian 
nearly at the same time, rising as Libra sets, and so seeming to chase 
that Constellation. They are Capella and Menkalina in the Charioteer, 
Aldebaran in Taurus, Bellatrix, Betelgueux, the Three Kings, and Rigel 
in Orion. Aldebaran passes the meridian first, indicating his right to his 
peculiar title of Leader. Nowhere in the heavens are there, near the 
same meridian, so many splendid Stars. And close behind them, but 
further South, follows Sirius, the Dog-Star, who showed the nine Elus 
the way to the murderer's cave. 
Besides the division of the signs into the ascending and descending 
series (referring to the upward and downward progress of the soul), the 
latter from Cancer to Capricorn, and the former from Capricorn to 
Cancer, there was another division of them not less important; that of 
the six superior and six inferior signs; the former, 2455 years before 
our era, from Taurus to Scorpio, and 300 years before our era, from 
Aries to Libra; and the latter, 2455 years B.C. from Scorpio to Taurus, 
and 300 years B.C. from Libra to Aries; of which we have already


--- PAGE 921 ---
spoken, as the two Hemispheres, or Kingdoms of Good and Evil, Light 
and Darkness; of Ormuzd and Ahriman among the Persians, and Osiris 
and Typhon among the Egyptians. 
With the Persians, the first six Genii, created by Ormuzd, presided over 
the first six signs, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo: and 
the six evil Genii, or Devs, created by Ahriman, over the six others, 
Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces. The 
soul was fortunate and happy under the Empire of the first six; and 
began to be sensible of evil, when it passed under the Balance or 
Libra, the seventh sign. Thus the soul entered the realm of Evil and 
Darkness when it passed into the Constellations that belong to and 
succeed the Autumnal Equinox; and it re-entered the realm of Good 
and Light, when it arrived, returning, at those of the Vernal Equinox. It 
lost its felicity by means of the Balance, and regained it by means of 
the Lamb. This is a necessary consequence of the premises; and it is 
confirmed by the authorities and by emblems still extant. 
Sallust the Philosopher, speaking of the Feasts of Rejoicing


--- PAGE 922 ---
celebrated at the Vernal Equinox, and those of Mourning, in memory of 
the rape of Proserpine, at the Autumnal Equinox, says that the former 
were celebrated, because then is effected, as it were, the return of the 
soul toward the Gods; that the time when the principle of Light 
recovered its superiority over that of Darkness, or day over night, was 
the most favorable one for souls that tend to re-ascend to their 
Principle; and that when Darkness and the Night again become victors, 
was most favorable to the descent of souls toward the infernal regions. 
For that reason, the old astrologers, as Firmicus states, fixed the 
locality of the river Styx in the 8th degree of the Balance. And he thinks 
that by Styx was allegorically meant the earth. 
The Emperor Julian gives the same explanation, but more fully 
developed. He states, as a reason why the august Mysteries of Ceres 
and Proserpine were celebrated at the Autumnal Equinox, that at that 
period of the year men feared lest the impious and dark power of the 
Evil Principle, then commencing to conquer, should do harm to their 
souls. They were a precaution and means of safety, thought to be


--- PAGE 923 ---
necessary at the moment when the God of Light was passing into the 
opposite or adverse region of the world; while at the Vernal Equinox 
there was less to be feared, because then that God, present in one 
portion of the world, recalled souls to Him, he says, and showed 
Himself to be their Saviour. He had a little before developed that 
theological idea, of the attractive force which the Sun exercises over 
souls, drawing them to him and raising them to his luminous sphere. 
He attributes this effect to him at the feasts of Atys, dead and restored 
to life, or the feasts of Rejoicing, which at the end of three days 
succeeded the mourning for that death; and he inquires why those 
Mysteries were celebrated at the Vernal Equinox. The reason, he says, 
is evident. As the sun, arriving at the equinoctial point of Spring, 
drawing nearer to us, increases the length of the days, that period 
seems most appropriate for those ceremonies. For, besides that there 
is a great affinity between the substance of Light and the nature of the 
Gods, the Sun has that occult force of attraction, by which he draws 
matter toward himself, by means of his warmth, making plants to shoot


--- PAGE 924 ---
and grow, etc.; and why can he not, by the same divine and pure action 
of his rays, attract and draw to him fortunate souls? Then, as light is 
analogous to the Divine Nature, and favorable to souls struggling to 
return to
their First Principle, and as that light so increases at the Vernal 
Equinox, that the days prevail in duration over the nights, and as the 
Sun has an attractive force, besides the visible energy of his rays, it 
follows that souls are attracted toward the solar light. He does not 
further pursue the explanation; because, he says, it belongs to a 
mysterious doctrine, beyond the reach of the vulgar and known only to 
those who understand the mode of action of Deity, like the Chaldean 
author whom he cites, who had treated of the Mysteries of Light, or the 
God with seven rays. 
Souls, the Ancients held, having emanated from the Principle of Light, 
partaking of its destiny here below, cannot be indifferent to nor 
unaffected by these revolutions of the Great Luminary, alternately 
victor and overcome during every Solar revolution.


--- PAGE 925 ---
This will be found to be confirmed by an examination of some of the 
Symbols used in the Mysteries. One of the most famous of these was 
THE SERPENT, the peculiar Symbol also of this Degree. The 
Cosmogony of the Hebrews and that of the Gnostics designated this 
reptile as the author of the fate of Souls. It was consecrated in the 
Mysteries of Bacchus and in those of Eleusis. Pluto overcame the 
virtue of Proserpine under the form of a serpent; and, like the Egyptian 
God Serapis, was always pictured seated on a serpent, or with that 
reptile entwined about him. It is found on the Mithriac Monuments, and 
supplied with attributes of Typhon to the Egyptians. The sacred 
basilisc, in coil, with head and neck erect, was the royal ensign of the 
Pharaohs. Two of them were entwined around and hung suspended 
from the winged Globe on the Egyptian Monuments. On a tablet in one 
of the Tombs at Thebes, a God with a spear pierces a serpent's head. 
On a tablet from the Temple of Osiris at Philæ is a tree, with a man on 
one side, and a woman on the other, and in front of the woman an 
erect basilisc, with horns on its head and a disk between the horns.


--- PAGE 926 ---
The head of Medusa was encircled by winged snakes, which, the head 
removed, left the Hierogram or Sacred Cypher of the Ophites or 
Serpent-worshippers. And the Serpent, in connection with the Globe or 
circle, is found upon the monuments of all the Ancient Nations. 
Over Libra, the sign through which souls were said to descend or fall, 
is found, on the Celestial Globe, the Serpent, grasped by Serpentarius, 
the Serpent-bearer. The head of the reptile is tinder Corona Borealis, 
the Northern Crown, called by Ovid, Libera, or
Proserpine; and the two Constellations rise, with the Balance, after the 
Virgin (or Isis), whose feet rest on the eastern horizon at Sunrise on 
the day of the equinox. As the Serpent extends over both signs, Libra 
and Scorpio, it has been the gate through which souls descend, during 
the whole time that those two signs in succession marked the Autumnal 
Equinox. To this alluded the Serpent, which, in the Mysteries of 
Bacchus Saba-Zeus was flung into the bosom of the Initiate. 
And hence came the enigmatical expression, the Serpent engenders 
the Bull, and the Bull the Serpent; alluding to the two adverse


--- PAGE 927 ---
constellations, answering to the two equinoxes, one of which rose as 
the other set, and which were at the two points of the heavens through 
which souls passed, ascending and descending. By the Serpent of 
Autumn, souls fell; and they were regenerated again by the Bull on 
which Mithras sate, and whose attributes Bacchus-Zagreus and the 
Egyptian Osiris assumed, in their Mysteries, wherein were represented 
the fall and regeneration of souls, by the Bull slain and restored to life. 
Afterward the regenerating Sun assumed the attributes of Aries or the 
Lamb; and in the Mysteries of Ammon, souls were regenerated by 
passing through that sign, after having fallen through the Serpent. 
The Serpent-bearer, or Ophicus, was Æsculapius, God of Healing. In 
the Mysteries of Eleusis, that Constellation was placed in the eighth 
Heaven: and on the eighth day of those Mysteries, the feast of 
Æsculapius was celebrated. It was also termed Epidaurus, or the feast 
of the Serpent of Epidaurus. The Serpent was sacred to Æsculapius; 
and was connected in various ways with the mythological adventures of 
Ceres.


--- PAGE 928 ---
So the libations to Souls, by pouring wine on the ground, and looking 
toward the two gates of Heaven, those of day and night, referred to the 
ascent and descent of Souls. 
Ceres and the Serpent, Jupiter Ammon and the Bull, all figured in the 
Mysteries of Bacchus. Suppose Aries, or Jupiter Ammon occupied by 
the Sun setting in the West; - Virgo (Ceres) will be on the Eastern 
horizon, and in her train the Crown, or Proserpine. Suppose Taurus 
setting; - then the Serpent is in the East; and reciprocally; so that 
Jupiter Ammon, or the Sun of Aries, causes the Crown to rise after the 
Virgin, in the train of which comes the Serpent. Place reciprocally the
Sun at the other equinox, with the balance in the West, in conjunction 
with the Serpent under the Crown; and we shall see the Bull and the 
Pleiades rise in the East. Thus are explained all the fables as to the 
generation of the Bull by the Serpent and of the Serpent by the Bull, 
the biting of the testicles of the Bull by the Scorpion, on the Mithriac 
Monuments; and that Jupiter made Ceres with child by tossing into her 
bosom the testicles of a Ram.


--- PAGE 929 ---
In the Mysteries of the bull-horned Bacchus, the officers held serpents 
in their hands, raised them above their heads, and cried aloud "Eva!" 
the generic oriental name of the serpent, and the particular name of the 
constellation in which the Persians placed Eve and the serpent. The 
Arabians call it Hevan, Ophiucus himself, Hawa, and the brilliant star in 
his head, Ras-al-Hawa. The use of this word Eva or Evoë caused 
Clemens of Alexandria to say that the priests in the Mysteries invoked 
Eve, by whom evil was brought into the world. 
The mystic winnowing-fan, encircled by serpents, was used in the 
feasts of Bacchus. In the Isiac Mysteries a basilisc twined round the 
handle of the mystic vase. The Ophites fed a serpent in a mysterious 
ark, from which they took him when they celebrated the Mysteries, and 
allowed him to glide among the sacred bread. The Romans kept 
serpents in the Temples of Bona Dea and Æsculapius. In the Mysteries 
of Apollo, the pursuit of Latona by the serpent Python was represented. 
In the Egyptian Mysteries, the dragon Typhon pursued Isis. 
According to Sanchoniathon, TAAUT, the interpreter of Heaven to men,


--- PAGE 930 ---
attributed something divine to the nature of the dragon and serpents, in 
which the Phoenicians and Egyptians followed him. They have more 
vitality, more spiritual force, than any other creature; of a fiery nature, 
shown by the rapidity of their motions, without the limbs of other 
animals. They assume many shapes and attitudes, and dart with 
extraordinary quickness and force. When they have reached old age, 
they throw off that age and are young again, and increase in size and 
strength, for a certain period of years. 
The Egyptian Priests fed the sacred serpents in the temple at Thebes. 
Taaut himself had in his writings discussed these mysteries in regard 
to the serpent. Sanchoniathon said in another work, that the serpent 
was immortal, and re-entered into himself; which, according to some 
ancient theosophists, particularly those
of India, was an attribute of the Deity. And he also said that the e serpent
never 
died, unless by a violent death. 
The Phoenicians called the serpent Agathodemon [the good spirit]; and
Kneph


--- PAGE 931 ---
was the Serpent-God of the Egyptians. 
The Egyptians, Sanchoniathon said, represented the serpent with the head
of a 
hawk, on account of the swift flight of that bird: and the chief Hierophant,
the 
sacred interpreter, gave very mysterious explanations of that symbol;
saying that 
such a serpent was a very divine creature, and that, opening his eyes, he
lighted 
with their rays the whole of first-born space: when he closes them, it is
darkness 
again. In reality, the hawk-headed serpent, genius of light, or good genius,
was 
the symbol of the Sun. 
In the hieroglyphic characters, a snake was the letter T or DJ. It occurs
many 
times on the Rosetta stone. The horned serpent was the hieroglyphic for a
God. 
According to Eusebius, the Egyptians represented the world by a blue
circle, 
sprinkled with flames, within which was extended a serpent with the head
of a 
hawk. Proclus says they represented the four quarters of the world by a
cross,


--- PAGE 932 ---
and the soul of the world, or Kneph, by a serpent surrounding it in the
form of a 
circle. 
We read in Anaxagoras, that Orpheus said, that the water, and the vessel
that 
produced it, were the primitive principles of things, and together gave
existence 
to an animated being, which was a serpent, with two heads, one of a lion
and the 
other of a bull, between a which was the figure of a God whose name was 
Hercules or Kronos: that from Hercules came the egg of the world, which 
produced Heaven and earth, by dividing itself into two hemispheres: and
that the 
God Phanes, which issued from that egg, was in the shape of a serpent. 
The Egyptian Goddess Ken, represented standing naked on a lion, held
two 
serpents in her hand. She is the same as the Astarte or Ashtaroth of the 
Assyrians. Hera, worshipped in the Great Temple at Babylon, held in her
right 
hand a serpent by the head; and near Khea, also worshipped there, were
two 
large silver serpents.


--- PAGE 933 ---
In a sculpture from Kouyunjik, two serpents attached to poles are near a
firealtar, 
at which two eunuchs are standing. Upon it is the sacred fire, and a 
bearded figure leads a wild goat to the sacrifice.
The serpent of the Temple of Epidaurus was sacred to Æsculapius, the God
of 
Medicine, and 462 years after the building of the city, was taken to Rome
after 
a pestilence. 
The Phoenicians represented the God Nomu (Kneph or Amun-Kneph) by a 
serpent. In Egypt, a Sun supported by two asps was the emblem of Horhat
the 
good genius; and the serpent with the winged globe was placed over the
doors 
and windows of the Temples as a tutelary God. Antipater of Sidon calls
Amun 
"the renowned Serpent," and the Cerastes is often found embalmed in the 
Thebaid. 
On ancient Tyrian coins and Indian medals, a serpent was represented,
coiled 
round the trunk of a tree. Python, the Serpent Deity, was esteemed
oracular;


--- PAGE 934 ---
and the tripod at Delphi was a triple-headed serpent of gold. 
The portals of all the Egyptian Temples are decorated with the hierogram
of 
the Circle and the Serpent. It is also found upon the Temple of Naki-
Rustan in 
Persia; on the triumphal arch at Pechin, in China; over the gates of the
great 
Temple of Chaundi Teeva, in Java; upon the walls of Athens; and in the 
Temple of Minerva at Tegea. The Mexican hierogram was formed by the 
intersecting of two great Serpents, which described the circle with their
bodies, 
and had each a human head in its mouth. 
All the Buddhists crosses in Ireland had serpents carved upon them.
Wreaths 
of snakes are on the columns of the ancient Hindu Temple at Burwah-
Sangor. 
Among the Egyptians, it was a symbol of Divine Wisdom, when extended
at 
length; and, with its tail in its mouth, of Eternity. 
In the ritual of Zoroaster, the Serpent was a symbol of the Universe. In
China,


--- PAGE 935 ---
the ring between two Serpents was the symbol of the world governed by
the 
power and wisdom of the Creator. The Bacchanals carried serpents in
their 
hands or round their heads. 
The Serpent entwined round an Egg, was a symbol common to the Indians,
the 
Egyptians, and the Druids. It referred to the creation of the Universe. A
Serpent 
with an egg in his mouth was a symbol of the Universe containing within
itself 
the germ of all things that the Sun develops. 
The property possessed by the Serpent, of casting its skin, and apparently 
renewing its youth, made it an emblem of eternity and immortality. The
Syrian 
women still employ it as a charm against
barrenness, as did the devotees of Mithras and Saba-Zeus. The Earthborn 
civilizers of the early world, Fohi, Cecrops, and Erechtheus, were 
half-man, half-serpent. The snake was the guardian of the Athenian 
Acropolis. NAKHUSTAN, the brazen serpent of the wilderness, became 
naturalized among the Hebrews as a token of healing power. "Be ye,"


--- PAGE 936 ---
said Christ, "wise as serpents, and harmless as doves." 
The Serpent was as often a symbol of malevolence and enmity. It 
appears among the emblems of Siva-Roudra, the power of desolation 
and death: it is the bane of Aëpytus, Idom, Archemorus, and 
Philoctetes: it gnaws the roots of the tree of life in the Eddas, and bites 
the heel of unfortunate Eurydice. In Hebrew writers it is generally a 
type of evil; and is particularly so in the Indian and Persian 
Mythologies. When the Sea is churned by Mount Mandar rotating 
within the coils of the Cosmical Serpent Vasouki, to produce the Amrita 
or water of immortality, the serpent vomits a hideous poison, which 
spreads through and infects the Universe, but which Vishnu renders 
harmless by swallowing it. Ahriman in serpent-form invades the realm 
of Ormuzd; and the Bull, emblem of life, is wounded by him and dies. It 
was therefore a religious obligation with every devout follower of 
Zoroaster to exterminate reptiles, and other impure animals, especially 
serpents. The moral and astronomical significance of the Serpent were 
connected. It became a maxim of the Zend-Avesta, that Ahriman, the


--- PAGE 937 ---
Principle of Evil, made the Great Serpent of Winter, who assaulted the 
creation of Ormuzd. 
A serpent-ring was a well-known symbol of time: and to express 
dramatically how time preys upon itself, the Egyptian priests fed vipers 
in a subterranean chamber, as it were in the sun's Winter abode on the 
fat of bulls, or the year's plenteousness. The dragon of Winter pursues 
Ammon, the golden ram, to Mount Casius. The Virgin of the zodiac is 
bitten in the heel by Serpens, who, with Scorpio, rises immediately 
behind her; and as honey, the emblem of purity and salvation, was 
thought to be an antidote to the serpent's bite, so the bees of Aristæus, 
the emblems of nature's abundance, are destroyed through the agency 
of the serpent, and regenerated within the entrails of the Vernal Bull. 
The Sun-God is finally victorious. Chrishna crushes the head of the 
serpent Calyia; Apollo destroys Python, and Hercules that Lernæan 
monster whose poison festered in the foot of Philoctetes,
of Mopsus, of Chiron, or of Sagittarius. The infant Hercules destroys 
the pernicious snakes detested of the gods, and ever, like St. George


--- PAGE 938 ---
of England and Michael the Archangel, wars against hydras and 
dragons. 
The eclipses of the sun and moon were believed by the Orientals to be 
caused by the assaults of a dæmon in dragon-form; and they 
endeavored to scare away the intruder by shouts and menaces. This 
was the original Leviathan or Crooked Serpent of old, transfixed in the 
olden time by the power of Jehovah, and suspended as a glittering 
trophy in the sky; yet also the Power of Darkness supposed to be ever 
in pursuit of the Sun and Moon. When it finally overtakes them, it will 
entwine them in its folds, and prevent their shining. In the last Indian 
Avatara, as in the Eddas, a serpent vomiting flames is expected to 
destroy the world. The serpent presides over the close of the year, 
where it guards the approach to the golden fleece of Aries, and the 
three apples or seasons of the Hesperides; presenting a formidable 
obstacle to the career of the Sun-God. The Great Destroyer of snakes 
is occasionally married to them; Hercules with the northern dragon 
begets the three ancestors of Scythia; for the Sun seems at one time to


--- PAGE 939 ---
rise victorious from the contest with darkness, and at another to sink 
into its embraces. The northern constellation Draco, whose sinuosities 
wind like a river through the wintry bear, was made the astronomical 
cincture of the Universe, as the serpent encircles the mundane egg in 
Egyptian hieroglyphics. 
The Persian Ahriman was called "The old serpent, the liar from the 
beginning, the Prince of Darkness, and the rover up and down." The 
Dragon was a well-known symbol of the waters and of great rivers; and 
it was natural that by the pastoral Asiatic Tribes, the powerful nations 
of the alluvial plains in their neighborhood who adored the dragon or 
Fish, should themselves be symbolized under the form of dragons; and 
overcome by the superior might of the Hebrew God, as monstrous 
Leviathans maimed and destroyed by him. Ophioneus, in the old Greek 
Theology, warred against Kronos, and was overcome and cast into his 
proper element, the sea. There he is installed as the Sea-God Oannes 
or Dragon, the Leviathan of the watery half of creation, the dragon who 
vomited a flood of water after the persecuted woman of the


--- PAGE 940 ---
Apocalypse, the monster who threatened to devour Hesione and 
Andromeda, and who for a time became the grave of Hercules and
Jonah; and he corresponds with the obscure name of Rahab, whom 
Jehovah is said in Job to have transfixed and overcome. 
In the Spring, the year or Sun-God appears as Mithras or Europa 
mounted on the Bull; but in the opposite half of the Zodiac he rides the 
emblem of the waters, the winged horse of Nestor or Poseidon: and the 
Serpent, rising heliacally at the Autumnal Equinox, besetting with 
poisonous influence the cold constellation Sagittarius, is explained as 
the reptile in the path who "bites the horse's heels, so that his rider falls 
backward." The same serpent, the Oannes Aphrenos or Musaros of 
Syncellus, was the Midgard Serpent which Odin sunk beneath the sea, 
but which grew to such a size as to encircle the whole earth. 
For these Asiatic symbols of the contest of the Sun-God with the 
Dragon of darkness and Winter were imported not only into the Zodiac, 
but into the more homely circle of European legend; and both Thor and 
Odin fight with dragons, as Apollo did with Python, the great scaly


--- PAGE 941 ---
snake, Achilles with the Scamander, and Bellerophon with the 
Chimæra. In the apocryphal book of Esther, dragons herald "a day of 
darkness and obscurity"; and St. George of England, a problematic 
Cappadocian Prince, was originally only a varying form of Mithras. 
Jehovah is said to have "cut Rahab and wounded the dragon." The 
latter is not only the type of earthly desolation, the dragon of the deep 
waters, but also the leader of the banded conspirators of the sky, of the 
rebellious stars, which, according to Enoch, "came not at the right 
time"; and his tail drew a third part of the Host of Heaven, and cast 
them to the earth. Jehovah "divided the sea by his strength, and broke 
the heads of the Dragons in the waters." And according to the Jewish 
and Persian belief, the Dragon would, in the latter days, the Winter of 
time, enjoy a short period of licensed impunity, which would be a 
season of the greatest suffering to the people of the earth; but he 
would finally be bound or destroyed in the great battle of Messiah; or, 
as it seems intimated by the Rabbinical figure of being eaten by the 
faithful, be, like Ahriman or Vasouki, ultimately absorbed by and united


--- PAGE 942 ---
with the Principle of good. 
Near the image of Rhea, in the Temple of Bel at Babylon, were two 
large serpents of silver, says Diodorus, each weighing thirty talents; 
and in the same temple was an image of Juno, holding in her right 
hand the head of a serpent. The Greeks called Bel
Beliar; and Hesychius interprets that word to mean a dragon or great 
serpent. We learn from the book of Bel and the Dragon, that in Babylon 
was kept a great, live serpent, which the people worshipped. 
The Assyrians, the Emperors of Constantinople, the Parthians, 
Scythians, Saxons, Chinese, and Danes all bore the serpent as a 
standard, and among the spoils taken by Aurelian from Zenobia were 
such standards, Persici Dracones. The Persians represented Ormuzd 
and Ahriman by two serpents, contending for the mundane egg. 
Mithras is represented with a lion's head and human body, encircled by 
a serpent. In the Sadder is this precept: "When you kill serpents, you 
will repeat the Zend-Avesta, and thence you will obtain great merit; for 
it is the same as if you had killed so many devils."


--- PAGE 943 ---
Serpents encircling rings and globes, and issuing from globes, are 
common in the Persian, Egyptian, Chinese, and Indian monuments. 
Vishnu is represented. reposing on a coiled serpent, whose folds form 
a canopy over him. Mahadeva is represented with a snake around his 
neck, one around his hair, and armlets of serpents on both arms. 
Bhairava sits on the coils of a serpent, whose head rises above his 
own. Parvati has snakes about her neck and waist. Vishnu is the 
Preserving Spirit, Mahadeva is Siva, the Evil Principle, Bhairava is his 
son, and Parvati his consort. The King of Evil Demons was called in 
Hindi! Mythology, Naga, the King of Serpents, in which name we trace 
the Hebrew Nachash, serpent. 
In Cashmere were seven hundred places where carved images of 
serpents were worshipped; and in Thibet the great Chinese Dragon 
ornamented the Temples of the Grand Lama. In China, the dragon was 
the stamp and symbol of royalty, sculptured in all the Temples, 
blazoned on the furniture of the houses, and interwoven with the 
vestments of the chief nobility. The Emperor bears it as his armorial


--- PAGE 944 ---
device; it is engraved on his sceptre and diadem, and on all the vases 
of the imperial palace. The Chinese believe that there is a dragon of 
extraordinary strength and sovereign power, in Heaven, in the air, on 
the waters, and on the mountains. The God Fohi is said to have had 
the form of a man, terminating in the tail of a snake, a combination to 
be more fully explained to you in a subsequent Degree. 
The dragon and serpent are the 5th and 6th signs of the Chinese
Zodiac; and the Hindus and Chinese believe that, at every eclipse, the 
sun or moon is seized by a huge serpent or dragon, the serpent Asootee 
of the Hindus, which enfolds the globe and the constellation Draco; to 
which also refers "the War in Heaven, when Michael and his Angels 
fought against the dragon." 
Sanchoniathon says that Taaut was the author of the worship of serpents 
among the Phoenicians. He "consecrated," he says, "the species of 
dragons and serpents; and the Phœnicians and Egyptians followed him in 
this superstition." He was "the first who made an image of Cœlus"; that
is,


--- PAGE 945 ---
who represented the Heavenly Hosts of Stars by visible symbols; and was 
probably the same as the Egyptian Thoth. On the Tyrian coins of the age 
of Alexander, serpents are represented in many positions and attitudes, 
coiled around trees, erect in front of altars, and crushed by the Syrian 
Hercules. 
The seventh letter of the Egyptian alphabet, called Zeuta or Life, was 
sacred to Thoth, and was expressed by a serpent standing on his tail; and 
that Deity, the God of healing, like Æsculapius, to whom the serpent was 
consecrated, leans on a knotted stick around which coils a snake. The 
Isiac tablet, describing the Mysteries of Isis, is charged with serpents in 
every part, as her emblems. The Asp was specially dedicated to her, and 
is seen on the heads of her statues, on the bonnets of her priests, and on 
the tiaras of the Kings of Egypt. Serapis was sometimes represented with 
a human head and serpentine tail: and in one engraving two minor Gods 
are represented with him, one by a serpent with a bull's head, and the 
other by a serpent with the radiated head of a lion. 
On an ancient sacrificial vessel found in Denmark, having several


--- PAGE 946 ---
compartments, a serpent is represented attacking a kneeling boy, 
pursuing him, retreating before him, appealed to beseechingly by him, 
and conversing with him. We are at once reminded of the Sun at the new 
year represented by a child sitting on a lotus, and of the relations of the 
Sun of Spring with the Autumnal Serpent, pursued by and pursuing him, 
and in conjunction with him. Other figures on this vessel belong to the 
Zodiac. 
The base of the tripod of the Pythian Priestess was a triple headed 
serpent of brass, whose body, folded in circles growing wider and wider 
toward the ground, formed a conical column, while the three heads, 
disposed triangularly, upheld the tripod
of gold. A similar column was placed on a pillar in the Hippodroine at 
Constantinople, by the founder of that city; one of the heads of which is 
said to have been broken off by Mahomet the Second, by a blow with his 
iron mace. 
The British God Hu was called "The Dragon-Ruler of the World," and his 
car was drawn by serpents. His ministers were styled adders. A Druid in a


--- PAGE 947 ---
poem of Taliessin says, "I am a Druid, I am an Architect, I am a Prophet, I 
am a Serpent (Gnadi)." The Car of the Goddess Ceridwen also was drawn 
by serpents. 
In the elegy of Uther Pendragon, this passage occurs in a description of
the 
religious rites of the Druids: "While the Sanctuary is earnestly invoking
The 
Gliding King, before whom the Fair One retreats, upon the evil that
covers 
the huge stones; whilst the Dragon moves round over the places which 
contain vessels of drink-offering, whilst the drink-offering is in the
Golden 
Horns;” in which we readily discover the mystic and obscure allusion to
the 
Autumnal Serpent pursuing the Sun along the circle of the Zodiac, to the 
celestial cup or crater, and the Golden horns of Virgil's milk-white bull;
and, 
a line or two further on, we find the Priest imploring the victorious Beli,
the 
Sun-God of the Babylonians. 
With the serpent, in the Ancient Monuments, is very often found
associated


--- PAGE 948 ---
the Cross. The Serpent upon a Cross was an Egyptian Standard. It occurs 
repeatedly upon the Grand Staircase of the Temple of Osiris at Philæ; and 
on the pyramid of Ghizeh are represented two kneeling figures erecting a 
Cross, on the top of which is a serpent erect. The Crux Ansata was a
Cross 
with a coiled Serpent above it; and it is perhaps the most common of all 
emblems on the Egyptian Monuments, carried in the hand of almost every 
figure of a Deity or a Priest. It was, as we learn by the monuments, the
form 
of the iron tether-pins, used for making fast to the ground the cords by 
which young animals were confined: and as used by shepherds, became a 
symbol of Royalty to the Shepherd Kings. 
A Cross like a Teutonic or Maltese one, formed by four curved lines
within a 
circle, is also common on the Monuments, and represented the Tropics
and 
the Colures. 
The Caduceus, borne by Hermes or Mercury, and also by Cybele, Minerva, 
Anubis, Hercules Oginius the God of the Celts, and the personified


--- PAGE 949 ---
Constellation Virgo, was a winged wand, entwined by
two serpents. It was originally a simple Cross, symbolizing the equator
and 
equinoctial Colure, and the four elements proceeding from a common
centre. 
This Cross, surmounted by a circle, and that by a crescent, became an 
emblem of the Supreme Deity - or of the active power of generation and
the 
passive power of production conjoined, - and was appropriated to Thoth
or 
Mercury. It then assumed an improved form, the arms of the Cross being 
changed into wings, and the circle and crescent being formed by two
snakes, 
springing from the wand, forming a circle by crossing each other, and
their 
heads making the horns of the crescent; in which form it is seen in the
hands 
of Anubis. 
The triple Tau, in the centre of a circle and a triangle, typifies the Sacred 
Name; and represents the Sacred Triad, the Creating, Preserving, and 
Destroying Powers; as well as the three great lights of Masonry. If to the


--- PAGE 950 ---
Masonic point within a Circle, and the two parallel lines, we add the
single 
Tau Cross, we have the Ancient Egyptian Triple Tau. 
A column in the form of a cross, with a circle over it, was used by the 
Egyptians to measure the increase of the inundations of the Nile. The Tau 
and Triple Tau are found in many Ancient Alphabets. 
With the Tau or the Triple Tau may be connected, within two circles, the 
double cube, or perfection; or the perfect ashlar. 
The Crux Ansata is found on the sculptures of Khorsabad; on the ivories
from 
Nimroud, of the same age, carried by an Assyrian Monarch; and on
cylinders 
of the later Assyrian period. 
As the single Tau represents the one God, so, no doubt, the Triple Tau,
the 
origin of which cannot be traced, was meant to represent the Trinity of
his 
attributes, the three Masonic pillars, WISDOM, STRENGTH, and
HARMONY. 
The Prophet Ezekiel, in the 4th verse of the 9th chapter, says: "And the
Lord


--- PAGE 951 ---
said unto him, 'Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of 
Jerusalem, and mark the letter TAU upon the foreheads of those that sigh 
and mourn for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof." So
the 
Latin Vulgate, and the probably most ancient copies of the Septuagint 
translate the passage. This Tau was in the form of the cross of this
Degree, 
and it was the emblem of life and salvation. The Samaritan Tau and the 
Ethiopic Tavvi are the evident prototype of the Greek t; and we learn
from 
Tertullian, Origen, and St. Jerome
that the Hebrew Tau was anciently written in the form of a Cross. 
In ancient times the mark Tau was set on those who had been acquitted by
their 
judges, as a symbol of innocence. The military commanders placed it on
soldiers 
who escaped unhurt from the field of battle, as a sign of their safety under
the 
Divine Protection. 
It was a sacred symbol among the Druids. Divesting a tree of part of its
branches,


--- PAGE 952 ---
they left it in the shape of a Tau Cross, preserved it carefully, and
consecrated it 
with solemn ceremonies. On the tree they cut deeply the word THAU, by
which 
they meant God. On the right arm of the Cross, they inscribed the word
HESULS, 
on the left BELEN or BELENUS, and on the middle of the trunk
THARAMIS. This 
represented the sacred Triad. 
It is certain that the Indians, Egyptians, and Arabians paid veneration to
the sign 
of the Cross, thousands of years before the coming of Christ. Everywhere
it was a 
sacred symbol. The Hindus and the Celtic Druids built many of their
Temples in 
the form of a Cross, as the ruins still remaining clearly show, and
particularly the 
ancient Druidical Temple at Classerniss in the Island of Lewis in Scotland.
The 
Circle is of 12 Stones. On each of the sides, east, west, and south, are
three. In 
the centre was the image of the Deity; and on the north an avenue of
twice


--- PAGE 953 ---
nineteen stones, and one at the entrance. The Supernal Pagoda at Benares
is in 
the form of a Cross; and the Druidical subterranean grotto at New Grange
in 
Ireland. 
The Statue of Osiris at Rome had the same emblem. Isis and Ceres also
bore it; 
and the caverns of initiation were constructed in that shape with a pyramid
over 
the Sacellum. 
Crosses were cut in the stones of the Temple of Serapis in Alexandria; and
many 
Tau Crosses are to be seen in the sculptures of Alabastion and Esné, in
Egypt. 
On coins, the symbol of the Egyptian God Kneph was a Cross within a
Circle. 
The Crux Ansata was the particular emblem of Osiris, and his sceptre
ended with 
that figure. It was also the emblem of Hermes, and was considered a
Sublime 
Hieroglyphic, possessing mysterious powers and virtues, as a wonder-
working 
amulet.


--- PAGE 954 ---
The Sacred Tau occurs in the hands of the mummy-shaped figures between
the 
forelegs of the row of Sphynxes, in the great avenue leading from Luxor to
Karnac. 
By the Tau Cross the
Cabalists expressed the number 10, a perfect number, denoting heaven,
and the 
Pythagorean Tetractys, or incommunicable name of God. The Tau Cross is
also 
found on the stones in front of the door, of the Temple of Amunoth III, at
Thebes, 
who reigned about the time when the Israelites took possession of Canaan:
and the 
Egyptian Priests carried it in all the sacred processions. 
Tertullian, who had been initiated, informs us that the Tau was inscribed
on the 
forehead of every person who had been admitted into the Mysteries of
Mithras. 
As the simple Tau represented Life, so, when the Circle, symbol of
Eternity, was 
added, it represented Eternal Life. 
At the Initiation of a King, the Tau, as the emblem of life and key of the
Mysteries,


--- PAGE 955 ---
was impressed upon his lips. 
In the Indian Mysteries, the Tau Cross, under the name of Tiluk, was
marked upon 
the body of the candidate, as a sign that he was set apart for the Sacred
Mysteries. 
On the upright tablet of the King, discovered at Nimroud, are the names of
thirteen 
Great Gods (among which are YAV and BEL); and the left-hand character
of every 
one is a cross composed of two cuneiform characters. 
The Cross appears upon an Ancient Phœnician medal found in the ruins of
Citium; 
on the very ancient Buddhist Obelisk near Ferns in Ross-shire; on the
Buddhist 
Round Towers in Ireland, and upon the splendid obelisk of the same era at
Forres 
in Scotland. 
Upon the façade of a temple at Kalabche in Nubia are three regal figures,
each 
holding a Crux Ansata. 
Like the Subterranean Mithriatic Temple at New Grange in Scotland, the
Pagodas of


--- PAGE 956 ---
Benares and Mathura were in the form of a Cross. Magnificent Buddhist
Crosses 
were erected, and are still standing, at Clonmacnoise, Finglas, and
Kilcullen in 
Ireland. Wherever the monuments of Buddhism are found, in India,
CeyIon, or 
Ireland, we find the Cross: for Buddha or Boudh was represented to have
been 
crucified. 
All the planets known to the Ancients were distinguished by the Mystic
Cross, in 
conjunction with the solar or lunar symbols; Saturn by a cross over a
crescent, 
Jupiter by a cross under a crescent, Mars by a cross resting obliquely on a
circle, 
Venus by a cross under a circle, and Mercury by a cross surmounted by a
circle and 
that by a crescent.
The Solstices, Cancer and Capricorn, the two Gates of Heaven, are the 
two pillars of Hercules, beyond which he, the Sun, never journeyed: and 
they still appear in our Lodges, as the two great columns, Jachin and 
Boaz, and also as the two parallel lines that bound the circle, with a point


--- PAGE 957 ---
in the centre, emblem of the Sun, between the two tropics of Cancer and 
Capricorn. 
The blazing Star in our Lodges, we have already said, represents Sirius, 
Anubis, or Mercury, Guardian and Guide of Souls. Our Ancient English 
brethren also considered it an emblem of the Sun. In the old Lectures 
they said: "The Blazing Star or Glory in the centre refers us to that Grand 
Luminary the Sun, which enlightens the Earth, and by its genial influence 
dispenses blessings to mankind." It is also said in those lectures to be an 
emblem of Prudence. The word Prudentia means, in its original and
fullest 
signification, Foresight: and accordingly the Blazing Star has been 
regarded as an emblem of Omniscience, or the All-Seeing Eye, which to 
the Ancients was the Sun. 
Even the Dagger of the Elu of Nine is that used in the Mysteries of 
Mithras; Which, with its blade black and hilt white, was an emblem of the 
two principles of Light and Darkness. 
Isis, the same as Ceres, was, as we learn from Eratosthenes, the


--- PAGE 958 ---
Constellation Virgo, represented by a woman holding an ear of wheat. 
The different emblems which accompany her in the description given by 
Apuleius, a serpent on either side, a golden vase, with a serpent twined 
round the handle, and the animals that marched in procession, the bear, 
the ape, and Pegasus, represented the Constellations that, rising with the 
Virgin, when on the day of the Vernal Equinox she stood in the Oriental 
gate of Heaven, brilliant with the rays of the full moon, seemed to march 
in her train. 
The cup, consecrated in the Mysteries both of Isis and Eleusis, was the 
Constellation Crater or the Cup. The sacred vessel of the Isiac ceremony 
finds its counterpart in the Heavens. The Olympic robe presented to the 
Initiate, a magnificent mantle, covered with figures of serpents and 
animals, and under which were twelve other sacred robes, wherewith he 
was clothed in the sanctuary, alluded to the starry Heaven and the twelve 
signs: while the seven preparatory immersions in the sea alluded to the 
seven spheres, through which the soul plunged, to arrive here below and 
take up its abode in a body.


--- PAGE 959 ---
The Celestial Virgin, during the last three centuries that preceded the 
Christian era, occupied the horoscope or Oriental point, and that gate 
of Heaven through which the Sun and Moon ascended above the 
horizon at the two equinoxes. Again it occupied it at midnight, at the 
Winter Solstice, the precise moment when the year commenced. Thus 
it was essentially connected with the march of times and seasons, of 
the Sun, the Moon, and day and night, at the principal epochs of the 
year. At the equinoxes were celebrated the greater and lesser 
Mysteries of Ceres. When souls descended past the Balance, at the 
moment when the Sun occupied that point, the Virgin rose before him; 
she stood at the gates of day and opened them to him. Her brilliant 
Star, Spica Virginis, and Arcturus, in Boötes, northwest of it, heralded 
his coming. When he had returned to the Vernal Equinox, at the 
moment when souls were generated, again it was the Celestial Virgin 
that led the march of the signs of night; and in her stars came the 
beautiful full moon of that month. Night and day were in succession 
introduced by her, when they began to diminish in length; and souls,


--- PAGE 960 ---
before arriving at the gates of Hell, were also led by her. In going 
through these signs, they passed the Styx in the 8th Degree of Libra. 
She was the famous Sibyl who initiated Eneas, and opened to him the 
way to the infernal regions. 
This peculiar situation of the Constellation Virgo, has caused it to enter 
into all the sacred fables in regard to nature, under different names and 
the most varied forms. It often takes the name of Isis or the Moon, 
which, when at its full at the Vernal Equinox, was in union with it or 
beneath its feet. Mercury (or Anubis) having his domicile and exaltation 
in the sign Virgo, was, in all the sacred fables and Sanctuaries, the 
inseparable companion of Isis, without whose counsels she did 
nothing. 
This relation between the emblems and mysterious recitals of the 
initiations, and the Heavenly bodies and order of the world, was still 
more clear in the Mysteries of Mithras, adored as the Sun in Asia 
Minor, Cappadocia, Armenia, and Persia, and whose Mysteries went to 
Rome in the time of Sylla. This is amply proved by the descriptions we


--- PAGE 961 ---
have of the Mithriac cave, in which were figured the two movements of 
the Heavens, that of the fixed Stars and that of the Planets, the 
Constellations, the eight mystic gates of the spheres, and the symbols 
of the elements. So on a celebrated monument of that religion, found at 
Rome, were figured, the Serpent or Hydra tinder Leo, 
as in the Heavens, the Celestial Dog, 
the Bull, the Scorpion, the Seven Planets, represented by seven 
altars, the Sun, Moon, and emblems relating to Light, to Darkness, and 
to their succession during the year, where each in turn triumphs for six 
months. 
The Mysteries of Atys were celebrated when the Sun entered Aries; 
and among the emblems was a ram at the foot of a tree which was 
being cut down. 
Thus, if not the whole truth, it is yet a large part of it, that the Heathen 
Pantheon, in its infinite diversity of names and personifications, was 
but a multitudinous, though in its origin unconscious allegory, of which 
physical phenomena, and principally the Heavenly Bodies, were the


--- PAGE 962 ---
fundamental types. The glorious images of Divinity which formed 
Jehovah's Host, were the Divine Dynasty or real theocracy which 
governed the early world; and the men of the golden age, whose looks 
held commerce with the skies, and who watched the radiant rulers 
bringing Winter and Summer to mortals, might be said with poetic truth 
to live in immediate communication with Heaven, and, like the Hebrew 
Patriarchs, to see God face to face. Then the Gods introduced their 
own worship among mankind: then Oannes, Oe or Aquarius rose from 
the Red Sea to impart science to the Babylonians; then the bright Bull 
legislated for India and Crete; and the Lights of Heaven, personified as 
Liber and Ceres, hung the Bœotian hills with vineyards, and gave the 
golden sheaf to Eleusis. The children of men were, in a sense, allied or 
married to those sons of God who sang the jubilee of creation; and the 
encircling vault with its countless Stars, which to the excited 
imagination of the solitary Chaldean wanderer appeared as animated 
intelligences, might naturally be compared to a gigantic ladder, on 
which, in their rising and setting, the Angel luminaries appeared to be


--- PAGE 963 ---
ascending and descending between earth and Heaven. The original 
revelation died out of men's memories; they worshipped the Creature 
instead of the Creator; and holding all earthly things as connected by 
eternal links of harmony and sympathy with the heavenly bodies, they 
united in one view astronomy, astrology, and religion. Long wandering 
thus in error, they at length ceased to look upon the Stars and external 
nature as Gods; and by directing their attention to the microcosm or 
narrower world of self, they again became acquainted with the True 
Ruler and Guide of the Universe,
and used the old fables and superstitions as symbols and allegories, 
by which to convey and under which to hide the great truths which had 
faded out of most men's remembrance. 
In the Hebrew writings, the term "Heavenly Hosts" includes not only the 
counsellors and emissaries of Jehovah, but also the celestial 
luminaries; and the stars, imagined in the East to be animated 
intelligences, presiding over human weal and woe, are identified with 
the more distinctly impersonated messengers or angels, who execute


--- PAGE 964 ---
the Divine decrees, and whose predominance in Heaven is in 
mysterious correspondence and relation with the powers and 
dominions of the earth. In job, the Morning Stars and the Sons of God 
are identified; they join in the same chorus of praise to the Almighty; 
they are both susceptible of joy; they walk in brightness, and are liable 
to impurity and imperfection in the sight of God. The Elohim originally 
included hot only foreign superstitious forms, but also all that host of 
Heaven which was revealed in poetry to the shepherds of the desert, 
now as an encampment of warriors, now as careering in chariots of fire, 
and now as winged messengers, ascending and descending the vault 
of Heaven, to communicate the will of God to mankind. 
"The Eternal," says the Bereshith Rabba to Genesis, "called forth 
Abraham and his posterity out of the dominion of the stars; by nature, 
the Israelite was a servant to the stars, and born under their influence, 
as are the heathen; but by virtue of the law given on Mount Sinai, he 
became liberated from this degrading servitude." The Arabs had a 
similar legend. The Prophet Amos explicitly asserts that the Israelites,


--- PAGE 965 ---
in the desert, worshipped, not Jehovah, but Moloch, or a Star-God, 
equivalent to Saturn. The Gods El or Jehovah were not merely 
planetary or solar. Their symbolism, like that of every other Deity, was 
coextensive with nature, and with the mind of man. Yet the astrological 
character is assigned even to Jehovah. He is described as seated on 
the pinnacle of the Universe, leading forth the Hosts of Heaven, and 
telling them unerringly by name and number. His stars are His sons 
and His eyes, which run through the whole world, keeping watch over 
men’s deeds. The stars and planets were properly the angels. In 
Pharisaic tradition, as in the phraseology of the New Testament, the 
Heavenly Host appears as an Angelic Army, divided into regiments and 
brigades, under the command
of imaginary chiefs, such as Massaloth, Legion, Kartor Gistra, etc., - each 
Gistra being captain of 365,000 myriads of stars. The Seven Spirits which 
stand before the throne, spoken of by several Jewish writers, and 
generally presumed to have been immediately derived from the. Persian 
Amshaspands, were ultimately the seven planetary intelligences, the


--- PAGE 966 ---
original model of the seven-branched golden candlestick exhibited to 
Moses on God's mountain. The stars were imagined to have fought in 
their courses against Sisera. The heavens were spoken of as holding a 
predominance over earth, as governing it by signs and ordinances, and 
as containing the elements of that astrological wisdom, more especially 
cultivated by the Babylonians and Egyptians. 
Each nation was supposed by the Hebrews to have its own guardian 
angel, and its own provincial star. One of the chiefs of the Celestial 
Powers, at first Jehovah Himself in the character of the Sun, standing in 
the height of Heaven, overlooking and governing all things, afterward one 
of the angels or subordinate planetary genii of Babylonian or Persian 
mythology, was the patron and protector of their own nation, "the Prince 
that standeth for the children of thy people." The discords of earth were 
accompanied by a warfare in the sky; and no people underwent the 
visitation of the Almighty, without a corresponding chastisement being 
inflicted on its tutelary angel. 
The fallen Angels were also fallen Stars; and the first allusion to a feud


--- PAGE 967 ---
among the spiritual powers in early Hebrew Mythology, where Rahab and 
his confederates are defeated, like the Titans in a battle against the 
Gods, seems to identify the rebellious Spirits as part of the visible 
Heavens, where the "high ones on high" are punished or chained, as a 
signal proof of God's power and justice. God, it is said – 
"Stirs the sea with His might - by His understanding He smote Rahab -
His 
breath clears the face of Heaven - His hand pierced the crooked Serpent 
.... God withdraws not His anger; beneath Him bow the confederates of 
Rahab." 
Rahab always means a sea-monster: probably some such legendary 
monstrous dragon, as in almost all mythologies is the adversary of 
Heaven and demon of eclipse, in whose belly, significantly called the 
belly of Hell, Hercules, like Jonah, passed three days, ultimately escaping 
with the loss of his hair or rays. Chesil, the rebellious giant Orion, 
represented in Job as riveted to the sky,
was compared to Ninus or Nimrod, the mythical founder of Nineveh


--- PAGE 968 ---
(City of Fish) the mighty hunter, who slew lions and panthers before the 
Lord. Rahab's confederates are probably the "High ones on High," the 
Chesilim or constellations in Isaiah, the Heavenly Host or Heavenly 
Powers, among whose number were found folly and disobedience. 
"I beheld," says Pseudo-Enoch, "seven stars like great blazing 
mountains, and like Spirits, entreating me. And the angel said, This 
place, until the consummation of Heaven and Earth, will be the prison 
of the Stars and of the Host of Heaven. These are the Stars which 
overstepped God's command before their time arrived; and came not at 
their proper season; therefore was he offended with them, and bound 
them, until the time of the consummation of their crimes in the secret 
year." And again: "These Seven Stars are those which have 
transgressed the commandment of the Most High God, and which are 
here bound until the number of the days of their crimes be completed." 
The Jewish and early Christian writers looked on the worship of the 
sun and the elements with comparative indulgence. Justin Martyr and 
Clemens of Alexandria admit that God had appointed the stars as


--- PAGE 969 ---
legitimate objects of heathen worship, in order to preserve throughout 
the world some tolerable notions of natural religion. It seemed a middle 
point between Heathenism and Christianity; and to it certain emblems 
and ordinances of that faith seemed to relate. The advent of Christ was 
announced by a Star from the East; and His nativity was celebrated on 
the shortest day of the Julian Calendar, the day when, in the physical 
commemorations of Persia and Egypt, Mithras or Osiris was newly 
found. It was then that the acclamations of the Host of Heaven, the 
unfailing attendants of the Sun, surrounded, as at the spring-dawn of 
creation, the cradle of His birth-place, and that, in the words of 
Ignatius, "a star, with light inexpressible, shone forth in the Heavens, to 
destroy the power of magic and the bonds of wickedness; for God 
Himself had appeared, in the form of man, for the renewal of eternal 
life." 
But however infinite the variety of objects which helped to develop the 
notion of Deity, and eventually assumed its place, substituting the 
worship of the creature for that of the creator; of parts of the body, for


--- PAGE 970 ---
that of the soul, of the Universe, still the notion itself was essentially 
one of unity. The idea of one
God, of a creative, productive, governing unity, resided in the earliest 
exertion of thought: and this monotheism of the primitive ages, makes 
every succeeding epoch, unless it be the present, appear only as a 
stage in the progress of degeneracy and aberration. Everywhere in the 
old faiths we find the idea of a supreme or presiding Deity. Amun or 
Osiris presides among the many gods of Egypt; Pan, with the music of 
his pipe, directs the chorus of the constellations, as Zeus leads the 
solemn procession of the celestial troops in the astronomical theology 
of the Pythagoreans. "Amidst an infinite diversity of opinions on all 
other subjects," says Maximus Tyrius, "the whole world is unanimous in 
the belief of one only almighty King and Father of all." 
There is always a Sovereign Power, a Zeus or Deus, Mahadeva or 
Adideva, to whom belongs the maintenance of the order of the 
Universe. Among the thousand gods of India, the doctrine of Divine 
Unity is never lost sight of; and the ethereal Jove, worshipped by the


--- PAGE 971 ---
Persian in an age long before Xenophanes or Anaxagoras, appears as 
supremely comprehensive and independent of planetary or elemental 
subdivisions, as the "Vast One" or "Great Soul" of the Vedas. 
But the simplicity of belief of the patriarchs did not exclude the 
employment of symbolical representations. The mind never rests 
satisfied with a mere feeling. That feeling ever strives to assume 
precision and durability as an idea, by some outward delineation of its 
thought. Even the ideas that are above and beyond the senses, as all 
ideas of God are, require the aid of the senses for their expression and 
communication. Hence come the representative forms and symbols 
which constitute the external investiture of every religion; attempts to 
express a religious sentiment that is essentially one, and that vainly 
struggles for adequate external utterance, striving to tell to one man, to 
paint to him, an idea existing in the mind of another, and essentially 
incapable of utterance or description, in a language all the words of 
which have a sensuous meaning. Thus, the idea being perhaps the 
same in all, its expressions and utterances are infinitely various, and


--- PAGE 972 ---
branch into an infinite diversity of creeds and sects. 
All religious expression is symbolism; since we can describe only what 
we see; and the true objects of religion are unseen. The earliest 
instruments of education were symbols; and they and all other religious 
forms differed and still differ according to
external circumstances and imagery, and according to differences of 
knowledge and mental cultivation. To present a visible symbol to the 
eye of another is not to inform him of the meaning which that symbol 
has to you. Hence the philosopher soon super-added to these symbols, 
explanations addressed to the ear, susceptible of more precision, but 
less effective, obvious, and impressive than the painted or sculptured 
forms which he despised. Out of these explanations grew by degrees a 
variety of narratives, whose true object and meaning were gradually 
forgotten. And when these were abandoned, and philosophy resorted 
to definitions and formulas, its language was but a more refined 
symbolism, grappling with and attempting to picture ideas impossible to 
be expressed. For the most abstract expression for Deity which


--- PAGE 973 ---
language can supply, is but a sign or symbol for an object unknown, 
and no more truthful and adequate than the terms Osiris and Vishnu, 
except as being less sensuous and explicit. To say that He is a Spirit, 
is but to say that He is not matter. What spirit is, we can only define as 
the Ancients did, by resorting, as if in despair, to some sublimized 
species of matter, as Light, Fire, or Ether. 
No symbol of Deity can be appropriate or durable except in a relative 
or moral sense. We cannot exalt words that have only a sensuous 
meaning, above sense. To call Him a Power or a Force, or an 
Intelligence, is merely to deceive ourselves into the belief that we use 
words that have a meaning to us, when they have none, or at least no 
more than the ancient visible symbols had. To call Him Sovereign, 
Father, Grand Architect of the Universe, Extension, Time, Beginning, 
Middle, and End, whose face is turned on all sides, the Source of life 
and death, is but to present other men with symbols by which we vainly 
endeavor to communicate to them the same vague ideas which men in 
all ages have impotently struggled to express. And it may be doubted


--- PAGE 974 ---
whether we have succeeded either in communicating, or in forming in 
our own minds, any more distinct and definite and true and adequate 
idea of the Deity, with all our metaphysical conceits and logical 
subtleties, than the rude ancients did, who endeavored to symbolize 
and so to express His attributes, by the Fire, the Light, the Sun and 
Stars, the Lotus and the Scarabæus; all of them types of what, except 
by types, more or less sufficient, could not be expressed at all. 
The Primitive man recognized the Divine Presence under a
variety of appearances, without losing his faith in this unity and 
Supremacy. The invisible God, manifested and on one of His many 
sides visible, did not cease to be God to him. He recognized Him in the 
evening breeze of Eden, in the whirlwind of Sinai, in he Stone of Beth- 
El.: and identified Him with the fire or thunder or the immovable rock 
adored in Ancient Arabia. To him the image of the Deity was reflected 
in all that was pre-eminent in excellence. He saw Jehovah, like Osiris 
and Bel, in the Sun as well as in the Stars, which were His children, His 
eyes, "which run through the whole world, and watch over the Sacred


--- PAGE 975 ---
Soil of Palestine, from the year's commencement to its close." He was 
the sacred fire of Mount Sinai, of the burning bush, of the Persians, 
those Puritans of Paganism. 
Naturally it followed that Symbolism soon became more complicated, 
and all the powers of Heaven were reproduced on earth, until a web of 
fiction and allegory was woven, which the wit of man, with his limited 
means of explanation, will never unravel. Hebrew Theism itself became 
involved in symbolism and image-worship, to which all religions ever 
tend. We have already seen what was the symbolism of the 
Tabernacle, the Temple, and the Ark. The Hebrew establishment 
tolerated not only the use of emblematic vessels, vestments, and 
cherubs, of Sacred Pillars and Seraphim, but symbolical 
representations of Jehovah Himself, not even confined to poetical or 
illustrative language. 
"Among the Adityas," says Chrishna, in the Bagvat Ghita, "I am Vishnu, 
the radiant Sun among the Stars; among the waters, am ocean; among 
the mountains, the Himalaya; and among the mountain-tops, Meru."


--- PAGE 976 ---
The Psalins and Isaiah are full of similar attempts to convey to the mind 
ideas of God, by ascribing to Him sensual proportions. He rides on the 
clouds, and sits on the wings of the wind. Heaven is His pavilion, and 
out of His mouth issue lightnings. Men cannot worship a mere 
abstraction. They require some outward form in which to clothe their 
conceptions, and invest their sympathies. If they do not shape and 
carve or paint visible images, they have invisible ones, perhaps quite 
as inadequate and unfaithful, within their own minds. 
The incongruous and monstrous in the Oriental images came from the 
desire to embody the Infinite, and to convey by multiplied, because 
individually inadequate symbols, a notion of the Divine Attributes to the 
understanding. Perhaps we should find
that we mentally do the same thing, and make within ourselves images 
quite as incongruous, if judged of by our own limited conceptions, if we 
were to undertake to analyze and gain a clear idea of the mass of 
infinite attributes which we assign to the Deity; and even of His infinite 
justice and infinite Mercy and Love.


--- PAGE 977 ---
We may well say, in the language of Maximus Tyrius: "If, in the desire 
to obtain some faint conception of the Universal Father, the Nameless 
Lawgiver, men had recourse to words or names, to silver or gold, to 
animals or plants, to mountain-tops or flowing rivers, every one 
inscribing the most valued and most beautiful things with the name of 
Deity, and with the fondness of a lover clinging with rapture to each 
trivial reminiscence of the Beloved, why should we seek to reduce this 
universal practice of symbolism, necessary, indeed, since the mind 
often needs the excitement of the imagination to rouse it into activity, to 
one monotonous standard of formal propriety? Only let the image duly 
perform its task, and bring the divine idea with vividness and truth 
before the mental eye; if this be effected, whether by the art of Phidias, 
the poetry of Homer, the Egyptian Hieroglyph, or the Persian element, 
we need not cavil at external differences, or lament the seeming fertility 
of unfamiliar creeds, so long as the great essential is attained, THAT 
MEN ARE MADE TO REMEMBER, TO UNDERSTAND, AND TO 
LOVE.”


--- PAGE 978 ---
Certainly, when men regarded Light and Fire as something spiritual, 
and above all the corruptions and exempt from all the decay of matter; 
when they looked upon the Sun and Stars and Planets as composed of 
this finer element, and as themselves great and mysterious 
Intelligences, infinitely superior to man, living Existences, gifted with 
mighty powers and wielding vast influences, those elements and 
bodies conveyed to them, when used as symbols of Deity, a far more 
adequate idea than they can now do to us, or than we can 
comprehend, now that Fire and Light are familiar to us as air and 
water, and the Heavenly Luminaries are lifeless worlds like our own. 
Perhaps they gave them ideas as adequate as we obtain from the mere 
words by which we endeavor to symbolize and shadow forth the 
ineffable mysteries and infinite attributes of God. 
There are, it is true, dangers inseparable from symbolism, which 
countervail its advantages, and afford an impressive lesson in regard 
to the similar risks attendant on the use of language. The
imagination, invited to assist the reason, usurps its place, or leaves its


--- PAGE 979 ---
ally helplessly entangled in its web. Names which stand for things are 
confounded with them; the means are mistaken for the end: the 
instrument of interpretation for the object; and thus symbols come to 
usurp an independent character as truths and persons. Though 
perhaps a necessary path, they were a dangerous one by which to 
approach the Deity; in which "many," says Plutarch, "mistaking the sign 
for the thing signified, fell into a ridiculous superstition; while others, in 
avoiding one extreme, plunged into the no less hideous gulf of 
irreligion and impiety." 
All great Reformers have warred against this evil, deeply feeling the 
intellectual mischief arising out of a degraded idea of the Supreme 
Being; and have claimed for their own God an existence or personality 
distinct from the objects of ancient superstition; disowning in His name 
the symbols and images that had profaned His Temple. But they have 
not seen that the utmost which can be effected by human effort, is to 
substitute impressions relatively correct, for others whose falsehood 
has been detected, and to replace a gross symbolism by a purer one.


--- PAGE 980 ---
Every man, without being aware of it, worships a conception of his own 
mind; for all symbolism, as well as all language, shares the subjective 
character of the ideas it represents. The epithets we apply to God only 
recall either visible or intellectual symbols to the eye or mind. The 
modes or forms of manifestation of the reverential feeling that 
constitutes the religious sentiment, are incomplete and progressive; 
each term and symbol predicates a partial truth, remaining always 
amenable to improvement or modification, and, in its turn, to be 
superseded by others more accurate and comprehensive. 
Idolatry consists in confounding the symbol with the thing signified, the 
substitution of a material for a mental object of worship, after a higher 
spiritualism has become possible; an ill-judged preference of the 
inferior to the superior symbol, an inadequate and sensual conception 
of the Deity: and every religion and every conception of God is 
idolatrous, in so far as it is imperfect, and as it substitutes a feeble and 
temporary idea in the shrine of that Undiscoverable Being who can be 
known only in part, and who can therefore be honored, even by the


--- PAGE 981 ---
most enlightened among His worshippers, only in proportion to their 
limited powers of understanding and imagining to themselves His 
perfections.
Like the belief in a Deity, the belief in the soul's immortality is rather a 
natural feeling, an adjunct of self-consciousness, than a dogma 
belonging to any particular age or country. It gives eternity to man's 
nature, and reconciles its seeming anomalies and contradictions; it 
makes him strong in weakness and perfectable in imperfection; and it 
alone gives an adequate object for his hopes and energies, and value 
and dignity to his pursuits. It is concurrent with the belief in an infinite, 
eternal Spirit, since it is chiefly through consciousness of the dignity of 
the mind within us, that we learn to appreciate its evidences in the 
Universe. 
To fortify, and as far as possible to impart this hope, was the great aim 
of ancient wisdom, whether expressed in forms of poetry or philosophy; 
as it was of the Mysteries, and as it is of Masonry. Life rising out of 
death was the great mystery, which symbolism delighted to represent


--- PAGE 982 ---
under a thousand ingenious forms. Nature was ransacked for 
attestations to the grand truth which seems to transcend all other gifts 
of imagination, or rather to be their essence and consummation. Such 
evidences were easily discovered. They were found in the olive and 
the lotus, in the evergreen myrtle of the Mystœ, and of the grave of 
Polydorus, in the deadly but self-renewing serpent, the wonderful moth 
emerging from the coffin of the worm, the phenomena of germination, 
the settings and risings of the sun and stars, the darkening and growth 
of the moon, and in sleep, "the minor mystery of death." 
The stories of the birth of Apollo from Latona, and of dead heroes, like 
Glaucus, resuscitated in caves, were allegories of the natural 
alternations of life and death in nature, changes that are but 
expedients to preserve her virginity and purity inviolable in the general 
sum of her operations, whose aggregate presents only a majestic calm, 
rebuking alike man's presumption and his despair. The typical death of 
the Nature-God, Osiris, Atys, Adonis, Hiram, was a profound but 
consolatory mystery: the healing charms of Orpheus were connected


--- PAGE 983 ---
with his destruction; and his bones, those valued pledges of fertility 
and victory, were, by a beautiful contrivance, often buried within the 
sacred precincts of his immortal equivalent. 
In their doctrines as to the immortality of the soul, the Greek 
Philosophers merely stated with more precision ideas long before 
extant independently among themselves, in the form of symbolical 
suggestion. Egypt and Ethiopia in these matters learned from
India, where, as everywhere else, the origin of the doctrine was as 
remote and untraceable as the origin of man himself. Its natural 
expression is found in the language of Chrishna, in the Bagvat Ghita: "I 
myself never was non-existent, nor thou, nor these princes of the Earth; 
nor shall we ever hereafter cease to be. The soul is not a thing of 
which a man may say, it hath been, or is about to be, or is to be 
hereafter; for it is a thing without birth; it is pre-existent, changeless, 
eternal, and is not to be destroyed with this mortal frame." 
According to the dogma of antiquity, the thronging forms of life are a


--- PAGE 984 ---
series of purifying migrations, through which the divine principle
reascends 
to the unity of its source. Inebriated in the bowl of Dionusos, 
and dazzled in the mirror of existence, the souls, those fragments or 
sparks of the Universal Intelligence, forgot their native dignity, and 
passed into the terrestrial frames they coveted. The most usual type of 
the spirit's descent was suggested by the sinking of the Sun and Stars 
from the upper to the lower hemisphere. When it arrived within the 
portals of the proper empire of Dionusos, the God of this World, the 
scene of delusion and change, its individuality became clothed in a 
material form; and as individual bodies were compared to a garment, 
the world was the investiture of the Universal Spirit. Again, the body 
was compared to a vase or urn, the soul's recipient; the world being the 
mighty bowl which received the descending Deity. In another image, 
ancient as the Grottoes of the Magi and the denunciations of Ezekiel, 
the world was as a dimly illuminated cavern, where shadows seem 
realities, and where the soul becomes forgetful of its celestial origin in


--- PAGE 985 ---
proportion to its proneness to material fascinations. By another, the 
period of the Soul's embodiment is as when exhalations are 
condensed, and the aerial element assumes the grosser form of water. 
But if vapor falls in water, it was held, water is again the birth of vapors, 
which ascend and adorn the Heavens. If our mortal existence be the 
death of the spirit, our death may be the renewal of its life; as physical 
bodies are exalted from earth to water, from water to air, from air to fire, 
so the man may rise into the Hero, the Hero into the God. In the course 
of Nature, the soul, to recover its lost estate, must pass through a 
series of trials and migrations. The scene of those trials is the Grand 
Sanctuary of Initiations, the world: their primary agents are the 
elements; and Dionusos, as Sovereign of Nature, or the sensuous 
world personified,
is official Arbiter of the Mysteries, and guide of the soul, which he 
introduces into the body and dismisses from it. He is the Sun, that 
liberator of the elements, and his spiritual mediation was suggested by 
the same imagery which made the Zodiac the supposed path of the


--- PAGE 986 ---
spirits in their descent and their return, and Cancer and Capricorn the 
gates through which they passed. 
He was not only Creator of the World, but guardian, liberator, and 
Saviour of the Soul. Ushered into the world amidst lightning and 
thunder he became the Liberator celebrated in the Mysteries of 
Thebes, delivering earth from Winter's chain, conducting the nightly 
chorus of the Stars and the celestial revolution of the year. His 
symbolism was the inexhaustible imagery employed to fill up the stellar 
devices of the Zodiac: he was the Vernal Bull, the Lion, the Ram, the 
Autumnal Goat, the Serpent: in short, the varied Deity, the resulting 
manifestation personified, the all in the many, the varied year, life 
passing into innumerable forms; essentially inferior to none, yet 
changing with the seasons, and undergoing their periodical decay. 
He mediates and intercedes for man, and reconciles the Universal 
Unseen Mind with the individualized spirit of which he is emphatically 
the Perfecter; a consummation which he effects, first through the 
vicissitudes of the elemental ordeal, the alternate fire of Summer and


--- PAGE 987 ---
the showers of Winter, "the trials or test of an immortal Nature"; and 
secondarily and symbolically through the Mysteries. He holds not only 
the cup of generation, but also that of wisdom or initiation, whose 
influence is contrary to that of the former, causing the soul to abhor its 
material bonds, and to long for its return. The first was the Cup of 
Forgetfulness; while the second is the Urn of Aquarius, quaffed by the 
returning spirit, as by the returning Sun at the Winter Solstice, and 
emblematic of the exchange of wordly impressions for the recovered 
recollections of the glorious sights and enjoyments of its preexistence. 
Water nourishes and purifies; and the urn from which it flows was 
thought worthy to be a symbol of Deity, as of the Osiris-Canobus who 
with living water irrigated the soil of Egypt; and also an emblem of 
Hope that should cheer the dwellings of the dead. 
The second birth of Dionusos, like the rising of Osiris and Atys from the 
dead, and the raising of Khürüm, is a type of the spiritual regeneration 
of man. Psyche (the Soul), like Ariadne, had
two lovers, an earthly and an immortal one. The immortal suitor is


--- PAGE 988 ---
Dionusos, the Eros-Phanes of the Orphici, gradually exalted by the 
progress of thought, out of the symbol of Sensuality into the torchbearer 
of the Nuptials of the Gods; the Divine Influence which 
physically called the world into being, and which, awakening the soul 
from its Stygian trance, restores it from earth to Heaven. 
Thus the scientific theories of the ancients, expounded in the 
Mysteries, as to the origin of the soul, its descent, its sojourn here 
below, and its return, were not a mere barren contemplation of the 
nature of the world, and of the intelligent beings existing there. They 
were not an idle speculation as to the order of the world, and about the 
soul, but a study of the means for arriving at the great object proposed, 
- the perfecting of the soul; and, as a necessary consequence, that of 
morals and society. This Earth, to them, was not the Soul's home, but 
its place of exile. Heaven was its home, and there was its birth-place. 
To it, it ought incessantly to turn its eyes. Man was not a terrestrial 
plant. His roots were in Heaven. The soul had lost its wings, clogged 
by the viscosity of matter. It would recover them when it extricated itself


--- PAGE 989 ---
from matter and commenced its upward flight. 
Matter being, in their view, as it was in that of St. Paul, the principle of 
all the passions that trouble reason, mislead the intelligence, and stain 
the purity of the soul, the Mysteries taught man how to enfeeble the 
action of matter on the soul, and to restore to the latter its natural 
dominion. And lest the stains so contracted should continue after 
death, lustrations were used, fastings, expiations, macerations, 
continence, and above all, initiations. Many of these practices were at 
first merely symbolical, - material signs indicating the moral purity 
required of the Initiates; but they afterward came to be regarded as 
actual productive causes of that purity. 
The effect of initiation was meant to be the same as that of philosophy, 
to purify the soul of its passions, to weaken the empire of the body over 
the divine portion of man, and to give him here below a happiness 
anticipatory of the felicity to be one day enjoyed by him, and of the 
future vision by him of the Divine Beings. And therefore Proclus and 
the other Platonists taught "that the Mysteries and initiations withdrew


--- PAGE 990 ---
souls from this mortal and material life, to re-unite them to the gods; 
and dissipated
for the adepts the shades of ignorance 'by the splendors of the Deity." 
Such were the precious fruits of the last Degree of the Mystic Science, 
- to see Nature in her springs and sources, and to become familiar with 
the causes of things and with real existences. 
Cicero says that the soul must exercise itself in the practice of the 
virtues, if it would speedily return to its place of origin. It should, while 
imprisoned in the body, free itself therefrom by the contemplation of 
superior beings, and in some sort be divorced from the body and the 
senses. Those who remain enslaved, subjugated by their passions and 
violating the sacred laws of religion and society, will re-ascend to 
Heaven, only after they shall have been purified through a long 
succession of ages. 
The Initiate was required to emancipate himself from his passions, and 
to free himself from the hindrances of the senses and of matter, in 
order that he might rise to the contemplation of the Deity, or of that


--- PAGE 991 ---
incorporeal and unchanging light in which live and subsist the causes 
of created natures. "We must," says Porphyry, "flee from everything 
sensual, that the soul may with ease re-unite itself with God, and live 
happily with Him." "This is the great work of initiation," says Hierocles,
- 
“to recall the soul to what is truly good and beautiful, and make it 
familiar therewith, and they its own; to deliver it from the pains and ills 
it endures here below, enchained in matter as in a dark prison; to 
facilitate its return to the celestial splendors, and to establish it in the 
Fortunate Isles, by restoring it to its first estate. Thereby, when the 
hour of death arrives, the soul, freed of its mortal garmenting, which it 
leaves behind it as a legacy to earth, will rise buoyantly to its home 
among the Stars, there to re-take its ancient condition, and approach 
toward the Divine nature as far as man may do." 
Plutarch compares Isis to knowledge, and Typhon to ignorance, 
obscuring the light of the sacred doctrine whose blaze lights the soul of 
the Initiate. No gift of the gods, he holds, is so precious as the


--- PAGE 992 ---
knowledge of the Truth, and that of the Nature of the gods, so far as 
our limited capacities allow us to rise toward them. The Valentinians 
termed initiation LIGHT. The Initiate, says Psellus, becomes an Epopt, 
when admitted to see THE DIVINE LIGHTS. Clemens of Alexandria, 
imitating the language of an Initiate in the Mysteries of Bacchus, and 
inviting this Initiate, whom he terms blind like Tiresias, to come to see 
Christ, Who will
blaze upon his eyes with greater glory than the Sun, exclaims: "Oh 
Mysteries most truly holy! Oh pure Light! When the torch of the 
Dadoukos gleams, Heaven and the Deity are displayed to my eyes! I 
am initiated, and become holy!" This was the true object of initiation; to 
be sanctified, and TO SEE, that is, to have just and faithful conceptions 
of the Deity, the knowledge of Whom was THE LIGHT of the Mysteries. 
It was promised the Initiate at Samothrace, that he should become pure 
and just. Clemens says that by baptism, souls are illuminated, and led 
to the pure light with which mingles no darkness, nor anything material. 
The Initiate, become an Epopt, was called A SEER. "HAIL, NEWBORN


--- PAGE 993 ---
LIGHT!" the Initiates cried in the Mysteries of Bacchus. 
Such was held to be the effect of complete initiation. It lighted up the 
soul with rays from the Divinity, and became for it, as it were, the eye 
with which, according to the Pythagoreans, it contemplates the field of 
Truth; in its mystical abstractions, wherein it rises superior to the body, 
whose action on it, it annuls for the time, to re-enter into itself, so as 
entirely to occupy itself with the view of the Divinity, and the means of 
coming to resemble Him. 
Thus enfeebling the dominion of the senses and the passions over the 
soul, and as it were freeing the latter from a sordid slavery, and by the 
steady practice of all the virtues, active and contemplative, our ancient 
brethren strove to fit themselves to return to the bosom of the Deity. Let 
not our objects as Masons fall below theirs. We use the symbols which 
they used; and teach the same great cardinal doctrines that they 
taught, of the existence of an intellectual God, and the immortality of 
the soul of man. If the details of their doctrines as to the soul seem to 
us to verge on absurdity, let us compare them with the common notions


--- PAGE 994 ---
of our own day, and be silent. If it seems to us that they regarded the 
symbol in some cases as the thing symbolized, and worshipped the 
sign as if it were itself Deity, let us reflect how insufficient are our own 
ideas of Deity, and how we worship those ideas and images formed 
and fashioned in our own minds, and not the Deity Himself: and if we 
are inclined to smile at the importance they attached to lustrations and 
fasts, let us pause and inquire whether the same weakness of human 
nature does not exist to-day, causing rites and ceremonies to be 
regarded as actively efficient for the salvation of souls.
And let us ever remember the words of an old writer, with which we 
conclude this lecture: "It is a pleasure to stand on the shore, and to see 
ships tossed upon the sea: a pleasure to stand in the window of a 
castle, and see a battle and the adventures thereof: but no pleasure is 
comparable to the standing on the vantage-ground of TRUTH (a hill not 
to be commanded, and where the air is always clear and serene), and 
to see the errors and wanderings, and mists and tempests, in the vale 
below; so always that this prospect be with pity, and not with swelling or


--- PAGE 995 ---
pride. Certainly it is Heaven upon Earth to have a man's mind move in 
charity, rest in Providence, AND TURN UPON THE POLES OF 
TRUTH." MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
26º - Prince of Mercy
XXVI. PRINCE OF MERCY, OR SCOTTISH TRINITARIAN. 
WHILE you were veiled in darkness, you heard repeated by the Voice of 
the Great Past its most ancient doctrines. None has the right to object, if 
the Christian Mason sees foreshadowed in Chrishna and Sosiosch, in 
Mithras and Osiris, the Divine WORD that, as he believes, became Man, 
and died upon the cross to redeem a fallen race. Nor can he object if


--- PAGE 996 ---
others see reproduced, in the WORD of the beloved Disciple, that was in 
the beginning with God, and that was God, and by Whom everything was 
made, only the LOGOS of Plato, and the WORD or Uttered THOUGHT or 
first Emanation of LIGHT, or the Perfect REASON of the Great, Silent, 
Supreme, Uncreated Deity, believed in and adored by all. 
We do not undervalue the importance of any Truth. We utter no word that 
can be deemed irreverent by any one of any faith. We do not tell the 
Moslem that it is only important for him to believe that there is but one 
God, and wholly unessential whether Mahomet was His prophet. We do 
not tell the Hebrew that the Messiah whom he expects was born in 
Bethlehem nearly two thousand years ago; and that he is a heretic 
because he will not so believe. And as little do we tell the sincere 
Christian that Jesus of Nazareth was but a man like us, or His history but 
the unreal revival of an older legend. To do either is beyond our 
jurisdiction. Masonry, of no one age, belongs to all time; of no one 
religion, it finds its great truths in all. 
To every Mason, there is a GOD; ONE, Supreme, Infinite in Goodness,


--- PAGE 997 ---
Wisdom, Foresight, justice, and Benevolence; Creator, Disposer, and 
Preserver of all things. How, or by what intermediates He creates and 
acts, and in what way He unfolds and manifests Himself, Masonry leaves 
to creeds and Religions to inquire. 
To every Mason, the soul of man is immortal. Whether it
emanates from and will return to God, and what its continued mode of 
existence hereafter, each judges for himself. Masonry was not made to 
settle that. 
To every Mason, WISDOM or INTELLIGENCE, FORCE or STRENGTH, 
and HARMONY, or FITNESS and BEAUTY, are the Trinity of the 
attributes of God. With the subtleties of Philosophy concerning them 
Masonry does not meddle, nor decide as to the reality of the supposed 
Existences which are their Personifications: nor whether the Christian 
Trinity be such a personification, or a Reality of the gravest import and 
significance. 
To every Mason, the Infinite justice and Benevolence of God give ample 
assurance that Evil will ultimately be dethroned, and the Good, the True,


--- PAGE 998 ---
and the Beautiful reign triumphant and eternal. It teaches, as it feels and 
knows, that Evil, and Pain, and Sorrow exist as part of a wise and 
beneficent plan, all the parts of which work together under God's eye to a 
result which shall be perfection. Whether the existence of evil is rightly 
explained in this creed or in that, by Typhon the Great Serpent, by 
Ahriman and his Armies of Wicked Spirits, by the Giants and Titans that 
war against Heaven, by the two co-existent Principles of Good and Evil, 
by Satan's temptation and the fall of Man, by Lok and the Serpent Fenris, 
it is beyond the domain of Masonry to decide, nor does it need to inquire. 
Nor is it within its Province to determine how the ultimate triumph of
Light 
and Truth and Good, over Darkness and Error and Evil, is to be achieved; 
nor whether the Redeemer, looked and longed for by all nations, hath 
appeared in Judea, or is yet to come. 
It reverences all the great reformers. It sees in Moses, the Lawgiver of the 
Jews, in Confucius and Zoroaster, in Jesus of Nazareth, and in the 
Arabian Iconoclast, Great Teachers of Morality, and Eminent Reformers,
if


--- PAGE 999 ---
no more: and allows every brother of the Order to assign to each such 
higher and even Divine Character as his Creed and Truth require. 
Thus Masonry disbelieves no truth, and teaches unbelief in no creed, 
except so far as such creed may lower its lofty estimate of the Deity, 
degrade Him to the level of the passions of humanity, deny the high 
destiny of man, impugn the goodness and benevolence of the Supreme 
God, strike at those great columns of Masonry, Faith, Hope, and Charity, 
or inculcate immorality, and disregard of the active duties of the Order.
Masonry is a worship; but one in which all civilized men can unite; for it 
does not undertake to explain or dogmatically to settle those great 
mysteries, that are above the feeble comprehension of our human 
intellect. It trusts in God, and HOPES; it BELIEVES, like a child, and is 
humble. It draws no sword to compel others to adopt its belief, or to be 
happy with its hopes. Arid it WAITS with patience to understand the 
mysteries of Nature and Nature's God hereafter. 
The greatest mysteries in the Universe are those which are ever going on 
around us; so trite and common to us that we never note them nor reflect


--- PAGE 1000 ---
upon them. Wise men tell us of the laws that regulate the motions of the 
spheres, which, flashing in huge circles and spinning on their axes, are 
also ever darting with inconceivable rapidity through the infinities of 
Space; while we atoms sit here, and dream that all was made for us. They 
tell us learnedly of centripetal and centrifugal forces, gravity and 
attraction, and all the other sounding terms invented to hide a want of 
meaning. There are other forces in the Universe than those that are 
mechanical. 
Here are two minute seeds, not much unlike in appearance, and two of 
larger size. Hand them to the learned Pundit, Chemistry, who tells us how 
combustion goes on in the lungs, and plants are fed with phosphorus and 
carbon, and the alkalies and silex. Let her decompose them, analyze 
them, torture them in all the ways she knows. The net result of each is a 
little sugar, a little fibrin, a little water - carbon, potassium, sodium, and 
the like - one cares not to know what. 
We hide them in the ground: and the slight rains moisten them, and the 
Sun shines upon them, and little slender shoots spring up and grow; - and


--- PAGE 1001 ---
what a miracle is the mere growth! - the force, the power, the capacity by 
which the little feeble shoot, that a small worm can nip off with a single 
snap of its mandibles, extracts from the earth and air and water the 
different elements, so learnedly catalogued, with which it increases in 
stature, and rises imperceptibly toward the sky. 
One grows to be a slender, fragile, feeble stalk, soft of texture, like an 
ordinary weed; another a strong bush, of woody fibre, armed with thorns, 
and sturdy enough to bid defiance to the winds : the third a tender tree, 
subject to be blighted by the frost, and looked down upon by all the
forest; 
while another spreads its
rugged arms abroad, and cares for neither frost nor ice, nor the snows that 
for months lie around its roots. 
But lo! out of the brown foul earth, and colorless invisible air, and limpid 
rain-water, the chemistry of the seeds has extracted colors - four different 
shades of green, that paint the leaves which put forth in the spring upon
our 
plants, our shrubs, and our trees. Later still come the flowers - the vivid


--- PAGE 1002 ---
colors of the rose, the beautiful brilliance of the carnation, the modest
blush 
of the apple, and the splendid white of the orange. Whence come the
colors 
of the leaves and flowers? By what process of chemistry are they
extracted 
from the carbon, the phosphorus, and the lime? Is it any greater miracle
to 
make something out of nothing? 
Pluck the flowers. Inhale the delicious perfumes; each perfect, and all 
delicious. Whence have they come? By what combination of acids and 
alkalies could the chemist's laboratory produce them? 
And now on two comes the fruit - the ruddy apple and the golden orange. 
Pluck them - open them! The texture and fabric how totally different! The 
taste how entirely dissimilar - the perfume of each distinct from its
flower 
and from the other. Whence the taste and this new perfume? The same 
earth and air and water have been made to furnish a different taste to each 
fruit, a different perfume not only to each fruit, but to each fruit and its
own 
flower.


--- PAGE 1003 ---
Is it any more a problem whence come thought and will and perception
and 
all the phenomena of the mind, than this, whence come the colors, the 
perfumes, the taste, of the fruit and flower? 
And lo! in each fruit new seeds, each gifted with the same wondrous
power 
of reproduction - each with the same wondrous forces wrapped up in it to 
be again in turn evolved. Forces that had lived three thousand years in the 
grain of wheat found in the wrappings of an Egyptian mummy; forces of 
which learning and science and wisdom know no more than they do of the 
nature and laws of action of God. What can we know of the nature, and 
how can we understand the powers and mode of operation of the human 
soul, when the glossy leaves, the pearl-white flower, and the golden fruit
of 
the orange are miracles wholly beyond our comprehension? 
We but hide our ignorance in a cloud of words; - and the words too often
are 
mere combinations of sounds without any meaning.
What is the centrifugal force? A tendency to go in a particular direction!
What


--- PAGE 1004 ---
external "force," then, produces that tendency? 
What force draws the needle round to the north? What force moves the
muscle 
that raises the arm, when the will determines it shall rise? Whence comes
the 
will itself? Is it spontaneous - a first cause, or an effect? These too are
miracles; 
inexplicable as the creation, or the existence and self-existence of God. 
Who will explain to us the passion, the peevishness, the anger, the
memory, and 
affections of the small canary-wren? the consciousness of identity and the 
dreams of the dog? the reasoning powers of the elephant? the wondrous 
instincts, passions, government, and civil policy, and modes of
communication of 
ideas of the ant and bee? 
Who has yet made us to understand, with all his learned words, how heat
comes 
to us from the Sun, and light from the remote Stars, setting out upon its
journey 
earth-ward from some, at the time the Chaldeans commenced to build the
Tower


--- PAGE 1005 ---
of Babel? Or how the image of an external object comes to and fixes itself
upon 
the retina of the eye; and when there, how that mere empty, unsubstantial
image 
becomes transmuted into the wondrous thing that we call SIGHT? Or how
the 
waves of the atmosphere striking upon the tympanum of the ear - those
thin, 
invisible waves - produce the equally wondrous phenomenon of
HEARING, and 
become the roar of the tornado, the crash of the thunder, the mighty voice
of the 
ocean, the chirping of the cricket, the delicate sweet notes and exquisite
trills 
and variations of the wren and mocking-bird, or the magic melody of the 
instrument of Paganini? 
Our senses are mysteries to us, and we are mysteries to ourselves.
Philosophy 
has taught us nothing as to the nature of our sensations, our perceptions,
our 
cognizances, the origin of our thoughts and ideas, but words. By no effort
or 
degree of reflection, never so long continued, can man become conscious
of a


--- PAGE 1006 ---
personal identity in himself, separate and distinct from his body and his
brain. 
We torture ourselves in the effort to gain an idea of ourselves, and weary
with 
the exertion. Who has yet made us understand how, from the contact with
a 
foreign body, the image in the eye, the wave of air impinging on the ear, 
particular particles entering the nostrils, and coming in contact with the
palate, 
come sensations in the nerves, and from that, perception in the mind, of
the 
animal or the man?
What do we know of Substance? Men even doubt yet whether it exists. 
Philosophers tell us that our senses make known to us only the attributes
of 
substance, extension, hardness, color, and the like; but not the thing itself
that is 
extended, solid, black or white; as we know the attributes of the Soul, its 
thoughts and its perceptions, and not the Soul itself which perceives and
thinks. 
What a wondrous mystery is there in heat and light, existing, we know not
how,


--- PAGE 1007 ---
within certain limits, narrow in comparison with infinity, beyond which on
every 
side stretch out infinite space and the blackness of unimaginable darkness,
and 
the intensity of inconceivable cold! Think only of the mighty Power
required to 
maintain warmth and light in the central point of such an infinity, to
whose 
darkness that of Midnight, to whose cold that of the last Arctic Island is
nothing. 
And yet GOD is everywhere. 
And what a mystery are the effects of heat and cold upon the wondrous
fluid that 
we call water! What a mystery lies hidden in every flake of snow and in
every 
crystal of ice, and in their final transformation into the invisible vapor
that rises 
from the ocean or the land, and floats above the summits of the
mountains! 
What a multitude of wonders, indeed, has chemistry unveiled to our eyes!
Think 
only that if some single law enacted by God were at once repealed, that of 
attraction or affinity or cohesion, for example, the whole material world,
with its


--- PAGE 1008 ---
solid granite and adamant, its veins of gold and silver, its trap and
porphyry, its 
huge beds of coal, our own frames and the very ribs and bones of this 
apparently indestructible earth, would instantaneously dissolve, with all
Suns 
and Stars and Worlds throughout all the Universe of God, into a thin
invisible 
vapor of infinitely minute particles or atoms, diffused throughout infinite
space; 
and with them light and heat would disappear; unless the Deity Himself
be, as 
the Ancient Persians thought, the Eternal Light and the Immortal Fire. 
The mysteries of the Great Universe of God! How can we with our limited
mental 
vision expect to grasp and comprehend them! Infinite SPACE, stretching
out 
from us every way, without limit: infinite TIME, without beginning or
end; and 
WE, HERE, and NOW, in the centre of each! An infinity of suns, the
nearest of 
which only diminish in size, viewed with the most powerful telescope:
each with 
its retinue of worlds; infinite numbers of such suns, so remote from us
that their


--- PAGE 1009 ---
light would not reach us, journeying during an infinity of time, while the
light that 
has
reached us, from some that we seem to see, has been upon its journey for 
fifty centuries: our world spinning upon its axis, and rushing ever in its 
circuit round the sun; and it, the sun, and all our system revolving round 
some great central point; and that, and suns, stars, and worlds evermore 
flashing onward with incredible rapidity through illimitable space: and 
then, in every drop of water that we drink, in every morsel of much of our 
food, in the air, in the earth, in the sea, incredible multitudes of living 
creatures, invisible to the naked eye, of a minuteness beyond belief, yet 
organized, living, feeding, perhaps with consciousness of identity, and 
memory and instinct. 
Such are some of the mysteries of the great Universe of God. And yet we, 
whose life and that of the world on which we live form but a point in the 
centre of infinite Time: we, who nourish animalculæ within, and on whom 
vegetables grow without, would fain learn how God created this Universe,


--- PAGE 1010 ---
would understand His Powers, His Attributes, His Emanations, His Mode 
of Existence and of Action; would fain know the plan according to which 
all events proceed, that plan profound as God Himself; would know the 
laws by which He controls His Universe; would fain see and talk to Him 
face to face, as man talks to man: and we try not to believe, because we 
do not understand. 
He commands us to love one another, to love our neighbor as ourself; 
and we dispute and wrangle, and hate and slay each other, because we 
cannot be of one opinion as to the Essence of His Nature, as to His 
Attributes; whether He became man born of a woman, and was crucified; 
whether the Holy Ghost is of the same substance with the Father, or only 
of a similar substance; whether a feeble old man is God's Vicegerent; 
whether some are elected from all eternity to be saved, and others to be 
condemned and punished; whether punishment of the wicked after death 
is to be eternal; whether this doctrine or the other be heresy or truth;- 
drenching the world with blood, depopulating realms, and turning fertile


--- PAGE 1011 ---
lands into deserts; until, for religious war, persecution, and bloodshed,
the 
Earth for many a century has rolled round the Sun, a charnel-house, 
steaming and reeking with human gore, the blood of brother slain by 
brother for opinion's sake, that has soaked into and polluted all her veins, 
and made her a horror to her sisters of the Universe. 
And if men were all Masons, and obeyed with all their heart
her mild and gentle, teachings, that world would be a paradise; while 
intolerance and persecution make of it a hell. For this is the Masonic 
Creed: BELIEVE, in God's Infinite Benevolence, Wisdom, and Justice: 
HOPE, for the final triumph of Good over Evil, and for Perfect Harmony
as 
the final result of all the concords and discords of the Universe: and be 
CHARITABLE as God is, toward the unfaith, the errors, the follies, and 
the faults of men: for all make one great brotherhood. 
INSTRUCTION. 
Sen.·. W.·. Brother Junior Warden, are you a Prince of Mercy? 
Jun.·. W.·. I have seen the Delta and the Holy NAMES upon it, and am an


--- PAGE 1012 ---
AMETH like yourself, in the TRIPLE COVENANT, Of which we bear the 
mark. 
Qu.·. What is the first Word upon the Delta? 
Ans.·. The Ineffable Name of Deity, the true mystery of which is known to 
the Ameth alone. 
Qu.·. What do the three sides of the Delta denote to us? 
Ans.·. To us, and to all Masons, the three Great Attributes or 
Developments of the Essence of the Deity; WISDOM, or the Reflective 
and Designing Power, in which, when there was naught but God, the Plan 
and Idea of the Universe was shaped and Formed: FORCE, or the 
Executing and Creating Power, which instantaneously acting, realized the 
Type and Idea framed by Wisdom; and the Universe, and all Stars and 
Worlds, and Light and Life, and Men and Angels and all living creatures 
WERE; and HARMONY, or the Preserving Power, Order, and Beauty, 
maintaining the Universe in its State, and constituting the law of
Harmony, 
Motion, Proportion, and Progression:- WISDOM, which thought the plan;


--- PAGE 1013 ---
STRENGTH, which created: HARMONY, which upholds and preserves:- 
the Masonic Trinity, three Powers and one Essence: the three columns 
which support the Universe, Physical, Intellectual, and Spiritual, of
which 
every Masonic Lodge is a type and symbol:- while to the Christian
Mason, 
they represent the Three that bear record in Heaven, the FATHER 
WORD, and the HOLY SPIRIT, which three are ONE. 
Qu.·. What do the three Greek letters upon the Delta, I.·.H.·. .·. [Iota, Eta, 
and Sigma] represent? 
Ans.·. Three of the Names of the Supreme Deity among the Syrians. 
Phœnicians and Hebrews…. IHUH [ ] Self-Ex
istence ... AL [ ] the Nature-God, or Soul of the Universe... SHADAI 
[ ] Supreme Power. Also three of the Six Chief Attributes of God, 
among the Kabbalists:- WISDOM [IEH], the Intellect, ( ) of the 
Egyptians, the Word ( ) of the Platonists, and the Wisdom ( ) of the 
Gnostics: MAGNIFICENCE [AL], the Symbol of which was the Lion's 
Head: and VICTORY and GLORY [Tsabaoth], which are the two columns


--- PAGE 1014 ---
JACHIN and BOAZ, that stand in the Portico of the Temple of Masonry. 
To the Christian Mason they are the first three letters of the name of the 
Son of God, Who died upon the cross to redeem mankind. 
Qu.·. What is the first of the THREE COVENANTS, of which we bear the 
mark? 
Ans.·. That which God made with Noah; when He said, "I will not again 
curse the earth any more for man's sake, neither will I smite any more 
everything living as I have done. While the Earth remaineth, seed-time 
and harvest, and cold and heat, and Winter and Summer, and day and 
night shall not cease. I will establish My covenant with you, and with
your 
seed after you, and with every living creature. All mankind shall no more 
be cut off by the waters of a flood, nor shall there any more be a flood to 
destroy the earth. This is the token of My covenant: I do set My bow in
the 
cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between Me and the earth: 
an everlasting covenant between Me and every living creature on the 
earth."


--- PAGE 1015 ---
Qu.·. What is the second of the Three Covenants? 
Ans.·. That which God made with Abraham; when He said, "I am the 
Absolute Uncreated God. I will make My covenant between Me and thee, 
and thou shalt be the Father of Many Nations, and Kings shall come from 
thy loins. I will establish My covenant between Me and thee, and thy 
descendants after thee, to the remotest generations, for an everlasting 
covenant; and I will be thy God and their God, and will give thee the land 
of Canaan for an everlasting possession." 
Qu.·. What is the third Covenant? 
Ans.·. That which God made with all men by His prophets; when He said: 
"I will gather all nations and tongues, and they shall come and see My 
Glory. I will create new Heavens and a new earth; and the former shall
not 
be remembered, nor come into mind. The Sun shall no more shine by 
day, nor the Moon by night; but the Lord shall be an everlasting light and 
splendor,
His Spirit and His Word shall remain with men forever. The heavens shall


--- PAGE 1016 ---
vanish away like vapor, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and 
they that dwell therein shall die; but my salvation shall be forever, and
my 
righteousness shall not end; and there shall be Light among the Gentiles, 
and salvation unto the ends of the earth. The redeemed of the Lord shall 
return, and everlasting joy be on their heads, and sorrow and mourning 
shall flee away." 
Qu.·. What is the symbol of the Triple Covenant? 
Ans.·. The Triple Triangle. 
Qu.·. Of what else is it the symbol to us? 
Ans.·. Of the Trinity of Attributes of the Deity; and of the triple essence
of 
Man, the Principle of Life, the Intellectual Power, and the Soul or
Immortal 
Emanation from the Deity. 
Qu.·. What is the first great Truth of the Sacred Mysteries? 
Ans.·. No man hath seen God at any time. He is One, Eternal, All- 
Powerful, All-Wise, Infinitely just, Merciful, Benevolent, and 
Compassionate, Creator and Preserver of all things, the Source of Light


--- PAGE 1017 ---
and Life, coextensive with Time and Space; Who thought, and with the 
Thought created the Universe and all living things, and the souls of men: 
THAT IS: - the PERMANENT; while everything beside is a perpetual 
genesis. 
Qu.·. '"That is the second great Truth of the Sacred Mysteries? 
Ans.·. The Soul of Man is Immortal; not the result of organization, nor an 
aggregate of modes of action of matter, nor a succession of phenomena 
and perceptions; but an EXISTENCE, one and identical, a living spirit, a 
spark of the Great Central Light, that hath entered info and dwells in the 
body; to be separated therefrom at death, and return to God who gave it: 
that doth not disperse nor vanish at death, like breath or a smoke, nor can 
be annihilated; but still exists and possesses activity and intelligence, 
even as it existed in God, before it was enveloped in the body. 
Qu.·. What is the third great Truth in Masonry? 
Ans.·. The impulse which directs to right conduct, and deters from crime, 
is not only older than the ages of nations and cities, but coeval with that 
Divine Being Who sees and rules both Heaven and earth. Nor did Tarquin


--- PAGE 1018 ---
less violate that Eternal Law, though in his reign there might have been 
no written law at Rome against such violence; for the principle that
impels 
us to right conduct, and warns us against guilt, springs out of the nature 
of things. It did not begin to be law when it was first written, nor
was it originated; but it is coeval with the Divine Intelligence itself. The 
consequence of virtue is not to be made the end thereof ; and laudable 
performances must have deeper roots, motives, and instigations, to give 
them the stamp of virtues. 
Qu.·. What is the fourth great Truth in Masonry? 
Ans.·. The moral truths are as absolute as the metaphysical truths. Even 
the Deity cannot make it that there should be effects without a cause, or 
phenomena without substance. As little could he make it to be sinful and 
evil to respect our pledged word, to love truth, to moderate our passions. 
The principles of Morality are axioms, like the principles of Geometry.
The 
moral laws are the necessary relations that flow from the nature of things, 
and they are not created by, but have existed eternally in God. Their


--- PAGE 1019 ---
continued existence does not depend upon the exercise of His WILL. 
Truth and Justice are of His ESSENCE. Not because we are feeble and 
God omnipotent, is it our duty to obey His law. We may be forced, but are 
not under obligation, to obey the stronger. God is the principle of
Morality, 
but not by His mere will, which, abstracted from all other of His
attributes, 
would be neither just nor unjust. Good is the expression of His will, in so 
far as that will is itself the expression of eternal, absolute, uncreated 
justice, which is in God, which His will did not create; but which it 
executes and promulgates, as our will proclaims and promulgates and 
executes the idea of the good which is in us. He has given us the law of 
Truth and justice; but He has not arbitrarily instituted that law. justice is 
inherent in His will, because it is contained in His intelligence and 
wisdom, in His very nature and most intimate essence. 
Qu.·. What is the fifth great Truth in Masonry? 
Ans.·. There is an essential distinction between Good and Evil, what is 
just and what is unjust; and to this distinction is attached, for every


--- PAGE 1020 ---
intelligent and free creature, the absolute obligation of conforming to
what 
is good and just. Man is an intelligent and free being, - free, because he
is 
conscious that it is his duty, and because it is made his duty, to obey the 
dictates of truth and justice, and therefore he must necessarily have the 
power of doing so, which involves the power of not doing so; - capable of 
comprehending the distinction between good and evil, justice and 
injustice, and the obligation which accompanies it, and of naturally 
adhering to that obligation, independently of any con-
tract or positive law; capable also of resisting the temptations which urge 
him toward evil and injustice, and of complying with the sacred law of 
eternal justice. 
That man is not governed by a resistless Fate or inexorable Destiny; but 
is free to choose between the evil and the good: that justice and Right, 
the Good and Beautiful, are of the essence of the Divinity, like His 
Infinitude; and therefore they are laws to man: that we are conscious of 
our freedom to act, as we are conscious of our identity, and the


--- PAGE 1021 ---
continuance and connectedness of our existence; and have the same 
evidence of one as of the other; and if we can put one in doubt, we have 
no certainty of either, and everything is unreal: that we can deny our free 
will and free agency, only upon the ground that they are in the nature of 
things impossible; which would be to deny the Omnipotence of God. 
Qu.·. What is the sixth great Truth of Masonry? 
Ans.·. The necessity of practising the moral truths, is obligation. The 
moral truths, necessary in the eye of reason, are obligatory on the will. 
The moral obligation, like the moral truth that is its foundation, is
absolute. 
As the necessary truths are not more or less necessary, so the obligation 
is not more or less obligatory. There are degrees of importance among 
different obligations; but none in the obligation itself. We are not nearly 
obliged, almost obliged. We are wholly so, or not at all. If there be any 
place of refuge to which we can escape from the obligation, it ceases to 
exist. If the obligation is absolute, it is immutable and universal. For if
that 
of to-day may not be that of to-morrow, if what is obligatory on me may
not


--- PAGE 1022 ---
be obligatory on you, the obligation would differ from itself, and be 
variable and contingent. This fact is the principle of all morality. That 
every act contrary to right and justice, deserves to be repressed by force, 
and punished when committed, equally in the absence of any law or 
contract: that man naturally recognizes the distinction between the merit 
and demerit of actions, as he does that between justice and injustice, 
honesty and dishonesty; and feels, without being taught, and in the 
absence of law or contract, that it is wrong for vice to be rewarded or go 
unpunished, and for virtue to be punished or left unrewarded: and that, 
the Deity being infinitely just and good, it must follow as a necessary and 
inflexible law that punishment shall be the result of Sin, its inevitable
and 
natural effect and corollary, and not a mere arbitrary vengeance.
Qu.·. What is the seventh great Truth in Masonry? 
Ans.·. The immutable law of God requires, that besides respecting the 
absolute rights of others, and being merely just, we should do good, be 
charitable, and obey the dictates of the generous and noble sentiments of


--- PAGE 1023 ---
the soul. Charity is a law, because our conscience is not satisfied nor at 
ease if we have not relieved the suffering, the distressed, and the 
destitute. It is to give that which he to whom you give has no right to take 
or demand. To be charitable is obligatory on us. We are the Almoners of 
God's bounties. But the obligation is not so precise and inflexible as the 
obligation to be just. Charity knows neither rule nor limit. It goes beyond 
all obligation. Its beauty consists in its liberty. "He that loveth not,
knoweth 
not God; FOR GOD IS LOVE. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, 
and His love is perfected in us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love, 
dwelleth in God, and God in him." To be kindly affectioned one to
another 
with brotherly love; to relieve the necessities of the needy, and be 
generous, liberal, and hospitable; to return to no man evil for evil ; to 
rejoice at the good fortune of others, and sympathize with them in their 
sorrows and reverses; to live peaceably with all men, and repay injuries 
with benefits and kindness; these are the sublime dictates of the Moral 
Law, taught from the infancy of the world, by Masonry.


--- PAGE 1024 ---
Qu.·. What is the eighth great Truth in Masonry? 
Ans.·. That the law which control and regulate the Universe of God, are 
those of motion and harmony. We see only the isolated, incidents of 
things, and with our feeble and limited capacity and, vision cannot
discern 
their connection, nor the mighty chords, that make the apparent discord 
perfect harmony. Evil is merely apparent, and all is in reality good and 
perfect. For pain and sorrow, persecution and hardships, affliction and 
destitution, sickness and death are but the means, by which alone the 
noblest, virtues could be developed. Without them, and without sin and 
error, and wrong and outrage, as there can be no effect without an 
adequate cause, there could be neither patience under suffering and 
distress; nor prudence in difficulty; nor temperance to avoid excess; nor 
courage to meet danger; nor truth, when to speak the truth is hazardous; 
nor love, when it is met with ingratitude; nor charity for the needy and 
destitute; nor forbearance and forgiveness of injuries; nor toleration of 
erroneous opinions; nor charitable judgment and construction of men's


--- PAGE 1025 ---
motives and
actions; nor patriotism, nor heroism, nor honor, nor self-denial, nor 
generosity. These and most other virtues and excellencies would have no 
existence, and even their names be unknown; and the poor virtues that 
still existed, would scarce deserve the name; for life would be one flat, 
dead, low level, above which none of the lofty elements of human nature 
would emerge; and man would lie lapped in contented indolence and 
idleness, a mere worthless negative, instead of the brave, strong soldier 
against the grim legions of Evil and rude Difficulty. 
Qu.·. What is the ninth great Truth in Masonry? 
Ans.·. The great leading doctrine of this Degree;- that the JUSTICE, the 
WISDOM, and the MERCY of God are alike infinite, alike perfect, and
yet 
do not in the least jar nor conflict one with the other; but form a Great 
Perfect Trinity of Attributes, three and yet one: that, the principle of
merit 
and demerit being absolute, and every good action deserving to be 
rewarded, and every bad one to be punished, and God being as just as


--- PAGE 1026 ---
He is good; and yet the cases constantly recurring in this world, in which 
crime and cruelty, oppression, tyranny, and injustice are prosperous, 
happy, fortunate, and self-contented, and rule and reign, and enjoy all the 
blessings of God's beneficence, while the virtuous and good are 
unfortunate, miserable, destitute, pining away in dungeons, perishing with 
cold, and famishing with hunger, slaves of oppression, and instruments 
and victims of the miscreants that govern; so that this world, if there
were 
no existence beyond it, would be one great theatre of wrong and injustice, 
proving God wholly disregardful of His own necessary law of merit and 
demerit; - it follows that there must be another life in which these
apparent 
wrongs shall be repaired: That all the powers of man's soul tend to 
infinity; and his indomitable instinct of immortality, and the universal
hope 
of another life, testified by all creeds, all poetry, all traditions, establish
its 
certainty; for man is not an orphan; but hath a Father near at hand: and 
the day must come when Light and Truth, and the just and Good shall be


--- PAGE 1027 ---
victorious, and Darkness, Error, Wrong, and Evil be annihilated, and 
known no more forever: That the Universe is one great Harmony, in 
which, according to the faith of all nations, deep-rooted in all hearts in
the 
primitive ages, Light will ultimately prevail over Darkness, and the Good 
Principle over the Evil: and the myriad souls that have emanated from the 
Divinity, purified and ennobled by the struggle
here below, will again return to perfect bliss in the bosom of God, to
offend 
against Whose laws will then be no longer possible. 
Qu.·. What, then, is the one great lesson taught to us, as Masons, in this 
Degree? 
Ans.·. That to that state and realm of Light and Truth and Perfection,
which 
is absolutely certain, all the good men on earth are tending; and if there is
a 
law from whose operation none are exempt, which inevitably conveys
their 
bodies to darkness and to dust, there is another not less certain nor less 
powerful, which conducts their spirits to that state of Happiness and


--- PAGE 1028 ---
Splendor and Perfection, the bosom of their Father and their God. The 
wheels of Nature are not made to roll backward. Everything presses on to 
Eternity. From the birth of Time an impetuous current has set in, which 
bears all the sons of men toward that interminable ocean. Meanwhile, 
Heaven is attracting to itself whatever is cogenial to its nature, is
enriching 
itself by the spoils of the Earth, and collecting within its capacious
bosom 
whatever is pure, permanent, and divine, leaving nothing for the last fire
to 
consume but the gross matter that creates concupiscence; while
everything 
fit for that good fortune shall be gathered and selected from the ruins of
the 
world, to adorn that Eternal City. 
Let every Mason then obey the voice that calls him thither. Let us seek
the 
things that are above, and be not content with a world that must shortly 
perish, and which we must speedily quit, while we neglect to prepare for 
that in which we are invited to dwell forever. While everything within us
and


--- PAGE 1029 ---
around us reminds us of the approach of death, and concurs to teach us 
that this is., not our rest, let us hasten our preparations for another world, 
and earnestly implore that help and strength from our Father, which alone 
can put an end to that fatal war which our desires have too long waged
with 
our destiny. When these move in the same, direction, and that which
God's 
will renders unavoidable shall become our choice, all things will be ours; 
life will be divested of its vanity, and death disarmed of its terrors. 
Qu.·. What are the symbols of the purification necessary to make us
perfect 
Masons? 
Ans.·. Lavation with pure water, or baptism; because to cleanse the body
is 
emblematical of purifying the soul; and because it conduces to the bodily 
health, and virtue is the health of the soul, as sin and vice are its malady 
and sickness:- unction, or anoint-
ing with oil; because thereby we are set apart and dedicated to the 
service and priesthood of the Beautiful, the True, and the Good:- and


--- PAGE 1030 ---
robes of white, emblems of candor, purity, and truth. 
Qu.·. What is to us the chief symbol of man's ultimate redemption and 
regeneration? 
Ans.·. The fraternal supper, of bread which nourishes, and of wine which 
refreshes and exhilarates, symbolical of the time which is to come, when 
all mankind shall be one great harmonious brotherhood; and teaching us 
these great lessons: that as matter changes ever, but no single atom is 
annihilated, it is not rational to suppose that the far nobler soul does not 
continue to exist beyond the grave: that many thousands who have died 
before us might claim to be joint owners with ourselves of the particles 
that compose our mortal bodies; for matter ever forms new combinations; 
and the bodies of the ancient dead, the patriarchs before and since the 
flood, the kings and common people of all ages, resolved into their 
constituent elements, are carried upon the wind over all continents, and 
continually enter into and form part of the habitations of new souls, 
creating new bonds of sympathy and brotherhood between each man that 
lives and all his race. And thus, in the bread we eat, and in the wine we


--- PAGE 1031 ---
drink to-night may enter into and form part of us the identical particles of 
matter that once formed parts of the material bodies called Moses, 
Confucius, Plato, Socrates, or Jesus of Nazareth. In the truest sense, we 
eat and drink the bodies of the dead; and cannot say that there is a single 
atom of our blood or body, the ownership of which some other soul might 
not dispute with us. It teaches us also the infinite beneficence of God who 
sends us seedtime and harvest each in its season, and makes His 
showers to fall and His sun to shine alike upon the evil and the good: 
bestowing upon us unsolicited His innumerable blessings, and asking no 
return. For there are no angels stationed upon the watchtowers of 
creation to call the world to prayer and sacrifice; but He bestows His 
benefits in silence, like a kind friend who comes at night, and, leaving his 
gifts at the door, to be found by us in the morning, goes quietly away and 
asks no thanks, nor ceases his kind offices for our ingratitude. And thus 
the bread and wine teach us that our Mortal Body is no more WE than the 
house in which we live, or the garments that we wear; but the Soul is I, 
the ONE, identical, unchangeable, immortal emanation from the Diety, to


--- PAGE 1032 ---
return to God and be forever happy, in His good time; as our mortal 
bodies, dissolving, return to the elements from which they came, their 
particles coining and going ever in perpetual genesis. To our Jewish 
Brethren, this supper is symbolical of the Passover: to the Christian 
Mason, of that eaten by Christ and His Disciples, when, celebrating the 
Passover, He broke bread and gave it to them, saying, "Take! eat! this is 
My body:" and giving them the cup, He said, "Drink ye all of it! for this
is 
My blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission 
of sins;" thus symbolizing the perfect harmony and union between
Himself 
and the faithful; and His death upon the cross for the salvation of man. 
The history of Masonry is the history of Philosophy. Masons do not 
pretend to set themselves up for instructors of the human race: but, 
though Asia produced and preserved the Mysteries, Masonry has, in 
Europe and America, given regularity to their doctrines, spirit, and
action, 
and developed the moral advantages which mankind may reap from them. 
More consistent, and more simple in its mode of procedure, it has put an


--- PAGE 1033 ---
end to the vast allegorical pantheon of ancient mythologies, and itself 
become a science. 
None can deny that Christ taught a lofty morality. "Love one another: 
forgive those that despitefully use you and persecute you: be pure of 
heart, meek, humble, contented: lay not up riches on earth, but in 
Heaven: submit to the powers lawfully over you: become like these little 
children, or ye cannot be saved, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven: 
forgive the repentant; and cast no stone at the sinner, if you too have 
sinned: do unto others as ye would have others do unto you:" such, and 
not abstruse questions of theology, were His simple and sublime 
teachings. 
The early Christians followed in His footsteps. The first preachers of the 
faith had no thought of domination. Entirely animated by His saying, that 
he among them should be first, who should serve with the greatest 
devotion, they were humble, modest, and charitable, and they knew how 
to communicate this spirit of the inner man to the churches under their 
direction. These churches were at first but spontaneous meetings of all


--- PAGE 1034 ---
Christians inhabiting the same locality. A pure and severe morality, 
mingled with religious enthusiasm, was the characteristic of each, and 
excited the admiration even of their persecutors. Everything was
in common among them; their property, their joys, and their sorrows. In 
the silence of night they met for instruction and to pray together. Their 
love-feasts, or fraternal repasts, ended these reunions, in which all 
differences in social position and rank were effaced in the presence of a 
paternal Divinity. Their sole object was to make men better, by bringing 
them back to a simple worship, of which universal morality was the basis; 
and to end those numerous and cruel sacrifices which everywhere 
inundated with blood the altars of the gods. Thus did Christianity reform 
the world, and obey the teachings of its founder. It gave to woman her 
proper rank and influence; it regulated domestic life; and by admitting the 
slaves to the love-feasts, it by degrees raised them above that oppression 
under which half of mankind had groaned for ages. 
This, in its purity, as taught by Christ Himself, was the true primitive 
religion, as communicated by God to the Patriarchs. It was no new


--- PAGE 1035 ---
religion, but the reproduction of the oldest of all; and its true and perfect 
morality is the morality of Masonry, as is the morality of every creed of 
antiquity. 
In the early days of Christianity, there was an initiation like those of the 
pagans. Persons were admitted on special conditions only. To arrive at a 
complete knowledge of the doctrine, they had to pass three degrees of 
instruction. The initiates were consequently divided into three classes;
the 
first, Auditors, the second, Catechumens, and the third, the Faithful. The 
Auditors were a sort of novices, who were prepared by certain 
ceremonies and certain instruction to receive the dogmas of Christianity. 
A portion of these dogmas was made known to the Catechumens; who, 
after particular purifications, received baptism, or the initiation of the 
theogenesis (divine generation); but in the grand mysteries of that 
religion, the incarnation, nativity, passion, and resurrection of Christ,
none 
were initiated but the Faithful. These doctrines, and the celebration of the 
Holy Sacraments, particularly the Eucharist, were kept with profound


--- PAGE 1036 ---
secrecy. These Mysteries were divided into two parts; the first styled the 
Mass of the Catechumens; the second, the Mass of the Faithful. The 
celebration of the Mysteries of Mithras was also styled a mass; and the 
ceremonies used were the same. There were found all the sacraments of 
the Catholic Church, even the breath of confirmation. The Priest of 
Mithras promised the Initiates deliverance from sin, by means
of confession and baptism, and a future life of happiness or misery. He 
celebrated the oblation of bread, image of the resurrection. The baptism 
of newly-born children, extreme unction, confession of sins, - all
belonged 
to the Mithriac rites. The candidate was purified by a species of baptism, 
a mark was impressed upon his forehead, he offered bread and water, 
pronouncing certain mysterious words. 
During the persecutions in the early ages of Christianity, the Christians 
took refuge in the vast catacombs which stretched for miles in every 
direction under the city of Rome, and are supposed to have been of


--- PAGE 1037 ---
Etruscan origin. There, amid labyrinthine windings, deep caverns, hidden 
chambers, chapels, and tombs, the persecuted fugitives found refuge, 
and there they performed the ceremonies of the Mysteries. 
The Basilideans, a sect of Christians that arose soon after the time of the 
Apostles, practised the Mysteries, with the old Egyptian legend. They 
symbolized Osiris by the Sun, Isis by the Moon, and Typhon by Scorpio; 
and wore crystals bearing these emblems, as amulets or talismans to 
protect them from danger; upon which were also a brilliant star and the 
serpent. They were copied from the talismans of Persia and Arabia, and 
given to every candidate, at his initiation. 
Irenæaus tells us that the Simonians, one of the earliest sects of the 
Gnostics, had a Priesthood of the Mysteries. 
Tertullian tells us that the Valentinians, the most celebrated of all the 
Gnostic schools, imitated, or rather perverted, the Mysteries of Eleusis. 
Irenæaus informs us, in several curious chapters, of the Mysteries 
practised by the Marcosians; and Origen gives, much information as to 
the Mysteries of the Ophites; and there is no doubt that all the Gnostic


--- PAGE 1038 ---
sects had Mysteries and an initiation. They all claimed to possess a 
secret doctrine, coming to them directly from Jesus Christ, different from 
that of the Gospels and Epistles, and superior to those communications, 
which in their eyes, were merely exoteric. This secret doctrine they did
not 
communicate to every one; and among the extensive sect of the 
Basilideans hardly one in a thousand knew it, as we learn from Irenæaus. 
We know the name of only the highest class of their Initiates. They were 
], and Strangers to the World [ styled Elect or Elus [ ]. 
They had at lest three Degrees - the Material, the Intellectual, and the 
Spiritual
and the lesser and greater Mysteries; and the number of those who attained
the 
highest Degree was quite small. 
Baptism was one of their most important ceremonies; and the Basilideans
celebrated 
the 10th of January, as the anniversary of the day on which Christ was
baptized in 
Jordan.


--- PAGE 1039 ---
They had the ceremony of laying on of hands, by way of purification; and
that of the 
mystic banquet, emblem of that to which they believed the Heavenly
Wisdom would 
]. one day admit them, in the fullness of things [ 
Their ceremonies were much more like those of the Christians than those
of Greece; 
but they mingled with them much that was borrowed from the Orient and
Egypt: and 
taught the primitive truths, mixed with a multitude of fantastic errors and
fictions. 
The discipline of the secret was the concealment (occultatio) of certain
tenets and 
ceremonies. So says Clemens of Alexandria. 
To avoid persecution, the early Christians were compelled to use great
precaution, 
and to hold meetings of the Faithful [of the Household of Faith] in private
places, 
under concealment by darkness, They assembled in the night, and they
guarded 
against the intrusion of false brethren and profane persons, spies who
might cause 
their arrest. They conversed together figuratively, and by the use of
symbols, lest


--- PAGE 1040 ---
cowans and eavesdroppers might overhear: and there existed among them a
favored 
class, or Order, who were initiated into certain Mysteries which they were
bound by 
solemn promise not to disclose, or even converse about, except with such
as had 
received them under the same sanction. They were called Brethren, the
Faithful, 
Stewards of the Mysteries, Superintendents, Devotees of the Secret, and 
ARCHITECTS. 
In the Hierarchiœ, attributed to St. Dionysius the Areopagite, the first
Bishop of 
Athens, the tradition of the sacrament is said to have been divided into
three 
Degrees, or grades, purification, initiation, and accomplishment or
perfection; and it 
mentions also, as part of the ceremony, the bringing to sight. 
The Apostolic Constitutions, attributed to Clemens, Bishop of Rome,
describe the 
early church, and say: "These regulations must on no account be
communicated to all 
sorts of persons, because of the Mysteries contained in them." They speak
of the


--- PAGE 1041 ---
Deacon's duty to keep the doors, that none uninitiated should enter at the
oblation. 
Ostiarii, or doorkeepers, kept guard, and gave notice of the time of prayer
and churchassemblies; 
and also by private
signal, in times of persecution, gave notice to those within, toe able them
to avoid 
danger. The Mysteries were open to the Fideles or Faithful only; and no
spectators 
were allowed at the communion. 
Tertullian, who died about A. D. 216, says in his Apology: "None are
admitted to 
the religious Mysteries without an oath of secrecy. We appeal to your
Thracian 
and Eleusinian Mysteries; and we are especially bound to this caution,
because if 
we prove faithless, we should not only provoke Heaven, but draw upon our
heads 
the utmost rigor of human displeasure. And should strangers betray us?
They 
know nothing but by report and hearsay. Far hence, ye Profane! is the
prohibition 
from all holy Mysteries."


--- PAGE 1042 ---
Clemens, Bishop of Alexandria, born about A.D. 191, says, in his
Stromata, that 
he cannot explain the Mysteries, because he should thereby, according to
the old 
proverb, put a sword into the hands of a child. He frequently compares
the 
Discipline of the Secret with the heathen Mysteries, as to their internal
and 
recondite wisdom. 
Whenever the early Christians happened to be in company with strangers,
more 
properly termed the Profane, they never spoke of their sacraments, but
indicated 
to one another what they meant by means of symbols and secret
watchwords, 
disguisedly, and as by direct communication of mind with mind, and by
enigmas. 
Origen, born A.D. 134 or 135, answering Celsus, who had objected that
the 
Christians had a concealed doctrine said: "Inasmuch as the essential and 
important doctrines and principles of Christianity are openly taught, it is
foolish to 
object that there are other things that are recondite; for this is common to
Christian


--- PAGE 1043 ---
discipline with that of those philosophers in whose teaching some things
were 
exoteric and some esoteric: and it is enough to say that it was so with
some of the 
disciples of Pythagoras." 
The formula which the primitive church pronounced at the moment of
celebrating 
its Mysteries, was this: "Depart, ye Profane! Let the Catechumens, and
those who 
have not been admitted or initiated, go forth." 
Archelaus, Bishop of Cascara in Mesopotamia, who, in the year 278,
conducted a 
controversy with the Manichaeans, said: "These Mysteries the church now 
communicates to him who has passed through the introductory Degree.
They are 
not explained to the Gentiles at all; nor are they taught openly in the
hearing of 
Catechumens: but much that is spoken is in disguised terms that the
Faithful [ ], who possess the knowledge, may be still more informed, 
and those who are not acquainted with it, may suffer no disadvantage." 
Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, was born in the year 315, and died in 386. In


--- PAGE 1044 ---
his Catechesis he says: "The Lord spake in parables to His hearers in 
general; but to His disciples He explained in private the parables and 
allegories which He spoke in public. The splendor of glory is for those 
who are early enlightened: obscurity and darkness are the portion of the 
unbelievers and ignorant. Just so the church discovers its Mysteries to 
those who have advanced beyond the class of Catechumens: we employ 
obscure terms with others." 
St. Basil, the Great Bishop of Cæsarea, born in the year 326, and dying in 
the year 376, says: "We receive the dogmas transmitted to us by writing, 
and those which have descended to us from the Apostles, beneath the 
mystery of oral tradition: for several things have been handed to us 
without writing, lest the vulgar, too familiar with our dogmas, should lose
a 
due respect for them. . . . This is what the uninitiated are not permitted to 
contemplate; and how should it ever be proper to write and circulate 
among the people an account of them?" 
St. Gregory Nazianzen, Bishop of Constantinople, A.D. 379, says: "You


--- PAGE 1045 ---
have heard as much of the Mystery as we are allowed to speak openly in 
the ears of all; the rest will be communicated to you in private; and that 
you must retain within yourself. …. Our Mysteries are not to be made 
known to strangers." 
St. Ambrose, Archbishop of Milan, who was born in 340, and died in 393, 
says in his work De Mysteriis: "All the Mystery should be kept concealed, 
guarded by faithful silence, lest it should be inconsiderately divulged to 
the ears of the Profane . . . . . It is not given to all to contemplate the 
depths of our Mysteries …. that they may not be seen by those who ought 
not to behold them; nor received by those who cannot preserve them." 
And in another work: "He sins against God, who divulges to the unworthy 
the Mysteries confided to him. The danger is not merely in violating
truth, 
but in telling truth, if he allow himself to give hints of them to those
from 
whom they ought to be concealed Beware of casting pearls before swine! 
.... Every Mystery ought to be kept secret; and, as it were, to be covered 
over by silence, lest it should rashly


--- PAGE 1046 ---
be divulged to the ears of the Profane. Take heed that you do not 
incautiously reveal the Mysteries!" 
St. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, who was born in 347, and died in 430,
says 
in one of his discourses: "Having dismissed the Catechumens, we have 
retained you only to be our hearers; because, besides those things which 
belong to all Christians in common, we are now to discourse to you of 
sublime Mysteries, which none are qualified to hear, but those who, by
the 
Master's favor, are made partakers of them….To have taught them openly, 
would have been to betray them." And he refers to the Ark of the
Covenant, 
and says that it signified a Mystery, or secret of God, shadowed over by
the 
cherubim of glory, and honored by being veiled. 
St. Chrysostom and St. Augustine speak of initiation more than fifty times.
St. 
Ambrose writes to those who are initiated; and initiation was not merely 
baptism, or admission into the church, but it referred to initiation into the 
Mysteries. To the baptized and initiated the Mysteries of religion were


--- PAGE 1047 ---
unveiled; they were kept secret from the Catechumens; who were
permitted 
to hear the Scriptures read and the ordinary discourses delivered, in
which 
the Mysteries, reserved for the Faithful, were never treated of. When the 
services and prayers were ended, the Catechumens and spectators all 
withdrew. Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople, was born in 354, and
died in 417. He 
says: "I wish to speak openly: but I dare not, on account of those who are
not 
initiated. I shall therefore avail myself of disguised terms, discoursing in
a 
shadowy manner ..... Where the holy Mysteries are celebrated, we drive 
away all uninitiated persons, and then close the doors." He mentions the 
acclamations of the initiated; "which," he says, "I here pass over in
silence; 
for it is forbidden to disclose such things to the Profane." Palladius, in his
life 
of Chrysostom, records, as a great outrage, that, a tumult having been 
excited against him by his enemies, they forced their way into the
penetralia, 
where the uninitiated beheld what was not proper for them to see; and


--- PAGE 1048 ---
Chrysostom mentions the same circumstance in his epistle to Pope
Innocent. 
St. Cyril of Alexandria, who was made Bishop in 412, and died in 444,
says in 
his 7th Book against Julian: "These Mysteries are so profound and so
exalted, 
that they can be comprehended by those only who are enlightened. I shall 
not, therefore, attempt to speak of what is so admirable in them, lest by 
discovering them to
the uninitiated, I should offend against the injunction not to give what is 
holy to the impure, nor cast pearls before such as cannot estimate their 
worth….. I should say much more, if I were not afraid of being heard by 
those who are uninitiated: because men are apt to deride what they do 
not understand. And the ignorant, not being aware of the weakness of 
their minds, condemn what they ought most to venerate." 
Theodoret, Bishop of Cyropolis in Syria, was born in 393, and made 
Bishop in 420. In one of his three Dialogues, called the Immutable, he 
introduces Orthodoxus, speaking thus: "Answer me, if you please, in 
mystical or obscure terms: for perhaps there are some persons present


--- PAGE 1049 ---
who are not initiated into the Mysteries." And in his preface to Ezekiel, 
tracing up the secret discipline to the commencement of the Christian era, 
he says: "These Mysteries are so august, that we ought to keep them with 
the greatest caution." 
Minucius Felix, an eminent lawyer of Rome, who lived in 212, and wrote
a 
defence of Christianity, says: "Many of them [the Christians] know each 
other by tokens and signs (notis et insignibus), and they form a friendship 
for each other, almost before they become acquainted." 
The Latin Word, tessera, originally meant a square piece of wood or 
stone, used in making tesselated pavements; afterward a tablet on which 
anything was written, and then a cube or die. Its most general use was to 
designate a piece of metal or wood, square in shape, on which the 
watchword of an Army was inscribed; whence tessera came to mean the 
watchword itself. There was also a tessera hospitalis, which was a piece 
of wood cut into two parts, as a pledge of friendship. Each party kept one 
of the parts; and they swore mutual fidelity by Jupiter. To break the


--- PAGE 1050 ---
tessera was considered a dissolution of the friendship. The early 
Christians used it as a Mark, the watchword of friendship. With them it 
was generally in the shape of a fish, and made of bone. On its face was 
inscribed the word , a fish, the initials of which represented the Greek 
words, ; Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Saviour. 
St. Augustine (de Fide et Svmbolis) says: "This is the faith which in a
few 
words is given to the Novices to be kept by a symbol; these few words are 
known to all the Faithful; that by believing they may be submissive to 
God; by being thus submissive, they
may live rightly; by living rightly, they may purify their hearts and with a
pure heart 
may understand what they believe." 
Maximus Taurinus says: "The tessera is a symbol and sign by which to
distinguish 
between the Faithful and the Profane." 
There are three Degrees in Blue Masonry; and in addition to the two words
of two 
syllables each, embodying the binary, three, of three syllables each. There
were


--- PAGE 1051 ---
three Grand Masters, the two Kings, and Khir-Om the Artificer. The
candidate gains 
admission by three raps, and three raps call up the Brethren. There are
three 
principal officers of the Lodge, three lights at the Altar, three gates -of the
Temple, 
all in the East, West, and South. The three lights represent the Sun, the
Moon, and 
Mercury; Osiris, Isis, and Horus; the Father, the Mother, and the Child;
Wisdom, 
Strength, and Beauty; Hakamah, Binah, and Daath; Gedulah, Geburah, nd 
Tepareth. The candidate makes three circuits of the Lodge: there were
three 
assassins of Khir-Om, and he was slain by three blows while seeking to
escape by 
the three gates of the Temple. The ejaculation at his grave was repeated
three 
times. There are three* divisions of the Temple, and three, five, and seven
Steps. A 
Master works with Chalk, Charcoal, and a vessel of Clay; there are -.hree
movable 
and three immovable jewels. The Triangle appears among the Symbols: the
two


--- PAGE 1052 ---
parallel lines enclosing the circle are connected at top, as are the Columns
Jachin 
and Boaz, symbolizing the equilibrium which explains the great Mysteries
of Nature. 
This continual reproduction of the number three is not accidental, nor
without a 
profound meaning: and we shall find the same repeated in all the Ancient 
philosophies. 
The Egyptian Gods formed Triads, the third member in each proceeding
from the 
other two. Thus we have the Triad of Thebes, Amun, Maut, and Kharso;
that of 
Philae, Osiris, Isis, and Horus; that of Elephantinë and the Cataracts,
Neph, Sate, 
and Anoukë. 
Osiris, Isis, and Horus were the Father, Mother, and Son; the latter being
Light, the 
Soul of the World, the Son, the Protogonos or First-Begotten. 
Sometimes this Triad was regarded as SPIRIT, or the active Principle or
Generative 
Power; MATTER, or the PASSIVE Principle or Productive Capacity; and
the


--- PAGE 1053 ---
Universe, which proceeds from the two Principles. 
We also find in Egypt this Triad or Trinity; Ammon-Ra, the Creator:
Osiris-Ra. the 
Giver of Fruitfulness: Horus-Ra the
Queller of Light; symbolized by the Summer, Autumn, and Spring Sun. For
the 
Egyptians had but three Seasons, the three gates of the Temple; and on
account of 
the different effects of the Sun on those three Seasons, the Deity appears
in these 
three forms. 
The Phoenician Trinity was Ulomos, Chusoros, and the Egg out of which
the Universe 
proceeded. 
The Chaldean Triad consisted of Bel, [the Persian Zervana Akherana],
Oromasdes, 
and Ahriman; the Good and Evil Principle alike outflowing from the
Father, by their 
equilibrium and alternating preponderance to produce harmony. Each was
to rule, in 
turn, for equal periods, until finally the Evil Principle should itself
become good.


--- PAGE 1054 ---
The Chaldean and Persian oracles of Zoroaster give us the Triad, Fire,
Light, and 
Ether. 
Orpheus celebrates the Triad of Phanes, Ouranos, and Kronos. Corry says
the Orphic 
Trinity consisted of Metis, Phanes, and Ericapaeus; Will, Light or Love,
and Life. 
Acusilaus makes it consist of Metis, Eros, and Æther: Will, Love, and
Ether. 
Phereycides of Syros, of Fire, Water, and Air or Spirit. In the two former
we readily 
recognize Osiris and Isis, the Sun and the Nile. 
The first three of the Persian Amshaspands were BAHMAN, the Lord of
LIGHT; 
Ardibehest, the Lord Of FIRE; and Shariver, the Lord of SPLENDOR.
These at once 
lead us back to the Kabala. 
Plutarch says: "The better and diviner nature consists of three; the
Intelligible (i.e. that 
and which exists within the Intellect only as yet), and Matter; , and that 
which proceeds from these, which the Greeks call Kosmos: of which Plato
calls the


--- PAGE 1055 ---
Intelligible, the Idea, the Exemplar, the Father: Matter, the Mother, the
Nurse, and the 
receptacle and place of generation: and the issue of these two, the
Offspring and 
Genesis." 
The Pythagorean fragments say: "Therefore, before the Heaven was made,
there 
existed Idea and Matter, and God the Demiourgos [workman or active
instrument], of 
the former. He made the world out of matter, perfect, only-begotten, with
a soul and 
intellect, and constituted it a divinity." 
Plato gives us Thought, the Father; Primitive Matter, the Mother; and
Kosmos, the 
Son, the issue of the two Principles. Kosmos is the ensouled Universe. 
With the later Platonists, the Triad was Potence, Intellect, and Spirit,
Philo represents 
Sanchoniathon's as Fire, Light, and
Flame, the three Sons of Genos; but this is the Alexandrian, not the 
Phœnician idea. 
Aurelius says the Demiourgos or Creator is triple, and the three Intellects


--- PAGE 1056 ---
are the three Kings: He who exists; He who possesses; He who beholds. 
The first is that which exists by its essence; the second exists in the first, 
and contains or possesses in itself the Universal of things; all that 
afterward becomes: the third beholds this Universal, formed and 
fashioned intellectually, and so having a separate existence. The Third 
exists in the Second, and the Second in the First. 
The most ancient Trinitarian doctrine on record is that of the Brahmins. 
The Eternal Supreme Essence, called PARABRAHMA, BRAHM, 
PARATMA, produced the Universe by self-reflection, and first revealed 
himself as BRAHMA, the Creating Power, then as VISHNU, the 
Preserving Power, and lastly as SIVA, the Destroying and Renovating 
Power; the three Modes in which the Supreme Essence reveals himself in 
the material Universe; but which soon to be regarded as three distinct 
Deities. These three Deities came they styled the TRIMURTI, or TRIAD. 
The Persians received from the Indians the doctrine of the three 
principles, and changed it to that of a principle of Life, which was


--- PAGE 1057 ---
individualized by the Sun, and a principle of Death, which was
symbolized 
by cold and darkness; parallel of the moral world; and in which the 
continual and alternating struggle between light and darkness, life and 
death, seemed but a phase of the great struggle between the good and 
evil principles, embodied in the legend of ORMUZD and AHRIMAN. 
MITHRAS, a Median reformer, was deified after his death, and invested 
with the attributes of the Sun; the different astronomical phenomena
being 
figuratively detailed as actual incidents of his life; in the same manner as 
the history of BUDDHA was invented among the Hindüs. 
The Trinity of the Hindüs became among the Ethiopians and Abyssinians 
NEPH-AMON, PHTHA, and NEITH - the God CREATOR, whose emblem 
was a ram - MATTER, or the primitive mud, symbolized by a globe or an 
egg, and THOUGHT, or the LIGHT which contains the germ of
everything; 
triple manifestation of one and the same God (ATHOM), considered in 
three aspects, as the creative power, goodness, and wisdom. Other 
Deities were speedily invented; and among them OSTRIS, represented by


--- PAGE 1058 ---
the Sun, ISIS, his wife, by the Moon or Earth, TYPHON, his Brother, the
Principle of Evil and Darkness, who was the son of Osiris and Isis. And 
the Trinity of OSIRIS, ISIS, and HORUS became subsequently the Chief 
Gods and objects of worship of the Egyptians. 
The ancient Etruscans (a race that emigrated from the Rhætian Alps into 
Italy, along whose route evidences of their migration have been 
discovered, and whose language none have yet succeeded in reading) 
acknowledged only one Supreme God; but they had images for His 
different attributes, and temples to these images. Each town had one 
National Temple, dedicated to the three great attributes of God, 
STRENGTH, RICHES, and WISDOM, or Tina, Talna, and Minerva. The 
National Deity was always a Triad under one roof; and it was the same in 
Egypt, where one Supreme God alone was acknowledged, but was 
worshipped as a Triad, with different names in each different home. Each 
city in Etruria might have as many gods and gates and temples as it 
pleased; but three sacred gates, and one Temple to three Divine


--- PAGE 1059 ---
Attributes were obligatory, wherever the laws of Tages (or Taunt or
Thoth) 
were received. The only gate that remains in Italy, of the olden time, 
undestroyed, is the Porta del Circo at Volterra; and it has upon it the three 
heads of the three National Divinities, one upon the keystone of its 
magnificent arch, and one above each side-pillar. 
The Buddhists hold that the God SAKYA of the Hindüs, called in Ceylon, 
GAUTAMA, in India beyond the Ganges, SOMONAKODOM, and in 
China, CHY-KIA, or Fo, constituted a Trinity [TRIRATNA], of BUDDHA, 
DHARMA, and SANGA, - Intelligence, Law, and Union or Harmony. 
The Chinese Sabæans represented the Supreme Deity as composed of 
CHANG-TI, the Supreme Sovereign; TIEN, the Heavens; and TAO, the 
Universal Supreme Reason and Principle of Faith; and that from Chaos, 
an immense silence, an immeasurable void. without perceptible forms, 
alone, infinite, immutable, moving in a circle in illimitable space,
without 
change or alteration, when vivified by the Principle of Truth, issued all 
Beings, under the influence of TAO, Principle of Faith, who produced
one,


--- PAGE 1060 ---
one produced two, two produced three, and three produced all that is. 
The Sclavono-Vendes typified the Trinity by the three heads of the God 
TRIGLAV; and the Pruczi or Prussians by the Tri-une God, PERKOUN, 
PIKOLLOS, and POTRIMPOS, the Deities of Light
and Thunder, of Hell and the Earth, its fruits and animals: and the 
Scandinavians by ODIN, FREA, and THOR. 
In the KABALAH, or the Hebrew traditional philosophy, the Infinite
Deity, 
beyond the reach of the Human Intellect, and without Name, Form, or 
Limitation, was represented as developing Himself, in order to create, and 
by self-limitation, in ten emanations or out-flowings, called SEPHIROTH, 
or rays, The first of these, in the world AZILUTH, that is, within the
Deity, 
was KETHER, or the Crown, by which we understand the Divine Will or 
Potency. Next came, as a pair, HAI",MAH and BAINAH, ordinarily 
translated "Wisdom" and "Intelligence," the former termed the FATHER, 
and the latter the MOTHER. HAKEMAH is the active Power or Energy of 
Deity, by which He produces within Himself Intellection or Thinking: and


--- PAGE 1061 ---
BAINAH, the passive Capacity, from which, acted on by the Power, the 
Intellection flows. This Intellection is called DAATH: and it is the
"WORD," 
of Plato and the Gnostics; the unuttered word, within the Deity. Here is 
the origin of the Trinity of the Father, the Mother or Holy Spirit, and the 
Son or Word. 
Another Trinity was composed of the fourth Sephirah, GEDULAH or 
KHASW, Benignity or Mercy, also termed FATHER (Aba); the fifth, 
GEBURAH, Severity or Strict Justice, also termed the MOTHER (Imma); 
and the sixth, the SON or Issue of these, TIPHARETH, Beauty or 
Harmony. "Everything," says the SOHAR, “proceeds according to the 
Mystery of the Balance" - that is, by the equilibrium of Opposites: and 
thus from the Infinite Mercy and the Infinite justice, in equilibrium,
flows 
the perfect Harmony of the Universe. Infinite POWER, which is Lawless, 
and Infinite WISDOM, in Equilibrium, also produce BEAUTY or 
HARMONY, as Son, Issue, or Result - the Word, or utterance of the 
Thought of God. Power and Justice or Severity are the same: Wisdom


--- PAGE 1062 ---
and Mercy or Benignity are the same; - in the Infinite Divine Nature. 
According to Philo of Alexandria, the Supreme Being, Primitive Light or 
Archetype of Light, uniting with WISDOM [ ], the mother of Creation, 
forms in Himself the types of all things, and acts upon the Universe
through 
the WORD [ . . Logos], who dwells in God, and in whom all His powers 
and attributes develop themselves; a doctrine borrowed by him from
Plato. 
Simon Magus and his disciples taught that the Supreme Being or Centre
of 
Light produced first of all, three couples of united
Existences, of both sexes, [ ... Suzugias], which were the origins of all 
things: REASON and INVENTIVENESS; SPEECH and THOUGHT; 
and and , CALCULATION and REFLECTION: [ 
and 
, 
… Nöus and Epinoia, Phöne and Ennoia, Logismos and 
Enthumësis]; of which Ennoia or WISDOM was the first produced, and
Mother


--- PAGE 1063 ---
of all that exists. 
Other Disciples of Simon, and with them most of the Gnostics, adopting
and 
… Pleröma, or PLENITUDE of modifying the doctrine, taught that the 
Superior Intelligences, having the Supreme Being at their head, was 
composed of eight Eons [ . . Aiönes] of different sexes; . . PROFUNDITY 
and SILENCE; SPIRIT and TRUTH; the WORD and LIFE; MAN and the 
; and ; and and : and CHURCH: [ 
…. Buthos and Sigë; Pneuma and Aletheia; Logos and 
and Zöe; Anthröpos and Ekklësia]. 
Bardesanes, whose doctrines the Syrian Christians long embraced, taught 
that the unknown Father, happy in the Plenitude of His Life and
Perfections, 
first produced a Companion for Himself [ ... Suzugos], whom He placed 
in the Celestial Paradise and who became, by Him, the Mother of
CHRISTOS, 
Son of the Living God: i.e. (laying aside the allegory), that the Eternal 
conceived, in the silence of His decrees, the Thought of revealing Himself
by


--- PAGE 1064 ---
a Being who should be His image or His Son: that to the Son succeeded
his 
Sister and Spouse, the Holy Spirit, and they produced four Spirits of the 
elements, male and female, Maio and Jabseho, Nouro and Rucho; then
Seven 
Mystic Couples of Spirits, and Heaven and Earth, and all that is; then
seven 
spirits governing the planets, twelve governing the Constellations of the 
Zodiac, and thirty-six Starry Intelligences whom he called Deacons: while
the 
Holy Spirit [Sophia Achamoth], being both the Holy Intelligence and the
Soul 
of the physical world, went from the Pleröma into that material world and
there 
mourned her degradation, until CHRISTOS, her former spouse, coming to
her 
with his Divine Light and Love, guided her in the way to purification, and
she 
again united herself with him as his primitive Companion. 
Basilides, the Christian Gnostic, taught that there were seven emanations 
from the Supreme Being: The First-born, Thought, the Word, Reflection, 
, , , , , Wisdom, Power, and Righteousness [ ,


--- PAGE 1065 ---
and Protogonos, Nous, Logos, Phronesis, Sophia, Dunamis, and 
Dikarosunë]; from whom emanated other Intelligences in succession, to
the 
number, in all, of three hundred and sixty-five; which were God
manifested, and 
composed the Plenitude of the Divine Emanations, or the God Abraxas; of
which 
the Thought [or Intellect, . . Nous] united itself, by baptism in the river 
Jordan, with the man Jesus, servant [ . Diakonos] of the human race; but 
did not suffer with Him; and the disciples of Basilides taught that the , put
on 
the appearance only of humanity, and that Simon of Cyrene was crucified
in His 
stead and ascended into Heaven. 
Basilides held that out of the unrevealed God, who is at the head, of the
world of 
emanations, and exalted above all conception or designation 
[ ], were evolved seven living, self-subsistent, ever-active 
hyposatized powers: 
1st. NOUS ................. 
2d. LOGOS ...............


--- PAGE 1066 ---
3d. Phronesis ............ 
4th. Sophia................ 
SECOND: THE ACTIVE OR OPERATIVE POWER. 
5th. Dunamis............. 
6th. Dikaiosunë ......... 
7th. Eirënë................. 
These Seven Powers ( .. Dunameis), with the Primal Ground out of 
which they were evolved, constituted in his scheme the [Prote 
Ogdoas], or First Octave, the root of all Existence. From this point, the
spiritual 
life proceeded to evolve out of itself continually many gradations of
existence, 
each lower one being still the impression, the antetype, of the immediate
higher 
one. He supposed there were 365 of these regions or gradations, expressed
by 
the mystical word 
FIRST: THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS.


--- PAGE 1067 ---
...................... The Mind. 
................ The Reason. 
........... The Thinking Power. 
................. Wisdom. 
............ Might, accomplishing the purposes of 
Wisdom. 
THIRD: THE MORAL ATTRIBUTES. 
...... Holiness or Moral Perfection. 
................ Inward Tranquility. 
[Abraxas].
The is thus interpreted, by the usual method of reckoning Greek letters 
numerically….. a,1 .. b,1 ….j,100 …. a,1 …. x,60.. a,1 . . x,200 = 365:
which is 
the whole Emanation-World, as the development of the Supreme Being. 
In the system of Basilides, Light, Life, Soul, and Good were opposed to 
Darkness, Death, Matter, and Evil, throughout the whole course of the
Universe. 
According to the Gnostic view, God was represented as the immanent,


--- PAGE 1068 ---
incomprehensible and original source of all perfection; the unfathomable
ABYSS 
( . . buthos), according to Valentinus, exalted above all possibility of 
designation; of whom, properly speaking, nothing can be predicated; the 
of Basilides, the of Philo. From this incomprehensible Essence of 
God, an immediate transition to finite things is inconceivable. Self-
limitation is 
the first beginning of a communication of life on the part of God - the
first 
passing of the hidden Deity into manifestation; and from this proceeds all
further 
self-developing manifestation of the Divine Essence. From this primal link
in the 
chain of life there are evolved, in the first place, the manifold powers or 
attributes inherent in the divine Essence, which, until that first
selfcomprehension, 
were all hidden in the Abyss of His Essence. Each of these 
attributes presents the whole divine Essence under one particular aspect;
and to 
each, therefore, in this respect, the title of God may appropriately be
applied. 
These Divine Powers evolving themselves to self-subsistence, become


--- PAGE 1069 ---
thereupon the germs and principles of all further developments of life. The
life 
contained in them unfolds and individualizes itself more and more, but in
such a 
way that the successive grades of this evolution of life continually sink
lower and 
lower; the spirits become feebler, the further they are removed from the
first link 
in the series. 
The first manifestation they termed 
heautou] or 
was hypostatically represented in a or 
[protë katalëpsis 
[proton katalëpton tou Theou]; which 
[Nous or Logos]. 
In the Alexandrian Gnosis, the Platonic notion of the [Hulë]
predominates. 
This is the dead, the unsubstantial - the boundary that limits from without
the 
evolution of life in its gradually advancing progression, whereby the
Perfect is


--- PAGE 1070 ---
ever evolving itself into the less Perfect. This again, is represented under 
various images; - at one time as the darkness that exists alongside of the
light; 
at another, as the void [ , 
.... Kenoma, Kenon], in opposition to the Fullness, [ .... Plëroma] of 
the Divine Life; or as the shadow that accompanies the light; or as the 
chaos, or the sluggish, stagnant, dark water. This matter, dead in itself, 
possesses by its own nature no inherent tendency; as life of every sort is 
foreign to it, itself makes no encroachment on the Divine. As, however, 
the evolutions of the Divine Life (the essences developing themselves out 
of the progressive emanation) become feebler, the further they are 
removed from the first link in the series; and as their connection with the 
first becomes looser at each successive step, there arises at the last step 
of the evolution, an imperfect, defective product, which, unable to retain 
its connection with the chain of Divine Life, sinks from the World of
Eons 
into the material chaos: or, according to the same notion, somewhat 
differently expressed [according to the Ophites and to Bardesanes], a


--- PAGE 1071 ---
drop from the fullness of the Divine life bubbles over into the bordering 
void. Hereupon the dead matter, by commixture with the living principle, 
which it wanted, first of all receives animation. But, at the same time,
also, 
the divine, the living, becomes corrupted by mingling with the chaotic 
mass. Existence now multiplies itself. There arises a subordinate, 
defective life; there is ground for a new world; a creation starts into
being, 
beyond the confines of the world of emanation. But, on the other hand, 
since the chaotic principle of matter has acquired vitality, there now
arises 
a more distinct and more active opposition to the God-like - a barely 
negative, blind, ungodly nature-power, which obstinately resists all 
influence of the Divine; hence, as products of the spirit of the (of the 
.. Pneuma Hulikon), are Satan, malignant spirits, wicked men, 
in none of whom is there any reasonable or moral principle, or any 
principle of a rational will; but blind passions alone have the ascendency. 
In them there is the same conflict, as the scheme of Platonism supposes, 
between the soul under the guidance of Divine reason [the . . Nous],


--- PAGE 1072 ---
and the soul blindly resisting reason - between the [pronoia] and 
the [anagë], the Divine Principle and the natural. 
The Syrian Gnosis assumed the existence of an active, turbulent kingdom 
of evil, or of darkness, which, by its encroachments on the kingdom of 
light, brought about a commixture of the light with the darkness, of the 
God-like with the ungodlike. 
Even among the Platonists, some thought that along with an
organized, inert matter, the substratum of the corporeal world, there 
existed from the beginning a blind, lawless motive power, an ungodlike 
soul, as its original motive and active principle. As the inorganic matter 
was organized into a corporeal world, by the plastic power of the Deity, 
so, by the same power, law and reason were communicated to that 
turbulent, irrational soul. Thus the chaos of the was transformed into 
an organized world, and that blind soul into a rational principle, a 
mundane soul, animating the Universe. As from the latter proceeds all 
rational, spiritual life in humanity, so from the former proceeds all that is 
irrational, all that is under the blind sway of passion and appetite; and all


--- PAGE 1073 ---
malignant spirits are its progeny. 
In one respect all the Gnostics agreed: they all held, that there was a 
world purely emanating out of the vital development of God, a creation 
evolved directly out of the Divine Essence, far exalted above any outward 
creation produced by God's plastic power, and conditioned by pre-existing 
matter. They agreed in holding that the framer of this lower world was not 
the Father of that higher world of emanation; but the Demiurge [ - 
], a being of a kindred nature with the Universe framed and governed 
by him, and far inferior to that higher system and the Father of it. 
But some, setting out from ideas which had long prevailed among certain 
Jews of Alexandria, supposed that the Supreme God created and 
governed the world by His ministering spirits, by the angels. At the head 
of these angels stood one who had the direction and control of all; 
therefore called the Artificer and Governor of the World. This Demiurge 
they compared with the plastic, animating, mundane spirit of Plato and 
….Deuteros Theos; the Platonists [the …. Theos 
Genetos], who, moreover, according to the Timæus of Plato, strives to


--- PAGE 1074 ---
represent the IDEA of the Divine Reason, in that which is becoming (as 
contradistinguished from that which is) and temporal. This angel is a 
representative of the Supreme God, on the lower stage of existence: he 
does not act independently, but merely according to the ideas inspired in 
him by the Supreme God; just as the plastic, mundane soul of the 
Platonists creates all things after the pattern of the ideas communicated 
.... Nous - the by the Supreme .Reason [ ... ho esti zöon - the 
paradeigma, of the Divine Reason hypostatized].
But these ideas transcend his limited essence; he cannot understand 
them; he is merely their unconscious organ; and therefore is unable 
himself to comprehend the whole scope and meaning of the work which 
lie performs. As an organ under the guidance of a higher inspiration, he 
reveals higher truths than he himself can comprehend. The mass of the 
Jews, they held, recognized not the angel, by whom, in all the 
Theophanies of the Old Testament, God revealed Himself ; they knew not 
the Demiurge in his true relation to the hidden Supreme God, who never 
reveals Himself in the sensible world. They confounded the type and the


--- PAGE 1075 ---
archetype, the symbol and the idea. They rose no higher than the 
Demiurge; they took him to be the Supreme God Himself. But the
spiritual 
men among them, on the contrary, clearly perceived, or at least divined, 
the ideas veiled under Judaism; they rose beyond the Demiurge, to a 
knowledge of the Supreme God; and are therefore properly His 
. . Therapeutai]. worshippers [ 
Other Gnostics, who had not been followers of the Mosaic religion, but 
who had, at an earlier period, framed to themselves an oriental Gnosis, 
regarded the Demiurge as a being absolutely hostile to the Supreme God. 
He and his angels, notwithstanding their finite nature, wish to establish 
their independence: they will tolerate no foreign rule within their realm. 
Whatever of a higher nature descends into their kingdom, they seek to 
hold imprisoned there, lest it should raise itself above their narrow 
precincts. Probably, in this system, the kingdom of the Demiurgic Angels 
corresponded, for the most part, with that of the deceitful Star-Spirits,
who 
seek to rob man of his freedom, to beguile him by various arts of


--- PAGE 1076 ---
deception, and who exercise a tyrannical sway over the things of this 
world. Accordingly, in the system of these Sabæans, the seven Planet- 
Spirits, and the twelve Star-Spirits of the zodiac, who sprang from an 
irregular connection between the cheated Fetahil and the Spirit of 
Darkness, play an important part in everything that is bad. The Demiurge 
is a limited and limiting being, proud, jealous, and revengeful; and this
his 
character betrays itself in the Old Testament, which, the Gnostics held, 
came from him. They transferred to the Demiurge himself, whatever in
the 
idea of God, as presented by the Old Testament, appeared to them 
defective. Against his will and rule the was continually rebelling, 
revolting without control against the dominion which he, the fashioner, 
would exercise over it,
casting off the yoke imposed on it, and destroying the work he had begun. 
The same jealous being, limited in his power, ruling with despotic sway, 
they imagined they saw in nature. He strives to check the germination of 
the divine seeds of life which the Supreme God of Holiness and Love,


--- PAGE 1077 ---
who has no connection whatever with the sensible world, has scattered 
among men. That perfect God was at most known and worshipped in 
Mysteries by a few spiritual men. 
The Gospel of St. John is in great measure a polemic against the 
Gnostics, whose different sects, to solve the great problems, the creation 
of a material world by an immaterial Being, the fall of man, the 
incarnation, the redemption and restoration of the spirits called men, 
admitted a long series of intelligences, intervening in a series of spiritual 
operations; and which they designated by the names, The Beginning, the 
Word, the Only-Begotten, Life, Light, and Spirit [Ghost]: in Greek, , 
, Mo- and [Archë, Logos, Monogenës, Zöe, , 
Phös, and Pneuma]. St. John, at the beginning of his Gospel, avers that it 
was Jesus Christ who existed in the Beginning; that He was the WORD of 
God by which everything was made; that He was the Only-Begotten, the 
Life and the Light, and that He diffuses among men the Holy Spirit [or 
Ghost], the Divine Life and Light. 
So the Plëroma [ ], Plenitude or Fullness, was a favorite term with


--- PAGE 1078 ---
the Gnostics, and Truth and Grace were the Gnostic Eons; and the 
Simonians, Dokëtës, and other Gnostics held that the Eon Christ Jesus 
was never really, but only apparently clothed with a human body: but St. 
John replies that the Word did really become Flesh, and dwelt among us; 
and that in Him were the Plëroma and Truth and Grace. 
In the doctrine of Valentinus, reared a Christian at Alexandria, God was a 
perfect Being, an Abyss [ . . Buthos], which no intelligence could 
sound, because no eye could reach the invisible and ineffable heights on 
which He dwelt, and no mind could comprehend the duration of His 
existence; He has always been; He is the Primitive Father and Beginning 
and [the . . Propatör and Proarchë]: He will BE always, and 
does not grow old. The development of His Perfections produced the 
intellectual world. After having passed infinite ages in repose and
silence, 
He manifested Himself by His Thought, source of all His manifestations, 
and which received from Him the germ of His
.. Ennoia] is also creations. Being of His Being, His Thought [


--- PAGE 1079 ---
termed [Charis], Grace or Joy, and , or [Sigë or Arrëton], 
Silence or the Ineffable. Its first manifestation was [Nous], the 
Intelligence, first of the Eons, commencement of all things, first
revelation 
of the Divinity, the [Monogenës], or Only-Begotten: next, Truth 
[ - … Alëtheia], his companion. Their manifestations were the Word 
….Zoë] and theirs, Man and the Church and .. Logos] and Life [ [
[ and …. Anthröpos and Ekklësia]: and from these, other 
twelve, six of whom were Hope, Faith, Charity, Intelligence, Happiness, 
and Wisdom; or, in the Hebrew, Kesten, Kina, Amphe, Ouananim, 
Thaedes, and Oubina. The harmony of the Eons, struggling to know and 
be united to the Primitive God, was disturbed, and to redeem and restore 
them, the Intelligence [ ] produced Christ and the Holy Spirit His 
companion; who restored them to their first estate of happiness and 
harmony; and thereupon they formed the Eon Jesus, born of a Virgin, to 
whom the Christos united himself in baptism and who, with his 
Companion Sophia-Achamoth, saved and redeemed the world.


--- PAGE 1080 ---
The Marcosians taught that the Supreme Deity produced by His words the 
[Logos] or Plenitude of Eons: His first utterance was a syllable of 
four letters, each of which became a being; His second of four, His third
of 
ten, and His fourth of twelve: thirty in all, which constituted the f 
[Plëroma]. 
The Valentinians, and others of the Gnostics, distinguished three orders 
of existences: - 1st. The divine germs of life, exalted by their nature
above 
matter, and akin to the (Sophia], to the mundane soul and to the 
Plëroma:- the spiritual natures, [Phuseis Pneumatikai]: 2d. 
The natures originating in the life, divided from the former by the
mixture 
, - the psychical natures, of the [Phuseis Psuchikai]; with 
which begins a perfectly new order of existence, an image of that higher 
mind and system, in a subordinate grade; and finally, 3d. The Ungodlike 
or Hylic Nature, which resists all amelioration, and whose tendency is 
only to destroy - the nature of blind lust and passion. 
The nature of the


--- PAGE 1081 ---
relationship with God (the 
[pneumatikon], the spiritual, is essential 
…. Homo-ousion tö Theö): hence 
the life of Unity, the undivided, the
, absolutely simple ( …. Ousia henike, monoeides). 
[psuchikoi) is disruption into multiplicity, The essence of the 
manifoldness; which, however, is subordinate to a higher unity, by which
it 
allows itself to be guided, first unconsciously, then consciously. 
The essence of the [Hulikoi] (of whom Satan is the head), is the 
direct opposite to all unity; disruption and disunion in itself, without the 
least sympathy, without any point of coalescence whatever for unity; 
together with an effort to destroy all unity, to extend its own inherent 
disunion to everything, and to rend everything asunder. This principle has 
no power to posit anything; but only to negative: it is unable to create, to 
produce, to form, but only to destroy, to decompose. 
By Marcus, the disciple of Valentinus, the idea of a [Logos


--- PAGE 1082 ---
Tou Ontos], of a WORD, manifesting the hidden Divine Essence, in the 
Creation, was spun out into the most subtle details - the entire creation 
being, in his view, a continuous utterance of the Ineffable. The way in 
which the germs of divine life [the …. spermata 
pneumatika], which lie shut up in the Eons, continually unfold and 
individualize them selves more and more, is represented as a 
spontaneous analysis of the several names of the Ineffable, into their 
several sounds. An echo of the Plëroma falls down into the [HuIë], and 
becomes the forming of a new but lower creation. 
One formula of the pneumatical baptism among the Gnostics ran thus: "In 
the NAME which is hidden from all the Divinities and Powers" [of the 
Demiurge], "The Name of Truth" [the [Aletheial, self-manifestation of 
the Buthos], which Jesus of Nazareth has put on in the light-zones of 
Christ, the living Christ, through the Holy Ghost, for the redemption of
the 
angels, - the Name by which all things attain to Perfection." The
candidate 
then said: "I am established and redeemed; I am redeemed in my soul


--- PAGE 1083 ---
from this world, and from all that belongs to it, by the name of , who 
has redeemed the Soul of Jesus by the living Christ." The assembly then 
said: "Peace (or Salvation) to all on whom this name rests!" 
The boy Dionusos, torn in pieces, according to the Bacchic Mysteries, by 
the Titans, was considered by the Manicheans as simply representing the 
Soul, swallowed up by the powers of dark-
ness, - the divine life rent into fragments by matter: - that part of the 
luminous essence of the primitive man [the [Protos 
Anthropos] of Mani, the [Praön Anthröpos] of the 
Valentinians, the Adam Kadmon of the Kabalah; and the Kalomorts of the 
Zendavesta], swallowed up by the powers of darkness; the Mundane 
Soul, mixed with matter - the seed of divine life, which had fallen into 
matter, and had thence to undergo a process of purification and 
development. 
The [Gnosis] of Carpocrates and his son Epiphanes consisted in 
the knowledge of one Supreme Original being, the highest unity, from 
whom all existence has emanated, and to whom it strives to return. The


--- PAGE 1084 ---
finite spirits that rule over the several portions of the Earth, seek to 
counteract this universal tendency to unity; and from their influence,
their 
laws, and arrangements, proceeds all that checks, disturbs, or limits the 
original communion, which is the basis of nature, as the outward 
manifestation of that highest Unity. These spirits, moreover, seek to
retain 
under their dominion the souls which, emanating from the highest Unity, 
and still partaking of its nature, have lapsed into the corporeal world, and 
have there been imprisoned in bodies, in order, under their dominion, to 
be kept within the cycle of migration. From these finite spirits, the
popular 
religions of different nations derive their origin. But the souls which,
from 
a reminiscence of their former condition, soar upward to the 
contemplation of that higher Unity, reach to such perfect freedom and 
repose, as nothing afterward can disturb or limit, and rise superior to the 
popular deities and religions. As examples of this sort, they named 
Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and Christ. They made no distinction


--- PAGE 1085 ---
between the latter and the wise and good men of every nation. They 
taught that any other soul which could soar to the same height of 
contemplation, might be regarded as equal with Him. 
The Ophites commenced their system with a Supreme Being, long 
unknown to the Human race, and still so the greater number of men; the 
[Buthos], or Profundity, Source of Light, and of Adam-Kadmon, the 
Primitive Man, made by the Demiourgos, but perfected by the Supreme 
God by the communication to him of the Spirit [ . . Pneuma]. The first 
emanation was the Thought of the Supreme Deity [the .. Ennoia], 
the conception of the Universe in the Thought of God.
This Thought, called also Silence ( . . Sigë), produced the Spirit [ 
.. Pneuma], Mother of the Living, and Wisdom of God. Together with this 
Primitive Existence, Matter existed also (the Waters, Darkness, Abyss, 
and Chaos), eternal like the Spiritual Principle. Buthos and His Thought, 
uniting with Wisdom, made her fruitful by the Divine Light, and she 
produced a perfect and an imperfect being, Christos, and a Second and 
inferior wisdom, Sophia-Achamoth, who falling into chaos remained


--- PAGE 1086 ---
entangled there, became enfeebled, and lost all knowledge of the 
Superior Wisdom that gave her birth. Communicating movement to 
Chaos, she produced Ialdabaoth, the Demiourgos, Agent of Material 
Creation, and then ascended toward her first place in the scale of 
creation. laldabaoth produced an angel that was his image, and this a 
second, and so on in succession to the sixth after the Demiourgos: the 
seven being reflections one of the other, yet different and inhabiting 
seven distinct regions. The names of the six thus produced were IAO, 
SABAOTH, ADONAI, ELOI, ORAI, and ASTAPHAL Ialdabaoth, to
become 
independent of his mother, and to pass for the Supreme Being, made the 
world, and man, in his own image; and his mother caused the Spiritual 
principle to pass from him into man so made; and henceforward the 
contest between the Demiourgos and his mother, between light and 
darkness, good and evil, was concentrated in man; and the image of 
Ialdabaoth, reflected upon matter, became the Serpent-Spirit, Satan, the 
Evil Intelligence. Eve, created by Ialdabaoth, had by Us Sons children


--- PAGE 1087 ---
that were angels like themselves. The Spiritual light was withdrawn from 
man by Sophia, and the world surrendered to the influence of evil; until 
the Spirit, urged by the entreaties of Wisdom, induced the Supreme Being 
to send Christos to redeem it. Compelled, despite himself, by his Mother, 
Ialdabaoth caused the man Jesus to be born of a Virgin, and the Celestial 
Saviour, uniting with his Sister, Wisdom, descended through the regions 
of the seven angels, appeared in each under the form of its chief, 
concealed his own, and entered with his sister into the man Jesus at the 
baptism in Jordan. Ialdabaoth, finding that Jesus was destroying his 
empire and abolishing his worship, caused the Jews to hate and crucify 
Him; before which happened, Christos and Wisdom had ascended to the 
celestial regions. They restored Jesus to life and gave Him an ethereal 
body, in which He remained eighteen months on earth, and receiving from 
Wisdom the per-
fect knowledge [ …..Gnosis], communicated it to a small number of 
His apostles, and then arose to the intermediate region inhabited by 
laldabaoth, where, unknown to him, He sits at his right hand, taking from


--- PAGE 1088 ---
him the Souls of Light purified by Christos. When nothing of the
Spiritual 
world shall remain subject to laldabaoth, the redemption will be 
accomplished, and the end of the world, the completion of the return of 
Light into the Plenitude, will occur. 
Tatian adopted the theory of Emanation, of Eons, of the existence of a 
God too sublime to allow Himself to be known, but displaying Himself by 
Intelligences emanating from His bosom. The first of these was His spirit 
[ ….. Pneuma], God Himself, God thinking, God conceiving the 
Universe. The second was the Word [ … Logos], no longer merely the 
Thought or Conception, but the Creative Utterance, manifestation of the 
Divinity, but emanating from the Thought or Spirit; the First-Begotten, 
author of the visible creation. This was the Trinity, composed of the 
Father, Spirit, and Word. 
The Elxaïtes adopted the Seven Spirits of the Gnostics; but named them 
Heaven, Water, Spirit, The Holy Angels of Prayer, Oil, Salt, and the
Earth. 
The opinion of the Doketes as to the human nature of Jesus Christ, was


--- PAGE 1089 ---
that most generally received among the Gnostics. They deemed the 
intelligences of the Superior World too pure and too much the antagonists 
of matter, to be willing to unite with it: and held that Christ, an
Intelligence 
of the first rank, in appearing upon the earth, did not become confounded 
with matter, but took upon Himself only the appearance of a body, or at 
the most used it only as an envelope. 
Noëtus termed the Son the first Utterance of the Father; the Word, not by 
Himself, as an Intelligence, and unconnected with the flesh, a real Son; 
but a Word, and a perfect Only-Begotten; light emanated from the Light; 
water flowing from its spring; a ray emanated from the Sun. 
Paul of Samosata taught that Jesus Christ was the Son of Joseph and 
Mary; but that the Word, Wisdom, or Intelligence of God, the [Nous] 
of the Gnostics, had united itself with Him, so that He might be said to be 
at once the Son of God, and God Himself. 
Arius called the Saviour the first of creatures, non-emanated from God, 
but really created, by the direct will of God, before time


--- PAGE 1090 ---
and the ages. According to the Church, Christ was of the same nature as 
God; according to some dissenters, of the same nature as man. Arius 
adopted the theory of a nature analogous to both. When God resolved to 
create the Human race, He made a Being which He called THE WORD, 
THE SON, WISDOM [ , , …. Logos, Uios, Sophia], to the end 
that He might give existence to men. This WORD is the Ormuzd of 
Zoroaster, the Ensoph of the Kabalah, the ; of Platonism and 
Philonism, and the or [Sophia or Demiourgos] of the 
Gnostics. He distinguished the Inferior Wisdom, or the daughter, from the 
Superior Wisdom; the latter being in God, inherent in His nature, and 
incapable of communication to any creature: the second, by which the 
Son was made, communicated itself to Him, and therefore He Himself
was 
entitled to be called the Word and the Son. 
Manes, founder of the Sect of the Manicheans, who had lived and been 
distinguished among the Persian Magi, profited by the doctrines of 
Scythianus, a Kabalist or Judaizing Gnostic of the times of the Apostles;


--- PAGE 1091 ---
and knowing those of Bardesanes and Harmonius, derived his doctrines 
from Zoroasterism, Christianity, and Gnosticism. He claimed to be the 
[Paraklêtos] or Comforter, in the Sense of a Teacher, organ of 
the Deity, but not in that of the Holy Spirit or Holy Ghost: and
commenced 
his Epistola Fundamenti in these words: "Manes, Apostle of Jesus Christ, 
elect of God the Father; Behold the Words of Salvation, emanating from 
the living and eternal fountain." The dominant idea of his doctrine was 
Pantheism, derived by him from its source in the regions of India and on 
the confines of China: that the cause of all that exists is in God; and at 
last, God is all in all. All souls are equal - God is in all, in men, animals, 
and plants. There are two Gods, one of Good and the other of Evil, each 
independent, eternal, chief of a distinct Empire; necessarily, and of their 
very natures, hostile to one another. The Evil God, Satan, is the Genius of 
matter alone. The God of Good is infinitely his Superior, the True God; 
while the other is but the chief of all that is the Enemy of God, and must
in 
the end succumb to His Power. The Empire of Light alone is eternal and


--- PAGE 1092 ---
true; and this Empire is a great chain of Emanations, all connected with 
the Supreme Being which they make manifest; all Him, under different 
forms, chosen for one end, the triumph of the Good. In each
of His members lie hidden thousands of ineffable treasures. Excellent in 
His Glory, incomprehensible in His Greatness, the Father has joined to 
Himself those fortunate, and glorious Eons [ . . Aionês], whose 
Power and Number it is impossible to determine. This is Spinoza's
Infinity 
of Infinite Attributes of God. Twelve Chief Eons, at the head of all, were 
the Genii of the twelve Constellations of the Zodiac, and called by
Manes, 
Olamin. Satan, also, Lord of the Empire of Darkness, had an Army of 
Eons or Demons, emanating from his Essence, and reflecting more or 
less his image, but divided and inharmonious among themselves. A war 
among them brought them to the confines of the Realm of Light. 
Delighted, they sought to conquer it. But the Chief of the Celestial
Empire 
created a Power which he placed on the frontiers of Heaven to protect his 
Eons, and destroy the Empire of Evil. This was the Mother of Life, the


--- PAGE 1093 ---
Soul of the World, an Emanation from the Supreme Being, too pure to 
come in immediate contact with matter. It remained in the highest region; 
but produced a Son, the first Man [the Kaiomorts, Adam-Kadmon, 
[Protos Anthropos,] and Hivil-Zivah; of the Zend-Avesta, the 
Kabalah, the Gnosis, and Sabeism]; who commenced the contest with the 
Powers of Evil, but, losing part of his panoply, of his Light, his Son and 
many souls born of the Light, who were devoured by the darkness, God 
sent to his assistance the living Spirit, or the Son of the First Man [ 
. . . Uios Anthropou], or Jesus Christ. The Mother of Life, general 
Principle of Divine Life, and the first Man, Primitive being that reveals
the 
Divine Life, are too sublime to be connected with the Empire of
Darkness. 
The Son of Man or Soul of the World, enters into the Darkness, becomes 
its captive, to end by tempering and softening its savage nature. The 
Divine Spirit, after having brought back the Primitive Man to the Empire
of 
Light, raises above the world that part of the Celestial Soul that remained 
unaffected by being mingled with the Empire of Darkness. Placed in the


--- PAGE 1094 ---
region of the Sun and Moon, this pure soul, the Son of Man, the 
Redeemer or Christ, labors to deliver and attract to Himself that part of 
the Light or of the Soul of the First Man diffused through matter; which 
done, the world will cease to exist. To retain the rays of Light still 
remaining among his Eons, and ever tending to escape and return, by 
concentrating them, the Prince of Darkness, with their consent, made
Adam, whose soul was of the Divine Light, contributed by the Eons, and 
his body of matter, so that he belonged to both Empires, that of Light and 
that of Darkness. To prevent the light from escaping at once, the Demons 
forbade Adam to eat the fruit of "knowledge of good and evil," by which
he 
would have known the Empire of Light and that of Darkness. He obeyed; 
an Angel of Light induced him to transgress, and gave him the means of 
victory; but the Demons created Eve, who seduced him into an act of 
Sensualism, that enfeebled him, and bound him anew in the bonds of 
matter. This is repeated in the case of every man that lives. 
To deliver the soul, captive in darkness, the Principle of Light, or Genius


--- PAGE 1095 ---
of the Sun, charged to redeem the Intellectual World, of which he is the 
type, came to manifest Himself among men. Light appeared in the 
darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not; according to the words 
of St. John. The Light could not unite with the darkness. It but put on the 
appearance of a human body, and took the name of Christ in the 
Messiah, only to accommodate itself to the language of the Jews. The 
Light did its work, turning the Jews from the adoration of the Evil 
Principle, and the Pagans from the worship of Demons. But the Chief of 
the Empire of Darkness caused Him to be crucified by the Jews. Still He 
suffered in appearance only, and His death gave to all souls the symbol 
of their enfranchisement. The person of Jesus having disappeared, there 
was seen in His place a cross of Light, over which a celestial voice 
pronounced these words: "The cross of Light is called The Word, Christ, 
The Gate, Joy, The Bread, The Sun, The Resurrection, Jesus, The 
Father, The Spirit, Life, Truth, and Grace." 
With the Priscillianists there were two principles, one the Divinity, the 
other, Primitive Matter and Darkness; each eternal. Satan is the son and


--- PAGE 1096 ---
lord of matter; and the secondary angels and demons, children of matter. 
Satan created and governs the visible world. But the soul of man 
emanated from God, and is of the same substance with God. Seduced by 
the evil spirits, it passes through various bodies, until, purified and 
reformed, it rises to God and is strengthened by His light. These powers 
of evil hold mankind in ledge; and to redeem this pledge, the Saviour, 
Christ the Redeemer, came and died upon the cross of expiation, thus 
discharging the written obligation. He, like all souls, was of the
same substance with God, a manifestation of the Divinity, no forming a 
second person; unborn, like the Divinity, and nothing else than the 
Divinity under another form. 
It is useless to trace these vagaries further; and we stop at the frontiers of 
the realm of the three hundred and sixty-five thousand emanations of the 
Mandaîtes from the Primitive Light, Fira or Ferho and Yavar; and return 
contentedly to the simple and sublime creed of Masonry. 
Such were some of the ancient notions concerning the Deity and taken in 
connection with what has been detailed in the preceding Degrees, this


--- PAGE 1097 ---
Lecture affords you a true picture of the ancient speculations. From the 
beginning until now, those who have undertaken to solve the great 
mystery of the creation of a material universe by an Immaterial Deity, 
have interposed between the two, and between God and man, divers 
manifestations of, or emanations from, or personified attributes or agents 
of, the Great Supreme God, who is coexistent with Time and coextensive 
with Space. 
The universal belief of the Orient was, that the Supreme Being did not 
Himself create either the earth or man. The fragment which commences 
the Book of Genesis, consisting of the first chapter and the three first 
verses of the second, assigns the creation or rather the formation or 
modelling of the world from matter already existing in confusion, not to 
lHUH, but to the ALHIM, well known as Subordinate Deities, Forces, or 
Manifestations, among the Phœnicians. The second fragment imputes it 
to IHUH-ALHIM,* and St. John assigns the creation to the or WORD; 
and asserts that CHRIST was that WORD, as well as LIGHT and LIFE, 
other emanations from the Great Primeval Deity, to which other faiths had


--- PAGE 1098 ---
assigned the work of creation. 
An absolute existence, wholly immaterial, in no way within the reach of 
our senses; a cause, but not an effect that never was not, but existed 
during an infinity of eternities, before there was anything else except
Time 
and Space, is wholly beyond the reach of our conceptions. The mind of 
man has wearied itself in speculations as to His nature, His essence, His 
attributes; and ended in being no wiser than it began. In the impossibility 
of conceiving of immateriality, we feel at sea and lost whenever we go 
beyond the domain of matter. And yet we know that there are Power 
* The Substance, or Very Self, of which the Alohayim are the
manifestations.
Forces, Causes, that are themselves not matter. We give them names, 
but what they really are, and what their essence, we are wholly ignorant. 
But, fortunately, it does not follow that we may not believe, or even
know, 
that which we cannot explain to ourselves, or that which is beyond the 
reach of our comprehension. If we believed only that which our intellect 
can grasp, measure, comprehend, and have distinct and clear ideas of,


--- PAGE 1099 ---
we should believe scarce anything. The senses are not the witnesses that 
bear testimony to us of the loftiest truths. 
Our greatest difficulty is, that language is not adequate to express our 
ideas; because our words refer to things, and are images of what is 
substantial and material. If we use the word “emanation," our mind 
involuntarily recurs to something material, flowing out of some other
thing 
that is material; and if we reject this idea of materiality, nothing is left of 
the emanation but an unreality. The word "thing" itself suggests to us that 
which is material and within the cognizance and jurisdiction of the
senses. 
If we cut away from it the idea of materiality, it presents itself to us as no 
thing, but an intangible unreality, which the mind vainly endeavors to 
grasp. Existence and Being are terms that have the same color of 
materiality; and when we speak of a Power or Force, the mind 
immediately images to itself one physical and material thing acting upon 
another. Eliminate that idea; and the Power or Force, devoid of physical 
characteristics, seems as unreal as the shadow that dances on a wall,


--- PAGE 1100 ---
itself a mere absence of light; as spirit is to us merely that which is not 
matter. 
Infinite space and infinite time are the two primary ideas. We formulize 
them thus: add body to body and sphere to sphere, until the imagination 
wearies; and still there will remain beyond, avoid, empty, unoccupied 
SPACE, limitless, because it is void. Add event to event in continuous 
succession, forever and forever, and there will still remain, before and 
after, a TIME in which there was and will be no event, and also endless 
because it too is void. 
Thus these two ideas of the boundlessness of space and the endlessness 
of time seem to involve the ideas that matter and events are limited and 
finite. We cannot conceive of an infinity of worlds or of events; but only
of 
an indefinite number of each; for. as we struggle to conceive of their 
infinity, the thought ever occurs in despite of all our efforts - there must
be 
space in which
there are no worlds; there must have been time when there were no
events.


--- PAGE 1101 ---
We cannot conceive how, if this earth moves millions of millions of miles
a 
million times repeated, it is still in the centre of space; nor how, if we
lived 
millions of millions of ages and centuries, we should still be in the centre
of 
eternity - with still as much space on one side as on the other; with still
as 
much time before us as behind; for that seems to say that the world has
not 
moved nor we lived at all. 
Nor can we comprehend how an infinite series of worlds, added together,
is 
no larger than an infinite series of atoms; or an infinite series of centuries 
no longer than an infinite series of seconds; both being alike infinite, and 
therefore one series containing no more nor fewer units than the other. 
Nor have we the capacity to form in ourselves any idea of that which is 
immaterial. We use the word, but it conveys to us on1v the idea of the 
absence and negation of materiality; which vanishing, Space and Time 
alone, infinite and boundless, seem to us to be left. 
We cannot form any conception of an effect without a cause. We cannot


--- PAGE 1102 ---
but believe, indeed we know, that, how far soever we may have to run
back 
along the chain of effects and causes, it cannot be infinite; but we must 
come at last to something which is not an effect, but the first cause: and
vet 
the fact is literaltv beyond our comprehension. The mind refuses to grasp 
the idea of self-existence, of existence without a beginning. As well
expect 
the hair that grows upon our head to understand the nature and
immortality 
of the soul. 
It does not need to go so far in search of mysteries; nor have we any right 
to disbelieve or doubt the existence of a Great First Cause, itself no
effect, 
because we cannot comprehend it; because the words we use do not even 
express it to us adequately. 
We rub a needle for a little while, on a dark, inert mass of iron ore, that
had 
lain idle in the earth for many centuries. Something is thereby 
communicated to the steel - we term it a virtue, a power, or a quality -
and


--- PAGE 1103 ---
then we balance it upon a pivot; and, lo! drawn by some invisible, 
mysterious Power, one pole of the needle turns to the North, and there the 
same Power keeps the same pole for days and years; will keep it there, 
perhaps, as long as the world lasts, carry the needle where you will, and
no 
matter what seas or
mountains intervene between it and the North Pole of the world. And this 
Power, thus acting, and indicating to the mariner his course over the 
trackless ocean, when the stars shine not for many days, saves vessels 
from shipwreck, families from distress, and those from sudden death on 
whose lives the fate of nations and the peace of the world depend. But for 
it, Napoleon might never have reached the ports of France on his return 
from Egypt, nor Nelson lived to fight and win at Trafalgar. Men call this 
Power Magnetism, and then complacently think that they have explained 
it all; and yet they have but given a new name to an unknown thing, to 
hide their ignorance. What is this wonderful Power? It is a real, actual, 
active Power: that we know and see. But what its essence is, or how it


--- PAGE 1104 ---
acts, we do not know, any more than we know the essence or the mode of 
action of the Creative Thought and Word of God. 
And again, what is that which we term galvanism and electricity, - which, 
evolved by the action of a little acid on two metals, aided by a magnet, 
circles the earth in a second, sending from land to land the Thoughts that 
govern the transactions of individuals and nations? The mind has formed 
no notion of matter, that will include it; and no name that we can give it, 
helps us to understand its essence and its being. It is a Power, like 
Thought and the Will. We know no more. 
What is this power of gravitation that makes everything upon the earth 
tend to the centre? How does it reach out its invisible hands toward the 
erratic meteor-stones, arrest them in their swift course, and draw them 
down to the earth's bosom? It is a power. We know no more. 
What is that heat which plays so wonderful a part in the world's
economy? 
- that caloric, latent everywhere, within us and without us, produced by 
combustion, by intense pressure, and by swift motion? Is it substance,


--- PAGE 1105 ---
matter, spirit, or immaterial, a mere Force or State of Matter? 
And what is light? A substance, say the books, - matter, that travels to us 
from the sun and stars, each ray separable into seven, by the prism, of 
distinct colors, and with distinct peculiar qualities and actions. And if a 
substance, what is its essence, and what power is inherent in it, by which 
it journeys incalculable myriads of miles, and reaches us ten thousand 
years or more after it leaves the stars?
All power is equally a mystery. Apply intense cold to a drop of water in
the 
centre of a globe of iron, and the globe is shattered as the water freezes. 
Confine a little of the same limpid element in a cylinder which Enceladus
or 
Typhon could not have risen asunder, and apply to it intense heat, and the 
vast power that couched latent in the water shivers the cylinder to atoms.
A 
little shoot from a minute seed, a shoot so soft and tender that the least 
bruise would kill it, forces its way downward into the hard, earth, to the 
depth of many feet, with an energy wholly incomprehensible. What are 
these mighty forces, locked up in the small seed and the drop of water?


--- PAGE 1106 ---
Nay, what is LIFE itself, with all its wondrous, mighty energies, - that
power 
which maintains the heat within us, and prevents our bodies, that decay
so 
soon without it, from resolution into their original elements - Life, that 
constant miracle, the nature and essence whereof have eluded all the 
philosophers; and all their learned dissertations on it are a mere jargon of 
words? 
No wonder the ancient Persians thought that Light and Life were one, -
both 
emanations from the Supreme Deity, the archetype of light. No wonder
that 
in their ignorance they worshipped the Sun. God breathed into man the 
spirit of life, - not matter, but an emanation from Himself; not a creature 
made by Him, nor a distinct existence, but a Power, like His own
Thought: 
and light, to those great-souled ancients, also seemed no creature, and no 
gross material substance, but a pure emanation from the Deity, immortal 
and indestructible like Himself. 
What, indeed, is REALITY? Our dreams are as real, while they last, as
the


--- PAGE 1107 ---
occurrences of the daytime. We see, hear, feel, act, experience pleasure 
and suffer pain, as vividly and actually in a dream as when awake. The 
occurrences and transactions of a year are crowded into the limits of a 
second: and the dream remembered is as real as the past occurrences of 
life. 
The philosophers tell us that we have no cognizance of substance itself,
but 
only of its attributes: that when we see that which we call a block of
marble, 
our perceptions give us information only of something extended, solid, 
colored, heavy, and the like; but not of the very thing itself, to which
these 
attributes belong. And yet the attributes do not exist without the
substance. 
They are not substances, but adjectives. There is no such thing or 
existence as hardness, weight or color, by itself, detached from any
subject, moving first here, then there, and attaching itself to this and to
the 
other subject. And yet, they say, the attributes are not the subject. 
So Thought, Volition, and Perception are not the soul, but its attributes;


--- PAGE 1108 ---
and we have no cognizance of the soul itself, but only of them, its 
manifestations. Nor of God; but only of His Wisdom, Power, 
Magnificence, Truth, and other attributes. 
And yet we know that there is matter, a soul within our body, a God that 
lives in the Universe. 
Take, then, the attributes of the soul. I am conscious that I exist and am 
the same identical person that I was twenty years ago. I am conscious 
that my body is not I, - that if my arms were lopped away, this person that 
I call ME, would still remain, complete, entire, identical as before. But I 
cannot ascertain, by the most intense and long-continued reflection, what 
I am, nor where within my body I reside, nor whether I am a point, or an 
expanded substance. I have no power to examine and inspect. I exist,
will, 
think, perceive. That I know, and nothing more. I think a noble and 
sublime Thought. What is that Thought? It is not Matter, nor Spirit. It is 
not a Thing; but a Power and Force. I make upon a paper certain 
conventional marks, that represent that Thought. There is no Power or


--- PAGE 1109 ---
Virtue in the marks I write, but only in the Thought which they tell to 
others. I die, but the Thought still lives. It is a Power. It acts on men, 
excites them to enthusiasm, inspires patriotism, governs their conduct, 
controls their destinies, disposes of life and death. The words I speak are 
but a certain succession of particular sounds, that by conventional 
arrangement communicate to others the Immaterial, Intangible, Eternal 
Thought. The fact that Thought continues to exist an instant, after it 
makes its appearance in the soul, proves it immortal: for there is nothing 
conceivable that can destroy it. The spoken words, being mere sounds, 
may vanish into thin air, and the written ones, mere marks, be burned, 
erased, destroyed: but the THOUGHT itself lives still, and must live on 
forever. 
A Human Thought, then, is an actual EXISTENCE, and a FORCE and 
POWER, capable of acting upon and controlling matter as well as mind.
Is 
not the existence of a God, who is the immaterial soul of the Universe, 
and whose THOUGHT, embodied or not embodied in His WORD, is an


--- PAGE 1110 ---
Infinite Power, of Creation and pro-
duction, destruction and preservation, quite as comprehensible as the 
existence of a Soul, of a Thought separated from the Soul, of the Power 
of that Thought to mould the fate and influence the Destinies of 
Humanity? 
And yet we know not when that Thought comes, nor what it is. It is not 
WE. We do not mould it, shape it, fashion it. It is neither our mechanism 
nor our invention. It appears spontaneously, flashing, as it were, into the 
soul, making that soul the involuntary instrument of its utterance to the 
world. It comes to us, and seems a stranger to us, seeking a home. 
As little can we explain the mighty power of the human WILL, Volition,
like 
Thought, seems spontaneous, an effect without a cause. Circumstances 
provoke it, and serve as its occasion, but do not produce it. It springs up 
in the soul, like Thought, as the waters gush upward in a spring. Is it the 
manifestation of the soul, merely making apparent what passes within the 
soul, or an emanation from it, going abroad and acting outwardly, itself a


--- PAGE 1111 ---
real Existence, as it is an admitted Power? We can but own our 
ignorance. It is certain that it acts on other souls, controls, directs them, 
shapes their action, legislates for men and nations: and yet it is not 
material nor visible; and the laws it writes merely n one soul of what has 
passed within another. 
God, therefore, is a mystery, only as everything that surrounds us, and as 
we ourselves, are mysteries. We know that there is and must be a FIRST 
CAUSE. His attributes, severed from Himself, are unrealities. As color
and 
extension, weight and hardness, do not exist apart from matter as 
separate existences and substantives, spiritual or immaterial; so the 
Goodness, Wisdom, justice, Mercy, and Benevolence of God are not 
independent existences, personify them as men may, but attributes of the 
Deity, the adjectives of One Great Substantive. But we know that He must 
be Good, True, Wise, Just, Benevolent, Merciful: and in all these, and all 
His other attributes, Perfect and Infinite; because we are conscious that 
these are laws imposed on us by the very nature of things, necessary,


--- PAGE 1112 ---
and without which the Universe would be confusion and the existence of
a 
God incredible. They are of His essence, and necessary, as His existence 
is. 
. . Estos], of Simon Magus, the 
He is the Living, Thinking, Intelligent SOUL of the Universe, the 
PERMANENT, the STATIONARY[ 
ONE that always is [To To ON] of Plato, as 
contradistinguished from the perpetual flux and reflux, or Genesis, of
things. 
And, as the Thought of the Soul, emanating from the Soul, becomes
audible and 
visible in Words, so did THE THOUGHT OF GOD, springing up within
Himself, 
immortal as Himself, when once conceived, - immortal before, because in 
Himself, utter Itself in THE WORD, its manifestation and mode of 
communication, and thus create the Material, Mental, Spiritual Universe,
which, 
like Him, never began to exist. 
This is the real idea of the Ancient Nations: GOD, the Almighty Father,
and


--- PAGE 1113 ---
Source of All; His THOUGHT, conceiving the whole Universe, and willing
its 
creation: His WORD, uttering that THOUGHT, and thus becoming the
Creator or 
Demiourgos, in the whom was Life and Light, and that Light the Life of
the 
Universe. 
Nor did that Word cease at the single act of Creation; and having set going
the 
great machine, and enacted the laws of its motion and progression, of birth
and 
life, and change and death, cease to exist, or remain thereafter in inert
idleness. 
FOR THE THOUGHT OF GOD LIVES AND IS IMMORTAL. Embodied in
the 
WORD, is not only created, but it preserves. It conducts and controls the 
Universe, all spheres, all worlds, all actions of mankind, and of every
animate 
and inanimate creature. It speaks in the soul of every man who lives. The
Stars, 
the Earth, the Trees, the Winds, the universal voice of Nature, tempest,
and 
avalanche, the Sea's roar and the grave voice of the waterfall, the hoarse


--- PAGE 1114 ---
thunder and the low whisper of the brook, the song of birds, the voice of
love, 
the speech of men, all are the alphabet in which it communicates itself to
men, 
and informs them of the will and law of God, the Soul of the Universe.
And thus 
most truly did "THE WORD BECOME PLESH AND DWELL AMONG
MEN." 
God, the unknown FATHER [ …Pater Agnõstos], known to us only 
by His Attributes; the ABSOLUTE I AM:.. The THOUGHT of God [ . 
Ennoia], and the WORD [ .... Logos], Manifestation and expression of the 
Thought; . . . . Behold THE TRUE MASONIC TRINITY; the UNIVERSAL
SOUL, 
the THOUGHT in the Soul, the WORD, or Thought expressed; the THREE
TN 
ONE, of a Trinitarian Ecossais. 
Here Masonry pauses, and leaves its Initiates to carry out and develop
these 
great Truths in such manner as to each may seem
most accordant with reason, philosophy, truth, and his religious faith. It 
declines to act as Arbiter between them. It looks calmly on, while each


--- PAGE 1115 ---
multiplies the intermediates between the Deity and Matter, and the 
personifications of God's manifestations and attributes, to whatever
extent 
his reason, his conviction, or his fancy dictates. 
While the Indian tells us that PARABRAHMA, BRAHM, and PARATMA 
were the first Triune God, revealing Himself as BRAHMA, VISHNU, and 
SIVA, Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer; .... 
The Egyptian, of AMUN-RE, NEITH, and PHTHA, Creator, Matter,
Thought 
or Light; the Persian of his Trinity of Three Powers in ORMUZD, Sources
of 
Light, Fire, and Water; the Buddhists of the God SAKYA, a Trinity 
composed of BUDDHA, DHARM and SANGA, - Intelligence, Law, and 
Union or Harmony; the Chinese Sabeans of their Trinity of Chang-ti, the 
Supreme Sovereign; Tien, the Heavens; and Tao, the Universal Supreme 
Reason and Principle of all things; who produced the Unit; that, two; two, 
three; and three, all that is; .... 
While the Sclavono-Vend typifies his Trinity by the three heads of the
God


--- PAGE 1116 ---
Triglav; the Ancient Prussian points to his Triune God, Perkoun, Pikollos, 
and Potrimpos, Deities of Light and Thunder, of Hell and of the Earth; the 
Ancient Scandinavian to Odin, Frea, and Thor; and the old Etruscans to 
TINA, TALNA, and MINIMVA, Strength, Abundance, and Wisdom; .... 
While Plato tells us of the Supreme Good, the Reason or Intellect, and the 
], and the Soul or Spirit; and Philo of the Archetype of Light, Wisdom [ 
os the Kabalists, of the Triads of the Sephiroth; . Word [ 
While the disciples of Simon Magus, and the many sects of the Gnostics, 
confuse us with their Eons, Emanations, Powers, Wisdom Superior and 
Inferior, Ialdabaoth, Adam-Kadmon, even to the three hundred and
sixtyfive 
thousand emanations of the Maldaites; .... 
And while the pious Christian believes that the WORD dwelt in the
Mortal 
Body of Jesus of Nazareth, and suffered upon the Cross; and that the 
HOLY GHOST was poured out upon the Apostles, and now inspires every 
truly Christian Soul: . . . . 
While all these faiths assert their claims to the exclusive possession of
the


--- PAGE 1117 ---
Truth, Masonry inculcates its old doctrine, and no more: .... That God is 
ONE; that His THOUGHT uttered in His
WORD, created the Universe, and preserves it by those Eternal Laws 
which are the expression of that Thought: that the Soul of Man, breathed 
into him by God, is immortal as His Thoughts are; that he is free to do
evil 
or to choose good, responsible for his acts and punishable for his sins: 
that all evil and wrong and suffering are but temporary, the discords of 
one great Harmony, and that in His good time they will lead by infinite 
modulations to the great, harmonic final chord and cadence of Truth, 
Love, Peace, and Happiness, that will ring forever and ever under the 
Arches of Heaven, among all the Stars and Worlds, and in all souls of 
men and Angels. MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry , prepared for the Supreme Council of the Thirty Third
Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: Charleston,
1871.
27º - Knight Commander of the Temple


--- PAGE 1118 ---
XXVII. KNIGHT COMMANDER OF THE EMPIRE
THIS is the first of the really Chivalric Degrees of the Ancient and
Accepted Scottish Rite. It occupies this place in the Calendar of the
Degrees between the 26th and the last of the Philosophical Degrees, in
order, by breaking the continuity of these, to relieve what might otherwise
become wearisome; and also to remind that, while engaged with the
speculations and abstractions of philosophy and creeds, the Mason is also
to continue engaged in active duties of this great warfare of life. He is not
only a Moralist and Philosopher, but a Soldier, the Successor of those
Knights of the Middle Age, who, while they wore the Cross, also wielded
the Sword, and were the Soldiers of Honor, Loyalty, and Duty.
Times change, and circumstances; but Virtue and Duty remain the same.
The Evils to be warred against but take another shape and are developed in
a different form.
There is the same need now of truth and loyalty as in the days of Frederic
Barbarossa.
The characters, religious and military, attention to the sick and wounded
in the Hospital, and war against the Infidel in the field are no longer
blended; but the same duties, to be performed in another shape, continue
to exist and to environ us all.


--- PAGE 1119 ---
The innocent virgin is no longer at the mercy of the brutal Baron or
licentious man-at-arms; but purity and innocence still need protectors.
War is no longer the apparently natural State of Society; and for most men
it is an empty obligation to assume, that they will not recede before the
enemy; but the same high duty and obligation still rest upon all men.
Truth, in act, profession, and opinion, is rarer now than in days of
chivalry. Falsehood has become a current coin, and circulates with a
certain degree of respectability; because it has an actual value. It is indeed
the great Vice of the Age--it, and its twin-sister, Dishonesty. Men, for
political preferment, profess whatever principles are expedient and
profitable. At the bar, in the pulpit, and in the halls of legislation, men
argue against their own convictions, and, with what they term logic, prove
to the satisfaction of others that which they do not themselves believe.
Insincerity and duplicity are valuable to their possessors, like estates in
stocks, that yield a certain revenue: and it is no longer the truth of an
opinion or a principle, but the net profit that may be realized from it,
which is the measure of its value.
The Press is the great sower of falsehood. To slander a political
antagonist, to misrepresent all that he says, and, if that be impossible, to
invent for him what he does not say; to put in circulation whatever
baseless calumnies against him are necessary to defeat him,--these are
habits so common as to have ceased to notice or comment, much less
surprise or disgust.
There was a time when a Knight would die rather than utter a lie or break
his Knightly word. The Knight Commander of the Temple revives the old
Knightly spirit; and devotes himself to the Knightly worship of Truth. No


--- PAGE 1120 ---
profession of an opinion not his own, for expediency's sake or profit, or
through fear of the world's disfavor; no slander of even an enemy; no
coloring or perversion of the sayings or acts of other men; no insincere
speech and argument for any purpose, or under any pretext, must soil his
fair escutcheon. Out of the Chapter, as well as in it, he must speak the
Truth, and all the Truth, no more and no less; or else speak not at all.
To purity and innocence everywhere, the Knight Commander owes
protection, as of old; against bold violence, or those, more guilty than
murderers, who by art and treachery seek to slay the soul; and against that
want and destitution that drive too many to sell their honor and innocence
for food.
In no age of the world has man had better opportunity than now to display
those lofty virtues and that noble heroism that so distinguished the three
great military and religious Orders, in their youth, before they became
corrupt and vitiated by prosperity and power.
When a fearful epidemic ravages a city, and death is inhaled with the air
men breathe; when the living scarcely suffice to bury the dead--most men
flee in abject terror, to return and live, respectable and influential, when
the danger has passed away. But the old Knightly spirit of devotion and
disinterestedness and contempt of death still lives, and is not extinct in
the human heart. Everywhere a few are found to stand firmly and
unflinchingly at their posts, to front and defy the danger, not for money, or
to be honored for it, or to protect their own household; but from mere
humanity, and to obey the unerring dictates of duty. They nurse the sick,
breathing the pestilential atmosphere of the hospital. They explore the
abodes of want and misery. With the gentlenes of woman, they soften the
pains of the dying, and feed the lamp of life in the convalescent. They
perform the last sad offices the dead; and they seek no other reward than
the approval their own consciences.


--- PAGE 1121 ---
These are the true Knights of the present age: these, and captain who
remains at his post on board his shattered ship un the last boat, loaded to
the water's edge with passengers and crew, has parted from her side; and
then goes calmly down with her into the mysterious depths of the ocean:--
the pilot who stands at the wheel while the swift flames eddy round him
and scorch away his life:--the fireman who ascends the blazing walls, and
plunges amid the flames to save the property or lives of those who have
upon him no claim by tie of blood, or friendship, or even of ordinary
acquaintance:--these, and others like these:--all men, who, set at the post
of duty, stand there manfully; to die, if need be, but not to desert their
post: for these, too, are sworn not to recede before the enemy.
To the performance of duties and of acts of heroism like these, you have
devoted yourself, my Brother, by becoming a Knight Commander of the
Temple. Soldier of the Truth and of Loyalty! Protector of Purity and
Innocence ! Defier of Plague and Pestilence ! Nurser of the Sick and
Burier of the Dead ! Knight, preferring Death to abandonment of the Post
of Duty! Welcome the bosom of this Order !

