=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Albert Pike~Masons.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 11
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:48:43.121066
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
The Scottish Rite's KKK Project or The Kennedy Killers are Sti
ll at Large;The House of Esau Did It; Direct Descendants of 
King Herod.
Isis and Osirus are both part of the Ancient Egyptian Mystery religion and moder
n Satanism.
Albert Pike in his "Morals and Dogma" and Albert Mackey in his "Encyclopedia of 
Freemasonry" say that masonry is a religion and that every Masonic lodge is a te
mple of religion.
As a Mason goes through the 32 degrees of the Scottish rite, he ends up giving w
orship to every Egyptian pagan god, the gods of Persia, gods of India, Greek god
s, Babylonian gods, and others.  As you come to the 17th degree, the Masons clai
m that they will give you the password that will give him entrance at the judgme
nt day to the Masonic deity, the great architect of the universe.  It is very in
teresting that this secret password is "Abaddon". 
Revelation chapter 9; it says, "The fifth angel sounded his trumpet, and I saw a
 star that had fallen from the sky to the earth.  The star was given the key to 
the shaft of the Abyss [the bottomless pit]...and smoke came out of the Abyss li
ke that of a great furnace..."  (It goes on to describe those in the abyss, then
 continues)  They had a king over them, the angel of the Abyss, whose name in He
brew is Abaddon..."  The 'angel' of the Abyss (Hell) is really the chief demon w
hose name is Abaddon.  Masons claim then, that the diety they worship is Abaddon
!  Not God.  Not Jesus.  But the number one servant of Lucifer (Satan). 
by Anton Chaitkin
{The following is the edited text of the speech delivered by Mr. Chaitkin to the
 Labor Day weekend conference of the Schiller Institute in suburban Washington, 
D.C.}
In the heart of Washington, D.C., there is a large statue and monument honoring 
the most important founder of the Ku Klux Klan. Inscribed on the base of the sta
tue are the words, ``poet''--the terrorist anthem of the KKK was his most famous
 literary work--and ``jurist''--he was called the KKK's chief judiciary officer,
 and reputedly wrote the organization manual for the terrorist anti-black moveme
nt after the U.S. Civil War. 
The immense, bearded figure of Confederate General Albert Pike is looming over a
 public square in the nation's capital. Why has it never been pulled down in tha
t predominantly black city? The statue is a tribute to the influence of Pike's o
rganization. It has power in the Executive Branch, and the Congress, and it is d
ecisive in the courts. It has great power in all branches of law enforcement and
 the military. Do I mean that the Ku Klux Klan has such sway over the government
? No, I'm speaking here of the ``Scottish Rite of Freemasonry Southern Jurisdict
ion,'' of which Pike was the chief, or ``Sovereign Grand Commander.'' The Ku Klu
x Klan, the Southern Confederacy, and the pre-Civil War secession movement were 
a single, continuous project, with Pike's ``Scottish Rite'' at its center. Thoug
h the Confederacy was defeated, this project lives on today, and now dominates U
.S. political life. 
Look at Baker & Botts, the Houston family firm and power base of Secretary of St
ate James A. Baker III.Howard Baker=Knoxville?] This law firm was formed after t
he Civil War by die-hard Confederate and Masonic officials in Albert Pike's Scot
tish Rite and military clique. With their British imperial racial notions, Baker
 & Botts and Scottish Rite freemasonry have dominated the Texas power structure 
ever since. Secretary Baker's grandfather, Captain James A. Baker, brought Engli


--- PAGE 2 ---
sh race scientist Julian Huxley in to supervise the ``race purification'' study 
program for Texas, at Rice University. Secretary Baker's family wealth and power
 came from their representing Harriman[Jacon is a smooth man, but Esau is an Har
riman], the international oil companies and George Bush's Zapata Petroleum, all 
sponsors of the population control, or ban-dark-babies movement. 
This movement is synonymous with the Scottish Rite. Bill Clinton is governor of 
Arkansas, a state infested by the tradition of Albert Pike, who was the Grand Dr
agon of the Ku Klux Klan in Arkansas. Look closely at the mind-set. Bill Clinton
 supports and carries out the death penalty, which in practice means executions 
of black people and poor people; and Clinton supports abortion. Clinton sat down
, and worked out his views on these issues with his Baptist minister, the late R
ev. W.O. Vaught, who was Clinton's spiritual guide and virtual foster father. As
 Vaught's son recently told me, Clinton and his pastor agreed that their religio
n permits the killing of prisoners and unborn children. The authority for this v
ersion of Christianity is derived from a peculiar, neo-pagan reading of the Old 
Testament. And the New Testament, with its ban on revenge and requirement to lov
e, is considered irrelevant: They say that Christ was primarily concerned with f
ulfilling the Old Law of the Hebrews (as interpreted by this faction), and when 
Christ said love your enemy and turn the other cheek, he was really trying to re
inforce and impose the authority of the Roman Empire. But whose religion is this
? 
Well, the Reverend W.O. Vaught was a 32nd Degree Mason, a {Sublime Prince of the
 Royal Secret} within the Scottish Rite hierarchy. What Is the Scottish Rite? Wh
at, then, is the Scottish Rite? Freemasonry was founded in the early 1700s in En
gland by the so-called Venetian Party[descendants of Venetian Bankers,descendant
s of King Herod,decendants of Esau]. This clique of British philosophical libera
ls had a few other experiments in human misery, for example: the East India Comp
any[of which the American Flag is but a copy], the royal African Company of slav
ers, and the slave colony of South Carolina. The Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, i
n particular, has a feudalist lore and legend, that is rooted in the black slave
 trade through the Caribbean Islands. In those islands, the pagan cults of slave
rs in ancient Rome, and Venice, were reused as anti-Judeo-Christian or Satanic c
ults and rituals for the amusement and gratification of the slave-traders, the B
ritish, Dutch, Bostonian, and Jewish[Esau]-ethnic slave runners. The Scottish Ri
te was formally organized in the U.S.A. in 1801, as a group of Tory partisans on
 the losing side of the American Revolution. In 1801 Isaac Long brought the stat
ue of Baphomet [ten headed satanic figure of the Apocalypse] to Charleston,South
 Carolina.
The Scottish Rite came to rule over American Freemasonry during the nineteenth c
entury. American colonial leaders had used the British Empire's Freemasonic lodg
es as political clubs, and the Venetian Party " turned them against the British 
Crown" in the American Revolution. But in the 1820s and 1830s, Masonry,when it b
ecame too independent, had been widely condemned and virtually run out of the U.
S.A. as a would-be dictatorial grouping, an unwanted ``British underground'' int
rusion into America. Then,with British assistance, the Masonic lodges were reint
roduced, under the control of the Scottish Rite based in Charleston, South Carol
ina, as a force for Southern secession;all under the control of the Venetian Par
ty. Since the 1840s, the U.S. Freemasonic structure has been strictly dominated 
by the Scottish Rite. The Scottish Rite dispenses the 4th and higher Masonic ``d
egrees'' of initiation, up to the 33rd. The Scottish Rite was divided into a Sou
thern Jurisdiction, and a Northern Jurisdiction based in Boston, that is politic
ally subordinate. 
As for Bill Clinton: A spokesman for the Freemasonic Grand Lodge of Arkansas tol
d me that although Clinton was a member of Freemasonry's Order of DeMolay as a y
oung man, he is not now a Mason. I have been informed, however, that DeMolay mem
bership is in fact a life membership. The influence of Scottish Rite-dominated F


--- PAGE 3 ---
reemasonry is shockingly pervasive in American government and culture, particula
rly in the South. But it has come under attack from some surprising quarters. Th
e Southern Baptist Convention recently voted to conduct an investigation of Free
masonry in all forms, and to prepare a report on whether Masonry is compatible w
ith Christianity. The Southern Baptist Convention, predominantly white, is the l
argest U.S. Protestant denomination, with 18 million church-goers. Freemasons ma
ke up a sizable proportion of this church's male membership, perhaps 20 percent.
 So this is a dramatic, emotional issue, a strongly factional issue within Prote
stant Christianity. At their annual meeting last June in Indianapolis, the Bapti
sts also adopted a resolution against secret societies, which reads in part: ``w
e ... call upon all Christians to ... [avoid] any association which conflicts wi
th clear Biblical ... teachings concerning the taking of oaths, the secrecy of a
ctivities, mystical knowledge, or racial discrimination....'' 
A leader of this initiative, Dr. James Holly of Beaumont, Texas, told me this wa
s aimed at the known fact that white Freemasonry is affiliated with the Ku Klux 
Klan. The 2.5 million member Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod says in its official
 Handbook: ``The Synod has declared itself firmly opposed to all societies, lodg
es and organizations of an un-Christian or anti-Christian character.'' The Luthe
ran Missouri Synod has also printed an attack on Freemasonry, which attacks its 
racialism and quotes from an absurd Masonic explanation of why blacks are exclud
ed from from white lodges: ``There are excellent reasons for this apparent race 
discrimination which only a Mason can fully understand ... [racial integration] 
would endanger the harmony of the lodge.... Secondly, although Negroes today may
 technically fulfill the Masonic requirement of being `free,' their subordinate 
economic, educational, and cultural position is such that they hardly fulfill th
e spirit of that prerequisite to initiation.'' `The True Religion of Masonry' Bu
t let us ask, does Mr. Pike's organization have an ``un-Christian or anti-Christ
ian character''? Albert Pike responded in 1861 to a Mason who tried to claim the
 Scottish Rite was somehow Christian. Pike said that if the Scottish Rite ``had 
a Christian basis, how did it chance that most of those who had possession of it
 in this country from 1763 to 1800 were Hebrews=EDOMITES?'' In fact, Pike and th
e Scottish Rite borrowed a good deal of numerology and other superstition from t
he Jewish[EDOMITE] cabala, a neo-pagan tradition in direct opposition to the Mos
aic law underlying the Jewish[JACOB] religion. 
We shall deal later on with the relationship of Jews[EDOMITES] to the Scottish R
ite. But if the Rite is not specifically Christian, is it anti-Christian? We may
 judge this from Sovereign Grand Commander Pike's words, on his {method}, and on
 the {true religion}. In Pike's book, {Morals and Dogma,} the Scottish Rite's ma
in guide to the universe, he explains his method: ``Magic is the science of the 
ancient magi.... ``Magic unites in one and the same science, whatsoever Philosop
hy can possess that is most certain, and Religion of the Infallible and the Eter
nal. It perfectly ... reconciles these two terms ... faith and reason ... those 
who accept [magic] as a rule may give their will a sovereign power that will mak
e them the masters of all inferior beings and of all errant spirits; that is to 
say, will make them the Arbiters and Kings of the World....'' Pike wrote this pa
rticular section to instruct ``Sublime Princes of the Royal Secret'' gentlemen o
f the 32nd Degree, such as was Bill Clinton's preacher. Thus, Pike is an illusio
nist, a conjurer, teaching his priesthood the means of controlling their squads 
of initiates. 
But what is the underlying belief? In France in 1889, Pike said: "That which we 
must say to the crowd is, we worship a God, but it is the God one adores without
 superstition.... The Masonic religion should be, by all of us initiates of the 
high degrees, maintained in the purity of the LUCIFERIAN Doctrine. If Lucifer we
re not God, would Adonay (the God of the Christians) whose deeds prove his cruel
ty, perfidy and hatred of man, barbarism and repulsion to science, would Adonay 
and his priests calumniate him? ``Yes, Lucifer is God, and unfortunately Adonay 
is also God. For the eternal law is that there is no light without shade, no bea


--- PAGE 4 ---
uty without ugliness, no white without black, for the absolute can only exist as
 two Gods.... Thus, the doctrine of Satanism is a heresy; and the true and pure 
philosophical religion is the belief in Lucifer, the equal of Adonay; but Lucife
r, God of Light and God of Good, is struggling for humanity against Adonay, the 
God of Darkness and Evil.'' This quote, by the way, is available in French and E
nglish in the Albert Pike vertical file at the library of the Scottish Rite Sout
hern Jurisdiction at 1733 16th St. NW, Washington D.C. 
The Terror Project The Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, an instrument of British Em
pire strategy, directed a continuous offensive of murder and racist terrorism ag
ainst the U.S.A. and neighboring countries, during the middle decades of the las
t century. The Salvation Army had been established in England prior to this time
 as a means of making anti-slavery politically correct to counter-balance this e
ffort..We shall trace thisracist endeavor, from the U.S. occupation of Mexico in
 the Mexican War (1846-48), to the slave owners' rebellion or U.S. Civil War (18
61-65), through the Ku Klux Klan's war against Reconstruction of the South (1867
-1870s). A few individuals will come into view repeatedly as gang leaders and pr
oject directors: Boston's {Albert Pike}, boss of Arkansas; New York's {John A. Q
uitman}, boss of Mississippi; New York's {John Slidell}, boss of Louisiana; Slid
ell's nephew and partner, British banker{ August Belmont, }boss of the Democrati
c Party; Slidell's trainee and partner, Britain's {Judah Benjamin}, boss of the 
Confederate secret service. Patriots such as then-Congressman Abraham Lincoln[Wh
o was a Rotschild relative and Railroad Attorney] in counter-balance said the 18
46 U.S. invasion of Mexico as a crime and folly, pushed by strategists of slaver
y who also aimed at the destruction of the U.S.A. 
Transplanted Southern Democrat John Slidell, and Whig[The Patrician/Venetian Par
ty families of Ancient Rome] leader Caleb Cushing, spokesman for Boston's opium 
and slave-running fortunes, had both planned and promoted the attack on Mexico. 
As that first U.S. war of aggression drew to a close, volunteer General John A. 
Quitman became the military governor and dictator over Mexico City. The U.S.A. p
repared to seize Mexico's northern territory, the area from California to Texas.
 Yet Quitman proposed to President Polk a plan for the forcible annexation of al
l Mexico, to be an area for negro slave plantations. During the peace negotiatio
ns, Quitman traveled as a conquering hero to Charleston, South Carolina. He was 
crowned a Sovereign Grand Inspector General of the Scottish Rite, and became the
 most powerful and prominent member of the Rite's Supreme Council. John Quitman'
s grandfather was governor of the island of Curacao, the Dutch West India Compan
y's slave concentration camp; his parents had fled the Caribbean slave revolts, 
taking their slaves with them to New York where John was born. In 1830, young Qu
itman had been formally commissioned by the Scottish Rite, leaders of the secess
ion movement, to establish their organization in the state of Mississippi. 
In the autumn of 1849, General Quitman held a meeting of anti-Union operatives f
rom throughout the South. They resolved to call a formal convention of the South
ern states for the following June, to begin the breakup of the United States. Qu
itman became governor of Mississippi in January 1850, and his Nashville secessio
n convention met from June 3 to 12. Delegates from nine states proclaimed the ri
ghts of slaveholders. Quitman and his clique meanwhile moved to provoke immediat
e civil war. He proposed to lead a private army from Texas, to conquer the new U
.S. territory of New Mexico on behalf of slavery. President Zachary Taylor faced
 Quitman down. President Taylor was determined to bring the new southwest into t
he Union as free states. On June 21, 1850, nine days after the secession convent
ion, Governor Quitman was indicted by a federal grand jury for violating the U.S
. Neutrality Laws! The charge was based on Quitman's leadership of a well-financ
ed conspiracy to invade and ``liberate'' Cuba from Spanish rule. Then two weeks 
later, on July 3, President Taylor threatened to hang those ``taken in rebellion
 against the Union.'' The next day the President fell ill, vomited blackish mate
rial, and died soon after. The Quitman prosecution was delayed. (You may recall 
that Taylor's body was recently dug up by Kentucky authorities, looking for evid


--- PAGE 5 ---
ence of arsenic poisoning.) The following summer, 1851, Quitman brought fellow M
ississippian Jefferson Davis to Massachusetts to meet with Caleb Cushing. They p
icked the man to be nominated by the Democrats for the U.S. presidency: voluntee
r General Franklin Pierce, a member of their clique in the Mexican War. Pierce s
urprised everyone by taking the nomination at the convention. 
Then, August Belmont, the U.S. representative of Britain's Rothschild banks, pai
d for Pierce's 1852 election campaign. Though this blatant foreign intrusion cau
sed a flare-up of resentment among the voters, Pierce was elected the 14th Presi
dent, and his foreign and domestic backers took over. Caleb Cushing became U.S. 
attorney general. Jefferson Davis became secretary of war. Banker August Belmont
 became ambassador to Holland. Scottish Rite chief John Quitman was now ready fo
r serious business. Some months earlier, when he had finally gone to trial, he w
as fortunate that Louisiana private attorney Judah Benjamin had been specially h
ired by the federal government to run the prosecution against Quitman. The jury 
was hung (rather than Quitman), and the charges were dropped. This outcome shoul
d not be too surprising to us, given prosecutor Benjamin's own growing role in t
he faction of which Gen. Quitman was then the shining star. 
Benjamin joined Slidell as a U.S. senator from Louisiana at the next election, a
nd was a top leader of the slave owners' insurrectionary government. Let's look 
for a minute at the trio of Slidell, Belmont, and Benjamin. Slidell had a master
's degree in political dirty tricks, learned as a member of Aaron Burr's machine
 in New York and Louisiana. Slidell had politically schooled Belmont and had bro
ught him into the Democratic Party, and Belmont married Slidell's niece. Slidell
 had also virtually adopted, taught and brought into politics the young Judah Be
njamin, a British West Indian Jew living in Louisiana. Both Belmont, and his ban
king client Benjamin, were passionate backers of the expansion of slavery into L
atin America. When he was a young private secretary for the Rothschild family, B
elmont had toured continental Europe doing financial and political intelligence 
work for the Rothschild bank, a pillar of the British royal family. With Britain
 meddling in Spain's civil war, the Rothschild's had sent Belmont off to the Spa
nish colony of Cuba in 1837 to ``take charge of Rothschild interests'' in Cuba. 
Belmont's ship stopped over in New York and he never went on to Cuba, but his su
bsequent U.S. banking and political career was often focused on Cuba's wealth an
d strategic location. 
Following the 1853 presidential inauguration of their candidate Pierce, Scottish
 Rite chief John Quitman and his New York financiers signed a formal agreement m
aking Quitman the ``civil and military chief of the revolution'' which they woul
d impose on Cuba. Once he had seized the island, Quitman was due to receive $1 m
illion from the proceeds of the revolutionary bonds the financiers were floating
. Quitman's criminal enterprise recruited as many as 50,000 U.S. mercenaries for
 the intended invasion. But the Spanish authorities brought these plans to grief
. They emancipated most of Cuba's slaves, encouraged racial intermarriage, armed
 the freed blacks and recruited them into a militia through which they could def
end their own freedom from the gringo attackers. The Spanish governor arrested Q
uitman's intriguer, Captain James D. Bulloch, when Bulloch brought his ship, the
 {Black Warrior}, into Havana. Senator John Slidell of Louisiana demanded the U.
S. neutrality laws be repealed. Attorney General Caleb Cushing called for a nava
l blockade around Cuba. But given the military realities, saner heads prevailed,
 and Quitman was placed under legal restraint. After the {Black Warrior} affair,
 the Quitman mercenary force was absorbed into a new, more aggressive movement w
ith enlarged aims. The {Knights of the Golden Circle} appeared first in Cincinna
ti[Loeb family,Rotschild agents.The Loeb[Schiff,Warburg] family financed Hitler 
and Stalin], under the supervision of the Scottish Rite's Midwest organizer Kill
ian Van Rensselaer, a longtime underground military operative for Britain in Nor
th America. So Cincinnati was the northern capital of the pro-slavery, Masonic t
errorist underground.


--- PAGE 6 ---
From there the Knights spread throughout Ohio, Indiana and Illinois, down the Mi
ssissippi to the Gulf south, and into Maryland and Virginia to surround the nati
onal capital. The Golden Circle was to be a new slave empire centered in Cuba. I
t would break up the U.S.A. and conquer Mexico, Central America and the Caribbea
n. The Knights armed and drilled up to 100,000 would-be emigrants, raiders, rapi
sts, and slaveholders. They were organized into lodges called ``castles,'' with 
Masonic signs, grips, and passwords. They were to kill the hated Catholic Hispan
ics, and fill their places with black slaves brought fresh from Africa. This is 
the first ``North American Free Trade Agreement''! (The Masonic imperialism of t
he Franklin Pierce administration lives on as the romantic, elite legend of the 
Eastern Establishment. They celebrate that legend in the marriage of President P
ierce's blood relative Barbara Pierce to George Bush, whose imperial ideas are r
ooted in the events of the 1850s.) Led by Quitman and his allies in the lower So
uth, the Knights of the Golden Circle formed the heart of the secession military
 machine as the crisis of the Union deepened. But John Quitman died in July 1858
. The Scottish Rite leadership was then totally reorganized. Albert Pike was bro
ught into the Supreme Council and, in 1859, Pike was elevated to Commander of th
e Southern Jurisdiction. While the Knights of the Golden Circle intensified thei
r terrorist activities in Texas, and their ``filibuster'' raids into Mexico and 
Central America, Albert Pike pulled together the inner core of a revolutionary g
overnment for the U.S. southern states. As Albert Pike said himself, Pike had no
t even heard of the Scottish Rite until 1853. Sponsored by his fellow Bostonian,
 Attorney General Caleb Cushing, who inserted Pike's cronies into office for him
 in the 1840s, Pike had become the boss of Arkansas politics. 
He had proven his ``Southern-ness'' by running racial hysteria campaigns against
 Arkansas's handful of freed blacks and against America's Catholic immigrants. J
oining Pike's new Scottish Rite Supreme Council in 1859 was the U.S. vice presid
ent, John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky. He would soon run for President on a sece
ssion platform, his campaign managed by Caleb Cushing. In March 1860, the U.S. t
reasury secretary, Howell Cobb, joined Pike's Supreme Council. (Cobb was a ruler
 of the Georgia Masonic mafia with Robert Toombs and James Bulloch.) If you are 
going to lead a revolt against a government, it is handy to have the head of tha
t government's treasury take charge of your finances, as Cobb did for his Masoni
c boss Albert Pike. Cobb resigned his treasury post in December 1860, following 
Abraham Lincoln's election to the U.S. presidency. Two months later, Cobb was pr
esident of the convention in Alabama, which created the Confederate government a
nd broke up the United States. Cobb's name appears at the top of signers of the 
Confederate Constitution, a document which Cobb and Albert Pike are supposed to 
have drafted together. The Lost Cause The rebellion of the Southern slave owners
, which brought on the Civil War, was a British Empire-sponsored insurrection. T
he British supplied the arms used by the anti-U.S. insurgents, and coordinated t
he Confederate secret service activities in North America and Europe. These expa
nded efforts continued the political and irregular military operations of the Sc
ottish Rite which had been led by Quitman, and by Pike after Quitman's death. Fo
r the final three years of the four-year Civil War, Judah P. Benjamin served as 
Confederate secretary of state. Benjamin supervised the financial and supply rel
ations to the British Empire and its ally, Napoleon III of France, and ran the C
onfederacy's international network of spies and saboteurs. 
Benjamin's secret service liaison man in England and the Confederacy's chief arm
s procurer there was James Bulloch. We remember Bulloch as the man who had been 
arrested in Cuba during Quitman's 1854 fiasco. John Slidell became the famous Co
nfederate commissioner to France, where he married off his daughter Mathilde to 
Baron Emil Erlanger. The baron was an eminent German-French Jewish banker, close
ly tied to the British government and the highest levels of British freemasonry.
 Slidell and Benjamin negotiated the famous Erlanger Loan, the series of Confede
rate war bonds floated by this banker. They sold the bonds primarily to British 
oligarchs who felt poisonous hatred for the American republic. The collateral fo
r the Erlanger loan was Southern slave cotton, that was smuggled out past the Un


--- PAGE 7 ---
ion blockade. John Slidell handled relations between the French Empire and the M
asonic ``filibusters,'' the raiders of Latin America. Slidell promoted the joint
 European/Confederate invasion of Mexico in the 1860s. The Confederate secret se
rvice, meanwhile, attempted to weaken the resolve of the Union to carry on the w
ar. The key to their strategy was the old Knights of the Golden Circle, still in
 place in the north, Midwest and southwest, involving pro-slavery whites--and Am
erican Indians. 
Sioux Indians, strangely organized into military Masonic lodges, wiped out 700 c
itizens of New Ulm, Minnesota and the surrounding area, while the town's young m
en were off in the Union Army. Albert Pike was at the time the Confederate gener
al officially in charge of arranging Indian attacks against the Union; Minnesota
 was also part of Commander Pike's Masonic Southern Jurisdiction. Judah Benjamin
 based his main secret service group in Montreal, a safe haven since Canada was 
then still British territory. They coordinated across the border with Golden Cir
cle networks in Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, and Wisconsin, and with the August Belm
ont Democratic Party machine in New York. Agents led by Jacob Thompson planned p
rison breaks, tried to burn down northern cities, and instigated anti-draft riot
s in which drunken mobs lynched black people and burned orphanages. This uglines
s was in vain. But just when Lincoln's nationalist money policies and our indust
rial strength overwhelmed the rebellion, President Lincoln was murdered. A dragn
et went out for the Confederate secret service operators, accused of participati
on in the assassination. Albert Pike escaped and joined Jacob Thompson in Canada
. Judah Benjamin fled to England, joining the exiled Robert Toombs and James Bul
loch. John Slidell stayed permanently in France. Confederate secret service agen
t John Surratt made it to Italy and hid in the Vatican, while Surratt's mother w
as convicted and hanged on the charge of plotting with John Wilkes Booth to kill
 Lincoln. John Surratt was discovered and returned for trial. He was acquitted. 
But in 1870, Surratt admitted publicly that he had plotted with Booth to ``abduc
t'' Lincoln. 
He told of the days preceding the murder, of his trip to Montreal carrying money
 and messages from Judah Benjamin. The secret service bank in Montreal, where go
ld from Britain was deposited for Benjamin's crew, was the same bank in which Li
ncoln's assassin John Wilkes Booth had made his deposits six months before the k
illing. The war was over. But the defeated Confederacy was transformed into the 
romantic {Lost Cause}, an object of cultish reverence. During Reconstruction Ant
i-slavery congressmen pressed ahead with plans for Reconstruction, designed to b
reak up the power of what was called the ``chivalry,'' the feudalist lords of th
e prewar South. In Tennessee, the pro-Union faction tried to increase its politi
cal strength by putting through a law, granting the right to vote to the newly f
reed blacks. The Knights of the Ku Klux Klan was a terrorist counterattack, begi
nning in Tennessee, designed to block Reconstruction and reverse the outcome of 
the Civil War. The Klan and the Scottish Rite were one and the same enterprise, 
continuing the imperial effort behind the slave owners' rebellion. Pike, Benjami
n, Slidell, Toombs, Bulloch, and Thompson were all in exile at war's end. 
Though Judah Benjamin had quickly become a wealthy lawyer for the British mercha
nt oligarchs, his continuing preoccupation with defeating Reconstruction is indi
cated in letters he wrote back to the U.S.A. with complaints such as these: ``I 
have always looked with the utmost dread and distrust on the experiment of emanc
ipation so suddenly enforced on the South by the event of the war. God knows how
 it will all end!''; and: ``the South is kept crushed under negro rule''; and: `
`I can never consent to go to New Orleans and break my heart witnessing the rule
 of negroes and carpetbaggers''; and: ``nothing is so abhorrent to me as Radical
ism which seeks to elevate the populace into the governing class.'' From Albert 
Pike's British sanctuary in Canada, on July 15, 1865, Pike issued a summons to t
he Supreme Council, to resume the operations of the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry
, Southern Jurisdiction. Six weeks later, ``under pressure from Masonic official
s in the government,'' the new President Andrew Johnson permitted Pike to re-ent


--- PAGE 8 ---
er the U.S.A. The Rite was reborn over the next few years, as money and messenge
rs went back and forth between Pike and the Confederacy's sponsors in England. I
n April 1866, a year after the murder of Abraham Lincoln, Albert Pike's Supreme 
Council met in full costume inside the White House. There Lincoln's successor Pr
esident Andrew Johnson granted a pardon to Pike. 
The following year, the awed and grateful Johnson was granted advanced degrees 4
 through 32 by the Scottish Rite. The Masons claim that Johnson's Freemasonic in
volvement was an important reason why the pro-Reconstruction congressmen tried t
o impeach Johnson. Albert Pike could not go home to Arkansas, however. He was st
ill under indictment for treason by state authorities there, for inciting the In
dians to break laws or treaties. So he settled in Memphis, Tennessee, just acros
s the Mississippi River from Arkansas, becoming a newspaper publisher, lawyer--a
nd president of the Tennessee Bar Association. Tennessee blacks got the right to
 vote in February 1867. Beginning that spring, Albert Pike and a small group of 
Confederate generals held several meetings in Nashville, at the Maxwell House Ho
tel, to form the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. (KKK=11,11,11 added by Hard Truth/
Wake Up America) The name was taken from the Greek, {kyklos}, meaning ``circle.'
' It was no mystery to the pro-Unionists: The Knights of the [Golden] Circle had
 reappeared. Pike was appointed chief judicial officer of the Invisible Empire. 
He is said to have written the Klan's military manual and ritual, and was the Kl
an's expert on secrecy of organization--its secret grips, signs, and passwords. 
At one of the later Nashville meetings, General Nathan Bedford Forrest was chose
n Imperial Wizard of the Klan. 
Albert Pike organized the Ku Klux Klan in Arkansas after General Forrest appoint
ed Pike the Grand Dragon of that Realm. The Tennessee leaders of the Klan at the
 time of its founding were prominent Masons subordinate to Grand Commander Pike.
 Pike's old comrade and financial backer Robert Toombs returned from England in 
1868. Toombs was appointed dictator of Scottish Rite activities inside Georgia, 
and Toombs and his family ran all aspects of the Klan within Georgia. President 
Ulysses Grant said that the Klan worked ``by force and terror to prevent all pol
itical action not in accord with the views of the members; to deprive colored ci
tizens of the right to bear arms and of the right to a free ballot; to suppress 
[i.e. burn] schools in which colored children were taught and to reduce the colo
red people to a condition akin to that of slavery.'' In his newspaper {The Memph
is Daily Appeal{ for April 16, 1868, publisher Albert Pike wrote: ``With negroes
 for witnesses and jurors, the administration of justice becomes a blasphemous m
ockery. A Loyal League of negroes can cause any white man to be arrested, and ca
n prove any charges it chooses to have made against him. ``The disenfranchised p
eople of the South ... can find no protection for property, liberty or life, exc
ept in secret association.... We would unite every white man in the South, who i
s opposed to negro suffrage, into one great Order of Southern Brotherhood, with 
an organization complete, active, vigorous, in which a few should execute the co
ncentrated will of all, and whose very existence should be concealed from all bu
t its members.'' 
In the latter decades of the nineteenth century, British-centered finance gained
 supremacy over American industry and U.S. policy-making. Under British sponsors
hip, Pike's Scottish Rite, Southern Jurisdiction, came to rule over much of the 
world's Freemasonry. At length its headquarters moved from South Carolina to Was
hington, D.C. Theodore Roosevelt, a racialist Anglophile and passionate Freemaso
n, became U.S. President September 14, 1901, upon the shooting death of William 
McKinley. Teddy Roosevelt's reign was the Lost Cause triumphant: Roosevelt's rev
ered exiled uncle, James Bulloch, Judah Benjamin's secret service chief in Engla
nd, had ghostwritten young Teddy's book on naval history; and Teddy's clique had
 finally conquered Cuba in the 1898 U.S. War with Spain. The Washington, D.C. st
atue honoring Klan founder Albert Pike was dedicated 39 days after Teddy Rooseve
lt's inauguration. The B'nai B'rith and `Egyptian Principles' In his admiring bi
ography of Judah Benjamin, Eli Evans quotes the famous attack against Benjamin's


--- PAGE 9 ---
pro-slavery fanaticism by Ohio's Senator Ben Wade: ``when old Moses, under the 
immediate inspiration of God Almighty, enticed a whole nation of slaves, and ran
 away ... to old Canaan, I suppose that Pharaoh and all the chivalry of old Egyp
t denounced him as a most furious abolitionist.... There were those who loved Eg
ypt better than they loved liberty.... They were `Israelites[Edomites] with Egyp
tian principles.'|'' Senator Wade's barb hit its mark. Judah Benjamin had desert
ed the religion of Moses. He had spat on the law of freedom, the gift that Jews[
Jacob] celebrate in the Passover seder (which was also Christ's last supper). 
Since then, other ,``Israelites with Egyptian principles'' those Jews[Edomites] 
who like Benjamin attached their destinies to the British Empire and its raciali
sm, have become a vital component of the Anglo-American Eastern Establishment; `
`honorary Anglo-Saxons,'' they have helped transform the United States into an e
ssentially mindless British model imperium. And the racialism they coauthored ha
s brought tragedy to Jews as well as to others outside the racial pale. In the C
ivil War, twice as many Jews fought for the Union as for the Confederacy. Northe
rn Jews, many of them recent German immigrants, were propagandized to be strongl
y pro-republican and anti-slavery. The predominant Jewish[Edomite] propoganda tr
adition in the South was not only pro-slavery, but overwhelmingly Freemasonic wh
ich was totall under the control of the Venetian Edomites. The Independent Order
 of B'nai B'rith formed in 1843 as a Jewish[Edomite] community sub-project in th
e restoration of Masonry by the Scottish Rite and the British foreign office. Th
ough most of its lodges were in the North, B'nai B'rith was openly pro-Confedera
te. Though it claimed to be neutral in the war, many of the Order's Northern spo
kesmen were stridently pro-slavery. B'nai B'rith's post-Civil War leaders were p
ro-Confederate operatives, including later president Simon Wolf, who had been ar
rested by the War Department in Washington, D.C. as the lawyer for a Confederate
 spy ring. 
Rabbi Isaac Wise established B'nai B'rith's center for the ``liberalizing'' of J
udaism in Cincinnati, Ohio--coinciding with Cincinnati's other great Scottish Ri
te scheme, the launching of the Knights of the Golden Circle. Wise was officiall
y neutral in the Civil War. Core leaders of the B'nai B'rith from then on have b
een Scottish Rite Masons. The political establishment associated with the Order 
has always had its headquarters in London. In Richmond, the Confederate capital,
 Gustavus A. Myers was Secretary of State Judah Benjamin's closest friend and Be
njamin's channel to banker August Belmont. The former president of the Richmond 
City Council, and the undisputed head of Richmond's Jewish community, Myers was 
Freemasonry Incarnate. Myers's maternal grandfather, Moses Michael Hays, had bro
ught the original ``patent'' and rituals from England to found the Scottish Rite
 in the American colonies. A tory and financial partner of Boston's slave trade 
millionaires, Hays passed his fortune and his Masonic and British underground co
nnections to his daughter's husband and sons, the Richmond Myers clan. Moses Mye
rs, merchant partner of the Richmond family, was head of Norfolk's Jewish commun
ity. His house is now a public museum, located on Norfolk's Freemason Street. In
side is a large wooden plaque given to the family by Queen Victoria, in recognit
ion of the family's long service to the British crown and cause. 
Several generations, living in that same Moses Myers house, were British consuls
. All of Virginia's Jewish[Edomite] leaders then were Masons, one of them Rothsc
hild's official Virginia agent who was grand master of Virginia Masons during th
e war of 1812. After the Civil War, the Belmont/Rothschild faction took absolute
 control over the Jewish leadership within New York and trans-Atlantic finance. 
Joseph Seligman, who had been pro-Union like most American Jews, joined the Brit
ish banking syndicate of Rothschild and J.P. Morgan, which ran U.S. government f
inance from the 1870s onward. London's Anglo-Saxon and Jewish[Edomite] employees
, banking partners of the Confederates against Lincoln's[Edomite] nationalist mo
ney policies, were now merged as the Eastern Liberal Establishment. While Alabam
a cotton broker Emanuel Lehman lived in Civil War New York, he sailed back and f
orth to England raising money for the Confederate war machine. Continuing the fa


--- PAGE 10 ---
mily tradition, his Lehman Brothers[merged with Loeb then becam American Express
] firm supported the racialist eugenics movement, and tenaciously defended their
 investments in Nazi Germany. 
But the big shot was Jacob Schiff of Kuhn Loeb private bank. Schiff's[Rothschild
 agent] power was entirely trans-Atlantic: Traveling back and forth between Lond
on and New York, Schiff was Sir Ernst Cassel's U.S. partner and representative; 
Cassel--the personal banker and the most intimate friend of Prince Edward VII, t
he grand master of British freemasonry. (Edward's son Albert Victor was supposed
 to be the subject of the Jack the Ripper story: His unapproved marriage was bro
ken and covered up by the Freemasonic murders of witnesses...who knows! On behal
f of the royal family, Ernst Cassel managed the finances of the British Fabian S
ociety leaders, and the British Round Table in its outrageous African racialist 
endeavors such as {apartheid}. At Kuhn Loeb in the 1890s, partner Otto Kahn (a B
ritish subject) directly supervised Schiff and Cassel's project to build up a ce
rtain snarling little railroad man who was a favorite of the old Belmont Confede
rate machine, Mr. E. H. Harriman. At that same time, the Warburg family joined K
uhn Loeb; the Warburgs' preoccupations were anchored in their Masonic Occult Ins
titute in Hamburg and London. These families are direct descendants of "King" He
rod.
Look at the first years of this century: Teddy Roosevelt is President, Edward VI
I is King, and the racist cult-master Lord Arthur Balfour is his Prime Minister.
 The British Masonic clique at Kuhn Loeb founded the American Jewish Committee, 
and made its president, Louis Marshall, the official legal advisor to the Harrim
an eugenics laboratory--mother of this century's nightmare race theories. It was
 Kuhn Loeb and the Warburgs who officially brokered New York's banking ties to H
itler's Nazis, as well as Harriman's entree to the Soviet dictatorship. A striki
ng instance of the Confederate ``Lost Cause,'' persisting and haunting the prese
nt century, is to be seen in the attic of {The New York Times.} Iphigenie Ochs m
arried Arthur Hays Sulzberger in 1917. He succeeded her father Adolphe Ochs as p
ublisher of {The Times}, which Mr. Ochs had bought in the 1890s. Adolphe Ochs an
d his father founded the ``Baroness Erlanger'' Hospital in Chattanooga, Tennesse
e. The hospital was named for John Slidell's daughter who married the Confederac
y's chief financier Baron Emil Erlanger. The Baron had bought up the main railwa
ys between the bankrupt South and Cincinnati. Adolphe Ochs had married Iphigenie
 Wise, the daughter of B'nai B'rith's Cincinnati leader Isaac Wise. When the Och
s family had lived in Cincinnati during the war, Adolphe's mother Bertha had bee
n arrested for smuggling drugs to the Confederate army. In 1991, Arthur Sulzberg
er's daughter Ruth sponsored the visit to America of British banker Rodolphe d'E
rlanger, John Slidell's great-great grandson. At a reception for Erlanger hospit
al, he said that his great grandfather, Baron Emil, was the partner of Cecil Rho
des in his nightmare race projects in Africa, and that Emil and his wife Mathild
e Slidell had introduced Wagner's {Tannhauser} to the stage in Paris--which was 
booed off the stage. 
Arthur Sulzberger's Philadelphia Uncle David Sulzberger joined the Confederate a
rmy in Arkansas. Cousin Cyrus Adler, born on the Sulzbergers' Arkansas slave pla
ntation, became the occult, psychic, Masonic, and gnostic expert for the New Yor
k Jewish establishment and for London and Cambridge Freemasonic strategists. At 
the same time, under the Teddy Roosevelt regime, cousin Mayer Sulzberger was pre
sident of B'nai B'rith International and president of the American Jewish Commit
tee. At that time, B'nai B'rith leaders (such as the Sulzberger's partners the M
orgenthaus) directly represented British crown interests in the Middle East, and
 worked as a bridge for Scottish Rite Masonry between the Middle East and Washin
gton. In the 1930s, Cyrus Adler, president of the American Jewish Committee, coo
rdinated with the family's B'nai B'rith, and the family's {New York Times}, to c
rush all U.S. political action against Adolf Hitler in Germany. The B'nai B'rith
 was the one Jewish[Edomite controlled] organization that Hitler[Rothschild rela
tive] deliberately left open  and functioning under Nazi rule from 1933 on. In 1


--- PAGE 11 ---
939, Britain made a dramatic change in its policy toward Hitler--after teaching 
Hitler his race theories, after forcefully backing his takeover of Germany, afte
r financing and equipping his armies, Britain now changed publicly to opposing H
itler. Only at that point, in 1939, about a year after Hitler finally closed B'n
ai B'rith's Nazi-authorized German operations, B'nai B'rith decided to ``approve
'' an international boycott against the Nazi regime.
 B'nai B'rith's Anti-Defamation League recently opened a vicious campaign to lab
el American black leaders as anti-Semites, aiming at a racial conflict, and stom
ping on the memory of the young Jews who fought for civil rights in the 1960s. I
t is essential that the religious, national, and historical character of this ra
cialism be precisely understood. Now a surprising breakthrough has occurred. Lea
ders of U.S. black Freemasonry have attacked white Masonry, particularly the Sco
ttish Rite, as a center of racialism. The attack is contained in the latest issu
e of the {News Quarterly}, official publication of the [``Supreme Council, Scott
ish Rite, Southern Jurisdiction,''] Prince Hall affiliation, in an article by Jo
seph A. Walkes, editor of the {Quarterly.} Walkes exposes Albert Pike as the nat
ional Chief Justice of the Invisible Empire of the Ku Klux Klan, and the organiz
er and Grand Dragon of the Klan in Arkansas. Walkes describes Albert Pike as a `
`traitor to his country.'' The article carries a photograph of the Washington me
morial statue to the KKK founder. Walkes calls the statue ``an affront'' to the 
residents of the nation's capital, a majority of whom are black. With this and s
imilar initiatives, a strong potential now exists for members of all faiths and 
ethnic groups to think about and to solve a central problem of our era: Fanatica
l Zionists are urged on by Anglo-American backers, to brutalize and displace Ara
b residents and Muslim religious institutions from Israeli occupied territory. A
mong the Anglo-Saxons cheering them on in their blind racialism are many known a
s ``fundamentalist Christians.'' They have seen a vision of Semitic warfare in t
he Holy Land, ending in mankind's annihilation, which they cheer as ``God's will
'' and ``Bible Prophesy.'' This madness has been called the British balance-of-p
ower strategy. But its familiar name is, British Freemasonry...
http://www.theforbiddenknowledge.com/
The Zionazireport: Tracking the Zionist Movement

