=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Alternate Sexuality~A look into homosexuality and pedophilia in Egypt.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 18
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:51:33.227463
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
4
7
6
12
8
9
1
11
14
1
Funerary Stela of
Khonserdais before
Osiris and Isis
(UC14506)
4
Pink limestone
hippopotamus
(UC15195)
6
Alabaster head of Pepy
II (UC16876)
7
Alabaster cosmetic vase
bearing the cartouche of
Hatshepsut (UC15862)
8
Ivory cosmetic spoon in
the form of a naked
female (UC26083)
9
Relief of Akhenaten and
Nefertiti (UC401)
11
Terracotta figure
resembling Ptolemy
Eurgetes (UC47632).
12
Mummy portrait of the
‘Red Youth’ (UC19610)
14
Bronze replica of the
‘Farnese Antinous’on
the portico of the Wilkins
Building, Main Entrance
to UCL on Gower St.
Only the objects on
permanent display have
been marked on the
museum map. Images of
other museum objects
are provided in the trail.
Beyond Isis and Osiris
Alternate Sexualities in Ancient Egypt
By John J Johnston


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 18
Introduction
This trail is the result of a series of lectures, which I have given either
at the Petrie Museum or to the Friends of the Museum during LGBT
History Month and at other times since 2008. In devising the trail, I
have endeavoured to restrict myself to those objects within the
museum’s collection rather than considering the wider evidence with
one notable exception, which lies beyond the confines of the
museum but still within the grounds of University College London.
It is, I think, appropriate that the Petrie Museum should host this trail
as Sir William Matthew Flinders Petrie (1853–1942) was particularly
keen, in his excavation of settlement areas, to reveal the truth of the
ancient Egyptians’ day-to-day lives rather than uncovering the art
treasures and funerary artefacts sought by his contemporaries.
I wish to begin by stating that the recognition and identification of
objects directly exemplifying alternative sexualities is not easy. Many
of the objects will serve merely as authentic illustrative tools. For
various reasons, not least the intervening millennia of destructive and
obstructive prejudice, the stories of these alterative sexualities are
often obscured by innuendo and the mores of the period. However,
sometimes, one is surprised by the refreshingly frank attitude
towards sexual matters, which can reveal how differently the ancients
viewed human sexuality and its manifold definitions.
That there is an ‘official’, somewhat censorious attitude towards
homosexual acts in Pharaonic Egyptian culture is difficult to deny.
However, the sources are varied and fragmentary. The twenty-
seventh declaration of Chapter 125 of the Book of the Dead is a
confirmation by the deceased that he did not have homosexual
relations, however, in that same section he states that neither did he
commit adultery (Parkinson, 1995, 61).
Similarly, there is a quite complex portion of the ‘Instructions of
Ptahhotep’ which appears to dissuadeone from having sex with a
‘woman-boy’(Parkinson, 1995, 69) a phrase which appears to
discriminate specifically against effeminacy.
I would suggest that although such references are few, they exist
because such acts did occur and probably with some frequency. In a
culture where procreative sex with one’s wife engendered aspects of
immortality both literally, albeit by proxy, and within a religio-funerary
context there is a suggestion that to engage in non-procreative
sexual acts was simply a waste of semen. It is apparent, as we shall
see, that homosexual acts were certainly known and in certain
circumstances accepted. As one moves forward through time and
approaches those objects supported by Classical literary sources, a
degree of clarity appears to develop although this, too, is open to
substantial interpretation.


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 18
I have included a relatively full bibliography in the hope that the
contents of this trail may encourage visitors to discover for
themselves the rich vein of material in libraries, museums and
galleries, which illustrate this alternative Egyptological approach.
John J Johnston
West Dulwich 2010
Acknowledgements
I wish to thank Professor Stephen Quirke, Dr Debbie Challis and Ms
Jan Picton, all of the Petrie Museum for their encouragement and
assistance in developing this trail and the lectures preceding it.
Finally, I wish to thank my partner, John Cunningham, for his unerring
support.
The Objects
1 Funerary Stela of Khonsuirdis before Isis and Osiris
Location: Main Room IC8 Top Shelf (Inscriptions Cases)
UC14506 Ptolemaic Period (305BC–30BC)
Osiris, here represented as the King of the Dead and Isis, his
consort, epitomise, with their son, Horus, the perfect ancient
Egyptian nuclear family through whom many aspects of human
experience: love, loyalty, birth and the darker elements, such as
death, loss, rivalry, revenge, jealousy and violence are revealed and
mythologized for consumption by the elite culture of ancient Egypt.
Similarly, the tale of Osiris provides a starting point for the
consideration of alternative sexuality in ancient Egypt.
Osiris is king of Egypt and like his siblings, including his sister-wife
Isis, a god. However, his brother, Seth, is jealous of Osiris’ royal
position and determines to be rid of him.
Seth organises a sumptuous banquet at which he holds a small
competition. Under his instructions artisans have crafted the most
beautiful and elegant wooden coffin. It is his intention that the coffin
will be won by whichever of his guests it best fits. The guests are
stunned not only by their host’s generosity but also by the
magnificence of the casket and so each tries the coffin for size. Their
efforts, however, are in vain as Seth has fashioned the coffin to
Osiris’ precise measurements. Therefore, when Osiris tries the coffin
for size, Seth slams shut the lid and hacks both coffin and brother to
pieces before hurling them into the Nile.
Seth then begins his campaign to succeed Osiris as king of Egypt.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 18
However, Isis, in the form, of a kite travels up and down the Nile
gathering the pieces of her husband’s body. Although they are both
gods, Isis’ magic cannot return the bandaged Osiris to life;
nevertheless, he enjoys a form of rebirth and eternal life as King of
the Underworld and succeeds in impregnating her, which results in
the birth of their son, the falcon deity, Horus.
The stage is set for the battle between divine uncle and nephew for
the throne of Egypt.
2 Papyrus Fragment: The Tale of Horus and Seth
UC32158. Late Middle Kingdom (1850BC–1700BC)
Found at Lahun. Not normally on display for conservation reasons.
The Tale of Horus and
Seth.
The reverse of this torn and damaged sheet of papyrus contains
fragments of one of the earliest known examples of the tale of Horus
and Seth’s rivalry for the throne of Egypt. A later and more intact
version of the tale is to be found on Papyrus Chester Beatty I, dated
to the 20th Dynasty reign of Ramses V. This is usually referred to as
‘The Contendings of Horus and Seth’ (Lichtheim, 1976, 214–223)
and, helpfully, provides a context for the Petrie fragment.
Horus and Seth, described as youths, have, nonetheless, been
quarrelling for 80 years and the matter has now been placed before
the divine court of Pre-Harakhti to decide upon the succession.
However, he is becoming bored by this endless wrangling and Seth
devises an alternative plan:


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 18
Then Seth said to Horus: ‘Come, let us have a feast day at my
house.’ And Horus said to him: ‘I will, I will.’ Now when evening had
come, a bed was prepared for them, and they lay down together. At
night, Seth let his member become stiff and he inserted it between
the thighs of Horus. And Horus placed his hands between his thighs
and caught the semen of Seth.
Lichtheim, 1976, 219
When, the following day, Isis is shown Seth’s semen inHorus’ palm,
she cuts off the offending hand and hurls it into the Nile, fashions a
new one for her son and has him drop his own semen onto the
lettuce growing in Seth’s garden, which Seth unwittingly eats.
On returning to the court, Seth states:
‘Let theoffice of ruler be given to me, for as regards Horus who
stands here, I have done a man’s deed to him.’ Then the [Court] cried
out aloud, and they spat out before Horus. And Horus laughed at
them; and Horus took an oath by the god, saying: ‘What Seth has
said is false. Let the semen of Seth be called, and let us see from
where it will answer. Then let mine be called, and let us see from
where it will answer.’
Lichtheim, 1976, 220
Of course, Seth’s semen answers from the waters where Isis has
thrown Horus’hand and Horus’ semen, which is in Seth’s stomach,
emerges as a golden sun disk from his head, which the god Thoth
then places as a crown on the head of Horus, the rightful heir to his
father, Osiris’ throne.
The Petrie Museum fragment relates the same sexual encounter but
it paints the protagonists as being rather more lustful in nature,
including phrases, which have been described (Parkinson, 1995, 70)
as the first recorded ‘chat-up’ line:
And then the Person of Seth said to the Person of Horus: ‘How lovely
are your buttocks! And how muscular your thighs…’
In the Petrie version it is similarly evident that Seth views the
penetrative act as more than the mere dominant behaviour of a
conqueror: it will be ‘sweet to his heart’(Quirke and Collier, 2004) to
have carnal knowledge of Horus and the flirtatious nature of Seth’s
approach suggests that Horus might also rather enjoy the activity.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 18
3 Bronze Mount in the form of Seth
UC63715. New Kingdom (1550BC–1350BC). Not always on display.
Bronze mount in the
form of Seth.
Although the regular form of Horus, that of the falcon, is generally
well-known, it may be useful to briefly consider the nature and
appearance of Seth. This unusual bronze shape shows the aegis of
Seth: his head, perhaps that of a mythical creature, with curved snout
and erect squared-off ears, atop a pectoral collar and surmounted by
the two crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt. Petrie thought this object
might be a brand although it has also been suggested as a mount,
which would have held coloured inlays of paste or stone. If the
former, it raises interesting questions about what was being branded
and why.
Seth represents the ‘outsider’, he is the lord of chaos and confusion
and as such he is the antithesis of all things the Egyptians believed
to be right and proper. As the god of storms, he represents the
unfettered forces of nature, including, perhaps, human nature. This
primal power is not all bad, however, as he is the only deity with the
ability to protect the sun god, Re, from the monstrous serpent
Apophis in his nightly journey through the heavens. Furthermore the
Ramesside kings adopted Seth as their patron deity.
It is too easy, therefore, to identify Seth as a god of evil with
homosexual proclivities. Seth and his proclivities were aspects of the
Egyptian psyche and experience, which helped to keep the world of
the Egyptians in balance (Velde, 1977).


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 18
4 Pink Limestone Hippopotamus
Location: Pottery Room PC5 Shelf 3 (Pottery Cases) UC15195
Period: Pre-dynastic 5300–3100 BC
This pink limestone hippopotamus pendant was excavated at
Gebelein and dates from Egypt’s Predynastic period, somewhere in
the region of 5300BC–3100BC. The hippopotamus was one of the
most ferocious creatures to share the Nile valley with the ancient
Egyptians. From the earliest periods the animal’s nature earned it not
only considerable respect and reverence but an association with
Seth.
In the longer version of the ‘Contending of Horus and Seth’ from
Papyrus Chester Beatty I, prior to Seth’s invitation, mentioned at
‘Object 2’, above, the two gods transform themselves into
hippopotami and wrestle in the Nile, goring at each other with their
sharp elongated tusks (Lichtheim, 1976, 218–9).
In Egyptian art, Seth is often depicted in the form of a hippopotamus,
usually being speared by Horus or the king in the guise of Horus.
This identification is usually thought to be due to the beast’s
savagery and unpredictability. However, ongoing researches by the
author seem to indicate that in a rare example of symbolic animal
behaviour, a dominant male hippopotamus besting a rival will expect
the loser to display his submission by yielding to an act of simulated
anal intercourse by his rival. The parallels seem obvious with the
sexualised, dominant behaviour of Seth and the observation of this
behaviour in the wild may have contributed these elements of the
tale.
5 Ostracon containing The Tale of Seth and Anat
Not on Display. UC31942. New Kingdom 1550–1350 BC
Ostracon containing The
Tale of Seth and Anat.


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 18
This pottery ostracon reveals in eight lines of hieratic text, the cursive
form of hieroglyphic writing, the tale of Anat and Seth. Anat was a
Syrian warrior goddess, accepted into the Egyptian pantheon of
deities in the New Kingdom. She has been described as, ‘some sort
of Amazon’(Manniche, 1987, 22), and is often depicted bare-
breasted and brandishing weapons. There is a tradition, which this
ostracon relates, that Seth attempted to force his attentions on her
whilst she bathed, mounting the warrior goddess from behind, as
though she were a man. This attempted rape, however, does not go
well for Seth.
Interestingly, Anat is also usually depicted wearing the tall plumed
Atef crown, more usually associated with Seth’s fratricidal victim,
Osiris.
6 Alabaster Head of Pepy II (?)
Location: Main Room Display Case I Shelf 1. UC16876.
Dynasty 6 (2345BC–2181BC)
This tiny, broken, alabaster head from a statuette bears starling
similarities to others of the infant king, Neferkare Pepy II who
appears to have ruled from a very young age until 94 years. In light
of his great age at death, it is ironic that the majority of sculptural
works to have reached us show him as a child.
The Petrie Museum also holds a relief from Koptos, UC14281,
showing his cartouche and the king in rather more vigorous, albeit
badly damaged, form striding out with staff and mace.
A text described by the great philologist, Sir Alan Gardiner in 1961 as
‘a story quite in the spirit of Herodotus’ (p.101)reaches us from some
point in the Late Period, although certain grammatical and stylistic
elements may, in fact, suggest a considerably earlier date.
The papyrus relates the tale of King Neferkare and his general,
Sasenet. For reasons which are never explained in the damaged
papyrus, one Teti, son of Henet, watches the king after dark as he
clambers up a lowered ladder into the home of his unmarried
general, where he remains for four hours, leaving only ‘after his
Person had done what he desired with him’(Montserrat, 2000, 143).
We have no idea how the tale ends but there is a suggestion that the
king should not be spending his valuable time in such frivolous ways.
If King Neferkare is the historical Pepy II, it is tempting to think that
the memory of Egypt’s descent into the decentralised chaos following
this king’s reign might have been the spur for such a cautionary tale.
7 Alabaster cosmetic vase bearing the cartouche of Hatshepsut
Location: Main Room WEC 7 Shelf 1. UC15862. Dynasty 18
(1550BC–1295BC). Found at Deir el Bahri


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 18
This alabaster jar was intended to hold some form of cosmetic –
possibly kohl for the eyes. It bears the cartouche of Hatshepsut and
may have been owned by her. It was discovered at Deir el Bahri,
where her mortuary temple lies and, consequently, may have formed
part of her funerary assemblage. However, it appears unfinished and
may have been an item which was being worked and discarded with
Hatshepsut’s death and never completed.
Daughter of King Tuthmosis I, wife and half-sister of Thuthmosis II,
Queen Hatshepsut reigned for some fourteen years following the
untimely death of her husband and, although she originally acted as
regent for her young step-son and nephew, the putative Tuthmosis
III, by Year Two of her reign some interesting iconographic changes
were underway as she assumed the role of king.
Although one could hardly describe Hatshepsut’s transformation from
female to male as transvestism, her statuary gradually adopted more
and more male attributes from the nemes headdress to the wearing
of the false beard and the short shendyt kilt.
Hatshepsut’s Karnak obelisk depicts her as male on two sides and
female on the other two whilst her birth name, which translates,
somewhat unfortunately, in the circumstances, as ‘Foremost of the
Noble Ladies’, is rendered without the feminine ending.
Although we can have no knowledge as to whether this masculine
demeanour was adopted in life, the Egyptian elite must have found
the adaptation and subversion of masculine royal iconography to be
challenging.
This view can probably be borne out by the discovery of an obscene
graffito in a tomb overlooking Hatshepsut’s mortuary temple
confirmed by Edward Wente in 1984 as dating from her reign. It
shows a king, bent over and being entered, from behind, by another
man. Although this has been interpreted as Hatshepsut being
serviced by her architect and major domo, Senenmut, Wente has
suggested, more plausibly, that it is a political satire on Hatshepsut’s
gender role as the king being incapable of fulfilling the role
suggesting that:
The sexually active male may simply be an anonymous figure
serving to provide the means for commenting pictorially upon the
absurdity of Hatshepsut’s acting as king, unable to be a ‘Mighty Bull’.
Wente, 1984, 53
8 Ivory cosmetic spoon in the form of a naked female
Location: Pottery Room. UC2608. Dynasty 19 (1295BC–1186BC)
Found at Qau
The evidence for lesbian behaviour in ancient Egypt is even less
prevalent than we find for male homosexuality. The ‘Dream Book’ of
the Papyrus Carlsberg XIII advises, ‘If a woman dreams that a


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 18
woman has intercourse with her, she will come to a bad end’
(Manniche, 1987, 22). Nevertheless, in the New Kingdom,
particularly, women are frequently shown enjoying female company
in a relaxed and intimate atmosphere, often surrounded by nude or
scantily clad female servants.
Furthermore, cosmetic jars and utensils are often adorned with
naked girls during this period. Whilst there are clearly connotations
with the goddess, Nut, as described by Arielle Kozloff (1998, 97–8),
consideration must also be given to the intrinsic nature of the form
these objects take. It is also evident from the soft woods and
polished ivory used most frequently in the manufacture of these
objects that the use of these items was intended to be sensual.
Of course, one must remember that cosmetic items were also used
by men and consequently, this interest in the female form may be
entirely predictable as men would not only use but commission and
fashion such items.
However, equally, from the earliest periods these same men are
portrayed as handsome, athletic, and desirable in works which are
usually fashioned and commissioned by other men. An article on The
Guardian website, dated 6 January 2009, described the recently
restored painting from the tomb of Nebamun in the British Museum
as depicting ‘a rather hunky athlete hunting in the marshes’(Bennett,
2009). One wonders, consequently, how obvious this foregrounding
of the athletic male was in the minds of the men involved. Were
these elegant and vigorous males, figures of aspiration or desire or,
indeed, both?
A point made by Jan Assman in his article on portraiture in Egypt
(1996) raises some interesting questions regarding the supposedly
idealised representations of the elite, particularly in the New
Kingdom. He suggests that these are not idealised images, so much
as homogenised and that the levels of depilation, cosmetic
application, and wig wearing amongst the fashionable elite may have
substantially reduced individuality to the point, where everyone
resembled a ‘type’ as is evident from artworks, which probably
suggests a concomitant blurring of outward gender distinctions.
9 Relief of Akhenaten and Nefertiti
Location: Main Room IC5 bottom shelf (inscriptions case). UC401
Early Akhenaten (1352BC–1336BC)
This exquisitely worked relief in alabaster from Akhenaten’s newly
found city of Akhetaten, modern Tell el Amarna, shows the king, his
chief wife, Nefertiti and one of their daughters, Meritaten,
worshipping their sole god, the sun’s disk, the Aten.


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 18
Enough has been written about Akhenaten and his heretical beliefs
to fill several libraries and yet we cannot be entirely certain about his
motivation for choosing to be depicted in such an unusual fashion.
Not only are we accustomed to seeing Akhenaten’selongated and
distorted facial features but as in this piece, the king’s body takes on
entirely feminine dimensions. The protuberant breasts, slim waist,
and wide hips are rendered almost identically to those of Nefertiti,
standing beside him. Certainly, theories have not been in short
supply. The combining of masculine and feminine traits was not
unique in Egyptian art and mythology per se: the fecundity of the Nile
god, Hapi is portrayed in a similar fashion and the sole creator god,
Atum is, by reason of his actions, essentially ‘hermaphroditic’ in
nature. However, the adoption of such traits by the king is without
precedent save in the intermediary stages of Hatshepsut’s
iconographic transformation, which were to a very different purpose
and effect.
A ‘news’ article dated as recently as 4 May 2008 details the work of a
physician in Baltimore with the headline, ‘Egyptian Pharaoh May
Have Been Natural Transsexual’ (Associated Press).The article
states that:
The female form was due to a genetic mutation that caused the
pharaoh’s body to convert more male hormones to female hormones
than needed, Dr. Irwin Braverman believes. The pharaoh had ‘an
androgynous appearance. He had a female physique with wide hips
and breasts, but he was male and he was fertile and he had six
daughters,’ Braverman said. ‘But nevertheless, he looked like he had
a female physique.’
There is a somewhat cautionary tale regarding the interpretation of
evidence and the concomitant long term outcomes thereof: Towards
the end of Akhenaten’sreign, Nefertiti appears to vanish from the
historical record and to be replaced by a male co-regent,
Smenkhkare. In 1928, Percy Newberry, perhaps one of the first to
hazard an ‘alternative’ reading of an Egyptian artefact wrote,
regarding Berlin Stela 17813:
[Howard] Carter has also drawn my attention to a remarkable stela in
the Berlin Museum… which has always been supposed to represent
Akhenaten and his queen Nefertiti, but, as Carter points out to me,
the double crown worn by the one figure and the Khepresh-crown
worn by the other make it clear that we have here two kings, and not
a king and his consort. The two royal personages here are
undoubtedly Akhenaten and his co-regent Smenkhkare. The intimate
relations between Pharaoh and the boy as shown by the scene on
the stela recall the relationship between the Emperor Hadrian and
the youth Antinous.
Newberry, 1928, 7


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 18
It was not until 1973 that Professor J R Harris re-identified the
individuals as Akhenaten and Nefertiti although for many the debate
rages on and Akhenaten is still erroneously referenced in many
publications as one of the first known homosexuals in history
(Montserrat, 2000, 166–182).
10 Terracotta head of Alexander the Great (?)
Not always on display. UC4988. Ptolemaic. 3rd Century BC. Found
at Memphis
Terracotta head of
Alexander the Great (?) .
This hollow terracotta head probably represents Alexander the Great
as it bears a strong resemblance to his portrait type with its full,
slightly unkempt, locks brushed back from the forehead.
Alexander III of Macedon arrived in Egypt in order to rout the Persian
invaders who had colonised many of the countries surrounding the
Mediterranean and had ruled Egypt for some two-hundred years. As
a result of his success, Alexander became the rightful ruler of Egypt,
accepting the title of King of Upper and Lower Egypt.
Unlike his predecessors in the role, however, Alexander was the
product of a Hellenic upbringing. His tutor was the great Athenian
philosopher, Aristotle and he was accustomed to the prevalent
fashion of socially accepted and promoted homosexuality between
elite males. Dalliances with attractive young men were to be
expected. Indeed, Alexander’s father, Phillip II, was rumoured to
have been murdered by a former male lover in a fit of jealous pique
before the eyes of his people and his wives.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 18
The sources tell us that Alexander had a particular bond with one of
his band of companions: Hephaestion, a boyhood friend, who in
many respects appears to have emulated Patroklos, as Alexander
strove to emulate his Homeric hero, Achilles. Both men travelled to
the site of Troy where they sacrificed to the shades of these heroes.
Although Homer, in his epic, does not make the relationship between
the two heroes explicit, it was generally accepted during the
Classical period that the relationship had been homosexual in nature.
Alexander’s links with Egypt appear to have been considerably more
than merely those of a visiting general. Whilst there, he sought the
advice of the Oracle of Ammon at Siwa Oasis, travelling to that far
flung outpost, after which, it is believed he believed himself to be the
son of a god. He also visited the ancient fishing village of Rakhotis,
where he founded the city of Alexandria. There are reliefs in the
temple of Karnak, showing Alexander in typically Pharaonic poses,
suggesting that he must have instituted some form of building or
restoration programme at this venerable site. He then departed with
Hephaestion to destroy the fleeing Persian army. Alexander sought to
conquer the world and in so doing, to unite east and west. In this and
many other things, Alexander was a unique thinker. Similarly, his
relationship with Hephaestion continued long after the Greek
tradition, which dictated that such relationships usually finished when
the younger party approached his early to mid twenties.
Alexander married and begot heirs. However, Hephaestion was
never far from his side and when Hephaestion died unexpectedly at
Ecbatana in October 324 BC, Alexander reacted with extreme
distress. He had the physician who had been tending Hephaestion
executed on the spot and threatened to raze the city to the ground.
We are further told that, against advice, he lay with the body for a full
twenty-four hours without food or drink. He endeavoured to have
Hephaestion deified but for the intervention of the Oracle of Ammon
in Egypt, who decreed he should be worshipped merely as a hero.
Nevertheless, a massive funeral pyre was constructed at enormous
expense, utilising bricks from the city walls of Babylon to create a
platform over 7m in height, the remains of which, which may have
been discovered by Robert Koldewey in 1904 (Palagia, 2000, p.173).
Thereafter, Alexander fell into a downward spiral, from which he
never recovered, dying, himself, only eight months later.
However, even in death Alexander’s link with Egypt was not to be
broken. His body was embalmed by Egyptians and Chaldeans, who,
we are told, used honey as a preservative and would have been
buried at the Macedonian royal necropolis at Vergina but for the fact
that his body was intercepted en route by his former general,
Ptolemy, who carried him to Egypt to serve as the ideological and
political hub of his own dynastic ambition.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 18
Alexander’s final resting place is now lost to us, although it is known
that both Julius Caesar and Octavian visited his mausoleum in
Alexandria, some three hundred years later.
Alexander had amassed a vast empire and enormous wealth before
he died at the age of thirty-two, during which time Hephaestion rarely
left his side.
11 Terracotta figurine resembling Ptolemy VIII Euergetes
(Physkon)
Location: Main Room IC19 (Inscriptions Cases/Ptolemaic Display)
UC47632. Middle Ptolemaic Period (203BC–117BC). Found at
Memphis
This tiny, terracotta figurine strongly resembles the descriptions
which have reached us of the monstrous king, Ptolemy VIII
Euergetes, known to the Alexandrian masses as Physkon or
‘Potbelly’. He appears to sit in a throne or chariot, with his somewhat
effeminate robes diaphanously revealing his grotesque bulk beneath.
If this does represent the king, then such an object would have been
a dangerous item to posses during the king’s lifetime as his bloodlust
and capacity for revenge were notorious.
The piece is, however, reminiscent of Diodorus Siculus’ description of
Ptolemy VIII puffing and sweating through the heat of the sun en
route to the harbour with the notoriously austere envoy from Rome,
Scipio Aemilianus, who had deliberately eschewed the use of a litter
and later commented, ‘The Alexandrians owe me one thing; they
have seen their king walk’(Ashton, 2001, 65).
The incident is worth mentioning in this particular context, not only
because the vision of Euergetes resembling a somewhat tacky and
overweight drag act remains an amusing one but also because under
the Ptolemies, Alexandria had become a hot bed of intellectual,
philosophical, artistic and literary activity and was also deemed to be
a rather good spot for picking up young men as exemplified in the
poetry of Callimachus, Theocritus and numerous others working at
the famous Library (Montserrat, 1996, 144–6).
12 Mummy Portrait of the ‘Red Youth’
Location: Fayum Portraits Case. UC19610. Roman Period (AD 140 -
160). Found at Hawara
This portrait of painted in wax on lime wood was excavated by Petrie
in 1911. It represents a muscular young man with tanned, naked
shoulders and chest, rather like an athlete. Petrie, himself, christened
the portrait the ‘Red Youth’. This and the other mummy boards in the
museum’s substantial collection would originally have been affixed to
the wrappings of the deceased in a manner similar to that of the
mummy of Artemidorus, on display in the British Museum.


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 18
Dominic Montserrat placed emphasis on the erotic aspect of the fifty
or so known mummy portraits of young men in their late teens to
early twenties. Montserrat commented on the iconography employed
in the portraits of young men ‘as being at the apogee of their sexual
desirability’(Montserrat, 1993, 225) with their slight moustaches,
frequently naked torsos and garlanded hair. While this should not,
necessarily, be deemed to represent homosexual desirability, it
should be recalled that Roman society, at various periods, was
distinctly ambivalent about one’s sexual proclivities outside of
marriage providing one remained within certain rules regarding
married women and freeborn girls and youths.
13 Coin of Hadrian
Not usually on display. UC39383. Roman Period. Found at Naukratis
Badly corroded bronze
coin of Emperor
Hadrian.
This badly corroded bronze coin of the Roman Emperor, Hadrian,
from the site of Naukratis is one of the few representations held in
the Petrie Museum of this oft-depicted emperor. Following the death
of Cleopatra VII, the emperors of Rome came to rule Egypt and, for
the purposes of Egyptian religion, the Kings of Upper and Lower
Egypt, although few visited the country.
A Spaniard by birth, Hadrian was fascinated by Greek history and art
and by the ‘mystery religions’ of Egypt. Hadrian wasphilhellene –a
lover of Greek Classical culture –and endowed and restored many
great buildings throughout the Greek provinces and rebuilt a number
of historic structures in Rome itself. He was known as Graeculus,
‘Little Greek’ and was the first Roman emperor to wear a beard in the
Greek style, although, in typically scurrilous Roman fashion, it was
rumoured that he only did so because beneath it, his face was
blemished.


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 of 18
Hadrian married Vibia Sabina, the Emperor Trajan’s niece by
marriage and, in so doing, secured for himself the Imperial throne. It
has also been suggested that an intimacy between Hadrian and
Trajan did not hinder matters.
Unlike the majority of Roman emperors, Hadrian spent much of his
reign away from Rome, touring the provinces. This involved a
substantial train of advisers, courtiers, intellectuals, the Empress and
a young man from the city of Claudiopolis, near the Black Sea,
whose name was Antinous…
14 Bronze replica of the ‘Farnese Antinous’
Location: Portico of the Wilkins Building, Main Entrance UCL on
Gower St. Eighteenth Century AD
This eighteenth century bronze copy of the so-called ‘Farnese
Antinous’ was donated to University College London by Dr Robert
Fellowes (1770–1847) in 1829. It, together with the ‘Diskobolos’,
donated at the same time, were sited on the portico of the Wilkins
Building, in 1872. The sculptor of the pieces is unknown.
Our textual knowledge of Antinous is slight: we cannot be sure when
he first met Hadrian or even of his precise age. He was possibly born
in AD 111 and almost certainlyfreeborn. A later votive text gives his
date of birth as 27 November. It is likely that Hadrian encountered
Antinous in Bithynia (modern Turkey) in approximately AD126 or 127.
Having travelled around the Greek provinces Hadrian, Antinous, and
the Empress Sabina were initiated in September AD 128 into the
Eleusinian Mysteries, which were related to the myth of Demeter and
Persephone and centred upon death and rebirth (Lambert, 1997,
104). As the journey progressed Hadrian became increasingly
obsessed with his own impending doom, foretold by dreams and the
prophecies of the sorcerers with whom Hadrian had begun to
consort.
By October AD 130 the Imperial party had reached Egypt and were
travelling on the Nile, possibly returning from a visit to the nearby
Hermopolis, the cult site of Thoth, the Egyptian god of writing, secret
wisdom and magic, which would seem to fit the Emperor’s interests
at the time.
On 24 October, the traditional date of Osiris’ death, the beautiful
Antinous drowned in the river Nile. The Classical sources initially tell
us, succinctly, ‘During a journey on the Nile [Hadrian] lost his
Antinous’, and that Hadrian, ‘wept like a woman’ at the death.
Suspicions surrounding the death were raised by all ancient
commentators with Aurelius Victor, writing some 150 years later
providing the most information:
For when Hadrian was desiring to prolong his life by any means, the
magicians proposed that someone should die voluntarily on his
behalf, everyone refused, Antinous alone offered.


--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 17 of 18
Lambert, 1997, 131
Certainly, by 30 October, Hadrian has founded a city, Antinoopolis, on
the banks of the Nile closest to the spot where Antinous died and
named a star in the constellation of Aquila (The Eagle) after the boy.
Hadrian’s mourning culminated in the unprecedented step of
Antinous being created a god; the last god of the ancient world. In his
worship throughout the empire, Antinous is often conflated with the
Egyptian, Osiris or the Greek, Dionysos but most frequently as
himself: a beautiful, ageless youth with gently downcast head.
We know that Hadrian survived his favourite by only eight unhappy
years during which, he frequently but unsuccessfully sought his own
death, before retreating to his villa at Tivoli, where excavators still
search for the tomb of Antinous (Mari, 2006).
Bibliography
Ashton, S.-A., (2001). Terracotta with a nozzle in the form of a caricature, Cleopatra of
Egypt from History to Myth, eds. S. Walker & P. Higgs, 64–5.
Assman, J., (1996). Preservation and Presentation of Self in Ancient Egyptian
Portraiture, Studies in Honor of William Kelly Simpson, ed. P. Der Manuelian Boston:
Museum of Fine Arts, 55–81.
Bennett, N., 2009. Nebamun’s Painted Burial Chamber.
http://www.guardianweekly.co.uk/?page=editorial&id=879&catID=10 (Accessed 13
January 2010).
Collier, M. & S. Quirke (eds.), (2004). The UCL Lahun Papyri: Religious, Literary,
Medical, Mathematical and Medical, Oxford: Archaeopress.
Davidson, J., 2007. The Greeks and Greek Love, London: Weidenfield and Nicolson.
Dowson, T. A., 2000. Why Queer Archaeology?An Introduction. World Archaeology,
32(2), 161–5.
Gardiner, A. H., 1961. Egypt of the Pharaohs, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Grajetzki, W and S. Quirke 2000 Digital Egypt for Universities:
http://www.digitalegypt.ucl.ac.uk/ (accessed 13 January 2009).


--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 18 of 18
Graves-Brown, C. (ed.) (2008). Sex and Gender in Ancient Egypt: ‘Don your wig for a
joyful hour’, Swansea: The Classical Press of Wales.
Harris, J. R., 1973. Nefertiti Rediviva. Acta Orientalia, 35, 5–13.
Kozloff, A. P., (1998).‘The Decorative and Funerary Arts During the Reign of
Amenhotep III’,Amenhotep III: Perspectives on his Reign, eds. D. O’Connor & E. H.
Cline Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 95–123.
Lambert, R., 1997. Beloved and God, London: Phoenix.
Lane Fox, R., 1986. Alexander the Great, London: Penguin.
Lichtheim, M., 1976. Ancient Egyptian Literature Volume II: The New Kingdom,
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Manniche, L., 1987. Sexual Life in Ancient Egypt, London: Kegan Paul International.
Mari, Z., (2006). La Tombe-Tempio di Antinoo a Villa Adriana, Suggestioni egizie a Villa
Adriana, eds. B. Adembri & Z. Mari Milano: Electa, 35–45.
Montserrat, D., 1993. ‘The Representation of Young Males’,‘Fayum Portraits’.The
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, 79, 215–25.
Montserrat, D., 1996. Sex and Society in Graeco-Roman Egypt, London: Kegan Paul
International.
Montserrat, D., 2000. Akhenaten: History, Fantasy and Ancient Egypt, London:
Routledge.
Newberry, P. E., 1928. Akhenaten’s Eldest Son-in-Law ‘Ankhkheprurē’. The Journal of
Egyptian Archaeology, Vol. 14 (No. 1/2), 3–9.
Opper, T., 2008.Hadrian: Empire and Conflict, London: British Museum Press.
Palagia, O., (2000). ‘Hephaestion’s Pyre and the Royal Hunt of Alexander’,Alexander
the Great in Fact and Fiction, eds. A. B. Bosworth & E. J. Baynham Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 167–206.
Parkinson, R. B., 1995. ‘Homosexual’ Desire and Middle Kingdom Literature.The
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, 81, 57–76.
Picton, J., S. Quirke & P. C. Roberts (eds.), (2007). Living Images: Egyptian Funerary
Portraits in the Petrie Museum, London: Left Coast Press.
Press Association. 2008. Egyptian Pharaoh May Have Been Natural Transsexual.
http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,353958,00.html (accessed 13 January 2009).
Robins, G., 1988. Ancient Egyptian Sexuality Discussions in Egyptology, 11, 61–72.
Velde, T., 1977.Seth, God of Confusion: A Study in his Role in Egyptian Mythology and
Religion, Leiden: Brill.
Vout, C., 2007. Power and Eroticism in Imperial Rome, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Vout, C. & P. Curtis (eds.), (2006).Antinous: The Face of the Antique, Leeds: Henry
Moore Institute.
Wente, E. F., 1984. Some Graffiti from the Reign of Hatshepsut. Journal of Near
Eastern Studies, 43(1), 47–54.
Text © John J. Johnston 2010, Images © Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology, UCL

