=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Amy Garvey~ Biography.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 325
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:58:56.252720
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
The V eiled
GARVEY


--- PAGE 3 ---
gender  & american culture
Coeditors
Thadious M. Davis
Linda K. Kerber
Editorial Advisory Board
Nancy Cott
Cathy N. Davidson
Jane Sherron De Hart
Sara Evans
Mary Kelley
Annette Kolodny
Wendy Martin
Nell Irvin Painter
Janice Radway
Barbara Sicherman


--- PAGE 4 ---
The V eiled
GARVEY
The Life & Times of
AMY JACQUES GARVEY
ula yvette taylor
The University of North Carolina Press
Chapel Hill and London


--- PAGE 5 ---
∫ 2002
The University of North Carolina Press
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
Set in Adobe Garamond and T rajan types
by Keystone Typesetting Inc.
The paper in this book meets the guidelines for
permanence and durability of the Committee on
Production Guidelines for Book Longevity of the
Council on Library Resources.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Taylor, Ula Y.
The veiled Garvey : the life and times of Amy Jacques
Garvey / Ula Yvette Taylor.
p. cm. — (Gender and American culture)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
isbn 0-8078-2718-5 (cloth: alk. paper)
isbn 0-8078-5386-0 (pbk.: alk. paper)
1. Garvey, Amy Jacques. 2. African American women
political activists—Biography. 3. Political activists—United
States—Biography. 4. Feminists—United States—
Biography. 5. Women intellectuals—United States—
Biography. 6. Garvey, Marcus, 1887–1940. 7. Black
nationalism—United States—History—20th century.
8. Pan-Africanism—History—20th century. 9. African
American women—Political activity—History—20th
century. 10. Feminism—United States—History—20th
century. I. Title. II. Gender & American culture
e185.97.g28 t39 2002
305.896%073%0092—dc21 2002018713
[b]
cloth 06 05 04 03 02 54321
paper 06 05 04 03 02 54321


--- PAGE 6 ---
For my ﬁrst teachers, my parents,
William T aylor and Lillian T aylor,
and my lifelong friend,
Otis Campbell
In loving memory of
John Climmie Rogers, maternal grandfather
Thretha Jackson, paternal grandmother


--- PAGE 7 ---



--- PAGE 8 ---
contents
Acknowledgments ix
Introduction 1
1 The Formative Years, 1895–1917 6
2 Amy Jacques and the unia 18
3 I Only Live to Perpetuate the Ideas of My Husband 41
4 Our Women and What They Think 64
5 Back to Jamaica and Forward to Europe 91
6 New Freedoms, New Constraints 112
7 Single Motherhood 125
8 A Decade of Unity 143
9 The Fifth Pan-African Congress, 1945 165
10 Essays and Literature for a Pan-African World 175
11 Activism Closer to Home 194
12 The Progressive Radical 213
Conclusion 235
Notes 239
Selected Bibliography 281
Index 297


--- PAGE 9 ---



--- PAGE 10 ---
acknowledgments
This book emerges out of my sincere appreciation and love for Pan-
African freedom ﬁghters. It began as a dissertation, and similar to most
long-term research projects, I have matured tremendously with this text.
Each successive draft conjured up new intellectual challenges that paral-
leled both personal hardships and exciting triumphs. I cannot properly
thank everyone in a few pages, so what follows is a modest attempt to
express my gratitude to colleagues, friends, and family who o√ered sup-
port and encouragement.
Given that Amy Jacques Garvey represents the epitome of a diasporic
subject, I conducted extensive research in New York City; Nashville, T en-
nessee; Cleveland, Ohio; Washington, D.C.; Kingston, Jamaica; Accra,
Ghana; and London. Financial assistance from the Ford Foundation (dis-
sertation and postdoctoral fellowships), the Schomburg Center for Re-
search in Black Culture Residence Fellowship, and the University of Cali-
fornia (uc), Berkeley (travel grants) was essential to completion of the
archival research. I also appreciate the help I received from all of the
archivists and reference librarians who pointed me in the proper direc-
tion. I am extremely grateful to Beth Howse and Ann Shockley at Fisk
University, Nashville; Diana Latachenere and Jonathan Mason at the
Schomburg Center in New York City; and Eppie D. Edwards at the
National Library of Jamaica. They always met my numerous requests
with total cooperation and patience.
At the University of North Carolina Press, my sponsoring editor, Sian
Hunter, prodded me to rewrite when I lacked energy and focus. The
anonymous readers o√ered valuable comments on how to improve the
overall text. I am especially indebted to the perceptive critique o√ered by
my dear friend, Chana Kai Lee. Her insightful suggestions and willing-
ness to plow through a taxing rough draft have demonstrated not only her
historical talents, intellectual sharpness, and, of course, endurance, but
also how a close friend can be an extraordinarily generous and supportive


--- PAGE 11 ---
x acknowledgments
colleague as well. Barbara Bair and T era Hunter took time out from their
work to give me valuable critical responses to earlier versions of various
chapters. Kathy Checkvotich and Lynnéa Stephen provided editing ad-
vice that helped me to present a more polished manuscript. As a result of
their collective criticism, my book has fewer errors and obscurities than it
would otherwise have contained.
Many people guided me in preparing this book. During my graduate
years at the University of California, Santa Barbara, Patricia Cohen,
Douglas Daniels, Carl Harris, and Gerald Horne a≈rmed my passion for
historical research. I found inspiration in the quality and intellectual
breadth of their teaching and scholarship. I am especially indebted to
Gerald Horne for the example of his own work and for his detailed
commentary on mine. To Rupert Lewis, Tony Martin, Robert Hill, Bar-
bara Bair, and Horace Campbell I am also deeply obligated. Their Garvey
scholarship has been an indispensable foundation from which my own
thought has proceeded.
Advice and encouragement have come from many quarters, but I take
special note of the following family members and friends with whom I
discussed many of the ideas in this book. My cousin, Lynnette Wooten,
read several chapters and o√ered critical insight; I owe her more than I can
express. My aunt, Mary Wooten, provided scrumptious Sunday meals,
wake-up calls, and warm advice. Saidiya Hartman, my heartfelt sister,
gave me gentle counsel and unconditional friendship when I needed it
the most. My weekly lunches with my comrade, VèVè Clark, provided
me with much-needed laughs and relaxation. My grandmother, Willie
Rogers, and my aunt, Priscilla Venable, cheerfully asked about ‘‘the book.’’
Both old and new friends—Otis Campbell, Venus Green, Koﬁ Hadjor,
Marti Adams, Ralph Russell, Omar Garrett-Wray, Tamarra Lewis, Clau-
dine Michel, Sharla Dundy-Millender, Kristy Bright, Shirley Burton,
Je√rey Baker, T erry Lindsey, Javanè Strong, and Lamont Toney—o√ered
support at pivotal moments. A special thanks to all of my colleagues and
the sta√ in the Department of African American Studies at uc Berkeley.
The ﬁnal version of this book was actually written in the company of
my nurturing father, William Taylor, and my beautiful sisters, Nan Taylor
and Yolanda Taylor. Their willingness to listen to my ‘‘Amy’’ rambling
and their questions regarding my work inspired me to write daily. I am
blessed to have a loving ‘‘home.’’
For everything else, I am deeply grateful to God.


--- PAGE 12 ---
The V eiled
GARVEY


--- PAGE 13 ---



--- PAGE 14 ---
introduction
The life and times of Amy Jacques Garvey challenge our understanding of
Marcus Garvey and Garveyism and unveil the complicated reality of a
black radical. Although Jacques Garvey was born in Jamaica on 31 De-
cember 1895, empowered by her father’s teachings, she assumed her politi-
cal identity in earnest in 1919, when she a≈liated herself with the Univer-
sal Negro Improvement Association ( unia) in Harlem, New York, as a
private secretary to its leader, Marcus Garvey. As Garvey’s personal secre-
tary, conﬁdante, and later second wife, she worked closely with him to
keep the movement aﬂoat, and as the archivist for the organization, she
kept meticulous records of his speeches and the e√orts of other activists
determined to empower Africans at ‘‘home’’ and throughout the diaspora.
Moreover, when Amy and Marcus married in 1922, she fully embraced the
endeavor ‘‘to be conversant with subjects that would help in his career,
and [to] try to make home a haven of rest and comfort for him.’’
∞ This
view of herself as a helpmate to Garvey would be transformed. As Jacques
Garvey grew beyond the color and class boundaries that had permeated
her world during her formative years, she became an independent Pan-
African intellectual of stellar proportions.
As a political journalist, Jacques Garvey unfailingly wrote about the
shortcomings of Jim Crow America, while simultaneously presenting the
unia as a viable alternative, creating a reﬁned discourse on the politics of
race in the United States. In addition, her editorials on the woman’s page
in the unia’s newspaper, the Negro World, destabilized masculinist dis-
course, o√ering a glimpse into the range and scope of feminism possible
during the 1920s and a model of women as political beings who could
change the world. In fact, Jacques Garvey’s writings were a key compo-
nent of early black feminism. She was adamant that men fulﬁll certain
gender-speciﬁc roles; nor did she question the prevailing ideology that
women should be self-sacriﬁcing wives. Jacques Garvey did, however,
challenge myopic gender politics. Her politically diverse articles encour-


--- PAGE 15 ---
2 introduction
aged women to navigate between both helpmate and leadership roles, and
she was openly critical of black men who stiﬂed options and choices
for women.
Amy Jacques Garvey, along with other ‘‘race women’’ at the dawn of the
twentieth century, mastered what I call ‘‘community feminism,’’ a term
that names the territory that Jacques Garvey was carving out—a territory
that allowed her to join feminism and nationalism in a single coherent,
consistent framework. At times, community feminism resembled a tug-
of-war between feminist and nationalist paradigms, but it also provided a
means of critiquing chauvinistic ideas of women as intellectually inferior.
Essentially, community feminism permitted Jacques Garvey to balance
her commitment to Garveyism and Pan-African ideas, and her commit-
ment to her own personal development and feminist interests.
As a community feminist, Jacques Garvey encouraged women to edu-
cate themselves and to perform as both helpmates and leaders in their
communities. By reading and discussing Pan-African materials, women,
she believed, would be empowered not only to confront racism, colonial-
ism, and imperialism, but to contest masculine dominance as well. In one
of her last published articles, ‘‘The Role of Women in Liberation Strug-
gles’’ (1972), she argued that women should use their ‘‘intelligence in a
righteous cause’’ and that they were needed to ‘‘ﬁll the breach, and ﬁght
as never before, for the masses need intelligent dedicated leadership.’’
≤
Times changed, but Jacques Garvey never wavered from her belief that
women should be given every opportunity for intellectual development.
Arguably representing the epitome of feminist agency, Jacques Gar-
vey often su√ered from the snubs of male comrades who believed that
women should exclusively perform private, behind-the-scenes, domesti-
cated roles within the movement. Her life reveals how one woman strug-
gled to negotiate this highly masculine terrain. Unlike many of her female
peers who refused to ‘‘air dirty laundry,’’ Jacques Garvey defended herself
both verbally and in print. Her personal relationship with Marcus Garvey
(this book covers episodes from their private and public lives), as well as
with other black men, generated ideas that rebu√ed male dominance
while still embracing aspects of patriarchy. Her stance was inconsistent in
that she did not want men and women to be liberated from socially
constructed gender-speciﬁc roles. For Jacques Garvey, ‘‘real men’’ were at
the very least breadwinners, and ‘‘true race’’ women inhabited a con-
sciousness that allowed them to celebrate their distinct culture and femi-
ninity without being delimited by it.


--- PAGE 16 ---
introduction 3
Jacques Garvey’s burgeoning intellectualism blossomed into an au-
thoritative tone and an expansive position in the unia. She was hailed as
the Joan of Arc of helpmates by unia members, but to her frustration, this
saintly moniker did not catapult her into real power within the organiza-
tion. She resisted feeling powerlessness in a cauldron of patriarchy by
never stiﬂing her e√orts, working sometimes up to eighteen hours a day
to disseminate a Pan-Africanist political agenda. This heavy workload
wreaked havoc on her physically, producing ailments and exacerbating
already existing ones. Throughout her life she su√ered from malaria, eye
strain, arthritis, rheumatism, and excessive weight loss. In fact, she be-
lieved that her eventual cancer was a result of all the years she had com-
promised her health for the movement. Jacques Garvey’s acts of self-
subordination conﬁrm her sincere commitment to the struggle and signal
the complicated but very real life of a dedicated activist.
Over the years, Amy Jacques Garvey moved from simply perpetuating
her husband’s ideas to shaping and disseminating the philosophy of Gar-
veyism. Most signiﬁcantly, as editor of two volumes of The Philosophy and
Opinions of Marcus Garvey  (two of the most important primary collec-
tions in the ﬁeld), she coalesced the scope of Garveyism and how it would
be presented to the world. Defending Garvey the man and Garveyism as
an ideology became the purpose of her existence until her death in 1973.
For example, when publications explained Garveyism as a theoretical
philosophy, she responded by underscoring that it was ‘‘not only a theo-
retical philosophy, but a working idealism, geared to the crying needs of
an entire race.’’
≥
For the Garveys, addressing the concerns of people of African descent
was paramount. In fact, they argued convincingly that black people were
living internationally as second-class citizens, largely as a result of eco-
nomic oppression. The Black Star Line Steamship Company was the
unia’s main venture to o√set this injustice. Unfortunately, this capitalis-
tic enterprise sowed the seeds of the organization’s demise and Garvey’s
downfall. Mismanagement of the Black Star Line gave the U.S. govern-
ment legal justiﬁcation to entangle Garvey in a web of innuendo and
fraud.
Since the early days of the organization, the federal government had
targeted Garvey as an enemy. Special agents were assigned to monitor his
every move with the goal of gathering incriminating evidence against
him. Ironically, once the government incarcerated Garvey in a federal
prison in 1925, Jacques Garvey was free to move beyond the strictures of


--- PAGE 17 ---
4 introduction
wifehood and veiled helpmate, becoming a mature political thinker who
frequently occupied the limelight. Although she often struggled to have
her ideas taken seriously by male colleagues, who at times criticized her
dominating personality, she never doubted her importance to the Pan-
African cause in general and to the unia in particular.
After her husband’s death in 1940, Amy Jacques Garvey experienced a
political rebirth. For example, she began to deviate from her belief that
the solution to black people’s problems was linked to black capitalism, as
she witnessed the su√ering they endured in the backbreaking process of
building a nation based on capitalist principles. Moreover, her private
hardship as a single parent of two children encouraged her to think di√er-
ently about the production, consumption, and distribution of resources.
Clearly, she was not afraid to alter her thinking in response to a dynamic
world. Her post-1940s articles thus emphasized the state’s need to inter-
vene and regulate the economy in order to beneﬁt the majority of citizens.
Evermore conscious of working-class issues, she moved from espousing
community feminist ideas, which begin to fade from her political vocabu-
lary, to championing the cause of exploited workers.
Jacques Garvey’s private correspondence, largely written during the
World War II period, reﬂects her intellectual evolution as a Pan-Africanist
and explains how she moved the discourse to new heights with her call for
‘‘unity.’’ By initiating dialogue with former enemies, she helped to fa-
cilitate an international network of thinkers working to achieve the goals
of black self-government, self-reliance, and self-determination. Jacques
Garvey argued that a redeemed Africa not only achieved decolonization
but also o√ered strength and protection to New World Africans wherever
they lived. Moreover, because she refused to let personal or petty di√er-
ences disrupt her work, she metamorphosed from an isolated political
woman to a group organizational woman for the Pan-African movement.
It is interesting how her intimacy with the spirit of Marcus Garvey in-
creased his emotional importance in her life and she became progressively
aware of the need for collective input and approval. With the assistance of
others, she completed major projects during the World War II period—
among them her Memorandum Correlative of Africa, the West Indies and
the Americas, a document addressed to United Nations representatives
analyzing the loopholes in the Atlantic Charter and an appeal for an
international African Freedom Charter and Council.
Jacques Garvey was a proliﬁc writer, and her voluminous output testi-
ﬁes to her passion and selﬂessness for the Pan-African cause. She seldom


--- PAGE 18 ---
introduction 5
relaxed, listening primarily to news on the radio and ‘‘read[ing] the news-
papers and magazines with pen in hand.’’∂ She was a disciplined, arduous
scholar whose objective was to fold Garveyism into existing progressive
organizations, thus uniting a divergent Pan-African movement. Viewing
herself as an authority on the Pan-African world, Jacques Garvey during
the post–World War II period included among her comrades Nnamdi
Azikiwe, W. E. B. Du Bois, Kwame Nkrumah, and George Padmore.
Amy Jacques Garvey’s ﬁfty-four years of activism demonstrate the
complexity and conditions of a progressive female radical, as well as the
limitations of conventional labels to describe her political participation.
Her activism ﬁlled every aspect of her life, and when each historical
moment brought new challenges, her supple mind adapted. Thus she
could metamorphose from community feminist to organizational woman
when conditions dictated yet another role in the struggle for liberation.
Her political trajectory was vast, and she thought and wrote about many
issues, always tying her ideas to a Pan-African theme, even when they were
not in vogue or elicited ill will.
Jacques Garvey’s skills were remarkable, and her grasp of international
politics outclassed many renowned intellectuals of her day. Her theo-
ries about women as leaders and helpmates are noteworthy not only in
the black radical tradition, but also in early twentieth-century feminist
thought. As both a community feminist and an organizational leader, she
served as journalist and editor, rallied support on behalf of Marcus Gar-
vey, gave numerous public speeches, and managed unia a√airs. As a
female Pan-Africanist, she was not simply a symbol for the movement,
but an active participant with ﬂuid political ideas who refused to be
silenced or manipulated.
Amy Jacques Garvey’s activism represents the crossroads of many im-
portant historical moments in Europe, Jamaica, the United States, and
West Africa, and her mind-set positioned her at the intersection of a
distinctive type of feminism and nationalism. Her biography and her
ideas remain impressive and important because they demonstrate how
these historical movements rigorously critiqued racism, colonialism, and
imperialism throughout the world.


--- PAGE 19 ---
1 The Formative Years, 1895–1917
L
ittle is known about the early life of Amy Jacques Garvey—the
woman who became not only the second wife of Marcus Garvey
but also a prominent Pan-African activist and intellectual in her
own right and, for a time, the uno≈cial leader of the worldwide
Universal Negro Improvement Association and African (Impe-
rial) Communities League (subsequently referred to as the unia). But the
scant information available—especially in terms of racial/color attitudes
and class—is important because these complex issues were crucial in
Jamaican society and undoubtedly inﬂuenced Amy Jacques’s formative
years as a member of the ‘‘brown’’ middle/upper class. T wo other factors
seem to have also been signiﬁcant but less typical: her formal schooling
and her role in the family. Thus, though we do not have much informa-
tion on Jacques’s upbringing, it is important to underscore what we do
know, since it gives us some thin threads that were woven into the tapestry
of her later life, sometimes in surprising ways.
Amy Jacques never described the island of her birth, Jamaica, as a
tourist paradise. She did not share memories of visiting the North Coast
(Montego Bay), where the blue-green water is serene and hummingbirds
abound. Nor did she write about the sun warming her ‘‘brown’’ face or
describe walking through the countryside or playing in waterfalls. The
girlhood recollections found in her essays and interviews are limited to a
few vivid accounts of how her father, George Samuel Jacques, challenged
her intellectually and prepared her for adult responsibilities. In hindsight,
she gives the impression that her childhood was ﬁlled with serious duties;
other than private piano lessons, her social engagements—whether festive
or formal—were apparently so few that she elected not to mention them.
And evidence to the contrary has not yet surfaced, despite the fact that the
island o√ered a variety of amusements.
∞ Though it is di≈cult to draw
many conclusions from such sketchy remembrances, it is important to


--- PAGE 20 ---
the formative years 7
glean what we can from the record of Amy’s early life in Jamaica, because
it was there that she blossomed into a bright, cultured young woman—
one in whom both her parents would take pride. What neither could have
anticipated was that she would ultimately be transﬁgured, after living in
the United States, from a typical debutante into a disciplined Pan-African
thinker and leader.
Amy was born on 31 December 1895 in Jamaica’s capital city of Kings-
ton, the heart of the island’s commercial, industrial, and professional life.
≤
Horse-drawn wagons and carriages still roamed the poorly paved streets,
but the loud cable cars gave this otherwise tranquil place a citiﬁed air. The
geographic beauty and amply stocked stores attracted sophisticated ur-
banites to this seaport. The wealth of Kingston was largely generated by
black workers, and, to some observers, women were the most visible
laborers. Edgar Mayhem Bacon, who visited the island in 1890, reported
that ‘‘women are the workers among the blacks in the neighborhood of
Kingston. They carry the coal on the wharves, load and unload vessels,
drive donkeys and mules with produce, break stones on the road, carry
stone and other building material for house builders, wash, bake, dig in
the ﬁelds.’’
≥
As was the case in most colonized communities, black labor over-
whelmingly beneﬁted elite Europeans, and Amy’s own lineage was deeply
rooted in an upper-class British heritage. Her great-great-grandfather,
John Jaques or Jacques, had been the ﬁrst mayor of Kingston.
∂ (Only
prosperous European men could participate in the political process and
hold public o≈ce.)
∑ As mayor, John Jaques was one of forty-seven mem-
bers of the Jamaican House of Assembly. During his tenure, and well into
the mid-nineteenth century, the assembly seems to have been shamelessly
corrupt and controlled by privileged planters who lacked ‘‘ﬁtness in char-
acter, education or morals.’’
∏
Mayor Jaques was not noted as an exceptional politician. For example,
after much debate Britain abolished the trading of Africans in 1807
(though slavery remained legal for another thirty-one years), but appar-
ently Jaques did not participate in this discussion and ultimately resigned
his assembly seat in 1812 for health reasons.
π Today, like many councillors,
Jaques is celebrated in Kingston by his namesake, Jacques Road.
There are no records of what Amy’s father, George, inherited in terms
of material wealth from his great-grandfather, John Jaques. It is clear that
he had the opportunity to receive a formal education and travel to the
United States and Cuba before accepting a managerial position at the La


--- PAGE 21 ---
8 the formative years
Paloma Cigar Factory. The tobacco trade was not a lucrative Jamaican
industry, since there was insu≈cient proﬁt to entice planters to manufac-
ture cigars and cigarettes as compared to sugar, co√ee, cocoa, and ba-
nanas. Planters also resisted tobacco production because it required large
growers to employ ‘‘a special manager’’ who was familiar with the Cuban
cultivation and curing process.
∫ Further, it was generally conceded that
Cubans grew a superior leaf. Nevertheless, by the early 1900s consump-
tion of Jamaican cigars in England and Germany had begun to generate a
greater demand for tobacco, and George’s employment at the cigar fac-
tory must have seemed relatively secure.
Sometime in 1891, George married Charlotte Henrietta from the par-
ish of St. Elizabeth. Charlotte’s mother was a black woman named Jane,
and her father, Frank South, was an English farmer. Like George, Char-
lotte was formally educated. With few exceptions, only members of the
capitalist elite received a higher education during this period, and be-
cause of their class status it was incumbent on both George and Charlotte
to socialize with, and ultimately marry, someone of comparable means.
George demonstrated his ﬁnancial security by purchasing seven acres of
property on Long Mountain Avenue, located in the eastern section of
Kingston where he built the family home. In addition, he bought real
estate in the Windward Road area, a popular section for the ‘‘brown’’/
colored elite on the outskirts of the city.
Ω Charlotte and George were
married for ﬁve years before the birth of their ﬁrst child. (George had
fathered children prior to his marriage, but they did not count as ‘‘legiti-
mate’’ heirs.)
∞≠ They had prayed for a son but were blessed with Amy.
Though Amy was later to serve as the archivist for the unia, she pro-
vided little documentation of her personal life before migrating to the
United States and meeting Marcus Garvey. Her reluctance to share the
details of her earlier life may be accounted for in several ways. Perhaps she
believed that it was not until she met Garvey that her life had profound
meaning. Or her decision not to fully disclose her well-to-do Jamaican
upbringing could have been tied to her need to maintain a public image of
modesty and thrift in spite of her access to wealth. Nevertheless, a look at
what it meant to be a part of the Jamaican middle/upper class in the early
twentieth century provides some clues about her girlhood.
The middle/upper class is di≈cult to deﬁne precisely in any culture or
community, because class is a relative term that is linked to the conditions
of a particular situation. In Jamaica, level of formal schooling and training
strongly inﬂuenced earning power and, therefore, class standing; how-


--- PAGE 22 ---
the formative years 9
ever, skin color was another important variable in class divisions. Amy’s
family fell in the category of—and received all the privileges accorded to—
formally educated ‘‘brown’’ Jamaicans.
The venomous seeds of the color/class system in Jamaica germinated
in the course of slavery. During that time, inhabitants were legally divided
into free (white), slave (African Caribbean), and freedmen/women (for-
mer slaves who lacked the full rights of a free person). In terms of legal
rights, political power, wealth, and prestige, the whites of Jamaica were at
the top of the hierarchy. Occupying the oppressive role of ‘‘masters,’’ they
had deﬁnite color preferences among the enslaved population; their ob-
session with pigmentation is evident by the color-coded records in all of
the slave registration returns from the British Caribbean.
∞∞ Skin color and
physical features were just as important as gender and age. Phenotype
functioned as a means to categorize enslaved people into speciﬁc occupa-
tions; later it determined treatment and labor expectations. A ranked
order, based on a racial gradation between ‘‘African’’ and ‘‘European,’’ was
ﬁrst established by the Spaniards but later adopted by the British, who
used it crudely to label individuals and ultimately to create contested
identities. Under this system, ﬂuid racial classiﬁcations were divided,
subdivided, and then diced into well-deﬁned but confusing categories:
Negro—child of a Negro and Negro
Mulatto—child of a White and Negro
Sambo—child of a Mulatto and Negro
Quadroon—child of a White and Mulatto
Mustee—child of a White and Quadroon
Mustiﬁno—child of a White and Mustee
Quintroon—child of a White and Mustiﬁno
Octoroon—child of a White and Quintroon.
∞≤
In addition to bearing the labels that were assigned them by this clas-
siﬁcation system, members of the miscegenated population (largely pro-
duced by the bodies of black women) were collectively regarded as ‘‘col-
ored’’ people. During slavery, coloreds far outnumbered Africans in
skilled trades and were underrepresented in ﬁeld gangs because they were
generally regarded by planters as more intelligent. Clearly, the ability to
think was linked to a lack of ‘‘color.’’ Everywhere in the British Caribbean,
the darkest Africans were relegated to the hardest ﬁeld work because snide
colonists linked their ancestry with savagery.
Not surprisingly, these racist and racialist attitudes toward the enslaved


--- PAGE 23 ---
10 the formative years
coloreds and Africans were passed on to the freedmen/women’s popula-
tion. There is little doubt among Caribbean slave scholars that, by and
large, freedmen/women tended to share the dominant and damaging
European cultural precepts about race; economically, they were just as
committed to slave owning as the principal route to wealth. The major-
ity of colored freedmen had inherited material wealth from their white
ancestors, and they owned ‘‘almost four times as many slaves as free
Blacks.’’
∞≥ Freed coloreds lagged behind whites in terms of ﬁnancial
wealth but were far ahead of freed blacks in terms of occupational skills,
ﬁnancial wealth, formal education, and thereby status. When slavery was
legally abolished in 1838, the glaring vestiges of the institution remained
ﬁrmly intact. This color/class system continued to be reinforced through-
out the nineteenth and well into the twentieth century.
∞∂
As a member of a well-to-do, middle-class family—and, more impor-
tantly, of a society in which race was intrinsically important to class for-
mation—Amy Jacques was proud of her light brown hue, which granted
her an assumption of di√erence, or ‘‘superiority,’’ when compared to the
black laboring classes of the island. She, like most Jamaican citizens of the
period, had no doubt internalized the Eurocentric, but very real connec-
tion between color and prestige fused during slavery. She had inherited
her mother’s genetic makeup: light brown skin and a ﬁne hair texture. In
contrast, her father was of a darker hue. Amy often credited him with her
intellectual development and apparently loved him dearly, but as the
product of an environment where individuals often prejudged others
based on appearance, she recalled how ‘‘she had been ashamed of her
father coming to school because of his dark color.’’
∞∑ Her reaction was one
of self-preservation. Physical attributes (skin color, hair type, and facial
features) could work like radar in terms of detecting one’s lineage and
evaluating that individual’s presumed manner of living. George Jacques’s
color, Amy thought, implied to her school peers that her pedigree was not
as ‘‘lightly-colored’’ as she wanted them to believe. And since women were
generally regarded as having less status than men, it was even harder for
them to escape color and class restrictions.
∞∏
Despite the fact that no legal color bar existed, scholars have docu-
mented color discrimination against dark-skinned people in employ-
ment, particularly in public service occupations. Unquestionably, class
and color were interwoven to an extent that class tensions often mani-
fested themselves as conﬂict over color.
∞π It seems that color clouded
Amy’s thinking in such a dramatic way that at times she felt uncomfort-


--- PAGE 24 ---
the formative years 11
able sharing a public space (her school) with her own father—a man who
clearly put energy into his parenting as well as providing for all of her
material needs and desires.
Racial characteristics, such as color, thus had a powerful impact on
everyday racial discourse in Jamaica; in this setting it would have been
nearly impossible for Amy to discover and embrace her ‘‘blackness.’’ But
two other features of her early upbringing may have helped to put her on
the path toward eventually becoming a Pan-African intellectual: her for-
mal education—which conﬁrmed standard ideas about race, but ironi-
cally, at the same time, gave her the intellectual tools to later challenge the
imperialist myth of European superiority—and the fact that, as a child,
she was treated ‘‘like a boy.’’
∞∫
Amy stated that she learned at an early age the signiﬁcance of an educa-
tion. Often her father would give her exercises to increase her knowledge
and develop her literary skills. ‘‘On Sundays, after dinner, he would col-
lect foreign newspapers, and I had to get a dictionary, and read the editori-
als and news items.’’ Jacques would explain events and answer all of her
questions. Sometimes he would give her an assignment to write an essay
on a news item or article. This dialectical, intergenerational exchange
provided a double-learning environment for Amy, causing her to ‘‘learn to
think independently on world a√airs and to analyze situations.’’
∞Ω
While her father challenged and stimulated her intellect at home, Amy
attended school at a time when compulsory elementary education was
nonexistent in Jamaica. Her formal instruction began at St. Patrick’s, then
continued at one of the twelve Deaconess Home Schools for boys and
girls. These Anglican schools were operated by nuns from London who
geared the curriculum toward the Cambridge Local Examinations, which
included instruction in religion, English language and literature, arith-
metic and mathematics, history, geography, music, and drill. Given that
the schools received a grant from the government, they were subject to
examination and inspection. In addition to requiring that all candidates
for admission submit testimonials of good character and conduct, Dea-
coness schools called for proof of vaccination and a medical certiﬁcate of
good health. T uition was mandatory for all pupils, and scholarships were
few and extremely competitive. Deaconess was noted for preparing Ja-
maican women to be parochial workers, nurses, and teachers.
In Jamaica, education was touted as the most e≈cient way to secure
and maintain wealth. No doubt, the pronounced inequalities of the strati-
ﬁed social order at the turn of the century were perpetuated by its educa-


--- PAGE 25 ---
12 the formative years
tional system. While the European elites sent their children to be edu-
cated in Britain and the United States, a select few from the middle/upper
stratum, many of whom were racially mixed people, sent their children to
the local secondary schools on the island. After completing her primary
schooling at the Deaconess Home School, Amy went on to the even more
prestigious Wolmers Girls’ School, which represented the essence of elite
secondary education. At that time secondary instruction in Jamaica had a
literary slant, including classes in Latin, English language and literature,
and modern languages as well as bookkeeping and shorthand. Manual
subjects were not a part of the curriculum, which prepared students for
the Cambridge Local Examinations, the External T raining College Ex-
aminations, and the Pupil T eachers’ Examinations.
≤≠
Founded in 1729, Wolmers remains the oldest existing secondary
school on the island. In 1911, while Amy was a student there, it was
comparable to a ‘‘good Girls Day school in an English town.’’ She and her
sister Ethlin attended Wolmers from 1911 to 1913.
≤∞ Because they were
enrolled together, their parents paid a slightly reduced tuition, but even
so, this fee (£8 to £6 annually) would have been a√ordable only for parents
of the middle/upper class. The Jacques girls were undoubtedly distin-
guished from their peers since only a handful of ‘‘brown’’/colored youth
had the opportunity to receive a secondary education. In fact, in 1910 only
about one-quarter of the colored population could read and write.
≤≤
In addition to providing academic skills, Wolmers acculturated its
students to adopt the essentialized values and lifestyle of the British.
Numerous testimonies by former pupils express how the school was not
just an educational institution, but a way of life. In many ways, Wolmers
provided a training ground not only for occupations but also for the social
roles individuals were expected to play as adults. One former student
stated that generations of girls had established an ‘‘uno≈cial code of
behavior’’ that could only be slightly modiﬁed. She further observed, ‘‘No
team of scientists can determine what the e√ect of that institution was on
our personalities.’’ It is impossible to accurately assess the full impact
Wolmers had on Amy Jacques in particular, but we know that her class-
mates were from the upper class, and she most likely associated with
similar peers outside of school.
≤≥ Her best friend, Leila Tomlinson (the
ﬁrst woman to receive a Jamaican scholarship to attend a British univer-
sity), also attended Wolmers. It would have been highly unusual for a
young woman with Amy’s pedigree not to think and act like the people
around her—especially since, as Etienne Balibar points out, no identity is


--- PAGE 26 ---
the formative years 13
ever acquired in isolation even though ‘‘all identity is individual.’’ More-
over, ‘‘there is no individual identity that is not historical or, in other
words, constructed within a ﬁeld of social values, norms of behavior and
collective symbols.’’
≤∂
Skin color and formal education were key markers of the Jamaican mid-
dle class, but family structure was also important, particularly in terms of
reinforcing gender-speciﬁc roles and ‘‘appropriate’’ behavior. Studies that
highlight Jamaican family conﬁgurations are primarily anthropological
and sociological in nature and center mostly on the post-1950s. These
works generally document how ﬁnancial wealth largely determined the
roles each family member played out or at least was encouraged to accept.
Though it would be ahistorical to apply these ﬁndings unhesitatingly to
the early twentieth century, aspects of these studies enable scholars to
reconstruct a ‘‘typical’’ Jamaican middle-class family structure for the time
frame encompassing Amy Jacques’s youth.
In contrast to the numerous working-class family studies, consider-
ably less is known about the socialization and variations among middle-/
upper-class families in the early twentieth century. It appears, though,
that these families modeled themselves on their British and U.S. counter-
parts. This is why, as Stuart Hall puts it, ‘‘If you live, as I’ve lived, in
Jamaica, in a lower-middle-class family that was trying to be a middle-
class Jamaican family trying to be an upper-middle-class Jamaican family
trying to be an English Victorian family,’’ your identity was grounded in
the notion of displacement.
≤∑ Essentially, well-to-do Jamaicans attempted
to replicate Victorian families, which were presumed to be ‘‘superior,’’ by
creating households that were patriarchal and nuclear.
The foundation of this household formation was based on the prevail-
ing assumption that a middle-class Jamaican woman would marry a man
with a secure economic and social position. The relationship of Amy
Jacques’s parents supports this generalized notion. George and Charlotte
were compatible mates in that his status a≈rmed his ability to maintain a
style of living that she was most likely accustomed to. Financial security
ensured a nonimpoverished home and ampliﬁed familiar choices, but it
also strengthened male dominance within the marriage. Most middle-/
upper-class women were believed to defer to masculine authority to a
greater degree than working-class women did because of their father’s or
husband’s strong earning power.
Whereas many wives evaluated their husbands in terms of their ability
to provide for the family ﬁnancially, many husbands, in turn, judged their


--- PAGE 27 ---
14 the formative years
wives based on how well they functioned as helpmates and mothers. For
young women in Jamaica, full adult status was achieved by the ‘‘rite of
passage’’ of either marriage or the birth of a child. Once a woman became
a mother, she was instrumental in the socialization of her children, par-
ticularly her daughters. Girls were feminized by following the patterns of
their mothers and other women around them. Role training began by the
age of ﬁve, primarily by learning ‘‘women’s work.’’ The major aim in the
female socializing process was ‘‘the repression of aggression and indepen-
dence.’’ Charlotte Jacques could be identiﬁed as a woman who succeeded
on these terms. In one of few statements about her, Amy describes her
mother as ‘‘soft and a goody-goody, if you know what I mean.’’
≤∏ Perhaps
she meant that Charlotte was shy and expressed herself in a genteel fash-
ion. Or, perhaps, as a housewife, she had internalized a speciﬁc type of
behavior that was displayed as meek or humble. Amy never states that she
wanted to emulate her mother’s temperament, despite the fact that it was
in keeping with an ‘‘appropriate,’’ feminine, middle-class demeanor.
Amy’s strong personality—presumably an antithesis to her mother’s—
was perhaps in part a reﬂection of her father’s displacement of his wish
for a son onto a desire to rear a strong daughter. The fact that he was ac-
tive in raising his children put him in direct contrast with most middle-
class fathers of the time. Men were believed to be inaccessible because
their work and social activities took them away from home during a
child’s waking hours. These conditions ultimately produced o√spring
who had little ‘‘experience with their fathers’ personality, values or be-
havioral traits.’’
≤π George Jacques, on the other hand, took an atypical
stance and was sincerely interested in child rearing after Amy’s birth. In
fact, Amy recalled that he trained her in the tradition ‘‘beﬁtting’’ a male
child. He exposed her not only to international a√airs but also to ‘‘male
responsibilities of handling [his] ﬁeld hands and sternly keeping the prop-
erty clear of stray cattle.’’
≤∫ Understanding that her father viewed her as a
substitute for a son, she explained that ‘‘I was brought up like a boy, you
see.’’ On another occasion she stated that ‘‘when I could walk around, he
would put me on his shoulders and trot me around the place and talk to
me as if I was a boy.’’
≤Ω Her description of their interaction is noteworthy
because Amy viewed her father’s attitude toward her in socially con-
structed, gender-speciﬁc terms. Being treated as a boy seems to have
brought an element of freedom and adventure to her young life.
But a ‘‘masculinized’’ daughter was charming only as long as she re-
mained in a child’s body. Adolescence marked the period when her par-


--- PAGE 28 ---
the formative years 15
ents, most likely at the urging of her mother, became more concerned
about Amy’s cultural reﬁnement. They insisted that she study music. Amy
tried to excel, but she had ‘‘no ear for music’’ and eventually convinced her
father to let her take shorthand and typing instead. He reluctantly agreed,
cautioning that these skills were to be used only to take notes when she
entered nursing school in England. As Amy matured, it seems that her fa-
ther backpedaled from his earlier instruction and began to reinforce more
traditional ideas regarding cultural and social values. He now wanted to
ensure that her decisions were appropriate for a lady. It was not contro-
versial to expose a girl to boy activities, perhaps, but a ‘‘proper’’ young
woman’s place was very di√erent from a young man’s.
Although Jacques had socialized Amy to be self-conﬁdent and high-
achieving, he ‘‘graciously declined’’ her ﬁrst employment o√er, a ‘‘begin-
ner’s post’’ in a law ﬁrm. As a protective patriarch, he later said, ‘‘I do not
want any daughter of mine to be exposed to the wiles of men in an o≈ce.’’
Thus, even though the ﬁrst lessons that Amy learned from her father were
to ‘‘stand on her own’’ and ‘‘never be afraid of men,’’ as she came of age he
did not want her to be in an unsupervised setting with mixed company.
By her own report, she learned to negotiate her father’s colliding messages
to his satisfaction, and she proudly stated that ‘‘the biggest inﬂuence in my
life was my father.’’
≥≠
Soon after Amy ﬁnished at Wolmers Girls’ School, she and her family
were forced to reckon with the tragic death of her father, who died from a
stroke on 3 August 1913 at their residence, Jacques Villa, on Long Moun-
tain Road. On 16 August, in keeping with middle-/upper-class etiquette,
the Jacques publicly thanked family and friends in the Daily Gleaner—the
newspaper read by all of high society—for the expressions of sympathy
during their bereavement. And on 23 August, Charlotte began proceed-
ings to ﬁle her husband’s last will and testament with the local records
o≈ce. He had bequeathed to all of his ‘‘lawful children,’’ Amy Euphemia,
Ethlin Maud, Cleveland Augustas, Ida Chole, and Joscelyn Samuel, ‘‘all
of my properties real and personal: provided that all monies in the banks
remaining with all interest accruing be divided by giving to each when
twenty-one a quota of one ﬁfth and each child after receiving its claims
shall not have any further claim in any remaining divided.’’
≥∞
Jacques had added the stipulation that his wife serve as the ‘‘sole execu-
trine’’ of his will and that all rents collected from the properties be ‘‘used
by her for the maintenance of the children and to repair and build upon
these premises as the executrine thinks ﬁt and desirous (without the con-


--- PAGE 29 ---
16 the formative years
sent of the children).’’≥≤ Perhaps he included this clause concerning his
‘‘lawful’’ children because he was aware of his wife’s ‘‘soft’’ demeanor, as
noted by both Amy and her sister Ida, and feared that the children would
squabble and take liberties with the property. But however meek Char-
lotte appeared to her daughters, the will conﬁrmed George’s faith in her
ability to oversee the household.
Though Charlotte was the legal executive, Amy took over as the head
of the family. She continued to stress the importance of a formal educa-
tion to her younger siblings and made sure that they all attended ﬁne
secondary schools. The following year her family’s personal solicitor, T. R.
MacMillian of Kingston, suggested to Charlotte that Amy work in his
o≈ce as a clerk to better facilitate the management of their estate. Her
mother may have had some reservations about her working outside the
home, but she did not have the puissant inﬂuence over her daughter that
her husband had had. No longer having a protective father to prohibit it,
Amy accepted the o√er. Her earlier private lessons in shorthand and
typing enabled her to perform her duties quite well. In fact, MacMillian
was so impressed that he encouraged Amy to become a lawyer, and her
sister Ida believed that she could have been the ﬁrst female attorney
in Jamaica.
As she worked in MacMillian’s chambers, Jacques su√ered chronic
health problems due to recurring bouts of malaria. All around the island
undrained mosquito-breeding swamps generated the optimum condi-
tions for transmission, which resulted in epidemics in spite of quinine
treatments. There are many clinical variations of malarial fevers; uncom-
plicated malarial symptoms include headache, sudden chills, shivering,
high fever, vomiting, shallow breathing, and muscle aches and pains. In
Jamaica, however, a severer form, Plasmodium falciparum, was responsi-
ble for high malaria mortality. Ida recalled that Amy would ‘‘faint’’ in the
MacMillian o≈ce due to her sickness. Fainting could have been a sign of
comatose malaria, a form that resembled apoplexy or sunstroke. Also,
‘‘sudden collapse’’ could have been a reaction to a falciparum infection.
Amy’s physician no doubt informed her that malaria transmission did not
occur at temperatures below 16 degrees centigrade and, more importantly,
that every variety of malaria, with all of its consequences, ‘‘may be con-
sidered as cured after the patient has lived in a malaria-free country for
some years.’’
≥≥ Clearly, her condition dictated that she seek relief in a
cooler climate.
After four years (1913–17) in the MacMillian o≈ce, Amy Jacques left


--- PAGE 30 ---
the formative years 17
the island of her birth. World War I prevented her from considering
England as a destination, since most shipping lines were refusing women
passengers due to submarine warfare.
≥∂ These circumstances caused her to
decide on Harlem, New York, where a well-established African Caribbean
population existed.
Departing any Caribbean island legally could easily turn into a bu-
reaucratic nightmare. The Jamaican Gazette, a popular newspaper that
printed information on immigration procedures, indicated that all trav-
elers would have to ‘‘convince the consular authorities of the necessity of
taking such a journey before they were granted an American Visa.’’ In
addition, all Jamaicans had to ‘‘satisfy the requirements of the U.S. Con-
sul at the port of departure.’’ A legal sponsor in the United States also had
to be identiﬁed. Charlotte Jacques had relatives in America, but Amy
could not stay with them because ‘‘they all passed as white.’’
≥∑ Although
she o√ers no further comments on her relatives ‘‘passing,’’ unquestionably
her presence would have called into question their racial ‘‘purity,’’ auto-
matically disqualifying them to claims—and the economic, social, politi-
cal, and legal privileges—of a white identity. She therefore had to look
elsewhere for a sponsor. Since the legal process was so cumbersome, it was
not unusual to have someone masquerade as a relative. Mrs. Lilly Francis,
a resident of New York City, agreed to pose as Amy’s ‘‘sister.’’
≥∏ Finally,
with all of her paperwork in order, Amy packed her bags and prepared for
the voyage.
This was a very emotional time in the Jacques household. Amy’s
mother ‘‘was so upset that she had a conference with [their] minister and
lawyer in hopes to dissuade [her].’’ They all agreed that America ‘‘was no
place for [her] type.’’ Although concerned about Amy’s sickness, Char-
lotte resisted the trip partly because honorable women seldom traveled by
themselves, and she did not even want to imagine Amy living alone in the
United States. Indeed, her daughter’s boldness frightened her. But Amy
had the self-conﬁdence needed to venture into another territory. As a
young girl she had become empowered by her father’s early teachings to
look beyond prevailing gender-speciﬁc constraints. As a strong-willed
young woman, she was convinced that she could take care of herself and
maintain her respectability in New York City. Nevertheless, to appease
her mother she promised to return home in ‘‘three months if conditions
were unbearable.’’
≥π


--- PAGE 31 ---
2 Amy Jacques and the unia
O
n 21 April 1917 Amy Jacques boarded the SS Carrilo in
Kingston Harbor and set sail for New York City. The
ticket cost at least $65, but the expense was not a major
issue for her: at the age of twenty-one she had inherited
money from her father’s estate and had saved her earn-
ings from her secretarial job over the previous four years.
∞
One of approximately 160 passengers, she sailed unaccompanied to a
land that was, according to her father’s description, ‘‘one mixed of oppor-
tunity and restrictions.’’
≤ She was undoubtedly ﬁlled with anxiety about
the trip itself, since at that time ship travel was very rough, and the
accommodations were deplorable. Yet New York City would provide the
cool climate and refuge that she so desperately needed to end her repeated
bouts of malaria. Still, she must have felt nervous about living away from
her nuclear family for the ﬁrst time in her life.
After ﬁve days at sea, the ship docked safely. Though the sky was
overcast and the air was cool, the dreariness of the day would not have
tempered Jacques’s excitement on arriving at Ellis Island. Here she faced
her ﬁrst hurdle as an immigrant. For years Ellis Island had been a symbol
of opportunity, but the Immigration Act of 1917, the ﬁrst in a series that
favored national groups thought to be more ‘‘assimilable,’’ had already
stiﬂed the hopes of many newcomers. Everyone over age sixteen had to
pass a literacy test, and all had to undergo a stringent and too-often-
humiliating medical examination to determine if they had a contagious
disease. But Jacques met both requirements and was subsequently re-
leased to Mrs. Lilly Francis, who was posing as her sister. Francis gave
o≈cials her name and address and agreed to assume full ﬁnancial respon-
sibility for Jacques. Participating in this charade may have been easy for
Francis, since she was well aware of Jacques’s status in Jamaica and had to
know about her resourcefulness. In addition to managing her family’s


--- PAGE 32 ---
amy jacques &  the unia 19
ﬁnancial a√airs after her father died and working as a secretary, Jacques’s
take-charge personality no doubt a≈rmed to others that she could pro-
vide for herself.
≥
Although we can make these assumptions with reasonable conﬁdence,
Jacques said little about her life in America between 1917 and 1919. Several
interviews report merely that she went to the United States for ‘‘additional
education’’ or because she was ‘‘restless’’ and desired to travel (and Europe
was not an option during wartime).
∂ Moreover, although her bouts with
malaria are well documented, Jacques herself never mentioned this as the
reason for her move, nor did she indicate how or where she lived in New
York before meeting Marcus Garvey. Locating Jacques is further compli-
cated by the fact that racial and gender hierarchies placed her at the
margins of organizational and normative structures. Cheryl Harris con-
tends that any intervention by a black woman was ‘‘subject to be over-
looked, misheard, misinterpreted, misrepresented and ultimately mis-
appropriated.’’
∑ Thus, what appears to be a deﬁciency of information
about Jacques in particular was actually the case for most black women.
That is, under these conditions it was di≈cult to be known via public
records. Essentially, one can speculate about Jacques’s life only by con-
textualizing and drawing conclusions from the few tidbits of information
that she did share.
We do know that her arrival in the United States coincided with the
peak period (1911–24) of black emigration from the English-speaking
Caribbean islands.
∏ Between 1899 and 1937 approximately 150,000 black
immigrants were legally admitted, making them the largest group of black
people who migrated voluntarily to the United States.
π Poverty (a series of
devastating hurricanes between 1910 and 1921 ravaged the agricultural
economy of the islands), lack of access to postsecondary education, and
limited professional opportunities in Jamaica all prompted migration.
Generally, it was easier to secure a visa if one had access to ﬁnancial
resources; thus, the vast majority of immigrants were literate, skilled, and
ambitious. Many of them were men (from 1911 to 1915, 126 males arrived
for every 100 females, but the ratio dwindled to 96–100 from 1916 to
1920). They were young and unmarried (3 out of 4 were between 14 and
44 years old, and 2 out of 3 were unmarried), and, by and large, their
fathers’ occupations identiﬁed them as middle class.
∫
Jacques’s ﬁrst two years in the United States obviously changed the
direction of her life—an experience shared by other black immigrants at
the time. The entry of the United States into World War I had provided


--- PAGE 33 ---
20 amy jacques &  the unia
an opportunity for both American and Caribbean black people to leave
their place of birth and move to northern cities. The war initially created
an economic boom for the United States, and with the lessening of Euro-
pean immigration, black people were o√ered work to ﬁll the void in the
labor market.
Ω Once they settled in the North, however, African Ameri-
can migrants and African Caribbean immigrants were restricted to low-
wage occupations and were forced to live in segregated, overcrowded
residential areas with high rents and poor sanitation. The newly emergent
northern ‘‘ghettos’’ became characteristic of black life.
These stressful conditions radicalized many Caribbean immigrants
who presumably would not have engaged in ‘‘race’’ or ‘‘class’’ activism in
their native countries. For the ﬁrst time, numerous African Caribbean
people found themselves cast in the role of a ‘‘racial minority’’ and had to
su√er the indignities that resulted from that status.
∞≠ This spurred many
to political action. Caribbean immigrants who became the forerunners of
black reform during this period included W. A. Domingo, Hubert Har-
rison, Cyril Briggs, and, of course, Marcus Garvey.
It is impossible to ascertain the direct impact these historical events
had on Amy Jacques, but her volunteer participation in the Universal
Negro Improvement Association (unia) had to be the last stop in a series
of adjustments, some of which we can only guess at. For example, it is
unclear if she actually lived with Lilly Francis at her home on West 134th
Street in the heart of black Harlem or if Francis simply identiﬁed herself as
a sponsor for the immigration o≈cials. Jacques’s sister Ida, who was still in
Jamaica at this time, recalls that Amy had actually arranged to stay with
their cousins, the Graves. If Jacques did not live with Francis or the Grave
family, she most likely resided with another African Caribbean family. It
would have been highly unusual for her to live in an apartment on her
own, since most single black people, whether Caribbean or American,
stayed with a family or in a rooming house.
∞∞
Even though Jacques was not ﬁnancially desperate, as were many Euro-
pean immigrants, and the foreign currency exchange rate favored the
Jamaican/British pound over the dollar, her personal drive and intel-
ligence would eventually have led her to ﬁnd some form of employment.
No doubt, her search quickly disclosed the harsh realities of racism in the
United States. Black women were almost exclusively limited to menial
jobs, regardless of their skills. Even college graduates often found them-
selves working in a service occupation at various times throughout the
year. Essentially, ‘‘black women’s work,’’ regardless of whether one was


--- PAGE 34 ---
amy jacques &  the unia 21
native-born or from the Caribbean, ‘‘was synonymous with domestic
service’’; thus, Jacques would have been an exception if she had found a
job that did not relegate her to domestic service or another low-paying
occupation.
∞≤ At best, she might have convinced a respected commu-
nity member to vouch for her character, which could have paved the way
for a black-owned business to hire her, since she could easily pass any
typing test.
The majority of African Caribbean women who trekked to the United
States in the early twentieth century sought work; only a smattering came
speciﬁcally to study. In a 1964 interview Jacques reported that she had
wanted to attend college, but she did not indicate that she ever enrolled,
and the 1920 U.S. census conﬁrms that she had not attended any school
since September 1919.
∞≥ For whatever reason, her desire to expand her
formal education in an institutional setting was apparently never fulﬁlled.
Amy Jacques was fortunate that Harlem had a well-established Carib-
bean community; nonetheless, for recent immigrants there was no place
like their homeland. Although the United States o√ered many material
comforts, these could not replace the comradeship that the newcomers
had previously known or eradicate their feelings of alienation. Joyce
Toney points out that one adaptive mechanism for Caribbean immi-
grants was to ‘‘look for esteem in the societies they left behind.’’
∞∂ Though
Jacques makes no reference to an involvement in any social or political
organization prior to the unia, she undoubtedly had access to a number
of associations that would remind her of home.
Groups such as the West Indian Committee on America, Foreign-Born
Citizens Alliance, West Indian Reform Association, British Jamaicans
Benevolent Association, or American West Indian Ladies Aid Society—a
likely group for Jacques, since Caribbean women ‘‘tend to ﬂock to each
other for their social life’’—were all possible sites for fellowship. These
benevolent organizations, with their elite underpinnings, provided both
charitable services and social activities, and members often established
lifelong friendships. Carol Boyce Davies has shown that societies are a
response to the ‘‘exile’’ felt by migrants, who ‘‘demand the creation of new
communities with new relationships to those homelands.’’
∞∑ A longing to
reconnect to home could have spurred Jacques to attend a function or a
meeting, but if she did they seemingly had no lasting meaning for her, as
she does not mention them in her writings.
Less formal interaction was more characteristic of Caribbean women’s
daily lives. For example, for Paule Marshall’s mother, who migrated to


--- PAGE 35 ---
22 amy jacques &  the unia
New York from Barbados following World War I, social life ‘‘consisted
mainly of sitting around the kitchen table after their return from work
each day and talking. Endlessly talking.’’ Much of their talk centered
around holding onto ‘‘the memories that deﬁned them,’’ the people and
events at home. ‘‘It was clearly an e√ort on their part,’’ Marshall points
out, ‘‘to retain their cultural identity amidst the perplexing newness of
America.’’
∞∏
The likelihood that Jacques established meaningful connections with
African Americans is even harder to imagine. Cross-cultural friendships
were di≈cult to forge because stereotypes and prejudices adversely af-
fected social relations between African Americans and African Caribbean
people. Economic competition and cultural di√erences produced obsta-
cles between the two groups that too often resulted in mutual suspicion
and tension.
African Americans often described islanders as overly aggressive, arro-
gant, and clannish; islanders identiﬁed native-born black people as lack-
ing ambition and self-conﬁdence and possessing a radical edge. As a child,
Paule Marshall observed how ‘‘the West Indian woman’’ during this pe-
riod ‘‘considered herself both di√erent and somehow superior’’ to the
African American woman. The distance that Caribbean women sought
to place between themselves and African American women was rein-
forced by the dominant culture, ‘‘which often praised them [the Ca-
ribbean women] for being more reliable, trustworthy and hard work-
ing.’’
∞π Cultural di√erences were so vast that people from the same island
tended to associate only with one another; they often expressed an aliena-
tion from all African Americans and sought to escape any identiﬁcation
with them.
∞∫
Though it is tempting to speculate about Jacques’s activities between
the day she checked out of Ellis Island and the day she entered the unia,
the fact is that she elected to keep her personal memories to herself. What
is veriﬁable is that she was drawn to the unia when it was already a
formidable organization. Jacques claims that she had heard conﬂicting
reports about the organization and that its purpose was unclear. Nor did
she understand what Marcus Garvey, whom she had ﬁrst met in Jamaica
in 1913, intended to do. Out of curiosity, she went one Sunday night in the
summer of 1919 to the newly purchased Liberty Hall, a ‘‘low-roofed, hot,
zinc-covered’’ former Baptist church that held six thousand people, at
138th Street in Harlem where the meetings took place.
∞Ω The thirty-ﬁve-


--- PAGE 36 ---
amy jacques &  the unia 23
cent admission charge included not only speeches and debates but upscale
musical performances and poetic renditions as well. After the session she
approached Garvey to congratulate him on his inspiring talk and ask him
about the many issues he had failed to explore. She told him that not only
did she want to be convinced that he was correct, but also to have the
opportunity to argue her convictions. His answers, however, generated
more questions, so they agreed to meet at his o≈ce, where they would
have more time to converse. At the o≈ce, he showed her around and
asked her opinion of it. She frankly told him that he needed a daily
reporting system so that he would be able to track the unia activities and
calculate the amount of money they generated. Garvey was impressed
with her suggestions and after much pleading on his part, she accepted a
secretarial position.
≤≠
Amy Jacques’s description of her initial meeting with Garvey is some-
what surprising if not downright hard to believe. She claims that at Lib-
erty Hall that ﬁrst night she was able to challenge him on points that he
did not cover in his speech, implying that she was well versed on diasporic
issues. She also opted to question Garvey afterward, face-to-face, instead
of addressing her concerns to the entire audience.
Her account of their conversation raises many questions. For example,
why would Garvey invite an unknown, inquisitive woman to his o≈ce,
when there was a host of unia o≈cers whom he could direct to answer her
questions? Why would Jacques put so much energy into wanting to be
convinced that Garvey’s ideas were right when she believed that her own
convictions were just as valid? We need to bear in mind that this is her ac-
count, not Garvey’s, and that she gave it for public consumption twenty-
six years after his death. Amy Jacques, like many individuals, chose to
remember and emphasize what she felt was essential—and perhaps what
showed her in the best light. She dwells on the fact that Garvey was
captivated by her sharp mind, her e≈ciency, and her willingness to chal-
lenge and criticize his ideas. No feminine charms are hinted at; Garvey
apparently admired her solely for her intelligence.
Another problematic version of how Jacques came both to learn about
and to enter unia’s headquarters is o√ered by Amy Ashwood. A cofounder
of the unia, Ashwood claims that the two women were friends in Ja-
maica. It was in Jacques’s birthplace, Kingston, that Ashwood and Garvey
‘‘planned a great Black Confraternity, under our own vine and ﬁg tree in
our own Africa’’ in early July 1914. The two were serious about their


--- PAGE 37 ---
24 amy jacques &  the unia
mission; Ashwood later described their commitment as a ‘‘bond of com-
radeship based upon a common ideal and belief, directed to a common
goal.’’
≤∞ The objectives of their new organization were:
To Establish a Universal Confraternity among the Race.
To Promote the Spirit of Race Pride and Love.
To Reclaim th[e] Fallen of the Race.
To Administer to, and help the Needy.
To Assist in Civilizing the Backward tribes of Africa.
To Strengthen the Imperialism of Bas[u]toland, Liberia, etc.
To Establish [C]ommissioners in the Principal Countries of the
world, for the Protection of all Negroes, Irrespective of
Nationality.
To Promote a Conscientious Christian Workshop among the Native
T ribes of Africa.
To Establish Universities and Colleges and Secondary Schools for the
Further Education and Culture of our Boys and Girls.
≤≤
Despite these published goals, the Daily Gleaner reported on 14 Sep-
tember 1914 that the object of this ‘‘New Society’’ was ‘‘to improve the
elocutionary and literary tastes of the youth of our community,’’ along
with doing social and charitable work. unia meetings and activities in
Jamaica thus resembled those of any other ‘‘society’’ at the turn of the
century. They raised funds to feed the poor of Kingston on Christmas
Day and distributed ﬂowers at hospitals.
≤≥
Although she makes no mention of it in later interviews, Amy Jacques
may have heard about the unia through the middle-class grapevine. Ash-
wood’s father was a successful caterer, and seventeen-year-old Amy was a
recent graduate of the prestigious Westwood High School. No doubt her
public association with the likes of Marcus Garvey was considered scan-
dalous. Ashwood’s mother did not approve, and even Garvey admitted
that he had ‘‘some terrible experience[s]’’ with Mrs. Ashwood.
≤∂ To be
sure, although Garvey was educated and had traveled abroad, he was
already twenty-seven years old, and, though not a ru≈an, he was poor.
Despite the fact that Garvey had his eyes on the elites, Ashwood’s parents
might have been concerned that he was using their daughter to gain access
to their respectable middle-class circle to further his schemes. Whatever
their particular concerns, Garvey was far from a prime catch for any
young woman outside the Jamaican working class.
Reports of unia activities in the Gleaner or the Daily Chronicle, where


--- PAGE 38 ---
amy jacques &  the unia 25
Garvey appealed for elite support, may have also caught Jacques’s eye.
Garvey believed that ‘‘the intelligent must lead and assist the unfortunate
of the people to rise.’’ But most middle- and upper-class colored and
‘‘brown’’ Jamaicans were not interested in an organization that embraced
and celebrated a black identity. Jacques, for example, was proud of her
‘‘brown’’ family and was ﬁnancially well o√ herself; why would she want
to be connected with a group that challenged the values of her own circle?
Surely her mother would have disapproved of any organization that
would arouse suspicion, and as an unmarried woman Jacques would not
have wanted to be caught hobnobbing with ‘‘ordinary members of the
association,’’ men who closely resembled her father’s former ﬁeld hands.
≤∑
She deﬁnitely would not have wanted to give anyone the impression that
she undervalued her own worth.
Any a≈liation with an organization that might question the founda-
tion of her status would almost certainly have been shunned by Jacques
and her peers. Financial wealth was the basis of this position, but ‘‘color’’
was at least as important a determinant of one’s place in Jamaican society,
as the contrast between Amy Jacques and Amy Ashwood illustrates. Ash-
wood’s family was lower middle class, but her experiences were very dif-
ferent from Jacques’s because Ashwood’s genealogical roots were not col-
ored. Ashwood’s response to this was to take pride in her Ashanti heritage;
her biographer, Lionel Yard, comments that ‘‘being dark’’ positioned Ash-
wood to be part of ‘‘the avant garde of a new social element that refused to
accept the color lines of the older generation.’’ This is undoubtedly at least
part of the reason why Ashwood cofounded an association that, ﬁrst and
foremost, did not view dark skin as o√ensive but regarded it as an indica-
tion of an honorable lineage and beauty. The unia appealed to dark-
skinned middle-class Jamaicans at a time when other comparable associa-
tions denied them membership. According to Ashwood, she moved to
New York in October 1918, and it was in Harlem that she learned that
Jacques needed lodging. Because of their prior friendship, Ashwood in-
vited Jacques to move into the apartment that she shared with her father
at 552 Lenox Avenue. Jacques accepted the o√er, Ashwood claims, but did
not develop an interest in any black movement.
≤∏
Meanwhile, Ashwood herself was continuing to raise funds for the
unia, now headquartered in Harlem. Garvey had settled in New York in
March 1916, and Ashwood reports that by the time he left the island,
many individuals had visited the debates and enjoyed the musical per-
formances, but only about one hundred people had become active mem-


--- PAGE 39 ---
26 amy jacques &  the unia
bers. Moreover, Garvey was swimming in debt, and his contributors were
clamoring for an accounting of the organization’s funds. In New York,
however, the unia began a new course when Garvey became one of Har-
lem’s most exciting step-ladder orators. His commanding voice could be
heard several blocks away. More important, though, was his message,
which struck a chord with disgruntled Harlemites who had been disap-
pointed in black leadership. Garvey convincingly argued that it was not
‘‘humanity that was lynched, burned, jim-crowed and segregated, but
Negro people.’’ No longer was the unia a mere society pledged to uplift
the poor and unreﬁned; it was now a political organization committed to
a Pan-African nationalist ideology. In Harlem Ashwood and Garvey once
again worked as a team to increase support for the unia.
≤π
All of this activity left Ashwood feeling overwhelmed by her unia
duties. On top of that, in November 1919 she and Garvey began planning
an elaborate wedding for Christmas Day. In need of a personal assistant,
Ashwood believed that she had now spent enough time with Jacques to
know that she had good secretarial skills, so she o√ered her the position.
Ashwood claims that she considered Jacques a good friend and antici-
pated that after the wedding she would be able to take over Ashwood’s
own role as one of the unia associate secretaries. According to Ashwood’s
biographer, at this point Amy Jacques was not knowledgeable about ‘‘the
African past,’’ nor was she a Garveyite, ‘‘but she was keen enough to sense
the economic importance of the organization and the important segment
of the power structure occupied’’ by Ashwood. Jacques was attractive and
intelligent, he continued, ‘‘but [had] never had the opportunity to gain
much recognition nor to wield the power which she saw with amazement
was in the position for which Amy [Ashwood] was grooming her.’’
≤∫
There is something persuasive in the idea that Jacques entered the
organization in a position of inﬂuence. Being a secretary for the head-
quarters would have been a comfortable role for her, giving her an oppor-
tunity to express a range of talents that were in keeping with her middle-
class training. Further, the post would not challenge the class structure of
her Caribbean upbringing, since she did not have to fraternize with the
working-class rank-and-ﬁle membership. Instead, her secretarial duties
gave her access to the privileged leadership, replicating, to a degree, the
people with whom she expected to associate. And, since the New York
branch of the unia had many West Indian members, Jacques might have
initially believed that she was joining a basically West Indian nationalist
organization, as opposed to a Pan-African movement.
≤Ω This mind-set


--- PAGE 40 ---
amy jacques &  the unia 27
made her unia membership not a major leap but one that kept her tied to
the class structure and cultural home of the Caribbean.
The precise conditions under which Amy Jacques initially became
a≈liated with the unia are now beyond retrieval. Jacques denied that she
and Ashwood were acquaintances in Jamaica, and she gave the impression
that Ashwood had no inﬂuence over her decision to attend a unia meet-
ing. It is di≈cult to reconstruct the two women’s early relationship be-
cause of the animosity that later developed between them; no doubt, their
mutual ill feelings tainted their perceptions of earlier events. But their
interaction, whatever its particulars, is signiﬁcant, because it sets the stage
for deﬁning the social roles that were deemed suitable for women in the
movement and the possible repercussions if one went against the grain.
There is no reliable evidence that Jacques actually lived with Ashwood
before her ﬁrst unia meeting.
≥≠ However, though Jacques refused to ac-
knowledge any prior friendship with her future foe, more than three
thousand people witnessed her standing by Ashwood as the maid of
honor at her wedding to Marcus Garvey on the evening of 25 December
1919 at Liberty Hall. Five ministers assisting at this grand Roman Catholic
service, and the pageantry-ﬁlled event was the talk of Harlem.
≥∞ One can
easily imagine Garvey dressed in his ceremonial regalia—a dark military
suit adorned with unia badges, brass buttons, and tassels, set o√ by his
legendary plumed chapeau—and Ashwood cloaked in an elaborate white
gown, her hair styled fashionably. Despite the fact that years later Jacques
distanced herself from the possibility of any sisterly relationship with
Ashwood, her role at the wedding substantiates the fact—or at least sub-
stantiates the appearance—that she and Ashwood were once close.
The Garveys’ two-week honeymoon was not traditional in that they
shared this intimate occasion with unia friends, including Jacques. The
newlyweds’ trip to Canada had a dual purpose: to celebrate the beginning
of their life as husband and wife and to negotiate unia business in Mon-
treal and Toronto. By January 1920 the unia had emerged as one of the
largest black organizations in the United States, and its considerable in-
ternational membership further distinguished it from others. Marcus
Garvey was slowly becoming the king on a neoteric throne, largely be-
cause of his ability to capitalize on the broken promises and injustices of
the post–World War I period in the United States. Countless black men
and women had begun adopting a militant stance and demonstrating
against racial injustices in an unprecedented fashion. The ‘‘New Negro’’
was symbolized by the overt expressions of self-defense and a deep frustra-


--- PAGE 41 ---
28 amy jacques &  the unia
Photograph of Marcus Garvey, founder of the Universal Negro Improvement
Association, taken on his wedding day in 1919. Photographer unknown. Schomburg
Center for Research in Black Culture.
tion with the status quo. Between June and December 1919 there were at
least twenty-six race riots in urban cities. A life-a≈rming racial conscious-
ness had taken hold, which in turn stimulated an optimal climate for a
Pan-African movement. Garvey responded by shifting the unia ideology
to include the ‘‘development of Independent Negro Nations and Com-
munities.’’
≥≤ He was the president-general of the organization, but his
new wife was a good fund-raiser and also in demand. Their Canada trip
was essentially a working honeymoon, and Amy Jacques was one of sev-
eral traveling secretaries who accompanied them.


--- PAGE 42 ---
amy jacques &  the unia 29
After the couple returned to New York, Garvey moved into his wife’s
apartment. Ashwood must not have had any reservations about Jacques at
this point, because Amy continued to live there as well. ≥≥ In addition,
two men—Ashwood’s brother Claudius and Alonso Roberts—also shared
these living quarters. (Almost every household in this black working-class
neighborhood had lodgers.)
≥∂ Apparently these accommodations proved
too cramped for Ashwood’s father, who had moved out by January 1920.
The Garveys experienced only a few months of marital bliss. Ashwood
writes: ‘‘In the full glare of the limelight the Marcus Garvey I knew
receded into the shadows. The public ﬁgure Garvey took his place, and we
found we were unable to continue the old partnership.’’
≥∑ Certainly Gar-
vey would not have been the ﬁrst man to change under the pressure of
leadership. It seems, though, that what happened was not so much a
transformation of the man as a transformation of his expectations of
Ashwood. It was one thing to be Garvey’s cofounder and ﬁancée, but it
was another to be his wife. He demanded that Ashwood function in a way
that she had never done before their marriage—to subdue her public
persona and support him in all of his undertakings, questioning neither
his political nor his business decisions. Jacques recalls him saying that he
‘‘must have her [Ashwood’s] sympathy and understanding of every action
of mine.’’
≥∏
Despite his progressive political views, Marcus Garvey was in some
respects very traditional, and his Jamaican upbringing stipulated that
wives were to be compromising helpmates. He described his mother as a
‘‘soft and good’’ woman who ‘‘always returned a smile for a blow.’’
≥π
Although Garvey was critical of his father’s maltreatment of his mother,
he believed that women should be self-sacriﬁcing and supportive, a stan-
dard he set for his own spouse and all unia wives. In fact, gender-speciﬁc
roles have had a long history in black intellectual traditions. Paul Gilroy
has pointed out that Martin Delany was the ﬁrst black intellectual to
argue that masculine power was fundamental to nationalist doctrine and
that women were to be educated exclusively for motherhood. The idea
that a ‘‘supreme patriarch’’ was needed for the ‘‘integrity of the race’’ has
since become something of a mantra for black nationalist thought.
≥∫ For
his part, Garvey argued that his male-centered nation beneﬁted women
because it allowed them the opportunity to develop their God-given
talents: making the home a haven of comfort and nurturing children, the
future generation.
In theory, Ashwood did not oppose this premise and had been raised in


--- PAGE 43 ---
30 amy jacques &  the unia
a comparable environment, but she represented a new generation of black
women and it was against her nature to submit totally. She had a mind of
her own and refused to accommodate Garvey’s every need. Ashwood was
a free spirit, and her lifestyle resembled that of a few other women in
America who were experiencing a taste of liberation during the Roaring
T wenties. This wife frequently consumed alcohol in public and appar-
ently never terminated her close friendships with other men.
≥Ω
Because Garvey could not control his wife, he soon concluded that her
behavior was detrimental to the unia. By March 1920 he had separated
from her. According to Jacques, Garvey met with her and Henrietta Vin-
ton Davis to explain the situation; ‘‘he said he wanted us to know before
the reporters had it their own way. He had decided to separate from his
wife and get a divorce afterwards.’’ He told them that his ‘‘life can either
be wrecked because of her [Ashwood’s] conduct, or embellished by her
deportment.’’
∂≠
Jacques’s comments suggest that Garvey had previously discussed his
reservations about his marriage with both her and Davis. When he left
Ashwood’s apartment and relocated to a ﬂat on 129th Street, he wanted to
keep both women near him. Davis had been elected international orga-
nizer of the unia in 1919, and Garvey trusted her immensely. Born in
1860, she was a dramatist who had toured the Caribbean islands in 1912
and 1913. Davis was well acquainted with global events and had a his-
tory of progressive activism. A loyal colleague, a good organizer, and a
captivating speaker, she was well respected by the general membership.
Jacques, on the other hand, was one of many secretaries. Her starting sal-
ary of twenty-three dollars a week eventually increased to forty dollars but
was still less than half that of Gwendolyn Campbell, who was in charge of
the stenographic force at unia headquarters. Her physical presence, how-
ever, may have reminded Garvey of the women who had shunned him at
home because of his dark color and his poverty. Jacques was slight in
stature—only ﬁve feet two inches tall and 110 pounds—and her mixed
racial heritage was evident in her appearance. Jacques recalled: ‘‘My hair,
let down, thrilled him. It was long and naturally wavy; he asked me to
never cut it.’’ Further, ‘‘the ﬁrst time he saw it down, curiously he felt some
strands and said, ‘‘Why, it is so soft.’’ As I tossed my head, he exclaimed,
‘‘Oh, but it is so alive!’’
∂∞
It is ironic that Garvey seemed to relish this most celebrated symbol of
‘‘mulatta’’ beauty—ﬁne-textured, long hair—since he was pointedly criti-
cal of all products that aimed to ‘‘knock the kink’’ out of hair and lighten


--- PAGE 44 ---
amy jacques &  the unia 31
black skin, declaring that they ‘‘destroyed the racial pride and self-respect
of the race.’’ In his desire to foster racial consciousness, he welcomed
anyone to the unia with ‘‘one-sixteenth or more black blood provided
they work for the unity of the race.’’
∂≤ But he remained openly skeptical of
mixed-race people, particularly men, and wanted to ‘‘save the Negro race
from extinction through miscegenation.’’ Garvey believed that mulattoes
were untrustworthy because their allegiance to the black race was pre-
carious. So Jacques’s heritage represented the colored privilege that re-
pulsed him; yet he was clearly enamored of her and viewed his own
attraction as somehow di√erent from that of other ‘‘darker men’’ whom he
indicted for their desire to marry the ‘‘lightest colored woman for special
privilege and honor.’’
∂≥
Not only was Jacques beautiful, but she was intelligent as well—and
Garvey was obviously attracted to smart women who were committed to
his nationalist vision. Garvey immediately ‘‘o√ered Miss Davis and I
[Jacques] a room to share there [the ﬂat on 133 West 129th Street]; we
accepted.’’ Jacques may not have consciously ﬂirted or enticed Garvey to
take a personal interest in her, but she had to have understood the possible
ramiﬁcations of living in his home. Nevertheless, she states only that
she and Davis accepted because they ‘‘would be better protected at nights
coming from meetings.’’
∂∂ The idea that decent women should not walk
alone at night was a serious issue that had nineteenth-century origins.
For example, a black Philadelphia schoolteacher, Fannie Jackson, hired a
‘‘janitor to escort her home in order to avoid the appearance of im-
propriety.’’
∂∑ Accepting lodging, however, was an altogether di√erent is-
sue. Jacques never admitted that she was attracted to Garvey or desired
more than a professional relationship with him at that time. Years later
she continued to maintain that she had married Garvey for the sake of
the black nationalist movement and dismissed the idea that she would
have married him for love. Admitting an intimate attraction would have
tainted the political image that Jacques wanted to construct for the world
and could have made her accountable for her role, if any, in the ultimate
breakup of Garvey and Amy Ashwood.
It must have been painful for Ashwood to witness her husband and her
former maid of honor living under the same roof without her. In fact, she
speciﬁcally blamed Jacques for the demise of her marriage, claiming that
Jacques had betrayed her and orchestrated a situation (suggestive of an
a√air) in which Garvey found her with another man, Sam Manning, a
noted T rinidadian calypsonian.
∂∏ Whether Jacques had had something to


--- PAGE 45 ---
32 amy jacques &  the unia
do with the breakup or not, she had to have felt some pressure from
Ashwood over her decision to go with Garvey. It is unsettling to imagine
Jacques not having some compassion for her former housemate. It is also
unpleasant to visualize this scenario of two intelligent women reduced to
squabbling over a man. Though on the surface all of their bickering seems
to have been over Garvey, it is likely that there were other points of
disagreement that never became a part of the public discourse. Ashwood
and Jacques, like anyone else, were vulnerable to human emotions, and
whatever the speciﬁc di√erences between them, their fractious interaction
is evidence, sadly, of how fragile friendships can quickly spiral downward
into an abyss of mudslinging. More signiﬁcantly, their behavior also re-
veals the fallacy of a utopian black sisterhood. E. Frances White has
warned against adopting the position that ‘‘accepts as unproblematic an
Afro-centric sisterhood across class, time, and geography,’’ because di√er-
ences and tensions exist between and among black women, as they do
among members of any other group.
∂π
Whatever the state of Ashwood and Jacques’s relationship, Ashwood
and Garvey were far beyond reconciling their di√erences, and on 15 July
1920 he ﬁled for an annulment of their marriage in the New York County
Circuit Court. In addition to being the general secretary for the New York
division of the unia, Amy Ashwood was one of the directors of the Black
Star Steamship Line Company, and Garvey accused her of misappropriat-
ing the organization’s funds to buy a house in Harlem. He vowed to
‘‘exercise every possible precaution to determine if one penny of the Asso-
ciation’s funds had been expended for the purchase’’ of her personal prop-
erty. Garvey also claimed that Ashwood had been an adulteress. Along
with the Sam Manning incident, Garvey charged that she had consorted
with a unia member, ‘‘a fashion plate in the employ of the Black Star
Line.’’ Finally, he identiﬁed her former Panamanian beau, Allan Cumber-
batch, as another man with whom she had continued to correspond after
their marriage.
∂∫
Ashwood responded to Garvey’s legal charges by accusing him in an
a≈davit, dated 30 August 1920, of consorting with other women, one of
whom was her presumed good friend, Amy Jacques. Ashwood had heard
gossip that her husband and Jacques were becoming more than business
associates. In a Federal Bureau of Investigation ( fbi) report, ﬁled on 31
August 1920, Special Agent F. B. Faulhaber stated that a Mr. Green, an
employee of the Black Star Line, had been ‘‘informed by Mrs. Garvey’’
that she had information ‘‘on some of the trips made from Philadelphia to


--- PAGE 46 ---
amy jacques &  the unia 33
New York in 1920 by Miss Jacques and Garvey.’’ It was alleged that ‘‘they
had both traveled in a pullman sleeper’’ and ‘‘slept together.’’ Green
‘‘could furnish no deﬁnite information on the source of Mrs. Garvey’s
information.’’
∂Ω
The fbi report was the result of an investigation spurred by the rapid
growth of the unia’s power and membership. The meteoric rise of the
movement was a reaction to imperialism and the rape of Africa under
the guise of Christianity and civilization, the horriﬁc lynchings of black
people in the United States, and the dehumanization of African peoples
in the Caribbean and Central and South America. Essentially, the racial
nationalism espoused by Garvey was a means to mobilize people to re-
claim territory and resources for self-protection, self-government, and
self-determination. The U.S. government, however, did not view this
movement to build a united African homeland simply as an e√ort among
people of African descent to ﬁnd reconnection, especially those in the
Americas who ‘‘were/are products of separations and dislocations and dis-
membering,’’ as Carol Boyce Davies has shown. Nor did they interpret
Garvey’s attempt to remap boundaries as an attempt to unite people of
African descent and create what Benedict Anderson has called an ‘‘imag-
ined community’’ that Paul Gilroy locates within the lure of ‘‘romantic
conceptions’’ of ‘‘race,’’ ‘‘nation,’’ and ‘‘people.’’ Instead, governmental
o≈cials, fueled by ‘‘Red Scare’’ propaganda, believed that Garvey’s e√orts
‘‘to build a tradition of liberation in the African cultural roots of the
masses’’ was a subversive activity. In fact, any organization that did not
pledge loyalty to the United States was perceived to be allied with the
Communist Party.
∑≠
Under the command of J. Edgar Hoover, the fbi had launched an
attack against all ‘‘radical’’ and ‘‘racial’’ political activities, seeking in-
criminating evidence to provide grounds for Garvey’s arrest and ultimate
deportation. Special agents were assigned to trail him and send periodic
reports back to the superintendent of the fbi’s New York division. Hoover
was so intent on disarming radicals that he pressured his agents to distort
and falsify evidence in order to satisfy his o≈cial request.
∑∞
In the course of their ‘‘investigation,’’ fbi agents instigated gossip,
recorded rumors, and leaked their ‘‘ﬁndings’’ to the general unia mem-
bership. This may explain why Amy Ashwood was so soon convinced that
her husband had been unfaithful to her. In her a≈davit she maintains that
she ‘‘felt near and dear to the said Amy Jacques and up to that time had
not the slightest suspicion that any improper relations existed between


--- PAGE 47 ---
34 amy jacques &  the unia
the plainti√ and the said Amy Jacques.’’ According to the a≈davit, ‘‘the
said Amy Jacques resides in the same apartment with the plainti√ herein
and appears daily on the streets arms locked with him, the two being
attended always by a body guard or two or three men.’’ Ashwood con-
cluded her sworn statement by denying ‘‘most emphatically, that she has
ever had at any time since the date of her marriage, sexual intercourse with
any man except’’ her husband.
∑≤
Not long after submitting the a≈davit, Ashwood packed her belong-
ings and left New York for Canada. In December 1920 W. E. B. Du Bois
reported in the Crisis that Garvey had already ‘‘divorced the young wife
whom he married with great fanfare of trumpets about a year ago,’’ but in
fact the couple was still legally married when Ashwood left.
∑≥
As the months passed, Garvey and Jacques were seen together more
frequently, and she was often his only traveling secretary. Clusters of fbi
reports continued to detail their alleged activities. A special agent who
trailed them ﬁled a report, dated 1 March 1921, stating that ‘‘Garvey was
accompanied by a girl named Amy Jakes [sic], his secretary.’’ Jacques was
identiﬁed as ‘‘the woman who caused all Garvey’s marital troubles, being
the cause of separation from his wife and an impending divorce.’’ This
‘‘girl Jakes is commonly known as the woman Garvey lives with.’’ The
report also noted that ‘‘they can always be seen walking arm in arm to and
from the o≈ce. He takes her on all his trips over the country and his
followers always entertain fears that some day he may be arrested [for]
White slavery.’’ unia o≈cials ‘‘tried in vain to discourage this state of
a√airs, but for some unknown reason she exercises a wonderful inﬂuence
over Garvey.’’ The agent concluded that Jacques ‘‘travels with Garvey
under the guise of private secretary to cover [for] him, but it is common
knowledge that they live together as man and wife.’’
∑∂
The following month Garvey, Jacques, her brother Cleveland (who
had arrived in the United States in May 1920 and served as a secretary for
the unia’s Negro Factory Corporation), and stenographer Enid Lamos
caravanned to Cuba, Port Limon, Costa Rica, Panama, and Jamaica to sell
Black Star Line stock and spread the message of Garveyism.
∑∑ After they
returned to the United States, another fbi report was ﬁled by the same
special agent, this one dated 1 July 1921, claiming that Garvey was married
to Ashwood but ‘‘he left here in company of Amy Jacques, an unmarried
woman negress. She is traveling as his wife by rail and his steamer kana-
wha over protest of all negroes he represents.’’ By seizing on the fact that


--- PAGE 48 ---
amy jacques &  the unia 35
Garvey had left the country with Jacques, the fbi was attempting to
charge him under the 1910 White Slave T ra≈c Act, also known as the
Mann Act. This statute made it a federal crime to ‘‘transport or aid or
assist in obtaining transportation in interstate or foreign commerce any
woman or girl for the purpose of prostitution or debauchery, or for any
other immoral purpose, or with the intent and purpose to induce, entice,
or compel such woman or girl to become a prostitute.’’
∑∏ The Mann Act,
one of the ﬁrst ‘‘federal crimes’’ laws, was aggressively enforced by the
nation’s police—the fbi. By 1912 the charges made under the act were so
numerous that the attorney general established the O≈ce of the Special
Commissioner for the Suppression of White Slave T ra≈c.
White slave o≈cers became the custodians of American morality in a
campaign to protect innocent, friendless young immigrant women and
girls who were in danger of being trapped in a life of ill repute by their
slavers. The law primarily aimed to jail incorrigible men, but women were
also arrested ‘‘to induce them to testify against their male transporters.’’
Marlene Beckman notes that the name ‘‘White Slave T ra≈c Act’’ is a
misnomer, because ‘‘the Act makes no distinction as to the race or the
color of the female whose transportation is a violation of the law.’’ Beck-
man’s study of 150 women who were convicted under the statute between
1927 and 1932, however, documents that 96 percent of the incarcerated
women were white.
∑π
It was highly unusual for a black woman to be prosecuted under the
Mann Act because to do so all of the negative stereotypes surrounding
black womanhood had to be subverted. Progressive Era reformers be-
lieved that white women were chaste and that ‘‘no woman became a
whore unless she had ﬁrst been raped, seduced, drugged, or deserted.’’ On
the other hand, black women throughout the diaspora struggled against a
Jezebel/harlot image that had been constructed during slavery to justify
the rape of them.
∑∫ This damaging image continued to haunt all black
women, no matter how virtuous they were. Nevertheless, fbi o≈cials
were so committed to arresting Garvey that they were willing to ignore
their customary racist assumptions about black women in order to iden-
tify Jacques as a chaste, vulnerable victim. It was only under those circum-
stances that Garvey could be held liable.
As part of the fbi’s attempt to frame Garvey, Special Agent Faulhaber
tried to convince Jacques’s brother Cleveland to provide information on
Garvey’s alleged violation of the Mann Act, but Cleveland Jacques refused


--- PAGE 49 ---
36 amy jacques &  the unia
‘‘point-blank’’ to cooperate. In addition, it was customary in Mann Act
cases to obtain a statement from the victim; thus, Agent Bremmann
awaited advice as to whether he should proceed with ‘‘interviewing Amy
Jacques.’’
∑Ω
In the end, government o≈cials decided not to pursue this avenue not
only because Jacques was not a ‘‘whore,’’ but also because they sensed that
a legal charge of immoral impropriety against a unia woman could be
catastrophic to their case against Garvey. Garveyites preached that their
nation could rise no higher than their women, and an unsubstantiated
attack against this foundation would be aggressively countered. In addi-
tion, since the 1890s black club women had organized and defended their
womanhood against accusations that defamed their reputation. Consci-
entious African Americans, even those who opposed Garvey, were united
in their belief that the protection of black women (which often translated
into paternalistic privileges) was paramount to the moral uplifting of the
race. The fbi wanted Garvey without the burden of battling black Amer-
ica on these grounds, so it continued to monitor him but changed its
witch-hunt strategy.
The federal government was not the only enemy that Garvey had to
contend with. By 1921 a cohort of black leaders—W. E. B. Du Bois, Cyril
Briggs, Chandler Owen, and William Pickens—had grown critical of his
approach and his unwillingness to cooperate with other black groups.
They attacked Garvey on many fronts, and on one occasion his relation-
ships with Jacques and Ashwood became fair game. Cyril Briggs, leader of
the African Blood Brotherhood, a socialist organization, was careful not
to name or malign these women with degrading details, but he did ques-
tion Garvey’s morality. As editor of the Crusader, Briggs favorably com-
pared himself to Garvey, stating, ‘‘The editor of the Crusader has never
left his wife, nor turned his wife out. The editor of the Crusader is not
now living with a woman not his wife and never has so lived.’’
∏≠ Although
Garvey always ﬁercely defended himself against negative allegations, he
was uncharacteristically silent in response to this disparaging remark.
While Garvey was under attack from every conceivable angle, Jacques
made it her business to submit a declaration of intention on 19 August
1921 to become a naturalized citizen of the United States. In general, Brit-
ish West Indians did not enthusiastically acquire citizenship. A testament
to this fact is revealed by the low number of naturalization records. In
1920 only 18 percent of all foreign-born black women and 14 percent of
foreign-born black men were naturalized, as opposed to 53 percent of


--- PAGE 50 ---
amy jacques &  the unia 37
foreign-born white women and 49 percent of foreign-born white men.∏∞
Most Caribbean immigrants did not seek citizenship, and those who did
were often scorned by their islander peers who remained loyal British sub-
jects with access to legal protection from the British consul. Jacques never
o√ered an explanation for her decision, but it does represent a process to
negotiate her migratory subjectivity by becoming a U.S. citizen.
At last, on 15 June 1922, Garvey was able to remove his personal life
from the glare of public scrutiny when he received his divorce decree. In
his court testimony, he had convinced the judge and jury that Ashwood
had been deceitful, o√ering a detailed description of how he had found
her sitting by a man in a parlor. The court found that ‘‘the allegations in
Plainti√ ’s [Marcus Garvey’s] petition are true; that plainti√ is injured and
[an] innocent party and entitled to the relief prayed.’’
∏≤
Rumors had circulated among the o≈cers of the unia that Jacques and
Garvey would marry, and they did, two months after his divorce became
ﬁnal.
∏≥ Jacques described Garvey’s motives for proposing this way: ‘‘He
must have someone who had the right to be his personal representative—
to act on his behalf, and on his instructions,’’ especially since the fbi was
trailing him. A ‘‘secretary,’’ she claimed, ‘‘would only be brushed aside as
an employee, and dismissed too. He must get a wife.’’ Garvey wanted an
African American ‘‘so as to please the people. The duty of sharing his tur-
bulent life might have been requested of Miss Davis[,]’’ but she was ‘‘older
than he, and he had hopes of having a son to carry on his name.’’ Al-
though there were ‘‘other eligible among the membership,’’ they ‘‘lacked
the sum total qualities of what he wanted for a wife now—a stand-in, in an
emergency.’’ Since he respected and valued her contributions to the unia,
‘‘he turned to me, and very adroitly put the onus on me, stating that it was
in my power to help the organization in this crisis. He had already ob-
tained a divorce, so we were married 27 July 1922.’’
∏∂
Ashwood, who by this time was living in England, became infuriated
on learning that Garvey had divorced her and married Jacques. She im-
mediately returned to the United States and ﬁled a countersuit seeking to
‘‘invalidate the proceedings’’ and naming ‘‘Amy Jacques as correspon-
dent.’’
∏∑ On 24 August 1922 she had Garvey served, at Liberty Hall, a
summons and complaint stating that no decree of divorce had been ob-
tained in any court and that she demanded judgment against him, ‘‘sever-
ing the bonds of matrimony,’’ given that she had ‘‘ever been true and
faithful to her marriage vows.’’ She also accused Garvey of bigamy and
failure to pay support of twelve dollars a week ordered by the New York


--- PAGE 51 ---
38 amy jacques &  the unia
court.∏∏ It was in Ashwood’s nature to stand up for herself, so it was not
surprising that she was now demanding the right to be treated with
respect and not be pushed aside. She had dedicated her life to the unia
and refused to be denied her due. Despite Garvey’s ‘‘mean-spirited’’ atti-
tude toward her and the ultimate failure of her countersuit, she refused
to accept the divorce and continued to refer to herself as Mrs. Marcus
Garvey until her death in May 1969.
This time around there was no public wedding for Marcus Garvey—just
Amy Jacques, the judge, a small group of friends, and an exchange of plain
gold rings. Who knows if they would have married had the circumstances
been less trying. Nonetheless, the unassuming ceremony itself illustrates
just how far Jacques had traveled from her middle-class Jamaican up-
bringing. Before her involvement with Garvey, she would certainly have
insisted on a proper wedding, so that at least all of her family could attend.
Middle-class etiquette stipulated that couples announce their planned
nuptials in the local newspaper before they occurred; not to do so was
deemed tasteless. Within a few short years Amy Jacques had changed. Her
decision to join the unia and her connection with Garvey were both a
cause and a consequence of this change.
In Jamaica, Jacques’s community had been arranged around class and
color connections. Though she had been reared to be a high achiever and
to fulﬁll her potential, it was not until after her father’s death that she was
able to have a professional work life and expand beyond his restrictive
cocoon. New York City provided a freedom zone for Jacques, one in
which she could toss aside the traditions that had kept her from fraterniz-
ing with persons not linked to elite enclaves.
∏π She continued to socialize
with Jamaicans in New York, but she also communicated with other West
Indians, as well as African Americans. This interaction gave her exposure
to di√erent ideas that undoubtedly challenged the aristocratic values she
had learned during her formative years. We can safely assume that it was
this environment that stimulated Amy Jacques Garvey to rethink how her
culturally constructed Jamaican identity had disconnected her from other
people of African descent.
Clearly, she was not the only Caribbean migrant to become radicalized
in America. As Winston James has noted, islanders entered the United
States during ‘‘the midnight darkness of the moment’’ regarding the
‘‘question of race.’’ ‘‘It was, therefore[,]’’ James argues, ‘‘not just the place


--- PAGE 52 ---
amy jacques &  the unia 39
that contributed to their radicalization: the exceptional times—a veritable
state of emergency for black America—played their part.’’ ∏∫ Thus, al-
though on the surface the unia—a race-ﬁrst, Pan-African movement—
seems to have been far removed from what Jacques was accustomed to, so
was the situation of racial prejudice she found herself in. As a young
woman who represented the epitome of ‘‘good Jamaican birth,’’ she must
have been shocked not only by white Americans’ perception of all ‘‘Ne-
groid’’ people as an undi√erentiated mass—regardless of their shade of
color or ﬁnancial status—but also by their unwarranted hostility toward
black people, which often translated into broad racial discrimination and
terrorist attacks. In the ﬁrst two years of her new life in the United States
(1917–19), Amy Jacques was exposed to the virulent racism that accom-
panied the great migration of black people from the South to the North,
the rise of white supremacist organizations, and the advent of race riots.
Her activities and ultimate membership in the unia indicate that she
had by then relinquished some of her culturally colored attitudes and
embraced her ‘‘blackness’’ in a new way.
The combination of living under the racial siege of Jim Crow and the
post–World War I crisis propelled a number of black radicals to the
forefront of the political struggle, and unquestionably Marcus Garvey was
one of the most exceptional of these ﬁgures. For his part, Garvey had
reshaped his organization to embrace the tenets of African American life
at the turn of the century: racial solidarity, moral uplift, and self-reliance.
By the time Jacques encountered the movement, she was ready to be
persuaded by it. Garvey convinced her of the ‘‘worthiness of his program,
and stressed the fact that the skin-color class system of Jamaica did not
exist in America, as all strata of the race were treated as one—the slogan
being, ‘any nigger is a nigger.’ ’’ Garvey stressed that ‘‘it was necessary for
the educated and better able to join with the masses in a strong uplift-and-
onward movement.’’
∏Ω
Amy Jacques had to be in another context, the United States, to be
‘‘convinced’’ that she was a part of a black community. Joy James has
shown how lynchings ‘‘transﬁgured’’ and ‘‘politicized’’ W. E. B. Du Bois;
in a similar vein, Jim Crow America transformed Amy Jacques.
π≠ Her
metamorphosis illuminates how Garvey’s program successfully worked to
unite African people from the continent and the diaspora. He collapsed
class, color, religious, and geographic distinctions and then encouraged
black people to view themselves as part of a Pan-African family, united


--- PAGE 53 ---
40 amy jacques &  the unia
for the common good and against their European oppressors. By 1922
Jacques’s youthful narcissistic thinking was a mere memory; already a
conﬁdent person, she had become emboldened enough to answer the call
to become socially responsible to her race.
π∞ She was no longer a ‘‘brown’’
Jamaican but a black woman committed to the unia agenda and willing
to sacriﬁce herself for its success.


--- PAGE 54 ---
3 I Only Live to Perpetuate the Ideas of My Husband
T
he early years of the Amy Jacques–Marcus Garvey bur-
geoning courtship and subsequent marriage paralleled the
zenith of the Universal Negro Improvement Association
(unia). Black people had begun to gravitate to the organiza-
tion in 1916, and by 1923 it claimed a membership of six
million, with at least nine hundred branches—ﬁve hundred through-
out the United States alone, and the rest in Canada, Central and South
America, the Caribbean, Great Britain, and Africa. Garvey himself, of
course, was a prominent reason for the organization’s growth. A member
of the Harlem chapter, Audley (Queen Mother) Moore, remembered that
‘‘when Marcus Garvey came on the scene, then of course a deep con-
sciousness was awakened in me. . . . [H]e raised in me a certain knowl-
edge of me belonging to people all over the world, the African people, and
he gave me pride, and he gave me a great knowledge of the history of the
wealth of Africa.’’ Garvey’s presence explains why the Harlem branch—
the organization’s headquarters—had the largest estimated membership,
at thirty-ﬁve thousand.
∞ No other Pan-African or black nationalist or-
ganization could document comparable statistics. Obviously, the black
masses worldwide had responded to the unia’s platform: to generate
global economic connections between Africans living in the Caribbean,
North America, and Africa via its passenger and shipping ﬂeet (the Black
Star Line); to redeem Africa from European colonists; and ultimately to
link a diasporic identity with a legal African nationality.
By 1923 the unia itself resembled a nation. Garveyites elected am-
bassadors, sponsored expeditions to Liberia, sent commissioners to the
League of Nations, and endorsed political candidates. Elaborate pagean-
try also gave the appearance of nationhood. Members sang a national
hymn and wore ﬂamboyant uniforms, and their red, black, and green
ﬂag—the ultimate emblem of an independent nation—garnished their


--- PAGE 55 ---
42 the ideas of my husband
meeting halls. All of the symbols of nationhood were evident, despite the
fact that they had no territory to call their own.
As the organization grew, so did the public role of Amy Jacques Garvey.
One month after her marriage in 1922, the annual unia August conven-
tion (marking the date of slave emancipation in the British colonies) took
place in Harlem. Unlike Amy Ashwood, who had had a visible role at the
previous conventions, often reciting the poetry of Paul Laurence Dunbar,
Jacques Garvey was still working behind the scenes, never once sharing
the limelight with her husband. Yet the issues raised at this meeting
provide a sense of the concerns that were escalating when Jacques became
Garvey’s wife.
Marcus Garvey’s agenda dominated the 1922 convention. Highly con-
cerned about dissension within the ranks, he was determined to stiﬂe all
opinions that disagreed with his own. He condemned members who
fraternized with his enemies, among them W. E. B. Du Bois, A. Philip
Randolph, Chandler Owen, and William Pickens. These men had been
unable, and in some cases unwilling, to organize the masses, and they
refused to give Garvey credit for his intellectual prowess and his herculean
e√ort to create a program that captured the imagination of black people.
They considered him to be a charlatan and a demagogue, preying ‘‘upon
the ignorant, unsuspecting poor West Indian working men and women,’’
taking their hard-earned monies for his egregious capitalist schemes. Gar-
vey responded to these accusations both before and during the conven-
tion by challenging these noted leaders of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People (naacp) to make their own records pub-
lic and account for the money they had spent over the previous ten years.
Feeling the need to eliminate those members who were fraternizing with
naacp luminaries, Garvey argued that the unia would have to ‘‘clean’’
itself from within in order to ﬁght those from ‘‘without.’’ Thus, his pri-
mary agenda was to restructure the unia so he could personally appoint
members of the Executive Cabinet, instead of their being nominated by
the membership, to ensure their loyalty to him.
≤
Garvey managed to convince the general body to amend the unia
constitution for this purpose, but on 31 August his dominance was unex-
pectedly challenged by another group: the lady delegates ‘‘by some clever
maneuvering were able to monopolize’’ this session. This move surprised
the men, because ‘‘Woman’s Day at Liberty Hall’’ had already been ob-
served ten days earlier. At this event, Henrietta Vinton Davis had led an
open forum on a ‘‘New Social Policy for the Negro,’’ and at least eighteen


--- PAGE 56 ---
the ideas of my husband 43
other women participated. They articulated the need for a policy to en-
sure that children were reared to be honest and that there was no double
standard of morality. Good manners and decent morals were essential to
respectability, and, as Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham has noted, during
this period black Baptist women ‘‘perceived respectability to be the ﬁrst
step in their communication with white America.’’
≥ For their part, unia
women considered respectability to be a key step toward establishing a
sovereign black nation.
Female delegates further wanted to establish a place where men and
women could learn their ‘‘social duties and obligations’’ to one another.
This environment would guarantee that the ‘‘men of the race would stick
to them’’ and not seek relationships with white women.
∂ On the surface
this discussion might be seen as a reactionary stance to protect the ‘‘mar-
ket’’ of black men by keeping competitors out, but a closer analysis dis-
closes that these women denounced interracial relationships not just be-
cause Garvey was opposed to miscegenation, but because they, too, were
aware of the deadly consequences that sometimes arose from black men
keeping company with white women. For example, Ida B. Wells-Barnett,
leader of the antilynching campaign, documented that some white
women willingly engaged in intimate relationships with black men and
then claimed they had been raped once their secret a√air was featured on
the gossip grapevine. The fact that these white women protected them-
selves at the expense of a black man’s life had devastating consequences for
the black community. unia women believed that ‘‘Negro men must be
taught to feel that their women are good enough for them and then the
women must be taught likewise as to the men.’’ By ‘‘sticking’’ together
they protected themselves against life-threatening situations and were
better able to ‘‘uplift’’ the ‘‘men and women of the rising generation.’’
∑
These limited comments by the delegates regarding white women fore-
shadowed future black nationalist rhetoric. A decade later, for instance,
Elijah Muhammad, leader of the Nation of Islam, a separatist black na-
tionalist organization, built on this thinking in a somewhat convoluted
way. Muhammad charged that white women were white men’s ‘‘bait’’ to
entice black men away from their family obligations.
∏
With the exception of openly criticizing black men who were attracted
to white women, ‘‘Woman’s Day at Liberty Hall’’—in addition to hosting
an industrial exhibition showcasing arts and crafts and a fashion revue—
was in keeping with the gender-speciﬁc roles performed by most women
in political and fraternal organizations during the 1920s. But on 31 August


--- PAGE 57 ---
44 the ideas of my husband
1922 women pushed beyond the parameters of what constituted appropri-
ate female activism.
The unia’s constitution was very di√erent from that of most black
organizations in that women were well integrated into the movement’s
structure.
π Amy Ashwood must be credited with helping to develop a
system in which women could enjoy equal participation. Each local divi-
sion elected a male and female president and vice president. The constitu-
tion did not guarantee equal participation, however, as a majority of
women delegates at the 31 August meeting pointed out. They elected Mrs.
Victoria W. T urner of St. Louis as their spokesperson, and she submitted a
ﬁve-point resolution to be adopted by the organization. These delegates
demanded that women be placed in ‘‘important’’ positions within ‘‘the
organization to help reﬁne and mold public sentiment.’’ They wanted ab-
solute control over the unia auxiliaries, the Black Cross Nurses (women
who performed duties similar to Red Cross nurses), and Motor Corps (car
ﬂeets), as well as more recognition on committees. Overall, they insisted
on empowerment ‘‘so that the Negro women all over the world can func-
tion without restriction from men.’’
∫
Garvey had constructed the roles of men and women in the unia to
meet his expectations for nationhood. Barbara Bair persuasively argues
that these culturally constructed roles were not ‘‘separate and equal,’’
as Ashwood had envisioned, but ‘‘separate and hierarchal.’’
Ω Men and
women were advised to wield proper inﬂuence and authority over sepa-
rate spheres: public and familiar. Women were charged to make the home
a haven, nurture children, and support their husbands; men, in turn, were
to be providers and protectors. Garveyites believed that when men and
women fulﬁlled these designated gender-speciﬁc roles, they replicated the
lifestyle of other ‘‘successful’’ and powerful people the world over.
A society organized according to the principles of patriarchy was the
trademark of most nationalist movements. For example, George Mosse’s
study on nationalism in modern Europe points out that nationalists as-
signed everyone their place in the social order, and ‘‘any confusion be-
tween these categories threatened chaos and loss of control.’’ European
nationalists identiﬁed women as passive guardians of the traditional order,
whereas men were to dominate the public realm. In sum, ‘‘the family was
supposed to mirror state and society’’; by emphasizing a hierarchical struc-
ture ‘‘through the rule of the father as patriarch, the family educated its
members to respect authority.’’
∞≠ (Importantly, Garveyites perceived that
community was thwarted by the reality of their working-class status. Even


--- PAGE 58 ---
the ideas of my husband 45
though many women wanted the choice—and choice was the key—not to
work outside the home, economic hardships did not make this national
structure feasible.)
Some women delegates ﬂatly rejected being conﬁned to the domestic
sphere and struggled to enhance their womanhood and ultimately their
nation by augmenting their duties in the Pan-African struggle. They were
not satisﬁed by performing charitable duties and reinforcing male leader-
ship; they wanted to be eligible for election to a variety of executive
positions to which they felt ‘‘entitled,’’ despite Garvey’s claim that women
should not be considered for ‘‘diplomatic missions.’’
∞∞
Garvey’s initial response to the women’s resolution was that he did not
see any reason for change, ‘‘as the women already had the power they were
asking for under the constitution. . . . The U.N.I.A. was one organization
that recognized women.’’ Henrietta Vinton Davis was on the Executive
Council, he pointed out, and ‘‘if there was any di√erence made in the
local divisions, it was not the fault of the policy of the unia, but it was the
fault of individuals.’’
∞≤ On all other issues raised at the meeting, Gar-
vey’s statements proved deﬁnitive, thereby ending further discussion. The
women delegates, however, were passionate enough about their position
to override class, geography, and other distinctions among themselves and
unite against Garvey in a way that unia men were unable to replicate. In
the end, their resolutions were modiﬁed and adopted by the convention.
The women had thus forced Garvey to concede on some level, which is
surprising since, as Carol Boyce Davies correctly argues, Pan-Africanism
‘‘operates from a singularly monolithic construction of an African theo-
retical homeland which asks for the submergence or silencing of gender.’’
As E. Frances White has shown, as late as 1970 Pan-African nation build-
ing had not moved beyond this formulation, and ‘‘complementary’’ still
‘‘did not mean equal.’’ Men and women continued ‘‘to have separate tasks
and unequal power.’’
∞≥
The unia women must be commended for struggling against the total-
izing nature of nationalist discourse. Assertively, they helped to redeﬁne
the appropriate roles for women in the association. Although Garvey did
not oppose the idea of female leadership, he was somewhat contemptuous
of these delegates’ desire to expand their functions as Pan-Africanists. In
this confrontation, Amy Jacques Garvey must have been faced with the
choice of supporting her husband, lining up with the unia women, or
situating herself between the two forces. The record does not tell us what
position she chose to take, as there are no statements by the delegates or


--- PAGE 59 ---
46 the ideas of my husband
the fbi indicating opinions by or about Jacques Garvey at the convention.
Nevertheless, this persistent tension related to the making of gendered
nationalist subjects would eventually compel her to take a surprising
public stance.
The Garveys’ personal life may have been a topic for gossip, but unia
members did not dare to make it a part of the convention record, and
Marcus Garvey clearly felt no need to explain his marital decision to
the membership. For her part, Jacques Garvey kept a low proﬁle at the
convention, but the period after that proved a turning point for her unia
activism.
To begin with, she increased her already hectic, if veiled, workload by
collecting her husband’s speeches and articles, the majority of which had
been printed in the Negro World, ‘‘as a personal record.’’ She then decided
to publish them to ‘‘give the public an opportunity of studying and form-
ing an opinion of him; not from inﬂated and misleading newspapers and
magazine articles, but from expressions of thoughts enunciated by him in
defense of his oppressed and struggling race; so that by his own words
[italics added] he may be judged.’’ These ‘‘gems of expressions,’’ essays,
and speeches, published in 1923 under the title The Philosophy and Opin-
ions of Marcus Garvey  were exclusively his words, but Jacques Garvey’s
intellect shaped how the overall scope of Garveyism would be presented
to the world.
∞∂
Although the majority of her revisions were simply abridgments, or a
combining of documents for clarity and continuity, she did locate herself
in the editing process: ‘‘I have produced what I consider two of the best
speeches of my husband.’’
∞∑ A line-by-line comparison of ﬁve speeches
reprinted in Philosophy and Opinions, for instance, indicates that Jacques
Garvey revised some of the longer texts by deleting sentences in which he
thanked delegates as well as lines that were obviously repetitious. On
several occasions, she went so far as to remove entire sections from the
original speech. Some of these excised portions revealed the more re-
bellious side of Garvey. They included, but were not limited to, state-
ments about the use of the latest artillery, explosives, and war strategy;
calls for retribution; and claims that if he had been born a slave, he ‘‘would
have made some trouble and made things hot for somebody during those
days.’’
∞∏
The fact that Jacques Garvey assembled this text when her husband
was attempting to gather support for a mail fraud indictment helps to
explain why she removed some of his more inﬂammatory statements. Not


--- PAGE 60 ---
the ideas of my husband 47
surprisingly, Garvey’s most radical speeches are not featured in the collec-
tion. Robert Hill argues that, unfortunately, this volume ‘‘has institu-
tionalized a distorted picture of the militant stage of the unia and its mass
following.’’
∞π Nevertheless, Garvey approved of this depiction of himself
and the movement. The book, published in February 1923, was Jacques
Garvey’s ﬁrst major editorial work. Though this propaganda package may
have been indirectly addressed to Garvey’s contemporaries, it eventually
became one of the ﬁrst primary collections on Garveyism.
Garvey was arrested for mail fraud after the 1922 convention. He had
sold stock for ﬁve dollars a share, through the mail, for the Black Star
Steamship Line Company (bsl). To keep the steamship ﬂeet in the hands
of the masses, no shareholder could buy more than two hundred dollars
worth of stock. Black people throughout the diaspora had seized the
opportunity to become stockholders, and African Americans led the way.
During World War I many Americans had accumulated a substantial
amount of wealth by purchasing stocks and bonds, and some Garveyites
invested in the ﬂeet in hopes of receiving lucrative returns. Even though a
variety of institutions and business enterprises were selling stock to Afri-
can Americans, including other steamship corporations, millions elected
to support the bsl.
∞∫
Stock proceeds ﬁlled the organization’s co√ers, and by May 1920 Gar-
vey had bought three shabby ships costing the unia more than $200,000.
The purchase of these tattered vessels underscored his lack of business
acumen; nonetheless, he used his tremendous organizing skills to estab-
lish an impressive cohort of unia leaders who were willing to aggressively
recruit others while selling stock. But because the unia was ﬁrst and
foremost a racial movement, at times Garvey’s eagerness to expand its
membership undercut bsl proﬁts. For example, on one occasion fruit
shipments spoiled due to delays caused by additional dockage at Carib-
bean ports while he spread the unia message.
∞Ω
Even the established African American elite, many of whom were criti-
cal of Garvey’s leadership, had to concede that the bsl was a monumental
achievement. W. E. B. Du Bois, an ardent opponent, acknowledged that
Garvey had proved that ‘‘American Negroes can be accumulating and
ministering their own capital, organize industry, join the black centers of
the South Atlantic by commercial enterprise and in this way ultimately
redeem Africa as a ﬁt and free home for black men.’’
≤≠
At the same time, some leaders expressed concern about the unia’s
growing commercial focus. Cyril Briggs was forced to admit that capitalist


--- PAGE 61 ---
48 the ideas of my husband
ventures were necessary, but he warned, ‘‘No business enterprise is good
enough to base the liberation movement and the morale of the Negro
masses upon the success or failure of that enterprise.’’ Not disputing the
necessity of businesses, he felt that it was a mistake to link ‘‘them up
directly with the liberation movement and thereby stake the entire move-
ment upon the changes of success or failure and at the same time invite
white aggression to what may be correctly considered a vulnerable spot in
our armor.’’ Briggs concluded that the sooner the Garvey section of the
liberation movement recognized this, the better. Despite the success of
the sale of bsl stock, the overall unia ﬁnances were in a shambles, due to
poor business management. Judith Stein has shown that stock proceeds
were siphoned o√ to subsidize the debt accrued from other unia holdings.
When accusations surfaced regarding Garvey’s lack of business savvy,
unia dissidents and several bsl o≈cers ﬁled complaints with the New
York district attorney’s o≈ce alleging that Garvey had misappropriated
funds. Among the claims against him were that ‘‘Garvey lost a stock book
in Virginia, issued shares without paying the federal revenue tax, failed to
keep records of expenditures, and used some of the proceeds to pay o√ the
debt against the unia restaurant.’’
≤∞
Even under these di≈cult circumstances, Garvey still exhibited the
conﬁdence of a successful leader, and his unwavering attacks against his
most zealous critics helped to legitimize him in the eyes of the black
world. At a Liberty Hall meeting on 11 July 1920, he had gloated: ‘‘I do not
care what the preacher in his criticism may say. I do not care what the
politician in his criticism may say. I do not care what the journalist in his
criticism may say. There is one conviction I have and that is that the
Negro in this age is entitled to as much liberty as any other race on the face
of the globe.’’ ‘‘We are a new people,’’ Garvey argued, ‘‘born out of a new
day and a new circumstance.’’
≤≤
Garvey also did not let desperate ﬁnancial concerns stymie the unia’s
Pan-African plan, and by 1921 the organization had sent an entourage to
Liberia to survey land and negotiate with the government for a unia
settlement. Garvey’s stalwart attitude and resiliency continued to lend
credence to the vitality of the unia, but Liberian o≈cials would not
legally commit to supporting the movement, and no doubt the U.S.
Justice Department investigation had hampered his cause. J. Edgar Hoo-
ver was on Garvey’s tail, identifying him as a ‘‘notorious negro agitator’’
and demanding that his investigators engage in ‘‘early action upon the
prosecution which is now pending, in order that he [Garvey] may be once


--- PAGE 62 ---
the ideas of my husband 49
and for all put where he can peruse his past activities behind the four walls
in the Atlanta clime.’’ ≤≥ (Atlanta, Georgia, was the location of the ﬁrst
federal penitentiary, and a mail fraud conviction would guarantee Gar-
vey’s residence there.)
At his trial, which began on 18 May 1923, Garvey was the ﬁrst defen-
dant called. The Kansas City Call  reported that he quickly ‘‘dispensed
with the services of his attorneys, and took his defense upon himself.’’
According to journalist J. A. Rogers, the trial quickly ‘‘deteriorated into
low comedy.’’ Although fbi agents said that Garvey was in the ‘‘habit of
counting money’’ from stock sales in his room with Amy Jacques Garvey
after meetings, she was not implicated in the conspiracy; therefore, he was
determined to have her testify on his behalf.
≤∂ Judge Julian Mack quickly
interrupted Garvey’s e√orts by demanding to know if Jacques Garvey was
his legal wife. Dismissing the question, Garvey replied, ‘‘I am calling her
as a witness.’’ But when the court pressed for a more explicit answer, he
said, ‘‘She is my legal wife at present.’’ Judge Mack ruled that her status
made her incompetent to testify. ‘‘Then I call Amy Jacques,’’ retorted
Garvey. He further asserted that if she could not testify, ‘‘his plans would
be completely upset,’’ as he would have to locate witnesses outside the
state of New York. Although the court reiterated its ﬁrst ruling, District
Attorney Mattuck apparently did not view Jacques as Marcus’s trump
card and withdrew his objection to her testimony.
≤∑
Stylishly dressed and wearing a ‘‘large picture hat,’’ Jacques Garvey was
described by reporters as having a ‘‘slender and girlish’’ stature and ap-
pearing to be ‘‘much younger than Garvey.’’ On the stand for two days,
she described her role as secretary at the headquarters, where she kept all
unia and bsl reports separate. She also sold stock, was in charge of the
money collected for the organization, and made it abundantly clear that
from 1920 onward she took charge of opening all the o≈ce mail, assisted
by other women. Garvey, she said, ‘‘opened no mail.’’ This was a pivotal
point, and several times during direct examination she ‘‘appeared ex-
tremely nervous.’’ On one occasion when she had di≈culty answering
questions without relating tangential conversations, Judge Mack spoke
sharply to her. Becoming emotional, Jacques Garvey ‘‘broke down and
began to weep.’’ But Garvey interposed, saying to her, ‘‘Take your time,
do not let anyone frighten or terrorize you.’’
≤∏
At the conclusion of the twenty-seven-day trial, Judge Mack instructed
the jurors that they ‘‘must determine whether Garvey undertook the orga-
nization of the Black Star Line as an honorable enterprise or simply to


--- PAGE 63 ---
50 the ideas of my husband
advance his personal ambitions. The defendant had a right to buy ships
and pay salaries, but not to make false ﬁnancial statements.’’ As the jury
deliberated, it was reported that Garvey’s codefendants (O. M. Thomp-
son, George Tobias, and Elie Garcia) left the courtroom, but Garvey
stayed and ‘‘his wife remained with him.’’
≤π T en hours later Garvey’s three
codefendants were exonerated, but he was found guilty of one count of
sending false promotional materials through the mail. He was sentenced
to a maximum of ﬁve years in federal prison and ordered to pay a one-
thousand-dollar ﬁne, in addition to court costs.
Garvey’s initial appeal for bail was rejected, and he was immediately
dispatched to Tombs Penitentiary in New York City, at which point the
press quickly focused their attention on his wife. The Pittsburgh American
reported on 20 July 1923 that ‘‘the conviction appears to be growing, that
Mrs. Garvey is an able, strong-minded woman equipped in every way to
do good work for the nationalist movement, by sweeping the dust of
misunderstanding from the minds of some, by strengthening the bonds of
unity between the members of the unia, by making new friends for the
cause and converting some of its enemies.’’ The Hotel T atler concurred in
mid-August: Mrs. Garvey has ‘‘proven [her] mettle under ﬁre.’’ Because of
her ‘‘modest and unassuming’’ manner, she was not the ‘‘type from which
heroines are molded, but the elevation of her brow and the toss of her
head when opposed, reveals her fearless and independent spirit.’’ No
longer conﬁned to the o≈ce, Jacques Garvey had revealed to ‘‘the world
for the ﬁrst time’’ her ‘‘intrinsic worth’’ to the cause of liberation.
≤∫
During this tumultuous time, Garvey continued to demand even more
from his wife, and she attempted to fulﬁll all of his requests, even when it
could cause her physical harm.
≤Ω Jacques Garvey recalled that she brought
a gun to the o≈ce to protect herself after a unia clerk had ‘‘threatened to
throw’’ her ‘‘down the stairs’’ because she had reported to the bsl directors
that he had lost ‘‘signed-up certiﬁcates.’’ She later identiﬁed the clerk as a
‘‘plant’’ to get information against Garvey for the mail fraud trial. It is
interesting that Jacques Garvey chose to arm herself with a gun, even
though Garvey refused to carry one himself, stating, ‘‘No gun for me; if I
am to be killed, then maybe it is my destiny.’’
≥≠ Although Jacques Garvey
had made sacriﬁces to meet her unia obligations, she was unwilling to be
a martyr for the movement. (Other black women leaders apparently felt
the same way. For example, Ida B. Wells-Barnett also carried a gun. Such
self-protection exempliﬁed another way to transgress ideas of ‘‘feminine
gentility and masculine courage.’’) Clearly, this was a trying time for Amy


--- PAGE 64 ---
the ideas of my husband 51
Jacques Garvey; in 1964 she recalled how ‘‘fear and sorrow now became
her constant companions.’’≥∞
Despite the physical dangers and emotional pressures of this period,
Jacques Garvey stepped forward to become an ambassador for her hus-
band and the unia. She said, ‘‘I only live to perpetuate the ideas of my
husband just as thousands of other Negroes, imbued with his spirit, have
vowed to do.’’ She directed all of her energies toward securing Garvey’s
release from prison. She must have been shocked to learn that he had
‘‘only left her $50 to face the world.’’ Although soon after they were
married, Garvey had ‘‘borrowed $400 of [her] early savings, to meet an
emergency of the organization,’’ she assumed that this need for money
was an exception.
≥≤ But Garvey’s lack of business acumen had encroached
on their personal household, and his wife soon found herself without
personal funds and with the need to raise money for his bail. It had to be
unnerving for her to acknowledge that their future was uncertain and
ﬁnancially insecure. It took a herculean e√ort on her part, along with
other leaders, to convince the court to grant bail and then raise the ﬁfteen
thousand dollars it required. After Jacques Garvey furnished the money—
in U.S. Liberty Bonds—to the clerk of the New York court, Garvey was
released on 10 September 1923. Three days later he was welcomed home at
a mass meeting in Liberty Hall.
≥≥
At this festive occasion Garvey publicly thanked his wife, noting that
she was ‘‘obedient’’ and ‘‘loyal’’ and had ‘‘carried out the instructions’’ he
gave her. Even when others who had pledged to support him had ‘‘got
weak-kneed’’ and ‘‘attempted to deter that poor, little woman, to strike
fear and terror into her heart and told her she was doing the wrong
things,’’ she persevered. Garveyite George Alexander McGuire agreed
with that assessment, hailing Jacques Garvey as a ‘‘little Joan of Arc.’’
According to McGuire, ‘‘Never did woman for man make similar sacri-
ﬁce, exhausting her mental and physical powers by day, and resisting the
embrace of Morpheus by night in her untiring e√orts which have brought
forth the ﬁrst fruits of success [Garvey’s release].’’
≥∂
Ironically, at the same time that he was praising her e√orts on his
behalf, Garvey was also using his wife as an excuse to justify his leaving
jail. He said that if it were not for ‘‘the pale face of my wife and the
su√ering depicted in her countenance every morning as she came to see
me I would have been as happy there [in jail] sending out the messages of
inspiration and hope to 400,000,000 black souls as speaking from the
platform of Liberty Hall.’’ He was not ‘‘afraid of jail’’ and was as ‘‘ready to


--- PAGE 65 ---
52 the ideas of my husband
go back as he was ready to go in the ﬁrst instance. The jail had no terrors
for me.’’ Only ‘‘God can strike terror and fear in the hearts of twentieth
century black men.’’ Garvey’s speech, in part, represented a certain per-
formance that was mandatory to maintain his masculinity. All unia men
asserted their manhood by not appearing weak and e√eminate. According
to George Mosse, ‘‘the specter of unmanly men had accompanied modern
masculinity from its birth’’ at the end of the eighteenth century.
≥∑ Real
men were tough, and jail served as another test to prove manhood.
Michael Kimmel cogently argues that ‘‘men deﬁne their masculinity,
not as much in relation to women, but in relation to one another.’’ Be-
cause of this, historically American men have behaved in macho ways so
others will not view them as ‘‘less than manly, as weak, timid, fright-
ened.’’
≥∏ Garvey may not have thought that it was emasculating to have
his wife protect and defend him while he was incarcerated, but he wanted
to ensure that the membership understood that neither masculine anxiety
nor insecurity pushed him to leave prison (a highly problematic homo-
social institution). Rather, he left because of his inability to meet the
ultimate obligation of a unia husband: protection of his wife.
In jail, Garvey’s asthmatic condition had ﬂared up, and on his release
his physician recommended a warmer climate. Though he had to stay in
the United States while his case was on appeal, he was not restricted to
New York, enabling he and his wife to plan a working vacation through
thirteen states, including the warm West Coast. Jacques Garvey recalled
that ‘‘he took me along, as the people in the Western states were anxious
to see and hear me.’’
≥π By October 1923, ﬁve months after the trial began,
the Garveys and their secretary Enid Lamos were on tour.
Jacques Garvey chronicled their trip in a series of six weekly articles
published in the Negro World. Her goal was to describe the places they
visited to show how ‘‘necessary it was to have united action to help over-
come such conditions.’’
≥∫ Her mission was to expose the injustices of Jim
Crow America and o√er the unia as an alternative. Jacques Garvey gave
her impressions of each state by highlighting the geographic landscape,
economic opportunities, and housing conditions. Though her prose was
not elegant, there was a vivacity in her articles that gave them a moving
quality. Like other political journalists writing during the Harlem Renais-
sance, Jacques Garvey used her words as a means to inspire a ‘‘collective
black consciousness.’’ Ultimately, she hoped to organize this energy into a
mass awakening of black people who would recognize the importance of
the unia’s ideology and program. For instance, she described how black


--- PAGE 66 ---
the ideas of my husband 53
folks with ‘‘a little money’’ had migrated to southern California from the
South and Midwest. Employment was plentiful in Los Angeles, ‘‘of course
keeping within the limit prescribed for him by the white man who is ever
watchful, ever on guard, saying, ‘Nigger, thus far shalt thou rise and no
farther.’ ’’ Jacques Garvey summed up the situation by saying, ‘‘Friends,
members of my race, I would not advise you to try to break down those
barriers.’’ It was more practical to ‘‘turn our eyes in the other direction and
look towards Mother Africa, where we will be able to rise to the heights of
true manhood and womanhood and live in happiness and prosperity with
our brothers and sisters over there.’’
≥Ω Robert Chrisman reminds us that
the Negro World was the ‘‘ideological arm of the unia,’’ and Jacques
Garvey’s observations inﬂuenced and shaped the thinking of her reader-
ship by articulating what many of them had ‘‘dimly felt, sensed or ob-
served in privacy, declaring that collective consciousness in clear, cold,
black type.’’
∂≠
In all six articles, Jacques Garvey’s Jim Crow discussions center pri-
marily on the activities of the Ku Klux Klan. She reports that in Indiana
the Klan’s ‘‘voters are said to number between 300,000 to 400,000 in the
entire state. It is said that the organization defeated several candidates in
the 1922 election.’’ Jacques Garvey did not exaggerate the political power
of the Klan; scholars have estimated that in the 1920s Klan membership
numbered between three and ﬁve million, with Indiana the hotbed of its
political activity. Kathleen Blee’s seminal work on the Klan documents
that in 1924, Indiana ‘‘Klan-backed candidates won the governorship,
many mayoral contests including those in Indianapolis, Evansville, and
Kokomo, and numerous local o≈ces of sheri√s, district attorneys, and
others.’’
∂∞ The strong presence of the Klan in every election in Indiana
during the 1920s may have jolted Jacques Garvey’s readership into se-
riously thinking about the unia as a rational political alternative.
Jacques Garvey also wrote about the ‘‘Southern sport among the white
gentry’’—lynching black men—and mob violence against black neighbor-
hoods. Following the lead of her peer Ida B. Wells-Barnett, she under-
stood that white people justiﬁed violence in the name of protecting their
communities from ‘‘black rapists and murderers.’’ She warned that ‘‘half
of the stories of murder and rape are untrue, but propaganda distorts
truth and even swallows it up when convenient.’’ As Marcus Garvey was
called one of the greatest propagandists of the period, his wife was well
acquainted with its use as a political tool. But she reasoned that her
husband’s use of propaganda was di√erent from white supremacist dogma


--- PAGE 67 ---
54 the ideas of my husband
because ‘‘we are not preaching a propaganda of hate against anyone,’’ and
it helped ‘‘his e√orts to educate black men to see the necessity for Afri-
can Nationalism, and to get white men to appreciate the righteousness of
his Cause.’’
∂≤
Her single-minded focus on the Klan impelled her to pose the ques-
tion, ‘‘You may ask why do I pay so much attention to the Klan? I am
interested in their activities, because I agree with Mr. Garvey when he
says that this organization is the hidden spirit of America.’’ She believed
that black people needed to know everything about the Klan to protect
their families and communities. Nevertheless, she concluded, ‘‘Let us not
knock our heads to smithereens against this high thick wall of white
supremacy . . . but let us turn our eyes in the other direction and look
toward Mother Africa.’’
∂≥
Jacques Garvey’s description of Jim Crow America was so vivid that her
writing served as a conduit to the original moment.∂∂ Although her arti-
cles do not represent investigative reporting like those of Wells-Barnett or
Mary Church T errell, she never let an opportunity pass to expose the
underbelly of race relations in the United States and o√er an analysis of
segregation. Even when Jacques Garvey found herself enjoying a working
vacation, she would quickly contextualize her emotions to move her feel-
ings beyond self-gratiﬁcation. For instance, she was fond of Los Angeles
and its surrounding communities, writing that it ‘‘would be a real Eden to
Negroes if it were not for that viper, race prejudice, with its fangs of hate
ever ready to strike and kill the rising ambition and hopes of Negroes.’’
∂∑
A personal side was also revealed through her Jim Crow stories. Glenda
Gilmore argues that ‘‘white supremacy entailed more than violence and
the denial of economic opportunities and political rights. It forced African
Americans to endure an excruciating assault on their hopes and dreams.’’
∂∏
In the 1920s the majority of black adults experienced, on one level or
another, humiliating pain associated with the maintenance of Jim Crow.
The Garveys were no exception to this reality, as Jacques Garvey related.
In St. Louis, for instance, she had become very thirsty, so they stopped at a
drugstore for a soda. The clerk refused them service, stating, ‘‘Sorry, but
we don’t serve colored people here’’—a familiar phrase to many African
Americans (though most had probably never heard it begin with the word
‘‘sorry’’). Jacques Garvey was ‘‘stunned, and repeated the words audibly.’’
She ‘‘really was too upset from the incident in the day to take an active part
in the meeting, but my husband, after drinking about ﬁve glasses of ice
water, was evidently cooled o√ and spoke for over an hour.’’ Jacques


--- PAGE 68 ---
the ideas of my husband 55
Garvey was still ‘‘depressed’’ in the afternoon, so her husband took her for
a leisurely drive.∂π
It is di≈cult to understand why Jacques Garvey seemed so surprised by
this episode. After all, she had lived in New York since 1917 and had
traveled to other states as Garvey’s private secretary. It is hard to imag-
ine that she had been so completely shielded from racial etiquette and
legal restrictions that she was unfamiliar with the basic tenets of Jim
Crow. On its face her reaction seems overly naive, but perhaps it is a
mistake to think that one can become immune to Jim Crow’s humilia-
tion. No matter how often people are told they are unwelcome, it is always
a distressing experience.
On the other hand, because the Garveys were treated like royalty by the
unia membership, they seldom had to interact with white America on the
same level as the majority of black people. A week before the occurrence in
St. Louis, Jacques Garvey had written that a white railroad stationmaster
had mistaken the Garveys for ‘‘Africans’’ because they were ‘‘well-clad,
independent-looking people traveling ﬁrst class.’’ If they had been ‘‘travel-
ing with bundles and had the air of ‘scared to death’ folks running from
the South, we would have been called ‘Niggers.’ ’’
∂∫ Jacques Garvey appar-
ently believed that she and her husband had an aura about them that
yielded respect. Maybe the Jim Crow incident shocked her because she
had internalized the respect and deference granted her by Garveyites and
others, and this moment was a frightening reminder that she was still
black in America.
In addition to her written dispatches, Jacques Garvey was asked to
speak at each location on their tour. Her verbal discourse mirrored the
late-nineteenth-century ‘‘woman-tempered rhetoric,’’ also described as
‘‘speechlets’’—spontaneous talks ranging from ﬁve to ﬁfteen minutes. Ac-
cording to Carol Mattingly, speechlets ensured that women did not speak
too long; thus, they were able to ‘‘assure audiences that their public stance
did not masculinize them.’’ Indeed, Jacques Garvey would often simply
add ‘‘my thanks to those of my husband’s.’’ By the end of the month-long
schedule, however, she was struggling to conﬁne her talks within a ‘‘femi-
nine’’ time frame. She wrote, ‘‘Yours truly was called upon to speak and
being fully wound up could not stop under half an hour. However, I was
rewarded with a large bouquet of ﬂowers.’’
∂Ω The ‘‘however’’ clariﬁed her
perception that the audience did not view her lengthy talk as an indiscre-
tion but instead appreciated her enthusiasm.
Jacques Garvey called her six articles ‘‘Impressions,’’ but they actually


--- PAGE 69 ---
56 the ideas of my husband
constituted a reﬁned discourse on the politics of race in the United States.
Michel Foucault tells us that discourses are not passive utterances, but
writing that moves beyond the places that produce texts and the people
who read them. More speciﬁcally, though, Jacques Garvey’s discourse not
only reﬂected her knowledge about the United States, but also became her
intellectual property, which she would draw on in the near future.
The articles were a smashing success among her readership. Garvey, in
fact, used material from some of her articles in his speeches, and when
they returned to New York, many wanted to hear her speak at the ﬁrst
mass meeting of the unia. Jacques Garvey remembered how ‘‘the au-
dience clapped and called out, We want Mrs. Garvey.’’ She rose, and
when ‘‘their cheering had died down, I had caught their infectious spirit,
and responded with a speech, that came to its climax in a call to rededicate
their lives for service to all.’’ Marcus Garvey acknowledged the energy,
and ‘‘before he spoke he said smilingly, Now I have a rival, but I am glad
she is my wife.’’
∑≠
Jacques Garvey’s intense e√orts on behalf of her husband and the unia
took their toll on her physical health, and by August 1924 she was quite ill.
At the annual convention Garvey explained the hardships that they had
experienced. ‘‘It is no wonder that I have now a sick and half-dying wife
because of the su√ering that we have had to undergo.’’ Jacques Garvey’s
poor health may have been a sign that she had never fully recuperated
from her earlier bouts with malaria. She never disclosed a diagnosis or any
treatment of her illness and only referred to it incidentally, such as she had
lacked ‘‘an appetite’’ for months.
∑∞
Other writers of the time noted Jacques Garvey’s small stature and
how she often looked ‘‘frail.’’ When discussing her dedication to Garvey,
George McGuire wrote that in spite of her ‘‘slender build, and apparently
frail constitution,’’ she ‘‘surmounted all barriers at the risk of a general
breakdown.’’ Martha Verbrugge’s study on nineteenth-century women
and personal health helps us to understand why Jacques Garvey’s small
body was linked to her poor health: ‘‘the occurrence of illness supported
the belief that women were physically weak; conversely, assumptions
about female frailty made sickness a more likely event.’’
∑≤ The result of
this widespread belief, which carried over into the twentieth century, was
that overwork and stress about her husband’s pending mail fraud appeal
seemed incidental to the fact that she was a petite woman who could be
presumed to be inevitably sick. This idea further erroneously implied that
rest and relaxation could not make her well.


--- PAGE 70 ---
the ideas of my husband 57
We may never know the cause of Jacques Garvey’s illness, but if the
advertisements for products to rejuvenate the body are any indication, she
was deﬁnitely not alone. The Negro World, New York Age, and Chicago
Defender carried numerous advertisements for tonics, pills, vitamins, and
potions, exhorting: ‘‘do you suffer from:  TB, Constipation, Catarrh,
Bronchitis, Asthma, Weak Lungs, Weakness, Run Down, Night Sweats,
Hemorrhages, Loss of Weight or Strength, Nervous Dyspepsia, Loss of
Appetite, Malnutrition, Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Chronic Constipation,
Bad Blood Diseases, Painful Conditions of the Kidneys, Bladder or Pelvic
Organs? If you do write at once to Dr. Ivy’s Free Booklet of Advice and
Information.’’
∑≥ Many ads speciﬁcally targeted women. The Pelvo Medi-
cal Company, for example, advertised in the New York Age on 25 March
1921: ‘‘weak women attention: If you su√er from female troubles such
as ovarian pains, pains in the lower part of your stomach, bearing down
pains, headache, backache, painful or irregular periods. If you have that
tired, worn out, nervous feeling so common to women—Feel well and
strong again.’’ Chronic sickness was either a part of black life or entrepre-
neurs tapped into, and magniﬁed, common bodily aliments. Historically,
poor people in the United States have had the least access to traditional
health care, and the post–World War I environment did not alter this
reality, especially for African Americans. Lack of money meant that the
vast majority of black people never saw a physician until their illness was
chronic and often irreversible. The unia addressed this concern through
preventive health advice. Editors of the Negro World ran an occasional
column, entitled ‘‘Health Talks,’’ that featured advice on how to keep
one’s body well.
How to remain physically and mentally ﬁt was on the minds of many
black people—especially women, since they were often the ones who
nursed their families. Jacques Garvey made it her business to take care
of her husband. On their working vacation, when he had an attack of
asthma because of their damp room, she made sure that in their next hotel
‘‘the room was warm before taking it.’’ She was Garvey’s caregiver, but
there were times when he was very attentive to her needs, and he sensed
when she needed to relax. He took her on ‘‘delightful drives’’ through the
cities they visited when she was ‘‘upset,’’ and she cherished these times.
∑∂
Jacques Garvey enjoyed being a passenger and sight-seer, and during these
private hours their lives resembled those of other newlyweds. But these
amusements and nourishing moments were too few, and it appears that
she often su√ered alone.


--- PAGE 71 ---
58 the ideas of my husband
Although illness can foster dependency, it can also be a way through
which people assert themselves, express frustration, and exert control over
their lives, as it was for Jacques Garvey.∑∑ Her political life had taxed her
physical well-being, and the fact that she and her new husband had a
working vacation instead of a traditional wedding trip further demon-
strates their hectic lifestyle. Ironically, when she was sick she had more
inﬂuence over her time and an excuse not to meet all of Garvey’s and the
unia’s demands. No doubt what she really needed was an extended rest,
and this she was unable to get.
When the U.S. Circuit Court rejected Garvey’s appeal on 2 February
1925, his wife once again had to summon the strength to deal with the
inevitable. On 23 March the Supreme Court of New York refused to
review the case, and a bench warrant was issued for Garvey’s arrest. The
couple was returning from a speaking tour in Detroit when he was ap-
prehended by marshals at the 125th Street train station in Harlem. He was
taken to the Tombs in New York to await a train that would take him to
the Atlanta federal penitentiary.
Assuming control of the situation, Jacques Garvey immediately con-
tacted their lawyer and unia o≈cers. ‘‘That night at Liberty Hall I had
di≈culty in preventing some of the members from demonstrating on the
streets. I calmed them with assurance—which I doubted—that justice
eventually would prevail,’’ she wrote.
∑∏ Understanding the importance of
remaining rational, especially when others were operating on an emo-
tional level, Jacques Garvey thought that a public street demonstration
would do more harm than good. In the end she was able to convince
Garveyites not to engage in protest. Her leadership was not paternal and
dictatorial but maternal and optimistic. Again, she combined socially
constructed feminine qualities (consoler and comforter) to navigate a
public (i.e., male) space.
This was not the ﬁrst time that Amy Jacques Garvey had navigated a
public space with feminine characteristics. As a spokesperson for the
unia, she had brought hope to discouraged black people before. One of
her most memorable experiences had been in Baton Rouge, Louisiana,
where ‘‘the people were tense and nervous; there had been a lynching
there the previous night, the horrors of which were related to [her] in de-
tail.’’ They advised her ‘‘not to speak and take the next train out of town,
as they did not want anything to happen’’ to her. Jacques Garvey appreci-
ated their concern but said that she ‘‘could not run out on them like that;
they needed comfort and cheer. So [they] agreed to have an early service.’’


--- PAGE 72 ---
the ideas of my husband 59
After the singing of hymns and prayers, she ‘‘preached the sermon.’’ Her
text was taken from Isaiah 40, Verses 1–6, which begins ‘‘Comfort ye,
comfort ye my people.’’ From the moans from the ‘‘Amen Corner’’ and
expressions such as, ‘‘T ell it, sister, tell it! Hallelujah!,’’ she felt that her talk
was a success. The method she employed that night—transforming a
tense moment into a setting of exhilaration—became part of her typical
lecture style.
∑π
Across the country, while Garvey was in prison, Jacques Garvey
‘‘preached the sermon’’ at a time when the majority of pulpits represented
the epitome of male hegemony. Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham’s seminal
study on the women’s movement in the Black Baptist Church notes that
even ‘‘the feminist theology of the black Baptist church never altered the
hierarchical structure of the church by revolutionizing power relations
between the sexes.’’
∑∫ In denying women the right to preach and teach in a
formal setting, the Black Baptist Church was similar to most institu-
tionalized religions of the day. Jacques Garvey was not a missionary, let
alone a minister, but she aggressively took the initiative to preach. One
can easily imagine her drawing from Isaiah 40:5 and repeating that ‘‘all the
glory of the Lord shall be revealed’’ if one followed the unia’s path.
Strikingly, she selected biblical verses that could be ‘‘feminized’’; that is, it
was the duty of all unia women to bring comfort to their families, and
Jacques Garvey easily moved this vernacular from the intimacy of the
home to a public space. Although not a controversial declaration, her
public message helped to expand what was considered ‘‘appropriate’’ ac-
tivism for a woman.
With Garvey’s incarceration, Jacques Garvey ably moved from the
background to the foreground and set the tone for the unia during this
crisis. In her husband’s absence she saw herself as the organization’s leader
and displayed a conﬁdent persona to inspire others to have faith in her
ability and judgment. She personiﬁed the stoic wife that Garvey had
come to rely on and represented herself as the voice of reason to the
membership.
Although her public sermons and talks raised awareness of the unjust
nature of Garvey’s case, legally her hands were tied and she was unable to
prevent his transfer from New York to the Georgia federal penitentiary.
Fear that he would have to serve the maximum sentence of ﬁve years made
Jacques Garvey even more determined to be with him on the ride to
Atlanta. unia members purchased her ticket, gave her extra money for a
‘‘drawing-room compartment in the pullman,’’ and made sure that she


--- PAGE 73 ---
60 the ideas of my husband
was on the right train. On board, the conductor instructed her to move to
another car, but she would not ‘‘budge,’’ and in Washington she secured
a private room in the Pullman. Apparently the guards were lenient and
allowed Garvey to share this compartment with his wife until they arrived
in Atlanta. It was in the Pullman compartment that Garvey dictated to
her his instructions for unia o≈cers and his ‘‘messages’’ for the Negro
World.
∑Ω
In Atlanta, Jacques Garvey was told that she could not see her husband
for two weeks, so she returned to Manhattan and went directly to the
Chelsea Bank to close out his personal account to pay their past due
household bill. But to her astonishment, the bank manager ‘‘brought
back [only] eight dollars, and a slip from the ledger clerk verifying the
balance. I had to summon all of my courage to face this situation,’’ she
wrote.
∏≠
It is unclear why Jacques Garvey continued to have conﬁdence in
Garvey when it came to their ﬁnances. Perhaps their lifestyle gave her the
impression that they had money. In any event, not only was she con-
cerned about her personal welfare, but also she now carried the burden of
once again raising funds for his legal defense. If this pressure were not
enough, a few days later she was summoned to the district attorney’s o≈ce
to pay the $1,000 court costs and ﬁne levied against Garvey. She brought
bsl stock certiﬁcates, which were checked by the clerk. Jacques Garvey
describes how ‘‘the hurt in my eyes was so eloquent, that he quickly
dismissed me, saying, ‘You may go.’ ’’
∏∞ It is interesting that in this en-
counter she did not feel the need to be stoic as she always had for the unia
membership. But did Jacques Garvey really feel so downtrodden that day,
or did she purposely look pitiful to stall o≈cers of the court? Either way,
an aspect of her burden had been lifted for the time being, and she could
concentrate on Garvey’s release from Atlanta.
Jacques Garvey’s next task was to raise money to continue Garvey’s
legal defense. This time, though, she had to make sure that the funds
would not be subject to conﬁscation by the district attorney’s o≈ce. To
this end, ‘‘I had to hide some of it in a bank in a nearby state, and a small
amount in another bank in the old section of New York.’’ To ensure that
she was not followed, she traveled a variety of routes to these banks, and
‘‘sometimes the cold numbed my feet and hands, but concealed on my
person was that precious money.’’ She was also very concerned about
Garvey, whom she visited every three weeks. He asked for money and
‘‘special gifts’’ that she could have sent directly from large department


--- PAGE 74 ---
the ideas of my husband 61
stores like ‘‘Macy’s or Gimbels.’’ She did her best to fulﬁll all of his
requests and keep him in a good mood. In turn, he planned her speaking/
fund-raising itinerary from his jail cell to maintain a constant ﬂow of
money for his legal defense fund.∏≤
With Garvey jailed, the federal government began to pay closer atten-
tion to Jacques Garvey’s role in maintaining the unia movement. New
York assistant attorney Edward S. Silver advised that Marcus Garvey was
‘‘at present instrumental in the furtherance of the scheme for which he
was convicted and sentenced,’’ and that ‘‘Mrs. Garvey received her in-
structions from him and as a result she was using the mails to defraud the
Negro people throughout the United States.’’ This matter appeared to be
‘‘properly one coming under the jurisdiction of the Postal authorities.’’
∏≥
A copy of this report was forwarded to the postmaster general and the
warden in Atlanta. These communications and enclosures were ‘‘referred
for consideration with other papers bearing on the matter.’’
∏∂
Acutely aware that ‘‘receiving instructions’’ from Garvey was not
enough to implicate Jacques Garvey, the U.S. government began to try to
link her exchanges with him to appeals for funds to buy a school in
Virginia that was ‘‘worth a quarter of a million dollars, when in fact there
was not as much as $1,000 invested in it.’’
∏∑ The unia o≈cers in New York
had placed a down payment on the school and sought membership sup-
port to complete the purchase. But this in itself was not a crime, and once
Garvey learned of the government’s attempt to bring his wife into the
matter, he was outraged. In a lengthy letter to Warden Snooks, he de-
clared that his ‘‘wife made no such appeal, and [he] challenge[d] any one
to honestly present such communication sent to [his] wife by way of
instructions and any such appeals for funds for any school as alleged.’’
Garvey repeated several times in the letter that Jacques Garvey had ‘‘made
no appeal with intent to defraud anyone and I dare anyone to so charge
her.’’ He concluded that his wife was not a unia o≈cer and had no
connection with the school.
∏∏ In the end, the government withdrew from
this line of attack.
Well aware that the federal government was watching her every move,
Jacques Garvey must have been caught o√ guard when she received an
a≈rmative response to her nationalization petition, ﬁled ﬁve years earlier.
Apparently the complicated bureaucracy of federal agencies had worked
to her advantage. The Department of Labor did not have a clue about her
current circumstances, and the fact that she had indicated on her applica-
tion for naturalization that her husband resided with her, as opposed to an


--- PAGE 75 ---
62 the ideas of my husband
Atlanta jail cell, shows that they made no connection between the couple.
It is ironic that on 6 July 1926, when she signed an oath of allegiance to the
United States, government o≈cials were attempting to implicate her in a
school fraud.
∏π
As the federal government was revamping its e√orts to stiﬂe the unia
movement completely, the Garveys undertook another project to garner
sympathy and support for the cause. After three months in jail, Marcus
Garvey believed that another edited volume of Philosophy and Opinions
would go a long way toward showing him in a proper light. Jacques
Garvey recalls that he ‘‘asked me to get together enough of his speeches,
writings, and extracts of the trial, and edit them for a book of about 400
pages; he wanted this done in a hurry.’’
∏∫ Like the ﬁrst volume, the second
was largely a compilation of material previously published in the Negro
World. No doubt, Jacques Garvey’s advocate role clouded her ability to
function as an objective editor. For his part, Garvey remained ﬁrmly
committed to his platform, so he saw no need to revise his ideas or prose.
Hence the reprints in the second volume are mostly identical to the
originals.
The second volume of Philosophy and Opinions, however, does provide
a few examples of Jacques Garvey falling back to a more conservative
position, reminiscent of some of the editorial deletions she made in the
ﬁrst volume. For instance, in Garvey’s last speech before his incarceration,
he said, ‘‘They brought 40,000,000 black men from Africa who never
disturbed the peace of the world and black men shall put up a ﬁght that
shall write a page upon the history of human a√airs.’’
∏Ω But in the second
volume reprint, Jacques Garvey inserted the word ‘‘constitutional’’ before
the word ‘‘ﬁght.’’ Her change implies that ‘‘black men’’ were not going to
be volatile, but civil and legal. Thus, it became a civil rights argument
versus the possibility of a bloody battle. In the same speech she also
substituted the word ‘‘glaring’’ for ‘‘bloody.’’
Moreover, Jacques Garvey prefaced one of Garvey’s most famous es-
says, ‘‘An Appeal to the Souls of White America,’’ with the biblical verse
‘‘Blessed are the peacemakers; for they shall be called the children of God.
Matt v.9.’’ This verse rea≈rmed that Garvey’s essay was indeed a humble
appeal rather than one inviting disharmony and destruction. These ex-
amples of editorial tampering in the second volume are the exceptions,
however. Overall, Jacques Garvey opted for subtle changes, pruning au-
dience responses (applause and laughter) along with subheadings. She


--- PAGE 76 ---
the ideas of my husband 63
resolved inconsistencies in dates and numbers, corrected spelling and
grammatical errors, and ﬁne-tuned Garvey’s style.π≠
Time may have been a factor in her decision not to make substantial
changes in the original, but we must also consider the possibility that she
was becoming even more committed to controversial—and, at times,
radical—political ideas. In the second volume, the thrust of Garvey’s voice
is never compromised. This second text was three times longer than the
ﬁrst and far more di≈cult to assemble. Jacques Garvey thought that she
had managed the impossible when she was able to rush him the ﬁrst copy
of The Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey, Volume II (1925). Gar-
vey, however, callously said, ‘‘Now I want you to send free copies to
Senators, Congressmen and prominent men who might be interested in
my case, as I want to make another application for a pardon.’’ After
completing this task, she was once again su√ering from ill health. One
of her eyes had become badly strained, she weighed only ninety-eight
pounds, and her blood pressure was low.
π∞
Over these early years, Jacques Garvey had become an increasingly
public ﬁgure and one well versed in unia operations, though all of her
work continued to be undertaken to ‘‘perpetuate the ideas of [her] hus-
band.’’ In her public speaking on his behalf and in her editing of his
writings, we see a woman both emerging in her own right and dedicating
herself to Pan-African ideas. Unquestionably, though, as Honor Ford
Smith of the Jamaican feminist theater group Sistren points out, Jacques
Garvey ‘‘typiﬁed the ideal image’’ of the woman in the unia as it devel-
oped in the United States. Even though ‘‘her literary and intellectual skills
account for much of the documentation of the movement, she did not
question her role as wife, . . . combining these duties with her respon-
sibilities as a tireless supporter of Garvey.’’
π≤
The challenge for Jacques Garvey at this point was to determine how
she could keep her husband at the center of her world while maintaining
her health and a sense of self. As the next chapter explores, by creating a
woman’s page in the Negro World she was able to keep Garvey’s agenda in
the forefront and still express her own budding ideas. These editorials also
proved therapeutic because they allowed her to release stressful emotions,
particularly anger and frustration, toward people whom she believed had
caused her grief and anguish. Indeed, Jacques Garvey’s writings on the
woman’s page mark a transition from perpetuating Garvey’s ideas to de-
veloping her own independent intellectual perspective.


--- PAGE 77 ---
4 Our Women and What They Think
I
n her dual political commitment to a Pan-African agenda and to
feminist ideas, and to her personal commitment to meeting her
husband’s needs as well as those for her own development and
expression, Amy Jacques Garvey faced numerous challenges. Her
solution to these apparently contradictory commitments was to
adopt an approach that I call ‘‘community feminism.’’ Her nearly two
hundred editorials for the Negro World—most of which were written
during Garvey’s imprisonment—provide a window for examining this
concept more fully.
In essence, community feminists are women who may or may not live
in a coverture relationship; either way, their activism is focused on as-
sisting both the men and the women in their lives—whether husbands
or sisters, fathers or mothers, sons or daughters—along with initiating
and participating in activities to ‘‘uplift’’ their communities. Despite this
‘‘helpmate’’ focus, community feminists are undeniably feminists in that
their activism discerns the conﬁguration of oppressive power relations,
shatters masculinist claims of women as intellectually inferior, and seeks
to empower women by expanding their roles and options. Best under-
stood through poststructuralist ideas of relativism and di√erence, com-
munity feminism counters a macropolitical model that implies that there
is something inherently ‘‘pure’’ or ‘‘essential’’ to feminist theory. By decen-
tering feminist epistemologies, the multiple identities of black women,
along with communitarian ideas (the rejection of self-interest and the
autonomous individual in recognition of the self as collective, interdepen-
dent, and relational), take center stage.
∞ Of crucial relevance to this theory
is the interplay between helpmate and leadership roles, both of which
come up repeatedly in Jacques Garvey’s writings.
As the helpmate of one of the most talked about political activists in
the black diaspora in general and Harlem in particular, Jacques Garvey


--- PAGE 78 ---
our women &  what they think 65
‘‘endeavor[ed] to be conversant with subjects that would help in his ca-
reer.’’≤ She did this by reading a diverse mix of newspapers and magazines
daily, arming herself with local, regional, and international information.
In many ways, Jacques Garvey’s intellectual development gave rise to her
expanding position within the black liberation movement. It is hard to
keep a thoughtful person, and more poignantly an organic intellectual,
silent and hemmed in the corner, and Jacques Garvey was no exception.
Growing conﬁdent in her opinion on just about everything tangen-
tially related to black people, she positioned herself to become a more
visible leader in the Universal Negro Improvement Association (unia) by
directly associating herself with the organization’s most inﬂuential propa-
ganda tool, its newspaper, Negro World. She took this stand when Marcus
Garvey was unable to wield direct power over the organization from his
Atlanta prison cell. Believing that she had a speciﬁc duty to address the
concerns of women in the movement, she consolidated all of her news-
paper clippings and magazines that were laced with her counterargu-
ments scrolled in the margins, and fused them into editorial commentary.
Overall, this material became the fodder for her motivational, thoughtful,
and, at times, scathing analyses.
Between February 1924 and June 1927 Jacques Garvey served as an
associate editor of the Negro World and prepared the woman’s page, ‘‘Our
Women and What They Think,’’ which she had introduced. T. Thomas
Fortune, editor of the newspaper during the woman’s page run, was gen-
uinely impressed with Jacques Garvey’s editorial ‘‘knack,’’ which ‘‘just
seem[ed] to come natural to her.’’ She had to ‘‘be born with genius to
do it.’’
≥ Her ‘‘genius,’’ however, does not brilliantly shine through each
weekly edition. In fact, at a glance the woman’s page appears to be a
hodgepodge of international sentiments regarding women. A compre-
hensive evaluation, though, reveals an eclectic pattern that hammered
home the need for women to work as political agents as well as to perform
as helpmates, acknowledging the di≈culties related to this nurturing role.
Although one might debate the various strategies or most appropriate
means of achieving the goal, the goal was still the same—empowerment
through self-determination and nationhood in Africa.
The appearance of the woman’s page coincided with the most tur-
bulent period of the unia. African American leaders had condescendingly
denounced Garveyites as the ‘‘humblest’’ and ‘‘primitive minded Ne-
groes,’’ and the press generally referred to Black Star Steamship Line
Company (bsl) ships as ‘‘ﬂoating co≈ns.’’ Marcus Garvey’s 1925 meeting


--- PAGE 79 ---
66 our women &  what they think
with the grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan had further tarnished his
reputation among African Americans, along with his indictment on mail
fraud charges in 1923, and his subsequent conviction and inprisonment in
Atlanta in 1925.
Recognizing that the Negro World and its printing plant constituted
the unia’s strongest and most viable enterprise, Jacques Garvey labored,
under these trying circumstances, to produce inspiring essays to galvanize
the black masses to support the movement to which her husband had
given his ‘‘whole existence.’’ Margaret Ward has observed that the high
points of women’s participation in nationalist movements have been ‘‘also
moments of exceptional political crisis, when women were either drawn
into the movement because of temporary (enforced) absence of men, or
they were encouraged to participate because a strong, uniﬁed front was
desperately needed.’’
∂ Jacques Garvey’s broadened leadership role in the
unia followed this trend.
For some Garveyites, however, even a crisis did not justify allowing a
woman at the helm. Soon after Garvey’s arrest in 1923, Jacques Garvey was
forced to publicly defend her expanded role in the unia. Several men
detailed their—and perhaps others’—dissatisfaction with her function in
a commentary potently entitled ‘‘Look Out for Mud.’’ This snipe, dated
14 July 1923, stated that Marcus Garvey ‘‘had designated three men among
the chosen o≈cers of the association to be responsible heads during his
absence. Mrs. Garvey is not part of this committee. Mrs. Garvey is not an
o≈cer of the association. Mrs. Garvey doesn’t actively or passively con-
trol the organization.’’ They concluded, ‘‘It is beneath the dignity of
common decency to attempt to drag the name of an innocent and helpless
woman into an arena where she cannot properly defend herself.’’
∑ In a
not-too-roundabout way, these men were in e√ect charging that Jacques
Garvey was in fact functioning as an elected o≈cial, but they cloaked
their concern in language that appeared to be defending her character as a
woman. In raising objections to her role, these men, who espoused self-
determination and self-reliance for the ‘‘Nation’’ but expected the op-
posite in gender relations, obviously believed that politics was men’s terri-
tory and were actually defending the cornerstone of their status in the
organization.
In a ‘‘Letter to the Editor,’’ Jacques Garvey replied: ‘‘[Y]ou have charac-
terized me as helpless. . . . I am innocent of the honor of having the unia


--- PAGE 80 ---
our women &  what they think 67
turned over to me by my husband, but I am not innocent of the depths to
which colored men can stoop to further their petty schemes even at the
expense of a downtrodden race such as ours.’’ She concluded that ‘‘with
my unusual general knowledge and experience for a young woman, may I
not ask if the word ‘helpless’ is not misapplied?’’ Her statement not only
publicly questioned the attitude and behavior of male leaders but focused
on her conﬁdence in her own skills and intelligence to lead the organiza-
tion. By placing the onus back on them, she conveyed her sentiments in a
way that forced them to rethink their accusations of her stepping beyond
her ‘‘place’’ as a woman.
∏ More importantly, while Jacques Garvey ac-
cepted her marital responsibilities to Marcus Garvey, she refused to allow
other men to occupy a position of authority over her. Her community
feminism empowered her to establish personal parameters regarding her
public and private roles, and only her husband had the right to question
her decisions.
Three years later, in 1926, George Weston accused her of instigating
conﬂict between American and West Indian members of the unia. Wes-
ton, president of the New York division, alleged that she had pitted him
against William Sherrill, an African American who was acting president-
general, in order to personally assume control of the unia. Jacques Garvey
batted away this accusation in a letter to the editor of the Negro World: ‘‘I
am compelled to contra[dict] the untrue statements . . . to wit Garvey
seeks to dethrone William Sherrill . . . and place in power his second wife
Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey. . . . I am not an o≈cer of the Universal Negro
Improvement Association nor am I desirous of being an o≈cer. At no
time has Marcus Garvey suggested nor intimated that he was desirous of
having me act for him during his imprisonment.’’ By this time, the pres-
sure against her had mounted to the boiling point. One ‘‘needs the pa-
tience of a Job to deal with our people in any mass movement,’’ she
declared.
π Even though Jacques Garvey was clearly a driving force, she
made sure everyone understood who was in charge of the organization
by stating, ‘‘If he wanted to place me at the head of a√airs, he would
have made known his desires to the people and they would have acted
on same.’’
∫
In regard to Sherrill and Weston, she wrote, ‘‘Both of these men have
conducted these a√airs without even informing Garvey of their activities
nor paying the slightest attention to his instruction.’’ She summed up her
position in this way: ‘‘If Mrs. Garvey rules, it will be as if Garvey himself


--- PAGE 81 ---
68 our women &  what they think
ruled, but when Sherrill rules he exhorts the people to build up apartment
houses in America and solve the problem, and Africa can be redeemed
later.’’
Ω
On several occasions, Marcus Garvey jumped into this mean-spirited
fray in letters to the Negro World in support of his wife. Once he stated,
‘‘This is to certify that my wife, Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey[,] has during
the period of my incarceration, remained loyal and devoted to me in all
her duties and obligations as a true and loving wife.’’ She had ‘‘ceaselessly
worked, with tremendous opposition, to protect and defend me during
this my time of trial and su√ering in the interest of a cause I almost
neglected her to service.’’ Finally, he felt ‘‘great sorrow’’ that his ‘‘pres-
ent situation, rendered [him] unable to give her the protection necessary
and to show my appreciation of her unselﬁsh love to me and to the cause
I love.’’
∞≠
Throughout her husband’s imprisonment, Jacques Garvey fearlessly
defended herself, both vocally and in print, against the opposition, whom
she characterized as ‘‘spineless and cowardly . . . colleagues, who will
shrink with fear and hesitate to move forward.’’
∞∞ No doubt her stinging
disapproval of Weston and Sherrill, two inﬂuential unia o≈cers, fur-
ther alienated her from their constituency. In addition, the fact that in
her editorials she continually unleashed her frustration on male leaders
whom, in general, she regarded as ‘‘indolent associates’’ who were will-
ing to ‘‘bask in the Glory’’ and ‘‘trade on’’ the name and achievements
of Garvey, helped to generate the reputation that she was di≈cult to
work with.
∞≤
When not in a defensive mode, Jacques Garvey’s writings encompassed
a wide variety of topics; as a group they provide rich documentation of her
philosophical worldview, her private a√airs, and her sincere desire to
include black women in the redemptive struggle. ‘‘The exigencies of this
present age require that women take their place beside their men,’’ she
wrote. She had created the woman’s page of the Negro World so that
women could contribute to the ‘‘race ﬁrst’’ movement ‘‘whether in the
form of news articles, poems or otherwise.’’
∞≥
During this period most women’s sections in newspapers merely high-
lighted the ﬁne points of etiquette, fashion, and food recipes. In the
Chicago Defender ’s occasional column, ‘‘Woman,’’ introduced in 1910,
discussions ranged from the proper ways to mourn a dead husband to the
ornamentation of silk stockings. One article called on club women in the
North to assist our ‘‘hard working ministers in the education of the newly


--- PAGE 82 ---
our women &  what they think 69
emigrated public from the South, into our way of living: teach them, ﬁrst,
to remember that they have left the South and they must wear their
Sunday clothes during the week.’’ The writer concluded, ‘‘If our club
women don’t get busy along this line, we may be disgraced by some
unthinking individual from down home.’’ Another article, by an irate
‘‘club woman,’’ noted that ‘‘many of our women have become an eyesore
on the street cars, in the street; in the public places and theaters, because
they do not act or dress right. . . . [T]heir heads are covered with rags and
shawls. . . . [O]ut in the stockyards they go into the pay o≈ce with their
hands full of vitals, making loud noises, and cutting up in general.’’ The
New York Age’s column ‘‘Of Interest to Women,’’ which appeared by 1917,
also gave recipes, helpful hints on food preparation, and shortcuts for
household chores, as well as emphasized rules on women’s ‘‘appropriate’’
behavior and appearance.
∞∂
Jacques Garvey balked at the frivolity of these columns, maintaining
that ‘‘fashions and [housewives’] topics only’’ were poor ‘‘reﬂections on
the intelligence of our women.’’ Believing that ‘‘men have a higher appre-
ciation of us when they read our ambitions and achievements, and more
help would be given us,’’ she opted, instead, to create an open forum in
which women could share their ideas and opinions on serious matters. ‘‘In
this way we will be able to command a respectful hearing before the
world, and prove that Negro women are great thinkers as well as doers.’’
She invited the views of ladies young and old, ‘‘bobbed and unbobbed.’’
Her appeal to ‘‘all Negro women of all climes’’ recognized that class bar-
riers stood in the way of a united race movement; thus, she instructed the
unfortunate women who ‘‘cannot express [them]selves on paper [to] get
some one who is better equipped to clothe [their] sentiments in proper
language and send them into our o≈ce.’’ ‘‘It is common knowledge,’’ she
wrote, ‘‘that some of the most beautiful sentiments and lofty ideas ema-
nate from the brains of women who have [had] very little education.’’
∞∑ By
celebrating the genius of poor black women, Jacques Garvey turned Du
Bois’s popular mantra of the ‘‘talented few’’ directly on its elitist head.
It was her ‘‘aim to encourage Negro women to express their views on
subjects of interest to their communities and particularly a√ecting our
struggling race.’’
∞∏
Jacques Garvey led the way by printing editorials that situated femi-
nist proclivities within black nationalism; her commentary thus repre-
sents a struggle on behalf of women in the context of masculinist dis-
course. Her feminism, however, was entrenched in her conﬁdence that an


--- PAGE 83 ---
70 our women &  what they think
internalized Pan-African agenda (itself based on the romantic imagining
of a modern black nation) would minimize divisive di√erences among
black people, since ‘‘the nation is always conceived as a deep, horizontal
comradeship.’’
∞π
Her political position was grounded in an array of international ex-
amples. She paralleled the unia’s call for an ‘‘Africa for the Africans at
home and abroad’’ with discussions of the struggles of China and India to
be free from ‘‘European Powers,’’ and she applauded the Moors’ willing-
ness to engage in warfare to keep the French and Belgians out of North
Africa. Their combined actions, she argued, weakened ‘‘our common
oppressor and strengthened the prestige of one of the members of the
family of darker peoples of the world in the ﬁeld of achievement and
world power.’’
∞∫
Jacques Garvey was not alone among women in her attempts to fuel
a discussion that connected the political aspirations, racial histories
and cultures, and potential for collective ‘‘world power’’ among non-
European people. A few members of the National Association of Colored
Women, led by Margaret Murray Washington, were also spreading infor-
mation on ‘‘peoples of color the world over’’ to secure cooperation and ap-
preciation of the ‘‘darker races of the world.’’ In 1920 a new organization—
the International Council of Women of the Darker Races (icwdr)—was
formed. The icwdr was short lived but during its heyday, 1924, 150 Amer-
ican and 50 foreign women of color constituted ‘‘Committees of Seven’’ to
study the conditions and promote race literature in schools in order to
stimulate ‘‘a greater degree of race pride for their achievements.’’
∞Ω Both
the unia and cultural nationalists placed the study of race history high on
their agendas, and Jacques Garvey may well have applauded the e√orts of
the icwdr—though they would have never extended membership to her.
Although the council had similar intellectual goals, the unquestionably
elite pedigree of icwdr placed women like Jacques Garvey (those without
college degrees) on the outskirts. In contrast, the unia and its woman’s
page in the Negro World provided an avenue for all black women, regard-
less of class and caste, to participate as intellectuals in the Pan-African
struggle.
Convinced that the most e≈cient way black people could free them-
selves from the clutches of colonialism and rise to their highest potential
was to acquire the ‘‘knowledge that has made other races great,’’ Jacques
Garvey asserted that intelligence, particularly as it related to the modern
sciences and capitalism, was a globally respected virtue that was rewarded


--- PAGE 84 ---
our women &  what they think 71
with material wealth and power. T o be sure, some leaders used informa-
tion deviously; it took shrewd minds to rob, steal, and cheat entire nations
out of their natural resources, labor power, and possessions. Neverthe-
less, she warned her readers about the far-reaching hazards of ignorance:
‘‘When the mind is enslaved, physical slavery, in one shape or another,
soon follows.’’
≤≠
An independent black nation could spring forth if black people used
their skills and resources to develop their own territory as opposed to
acculturating into the American mainstream. Acculturation, to Jacques
Garvey, was akin to ‘‘parrot-like’’ behavior, and this is why she told her
readership that ‘‘the educated man is not necessarily a thinker.’’ Any
schooled person, she wrote, could ‘‘quote from the writings and theories
of great men.’’ The ‘‘really educated’’ person is one ‘‘who thinks for him-
self and is able to discover new truths.’’
≤∞
Tapping into the most uncontested political strategy for empower-
ment, Jacques Garvey’s writings on the imperative of education echoed
themes that had been popular among African Americans since the Re-
construction era. In his discussion of the rise of universal education
among ex-slave communities in the United States, James Anderson notes
that as a group they believed that ‘‘political and economic independence
or self-determination’’ could not be achieved ‘‘without ﬁrst becoming
organized, and organization was impossible without well-trained intel-
lectuals—teachers, ministers, politicians, managers, administrators, and
businessmen.’’
≤≤
Jacques Garvey surely would have agreed with this pronouncement. In
recalling the activities of women after Emancipation, she noted how a
mother would wash, iron, and perform odd jobs ‘‘so as to support her
children through school, giving to them what she never had—an educa-
tion.’’ The vexed history of women’s education and the even more contro-
versial conversations on the ‘‘appropriate’’ public roles for women pushed
Jacques Garvey to argue further that black women could superbly per-
form in any fashion if given the training and opportunity. She stated,
‘‘Look at her today, educated, independent and well equipped along all
lines to compete with her men and in many instances outclass them.’’
≤≥
As a connoisseur of international news, Jacques Garvey regularly com-
pared the ‘‘New Negro Woman’’ to that of other women in the world. She
commented that women of the East (India, Egypt, T urkey) were being
educated and no longer considered themselves ‘‘slaves to their husbands’’
but rather ‘‘intelligent, independent human beings [able] to assert and


--- PAGE 85 ---
72 our women &  what they think
maintain their rights in co-partnership with their men.’’ In this discus-
sion and others, Jacques Garvey connected the worldwide ‘‘awakening of
women’’ to their academic achievements, which ‘‘enhance[d] the prestige
of their own nations and race.’’ Not only was education pivotal to the
redemption of Africa (‘‘Africa does not want illiterate people now,’’ it
needs ‘‘job makers not job-hunters. The fellow who is looking for a job
had better stay right here and keep looking’’), but it would also lead to
women’s own personal freedom from marital bondage and the clutches of
colonists.
≤∂
At the turn of the century, Booker T. Washington and W. E. B. Du Bois
had set the parameters for a debate on formal education in African Ameri-
can life: despite the lack of clear boundaries between a classical liberal arts
education and industrial training, an artiﬁcial distinction was created
between the two. Disregarding this argument, Jacques Garvey focused
exclusively on the educational needs of women, putting forth the fun-
damental premise that ‘‘women have been endowed with the same mental
faculties as men.’’ Careful to keep her equality rhetoric within the pre-
scribed gender conventions, she added that although it was ‘‘common
knowledge that women are not as physically strong as men,’’ the Creator—
‘‘God Almighty’’—gave women other natural gifts to ‘‘repay’’ them for
their ‘‘physical weakness.’’ These attributes included ‘‘graciousness and
keenness of mind’’ and the ability to ‘‘control and order things systemati-
cally and economically.’’
≤∑
The educational concepts that Jacques Garvey promulgated in the
1920s are reminiscent of those of 1890s female reformers. In 1892 Anna
Cooper, a well-respected, formally educated, middle-class club woman,
whose text, A Voice from the South, is commemorated by literary scholars
as the ‘‘unparalleled articulation’’ of black feminist thought, declared, ‘‘As
you know that she is physically the weaker of the two, don’t stand from
under and leave her to bu√et the waves alone.’’ Girls needed encourage-
ment and scholarships though ‘‘not the boys less, but the girls more.’’
≤∏
In addition, Jacques Garvey’s writings reﬂect the prevailing attitude of
racial uplift and Christian ideologies that saturated postsecondary educa-
tional institutions of the time. For example, T. J. Morgan, secretary for the
American Baptist Home Mission Society (1892–1902), believed that black
women’s schooling ‘‘ought to be as thorough and as rigorous as men’s.’’
≤π A
higher education, Morgan argued, expanded the opportunities for black
women to earn a living outside of domestic service. Jacques Garvey, how-
ever, chose not to engage this point of view despite the glut of underpaid


--- PAGE 86 ---
our women &  what they think 73
working-class Garveyite women. Instead, she focused on the missionary
spirit that reinforced moral training and the need to work and sacriﬁce for
the race.
It is also revealing to contrast Jacques Garvey’s political perspective—
given her strong command of international history and current a√airs—
with Anna Cooper’s. Unlike Jacques Garvey, who saw the ‘‘race-ﬁrst’’
movement as a path to unity and mutual respect, Cooper proclaimed that
‘‘one race predominance means death,’’ and that a diversity of people was
necessary to give ‘‘birth to reciprocity and liberty.’’ Moreover, Cooper
took the passive position that ‘‘God and time’’ would work out the race
problem, whereas Jacques Garvey was adamant that black people could
not a√ord to wait for divine intervention, especially since they had the
power to control their own destiny. Cooper, in conjunction with other
black women intellectuals who championed integration, would undoubt-
edly have critically analyzed the unia as just another ‘‘new and improved
method of getting the answer [to the race problem] and clearing the slate:
amalgamation, deportation, colonization and all the other ations that
were ever devised or dreamt of.’’
≤∫ Though Cooper did not oppose the
idea of individuals leaving the United States if they so desired, she dis-
missed it as a political solution.
Like the e√orts of other black intellectuals of comparable stature—such
as Mary Church T errell, Frances Harper, Lugenia Burns Hope, and, of
course, Jacques Garvey—Cooper’s struggle to uplift her race (primarily
through formal education and Victorian morals) was laced with contra-
dictions. Kevin Gaines calls attention to how Cooper used uplift ideology
to uncover the ‘‘moral bankruptcy of white supremacy’’ while seeking the
support of white reformers and capitalist elites.
≤Ω As a Pan-Africanist,
Jacques Garvey could go only part of the way with her distinguished
contemporaries. She respected and agreed with their moral ideas, but it
was inconceivable to her that the New Negro Woman, by being well-
mannered and unnervingly accommodating, could sway white America
into sharing its resources. She considered any covenant with whites im-
possible because racism was too entrenched in U.S. society, and colonizers
were selﬁsh imperialists who would never share power with people whom
they considered inferior.
In addition to focusing on the need for education, Jacques Garvey’s edi-
torials highlighted the interplay between the familial and public lives of
women. She instructed black women to be competent mothers and to


--- PAGE 87 ---
74 our women &  what they think
a≈rm men in the movement for self-determination. At the same time, she
went beyond a relational view of self by anchoring her discourse within
the refashioning of gender roles so that women could do their part as
political leaders in building the black nation. Although emphasizing their
maternal role, Jacques Garvey di√ered from most of her peers in that she
believed that their nurturing traits allowed women to run not only their
homes and communities e≈ciently, but also their respective countries.
Dedicated to the idea that women could reorder the gender practices
of their communities in feminist directions, in the editorial ‘‘Women’s
Function in Life’’ Jacques Garvey addressed ‘‘whether woman’s place is in
the home, in business, in politics or in industry.’’ She understood that
countries were di√erent and women’s status varied; however, ‘‘present day
events convince us that women, lovely women if you please, are making
their presence felt in every walk of life.’’ The woman ‘‘of today has a place
in nearly all phases of man’s life’’; moreover, ‘‘where such a place is not yet
properly established her voice is heard in that regard.’’
≥≠
To ensure that her readership recognized that her position di√ered
from her husband’s traditional view of patriarchy, Jacques Garvey restated
in numerous editorials that women must not be denied roles as intellec-
tuals and political architects. Under the title ‘‘No Sex in Brains and Abil-
ity,’’ she wrote that ‘‘some men declare that women should remain in the
homes and leave professions and legislation to men, but this is an anti-
quated belief, and has been exploded by woman’s competency in these
new ﬁelds and further by the fact that their homes have not su√ered by a
division of their time and interest.’’
≥∞
She continued to bolster her opinion by answering the question, ‘‘Will
the Entrance of Women in Politics A√ect Homelife?,’’ with the claim that
men tend not to realize the value of women in the home until they decide
to enter electoral politics or political movements; then they bemoan,
‘‘Our homes will be broken up, our children will be rejected.’’ Despite the
highly charged disapproval of some men, Jacques Garvey declared that
family life had not been neglected by women’s entry into politics but had
in fact beneﬁted from it because legislative policies a√ected the home,
communities, and nation. The only pertinent question to be addressed
was how much time a woman should spend in her home and how much
she should devote to politics. Without hesitation Jacques Garvey wrote:
‘‘This is a matter for the individual and women are rational and reason-
able enough to give as much time in the home as the exigencies of the


--- PAGE 88 ---
our women &  what they think 75
hour demand. Woman’s inherent self-sacriﬁce and love will inﬂuence her
decision in this direction.’’≥≤
Jacques Garvey wanted her readership to understand how the familiar
and public spheres were complementary. Thus, in her editorials she also
explored the private lives of women as helpmates and the important rami-
ﬁcations that their home life had for nation building. A helpmate role did
not debilitate women, she professed, but instead gave them authority to
wield inﬂuence over men. In the editorial ‘‘Woman as Man’s Helper,’’ she
stated that if it were not for women, ‘‘men would plunge more deeply in
the mire of mistakes than they do. What great man has ever done any
proﬁtable thing without the help of some good woman?’’ She o√ered this
question to generate dialogue among her readership about the empower-
ing nature of a woman’s relationship to a man, which, by the way, put men
at ease with women’s expanding roles. She concluded, ‘‘However great a
thing may be, or whatever other men are consulted, even if it is clan-
destinely done, bank on it, there is a woman in the case before all con-
sultations come to a close.’’
≥≥ Even though a woman might not occupy the
limelight or a position of visible inﬂuence, she emphatically shaped the
outcome of important decisions. Jacques Garvey reiterated this idea in the
editorial ‘‘The Joy of Living’’: ‘‘A woman may be born into this world for
the purpose of mothering and training the President of a nation; another
may be born to be the wife of a great statesman, whose single word could
decide the destinies of millions of people.’’
≥∂ To speak of women being
‘‘born’’ was simply another way for Jacques Garvey to create a narrative
around presumed intrinsic qualities in women. The idea that speciﬁc
traits (good judgment, mother wit) were ingrained in the female mind
and could be used for covert and overt purposes served as a means to
celebrate the inﬁnite possibilities of women.
Although Jacques Garvey encouraged black women to be guided by
an African consciousness and to let their voices be heard in political and
civic a√airs, by no means did she want them to be ‘‘liberated’’ from all
gender-speciﬁc roles. She believed, like Marcus Garvey, that these were
innate and beneﬁcial to both women and men, hence to the community.
Women were particularly suited to be nurturers, Jacques Garvey said,
despite the fact that this role set a restrictive standard for appropriate
behavior. Her discussion of a black woman’s relational self, however, did
call into question the contemporary perception that helpmates consis-
tently occupied a second-class status.


--- PAGE 89 ---
76 our women &  what they think
The social construction of the term ‘‘helpmate’’ has been inaccurately
reduced, largely by radical feminists, to imply passivity. Jean Bethke
Elshtain argues insistently that too often feminists, radicals, and re-
formers analyze traditional community and family as ‘‘reactionary by
deﬁnition’’ and ‘‘repressive by nature.’’ By doing so, they obfuscate rather
than illuminate how women actually grapple with and refashion family
and community in ways that are beneﬁcial to them. For example, at the
turn of the century, Deborah Gray White observes, black club women
ﬁercely debated woman’s place in the uplift movement; many concluded
that ‘‘a woman exercised her greatest inﬂuence on behalf of the race in
her role as wife, mother, and teacher.’’ For them, ‘‘this did not imply
notions of woman’s inferiority to man’’ because, as club woman Alice
White points out, ‘‘woman is man’s equal intellectually.’’ Moreover, most
black women in the 1920s did not passively surrender to the will or whims
of black men. The contested history of black female and male ideological
and relational di√erences, which have extended across class and geo-
graphic lines, is proof that they were active and assertive in varying ways.
≥∑
Jacques Garvey’s feminism must be understood within this cultural
paradigm. Certainly, cultural essentialism is haunting, and a totalizing
vision of black people is also problematic; nonetheless, for Garveyites,
submissive and docile behavior was the antithesis not only to a progressive
black identity (based on phenotype and a cultural commitment to the
black world) but also to nationhood building, which required purposeful
agency—a combination of leaders and supporters—from all of its mem-
bers. As a community feminist, Jacques Garvey assisted black women in
reconciling these two (helpmate and leader) di√erent paths by exposing
the underlying unity of the di√erent approaches.
One reason that Amy Jacques Garvey was able to expend so much energy
in the Pan-African struggle during the 1920s was that she was not yet a
mother to her own children, although she may have seen herself as a
mother to the race. Her writings on motherhood most closely resemble
those of the black club women of the period. Together their words articu-
late the need for properly reared children. Jacques Garvey observed that
‘‘ill-bred children are a menace to any country because they develop into
individuals who take on vices that often wreck their homes and endanger
the safety of their communities.’’ She viewed the proper guidance of
children as important not just for race betterment, as black club women


--- PAGE 90 ---
our women &  what they think 77
preached, but to bring character, dignity, and skills to the future nation
in Africa.≥∏
It was the importance of this responsibility to bear and raise children
that inspired Jacques Garvey to place a section on the woman’s page
directly under the advice of the Universal Black Cross Nurses. The Black
Cross Nurses demanded a sound health program especially for children.
They were committed to reaching a standard of knowledge where they
would not accept ‘‘disease as something inevitable, something inconve-
nient but necessary, a visitation from the Supreme Being but instead focus
their e√orts to transgress nature’s laws.’’
≥π The nurses answered questions
relating to the care and feeding of infants and children. Good health and
the formal education of mothers and children were necessary to prepare
the ‘‘Negro of Tomorrow.’’
It was primarily the mother who shaped the minds of her children,
and—not surprisingly—Jacques Garvey maintained that the most e≈-
cient, organized, and prepared woman to handle this monumental task
was an educated one. In writing about the educated mother, she insisted
that women should ‘‘be given every opportunity to develop intellectually
so that their o√-spring may inherit such a quality.’’ Nevertheless, educa-
tional opportunities for most black women were few and far between.
Jacques Garvey responded to this reality with suggestions on how women
could create avenues to learn, gather information, and share it with their
children. For example, she was an avid reader and instructed women to
cultivate a ‘‘taste for serious reading.’’ Do not throw away newspapers but
‘‘put a wrapper on it and mail it’’ to others, she advised. Books should be
sent as gifts, and mothers should tell children stories from their reading
material. Reading should become a family event. Jacques Garvey knew
from her own childhood experience that this was possible. Her father
had stimulated her intellect, and she believed that parents, particularly
mothers, had the same obligation to their children. In one editorial she
observed, ‘‘Meek docile women usually rear puny, e√eminate men, and
ignorance certainly begets ignorance.’’
≥∫ As a community feminist, she
advocated educating mothers not for self and personal privilege but for
community advancement.
The importance of motherhood elicited the most wholehearted agree-
ment from Jacques Garvey’s readers, who submitted numerous articles
exalting women’s maternal role. One writer stated that a mother was to
be ‘‘particularly careful of her own habits and temperaments and cus-


--- PAGE 91 ---
78 our women &  what they think
toms. She has to practice self control, read good books and entertain only
clean and wholesome thoughts and habits that she might bequeath to her
child.’’
≥Ω Many statements on the woman’s page proclaimed that a black
woman had to sacriﬁce ‘‘pleasure’’ (movies, dances, and card games) in an
attempt to formally educate her child while maintaining her virtue. Be-
cause many women throughout the world structured their lives around
concerns for their children, it is no wonder that they internalized this role
as a privilege. To alter one’s life totally for another is indeed the ultimate
sacriﬁce. At the same time, though, this mother-as-nurturer role placed
women who had no interest in having children outside the race’s woman-
hood. Paramount to nation building, one scholar points out, was the
‘‘possession and control of [the woman’s] womb.’’
∂≠
As an intellectual committed to the exchange of ideas, Jacques Garvey
disseminated the thoughts of her peers by reprinting on the woman’s page
stories and clippings from local newspapers and magazines on activities
and issues that related to women.
∂∞ She also repeatedly asked for submis-
sions from her readership. Her strategy to allow debate on the woman’s
page was a conscious e√ort to foster agitation, though she never shifted
from her own position that women had the right to act as political beings.
She hoped that controversy would encourage women to analytically de-
velop their own viewpoints and inspire others to take notice of and re-
spect the ideas of Garveyites. Given that Jacques Garvey regarded the
sharing of ideas—theorizing—as a form of activism, she repeatedly em-
phasized that contributions to the Pan-African struggle could come from
the stroke of a pen or a typewriter.
Her readership responded with a range of contributions, conﬁrm-
ing that black women’s thought was not monolithic. Some agreed with
Jacques Garvey that black women should stand beside black men but not
be afraid to challenge them in the struggle for liberation. Other women
only partially concurred with her position. They felt that their role was to
be exclusively in the home and their function was solely to raise their
children to be conscious citizens and support their husbands as they
engaged the struggle for black liberation.
Jacques Garvey’s advocacy of a range of public and political roles for
unia women received wide support. In fact, numerous black women can-
didly pushed for female leadership. One article submitted to the woman’s
page argued: ‘‘There are many people who think that a woman’s place is
only in the home—to raise children, cook, wash, and attend to the domes-


--- PAGE 92 ---
our women &  what they think 79
tic a√airs of the house. The idea, however, does not hold true with the
New Negro Woman.’’ Black women needed to learn the essential leader-
ship skills to uplift their race; ‘‘here are a few of the important places
which the New Negro Woman desires to take in the rebirth of Africa at
home and abroad: ‘T o work on par with men in the o≈ces as well as on
the platform’ and ‘To practice actual economy and thrift.’ ’’ As black
nationalists, women were also ‘‘to teach practical and constructive race
doctrine to the children’’ as well as ‘‘to teach the young the moral dangers
of social disease and to love their race ﬁrst.’’ Lastly, the ‘‘New Negro
Woman’’ had ‘‘to demand absolute respect from men of all races.’’
∂≤
These ﬁve points echoed Jacques Garvey’s concept for empowerment.
Black women had to make use of the skills practiced in the home (econ-
omy and thrift), cultivate their relationships with their children, and not
only seek protection from men but also demand respect from all races in
order to have a ﬂuid, dialectical relationship between traditional roles and
a willful feminist identity.
To Jacques Garvey’s question, ‘‘Will the Entrance of Women in Politics
A√ect Homelife?,’’ several comments appeared. E. Elliott Rawlins, M.D.,
wrote that politics would become puriﬁed by women’s participation. He
stressed that politics intersected with domestic life in many ways—school
conditions, property and personal taxes, rent laws, health laws, morality,
and crime. He suggested that the solutions to these concerns and others
could be settled through politics. In sum, Rawlins agreed with Jacques
Garvey that women did not automatically neglect home duties when they
became political actors because their activities merely supplemented their
domestic interests.
∂≥
Saydee E. Parham, a law student, reinforced Jacques Garvey’s position
by suggesting that a woman’s entry into the political world would enable
her to formulate and carry out laws to improve the living conditions in
her community. Parham concluded: ‘‘Having better economic and better
educational conditions, her children are raised in the midst of healthy
surroundings, giving them high aspirations.’’
∂∂
In opposing this argument, Reverend G. E. Carter o√ered three ways
in which women’s entry into politics would negatively a√ect the home:
(1) Politics requires study and whole-hearted interest and the home
must have the same. Both cannot have this at the same time and
the home su√ers.
(2) Motherhood is a natural requisite of a true woman, children need


--- PAGE 93 ---
80 our women &  what they think
the attention of women 18 hours a day. Politics requires at least 8
hours of any woman’s time to be prepared for the task. T en hours is
not enough for the child[;] thus the home su√ers through neglect
of children.
(3) The love for adventure, the idealism of politics and desire to
reform the evils of society will fascinate some women so much that
this love will supersede the love for home and children; therefore,
the race reproduction will be greatly jeopardized.
∂∑
Finally, Marion L. Wallace believed that the home should come before
political work if the woman was a mother. She argued that when it came
to holding ‘‘big political positions,’’ a woman had to contend with the
obligations of child rearing and homemaking, and she would be ‘‘better
o√ making splendid women and men out of her children.’’ On the other
hand, if the woman had ‘‘unusual attributes’’ and no home worries, or if
‘‘her husband is dead and she has to raise children, the remunerations she
raises from a good political position would enable her to raise her children
properly.’’ Wallace concluded that men were stronger physically, but the
a√airs of school, community work, and social uplift should be left entirely
in the hands of ‘‘sympathetic’’ women.
∂∏
In terms of domestic responsibilities, women in the unia went beyond
perceiving the home as a place of sanctuary. One woman wrote that ‘‘no
one but a woman can make a home, and the home is the backbone of the
nation. Men need it, children need it, and the woman herself needs it.’’
This writer claimed that it was through the home that the black woman
was able to fulﬁll her ‘‘greatest privilege, her most sacred duty and her
most solemn obligation.’’ Her ‘‘most sacred duty’’ was to support her
husband in all facets of his life: ‘‘She is man’s solace and when he needs
comfort and sympathy, he needs it mighty quickly.’’
∂π
Other comments reiterated this idea that black women must be self-
sacriﬁcing and undemanding while their husbands led the race toward
self-determination. One writer stated that if a black woman ‘‘rejected her
home that she was not only violating her marital vows but also her des-
tiny.’’ It was only through the home that a black woman was able to fulﬁll
her ‘‘calling.’’ Another woman contended, in her article ‘‘Girls Should Be
Taught to Keep House Properly,’’ that many divorces were the fault of
ine≈cient housewives: ‘‘I know from experience that there is nothing a
man hates more than laziness in a home. We of the unia want energetic
useful young wives who will work for the home and for the race.’’
∂∫


--- PAGE 94 ---
our women &  what they think 81
Jacques Garvey agreed that laziness was akin to docility and passivity and
had no place in the struggle for liberation, but she would add that divorces
were not just about ine≈cient housewives but incompetent husbands
who failed as ﬁnancial providers. Such statements conﬁrm that neither
unia members nor Jacques Garvey herself challenged the prevailing ideol-
ogy that women should be self-sacriﬁcing wives. In essence, the task of
building a black nation relied on masculine redemption, and the Garveys
constructed and positioned, to borrow from Paulette Pierce and Brackette
Williams, ‘‘the manliness of male-the-provider against the femininity of
female-the-nurturer.’’
∂Ω
When it came to black womanhood, a myriad of articles described
what made a ‘‘good woman’’ for the black race. To begin, a good woman
always had a husband or was a widow; she was never a single woman. This
general opinion reinforced the idea that decent black women existed only
in relation to another human being. As one writer put it, a ‘‘good woman
is one who takes interest in the home, who acts as helper and companion
to both husband and children. Modest, well bred, encouraging and a
loveable disposition.’’ Black women di√ered from the numerous white
women who echoed comparable sentiments by adding that they ‘‘must do
[their] best in all things and [be] satisﬁed with the lesser things in life,
knowing [they] cannot at the present have the greatest things. Though
[they] would love to have as much as other women.’’
∑≠ For a unia woman,
self-sacriﬁce was not immediately rewarded with material wealth, as they
presumed it to be for white women. Many black women justiﬁed their
lack of tangible, extravagant goods by explaining that black men were
‘‘broken down by the awful and implacable approach of doom and abid-
ing with unshrinkable ﬁrmness the bitter blast of adversity.’’
∑∞
These comments indicate that many black women were only in partial
agreement with Jacques Garvey’s feminist ideas. For them, the transition
from a helpmate into a leadership role was undesirable. Though an inﬂu-
ential unia leader, Jacques Garvey was able to drive only a slight crack
into the prevailing ‘‘patriarchal sensibilities’’ that race leaders should be
race men. Her case was further hampered by the fact that, as Hazel V.
Carby observes, leading race men, such as Du Bois, failed to ‘‘imagine a
community in which positive intellectual and social transformation could
be evoked’’ through black women.
∑≤ Thus, Jacques Garvey’s audacious
call to black women to move ahead of haphazard male leadership (espe-
cially since her husband could be a prime target) challenged the idea that
thinking, inﬂuential women were the usurpers of masculine agency.


--- PAGE 95 ---
82 our women &  what they think
Eventually, her critique of myopic gender politics became part of the
militant, vanguard discourse that present-day women celebrate as a com-
ponent of black feminism.
Jacques Garvey had opinions about all areas of Pan-African thought
and the redemption of Africa. Therefore, although most of her editorials
addressed the role of women, she knew she also had to deal directly with
men. Motivating black men could be a di≈cult task, she believed, because
they lacked faith in themselves and their potential. They had lost the
‘‘incentive to achieve big things, and produced an over burdened woman-
hood,’’ and the race was that ‘‘much poorer because of their slothful-
ness.’’
∑≥ Although Jacques Garvey was sympathetic to their plight, she
gave them little room to excuse or justify counterproductive behavior and
lack of action. Indeed, at times her chastisement of black men was harsh
and aggressive.
Never short on demonstrative terms to describe black men, many of
Jacques Garvey’s editorials refer to them as ‘‘selﬁsh,’’ ‘‘unappreciative,’’
‘‘lazy,’’ ‘‘parasites,’’ and ‘‘petty.’’ Deborah Gray White calls attention to the
fact that club women, though they challenged patriarchy, never mounted
‘‘a malevolent attack against black men.’’ Jacques Garvey, on the other
hand, pitched an assault from every possible angle, ranging from black
men’s inability to provide for and protect black women to their lack of
appreciation for their mothers and wives. Simultaneously, she consoled
black women who su√ered because of ‘‘the lethargy of [black] men, who
are content to be servants, dependents all their lives, and lack the pluck
to go out and create positions for themselves.’’
∑∂ One interpretation of
this vehemence is that Jacques Garvey’s ultimate goal was to motivate
black women to stay on course in the redemption of Africa, and she felt
that black men were failing to honor their women in this task. In the
editorial ‘‘Listen Women,’’ she hoped to inspire women by counseling
them not to let the ‘‘apathy of your men discourage you, as black women
bore the rigors of slavery so will you bear the hardship preparatory to
nationhood.’’
∑∑
As Jacques Garvey unleashed her volley against black men, she often
fell into the trap of comparing them to white men. Though she identiﬁed
white men as oppressors, she too often wanted black men to emulate their
behavior because she believed it would be advantageous for the race. In
one editorial she stated, ‘‘White men are the greatest pioneers of the age.
They will brave hell itself to satisfy their women; this desire to please them


--- PAGE 96 ---
our women &  what they think 83
is actuated by their love and respect for them.’’ If black men ‘‘would place
the right value on their women, they, too, would feel that there is nothing
on God’s green earth too good to give them.’’ To understand this attitude,
we need to remember that the unia was a procapitalist, masculinist move-
ment, and Jacques Garvey wanted black women to reap the same material
beneﬁts as white women. She projected this position with statements like
‘‘White men, on the other hand, idolize their women and for them they
will dare anything in order to merit their looks of admiration’’ and ‘‘They
have braved the tropical jungles, slain black men, in order to get gold and
diamonds with which to adorn their women; they have ventured forth
into the Arctic regions so that she may have beautiful furs to keep her
warm; they have exterminated the red Indians in North America, and
built up a great republic, so that their women may live in comfort and
luxury.’’
∑∏
This editorial suggests that she joined other black women—more pre-
cisely, 1920s classic blues singers—who connected grand attire with power.
Hazel Carby has contended that the physical presence of these performers
was a ‘‘crucial aspect of their power.’’ One way that they reclaimed their
‘‘female sexuality from being an objectiﬁcation of male desire to a rep-
resentation of female desire’’ was to wear glittered dresses, furs, and
diamonds.
∑π
Jacques Garvey was not known for draping herself daily with jewelry
and expensive clothes. Nonetheless, she believed that the devaluation of
black womanhood was a global issue that called for redress. So she wrote
that black women were entitled to everything the world had to o√er,
including what adorned the bodies of elite white women and, in some
instances, successful women blues singers. Her raw description of the
alleged motivation of white men seeking wealth undoubtedly captured
the imagination of her readers and encouraged them to think about why
they were impoverished in the midst of abundance.
Jacques Garvey’s opinions of black men in many ways expose the con-
tradictions of the unia generally. Though she criticized white men for
being ‘‘racially selﬁsh,’’ she wanted black men to have that same zeal in
pursuing the redemption of Africa. She was adamant that men, just like
women, had to perform certain gender-speciﬁc roles. ‘‘Black men, you
are failing on your jobs! Measure height of achievement and breadth of
usefulness with others, and be honest enough to admit your laziness.’’ The
world expected men ‘‘to play a man’s part and is fed up on your whining


--- PAGE 97 ---
84 our women &  what they think
and ‘can’t-be-done’ moans. Be real men, honest, sincere, determined and
straight a way the race will be lifted up in the estimation of others who
respect those who respect themselves.’’
∑∫
Although Jacques Garvey’s vehement stance was not completely out of
step with the attitudes of other unia women, it does blame black men
(including Marcus Garvey)—not racism and colonialism—and appears
somewhat inconsistent. It is puzzling, for example, that she calls on black
women to support the same men whom she frequently describes as un-
worthy and inept. In addition, she continually urges black men to read
the woman’s page and respect the ideas it puts forward when no man
would want to be bombarded by such scathing, generalized attacks.
Jacques Garvey’s resentment of the unia’s male leadership, which she
felt did not appreciate her diligent work on behalf of the organization,
undoubtedly carried over into her writings and can be better understood
through the work of Anne Witte Garland. Garland documents how anger
can be a principal motivator underlying activists’ thinking and behavior.
After interviewing a number of contemporary activists, she concluded
that ‘‘anger is often at the center of their transformations from private
actors in restricted universes to encompassing all the important issues of
the day.’’
∑Ω Jacques Garvey created a space to release her indignation
through her editorials. Although her attacks could be venomous, she
never doubted that she deserved a place in the unia movement as a leader
and a challenger of chauvinistic men.
No doubt Jacques Garvey was ambivalent about patriarchal traditions.
She rebu√ed notions that women should be conﬁned to the domestic
sphere, but based her idea of male roles exclusively on patriarchal stan-
dards. Men should be the breadwinners so that women would have the
choice not to work outside the home. Further, ‘‘white women have greater
opportunities to display their ability because of the standing of their
men.’’ She declared that ‘‘black women [would] come out of Miss Ann’s
kitchen, leave her washtub and preside over their own homes’’ if their men
would ‘‘bring home the bacon.’’ Understanding the economic state of the
black diaspora and Africa was not enough to squash her repulsion toward
the black man who ‘‘is always out of a job because he is too lazy to go
out and make a job for himself; he prefers to hang around the white
man’s factory doors begging for a job, and oftimes gets what he deserves—
a kick.’’
∏≠
Only a few black club women who were in the militant vanguard wrote
comparable essays. Fannie Barrie Williams, one of the most brilliant and


--- PAGE 98 ---
our women &  what they think 85
vocal club women, was extremely critical of black men who failed to
defend black women against degrading slurs and sexual exploitation. She
challenged them with the question, ‘‘Is the Colored man brave enough to
stand out and say to all the world, ‘Thus far and no further in your
attempt to insult and degrade our women?’ ’’ In short, the New Negro
Woman was revolutionizing the old type of male leadership. ‘‘We are
women of the newer type, striving to make our race sublime—conscious
that the time is ripe, to put our men on the ﬁring line.’’
∏∞ On another
occasion, Fannie Williams urged her sisters not to mimic black male
leadership, ‘‘whose innumerable conventions, councils, and conferences
during the last twenty-ﬁve years have all begun with talk and ended with
talk.’’ In 1922 Mrs. Robert Patterson, socialist candidate for the Pennsyl-
vania General Assembly in Philadelphia, joined the attack, stating that
‘‘we need women who are not content to trail along in [the] foolish
political paths of Negro men.’’
∏≤
Although their rhetoric rarely matched the intensity of Jacques Garvey,
other Garveyite women submitted articles criticizing masculine domi-
nance. These women, along with other progressive African American
women, challenged black men to step up their activism or be prepared to
be put down and led by those who were better equipped—and no one was
more prepared for leadership than Jacques Garvey herself.
Throughout her editorials, Jacques Garvey identiﬁes ‘‘innate’’ qualities in
black women that enable them to fulﬁll a host of duties. Not surprisingly,
perhaps, she herself possessed the majority of these traits. She consciously
personiﬁed the type of black woman that the unia needed—intelligent,
industrious, willing to sacriﬁce self to better her home, community, and
nation.
Jacques Garvey also generalized from her own experience in identify-
ing her expectations for others. Unwavering as a helpmate to her hus-
band, she expected all women to occupy this role even if it caused them
discomfort. She su√ered as the wife of the movement’s leader, so she
expected others to bear similar crosses. For instance, producing the wom-
an’s page ‘‘certainly [was] a hardship’’; she had ‘‘to put in eighteen hours of
work daily and sometimes [got] only three hours of sleep.’’ Lack of rest
magniﬁed her physical ailments, and she often complained of ‘‘eye trou-
ble’’ and was ‘‘handicapped by prolonged illness.’’ Eventually she had an
unspeciﬁed minor operation. Jacques Garvey knew that it was di≈cult to
grieve in silence, and she urged women to ‘‘ﬁnd an outlet for one’s woes’’;


--- PAGE 99 ---
86 our women &  what they think
however, ‘‘strive always to show a calm exterior, thereby you will com-
mand their [black men’s] respect and gain their sympathy.’’∏≥
This advice may sound a bit manipulative and counterproductive.
One would think that she shuddered at the thought that someone wasted
energy on pity. Based on her record, she should have preferred that vigor
be placed into productive action for nationhood. Her statement may be
out of character, but it reveals an emotional side that she made every e√ort
to keep private. Jacques Garvey was a sensitive human being despite the
no-nonsense image she projected to the world.
Occasionally Jacques Garvey’s personal decisions did taint her theory.
Too often she labored on behalf of Marcus Garvey until her physical
health was compromised. Similar to other committed activists, she con-
sciously and unconsciously became a sacriﬁcial lamb for his needs and the
unia’s goal. Jacques Garvey’s acts of self-subordination unfolded in many
forms, but overall they signaled the multiple practices of feminism in the
1920s. These circumstances require that we create concepts to grapple
with seemingly problematic forms of feminism that are endemic to a
historical moment. The concept of community feminism (which at times
resembles a tug-of-war between feminism and nationalism) gives us a
channel through which we can observe the larger implications of both
Jacques Garvey’s personal choices and her political activism.
By placing the unia’s nationalist ideas within a feminist paradigm,
Jacques Garvey was able to keep her husband at the center of her world
without shifting her intellectual self completely to the periphery. The
di≈culty, as Carol Boyce Davies points out, is that ‘‘Afrocentric feminism
sounds like a contradiction in terms, for if it is Afro-centered then the
feminine/feminism is already an appendage, an excess, easily expelled or
contained within.’’
∏∂ In editorials, however, Jacques Garvey expressed her
feminism as a cornerstone of the unia’s platform. It was obvious to her
that skilled, smart women were not only an asset to themselves but to
their families, communities, and the unia as well.
Although Garveyites imagined a gendered community inherently
grounded in a system of di√erences, Jacques Garvey contested the socially
constructed categories and roles that limited the personal and intellectual
development of women, and her feminism became a linchpin to unite all
black women to reach their full potential for the black nation. Overall,
her writings exemplify how one woman maneuvered between what most
view as intrinsically oppositional forces—nationalism (a doctrine that ﬁrst
and foremost advocated popular freedom and sovereignty to determine


--- PAGE 100 ---
our women &  what they think 87
one’s destiny) and feminism (a doctrine of equal rights for women that
challenged women’s oppression and subordination)—and brought them
together in one theoretical construct dedicated to establishing an inde-
pendent nation in Africa.
One of the most salient features of Jacques Garvey’s editorials was her
stout assertion that women must claim their equality to men even though
she herself lived in a male-dominated marriage. That apparent contradic-
tion assumes that she simultaneously rejected and accepted codes of pa-
triarchy. In the Garvey household, as in most homes of the 1920s, the
parameters for the wife, helpmate, mother, and daughter were based on
patriarchal principles.
∏∑ Though a universal idea, patriarchy was diverse
in its speciﬁc structures and e√ects. For example, capitalist patriarchy was
so pervasive in the United States that in some cities married women were
barred from working in certain professions, such as teaching, because it
was believed that their husbands should maintain their status by being the
primary breadwinner.
∏∏ Social norms dictated that women, especially
middle-class women, function as self-sacriﬁcing nurturers who deferred
to their husband’s and father’s wishes, making their family obligations the
priority in their lives.
Moreover, race women believed that they had an additional moral
obligation to be e≈cient housewives because their domestic responsibili-
ties to their husbands and children were paramount for racial progress.
According to Stephanie Shaw, even elite black women were not excused
from performing household duties, and they devoted as much energy to
their communities as to their families. In an Afrocentric community,
to borrow from Elsa Barkley Brown, ‘‘community is family.’’
∏π Thus,
Jacques Garvey’s domestic behavior should not be seen as merely a reﬂec-
tion of her inability to challenge patriarchy wholeheartedly or to take a
critical stand against her husband for the sake of their marriage, but more
as an expression of her talent to maneuver between her family and the
larger world. In doing so, she, along with other race women, mastered
community feminism.
The notion that women ought to be leaders as well as helpmates was
central to ‘‘talented-tenth’’ uplift rhetoric. Certainly, Jacques Garvey was
not the only black woman who had a strong gender lens that focused on
declaring that women had the right to multiple identities and the where-
withal to successfully engage on contested terrain: the vast majority of
African American women lived lives that reﬂected this reality. But elite
African American integrationists of the period believed that it was the


--- PAGE 101 ---
88 our women &  what they think
duty of women to engage in a speciﬁc brand of community leadership,
such as the social work detailed in Jacqueline Rouse’s biography, Lugenia
Burns Hope: Black Southern Reformer  (1989). The majority of activists
were reluctant to admit that women could move beyond domestically
situated activism.
Jacques Garvey’s position also becomes exceptional when contextual-
ized within nationalist political rhetoric (including Marcus Garvey’s),
which stipulated that racial progress was inextricably tied to men and
women ‘‘functioning’’ within gendered spaces to guarantee masculine
control. And though male dominance (at the heart of masculine politi-
cal thought) could not simply be reduced to role playing, it was often per-
formed; Jacques Garvey’s writings questioned what was presumed by
many unia followers to be indispensable to nationhood—masculine
dominance. Cynthia Enloe, who has explored women’s relationships to
nationalist movements internationally, posits that nationalism, ‘‘more
than many ideologies, has a vision that includes women, for no nation can
survive without culture being transmitted and children being born and
nurtured.’’ Nevertheless, even though women, too, have su√ered abuses,
‘‘they have been treated more as symbols than as active participants by
Nationalist movements organized to end colonialism and racism.’’ Enloe
goes on to observe that women are frequently urged to fulﬁll the roles
of ‘‘ego-stroking girlfriend, stoic wife or nurturing mother.’’ These tra-
ditional identities are nonthreatening to male nationalists; therefore,
women who refuse to be maternally conﬁned have an ‘‘uneasy’’ relation-
ship with men.
∏∫ Other scholars have also critiqued the way nationalism
invariably entails the subordination of women largely due to the symbolic
creation of ‘‘nation’’ as a patriarchal construct.∏Ω
Yet Garveyites conceived of Africa as a motherland, and, like many
anticolonial struggles, the Garvey movement was an oppositional dis-
course to that of Western colonists, the progenitors of patriarchal na-
tionalism. Keeping this complexity in mind, Jacques Garvey gave the
straightforward message that women should be powerful in their own
right and progressive actors in the making of a public world—a place that,
ironically, honored masculine forms of chauvinism. Thus, in many ways,
her editorials and activism pushed for what Partha Chatterjee calls a ‘‘new
patriarchy.’’ Jacques Garvey wanted women to be ‘‘active agents in the
nationalist project—complicit in the framing of its hegemonic strategies
as much as [she was] resistant to them because of [women’s] subordina-
tion under the new forms of patriarchy.’’
π≠ This explains why many of her


--- PAGE 102 ---
our women &  what they think 89
editorials cried out ‘‘God, Give Us Men!’’ but detailed the potential of
women and opposed ideas that pigeonholed them domestically.
Despite her e√orts to balance feminism and nationalism—with the
textual link of the principle of self-determination—Jacques Garvey’s es-
pousal of a liberation narrative that granted women equal status was too
often constrained by a rigidly bound nationalistic expression. That is,
her unﬂinching commitment, both emotionally and ideologically, to the
idea that the only solution to the problems of oppressed people of color
was the divine right to control their homeland’s resources took prece-
dence, regardless of whether men or women assumed the lead in pursuing
that goal.
The excruciating pace involved in producing the woman’s page and lead-
ing the defense committee to pardon Marcus Garvey eventually took its
toll on her physical and emotional health. The woman’s page of Negro
World ended abruptly on 30 April 1927; Jacques Garvey remained an
associate editor for two additional months and only a contributing editor
thereafter. She elected to put all of her energy into securing Garvey’s
release. Finally, her e√orts (and those of countless other Garveyites) paid
o√ when President Calvin Coolidge commuted his prison sentence on
18 November 1927. By this time the U.S. government had sensed the
depth of his followers’ loyalty, and o≈cials were feeling the pressure by
others who believed that Garvey’s punishment was unjust. On 26 Novem-
ber he was discharged from the Atlanta prison into the custody of the U.S.
Immigration Commission. Garvey’s attorney, Arim Kohn, Jacques Gar-
vey, and other unia o≈cials tried unsuccessfully to get a stay of execution
on the deportation order. Six days later Garvey gave his farewell address,
as a choir sang the Ethiopian national anthem, from the deck of the SS
Saramacca in New Orleans. Marcus Garvey’s tenure in the United States
marked the peak of the unia in terms of organized membership, eco-
nomic resources, and political and radical militancy.
As her husband sailed to Jamaica, Jacques Garvey stayed in New York
to raise money to pay o√ his legal expenses and to ‘‘ﬁnalize all other mat-
ters preparatory to joining him in Jamaica.’’ On 10 December he received
a hero’s welcome in his homeland. He immediately wrote Jacques Garvey
that he had purchased a home for them and to bring everything from
New York: ‘‘Say darling I do not want you to leave even a piece of paper
behind for I want all my books.’’
π∞
The packing and shipping of their belongings, including a large collec-


--- PAGE 103 ---
90 our women &  what they think
tion of breakable antiques, proved to be a di≈cult assignment. After two
estimates, Jacques Garvey ‘‘realized the immensity and costliness of the
task.’’ Apparently she informed him that packing ‘‘everything’’ was a
formidable chore. Garvey responded, ‘‘I notice you are repeating the same
news that you are packing. . . . I am surprised that you should be telling
me about the quantity of things, I know all about it so when I tell you to
ship everything I fully knew what I was about.’’ He further warned her
that ‘‘I am waiting in Kingston only for you but I can wait no longer than
the 13th of January for I sail the 14th on my tour of Central America etc.’’
π≤
Frustrated and beleaguered, Jacques Garvey wrote that Garvey ‘‘had no
thought’’ of the particulars required to send items by freighter, but what
was most disappointing to her was that he had not mentioned their
‘‘promised vacation together alone.’’ She reasoned, ‘‘If the last three stren-
uous years did not warrant it, then what more would?’’ A vacation would
rejuvenate their relationship, but Garvey’s main concern remained the
unia. They had been married under trying circumstances, and it seemed
as if they always faced a crisis. In her view, Garvey’s dismissal of a holiday
conﬁrmed that their marriage would continue to take a backseat to the
movement.
π≥
Amy Jacques Garvey arrived in Kingston on 26 December 1927, after
she had dotted all the i’s and crossed all the t’s on their New York home-
stead. It had been almost ten years since she had lived in Jamaica. Her
family and close friends knew about her marriage to Garvey and her
transformation into a passionate Pan-Africanist activist. Some would
quickly embrace her, but many of her former peers might have felt the
need to distance themselves until they had time to observe her behavior
and evaluate how di√erent she really had become. Jacques Garvey had to
have mixed feelings about how she and Garvey would relate to one an-
other as husband and wife residing in the same household. Though both
of them were committed to maintaining the unia, there were no guaran-
tees of their personal future together.


--- PAGE 104 ---
5 Back to Jamaica and Forward to Europe
J
amaica in 1928 still largely reﬂected the society that Amy and
Marcus had left in 1917 and 1916, respectively. The island had
remained largely rural, and even the most vocal naysayer could
not deny the botanical beauty of some areas. Most signiﬁcantly,
though, the British colonial state had succeeded in maintaining a
racial hierarchy. Of its million citizens, black people remained nu-
merically the majority, but they were politically and economically domi-
nated by ‘‘intermediary’’ ethnic groups—coloreds, Chinese, Lebanese,
and Jews. White residents had declined from 3 percent to 1 percent, but
they continued to function as colonial gatekeepers, which translated into
a manipulative control of corporate capital. As was the case in other
English-speaking Caribbean territories (Grenada, T rinidad, Dominica,
and Barbados), racial discrimination and cutthroat capitalism prevented
the vast majority of blacks from owning the economic means of produc-
tion, clinching their aggregate status as a group whose labor power was
exploited well beyond human decency. In addition, poor black people still
lacked access to postsecondary schooling; this magniﬁed the probability
that they would have to work for low wages as adults, primarily producing
export crops such as bananas, co√ee, citrus, pimentos, and sugar.
∞
These conditions spurred the Garveys to take a greater interest in Pan-
Caribbean issues on their return to Jamaica. While maintaining their
dedication to Pan-African liberation, they quickly tailored the platform of
the Universal Negro Improvement Association ( unia) to deal directly
with Jamaican workers’ concerns as well. With a small entourage, they
toured the island to build up local unia membership, making sure to
reach the rural districts despite the unpaved roads. Garvey gave talks
emphasizing the need to establish a university that would be available to
all who desired a higher education. He also echoed the sentiments of
farmers and peasants who wanted to acquire their own cultivatable land


--- PAGE 105 ---
92 back to jamaica &  forward to europe
to produce crops. Harking back to their days in the United States, the
couple encouraged the building of a national steamship line to assist
independent farmers in transporting their goods to the world. Their
prolabor position called for a ‘‘minimum wage, an eight-hour working
day, housing and medical attention on the estates, prohibition of child
labor, assurance against accident or failing health,’’ and the right of work-
ers in trades to organize into unions. These e√orts doubled the number of
registered unia members in Kingston.
≤
As revolutionary nationalists, the Garveys adamantly talked about ra-
cial solidarity as a means to counter colonialism and solve the ‘‘Negro
problem.’’ In her characteristically blunt tone, Amy Jacques Garvey said,
‘‘If the Negro does not organize and keep organized and place himself on a
good sound economic foundation he will starve to death and be elimi-
nated altogether.’’
≥ But like racial uplift ideology in the United States,
which too often reﬂected conservative middle-class aspirations and was
plagued by color contradictions, their rhetoric was also designed to appeal
to the problematic agenda of the Jamaican business elites, many of whom
were ‘‘brown’’ or colored and unashamedly expressed contempt for black
workers. When Marcus Garvey had ﬁrst organized the unia in Jamaica,
he had wanted elite support. On his return, he continued to have an
ambivalent relationship with this group—which became even more pre-
carious with his increasing fame—complicated by the fact that his in-laws
were proud to be ‘‘brown’’ and privileged. His wife, however, had learned
to embrace a ‘‘black’’ identity in the United States. Jacques Garvey’s new
political stance placed her at the vortex of race, class, and color tensions
in Jamaica, demonstrating how a black identity can sometimes be an
unstable racial category.
On some level it had to be unsettling for Jacques Garvey to be sympa-
thetic to the needs of the black masses while her family continued to bask
in their distinct ‘‘brownness.’’ Her position might remind some of the
‘‘tragic mulatta’’ popularized in late-nineteenth- and early-twentieth-
century American literature. In ﬁction, the debate around this character
ranges from seeing her as a ﬁgure designed to enlist the sympathies of
whites to a more subversive character who deconstructs the categories of
race and problematizes the relationship between black and white people.
∂
The heart of the tragedy lies in the mulatta’s desire for the privileges
associated with whiteness. Jacques Garvey, unlike her chameleonlike ﬁc-
tional counterpart, maintained a consistent ideological position on race.
Her commitment to black liberation and self-determination turned her


--- PAGE 106 ---
back to jamaica &  forward to europe 93
away from a ‘‘brown’’ identity and its attendant advantages. At the same
time, though, her commitment to capitalist notions of success, which
were similar to her husband’s, also prevented her from completely reject-
ing bourgeois ideas. She and Garvey were thus lodged in a cauldron of
competing beliefs that spawned a dubious relationship with workers and
capitalists alike.
With Garvey once again in the limelight of the liberation movement,
Jacques Garvey retreated to the domestic front to instill order in their new
home, called ‘‘Somali Court,’’ on Lady Musgrave Road. It was located in
an exclusive section of St. Andrew, near the governor’s mansion, an area
largely inhabited by upper-class whites. Garvey was proud that he was
able to buy such a prestigious property, not only because it symbolized a
bourgeois lifestyle but also because he had always believed that all black
people deserved to live well, even if it meant that the majority of his
neighbors were white. In a letter to his wife while she was still in New York
(a√ectionately calling her ‘‘Mopsie’’), he described the ‘‘three bedrooms,
drawing and dining rooms, bath and other rooms, piazzas, outroom bldg.
pantry, garage[;] [it’s] with a ﬂower garden and one acre of garden and
trees, we can get more land adjoining later.’’ To make sure that she would
approve of the home, Garvey had enlisted the opinion of his mother-in-
law, who was ‘‘pleased with it.’’
∑
Having been raised in an a∆uent Kingston neighborhood and having
lived in the United States in a Harlem apartment—albeit modest—that
was ﬁlled with costly antiques, Jacques Garvey was accustomed to some
degree of opulence. Perhaps this is why she later characterized the same
property as ‘‘a three bedroom, one bathroom house, with the necessary
outbuildings,’’ but ‘‘there was no tilework and the ﬁnish was poor.’’ The
details about the inferior construction would have made clear to her
audience that, in her mind, they were not living in the lap of luxury, even
though the majority of Jamaicans would have disagreed and the American
press reported, ‘‘Garvey’s Black House was [ﬁlled with] liveried servants.’’
∏
Once their furniture arrived from New York, Garvey ‘‘arranged it just
where he wanted it. I [Jacques Garvey] was allowed to sort and classify the
books.’’π Jacques Garvey’s phrasing to describe this simple domestic event
gives us another glimpse into their home life. Both she and Garvey valued
books, and perhaps under these circumstances it was a privilege to arrange
them. Further, in addition to indicating her love of knowledge, her com-
ments might also have signaled to other men that they should take part in


--- PAGE 107 ---
94 back to jamaica &  forward to europe
making their home a haven. Notwithstanding these possible interpreta-
tions, the fact that Garvey ‘‘allowed’’ her to perform the task of alphabetiz-
ing books is evidence that he tried to control the entire organization of
their household, an impression that runs counter to the unia’s notion that
the home should be in the hands of women—another small example of
the discrepancy that sometimes appeared between the man and his ideas.
On completing his speaking tour in Jamaica, Garvey wanted to visit
Central America, but his request for a passport was denied. Rupert Lewis
has shown that a major tactic of colonial authorities was ‘‘to pin him down
to Jamaica’’ so they could ‘‘watch’’ him and prevent his ‘‘personal contact’’
with the main unia branches.
∫ After some discussion, the Garveys agreed
that since authorities had not restricted his freedom in the West, Europe
would be the best place to jump-start the fragmented movement and
enlist sympathy for their cause.
In April 1928 the Garveys left Jamaica—with Hazel Escridge, a personal
secretary from New York—for a stay in West Kensington, England. It was
here that Jacques Garvey noticed her husband’s tendency not to reﬂect on
the immediate past. She recalled him saying, ‘‘I never look back; there is
no time for that; besides it would make me cautious. How could I dare for
the future, when the past is written with so many warnings?’’ At the time,
journalist J. A. Rogers noted that despite Garvey’s three years in jail, he
looked ‘‘younger’’ and seemed ‘‘as undiscouraged as ever.’’
Ω Garvey’s abil-
ity to move beyond the negative indicated his resiliency, but Jacques
Garvey did not always appreciate that remarkable quality. She was still
disappointed that he had not kept his promise to take a private vacation,
and her frustration with him continued to mount. In hindsight, she
interpreted Garvey’s political attitude as ‘‘impersonal,’’ saying, ‘‘Those
who get hurt in the tense moments of the adventure are only regarded as
necessary props to the build-up of the hero.’’
∞≠
As soon as a unia o≈ce was set up in West Kensington, Garvey began
contacting dockworkers, whose potential courier status made them fun-
damental to the spread of Garveyism, as well as African students, the
majority of whom were male and from wealthy families.
∞∞ Despite these
e√orts, the turnout at the ﬁrst major meeting was disappointing. The
amused press reported that there were ‘‘9800 Empty Seats,’’ adding,
‘‘Each member of the audience had a choice of ﬁfty seats.’’ Taken aback by
the inertia of the black masses there, the Garveys soon reasoned that they
had to revamp their strategy, since ‘‘seamen would lose their jobs and
students would be ﬂunked in their examinations’’ if they were ‘‘keeping


--- PAGE 108 ---
back to jamaica &  forward to europe 95
bad company.’’ The ﬂamboyant displays of pomp and chivalry that had
characterized the unia in New York thus disappeared. Jacques Garvey
observed that Garvey had to opt for ‘‘greater silent, penetrating forces’’ if
the unia was to be e√ective. Other activists concurred. In fact, Ladipo
Solanke, a leading Nigerian student spokesman at University College,
London, suggested to Garvey that he go to Africa on Garvey’s behalf ‘‘in a
secret mission to organize in every country.’’
∞≤
Another important change to accommodate the London conditions
had to do with the unia’s relationship with whites, particularly white
women. In Jamaica white people were few in number, and in the United
States members reluctantly interacted with them. The prevailing senti-
ment was that there was no reason to trust those who had colonized and
oppressed and had no respect for anything African. In London, though,
Garvey employed a white stenographer and formed an auxiliary for the
English wives of African male members. (However, these women were
not allowed to become registered members or participate in ‘‘internal
discussions.’’)
∞≥
The support of white women in the cause of racial uplift was not
novel; every major black organization promoting integration in the
United States touted its white members. But black nationalists held the
opinion that racial uplift was about reducing dependency on whites; self-
su≈ciency produced self-respect and the power to determine one’s des-
tiny. Many Garveyites around the world would have debated the inclu-
sion of whites in their movement had it become a part of the international
discourse. The unia female vanguard of 1922, in particular, would have
objected, since the presence of white wives was a slap in the face to their
e√orts to secure black families. Other Garveyites, however, might have
agreed with Jacques Garvey, who apparently did not have a problem with
the members of this auxiliary, whom she described as ‘‘sincere in their
work to enhance the standing of the men whom they had chosen to
marry.’’
∞∂
No one could question that the Garveys were black nationalists of the
highest order. Their speeches and writings were ﬁlled with references to
political power based on racial unity. In the end, Garvey’s decision to
enlist the support of white women and Jacques Garvey’s belief that it
did not contradict their philosophy substantiate that they were more
problack than antiwhite. Charles Hamilton has pointed out that Pan-
Africanism has both short-term and long-term dimensions. To achieve
the long-term goal of a united African continent, ‘‘reformist’’ objectives


--- PAGE 109 ---
96 back to jamaica &  forward to europe
are often adopted. The Garveys viewed their decision to organize these
white women as a short-term strategy to unify a ‘‘scattered Ethiopia.’’∞∑
In late July 1928 the Garveys, with secretary Escridge in tow, began
their tour of Europe. Though they always tried to travel ﬁrst class and
lodge in the best hotels, their trip was not a conventional upper-class
journey abroad, but one to investigate ﬁrsthand the politics and policies
of European countries as they related to people of African descent. The
tour also served as a recruitment strategy to bring together the greatest
array of black people for the August 1929 unia convention.
Their sojourn began in France, about which both Amy and Marcus
had strong opinions prior to their arrival. Several years earlier Jacques
Garvey had argued that it was reasonable to expect France not ‘‘to give up
her possessions in West Africa, when her factories are waiting for the raw
products to keep her people employed and to furnish them commodities
at minimum prices.’’ But she was appalled by the large number of Afri-
cans used by the French in Morocco during the Arab war. ‘‘That is the
horror,’’ she said, ‘‘the tragedy of it—brothers in race and blood thrown
against each other to keep all servitude to the white European!’’
∞∏
Carrying this ideological baggage with her, Jacques Garvey and her
husband were escorted in Paris by members of the Comité de Défense de
la Race Nègre and updated on racial activities in the colonies. From these
conversations, Garvey concluded that the French administrators had
adopted the ‘‘usual method of exploiting the Native African.’’ During a
speech attended by at least six hundred people at the Club de Faubourg,
Garvey contended that members of the African diaspora had a ‘‘legal right
to many portions of the African continent and that his race did not intend
to forfeit this right.’’
∞π
On the subject of black people living in France, he had declared that
there was ‘‘absolutely no di√erence between the white Frenchman, the
white American and the white Englishman on the question of race.’’ The
French simply interact in another way because ‘‘she had not a Negro
domestic problem.’’ These conditions led Garvey to echo many of his
contemporaries: ‘‘Comparatively speaking, the black man ought to be
more sympathetic and friendly toward France than any other major na-
tions, like England and America, because he is better treated.’’ (The fact
that African American and West African soldiers had fought for France in
World War I had made the French a bit more tolerant of members of these
groups, as opposed to North Africans—particularly Algerians—toward
whom they remained arrestingly hostile.) Tyler Stovall has documented


--- PAGE 110 ---
back to jamaica &  forward to europe 97
that in the twenties the French were by no means color-blind, but next to
other Europeans and white Americans they were more accommodating
and openly condemned racial discrimination; thus, a trickle of the Afri-
can diaspora had chosen to settle in France. Because racism there was not
as violative as that of the United States and Britain, Garvey believed that
the French internal policy of ‘‘courteous treatment for all’’ was detrimen-
tal in the long run, because it prevented Africans in France from develop-
ing a critical race consciousness.
∞∫
The Garveys enjoyed visiting all of the tourist sites. Jacques Garvey
recalled an episode involving a Frenchman who joined them one eve-
ning for dinner. ‘‘With his broken English and my schoolgirl French we
seemed to have carried on the conversation as a team.’’ Before they left,
the Frenchman asked Garvey if he could arrange to have another meeting
with ‘‘Mademoiselle.’’ Garvey responded curtly, ‘‘She is my wife.’’ The
Frenchman was ‘‘embarrassed’’ and believed that Garvey had not consid-
ered the question in the spirit in which it was given. Apparently Garvey
was jealous that another man was attracted to his wife and, moreover, that
she enjoyed his company. Later Garvey asked her, ‘‘Why don’t you put on
some weight? You are so frail.’’ On some level, he believed that she was
enticing the Frenchman not only with her intellect but also with her body.
She responded, ‘‘But how could I?’’ Their pace had been hectic and
constant since leaving the United States, and there was no end in sight.
∞Ω
Garvey’s protective nature did not stop his wife from socializing and
engaging intellectually with other men in Paris. As a journalist, she took
an interest in the serials produced there, especially La Race Nègre , the
monthly periodical of the League for the Defense of the Negro Race,
founded in 1927 by Lamine Senghor and Tiemolo Garan Kouyate. Kou-
yate, a Sudanese instructor with communist leanings, was the league’s
general secretary and wrote the most erudite essays. He and Jacques Gar-
vey continued to correspond after she left Paris, primarily exchanging La
Race Nègre for the Negro World.
≤≠
From Paris the Garveys traveled to Berlin. Like any tourist, Jacques
Garvey walked up and down the streets to get an up-close-and-personal
view of people’s lives. She was immediately taken with Germany’s remark-
able recovery from World War I; only a smattering of French colonial
troops (from North Africa, Madagascar, and Senegal) still occupied the
Rhineland territories. Although aware that Germans ‘‘were the people
who made up the colonial powers, who had joined others in partitioning
Africa to buttress their economy,’’ she and her husband still agreed that it


--- PAGE 111 ---
98 back to jamaica &  forward to europe
would be wise for the African diaspora to seek an alliance with them. As
Garvey put it, ‘‘There is no fooling around Germany with the Germans.
Every man is serious; he has a purpose, and apparently he is living for it.’’
Furthermore, German discipline produced a kind of ‘‘character’’ that
acted as a ‘‘safeguard against abuses’’ from other people.
≤∞
Jacques Garvey was so impressed with Germany that she was inspired
to write an article for the Negro World based on her observations of its
imperial development. Building on Garvey’s views about the importance
of ‘‘discipline,’’ she added that the ‘‘compulsory military training’’ for all
young men and the ‘‘special care’’ given to girls’ ‘‘physical development’’
was excellent. Unlike the Belgians and French, who were ‘‘frail-looking,’’
the Germans had ‘‘splendid physiques,’’ which made for a ‘‘sturdy popula-
tion, ready at any moment to demonstrate ﬁtness to rule.’’ Germany was
‘‘strenuously preparing’’ itself to get what it wanted: its commercial planes
were up-to-date; it had expanded trade in the East; it had a sizable police
force, a thriving local industry, and a higher birthrate than other European
countries, because ‘‘every encouragement is given to women to become
mothers.’’ Jacques Garvey warned black people not to let themselves be
used ‘‘as tools’’ to ‘‘stop the brutal Hun from overrunning Europe.’’ Ger-
mans had ‘‘been trained to want to achieve what seems impossible to
others,’’ and Africans should have that same nationalist zeal. In fact, her
husband wanted to create an empire comparable to Berlin in Africa.
≤≤
Jacques Garvey had keyed in on a fundamental obsession of the Ger-
man state in 1928—the culture of the body. Since World War I, German
leaders had become preoccupied with the ‘‘puriﬁcation’’ of the body. They
wanted to distinguish themselves from their enemy, the ‘‘feminine’’ intel-
lectual or cerebral French, and convey to the world that they were hard-
working, productive, and physically and morally ﬁt. Germany wanted to
be to viewed as the ﬁrst modern nation, an image predicated on a healthy,
‘‘performance-oriented’’ nationalist community.
≤≥
Jacques Garvey’s article could have easily been written by a publicist for
the German state. However, the shift from a focus on the development of
a ‘‘healthy’’ citizenry to the ‘‘puriﬁcation’’ of society based on principles of
‘‘race’’ would not become obvious until 1933, under Adolf Hitler’s Third
Reich. Nevertheless, Marcus Garvey’s initial endorsement of postwar
Germany, Hitler, and fascism generally have become the cross on which
his intellectual cruciﬁxion has taken place. Garvey’s dictatorial leader-
ship style and his obsession with having disciplined followers—men and
women who were willing to place themselves on the ﬁring line and end


--- PAGE 112 ---
back to jamaica &  forward to europe 99
racial oppression through violence—are hallmarks of fanaticism. Further-
more, the unia’s racialized fraternity and bourgeoisie morality not only
existed alongside, but also could have been a slip away from the racial
purity extremism of a fascist nation-state. Tony Martin succinctly points
out the similarities between the doctrines of Garveyism, Mussolini’s fas-
cism, and Hitler’s Nazism: ‘‘In their ﬁerce nationalism, in their doctrines
of racial purity, in their uniformed indoctrinated youth groups, in their
conversion of the crowd into disciplined uniformed units, with some
qualiﬁcations in their anticommunism, in the impassioned oratory of
their leaders, in their pageantry, the atmosphere of excitement surround-
ing their movements . . . bore certain resemblances.’’
≤∂
Garvey himself celebrated these comparisons. When J. A. Rogers wrote
in 1927 that ‘‘Mussolini and Fascism is like Garvey and Garveyism,’’ not
only did the Negro World publish his article but also Garvey later boasted
to Rogers that he had not quite hit the nail on the head. Reportedly he
said, ‘‘We were the ﬁrst fascists. We had disciplined men, women and
children in the training for the liberation of Africa. The black masses saw
that in this extreme nationalism lay their hope and readily supported it.’’
He bragged that ‘‘Mussolini copied fascism from me but the Negro reac-
tionaries sabotaged it.’’
≤∑
At the same time that Garvey praised fascism, Jacques Garvey was
more critical of it as a form of government. ‘‘Fascism as Mussolini of Italy
exempliﬁes it, is absolute dictatorship, the mind, body and soul of Italy
being in the hands of one man,’’ she wrote. Though his ‘‘policy’’ had
‘‘pulled Italy out of the ﬁnancial mire,’’ many Italians charged, ‘‘Our
mouths are muzzled, we dare not act as free men, or express our opinions
in the press on the public platforms; our country is being run by a despot
against the wishes of the masses.’’ Understanding that fascism suppressed
the politics of the subaltern, Jacques Garvey explained how her vision was
di√erent from Garvey’s in that she dreamed of a government that ‘‘will be
a democracy in the truest sense of the word, for the beneﬁt of all classes,
where money and color will not be the standard by which one will be
measured, but by his service to humanity.’’
≤∏ For Jacques Garvey, then,
black nationalism was not demagogic or loaded with reactionary baggage
and certainly not a stepping stone to a fascist government.
In all fairness to Marcus Garvey, he took a scathing view of German na-
tionalism when it made a quantum leap to Nazism and of Mussolini when
he invaded Ethiopia in the fall of 1935, destroying one of the three inde-
pendent African nations. He published a number of articles condemning


--- PAGE 113 ---
100 back to jamaica &  forward to europe
these atrocities and pleading that the League of Nations stop their imperi-
alism. Informing black people that the fascist intention to establish a
supreme race spelled extermination for Africa, he emphasized that black
people ‘‘are in sympathy with Jews because they are an oppressed minor-
ity,’’ and he attacked Mussolini for committing war crimes against ‘‘inno-
cent women and children of the civil population of Ethiopia.’’
≤π
But during their German tour in 1928, both Amy and Marcus admired
what they saw. Perhaps if they had conversed with the communists living
there, they would have had a clue that the brewing fascism could only
mean ruin to Africa. No doubt they would have reconsidered their desire
for an alliance had they been aware that German political parties had sub-
mitted a parliamentary petition to withdraw all ‘‘colored troops,’’ who
were ‘‘wild people’’ and a ‘‘dreadful danger’’ to whites.
≤∫ Most likely
the Garveys did not study the living conditions of Africans and their ap-
proximately ﬁve hundred African German children, whom authorities
regarded as a menace, because their numbers were so small and the popu-
lation was transitory. Nonetheless, it is di≈cult to understand why they
were not more judgmental considering that Germany also had pillaged a
little corner of Africa. The Garveys’ approval can best be explained by
recognizing that their critical eye was trained on the Euro-American elites
who had beneﬁted most from the Atlantic slave trade and who continued
to prosper from colonialism. The T reaty of Versailles had deprived Ger-
many of its colonies in 1919, and, compared to France, Britain, and the
United States, its exploitation of Africa was relatively minor. Further-
more, an interesting commentary printed on the Negro World woman’s
page in 1925 drives home the message that Euro-Americans were the main
oppressors of black people and polluted the world with racism. The writer
announced that a female member of the British Parliament, speaking
about ‘‘Black T roops on the Rhine,’’ said, ‘‘we women of England have no
love for the women of Germany, but we shall boycott French goods unless
France puts an end to the despoil[ation] of German women and girls by
their black troops.’’
≤Ω It was not a German representative calling for inter-
vention, but a British woman who had spread venom against black men.
Other black intellectuals concurred with the Garveys’ analysis of who
were the most harmful whites to the black world. As early as 1884, Freder-
ick Douglass had written to friends that ‘‘the leprous distillment of Ameri-
can prejudice’’ had crossed the Atlantic to Paris. And in 1923 Claude
McKay wrote that in his travels abroad, ‘‘everywhere I [have] been treated
much better and with altogether more consideration than in America and


--- PAGE 114 ---
back to jamaica &  forward to europe 101
England.’’ Dr. Raphael Armattoe of Togoland underscored this percep-
tion when he explained that ‘‘at one time all Africans born in the French
Empire were citizens. It was only when the Anglo-Saxons brought their
inﬂuence to bear on the French that the position changed and fewer
Africans were regarded as citizens.’’
≥≠ The Garveys’ notions of who quali-
ﬁed as ‘‘oppressors’’ similarly rested on a construction of whiteness based
on the Anglo-Saxon/Anglo-American model.
On a personal note, the Garveys’ legal national status as British sub-
jects had not conferred on them a citizenship with adequate rights and
protections even though ‘‘it was the black subjects in the British posses-
sions that were feeding the English people,’’ Jacques Garvey announced at
a Liberty Hall meeting. Puzzled by these conditions, she later wrote that
‘‘the fact that Negroes from any part of the British common-wealth of
Nations, being born under the British Union Jack, should have been rated
as ‘aliens’ in England’’ clinched their persecution as a people. ‘‘When
Uncle Sam lynches her black boys with her uniform on their back, and
John Bull calls her ex-soldiers aliens,’’ then it was ‘‘high time for some
dull, apathetic Negroes to think in terms of nationhood.’’
≥∞
From Berlin, the Garveys returned to London. On 2 September 1928,
the opening day of a series of speeches presenting the case of African
peoples to the English for their ‘‘consideration and adjustment,’’ both
spoke at the Century Theater in the Westbourne Grove area of West
London. Jacques Garvey, who preceded her husband, was just ‘‘given
ﬁfteen minutes’’ to articulate a ringing message from ‘‘Negro women to
the white women of London.’’ She began by noting that it was ‘‘di≈cult to
deliver’’ such an important speech within a ‘‘short space of time.’’ Though
Jacques Garvey had kept her early talks within the prescribed ‘‘feminine’’
time frame, she now became publicly critical of this gendered discrepancy
that apparently had no national boundary. Nevertheless, in her limited
time on stage, she raised many issues, moving back and forth between
complimenting white women and chastising them for their unwillingness
to learn more about black women the ‘‘world over.’’
≥≤
Jacques Garvey’s comments were a reﬂection of her ambivalence to-
ward white women generally. On the one hand, she recognized that
they were discriminated against as women in a male-dominated society:
‘‘Know this, that we su√er even as you do, because the color of our skins
does not make us di√erent in our physical bodies, does not make us
di√erent in our ambitions, and in our aspirations and in our hopes. No.
We hope for as much as you have hoped and longed for.’’ At the same


--- PAGE 115 ---
102 back to jamaica &  forward to europe
time, their whiteness empowered them to insult black women with the
Jim Crow statement, ‘‘I am sorry; we do not serve black people in here.’’
As an Anglican, she lambasted this behavior as unchristian and, in yet
another turn, appealed to them as women, who have a ‘‘ﬁner conscience,
or perhaps more conscience, in them than men have.’’ ‘‘Think twice’’ and
‘‘remind your men’’ that ‘‘we are all human beings, and as children of
God, we deserve equal treatment, equal fairness, equal justice in common
with all humanity.’’ Jacques Garvey’s appeal on religious grounds, the
allegedly highest and most moral authority, was a popular propaganda
tool of countless activists, regardless of their political leanings. The En-
glish were ‘‘surprised’’ by her ‘‘force and conviction,’’ but Garveyites were
not. By now they were hailing her as ‘‘the greatest Negro woman of our
race,’’ who was unshakable in her commitment to present the cause of the
black woman internationally to the European world.
≥≥
Following his wife to the podium, Garvey further elaborated on her
appeal to the English people’s sense of humanity and love of God. A
longer time slot, however, gave him the opportunity to discuss many
ideas, including how ‘‘God intended’’ that Africans and Europeans have
di√erent political and social outlooks; ‘‘that is why geographically he
suited you for Europe and suited me for Africa.’’ He also attacked colo-
nialism and U.S. imperialism.
≥∂
After the speech, Garvey and secretary Escridge left for Geneva to
present to the League of Nations on 11 September a petition on the need
to consider the question of Negro liberation and anticolonial measures.
This was the second petition forwarded to the league on behalf of the
unia. The ﬁrst, which had been brought to the attention of the U.S. State
Department in September 1922, included the statement that the peti-
tioners, representing 400 million Negro people, ‘‘desire to bring before
you the fact that our race is now seeking racial political liberty; that we
desire to found a Government of our own, and that we shall be given the
opportunity to exercise that liberty that is common to all free men of all
races and nations.’’ A ‘‘non-action’’ endorsement from the American con-
sul followed, but State Department documents warned that ‘‘quite a large
number of American negroes’’ are ‘‘part of this agitation.’’
≥∑
It is alleged that 20 million copies of the second petition circulated
among Europeans, and Garvey was assured that their concerns would be
fully discussed at the League of Nations assembly session in 1929. Jacques
Garvey did not participate in what her husband would later cite as his


--- PAGE 116 ---
back to jamaica &  forward to europe 103
most ‘‘successful accomplishment’’ in Europe, because ‘‘he had not su≈-
cient money to take [her]’’ to Geneva.≥∏
At the end of October, the couple left England for a North American
tour beginning in Quebec. Garvey had scheduled a meeting with unia
division presidents in Toronto on 2 November to discuss the agenda for
the Sixth International Convention of African Peoples of the World, to be
held there the following August. His deportation from the United States
prevented his return, so Jacques Garvey made that leg of the journey
without him. On 23 October, accompanied by secretary Escridge, she
embarked on a speaking and fund-raising trek for the unia.
On this trip, just as she had throughout Europe, Jacques Garvey dem-
onstrated how a community feminist functioned. She was able to move
easily from the role of wife in Paris, to that of independent thinker and
leader of women in London, to that of Garvey’s deputy in the United
States. Her ability to alternate between helpmate and leadership roles was
the epitome of a community feminist. Both she and Garvey understood
the necessity of political ﬂexibility; in fact, their helpmate/leader func-
tions were now reversed, since Garvey had the task of creating her U.S.
itinerary from Canada, as he had similarly done from prison. They com-
municated by letter and telegram, often addressing each other by their
a√ectionate nicknames of ‘‘Mopsie’’ and ‘‘Popsie’’ despite the tension that
existed between them. Clearly, they worked particularly well together
when Jacques Garvey had more occasion to act independently.
In the United States, she was able to draw hundreds to hear her speak,
and the Negro World advertised her ‘‘monster mass meeting[s]’’ by display-
ing an elegant seated portrait of her, modestly attired in a sleeveless dress,
hair pulled up, a single strand of white pearls around her neck. But the
pace was grueling; her schedule ‘‘allowed no rest, except on midnight
trains.’’ When she arrived in New York on 28 October 1928, Madame
DeMena—assistant international organizer and another powerful woman
of the unia—joined Jacques Garvey and her secretary, serving as a travel-
ing companion for the remainder of the trip.
≥π Although Jacques Garvey
did not comment on their relationship, DeMena’s inclusion on the trip
suggests that at the very least they had the beneﬁt of a mutual respect. And
when Escridge left to vacation with relatives in Bu√alo, DeMena’s pres-
ence saved Jacques Garvey from the impropriety of a woman traveling
cross-country alone.
At the Commonwealth Casino on the evening of 30 October, Jacques


--- PAGE 117 ---
104 back to jamaica &  forward to europe
Garvey enjoyed an ‘‘uproarious welcome.’’ unia members o√ered ‘‘a√ec-
tion’’ to the ‘‘talented wife’’ of Garvey. The Negro World reported that she
gave a ‘‘splendid address,’’ describing her travels throughout Europe as
well as ‘‘the activities of herself and husband.’’ In conclusion, she ‘‘urged
the membership’’ to undertake more ‘‘strenuous endeavor[s].’’
≥∫
The next day she went to Philadelphia and received a ‘‘tumultuous
ovation’’ at the Mt. Zion African Methodist Episcopal Church. Gar-
veyites were there to ‘‘honor the bravest little woman [they] know and to
drink, as they delight to do, from the fountain of Garveyism.’’ A delega-
tion from the Democratic Headquarters Citizens’ Organization, on be-
half of presidential candidate Al Smith, and a representative from the
Democratic Women of Philadelphia, of which Mrs. Franklin D. Roose-
velt was chairwoman, presented Jacques Garvey with a bouquet of ﬂowers
in ‘‘appreciation for her leadership among Negro women.’’ Jacques Gar-
vey was pleased by this unexpected display of ‘‘inter-racial good will.’’ She
received twenty-ﬁve dollars from the local division and a gold key in-
scribed with her initials from the city. At this event, Jacques Garvey,
described as ‘‘graceful as a queen and as charming as a rose,’’ stuck to her
script, detailing the Garveys’ recent activities and discussing how they had
struggled to educate Europeans on the aims of the unia. She ended by
‘‘inspiring members to nobler heights.’’
≥Ω
Amy Jacques Garvey never seemed to disappoint her audiences.
Though sleepless nights and fatigue were her constant companions, she
became energized by the presence of fellow Garveyites. Her U.S. tour
conﬁrmed that they appreciated all of her personal e√orts for the move-
ment. Perhaps they had sensed her frustrations and feelings of isolation,
which were layered into her editorials on the woman’s page. Whatever the
reason, at this point in her life she needed recognition, and on every
public occasion members took the opportunity to let her know that she
was not alone. They a≈rmed her by giving her gifts and expressing their
love and respect.
Everywhere Jacques Garvey went, she appealed for unia funds, and
people gave generously. She kept her husband informed of her fund-
raising, and on two occasions he wired her for money. His monetary
requests had become frequent, and Jacques Garvey seemed a bit per-
turbed. Clearly, she had not relinquished her patriarchal ideas that hus-
bands were to perform as primary breadwinners, and to her his requests
were direct signs of domestic failure. Despite her frustration, she sent him
a total of eight hundred dollars via Western Union, ‘‘practically every cent


--- PAGE 118 ---
back to jamaica &  forward to europe 105
I had raised at paid meetings, after paying all expenses, and giving the
branches a percentage.’’∂≠
While his wife was still in the United States, Marcus Garvey, who was
viewed as a menace by Canadian immigration o≈cials, was apprehended
and charged with illegal entry. Both his peers and contemporary scholars
reasoned that his detainment was a response by Canadian o≈cials to
American diplomats’ fear that he could inﬂuence the upcoming presiden-
tial election. He had published several scathing articles on Republican
presidential candidate Herbert Hoover, whom he linked with Harvey
Firestone, the culprit who had forced thousands of Liberians to work as
slaves on rubber plantations.
∂∞ Garvey had made impassioned pleas to
American voters not to vote for Hoover—‘‘A vote for Hoover is a vote for
slavery.’’ In addition, he urged African Americans to cast their ballot for
the more progressive presidential candidate, Al Smith, the Democratic
Catholic governor of New York. Though Canadian immigration o≈cials
detained him for only one day, they limited his stay to one additional
week; thus he had to leave by 7 November.
∂≤
After notifying his wife of these unforeseen circumstances, Garvey
arranged for them to meet in Bermuda. Jacques Garvey, however, was
confused about the schedule, and she wrote back inquiring whether she
should return to Toronto after Detroit or go directly to Bermuda. ‘‘If you
care I will speak Brooklyn seventh, Newark eighth you wire & make ar-
rangem[en]ts & inform me.’’ Garvey quickly responded to ‘‘Mopsie,’’ de-
tailing her arrangements to sail ﬁrst from New York, then from Bermuda
on 10 November. From Bermuda to Jamaica, ‘‘we will have ﬁrst class
passage.’’ Garvey’s last sentence was undoubtedly intended to smooth
over his wife’s anticipated displeasure with the second-class tickets he had
purchased for her and Escridge. (Once on board, however, Escridge had
enough money to upgrade their tickets to the ﬁrst-class accommodations
that they were accustomed to.)
∂≥
They traveled according to plan, but when the Canadian SS Forrester
docked in Bermuda, British o≈cials would not let Garvey on the pier, so
that evening Jacques Garvey spoke on his behalf. She was hailed as an
‘‘inspiration’’; ‘‘cleaving to the side of our Leader, she has braved all and
dared all.’’ Her ‘‘fortitude, determination, and sagacity stand out as mon-
uments.’’ Unlike her other speeches, which concentrated on her Euro-
pean travels, this one cleared up points of confusion about the unia. First,
since many people continued to misinterpret its platform, she said, ‘‘You
must not think that we intend to dump the entire Negro population of


--- PAGE 119 ---
106 back to jamaica &  forward to europe
Bermuda in Africa.’’ For one thing, some people were not worthy of being
sent—for example, those who lacked technical skills or a progressive Pan-
African consciousness; ‘‘the weeding-out process,’’ she believed, would
prevent this from happening. The unia simply wanted to be able to send a
Bermuda representative to the League of Nations or to ‘‘any other place
where one is needed.’’
∂∂ Although lightly stated, Jacques Garvey had high-
lighted a fundamental organizing principle of Pan-Africanism: that black
people the world over needed the power to voice their complaints before
an inﬂuential decision-making body, and this could only occur with po-
litical backing.
Further, she clariﬁed, black nationalists were not antiwhite; in fact,
‘‘our people must work side by side with the exponents of western civiliza-
tion, absorb the best of it and return with it to our brothers and sisters on
the Continent.’’
∂∑ Over the years, the Garveys had conveyed how the
United States and the West Indies had been ‘‘splendid training grounds’’
in terms of Western education. Though formal schooling had always been
a key strategy of uplift ideology, for Jacques Garvey it was not meant to ac-
culturate the lowly black masses to become philosophers who, in the
words of one contemporary observer, ‘‘intellectualize black people to
death.’’ Africa, she had written earlier, ‘‘needs black men and women who
have mastered the sciences, literature and the art of modern government
in this Western Hemisphere to go over and teach their brethren.’’
∂∏
Jacques Garvey’s statements are reminiscent of other anticolonial nation-
alists who divided the world into two domains—the material and the
spiritual. The material was the ‘‘outside’’—the economy, science, and
technology—a domain where the West excelled; thus, its accomplish-
ments had to be carefully interrogated and replicated. By comparison, the
spiritual domain marked the ‘‘inner’’ and ‘‘essential,’’ represented by reli-
gion and family, stamps of cultural identity. Thus, a core feature of anti-
colonial nationalism in Africa and Asia, as Partha Chatterjee points out,
was to imitate Western material skills; the greater one’s success, the greater
the imperative to preserve the uniqueness of one’s spiritual culture.
∂π
Anticolonial nationalists like Jacques Garvey set out to launch a modern
national culture that was nevertheless not Western.
In Bermuda, Jacques Garvey also tackled accusations that Garveyites
were not law-abiding citizens. ‘‘We of the U.N.I.A. believe in constituted
authority, and advocate respect for and a proper observance of the laws of
any country in which we ﬁnd ourselves.’’ To hammer home the reason-
ableness of Garveyites, she asked aggressively, ‘‘Who is Red? We are not


--- PAGE 120 ---
back to jamaica &  forward to europe 107
Reds! Nor are we Socialist! We are a people banded together whose princi-
ples are self-love, and amity with all peoples.’’ It is ironic that Jacques
Garvey would make such a distinction, since three years earlier she had
given an equally sharp response to ‘‘whether a connection existed between
[the] African repatriation movement and communism.’’ In May 1925 she
said, ‘‘The time has come when everyone who ﬁghts for some measure of
reform or justice is labeled ‘communists’ as though the term meant some-
thing incorrigibly bad or vicious.’’
∂∫ It is unclear what accounted for her
philosophical change that apparently accepted, at least to some degree,
the popular Western conception that positioned communism and social-
ism as principal threats to world peace. The fact that Marcus Garvey’s
personal enemies in the United States fell into these camps may have
magniﬁed her antileftist tilt. A closer reading, however, reveals her an-
noyance that white authorities found it so di≈cult to believe that black
people could select their own leader and organize independently from
other groups.
After a brief stop in the Bahamas on 22 November 1928, the Garveys
arrived in the Kingston harbor and disembarked to a 1:00 a.m. heroes’
welcome. Overall, Jacques Garvey viewed their journey as a success, and
she complimented her husband on his ‘‘splendid work in organizing and
ﬁnancing the underground movement to all parts of Africa.’’
∂Ω One has to
wonder why they did not include a brief tour of West Africa on their
journey. After all, Garvey had political connections and unia branches in
West and South Africa, as well as supporters in Kenya and the Congo.
Neither had yet visited the continent that had provided the ammunition
for their discourse. To touch African soil and share ﬁrsthand impressions
would have gone a long way with fellow Garveyites. Money may have
been an issue, but they were able to scrounge up funds to go everywhere
else. It is more probable that the restrictions on Garvey’s passport and the
di≈culty in locating a country to sponsor their visas prevented them from
visiting West Africa. Moreover, the Garveys undoubtedly had a plan that
could only be executed one step at a time, and on this trip they concen-
trated on laying the foundation to unite the African diaspora.
Back home in Jamaica, the Garveys’ ﬁnancial status was still far from
certain. By 1929 the Negro World was reduced to selling advertisements
for skin ‘‘whiteners’’ to generate income. Garvey admitted that since 1922
he had ‘‘never yet received a full check for salary’’ from the unia.
∑≠ He
was a politician without a secure political post. To address these two
concerns—ﬁnancial and political stability—at once, he decided to begin


--- PAGE 121 ---
108 back to jamaica &  forward to europe
publishing the Blackman, a daily paper to compete with the conservative
Daily Gleaner. Blackman would generate a local income, along with giv-
ing him an instrument to voice his political concerns and agenda. To his
wife’s dismay, Garvey cashed in his life insurance policy to obtain funds
for a printing press and o≈ce space in Kingston. In his typically grand
style, he bought not a small o≈ce but Edelweiss Park, which included a
large outdoor amphitheater that eventually became a ‘‘centre of the social
and pleasure life of the Corporate Area.’’ Garvey was a master of propa-
ganda but still a novice when it came to money management, so Jacques
Garvey pleaded with him to let her ‘‘put aside a portion of the money, but
he refused.’’
∑∞ By March 1929 the ﬁrst issue of Blackman was hot o√ the
press. Garvey, of course, was the editor, and though the newspaper did not
have a woman’s page, Jacques Garvey continued to publish her trademark
feminist editorials.
∑≤
From the ﬁrst time that Garvey had been imprisoned in the United
States until now, Jacques Garvey had been preoccupied with money di≈-
culties. It is likely that Garvey’s perpetual mismanagement of funds had
made her even more conscious of the times that money had slipped out of
her hands and into his. This problem intensiﬁed in Jamaica, where pov-
erty was abundant and where they no longer had immediate access to the
most solvent unia branches. These circumstances helped to shift the
focus of Jacques Garvey’s editorials. Many of them were reprints from the
Negro World, under the same title but with a slightly abridged text, yet her
monetary concentration is more pronounced because she published fewer
articles in Blackman.
∑≥ Feminist issues persisted, but overall her Blackman
editorials were more concerned with poverty and empowerment. Other
themes consistent with this topic included the virtues of intellectual de-
velopment, self-sacriﬁce, and endurance to overcome obstacles. These
qualities would bring, Jacques Garvey believed, ﬁnancial rewards and
political sovereignty.
‘‘Poverty is Slavery,’’ she wrote, because it is an ill whose ‘‘cure is not
within easy reach of its victims.’’ In asking ‘‘why is the Negro race the
poorest of all races, yet Africa is the richest continent in the world?,’’ she
joined other writers who critiqued colonialism. It began with the forced
removal of Africans during the horriﬁc transatlantic and East African
slave trades; the 1884 Berlin conference, where Europeans carved up the
continent for economic gain, sealed the fate of African people and their
natural resources. Although her analysis is not as sophisticated as that of
her contemporary, R. Palme Dutt, who addressed how the traditional


--- PAGE 122 ---
back to jamaica &  forward to europe 109
methods and tactics of bourgeois domination (violence, lawlessness, and
corruption) were used against colonial subjects to build the ‘‘democratic
foundations’’ of Western imperialism, she did respond to a pivotal ques-
tion, noting, ‘‘All Negroes have not learned the value of Africa, and not
knowing they have not made united e√orts to hold and protect same.’’
This essay dealt not only with the larger Pan-African question but also
with local ﬁnancial issues. Jacques Garvey told her readers that to be
‘‘truly independent one must have money invested.’’ But to ensure that all
understood that the ultimate goal was beyond material possessions, she
concluded by saying, ‘‘A sound brain is better than a bank account, if the
owner knows how to use it.’’
∑∂
Jacques Garvey consistently reiterated the importance of acquiring
knowledge, and not simply for monetary rewards. In ‘‘Some Fallacies
about Children,’’ she exhorted, ‘‘Never let children get ahead of you
mentally.’’ Though Jamaica was poor and could o√er a secondary educa-
tion to only a few, there were ways to get around these limitations. For
instance, she noted, ‘‘In this world of progress grown-up folk can go to
night school, get good books and magazines from free libraries and pay
only a few pennies for newspapers.’’ This is how Jacques Garvey herself
kept abreast of what happened o√ the island, so others could do the same.
She felt that children should not have to remark, ‘‘Mother is so dumb, she
doesn’t know whether the world is moving or standing still.’’
∑∑
Postulating that a formula of self-help plus intellectual development
equaled empowerment, Jacques Garvey turned to the popular philoso-
phies that had taken root in the African American community and re-
charged them in Jamaica. Admittedly, working-class African Americans
had felt removed from these discussions, and Jamaican peasants had com-
parable reasons to feel alienated—both struggled to meet daily living
expenses and were not privileged with leisure time to contemplate what
was going on outside their immediate communities. Moreover, capitalism
and colonialism ensured that there would always be a surplus workforce
no matter how hard one labored. It was easier for someone who had access
to a middle-class income, as well as assets, to work exclusively as an
intellectual, and the Garveys fell into this category. They were not re-
quired to work as wage laborers and had the resources to travel abroad.
Nevertheless, their elite external lifestyle did not quash their rebellious
spirit. In fact, Jacques Garvey’s travels had made her more attuned to
issues of poverty and fair distribution of wealth—questions that had be-
come essential to her thinking and writing.


--- PAGE 123 ---
110 back to jamaica &  forward to europe
In a further step to deal concretely with poverty and disfranchisement,
the Garveys organized a Jamaican-based party—the People’s Political
Party (ppp). The ppp was formally launched at the Sixth unia Conven-
tion, held in Kingston in August 1929, with 15,000 delegates attending.∑∏
The pageantry that had become legendary in the United States, as well as
the chaos and internal bickering, marked the occasion. Before the con-
vention, George O. Marke, the former supreme deputy potentate of the
unia, had sued the organization for back payment of salary totaling
$35,000, and Garvey had contested his claim in court, arguing that he had
‘‘never earned one penny of it hardly.’’ Marke was not the only disgruntled
leader; even Henrietta Vinton Davis, a longtime supporter of the unia
and the Garveys’ former housemate, had requested $12,000 in back salary.
In the end, Garvey chastised the New York contingent as ‘‘wicked men,
vicious men, crafty men, greedy men, men without honor, men without
character, men without any respect at all for their race.’’
∑π It was this
entourage that had mishandled the unia’s ﬁnances during his incarcera-
tion, Garvey claimed, resulting in the bankruptcy of the organization.
During the convention Garvey decided to safeguard the remaining
unia assets by reorganizing under a new name ‘‘ unia, August 1929, the
World.’’ The new and improved unia, based at Edelweiss Park, consoli-
dated Garvey’s power and further split the movement into American and
West Indian factions, despite the fact that Kingston had been selected as
the site for the convention ‘‘to bring the American Negroes into closer
contact with the Negroes of the West Indies for trade and commercial and
industrial relationship.’’
∑∫
After the convention, the Garveys shifted their activities from the unia
and to the ppp. On 9 September 1929, in Cross Roads, Jamaica, Garvey
pronounced himself chairman of the ppp—a political organization ‘‘spon-
soring the election of fourteen men to the Legislative Council of Ja-
maica.’’ Garvey, who had already included himself in this group, said,
‘‘There are fourteen things that I hope to do in the Legislative Council
after my election.’’
∑Ω This manifesto made Jamaican history by establish-
ing a modern political party, though loosely organized, whose platform
defended the interests of the masses.
∏≠ Unlike the earlier objectives of the
unia, the ppp did not mention women’s issues; instead, it focused on labor
protection, a minimum wage, land reform, fair distribution of wealth to
improve urban areas, a Jamaican university, legal aid, and a national park.
Progressive critics, particularly members of the Communist Party, were
not convinced that the ppp was sincerely behind the Jamaican workers


--- PAGE 124 ---
back to jamaica &  forward to europe 111
because of its continued close alliances with local businessmen. Conserva-
tive critics, such as the Jamaican Supreme Court, believed that the ppp’s
tenth plank, which called for a law to impeach and imprison judges who
illicitly made arrangements with lawyers and deprived clients of their
court rights, was an attack against them and therefore illegal. Legal retri-
bution against Garvey by the court was swift. He was charged with ‘‘con-
tempt’’ (a ‘‘ﬁrst class misdemeanor’’), and sentenced on 26 September to
three months’ incarceration at Spanish Town prison, twelve miles from
Kingston, and ﬁned one hundred pounds ($400).
∏∞
Jacques Garvey once again attempted to make her husband’s jail con-
ﬁnement tolerable. This task was magniﬁed when they learned that he
su√ered from diabetes. She ‘‘arranged with the proprietress of a lodging
house nearby [the prison] to look after Garvey’s laundry, and send in all of
his meals.’’ On one of her regular visits, which were cumbersome due to
the unpaved roads, he informed her that the creditors of the Edelweiss
Park property had threatened foreclosure if they did not receive payment.
According to Jacques Garvey, he told her: ‘‘I am powerless to help, being
here; you are the only person who can save the situation, by mortgaging
the home and giving a bill of sale on the furniture.’’ She felt she had little
choice in the matter and ‘‘acceded to his wish.’’
∏≤
Once released from prison, on 19 December, Garvey began campaign-
ing for o≈ce. This proved di≈cult, since poverty made the vast majority
of his supporters ineligible to vote (a citizen had to either pay a tax or earn
£1 per week or £25 a year to vote). Only 7.75 percent of the Jamaican
population was registered for the election. Soon the Garveys were con-
vinced that those Jamaicans who could vote were ‘‘intimidated’’ and felt
that retribution would be taken against them by the government if they
cast their ballot for Marcus Garvey. These conditions forced the Garveys
to conclude that his chances of being elected were nil, and that they
should put their e√orts into helping other candidates on the ppp ticket.
On election day, political apathy resulted in only a 2.74 percent show-
ing.
∏≥ To some, Garvey appeared ‘‘to be losing such inﬂuence as he pos-
sessed.’’∏∂ The Garveys’ disappointment, however, was eased by the elec-
tion of three ppp candidates: Dr. Felix Gordon Veitch, from Hanover
Parish; R. Ehrenstein, of St. Thomas; and Philip Lightbody, a journalist
whose nationalist views most closely resembled those of Garveyites. Most
exciting, though, was their personal news: after seven years of marriage,
Jacques Garvey was pregnant.


--- PAGE 125 ---
6 New Freedoms, New Constraints
F
or years Amy Jacques Garvey had written about the value of
motherhood, but after more than seven years of marriage she still
had not had a child herself. Though she makes no mention of
this in her correspondence or memoir, gossip and rumors re-
garding her ‘‘womb’’ must have hovered over her. No doubt
today’s observers would have questioned her husband’s medical history,
perhaps hypothesizing that his multiple ailments could have rendered
him impotent, but in that era childbearing and rearing were viewed
as exclusively a woman’s responsibility. In fact, once she did become a
mother, Jacques Garvey performed the role as seriously and singlemind-
edly as any other woman of the period. Despite her early feminist call to
women—and mothers in particular—to perform public leadership roles,
with the birth of her own children she withdrew from politics. Mother-
hood absorbed most of her time and energy; even her husband’s needs and
concerns were pushed to the background. As wifehood gave way to moth-
erhood, Jacques Garvey moved away from the speciﬁc political/personal
balance of her community feminism. T ransformed by issues directly re-
lated to providing the essentials for their children, she ultimately removed
herself from active participation in the Pan-African struggle.
In the 1920s, many American women, especially activists, intentionally
delayed motherhood in order to complete their education, travel, or fulﬁll
other personal desires.
∞ But there is no evidence that this was the case for
Jacques Garvey. She knew that Marcus Garvey wanted children; in fact,
this was her explanation for why he decided to marry her instead of the
older Henrietta Vinton Davis. Her delay in getting pregnant probably
had more to do with the poor health and physical weakness she had
complained of during her sojourn in the United States, as well as Garvey’s
frequent absences and the stress associated with serving as a leader of the


--- PAGE 126 ---
new freedoms, new constraints 113
Universal Negro Improvement Association ( unia) during his repeated
periods of incarceration.
When Jacques Garvey returned home to Jamaica at the age of thirty-
three, many people may have believed that she was unable to have a baby,
since most Jamaican women had their ﬁrst child in their late teens or
early twenties.
≤ Once she and Marcus Garvey had a lengthy period of
time together uninterrupted by separations, she did ﬁnally become preg-
nant. Jacques Garvey was thirty-ﬁve years old when Marcus Garvey Jr.
was born on 17 September 1930. Like most Caribbean women, she gave
birth at home, assisted by a trained nurse. Her mother and sister Ida were
nearby. Garvey was at his o≈ce when the baby was delivered and was
notiﬁed of the happy news by telephone. Jacques Garvey remembered
that later he hurried home to ‘‘see what the baby looked like, beamed all
over his face, and returned to the o≈ce, like most proud fathers, to say, ‘I
have a son.’ ’’ No doubt Garvey was elated—he was a ﬁrst-time father at
forty-three, an age when most Jamaican men were already grandfathers.
He also must have been relieved that his wife was doing well after the
birth, since she had had a di≈cult pregnancy. Indeed, in her ﬁrst trimester
her physician had ordered her to bed for six weeks. Everyone around her
was made aware of her delicate state and tried to shield her from stress and
anxiety. On one occasion, a wooden statue of an ‘‘African woman holding
a light’’ was removed from the Garveys’ open veranda by vandals, and
when the pieces were found, they were not ‘‘brought home on account of
my condition.’’
≥
Although Garvey apparently had done his best not to worry his wife
during her pregnancy, the couple was clearly having ﬁnancial problems.
At one point, when he needed money to pay pressing unia bills, he went
to her with an ‘‘acceptance’’ to sign in order to obtain funds presumably
from her personal savings account. In the past Jacques Garvey had always
given in to her husband’s monetary demands, but this time she stood her
ground. The house and furniture were already mortgaged, and she had
recently ‘‘backed other notes for him. I was in no condition to be further
harassed.’’ In response to her refusal, which must have shocked him,
Garvey immediately packed his suitcase and left the house. He returned
later that evening and pleaded with her once again on behalf of the
organization. Jacques Garvey was ‘‘lying down, too worn out and dis-
gusted for words; I shook my head in refusal.’’ T wo days later ‘‘I felt as if I
was losing the baby.’’ She summoned the physician and her mother, but


--- PAGE 127 ---
114 new freedoms, new constraints
not Garvey, who had taken up residence at a nearby house shared by his
widowed sister, Indiana, and two unia secretaries.∂
During this crisis Mrs. Jacques stayed with her daughter and o√ered
support. When Garvey returned later that week, his mother-in-law ‘‘did
not scold him, only asked what had happened.’’ He poured out his ‘‘ﬁnan-
cial woes’’ to her, Jacques Garvey claims, and then confessed that he could
not ‘‘take it’’ when his wife ‘‘turned him down,’’ because ‘‘she is all I have
to depend on.’’ Mrs. Jacques was well aware of Garvey’s ﬁnancial troubles,
since her daughter was constantly withdrawing funds from her savings
account and other assets willed to her by her father. In addition, that week
she had witnessed her daughter sending the ‘‘gardener and maid’’ to
Garvey ‘‘for their pay.’’ They had returned to inform her that Garvey had
said that ‘‘he had no money’’ and that they would stay on an additional
week out of respect for Jacques Garvey and in hope that their salaries
would materialize. Mrs. Jacques’s comments to Garvey are not recorded,
but she must have used her ‘‘soft’’ nature to convince him to do the right
thing, because that night he went back to his wife and they ‘‘never dis-
cussed the incident’’ again.
∑
Jacques Garvey narrates this story as if death were ﬁguratively knock-
ing at her door, and that was the only reason she did not try to reconcile
these money matters at the time. She and Garvey had both sacriﬁced their
personal lives for the unia, but she was adamant about not putting their
baby at risk. To be sure, Garvey also wanted a healthy child, but he was
not prepared for her change of heart. From this period Jacques Garvey
began pushing her husband away from the center of her world and replac-
ing him with their child. She would still be a helpmate to Garvey, but now
regarded motherhood as her ultimate duty.
The birth of Marcus Garvey Jr. coincided with the beginning of the
Great Depression. By 1930 the domino e√ect of the 1929 stock market
crash in the United States had created a slump in the world economy.
Practically every country was a√ected by this phenomenon, though its
duration and severity di√ered signiﬁcantly from region to region. In Brit-
ain, as W. R. Garside has shown, Parliament passed the Colonial De-
velopment Act of 1929 to keep its colonies from diversifying their econo-
mies, thus making them dependent on imports, which would in turn, it
was hoped, stimulate employment and income in the British market. But
as the depression intensiﬁed, the 1929 act proved a dismal failure for
Jamaica. Shifts in the terms of trade, combined with natural disasters,
resulted in a reduction of one of the island’s most proﬁtable commodities,


--- PAGE 128 ---
new freedoms, new constraints 115
fruit. Devastating hurricanes in 1934 and 1935 further curtailed fruit pro-
duction, and the American fruit market collapsed in 1935. Lower divi-
dends followed, and any hope of ﬁnancial independence for small pro-
ducers disappeared.
∏
Moreover, the population was increasing as Jamaican nationals began
to return home from Central America because of the depression. The
failure of the economy to cope with this growth laid the foundation for
acute unemployment. Countless Jamaicans—landless and unemployed—
moved throughout the city, scrambling for provisions and settling into
the ‘‘pens’’ of Kingston, properties on the outskirts of town.
π
The lack of an increase in home food production magniﬁed the e√ects
of the depression. In 1930 the rising demand for goods pushed Jamaica to
spend as much as 9 percent of its national income on imported food.
Patterns of consumer expenditures in 1930 show that about 49.4 percent
of a household’s income was spent on food alone.
∫ Jamaica’s economy was
deteriorating rapidly, but the Garveys were determined that their son
would not su√er for want of any material needs. Indeed, from the mo-
ment of Junior’s birth, it appeared that his mother’s middle-class roots
were reasserting themselves: an announcement appeared in the news-
paper, and a formal christening ceremony took place at St. Luke’s Angli-
can Church (even though Garvey was a Roman Catholic). In Jamaica,
Anglican services were noted for being ‘‘unemotional and decorous’’;
whites were generally associated with this orthodox church, which had a
‘‘high snob value for the social climber.’’ The Garveys selected ‘‘profes-
sionals’’ as godparents: Mr. J. Hume Steward, a merchant of Spanish
Town; Dr. Samuels, a dentist in Kingston; and Mrs. Stewart of Half-Way
T ree. Although it was Amy Jacques Garvey who possessed the middle-
class pedigree, Marcus Garvey seemed equally committed to these deci-
sions. It was he who submitted the birth announcement and arranged for
the elaborate christening.
Ω
To be fair, these activities were probably more a reﬂection of the jubila-
tion of new parenthood than an excess of middle-class decorum. Still,
there were other indications that Garvey was increasingly adopting a self-
aggrandizing attitude, which a√ected both his personal and business af-
fairs. For example, after the People’s Political Party (ppp) elections and the
implementation by the U.S. House of Representatives in 1930 of the
‘‘quota system’’ restricting immigration from the West Indies, Garvey
intensiﬁed his e√orts to develop black entrepreneurship in Jamaica.
∞≠
Although this was a step forward in the national democratic revolution


--- PAGE 129 ---
116 new freedoms, new constraints
and a justiﬁable tactic to empower people of African descent, who had
been discriminated against by banks and other credit agencies, it also
relied on the conservative idea that opportunities and increased wages
would trickle down to the masses from their employers.
Garvey instructed workers to study their employer’s interests and ‘‘give
him an honest day’s work so his business [can] succeed,’’ contending that
this would create ‘‘the opportunity for increased remuneration.’’ In the-
ory, it made sense to argue that when ‘‘he [the laborer] gets his pay . . . he is
an independent man’’; but the reality was quite di√erent.
∞∞ Even the most
‘‘philanthropic and paternalistic’’ capitalist, R. L. M. Kirkwood, manag-
ing director of the West Indies Sugar Company ( wisco), in testifying
in 1938 before the Jamaican government commission, admitted that al-
though his company planned to ‘‘invest ten thousand pounds per year in
Jamaica over a period of years’’ and provide family dwellings for its work-
ers, there would not be ‘‘any signiﬁcant wage increases.’’ Kirkwood added
that due to the island’s ‘‘disorganized’’ labor force, it was impossible to
‘‘determine a fair wage level.’’ He concluded that ‘‘those companies which
could a√ord to pay their labour more than the standard rates should
devote their attention to housing, medical facilities, recreation grounds
and clubs, rather than to embark upon a process of competitive wage
increase.’’ Thomas Holt accurately observes that wisco ‘‘deliberately cre-
ated a situation of chronic underemployment at low wages, ostensibly for
a larger social good.’’
∞≤ Garvey’s labor rhetoric failed to acknowledge these
real-world conditions. Though he continued to be a champion of the
masses and was well aware of the hardships that most workers endured, at
times his speeches and writings undermined their interests.
Marcus Garvey still believed that workers had legitimate grievances,
but in his opinion they were unable to articulate them in a way that would
impress government o≈cials. Unlike the common folk, he was able to
‘‘speak for himself before anyone, and he was assuming the responsibility
to interpret the sorrows and su√ering of his people, not only to the local
government, but to the imperial government.’’ Garvey claimed that he
was the explicator of the people and understood the power inherent in
that role. Literary scholar and novelist Ngugi Thiong’o has suggested that
intellectuals who serve as interpreters sometimes see themselves as ‘‘scouts
and guides’’ in their own linguistic space. Unfortunately, too often these
thinkers fall into the trap of locating power solely in those who can
articulate it, failing to see its source in the people themselves. In Jamaica it
was becoming more evident that Garvey saw himself as the ‘‘cultured


--- PAGE 130 ---
new freedoms, new constraints 117
representative’’ of the masses, even though he had criticized this attitude
among African American leaders in the preceding decade.∞≥
While her husband was addressing labor issues in an abstract and
public vein, Amy Jacques Garvey was becoming concretely aware of pov-
erty and the di≈culties of making ends meet at home. This began to
change her ideas about what constituted waste and excess. On one occa-
sion in 1931, she suggested to Garvey that he spend less on his personal
secretaries. Both secretaries were paid U.S. salaries and had access to a car
(a major luxury, since most people on the island traveled by foot, donkey,
or mule, or hitched a ride on the back of a truck). In addition, Garvey
gave them presents, took them on costly outings, and after a year of
employment paid for their vacations in the United States. All of this
occurred when ‘‘we at home are su√ering great deprivations, and he was
being pressed to meet organization bills.’’ In response to her complaints,
Jacques Garvey recalled that he ‘‘calmly and deliberately’’ told her that
because he received most of his ﬁnancial support from the United States,
the African American secretaries had to be accommodated, ‘‘I thought
you realized this long ago,’’ he reportedly told her.
∞∂
On the surface, Jacques Garvey knew that her husband felt the need to
keep the secretaries materially happy so they would remain ‘‘loyal’’ to
him. But perhaps since she had also been his personal secretary and had
ended up as his wife, she was a bit jealous of all the time that he spent with
these women. Given, too, that money was short and she and her son were
doing without, it is understandable why she wanted him to change his
spending habits.
∞∑
Essentially, she was responding to what appeared to be elaborate ex-
penditures when they had their baby’s future to secure. Her father had
labored and invested the family wealth to ensure his family’s lifestyle,
and she expected Garvey to do the same for their child, especially since
Garveyites were adamant that men needed to function as heads of house-
holds and take full responsibility for their ﬁnancial success. Other Jamai-
can women born at the turn of the century held similar views, believing
that it was the ‘‘task’’ of men to ‘‘donate money’’ to sustain the family.
∞∏
Throughout her memoir, Garvey and Garveyism (1963), Jacques Garvey
claims that her husband continually drained both their household funds
and her inheritance to meet unia debts. But with the birth of Junior
her attitude about Garvey’s haphazard money management changed: she
went from simply voicing her complaints to refusing his requests and
openly criticizing his pecuniary mishaps. The overall tenor of her memoir


--- PAGE 131 ---
118 new freedoms, new constraints
reveals that although saying no to her husband could be painful, because
she had always done everything in her power to help him achieve the goals
of the unia, it was also necessary. Now she and her child were struggling
ﬁnancially, and she was forced to heed the advice she had given her
readership over the years on how to stretch a dollar. No longer could she
merely o√er suggestions on ‘‘making do’’ as an outside observer; now she
herself had to make do.
Of course, class struggles are relative. When journalist Harold Stan-
nard described the housing conditions of agricultural workers of the West
Indies in 1938, he stated: ‘‘The ﬁrst time I saw one of these hovels I could
hardly believe that it was intended for human occupation. Stands of dried
bamboo are woven round a framework of stakes and ‘the room’ thus
formed is covered with palm thatch. There is no furniture except sacking
on the earth and some sort of table to hold the oil-stove.’’ Conditions in
Kingston were even worse: ‘‘shacks were put together anyhow out of the
sides of packing cases and sheets of corrugated iron.’’ Thus, a poor Jamai-
can woman who ‘‘made do’’ by supplementing her family income with her
‘‘own account’’ work—domestic service, dressmaking, hairdressing, and
selling the surplus food staples of small farmers—would accurately have
viewed Jacques Garvey’s complaints as petty. After all, the Garveys lived in
a modern home in a prestigious neighborhood, they had a maid and a
gardener, a car (American Garveyites had sent them a Buick in 1929, and
when the engine gave out, they sent a Hudson), and a telephone in their
home.
∞π But all that glitters is not prosperity, and maintaining a middle-
class exterior, in any culture, is di≈cult without a steady monthly income.
Jacques Garvey found motherhood extremely time-consuming. Al-
though she had extended family support, particularly from her mother
and sister, she could no longer give Garvey and the unia the kind of
energy she had provided before. Her helpmate role was now primarily to
care for her son, and she was annoyed when Garvey’s decisions impeded
her ability to meet her maternal obligations. For example, at one point she
wanted to purchase a Jersey cow with some of the money they had been
given when Junior was born. As a nursing mother, she most likely in-
tended to wean him after nine months and therefore was eager to have a
ready source of cow’s milk.
∞∫ In recalling the incident, she describes the
irritation she felt at having to sell a calf ‘‘and all my ducks and fowls to pay
for the cow,’’ because Garvey was ‘‘unable to return the amount’’ he had
borrowed from Junior’s funds.
∞Ω The fact that Garvey had to borrow his
son’s money indicates that Jacques Garvey controlled these funds, and


--- PAGE 132 ---
new freedoms, new constraints 119
Garvey could not simply help himself. Despite the fact that Garveyites
argued that ﬁnancial matters were the responsibility of fathers, Jacques
Garvey apparently considered the management of the household ﬁnances
to be intrinsic to her maternal duties.
Since motherhood for Jacques Garvey was a full-time undertaking, it is
understandable that there is no evidence that she contributed essays to the
Blackman after Junior’s birth in 1930.
≤≠ In early February 1931 Garvey
suspended publication because of debts related to the printing press, but,
as always, he persevered and in July 1932 began an evening newspaper, the
New Jamaican, published in St. Andrews. Jacques Garvey apparently
never wrote for this organ, either.
≤∞ Interestingly, critics perceived the
New Jamaican as conﬁrmation that Garvey was ‘‘racially dead,’’ that he
was now a man who had ‘‘completely dropped the great cause and is only
interested in making a living for himself and his family.’’ Jacques Garvey,
on the other hand, had to view this publication as direct evidence that he
continued to put the movement before his family. At this point Garvey
was in poor health, and others pleaded with him to retire and ‘‘start
life on your own. For your family’s sake, give it up.’’ His wife claimed
that he could not stop; if he tried to, the su√ering of his people would
‘‘haunt’’ him.
≤≤
In the writings and recollections of Jacques Garvey, there are many
indications that she and her husband had always experienced some degree
of marital strain. Garvey’s editorial in the New Jamaican of 1 September
1932, entitled ‘‘The Question of Love,’’ suggests that these tensions were
pervasive. He begins the piece by asserting that ‘‘love is really a personal
matter.’’ For instance, ‘‘One man will love a woman because of her beauti-
ful hair.’’ From this point on, the essay hints strongly at autobiography. ‘‘A
man marries a woman in the ﬁrst instance of loving her, for her hair.’’ As
the marriage develops, he may begin to realize her ‘‘shortcomings phys-
ically and otherwise, not consistent with the love that the person had in
the ﬁrst instance, because of the beautiful head of hair.’’ Garvey describes
how a philosopher sympathetically reasons with his spouse about her
‘‘repulsiveness or bad disposition’’ as a means to reform her. If the spouse
accepts these suggestions, ‘‘the lover will ﬁnd himself not only loving the
hair of a person, but loving the person completely.’’ But when the woman
‘‘refuses to conform . . . then you have a variance that cannot be in-
terpreted as love.’’ He concludes that ‘‘a little sympathy and a little will-
ingness to adapt oneself . . . would insure as genuine a love as man
could want.’’


--- PAGE 133 ---
120 new freedoms, new constraints
Here Garvey is attempting to discuss ‘‘love’’ from a nonpersonal stand-
point, as a ‘‘philosopher,’’ but the fact that he uses ‘‘hair’’ as an example of
attraction is signiﬁcant, because in Jacques Garvey’s memoir she talks
about how her hair ‘‘thrilled’’ her husband. Her hair was ultimately a
metaphor for her ‘‘brown’’ beauty. Though beauty was only one aspect of
Jacques Garvey’s identity, it was initially an important one for Garvey.
≤≥
While we need to be careful about over interpreting a single editorial, it is
fascinating to explore what appears to be Garvey’s revealing indictment of
his marriage.
In this essay Garvey stresses the importance of ‘‘adapting oneself ’’ to
avoid ‘‘domestic confusion and upheavals.’’ In his view, marital ‘‘gain’’ is
related to compatibility and complementarity, and he o√ers a model to
resolve marital di≈culties based on bargaining. Although Jacques Garvey
might well have agreed with this statement in principle, in practice both
were unwilling to give up their dominating traits to accommodate the
other. Jacques Garvey was not going to turn back the clock and sacri-
ﬁce herself for her husband when she had a child to provide for. As
the ‘‘philosopher,’’ Garvey did not see himself as the one who needed
to conform; therefore, their marital problems were destined to remain
unresolved.
No doubt Jacques Garvey exhibited kindness, warmth, and compas-
sion, but these qualities were not central to her temperament. Because of
her commitment to the Pan-African struggle and later to her mothering
duties, she had little time to coddle and console others; thus, she could be
both brash and aloof. On the surface, her impetuous personality seems to
have conﬂicted with the helpmate role that she wrote about and charged
other women to commit themselves to. Nevertheless, the fact that she was
not always cheerful does not mean that she was unhelpful. In addition, as
she matured with motherhood, her ideas of what constituted a helpmate
probably also changed. By the early 1930s she was apparently quite vocal
with Garvey about her money-related concerns, and she refused to always
back down and accommodate her husband’s wishes, as she had done early
in their marriage. Raising a child in an economically depressed world had
made Jacques Garvey even more conscious of working-class struggles. In
many ways, this moment provided a bridge to move her from her earlier
unia political and intellectual activities, in which she demonstrated her
skills as a community feminist, to an astute political awareness of ex-
ploited workers and actions on their behalf.
As in most marriages, the Garveys’ ﬁnancial problems exacerbated


--- PAGE 134 ---
new freedoms, new constraints 121
their marital strains. At one point, Jacques Garvey was summoned by a
baili√ for ‘‘over a year’s taxes due on the home,’’ and she went to court and
arranged for payment. As their money troubles continued to worsen, debt
forced Garvey to suspend publication of the New Jamaica. Nevertheless,
despite these pressures, the couple continued to live as husband and wife,
and on 16 August 1933 Jacques Garvey gave birth to their second son at
their Somali Court home. He was christened Julius Winston Garvey at
St. Luke’s Anglican Church. One might have expected the couple to
name their second child after an African leader or a noted African of the
diaspora, not after Julius Caesar and Winston Churchill; the Garveys,
however, identiﬁed these names with the power and strength of these
leaders.
≤∂ Obviously, they held high aspirations for the child, who physi-
cally resembled Garvey at birth.
With the birth of Julius, the joys of motherhood became twofold for
Jacques Garvey. But raising her children in Jamaica also reawakened her
to unresolved issues of her ‘‘colored’’ past. One day, while out walking
with the three-month-old Julius, she bumped into a former schoolmate,
who greeted her with, ‘‘I haven’t seen you in ages. What are you doing
with this little black baby?’’
≤∑ Jacques Garvey later recalled this incident as
if it had a√ected her a great deal. Her former peer’s question no doubt
called up a whole network of ‘‘colored’’ ideas. First of all, her schoolmate
never entertained the thought that the baby might be Jacques Garvey’s
child, because middle-class ‘‘brown’’ Jamaicans customarily married a
person of comparable hue. The former schoolmate knew her family, as
well as the importance of fulﬁlling ‘‘colored’’ expectations. Confronted
with the fact that she had steered away from the practice of marrying
‘‘light,’’ Jacques Garvey also had to have been reminded of the belief
system that she herself had once subscribed to. If she had stayed in Ja-
maica, she would never have associated, let alone married, a man like
Marcus Garvey, who was poor and black and had no legitimate ties to her
family’s lifestyle, no matter how hard he courted elite support. Years later
her sister, Mrs. Ida Repole, asserted that if their father had lived, Jacques
Garvey would not have married Garvey, implying that his paternal au-
thority would have prevented such a major break from tradition.
≤∏
In recalling the incident, Jacques Garvey does not share how she re-
sponded to her schoolmate’s query. One would hope that she repeated her
belief that ‘‘Black is beautiful’’ and that everyone in the African diaspora
should value their African heritage. But regardless of what she said, she


--- PAGE 135 ---
122 new freedoms, new constraints
had to have felt a twinge of pain, not only for herself but also for her child.
Her marriage to Marcus Garvey had shattered any hope of rekindling
certain relationships, and this fact was complicated by her present anger
with her husband. Although her duties to the unia, and later her children,
were time-consuming, they also gave her an excuse not to wholeheartedly
confront the ideology of her past, which was plagued with contradictions.
Jacques Garvey had largely shielded herself from the gossip and disap-
proval that surrounded her choice of a husband. But would she be able to
do the same for her children, whom she loved so dearly? What would their
future hold if they were snubbed by their own people? Though there was
no legal color bar in Jamaica, it was in fact ‘‘di≈cult for a really dark man
or woman to get any of the better and more responsible jobs.’’
≤π In hind-
sight, Jacques Garvey analyzed the encounter with her former schoolmate
as an informed black nationalist intellectual would, explaining that the
‘‘concept of skin-color distinction, and the idea of raising one’s color by
marriage dies hard with our people.’’
≤∫ But we cannot really know the full
impact of this incident at the time.
As the mother of an infant and a toddler, Jacques Garvey was indeed
domestically occupied. Homebound but not unhappy, she now found
satisfaction chieﬂy in nurturing her children, which was quite di√erent
from nurturing her husband or the Pan-African nation. In the preceding
years, she had been in a position to inﬂuence her husband’s political
decisions by o√ering him her opinions and analysis of events. For this role
she had been rewarded by the unia membership and hailed as the ‘‘Joan of
Arc’’ of helpmates. Nevertheless, her status had not automatically trans-
lated into real power in the movement; indeed, it seems that she con-
stantly struggled against feeling powerless within the realm of patriarchal
power. With her children, on the other hand, she experienced a sense of
real and absolute power. ‘‘Pregnancy, birth, and breast-feeding are such
powerful bodily experiences and the emotional attachment to the infant
so intense,’’ Evelyn Nakano Glenn has observed, ‘‘that it is di≈cult for
women who have gone through these experiences and emotions to think
that they do not constitute unique female experiences.’’
≤Ω These experi-
ences were so profound for Jacques Garvey that she was willing to sacriﬁce
personal desires to fulﬁll maternal responsibilities. Essentially, mother-
hood empowered her to take positions against her husband to protect
their ﬁnancial welfare. As her marital relationship became more pre-
carious, her mother-child relationship became a rock of stability.
In her earlier writings, Jacques Garvey had not conﬂated ‘‘woman’’


--- PAGE 136 ---
new freedoms, new constraints 123
with ‘‘mother,’’ but as a mother of small children, it appears that she was
too busy not to di√erentiate between the two. The records do not reveal
her romanticizing motherhood during these years as a ‘‘labor or love,’’ but
she was apparently so taken with child rearing that she was no longer a
tireless unia worker. She did not lend herself to the editorial/publication
sta√ of either the New Jamaican or Garvey’s new publication, the Black
Man: A Monthly Magazine of Negro Thought and Opinion , which ﬁrst
appeared in December 1933.
≥≠ As an intellectual, her words had always
been her primary means of production, but now she concentrated her
e√orts on raising the next generation.
Ironically, Jacques Garvey’s absence from the political scene coincided
with a peak of political activity for many Jamaican unia women, who
were also a≈liated with female-centered organizations. More than any
other black nationalist group in the early twentieth century, the unia had
emphasized female participation. Women were always central to the orga-
nization’s management and annually elected to leadership positions. In
the 1930s some of these women applied skills learned in the unia to
Jamaican women’s organizations. Indeed, in one of the few works that
deals exclusively with early political organizing among Jamaican women,
Joan French and Honor Ford-Smith’s Women, Work, and Organization in
Jamaica, 1900–1944  shows that ‘‘the unia was the training ground for
many of the middle and working class women leaders of the thirties.’’
≥∞
Liberal Jamaican feminists such as Amy Bailey, Una Marson, Satire Earle,
Adina Spencer, and Jacques Garvey’s U.S. traveling companion, Madame
DeMena, were all committed Garveyites. They were also active in the
Women’s Social Service Club (wssc), formed in 1918, and were outspoken
critics of female unemployment.
≥≤
The social work of middle-class women in Jamaica was consistent with
the ideology of ‘‘housewiﬁsation.’’ This term, coined by Marie Mies in
1981, is used to account for ‘‘the concentration of women in sectors where
the tasks and duties performed are extensions of housework, or deﬁned as
in keeping with the natural labour of women.’’ Basically, this ideology
supports the notion that the biological ability of women to have babies
should be extended so they can become the ‘‘social nurture[r] of man-
kind.’’ Thus, if a middle-class woman wanted to work outside the home,
she should apply herself to ‘‘good works on a voluntary basis.’’ Eventually
the wssc became the most prominent Jamaican women’s organization of
the early twentieth century. This club and others like it allowed women to
organize in ‘‘women’s arms’’ and later to resist the colonial deﬁnition of


--- PAGE 137 ---
124 new freedoms, new constraints
the ideal woman, one who believed it was in her best interest to maintain
male privileges.≥≥
As a community feminist, Jacques Garvey had pressed black women to
serve their communities as both helpmates and leaders, and these activists
were doing just that. Nonetheless, Jacques Garvey herself was not in-
volved in any of these groups. It is perhaps unfortunate that she did not
participate in this movement, which provided opportunities for women
to expand their horizons and their relationships with other women. Not
only might this have been a potential source of female friendship, but also
it would have provided her with the company of women who did not
allow men to mediate their lives—experiences that Jacques Garvey might
well have beneﬁted from.
Meanwhile, as Jamaican women were consolidating their activism in
their own organizations, the unia was struggling to remain solvent. In
addition, in the United States the unia now had to compete with thriving
rival movements, such as Father Divine and the Communist Party in
Harlem. To deal with this pending crisis, and because in Jamaica he felt
isolated from world a√airs, Marcus Garvey decided once again to relocate
to London.
≥∂
When her husband departed Jamaica for London in March 1935,
Jacques Garvey was left with sole responsibility for their children and
inadequate ﬁnancial resources for their care. Moreover, by this time Gar-
vey was bankrupt. The Edelweiss Park property had been foreclosed, and
Garvey had sold the household furniture to generate funds.
≥∑ What re-
mained was ‘‘a bedroom suite, the books and two large pictures and
vases.’’ Jacques Garvey reports that Garvey instructed her to ‘‘rent out the
home, get two rooms somewhere, as my mother’s home was being re-
model[ed], and in time he would send for us.’’
≥∏ Black nationalism un-
apologetically argued for a patriarchal family structure, and Garvey had
spoken out against ‘‘female-headed’’ households, but now he was leaving
his wife to care for their sons alone. Whatever else it may say about the
state of their marriage, the fact that Garvey could leave without his chil-
dren exempliﬁed his freedom from daily child care responsibilities and
Jacques Garvey’s role as the primary caregiver.


--- PAGE 138 ---
7 Single Motherhood
W
hen Marcus Garvey moved to London without his
family, Jacques Garvey became the head of the
household in Jamaica. Garvey had always been the
patriarch, making the ﬁnal decision on most family
matters, but with the birth of their children, Jacques
Garvey began increasingly to challenge him on issues. Hence, their home
eventually became a repository for more tension than ease and more
distance than familial warmth. When Garvey left the island in 1935, both
of them must have exhaled with relief to be free of the pressure of living
under the same roof.
After thirteen years of marriage, the Garveys had separated by choice.
Even though the preceding years had been made di≈cult by Garvey’s
pecuniary mishaps, life without her husband was arduous for Jacques
Garvey. She was free of a day-to-day marital accountability, but her paren-
tal obligations had increased. For all intents and purposes, she now was a
single mother—one of a host of Jamaican women who raised their chil-
dren without any daily interaction or assistance from the father. Edna
Brodber has documented that the absence of a man from a woman’s life
was a ‘‘social fact’’ in Jamaica. This social fact was also indicative of an
economic one: the vast majority of these women were poor, their hus-
bands often working in a di√erent parish or o√ the island in order to
provide their families some ﬁnancial support. Of course, in the years
during and immediately following the Great Depression, poverty was not
limited to female-headed households. By 1935, 25 to 33 percent of urban
wageworkers were unemployed, and the average weekly salary of the bulk
of employed laborers had fallen to new lows.
∞ Nevertheless, ﬁnancial
problems were particularly severe for mothers trying to raise children on
their own.
Jacques Garvey’s middle-class inheritance was not enough to cushion


--- PAGE 139 ---
126 single motherhood
her nuclear family against ﬁnancial bankruptcy, and creditors continued
to stalk her. Bills went unpaid, and on one occasion she was summoned to
court because of a physician’s debt incurred during and after her ﬁrst
pregnancy. She arranged to pay monthly installments ‘‘out of the small
irregular amounts [Garvey] sent us.’’ In addition to the gradual dissolu-
tion of her personal inheritance, the ﬁnancial resources gleaned from the
Universal Negro Improvement Association (unia) were atrophying along
with the organization’s membership. At one point Jacques Garvey admit-
ted that she ‘‘missed the thoughtfulness and unsolicited services of Gar-
veyites in America.’’ Over the years they had sent cars, gifts, and money to
Jamaica, but the depression prevented even the most loyal members from
giving as they had in the past. Though many of these Garveyites were
born in the West Indies, Jacques Garvey attributed their generosity to
living in America. She believed that the American atmosphere had ‘‘mel-
lowed’’ Jamaicans with the ‘‘spirit’’ to give and do for others, ‘‘unlike most
Jamaicans at home, who had nothing to give but their services, and even
this they withheld.’’
≤
Jacques Garvey was more critical of Jamaican Garveyites in part be-
cause she had direct contact with them now, and it seemed to her that they
had forgotten what the unia had done for them in the past. This feeling is
illustrated by her recollection of an incident that involved a Jamaican
physician who had worked at the unia headquarters in New York City
while he was a medical student at Howard University. Years later, in
Jamaica, when she took Julius to this doctor, he merely gave her son a
‘‘once-over’’ look and proclaimed him a healthy child. On leaving the
o≈ce, they passed the dispenser’s window, where the receptionist asked
for payment of the fee. ‘‘I told her that the doctor had not prescribed any
medicine, so I did not think he would charge me.’’ In Jacques Garvey’s
mind, this doctor should not collect money from her not only because he
had not provided any real service, but also because her husband had
assisted him during his time of need. If Jacques Garvey had had the
money to pay the doctor, she might not have been so put o√ by his fee, but
she was ﬁnancially strapped and had to ‘‘borrow a shilling’’ from a friend
for ‘‘tram car fares’’ after paying the amount due. She was soured by this
experience, believing that only a money-hungry human being would not
honor a past act of kindness. She also had to wonder whether the doctor
would have charged Garvey for the same nominal service. Unfortunately,
she chose to regard this physician’s behavior as representative of all Jamai-


--- PAGE 140 ---
single motherhood 127
cans, whom she callously stereotyped as people who ‘‘go to bed with the
‘gimmies’ and wake up with the ‘wants.’ ’’≥
Times had changed, and Jacques Garvey had not yet adjusted to the
fact that she no longer commanded the kind of deference that had once
been showered on her by fellow Garveyites. To add insult to injury, she
lacked adequate ﬁnancial resources to ﬁll this void with material comfort.
Like most female heads of households, Jacques Garvey found herself the
lord—or in this case the lady—over a few pence, and she complained
about her money problems to anyone who would listen. In this respect,
her attitude di√ered from that of other middle-class people during the
depression. Most were too proud to let others know their plight and
ashamed that they could not provide for themselves. Letters written by
middle-class Americans to President and Mrs. Roosevelt, for example,
indicate that they were embarrassed by their misfortune and that what
they wanted was not charity but a loan. These letters largely emphasize
that the authors had ‘‘never as yet begged.’’
∂
Middle-class Western culture of this time, regardless of precise geo-
graphic location, was deeply infused with a work ethic. The idea, most
notably promoted by Booker T. Washington, that hard work and self-help
were the rudiments of success resounded. In the 1920s Jacques Garvey
herself had been critical of black men who were waiting for a handout,
declaring that they deserved a swift ‘‘kick’’ for not creating a job for
themselves.
∑ When it came to her own needs and expectations during the
depression years, however, she refused to be silenced by a false sense of
pride. To some, she must have sounded like a broken record; nonetheless,
she would not pretend that her family was doing well and evidently saw
her own complaints not as a form of begging but as an expression of
legitimate entitlement.
Garvey, on the other hand, wanted to keep their personal a√airs con-
ﬁdential and was critical of his wife for discussing them with others. He
wrote to her that he ‘‘would appreciate if you keep our business to our-
selves instead of talking to or writing to people who only care about their
own a√airs.’’ Was Garvey embarrassed, as were so many others who la-
bored to maintain a middle-class lifestyle, that he was not able to ade-
quately support his family? In the same letter he also stated, ‘‘What I can
do I do when I can and other people have nothing to do with it, for it is
not their business and they do not care.’’
∏ Garvey did periodically send
money home, and he sent suits to his sons; thus, he had not completely


--- PAGE 141 ---
128 single motherhood
abandoned his familial responsibilities. But his e√orts were not enough to
satisfy his wife. Jacques Garvey could not ﬁnagle or postpone feeding,
housing, or clothing their children, who were at the rambunctious and
needy ages of ﬁve and three. She bewailed to Garvey the need to provide
clothes and other basic provisions. Indeed, recent research suggests that
female household heads in Jamaica continue to allocate a larger share of
their budget to children’s goods than to other necessities.
π
The 1930s were di≈cult worldwide because of the Great Depression,
but Jacques Garvey tended to characterize her family’s su√ering as if it
were far more horrendous than others’. It may help to put her reactions in
perspective if we consider the ﬁndings of researchers that economic strain
can produce what has been called the stress-distress paradigm: a slew of
emotional reactions, especially mental depression among women and
hostility among men.
∫ The Garveys shared a ﬁery spirit that often sur-
faced as animosity but also prevented them from becoming deeply de-
pressed. Obviously, they knew that the black masses were chronically
poorer than they were, but they elected not to adopt the coping strategy
that encourages people to appreciate what they have because times could
be worse. Their expectations were high. In a political context, this had the
advantage of encouraging them to dream of a Pan-African world, one that
would bring substantial prosperity to all Africans at home and abroad. In
a personal context, the Garveys believed that they deserved the best and
complained when anything fell short of their desires.
In many ways, the Garveys turned complaining into an art form. Both
of them were elaborate, excessive, and biting in their criticism of others
(and, at times, of one another). At one point Jacques Garvey even admit-
ted that she was ‘‘full of arguments and contradictions.’’
Ω Their attitudes
and charges against others sometimes made them di≈cult to be around;
by the same token, however, it was their verbal and written forcefulness
that made them such powerful and persuasive ﬁgures.
Writing and talking were the cords that bound the Garveys to life, and
during their separation they maintained an open dialogue. They even
showed signs of a√ection for each other, continuing to use their nick-
names of Mopsie and Popsie even in their most embittered exchanges.
Garvey always made it a point to send greetings to Jacques Garvey’s sister,
mother, and aunts, and he was careful to mention that he appreciated all
of the sweet treats that his wife sent him.
Garvey’s letters from this period indicate that his political and personal
life was di≈cult in London. He described a unia o≈ce that was fraught


--- PAGE 142 ---
single motherhood 129
with tension, and he wrote of his inability to hire capable clerks and trust-
worthy housekeepers. One maid, he claimed, had ‘‘searched the home
and my pockets and drawers from end to end. She and the people around
knew more of my business than I knew myself, and nobody would tell me
what was going on.’’ He was also upset by the alleged behavior of Eric
Walrond, an acclaimed Guyanese journalist and novelist, who, Garvey
believed, had been ‘‘making love to all of them [the female sta√ ] at one
and the same time.’’
∞≠
Garvey’s London residence and the unia o≈ce were in a shambles, and
Jacques Garvey must have read between the lines of his letters the implica-
tion that many of his worries would be alleviated if she would come and
take care of the household and unia business. But Garvey still did not
arrange for his family to join him. Jacques Garvey understood that he was
not receiving enough money to support a household in addition to the
work of the unia and the publication of the Black Man magazine, ‘‘so our
going was deferred for these priorities.’’
∞∞
For two years Garvey labored to regain his leadership among the black
masses and to keep his Pan-African ideas alive, while his wife struggled to
make ends meet with their children in Jamaica. Though she was not
desperate enough to become a wage laborer, Jacques Garvey most likely
supplemented her household allowance with support from her family and
the minimal aid from unia members in Jamaica.
At last, in May 1937, Garvey arranged for his family to join him. He
wrote his wife with instructions to collect the tickets and prepare to sail on
8 June. As always, he had a list of tasks for her to complete prior to the trip.
He wanted her to bring ‘‘as many of the two Vols of Philosophy and
Opinions as possible and about 500 of the Hymnals.’’ It is unclear if
Jacques Garvey requested an additional ticket for a maid, or if Garvey
made that decision to ensure that his wife would travel with ease. In any
case, Jacques Garvey, her maid, and the two boys departed Jamaica as
scheduled, arriving at Avonmouth on 21 June 1937.
∞≤
When Garvey met his family at the dock, his wife found that ‘‘in
appearance he had not changed much, though his hair was thinning out
in the front.’’ What was obvious to all present was his delight in seeing his
children. Jacques Garvey noticed that her husband was particularly taken
with Julius’s physical appearance; his youngest son still looked and now
walked like him. Garvey believed that he ‘‘must have been just like him as
a boy.’’ After riding a ‘‘boat train’’ to London, they arrived at their home at
2 Beaumont Crescent in West Kensington.
∞≥


--- PAGE 143 ---
130 single motherhood
It was an unexpected blessing that Garvey could a√ord to lease only
part of the house, for the cramped quarters inevitably helped to bring the
family closer together. In the weeks that followed, the father tried to make
up for lost time with his sons. He enjoyed taking them out, especially to
the cinema. Quickly the boys became something of a novelty, Jacques
Garvey recalled, because ‘‘colored children were rarely seen in England at
this time.’’ Garvey was ‘‘intrigued by English remarks such as these: Aren’t
they lovely? . . . [S]uch big black eyes! What beautiful white teeth! They
speak English, too. Can I touch him for luck?’’ Apparently he was so
exhilarated to be with them that he found himself ‘‘intrigued,’’ as opposed
to upset, that his children had a carnivalesque appeal for his white English
neighbors.
∞∂
That fall, the children settled into school and Garvey prepared for unia
regional conferences. The family reunion had lasted less than two months
when, on 12 August, Garvey set sail with his secretary, Daisy Whyte, for
organizational meetings in Canada, the British West Indies, and Cen-
tral America. He left written instructions for Jacques Garvey, who was
placed in charge of the London headquarters. This was the ﬁrst sign
since the birth of their children that she was wholeheartedly active in the
organization.
∞∑
To manage unia business again must have been like riding a bicycle for
Jacques Garvey. She was able to mount the seat and peddle away, bringing
order to the chaos that had threatened to engulf the o≈ce. She rode alone
for three months, and when Garvey returned on 20 November, he pro-
nounced his trip a success; there is no evidence that he was disappointed
with his wife’s performance, either.
∞∏
In February 1938 the Garveys found a house that they could a√ord to
rent on Targarth Road, near the unia o≈ce. Since the house had not been
occupied for some time and was in bad shape, Garvey convinced the
owner that some rent was better than none at all. The structure was
exceptionally damp due to the long vacancy, but it was large and allowed
them to live once again in spacious comfort. Garvey took control of
setting up this household, as he had done in Jamaica, by placing furniture
where he saw ﬁt and assigning particular rooms to his family and sta√. He
put Jacques Garvey and the children in a rear room on the top ﬂoor; his
secretary had the large front room and the maid the smaller one. Garvey
lodged on the second ﬂoor, in a set of rooms that included his bedroom,
the bathroom, and a library. The ﬁrst ﬂoor contained two sitting rooms
and the basement, the kitchen and dining room. Jacques Garvey was not


--- PAGE 144 ---
single motherhood 131
pleased with these arrangements and asked Garvey to transfer herself and
the boys to the back sitting room on the ﬁrst ﬂoor, but, she claims, he
replied, ‘‘No up there the children are out of the way, and not distracting
to me.’’ As someone who prided herself on knowing her husband better
than he knew himself, she suggested that his caustic response was similar
to what his own father would have said. Garvey wanted to be di√erent
from his father, but she observed that ‘‘although a man may strive to be
what he wants to be, he is made up of what has been, the genesis of which
gives him impulses to do and become what he does not wish to be;
therefore he usually denies the labels his actions merit.’’
∞π
It is unclear why, in this analysis, Jacques Garvey did not plainly call
her husband impatient or selﬁsh, especially since she had said as much on
other occasions. One can speculate that her dissection of this conversation
demonstrates that she was grappling for a more meaningful and compas-
sionate explanation for his behavior since his comments related to their
children. Though Jacques Garvey never implicated herself as the catalyst
for his foul moods, as an intellectual she needed to ground his personality
in some veriﬁable source. Overall, her analysis teeter-tottered between
reactionary and historical truths. It was reactionary because she sought to
ﬁnd direct evidence, linked to his past, to explain his insensitive behavior.
And though Garvey’s disposition may have been characteristic of his
father, it also could have been spurred by the desperation and the pressure
he felt to pump air back into his su√ocated movement.
Once again, tensions in the Garvey household were compounded by
problems in the unia: living conditions for black people throughout the
world were worsening, the annual convention attendance over the last
four years had been poor, and unia membership had dropped to an all-
time low because of the popularity of rival organizations such as New York
unia Inc. (formed after the 1929 unia convention), Father Divine, and
the Peace Mission movement. The Pan-African movement had brought
the Garveys many joys and disappointments over the years, and their
marriage had reﬂected this ebb and ﬂow. When Jacques Garvey ﬁrst
pledged unia membership in 1919, she was just as committed as Garvey,
and when she made her marriage vows to him in 1922, she was equally
vested in their union. Although their di√erences were often personal and
not political, unia business did sometimes trigger a showdown. But it
took a medical crisis—Junior contracting rheumatic fever—to reveal the
true extent of their marital discord.
Poor health had loomed over the Garvey household for years. Chronic


--- PAGE 145 ---
132 single motherhood
fatigue and weight loss had dogged Jacques Garvey, and bronchitis related
to acute asthma, along with diabetes, a∆icted Garvey. In London, a
favorite game of Junior and Julius was ‘‘machine gun bombardment,’’
which required Junior to kneel on one knee on the uncarpeted ﬂoor,
behind an armchair, in order to aim his toy weapon. This game eventually
had crippling consequences for him. ‘‘That knee became drawn and pain-
ful,’’ Jacques Garvey remembered, and ‘‘the fever lasted three weeks.’’
Completely attentive to the needs of her sick child, Jacques Garvey relin-
quished her unia duties to nurse him. She had to keep pressure, including
blankets, away from his leg; maintain a ﬁre in his room; and climb up and
down two ﬂights of stairs to get food and hot water from the kitchen. Her
attention to Junior also kept Julius in the house, and he soon developed
bronchitis from lack of fresh air. Jacques Garvey later said the situation
brought her to the ‘‘breaking point,’’ and Garvey was little help because
he did not ‘‘know how to attend to them’’ and it pained him to see them
sick and su√ering. Though there was a live-in maid and Garvey’s secretary
in the home, Jacques Garvey still believed that it was her role to care for
her boys, and she did everything in her power to make them well.
∞∫
Julius’s illness ran its course, but Junior remained sick. Garvey began
climbing to the top ﬂoor daily to visit with his son. Junior said that the
pain was ‘‘like lightning striking through it, and my heart trembles.’’
Garvey told him to be brave; he did not want him to ‘‘become a weakling.
When the asthma bothers me, I try to throw it o√, knowing full well that
when the body becomes weak the forces of man, and even nature, seek to
brush you aside.’’ Garvey was a ﬁrm believer in the power of positive
thinking. Only a month earlier, during a speech at St. Kitts, he had
declared that ‘‘there is nothing outside of you as strong as what is inside of
you. That power inside you is stronger.’’
∞Ω No doubt Junior tried to follow
his father’s suggestion, but by the end of the fourth week the doctor
informed the Garveys that he needed to be seen by a bone specialist and to
be hospitalized. For three months Junior stayed in the orthopedic ward of
the Princess Beatrice Hospital. His parents visited him often, and Garvey
pampered him with chocolates and made sure that he did not get behind
in his schoolwork by bringing him volumes of Arthur Mee’s Children’s
Encyclopedia.
Junior was ﬁnally released in July, just as his father was preparing for
his annual visit to Canada, where the Eighth Annual unia Convention
would take place in August. The morning before his departure, he gave
his wife ‘‘four pages of typewritten instructions, and told [her she] was


--- PAGE 146 ---
single motherhood 133
again in charge of the o≈ce.’’ Because Garvey pushed everyone around
him to work hard, his loyal secretary, Daisy Whyte, was too physically
exhausted to travel with him, so he arranged to have a secretary sent from
New York to meet him in Canada. Jacques Garvey and Whyte held down
the fort at home, a task made more di≈cult by the fact that Garvey had
left them only ten dollars a week for sta√ salaries and household money.
Jacques Garvey ‘‘earned the compliment for my sex, from one of the
English typists in the o≈ce, when she said, ‘[I]t takes a woman to do
it.’ ’’
≤≠ As she had during Garvey’s imprisonment, Jacques Garvey faith-
fully completed the tasks he had assigned to her. Although her helpmate/
leadership role (a glimmer of her earlier community feminism) was now
visible only to the typists, Jacques Garvey clearly remembered the En-
glishwoman’s comment with pride, hearing it not only as a personal com-
pliment, but as one for her sex as well.
As the unia August convention was drawing to a close, Junior’s leg,
which had become slightly drawn after the plaster had been replaced with
a hip-length wool sock, grew worse. A specialist sought his mother’s con-
sent to have his leg straightened out for replastering, a procedure that
would entail anesthetizing him with ether. The doctor also felt that what
Junior really needed was heat, so after the replastering he recommended
that he be sent to an orthopedic hospital in the south of England that
specialized in ultra violet-ray treatment. After another consultation, it was
suggested that Jacques Garvey take Junior back to the West Indies for
sunshine instead. Jacques Garvey reported that one of the female doctors
who also knew Garvey asked her, ‘‘Where was the objector?’’ When she
told her that he was in Canada, the doctor said, ‘‘You must decide. This
child is intelligent and must not be allowed to grow up as a cripple.’’
≤∞
Relocation for health reasons was something that Jacques Garvey was
certainly familiar with, having, in 1917, ﬂed the warm tropical air of
Jamaica for a cooler climate. Now her son required the opposite move.
She elected to resolve this di≈cult question without any input from
her husband, making the immediate decision to take their child back to
Jamaica. Here again is evidence that Jacques Garvey had assumed full
control of her children’s development, even if it meant leaving Garvey
completely outside the decision-making realm.
Years later, in recalling this critical decision, Jacques Garvey rational-
ized that she had had to rely on her own good judgment in Garvey’s
absence. He had always expected her to do this; that was why he had
placed her in charge in the ﬁrst place. Once she made the decision to go,


--- PAGE 147 ---
134 single motherhood
she ‘‘sold a diamond ring, booked our passages and cabled an S.O.S. to my
aunt for the balance.’’ (The fact that she had a diamond ring to sell
indicates that though she lacked cash in Jamaica, she still had personal
property in the form of jewelry and land.) In her memoir, Jacques Garvey
describes hasty preparations for her departure. She told ‘‘no one of my
plans until the night before sailing.’’
≤≤ It is likely that she kept her voyage
secret since she knew that Garvey would not approve and may have
thought that he would try to stop her.
Jacques Garvey presents her decision to leave London as if she had no
other choice, as if Junior’s health mandated it. But perhaps her concern
for Junior had deﬂected attention from what she had wanted to do for
some time. The two years she had spent away from Garvey had been
di≈cult, but the great distance between them may have made it easier for
her to gloss over his imperfections, as well as her own. Time and distance
can transform memories into romantic testaments on caring and the
desirability of a person in one’s daily life. In London she had once again
seen Garvey up close and personal, and seemingly his ﬂaws again grated
on her; thus, she may have been seizing the opportunity to be released
from his smothering clutches. By now, the demands of wifehood had
completely given way to those of motherhood, but she still may have felt
the need to steal herself and children away from London because she
feared that her husband would object.
Jacques Garvey was not the only one concerned about Garvey’s reac-
tion. When she told Daisy Whyte of her decision, the secretary appar-
ently became ‘‘upset and said, How am I going to tell Mr. Garvey?’’ To
handle this phase of her plan Jacques Garvey wrote two letters to her
husband, ‘‘one containing a statement on the o≈ce transactions, and the
other marked personal explaining the urgency of Junior’s case, and that
we would stay at my mother’s home.’’
≤≥ She entrusted these letters to
Whyte and instructed her to give them to Garvey when he returned.
In early September 1938 Jacques Garvey and her two sons set sail from
the Royal Albert Docks, bound for Jamaica via Amsterdam. The calm
ocean gave them the opportunity to ‘‘rest and revive’’ their ‘‘spent bod-
ies.’’
≤∂ This relaxed state yielded a peace that must have eased Jacques
Garvey’s mind and a≈rmed to her that she had done the right thing. At
the same time, she must have been somewhat apprehensive about what
her surroundings would look like when they docked in the Kingston
harbor. From April to June the island had been in a state of rebellion.
That year, 1938, marked the centenary of West Indian emancipation,


--- PAGE 148 ---
single motherhood 135
but the mass of Jamaicans had not experienced the political and material
promises of freedom. Thomas Holt has shown that by the late 1930s,
‘‘access to small plots of land no longer meant freedom—for the peasant
fruit growers who supplied United Fruit nor for the migrant workers
cutting cane for wisco—West Indies Sugar Company.’’ There had been a
general shift in industry toward a more cutthroat capitalism. This reshap-
ing had strained the network of personal relationships between employer
and employee. No longer were laborers allowed to graze their animals or
chop wood on the estates they worked. Though the roughest phase of the
Great Depression in Jamaica occurred between 1931 and 1933, working
conditions in 1938 were still poor. A survey of all estate properties revealed
that there were ‘‘2,513 barracks accommodating a maximum of 22,620
persons in 8,596 rooms, fewer than half of which were judged to be in
acceptable condition.’’ Of these 2,513 barracks, 258 of them had no latrines
and 567 others were unsanitary. Only approximately ‘‘1 out of every 8 bar-
racks was supplied with water, either piped or drawn from the wells;
38 percent made no provision at all, and about half received water from
rivers and ponds.’’ The sugar properties were deemed to be the worst.
≤∑
Not surprisingly, wisco was the ﬁrst target of the protestors at the
Frome Sugar Estate in the parish of Westmoreland. On 29 April a mis-
understanding over the payment of wages led to a riot. A strike followed,
with workers demanding that their pay be raised to a minimum of four
shillings a day (80 cents). More than a hundred armed police incited
the workers to defend themselves, and four people were killed, fourteen
wounded, and eighty-ﬁve arrested. After this, sporadic strikes by dock-
workers and banana loaders on the waterfront in Kingston and St. Ann’s
Bay eventually ignited a march through Kingston that closed down pub-
lic services, factories, and ship transport. Jamaican workers held protest
meetings all over the island, and by 2 June workers were in rebellion in
almost every parish.
≤∏ Amazingly it was reported that only 12 people were
killed, ‘‘32 wounded by gunshot and 139 injured. Of the 745 persons
prosecuted, 265 were found not guilty where 40 were convicted and given
a variety of punishments.’’
≤π
To regain control, the British and local elites sent British troops to
reinforce the police and then appointed a Royal Commission to investi-
gate the social and economic conditions in the Caribbean colonies. In the
end, a concession was o√ered: the local political leadership would be
assigned a greater role in the island’s government. It had been more than
seventy years since Jamaica had had a system of self-government, and the


--- PAGE 149 ---
136 single motherhood
people responded with the call to create a political party dedicated to the
workers of Jamaica. On 18 September, just days before Jacques Garvey’s
arrival, the People’s National Party ( pnp), led by Rhodes scholar and
lawyer Norman Manley, was inaugurated.
The ﬁrst modern political party on the island had been Garvey’s Peo-
ple’s Political Party (ppp), which had at its base a racial appeal. But with
the rebellion and the expansion of labor unions, class issues had begun to
surpass those of race and color. Jacques Garvey accurately observed that it
was not a ‘‘race riot or a color riot; these desperate men and women felt
that they must now, with their own hands, destroy anything and every-
thing, that represented the class barrier, which had kept them away from
good food and decent homes and, in short, a happy life.’’
≤∫ This class
struggle marked the beginning of the liberation movement of the workers
on the island, and Jacques Garvey’s return coincided with this new period
in the history of modern Jamaica.
When the ship docked in Kingston, a large crowd was assembled on
the pier. ‘‘The angry neglected masses were on the march,’’ Jacques Gar-
vey later wrote. Rumors had ﬂoated that Marcus Garvey was coming
home, so a crowd of workers had gathered, many of whom had been
loading a banana boat nearby. Jacques Garvey evidently was caught o√
guard by the reporters’ questions—‘‘Do you intend to take any part in
politics in Jamaica? Will you pave the way for Garvey to come later on?’’
≤Ω
She does not say how she responded to these queries, and Jamaican news-
papers do not record her arrival, but no doubt she privately acknowledged
what many other Jamaicans felt—that though Marcus Garvey was not
physically present, his ideas pervaded the island; in many ways, he had
served as a catalyst for all the changes that were now taking place.
The next day Jacques Garvey took Junior to a specialist at the Public
General Hospital in Kingston. He stayed there a few days to have his leg
replastered and then returned every two weeks for the next two years as an
outpatient. This time around, hospital bills were not an issue; because of
her ‘‘ﬁnancial condition, I was not billed.’’ Once again Jacques Garvey
was struggling economically, and it did not help that she had arrived ‘‘just
in time to lose [their] home by private sale, as the rental could not pay the
mortgage, taxes, water, insurance and repairs for damage by termites,
which are prevalent in the tropics.’’
≥≠ At the end of this ﬁnancial ﬁasco,
which was compounded by a lien on two linotype machines purchased for
the printing plant, Jacques Garvey received only two hundred dollars for
the sale of their home. She and her sons moved into her mother’s house, as


--- PAGE 150 ---
single motherhood 137
initially planned, and she wrote Garvey two letters explaining the state of
their a√airs.
When Garvey learned of the loss of his home, his mind may well have
echoed his own words: ‘‘Own your own house and land; then you will be a
respectable citizen. . . . [D]on’t let it get away from you.’’ But whatever
he thought, Jacques Garvey received no reply from him personally; his
secretary informed her only that he was ‘‘angry because [she] had taken
the children back to Jamaica.’’
≥∞ Jacques Garvey had anticipated his dis-
approval, but not his pain at having the children taken from him. He was
apparently so upset that he ﬂatly refused to correspond with her but kept
in constant contact with his sons. In two separate letters dated 8 Decem-
ber 1938, Garvey told Junior and Julius that he was ‘‘surprised to have not
found you [children] at home when I returned from Canada, but I know
as children, you have nothing to do with what happened. I am hoping,
however, that you are well.’’ Garvey also made it clear that he would ‘‘not
be returning to Jamaica.’’
≥≤ Nevertheless, his correspondence to his sons
resonated with genuine concern and a√ection for them. In one letter he
told Julius to have his grandmother write on his behalf and he would
send him whatever he needed. Garvey enclosed one pound ($4.00) for a
Christmas gift and wrote that clothes and books would be forthcoming.
When Daisy Whyte went to Jamaica on vacation in January, Garvey
made good on his promise to his children. He had her bring them a
package containing two suits for each child, books, and two letters, each
with one pound enclosed. Jacques Garvey was o√ended by the amount
and told Whyte to ‘‘tell him that when he is able to make it up to the past
four months of support, he should mail it.’’ Finding herself in the middle
of a marital war zone, Whyte stressed to Jacques Garvey that her husband
missed and worried about the boys and that he was depositing ﬁve shill-
ings ($1.00) a week in a savings account for them. She concluded her plea
on his behalf by stating that he felt ‘‘that with your family connections
they were alright.’’
≥≥
Garvey was correct to assume that Jacques Garvey’s family would assist
her. Several years later, in a letter to unia secretary general Ethel Collins,
Jacques Garvey wrote, ‘‘If I did not have family who were comfortably
well-o√, I would be in a worse plight.’’ But her reply to Whyte that day in
January 1939 was that Garvey ‘‘should have known that the attitudes of
relatives and some friends would be, put colloquially, if you make your
bed hard, you must lay down in it.’’ Since Jacques Garvey had chosen to
marry Garvey, a poor black man, then she had to take full responsibility


--- PAGE 151 ---
138 single motherhood
for the outcome. Also, she did not want to have to depend on others when
she had a husband. Garvey had submerged ‘‘the roles of husband and
father’’ and sacriﬁced ‘‘his family on the altar of African redemption.’’
≥∂
The boys thanked their father for his gifts in letters dated 11 January
1939. Junior informed him that his mother pushed him in a wheelchair
and that he felt better. He also asked him, ‘‘Why don’t you send money for
us for food and school and movies. Grannie feeds us and we live in her
house, but we need lots of things.’’ Julius echoed these sentiments, adding
that ‘‘I thought you forgot all about us, as you never send us any money.’’
≥∑
Since the boys were only nine and six years old, it is likely that their
mother coached them to say this. Garvey seems to have reached a similar
conclusion. After receiving several letters along these lines, he ﬁnally
wrote Junior that ‘‘I am not prepared to [blame?] you [for] all it contains.
I am always thoughtful of you and Chubbie [Julius], and I know the
unreasonable statements are not yours.’’ Garvey always replied to both
sons that he was glad to hear from them and that they must stick to their
studies; on one occasion, he told Junior that he was ‘‘glad to know you
have taken your condition like a man.’’ (Garveyite ‘‘men’’ had always
symbolized ultramasculinity. They were charged to be imposing, strong,
and brave warriors.) Garvey never inquired after their mother but wrote
instead to ‘‘tell Grannie to look after you.’’
≥∏
Garvey sent brief letters to his sons every week, enclosing pocket change
and money for school fees.≥π But this was not enough to maintain them in
the fashion that Jacques Garvey deemed ﬁt. Because Junior was sick and
‘‘needed constant care,’’ she ‘‘could not take a full time job.’’ It was during
this period that she ‘‘took charge of [her] share of [what remained of her]
father’s estate and started to develop it to be revenue bearing.’’
≥∫ In other
words, she took advantage of an elite option and became a landlady,
renting her property to generate a steady income. Jacques Garvey was
developing a new attitude about her role in ﬁnancially supporting her
family. She had been raised in a household whose well-being was served by
the father, and she had initially expected her husband—and all other black
men—to do the same for their own families. In the 1920s she had been
critical of black men who failed on the job, keeping black women in ‘‘Miss
Ann’s kitchen.’’ But changed circumstances had forced her to rethink the
role of breadwinner.
Jacques Garvey was taking on the role of breadwinner at a time when it
was still uncommon for a middle-class woman to do so. During the 1938


--- PAGE 152 ---
single motherhood 139
rebellion women did not demand equal pay but only an increase in wages.
This position was ‘‘a reﬂection of the male breadwinner ideology which
was imposed on the working class.’’
≥Ω Meanwhile, middle-class women
continued to be consumed by and to defend an ideology that kept them
relegated to the home. Even women like Amy Bailey and Una Marson
steered clear of the riots and supported the men of their class in the hope
of winning concessions for them. Overall, Jamaican women, regardless of
class, wanted to be ﬁnancially solvent, but they were not advancing them-
selves to become ﬁnancially independent from men; therefore, Jacques
Garvey’s attitude can fairly be seen as a precursor to that of the later
liberated woman.
With Jacques Garvey’s return to Jamaica, the Garveys’ marital ties
completely unraveled. It was not easy for Jacques Garvey to be head of the
household, especially since this time around her husband had not sanc-
tioned it. Essentially, she had traded away a potentially higher household
income and greater social acceptability with her husband for the ability to
make the family’s decisions and control its resources. Garvey’s unwilling-
ness to communicate with her signiﬁes the strength of his refusal to accept
what she had done. Robert Hill notes that this breach ‘‘represented the
end of the last major working relationship that he [Garvey] had been able
to maintain from the days of the early unia.’’
∂≠
The couple’s political working relationship was severed by their marital
problems, and their marital problems made their marital vows, particu-
larly to ‘‘love and cherish in sickness and in health,’’ null and void. In early
January 1940 Garvey su√ered a stroke, which left him partially paralyzed
and a√ected his speech. Since he refused to go to the hospital, he was
nursed by an entourage consisting of Daisy Whyte, his personal secretary;
a white housekeeper; and two clerks. Jacques Garvey does not indicate
that she was the least inclined to visit him in London, even though she
had been informed that ‘‘with care he might have two years’’ to live. T wo
months later, when Junior’s leg was out of plaster and he could walk
without crutches (making it possible for him to travel without much
di≈culty), she nevertheless opted to send Garvey a photograph of the
children instead of taking them to see him. Whyte wrote her that ‘‘tears
came down his cheeks’’ when he saw the picture, and he ‘‘insisted on
keeping it under his pillow.’’ But Garvey’s response did not soften his wife.
In fact, she believed that ‘‘lying paralyzed on one side and unable to get
around he now felt and understood the su√ering of Junior, who might


--- PAGE 153 ---
140 single motherhood
Photograph of Marcus Jacques Garvey (right) and Julius Jacques Garvey, Jamaica,
1940. Photograph by W . G. Morais. Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture.
have been a permanent cripple.’’ She asked, ‘‘Did the picture of his two
sons arouse his paternal instincts?’’∂∞ Unquestionably, her bitterness about
his previous lack of support was so intense that even the gravity of his
illness could not alleviate it. There is little doubt that Jacques Garvey no
longer saw herself as his comforter or nurturing helpmate.


--- PAGE 154 ---
single motherhood 141
Garvey dictated several letters informing his children that he was sick.
Writing to both boys on 1 June 1940, he stated, ‘‘I am dropping you these
few lines to let you know that I am still sick and think of you.’’ On 9 June
Whyte notiﬁed Jacques Garvey by cable that ‘‘Garvey Relapsed Sinking.’’
He had apparently su√ered another stroke or possibly cardiac arrest and
died the next day. A telegram to Jacques Garvey on 11 June conﬁrmed that
she was now a widow.
∂≤
Strikingly, Jacques Garvey’s writings o√er no indication of how she felt
or the reaction of her children to this news. Although they were no longer
close, Marcus Garvey had been part of her life for the past twenty-one
years; with him she had matured politically and emotionally. During their
courtship and the early years of their marriage, she had catered to his
unending needs and represented herself as the epitome of a helpmate. He
had helped her realize her journalistic skills, and with his aid she had
grown conﬁdent as an intellectual. When men in the unia were critical of
her, he had publicly defended her right to occupy a leadership position in
the movement. He had also understood—at least at one point—the degree
to which she had su√ered. In a 1925 message addressed to black people of
the world, Garvey had stated that he had given everything to them and
that Jacques Garvey had ‘‘su√ered and sacriﬁced with me for you.’’ He
concluded, ‘‘I have left her penniless and helpless to face the world, be-
cause I gave all to you, but her courage is great, and I know she will hold
up for you and me.’’
∂≥
They had been a leadership team, poised to direct the Pan-African
cause, and they had tried to submerge their personal problems for the
beneﬁt of the movement. With the birth of their children, however,
Jacques Garvey’s helpmate role had shifted from her husband to her
children. Garvey had di≈culty adjusting to this change, and Jacques
Garvey grew impatient and then bitter with what she saw as his lack of
support. An intense marital tension grew between them, and by the end
of Garvey’s life they were not even on speaking terms. In the beginning
they had brought out the best in each other, but by the end of his life their
interaction unleashed venom, not camaraderie.
Ironically, Garvey’s death revitalized Jacques Garvey’s dedication to his
ideas and her commitment to spread the unia’s agenda. Letters from unia
leaders assured her ‘‘that while we too have forgotten you in the past, there
will be many [members] whom shall never forget you and his children, so
continue to be brave, as you have always done, and for which we have
always admired you.’’ At the unia convention in New York City in August


--- PAGE 155 ---
142 single motherhood
1940, she gave evidence of having begun this next phase of her life, send-
ing the following message to be read to the participants: ‘‘Through a cruel
chain of circumstances I greet you as a widow, a mother of two fatherless
sons, as a bereaved member of the Negro race, who has lost the active
leadership of Marcus Garvey.’’
∂∂


--- PAGE 156 ---
8 A Decade of Unity
T
he 1940s set the tone for the direction and intensity of Amy
Jacques Garvey’s renewed public commitment to the philos-
ophy of Garveyism. By the time of her husband’s death, the
Universal Negro Improvement Association (unia) had gone
through a stream of national o≈cers, experienced countless
ﬁnancial setbacks, and divided along U.S. versus Caribbean lines. Jacques
Garvey had witnessed the decline and divide of the unia, and she had
watched her husband labor to keep his ideas in the forefront of the Pan-
African struggle. Few leaders in the history of Pan-Africanism had been as
dedicated as Marcus Garvey, but despite all of his e√orts, a dwindling
membership now made the future of the organization appear bleak. After
his death, Jacques Garvey had to decide whether to abandon a sinking
unia or try to help resuscitate it. This was one of many decisions that
she would have to make as she grieved (in her own way) the loss of
her husband.
Jacques Garvey’s sorrow was undoubtedly tempered by the years they
had spent living apart. Signiﬁcantly, she wrote that his death left her a
‘‘bereaved member of the Negro race,’’ not a bereaved widow, suggesting
that she was no more personally a√ected by it than any other black per-
son. She believed that all conscious people of African descent mourned
the loss of Marcus Garvey, and she never suggested that her private pain
was more intense than others who respected and loved him.
∞
In his will Garvey had requested that his body be embalmed and sent
to Jamaica. (The preferred method among many people of African de-
scent is to have the deceased buried ‘‘back home’’; cremation is often
rejected because of a belief in the sanctity of the body and spirit.) Case
studies indicate that widows feel a sense of obligation to carry out their
spouses’ last wishes, especially when connected to the disposal of the
body, and Jacques Garvey was no exception. Wartime hostilities, however,


--- PAGE 157 ---
144 a decade of unity
prevented the timely removal of Garvey’s body from London, so she had
no choice but to have his remains placed in a vault until the end of
the war.
≤
‘‘In the universal language of mourning,’’ Hosea Perry writes, ‘‘the
external expression is the funeral ceremony.’’ If Jacques Garvey had at-
tended the elaborate memorial service held for Garvey at St. Marks Meth-
odist Episcopal Church, Harlem, on 21 July 1940, she would have experi-
enced a real sense of his demise. The rite began with a short but colorful
parade from the Garvey Club headquarters on 133d Street to the church.
Under the direction of unia general secretary Ethel M. Collins and high
chancellor Thomas W. Harvey, the program included presentations by
two bishops, four priests, one judge, three attorneys, eight local unia
presidents of Greater New York branches, students of an African philoso-
phy club, civil leaders, and local talent. Funerals allow for closure; without
them, family members can remain in a state of anxiety or limbo. Although
it was unknown how long it would be before Garvey’s body could be
shipped home, Jacques Garvey was committed to the idea that her hus-
band would have a public burial and that Jamaica would ‘‘be the ﬁnal
resting place of his body.’’
≥
In addition accepting the fact that Garvey would not have a timely
formal funeral, Jacques Garvey had to contend with unia matters in the
aftermath of his passing. On 28 June, just eighteen days after his death,
she received a letter from Ethel M. Collins stating, ‘‘The headquarters
could easily be shifted back to Jamaica where you are, along with Miss
Whyte when she can get to you, and myself and Mr. Harvey could con-
tinue here [in the United States] as National Representatives and report to
you.’’ This proposal does not appear to have been echoed by anyone else
in the unia leadership. In fact, unia commissioners later voiced their
feeling ‘‘that it would be very cruel to place this burden’’ on Jacques
Garvey’s ‘‘shoulder,’’ given the ‘‘death of Garvey’’ and her ‘‘added respon-
sibility of taking care of the children.’’ Just as they had in the 1920s, unia
male leaders were still in the business of preventing legitimate power from
slipping into Jacques Garvey’s hands under the guise of ‘‘protecting’’ her.
Whatever her reaction to their opinions, she elected not to take Collins up
on her suggestion, thereby taking the decisive step not to become en-
grossed in unia a√airs. Jacques Garvey believed that the United States was
the best place for the headquarters because Garveyites there had always
been the most numerous and had better access to resources. She therefore


--- PAGE 158 ---
a decade of unity 145
wrote letters notifying the various unia divisions that unia headquarters
had been transferred from London to the United States.∂
On 18 August 1940 unia delegates from the United States, the West
Indies, and Canada converged on New York for an emergency meeting to
discuss the future of their organization. Though she did not attend,
Jacques Garvey dispatched a ﬁve-page letter outlining matters that would
ultimately monopolize her attention for decades to come. Her foremost
concern was that her children be able to continue their formal education,
so she challenged unia members to support them ﬁnancially in their
studies. She also admonished members that ‘‘whatever you may do in
your deliberations, always remember this;—You can’t leave Garvey out of
the U.N.I.A.’’ Perhaps she feared that as the movement surged forward,
her husband’s contributions and thereby her own might vanish from the
collective memory. She urged the membership not to try to ﬁll Garvey’s
position ‘‘because it is not empty.’’ Garvey gave his program to the unia
forever, she wrote, and members need only carry out the organization’s
platform, which was ‘‘in a nutshell Africa for the Africans, those at home
and those abroad.’’
∑
Moving to another political level, Jacques Garvey observed that the
unia was now in its second stage of ‘‘quiet, penetrating work,’’ a stage that
would require a change in leadership style. She did not favor the appoint-
ment or election of another imposing, powerful, ﬁgure; nor did she pro-
pose an alternative vision, such as a collective council. Instead, she simply
explained why a change needed to occur. The ﬁrst stage of the movement
had required Garvey to awaken ‘‘the sleeping Negro’’ and arouse ‘‘in him a
consciousness of his potentialities as a man.’’ Indeed, ideas of manhood
had long been a feature of the movement. In a speech in June 1922, Garvey
had stated, ‘‘Now, understand the Universal Negro Improvement Asso-
ciation represents a manhood program, a program of unity and love, a
program of charity but we say charity begins at home.’’
∏ Jacques Garvey
now took up this mantra, but for her, manhood also served as a means to
allow women to be women.
She had always argued that the socially constructed masculine attrib-
utes of breadwinner and protector of women freed women from carrying
the burdens alone, thereby giving them more time to develop other pur-
suits as well as their ‘‘feminine’’ nature.
But in 1940 Jacques Garvey thought that a new approach was called
for. There was ‘‘no necessity now for shouting,’’ she argued. ‘‘The Negro


--- PAGE 159 ---
146 a decade of unity
is awake; he is shaking himself, and looking around. T each him now
quietly.’’ It would be self-defeating to ‘‘let the other fellow hear [giving
him leverage to manipulate] how he [the black man] is to stand ﬁrm on
his two feet, get his balance and use his brains as well as his brawn to make
a place for himself among the nations of the world.’’
π
Garveyites responded to Jacques Garvey’s communiqué by voting to
give her family a monthly allowance of ﬁfty to one hundred dollars. But
they rejected the idea that another president-general was unnecessary and
elected James Stewart to ﬁll the o≈ce until the next formal convention in
1942. A leader in the tradition of Marcus Garvey, Stewart was a good
writer, a captivating speaker, and headstrong in his beliefs and com-
mitment to Pan-Africanism. He relocated the unia headquarters to his
hometown of Cleveland, Ohio, and made Jacques Garvey’s former foe,
William Sherrill, the head of the unia’s National Public Relations Com-
mittee, based in Washington, D.C.
∫
A new unia appeared to be on the move, and though Jacques Garvey
refused to be its leader, she did want to be a part of the decision-making
body. Since joining the organization in 1919, she had never been elected to
an o≈ce; she claimed that she was not ‘‘desirous of being an o≈cer’’ but
had always functioned as a member of the executive council. Stewart,
however, did not recognize, let alone take advantage of, Jacques Garvey’s
leadership assets. Her history with Sherrill may have been part of the
problem. It was public knowledge that she had once accused Sherrill of
not regarding the redemption of Africa as the unia’s top priority; instead,
she had argued, he sought to solve diasporic problems by building up
‘‘apartment houses’’ in America.
Ω This disagreement reﬂected the fac-
tionalism in the movement, that of taking local versus international ap-
proaches to black problems.
Undoubtedly personal antagonisms were also at work here. Over the
years, Jacques Garvey had developed a reputation for being opinion-
ated, controlling, and uncompromising—qualities that her husband had
also possessed. The Garveys’ commitment to Pan-Africanism yielded, at
times, similar attitudes, but though Garvey’s disposition was viewed as a
masculine double-edged sword (when handled with ﬁnesse, these attrib-
utes would grant him what he wanted for the movement or keep pre-
sumed enemies out of his camp), this same weapon in Jacques Garvey’s
hands was interpreted as nothing short of a dagger, a tool for stabbing all
who got in her way. Garvey was celebrated as a man who refused to
humble himself in the face of adversity, whereas Jacques Garvey was


--- PAGE 160 ---
a decade of unity 147
criticized as a woman with a volatile temperament who could not be
subdued. Stewart’s response was to keep her in the dark and to rarely
solicit her ideas. Exasperated by his behavior, she later wrote, ‘‘For years I
have never heard one word from that man [Stewart].’’
∞≠
At the 1942 unia annual convention, Stewart was reelected president-
general. Among the only surviving correspondence between him and
Jacques Garvey is a letter regarding payment on Garvey’s burial vault. In
June 1942 Stewart had informed her that he had in his ‘‘possession funds
for the renewal of the rental of the vault for the body of your late husband
our Beloved leader.’’
∞∞ Jacques Garvey, pleased that the organization was
honoring this ﬁnancial responsibility, replied with the name and address
of the cemetery in London. But this spark of conﬁdence in the unia was
short-lived. Delegates at the August convention passed a motion that
allowed Stewart to place in escrow the money collected from the divisions
for the Garvey children until they reached the age of twenty-one.
After the convention, several o≈cers informed Jacques Garvey that
Stewart had used improper balloting for the election and had inappropri-
ately spent the money collected from unia divisions for the vault. N. H.
Grissom, commissioner of the Wisconsin Division, echoed these accusa-
tions in a letter to Jacques Garvey saying, ‘‘He [Stewart] was dead wrong
in his actions, he utterly failed to come up to his own agreement with the
contributions, he told each division, he would refund their donations
toward this vault.’’
∞≤
Jacques Garvey became increasingly disgusted with Stewart, whom she
labeled a ‘‘discredited, dishonest man’’; in 1945 she wrote that it was
remarkable to her ‘‘that people in the unia would allow themselves to be
fooled by him, after he collected over $600 to pay for the Chief ’s vault, in
1942, and did not pay a cent of it.’’ Her contempt was shared by Ethel
Collins, who also expressed frustration with other unia o≈cers. Collins
wrote to Jacques Garvey that ‘‘in my speaking at all times, I speak for
the support of the organization, and not individuals, and so I am mis-
understood.’’
∞≥ Misunderstandings, misinformation, and radically di-
verse opinions on how to achieve the Pan-African goal kept the unia
swimming in a sea of dominating personalities.
With an ego of her own, Jacques Garvey complained as she distanced
herself from the unia parent body; still, she remained closely a≈liated
with the original Garvey Club members in New York. Her political com-
mitment made it nearly impossible for her to sever her ties to the unia
altogether, despite her disrespect for Stewart and his entourage. Stewart


--- PAGE 161 ---
148 a decade of unity
angered Jacques Garvey so much that she eventually refused even to refer
to the organization he led as the unia. Writing to B. Gibbons, president of
the New York Garvey Club, she stated, ‘‘My reason for using A.C.L.
[African Communities League] alone, was because of Stewart, I did not
want him to say that I inﬂuenced divisions to forsake him, so I ignored
him, and let him fade out.’’
∞∂
As she grew tired of her antagonistic relationships with the male leader-
ship, Jacques Garvey began to consider her prospects for a≈liating with
the unia and ultimately the Pan-African cause in a di√erent way. Philo-
sophically, she began to view the unia as a collection of sects, making it an
inadequate political vehicle; but its business antics and nepotism did not
seem unusual, and she felt there was little guarantee that she would ﬁnd a
better organizational home elsewhere. Finally, she decided to strike out on
her own. To ensure that she would not be stiﬂed by others, she created
‘‘Garvey’s African Communities League’’ with the objective of bringing
‘‘cultural and ethical development to people of African Descent’’ and
named herself ‘‘Successor and Director of All Allied Garvey Associations
and Societies.’’
∞∑ Under this banner she was able to function indepen-
dently even though the group she envisioned never fully materialized.
Although Jacques Garvey had made it clear that she did not want to
lead the unia, by 1944 she was identifying herself as Marcus Garvey’s
natural ‘‘successor.’’ A spiritual connection with her late husband had
redeﬁned her attachment to him and his ideas and had in turn engen-
dered her political rebirth. Four years after Garvey’s death, she now felt
the need to ‘‘relay what M. G., our Chief, has thro words, and spiritual
contact, told me to do and say.’’
∞∏ J. Bowlby’s scholarship on the processes
of mourning points out that the last phase of ‘‘healthy mourning’’ results
in the achievement of a di√erent relationship with the ‘‘lost loved one, in
which, through identiﬁcation, the griever continues to carry out the goals
and ideas attributed to the lost loved one.’’ Jacques Garvey felt that she
had a continuing relationship with her dead husband, and she was com-
mitted to fulﬁlling the goals that he ‘‘channeled’’ to her. Intimacy with
Garvey’s spirit increased his emotional importance in her life. She would
explain his intervention with phrases like ‘‘the chief is worrying me to
have it done’’ or ‘‘he appeared to me in a dream recently, and urged me to
go forward.’’
∞π
For Jacques Garvey, moving forward meant integrating ‘‘Garveyism
into the folds of organizations, groups, etc.’’ In 1944 she wrote, ‘‘My work
of the last six months is to get Leaders of thought and action through all


--- PAGE 162 ---
a decade of unity 149
the di√erent agencies of expression that modern man uses, to understand
Garveyism—which as you know is Nationalism, by stages of course, for all
people of African blood.’’ The work of Marcus Garvey had ‘‘outgrown the
limited capacity of one Organization’’; thus, she was no longer concerned
about membership a≈liation or making every person of African descent
an active member of the unia. To drive home her point, Jacques Garvey
informed Wyalt Dougherty, representative of the Union of People of
African Descent, based in Washington, D.C., that her ‘‘policy since the
death of [my] husband, is that groups can travel along di√erent roads, and
work according to their own fashion, and liking, as long as there is an
awareness and appreciation of each other’s work—but all having the same
goal and strengthened and inspired thereby.’’
∞∫
Retreating from confrontational dialogue, Jacques Garvey wrote
countless letters to Garvey’s friends and foes to meet her new objective.
No longer exclusively rooted in the unia, she became more e√ective as a
team player—a move that signaled the beginning of her transformation
into an organizational woman for the Pan-African movement.
It may seem somewhat ironic to call Jacques Garvey an organizational
woman at this time, given that she had never been so far removed from
the inner workings of the unia and that her own organization, Garvey’s
African Communities League, was supported primarily by a few members
from the Garvey Club in New York. But by calling her a team player, I
mean to underscore the fact that she was most e√ective when not con-
sumed by defending her right to be a political player; thus, her decision
not to ‘‘bottle up Garveyism in one or two organizations’’ also freed her to
view former competitors as comrades in the Pan-African struggle.
∞Ω
The execution of Jacques Garvey’s new agenda required forming a co-
alition from the di√erent Pan-African groups. As she explained to A.
Philip Randolph, president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters,
‘‘when there is no unity . . . we both lose precious time ridiculing each
other, we become loud-mouthed trying to convince each other that ‘I
should not be dictated to.’ ’’ Emphasizing how enemies of the Pan-African
cause relished their disharmony, she stated that they ‘‘chuckle’’ and say
‘‘they will never unite, so I will get them one by one.’’ By ‘‘unity’’ Jacques
Garvey did not mean ‘‘conformity of e√ort.’’ In fact, she rather welcomed
‘‘diversity of e√ort, as we respectively cover much more ground, in our
di√erent journey to the focal point.’’
≤≠
Once she had committed herself to the goal of unifying a dispersed
and divergent movement, Jacques Garvey began to assay the political


--- PAGE 163 ---
150 a decade of unity
terrain. She concluded that the Atlantic Charter, the joint declaration of
peace issued by President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Prime Minister
Winston Churchill on 14 August 1941, required an intellectual critique.
The charter was a military alliance, an expression of Anglo-American soli-
darity against the domination by conquest ‘‘upon which the Hitlerite gov-
ernment of Germany and other governments associated therewith [i.e.,
Japan]’’ had embarked. To secure a better future for the world, the charter
stipulated that nations would not seek territories nor make territorial
changes without the freely expressed wishes of the inhabitants concerned,
the right to self-determination and self-government, collaboration among
nations for social and economic security, and freedom from fear that
follows the defeated enemy and the disarmament of the aggressors’ na-
tions. Issued as a press release, the Atlantic Charter provided no speciﬁc
plan of how to translate this lofty rhetoric into political reality. Roosevelt
later conceded that the charter was essentially a ‘‘beautiful idea’’; the
British needed hope because they were losing the war, and the charter
‘‘gave it to them.’’
≤∞
On 1 January 1942 representatives of twenty-six nations, led by the
United States, Great Britain, the Soviet Union, and China, endorsed this
important document. They signed a Declaration by United Nations that
became the ﬁrst landmark document in the evolution of the ‘‘United
Nations’’ (a term coined by Roosevelt). Diplomatic relations took a deci-
sive turn as countries began positioning themselves to align with the
United Nations in order to receive protection and postwar consideration,
particularly material assistance from the United States and Great Britain.
Even James Ford, national committee member of the Communist Party,
agreed that ‘‘a world-shaking realignment of forces is taking place.’’ This
‘‘unity of forces on a world scale to wipe fascism from the face of the earth’’
could serve as a means to ‘‘develop a path for freedom and democracy for
peoples throughout the world,’’ he predicted.
≤≤
The intellectual and political signiﬁcance of the Atlantic Charter, as
well as its propaganda value, was driven home to Jacques Garvey by
Eleanor Roosevelt, who arrived in Jamaica on 9 March 1944 for a two-day
visit as part of a three-week goodwill tour of the U.S. bases in the Carib-
bean and Latin America. In a letter to Adam Clayton Powell Jr., Jacques
Garvey described Mrs. Roosevelt’s press conference, in which Jacques
Garvey gave her ‘‘impression’’ of the charter as a ‘‘ﬁne Declaration of faith,
whose importance can be real’’ when the points are implemented and
‘‘applied to all the peoples of the world.’’ While praising its possibilities,


--- PAGE 164 ---
a decade of unity 151
Jacques Garvey was careful to note that the charter primarily concerned
the ‘‘oppressed nations of Europe.’’≤≥
Comments by both Roosevelt and Churchill conﬁrmed Jacques Gar-
vey’s assessment of the charter as Eurocentric. Roosevelt had indicated
that his ‘‘sole purpose’’ in drafting it was to ‘‘save French Africa’’ from
‘‘laws passed in France under German pressure.’’ Defeating the Germans
in North Africa was clearly his goal, even though the French resisted the
Allied invasion. To placate the French, Roosevelt gave a radio message
assuring them that the United States had ‘‘no desire to take over any of her
territory and that, at the end of the war, whatever we were obliged to
invade, we would return to them.’’
≤∂
Churchill, on the other hand, saw the Africa invasion as just the begin-
ning; he told Roosevelt: ‘‘If all goes well . . . we might control the whole
North African shore . . . thus saving some of the masses of shipping now
rounding the Cape. This is our ﬁrst great prize.’’ Never did either Chur-
chill or Roosevelt want to free Africans from colonizers, despite the char-
ter’s declaration to ‘‘see sovereign rights and self government restored to
those who have been forcibly deprived of them.’’ In fact, Churchill made
it abundantly clear that the charter should not be applied everywhere. For
example, he stated that ‘‘[i]n the Middle East the Arabs might claim by
majority they could expel the Jews from Palestine, or at any time forbid all
further immigration. I am strongly wedded to the Zionist policy, of which
I was one of the authors.’’
≤∑
The Atlantic Charter’s major racist shortcoming became the catalyst
for Jacques Garvey’s ﬁrst project to popularize ‘‘materially’’ the work of
Pan-African organizations. Determined to move beyond symbolic ges-
tures, she conceptualized a ‘‘collective’’ writing of memorandums to in-
form the United Nations of Pan-Africanist demands.
≤∏ She introduced
her idea through a personal letter-writing campaign to leaders in the ﬁght
against racial injustice.
One man whom Jacques Garvey targeted was Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
As one of the editors of Harlem’s People’s Voice, Powell had held a mass
‘‘symposium for the one billion people of the darker races’’ in the news-
paper’s 28 March 1942 edition. Identifying himself as a speaker ‘‘on behalf
of free Negroes of the Western Hemisphere,’’ he also pushed for a free
Africa, India, and China. Both a preacher and a politician, Powell had a
diverse base of supporters, whom he represented through the Abyssinian
Baptist Church in Harlem and the People’s Committee, a militant protest
organization in Harlem aimed at economic empowerment and political


--- PAGE 165 ---
152 a decade of unity
equality with the slogan ‘‘One People, One Fight, One Victory.’’ ≤π An
ambitious community leader, Powell was ‘‘perceived as one who would
stand up to the authorities and not equivocate’’; he was the kind of man
whom Jacques Garvey would want on her team. Powell was busy solidify-
ing support for his bid for Congress when he received her letter, but he
took the time to reply that he wanted to support her e√orts ‘‘to bring to
pass the complete freedom of Africa and Africans.’’ He assured her that he
‘‘shall with a few friends try to put forward a program which will meet
with your approval.’’
≤∫
Jacques Garvey notiﬁed a host of other activists to give them detailed
instructions on what their individual memorandums to the United Na-
tion should include. For instance, she told Powell to ‘‘have a committee
draw up a Memorandum proposing an African Freedom Charter, appli-
cable to Africans in Africa, abroad, and all peoples of African descent
(whether 100% or 1%).’’ (Acknowledging mixed-race peoples but unwill-
ing to split hairs, Jacques Garvey continued to repeat the North American
‘‘one drop’’ rule of African identiﬁcation; for her, however, it was a means
of inclusion, not exclusion.) The memorandums would be the ﬁrst step in
writing a new charter that would ‘‘restore to them [African people] their
manhood rights, by declaring for them the following Six Freedoms—
Economically, Socially, Educationally, Politically, Spiritually and Mor-
ally.’’ These freedoms were the only way that African people could com-
pletely determine their own destiny.
≤Ω
Powell’s memorandum, Jacques Garvey suggested, should start with a
preamble that referred to past and present contributions of Africans to
civilization. Another paragraph should detail the Six Freedoms, and the
closing one should show ‘‘the natural consequences of the continued
denial of manhood rights, because of color, to peoples enlightened by the
pressing needs of war, and ironically by pressing needs of peace too.’’
Jacques Garvey indicated the ‘‘lines on which the Memorandum should
be drawn’’ and ‘‘what international action we want taken.’’ When she
commissioned Nnamdi Azikiwe, director of the West African Pilot, a black
nationalist newspaper published in Lagos, Nigeria, to write The West
African Press Delegation Memorandum, she asked that he emphasize self-
government in Gambia, Sierra Leone, the Gold Coast, and North and
South Nigeria, as well as survey the import and export situation with
suggestions for government improvement.
≥≠
Each contact was charged to write a memorandum ‘‘in their own word-
ing.’’ This approach, Jacques Garvey hoped, would make ‘‘the representa-


--- PAGE 166 ---
a decade of unity 153
tion more universal, and not stereotyped.’’ She assured her contacts that
‘‘our international plan will not interfere with local e√orts to relieve local
conditions; but rather strengthen all local e√orts.’’
≥∞
As a burgeoning organizational woman, Jacques Garvey became more
conscious of collective input and approval; thus, she told her contacts to
make sure that they ‘‘put the resolution to the meeting [of their consti-
tuency], and have it seconded and carried.’’ It was only then that the
memorandum could be forwarded to President Roosevelt, Prime Minis-
ter Churchill, Premier Stalin of Russia, and General Chiang Kaishek of
China. Correct in her assessment of who constituted the United Nations
heavyweights, Jacques Garvey argued that these men were ‘‘the Architects
of our Fate in a world, under demolition and reconstruction.’’ More
radical activists like Claudia Jones, representative of the Young Commu-
nist League, however, refused to accept this premise; she stated, ‘‘While
pretending to be ﬁghting for the rights of small nations for democracy,
the British ruler denies to its colonies the most elementary democratic
rights.’’
≥≤ It is hard to imagine that Jacques Garvey would take issue with
Jones’s statement, but seemingly she was so exhilarated by the possibilities
of the period that she believed that it was important to appeal to powerful
men like Churchill.
Self-government was an explosive topic among Pan-Africanists. Keith
Byerman has shown that one of the common assumptions that frequently
shaped this discourse was that ‘‘Africans were incapable of achieving the
standards of modern civilization on their own.’’ Reform of colonial prac-
tices and immigration to the continent were solutions that Garvey had
pushed and that Jacques Garvey was trying to move beyond—although
not as forthrightly as Claudia Jones, who questioned whether it was better
for African people to support British imperialism in the conﬂict when
compared to their status under German rule. Jones believed that this argu-
ment was ‘‘dangerous because it is a vicious acceptance of the status of Ne-
groes as inferiors, who must be ruled, regardless.’’ Jacques Garvey took the
most popular, intermediate stance in this debate. Although she did not
want to simply substitute ‘‘masters’’ of African peoples, she did feel that
the process to end colonialism should not be abrupt and the West African
memorandum should reﬂect this. In the end, the completed document
requested ‘‘self-government within the British Commonwealth, by stages
of course, being ten years of Representative government, and ﬁve years
of Responsible government, internally independent and then dominion
status.’’
≥≥


--- PAGE 167 ---
154 a decade of unity
When Dr. Harold Moody, a Jamaican physician and chairman of the
London Missionary Society, became aware of the multiple memoran-
dums, he asked Jacques Garvey for a single, summary document that
could be presented at a July 1944 conference on Africa. Impressed by
Moody’s determination to ‘‘do something which would be of positive
and permanent value to Africa,’’ she mentioned his plan to W. E. B.
Du Bois, stating, ‘‘He warrants your encouragement and suggestions.’’
When Du Bois pledged his support, Jacques Garvey became even more
excited about the vast possibilities of the conference.
≥∂
In response to Moody’s request, Jacques Garvey labored to complete a
comprehensive document as if Marcus Garvey himself had ordered it.
‘‘The Chief ’s Spirit drives me on,’’ she said. ‘‘I must obey it, it directs me
in all I write, say or do.’’ Though she lacked the funds to pay a research
assistant and her ﬁngers were sore because she could not a√ord a typist,
she pressed on. She did most of the work ‘‘in bed, propped up, and ﬁnally
[I] had to summon God’s aid to strengthen me, as I had to do all the
typing myself.’’ Four months later, she informed New York Garvey Club
president Gibbons that she had ‘‘just completed the Memorandum Cor-
relative of Africa, the West Indies and the Americas’’ for the July meeting.
Proud of her accomplishment, she declared that ‘‘it is the only work of its
kind done by a member of my race, and I have done same under great
handicaps.’’
≥∑
Addressing the Memorandum Correlative of Africa, the West Indies, and
the Americas to the United Nations representatives, she wrote that African
peoples should be able to ‘‘share, as Partners, in this post-war Democracy,
[as] our centuries of blood, sweat, and tears, [have] contribut[ed] to hu-
manity’s comfort and happiness.’’ An analysis of the loopholes in the
Atlantic Charter and an appeal for an international African Freedom
Charter and Council represent the heart and soul of the memorandum:
As millions of men of African blood, cheerfully give their lives in
the globular war, in answer to the call of the United Nations, to help
save the world for Democracy, in like manner, we call on the United
Nations—for the sake of Democracy to save Africans from the hands of
saboteurs of justice by declaring for an African Freedom Charter which
will give Africa and all peoples of African descent, everywhere, their
share of Democracy—in principle and in fact—and free all of them
from their present disabilities—economically, socially, educationally,
politically, spiritually, and morally.
≥∏


--- PAGE 168 ---
a decade of unity 155
Jacques Garvey described this text as a ‘‘sacred document’’ that elevated
Pan-African discourse to new heights. Since she freely admitted that she
was unable to keep up with the activities of African Americans due to the
‘‘dearth of American reading matter’’ in Jamaica, she was no doubt un-
aware of Roi Ottley’s New World a-Coming (1943) and W. E. B. Du Bois’s
Color and Democracy (1945) (even though she was corresponding with Du
Bois), books that also analyzed the Pan-African world.
≥π Her sixty-six-
page document is a somewhat miniature version of these works, as well as
of a host of others that appeared during World War II. It also stands as a
testament to the fact that she was intellectually grounded in a set of
concepts that resonated in the diasporic intellectual community of the
time while simultaneously raising the debate to another level.
Like Ottley, Jacques Garvey o√ered a study of black nationalism and
the contributions of Africans to world development, celebrating what
Ottley described as the ‘‘Negro’s aggressive attitude’’ that took center stage
during the war. ‘‘Negroes want tangible assurances that the loud talk of
democracy is in fact meant to include them,’’ he wrote. Jacques Garvey
would add that ‘‘this is why the Africans at home, like his kin abroad, ﬁght
and die willingly. They feel that their human and material sacriﬁces, are
the means of laying the foundation of a better world, in which, in their
respective habitats, they will be able to live as free men—unhampered
and unexploited.’’ And, like Du Bois, Jacques Garvey o√ered a scientiﬁc
glance at the real-world contributions (size, location, terrain, popula-
tion ratio, crops produced, and colonial imperialism) of Africa and the
West Indies largely based on statistics compiled from the World Almanac.
Du Bois had asserted that ‘‘colonies and the colonial system make
the colonial peoples in a sense the slums of the world, disfran-
chised and held in poverty and disease.’’ Jacques Garvey expounded
on this idea by noting that Africans in the New World ‘‘work and su√er,
under similar disabilities as are imposed on Africans in Africa. Brieﬂy it is
this. . . . No black man, carrying either a British or American passport, is
given the recognition, and accorded the same privileges, as a white man
with similar passport.’’
≥∫
Jacques Garvey not only echoed but also moved beyond the works of
Ottley and Du Bois by omitting any personal material in the summarized
Memorandum Correlative. When she had written her ‘‘Impression’’ series
for the Negro World in the 1920s, her ﬁrsthand observations had been the
basis for a portrait of Jim Crow America; during her European tour, she
also wrote of her own experiences. By removing herself from this docu-


--- PAGE 169 ---
156 a decade of unity
ment, she ensured that her analysis of the facts would not be muddled by
personal stories that could easily be disputed or singled out as an aberra-
tion. Her decision to exclude her personal reﬂections was not an indica-
tion that she no longer viewed herself as an authority on the Pan-African
world but represented an attempt to make the Memorandum an authori-
tative document rather than a commonplace memoir.
Most signiﬁcant, though, was Jacques Garvey’s reluctance to use the
word ‘‘Negro’’ in the document. In a letter to Du Bois she explained that
he ‘‘must avoid any reference to the word Negro. Regardless what white
Scientists say, in order to have the hearty cooperation of all, and we will,
we must not use the word. To the mind of the African it is synonymous
with slavery, serfdom, it is just as if it were spelt with two g’s.’’ Continuing,
she argued that ‘‘White America has abused the word ‘Negro,’ its refer-
ence means a low person to be kicked about. No, don’t use it. Except
where an Organization bears the name. That is why M. G. later organized
the A[f ]rican Communities’ League.’’ Correct in her assertion that whites
tended to associate negative images with ‘‘Negroes,’’ Jacques Garvey’s
analysis was later rearticulated by Black Power advocates, such as Stokely
Carmichael and Charles Hamilton, in the 1960s. Du Bois, however, never
responded to her suggestion and in later writings continued to use the
word ‘‘Negro,’’ balanced with the word ‘‘black.’’ Essentially, Du Bois’s
position was that ‘‘if men despise Negroes, they will not despise them less
if Negroes are called ‘colored’ or ‘Afro-Americans.’ ’’
≥Ω
In her sensitivity to the ways in which language can shape and stiﬂe
political options, Jacques Garvey was far ahead of her peers. For her it was
not just a matter of what others thought of her race, but of what people of
African descent thought of themselves. Only in recent years have scholars
investigated how ‘‘the control of language and the terms we adopt take on
enormous political signiﬁcance,’’ inﬂuencing the way we think about our
political situation. ‘‘Indeed, language can be viewed as essentially po-
litical,’’ Ruth Grant and Marion Orr have shown, since ‘‘language nec-
essarily reﬂects, reinforces and reproduces the power relations within
every society.’’
∂≠
‘‘Africa for the Africans, at home and abroad’’ had been Marcus Gar-
vey’s motto, and he had been extremely conscientious about language and
identity. He capitalized and used the word ‘‘Negro’’ at a time when most
of the African diaspora still preferred the term ‘‘colored.’’ During the two
world wars ‘‘Negro’’ had gained predominance in America, but Jacques
Garvey now rejected it, preferring instead ‘‘Africans or people of African


--- PAGE 170 ---
a decade of unity 157
decent [ sic].’’ Her shift from race to ‘‘ethnicity’’ and ‘‘culture’’ as the
deﬁning characteristic of the group evoked not only similarities that
moved beyond the ‘‘cuss of color,’’ but also the importance of homeland
for a homeless diaspora.
∂∞
The idea of connectedness, as opposed to that of displacement, rooted
Jacques Garvey’s identity concerns in an imagined ‘‘African’’ community.
As Paul Gilroy convincingly argues, ‘‘The need to locate cultural or ethnic
roots and then to use the idea of being in touch with them as a means to
reﬁgure the cartography of dispersal and exile is perhaps best understood
as a simple and direct response to the varieties of racism which have
denied the historical character of black experience and the integrity of
black culture.’’
∂≤ Unity was her call, and emphasizing one Africa was a
means to combat the borders and fragmentation that had weakened the
Pan-African world.
The last section of the Memorandum Correlative provided an overview
of race issues in the United States, describing Jim Crow and its armed
forces. The document concluded with the Greater Liberian Bill (also
known as Bilbo’s Bill), a ‘‘Freedom for All’’ appeal to the United Nations,
and Marcus Garvey’s hymn. In essence, the Memorandum Correlative
explained the aims of ‘‘African-Nationalism,—just what each territory
wants, its potentialities, and the ambitions of our people to have politi-
cal freedom and economic independence.’’
∂≥ This document, among its
other reasons for being of historical interest, is compelling evidence that
Jacques Garvey deserves a place among the intellectual leaders of the
movement to empower Africa and Africans.
Once her comprehensive memorandum was drafted, Jacques Garvey
enlisted the New York Garvey Club to print it. ‘‘As you know I cannot
print it here [in Jamaica], not even a simple letter,’’ she wrote to club
president Gibbons. She was ‘‘powerless at this end to do anything ﬁnan-
cially, I have made my full contributions, by doing all the work, in a sick
state of body, and grieved state of mind.’’
∂∂ Making it clear to others
that she had done her part was not just about tooting her own horn,
but about her conviction that everyone should participate on some level.
The club was her only organizational base, and she believed that together
they could complete this di≈cult task if they followed her instructions.
Her plain but meticulous directive left no room for error and was remi-
niscent of the orders that she had received from her husband over the
years. ‘‘When you get the Memorandum from me, you must not show it
around,’’ Jacques Garvey explained. ‘‘Keep it safely, until the printer gets


--- PAGE 171 ---
158 a decade of unity
it.’’ Always willing to share ideas, she did not fear that others might lay
claim to the fruits of her scholarship, but she did not want the document
to get bogged down while a variety of organizations decided whether to
approve it. If it were subjected to that sort of review, she predicted, the
memorandum ‘‘would have been going around and creating controversy
until the next war comes and would not be ratiﬁed.’’ ‘‘Not one word is to
be changed’’; she wanted to do ‘‘all the proof reading, when you send me a
proof, and it must be registered.’’ She also wished to print the document
in the form of a ‘‘booklet, 6 by 9 inches, sewn in the center with cloth
cover.’’ ‘‘A whole Race’s welfare is depending on the speed with which you
can have same printed,’’ she emphasized. And in case that was not enough
to galvanize the club members, she added a warning meant to strike a
chord of fear: ‘‘Don’t fail, or God will fail you.’’
∂∑ No longer having the
wrath of Marcus Garvey on her side, Jacques Garvey reminded her com-
patriots that they must answer to a higher power if her expectations were
not met.
Such dramatic language is featured throughout Jacques Garvey’s writ-
ings, and it undoubtedly added a sense of urgency to her correspondence.
Conﬁdentially, though, she told Nnamdi Azikiwe that she ‘‘never for a
moment believed that our Memorandum of Demands, because of its
rectitude, would bring moral adjustments.’’ Nevertheless, it was essential
that ‘‘we present our demands and suggest means of rectiﬁcation, when
world readjustments were under consideration.’’ Otherwise, ‘‘our omis-
sion would be used as a plausible excuse, for unfair adjustments against us,
on their plea of ignorance of our desires and ambitions, therefore inno-
cence of guilt on their part.’’
∂∏
Once they received it, the Garvey Club members critiqued the Memo-
randum Correlative and particularly questioned the inclusion of Mis-
sissippi senator Theodore G. Bilbo’s Greater Liberian Bill, introduced in
1938 and 1939 to assist African Americans with volunteer repatriations to
West Africa. Marcus Garvey had enthusiastically supported the bill, for
which unia members had collected over 50,000 signatures.
∂π Since Gar-
vey’s death, Jacques Garvey had written three letters to Bilbo regarding his
bill, because she believed that it would be important for years to come.
She wanted to include a copy of it in the Memorandum so readers would
have a chance to ‘‘make suggestions to the Bill, before it is re-introduced’’
in Congress. Bilbo indicated that the war had hampered e√orts to pass the
bill, which ‘‘asked for million of dollars,’’ but he promised to continue
working for its passage. Changing times, however, had caused fellow


--- PAGE 172 ---
a decade of unity 159
Garveyites, some of whom had initially supported the bill, to have a
change of heart. James A. Blades, on behalf of the Garvey Club, wrote to
Jacques Garvey that ‘‘the name Bilbo stands out in the minds of American
blacks with the worse elements of Southern thought and action.’’ There-
fore, ‘‘To ask the race in the United States to accept anything coming from
Bilbo as having any possible good, is sheer madness. . . . As a good
Christian, would you accept a plan from the devil as to how you may get
to heaven?’’ How could the Garvey Club ‘‘sponsor a program, which in
the American black man’s mind will come straight from the master of
Hades himself ?’’
∂∫
This was not the ﬁrst time that Jacques Garvey had bumped heads with
Garveyites over the charge that she was colluding with racists. For exam-
ple, at one point she had corresponded with Ernest Cox, a representative
of the White American Society, an organization that condemned mis-
cegenation and advocated the colonization of African Americans and the
superiority of the white race. Cox and Marcus Garvey had had extensive
contact, and occasionally Cox addressed unia meetings during which
Garvey told members to read his works, White America (1923) and Let My
People Go (1925). For Jacques Garvey, maintaining a relationship with Cox
was a purely political matter. She reasoned that ‘‘Mr. Cox is a white man,
and an exponent of ‘White America,’ but his ideal of race purity appeals
to us, as we also do not want to use miscegenation to solve our Race
problem in the U.S.A.’’ She saw nothing wrong with seeking his assistance
in obtaining support for the Greater Liberian Bill. But when N. H. Gris-
som, commissioner of the Wisconsin unia Division, learned of Jacques
Garvey’s discussions with Cox, he told her that the unia belongs to ‘‘Ne-
groes in the world, not whites and as long as you shall solicit white
support—you are deadly wrong and I am opposed to any e√ort on your
part in this direction.’’
∂Ω
Initially, Jacques Garvey responded to this criticism by stating that
whites who agreed with the Pan-African agenda should be used for politi-
cal leverage and their access to resources. Garvey had always lined up with
whites who supported his agenda, and Jacques Garvey had supported the
activities of white English women who were married to Africans in Lon-
don. Unlike Garvey, though, she had learned to back away from an un-
popular decision. When she received a letter from Gibbons ‘‘regarding the
rabid, rude attitude of the Senator [Bilbo]’’ and containing his suggestion
‘‘that we exclude same from the pamphlet,’’ she ‘‘gladly acted on’’ his
request.
∑≠ Adjusting the Memorandum Correlative to exclude the bill was


--- PAGE 173 ---
160 a decade of unity
another example of Jacques Garvey’s political rebirth and newfound abil-
ity to function as a true organizational woman who was willing to listen to
and incorporate the opinions of others.
After the removal of the bill from the Memorandum had been agreed
upon, the Garvey Club members began production. Out of frustration
with the situation, Gibbons informed Jacques Garvey that ‘‘we didn’t
want to burden you with matters we felt we must put through. The total
cost of printing the Memos and 3000 pamphlets is $515 approximately. . . .
[W]e have paid on account $205.00 which leaves a balance of $310.’’ In
addition, ‘‘production [by] the printer cannot be guaranteed, due to the
war.’’ It was important to Gibbons that Jacques Garvey understand that
the club members were not complaining about their assignment but ‘‘sim-
ply feel that you should know.’’ This report of a ﬁnancial shortfall must
have reminded Jacques Garvey of the many conversations she had had
with her husband regarding ﬁnancing publications. Experience had made
her sensitive to these di≈culties, especially since she was the one who
usually handled the logistics. She responded to Gibbons that ‘‘re cost of
printing, I see where you have done your very best, under the circum-
stances.’’ She told him to use good judgment in deciding whether to sell
the pamphlets at $1.00 or $0.75, ‘‘seeing that we have to give away so
many to High O≈cials of governments etc.’’
∑∞
The individual memorandums were part of ‘‘our world-wide represen-
tations’’ to world leaders questioning the ‘‘depth and breadth of the Atlan-
tic Charter’’ and fostering a ‘‘something must be done attitude in our
favor.’’ With the Memorandum Correlative ﬁnally approved, Jacques Gar-
vey continued to enlist others in her sustained e√ort to introduce inter-
national reforms. She was especially determined to engage the assistance
of W. E. B. Du Bois, crediting his ‘‘calm, calculating judgement . . . and
knowledge of international a√airs.’’ Though Du Bois’s leadership had
been somewhat eclipsed by younger African Americans like A. Philip
Randolph and Adam Clayton Powell Jr., Jacques Garvey still viewed
him as an ardent race man. Nevertheless, her willingness to reach out to
Du Bois meant overlooking his past criticism of Marcus Garvey. An
outspoken enemy of Garvey’s, Du Bois in 1924 had written that Garvey
was either ‘‘a lunatic or a traitor’’ and without doubt ‘‘the most dangerous
enemy of the Negro race in America and in the world.’’ During the mail
fraud trial, Du Bois had observed that Garvey had convicted himself with
‘‘his swaggering monkey-shines in the court room.’’
∑≤
But much had happened to Du Bois in the intervening years. He had


--- PAGE 174 ---
a decade of unity 161
been forced into retirement from his teaching position at Atlanta Univer-
sity in 1944, and he was on the verge of returning to the National Asso-
ciation for the Advancement of Colored People ( naacp) that spring as
director of special research, a title that loosely translated into minister of
foreign a√airs. This was a perfect post for Du Bois, who had by then
traveled to most European countries, Asia, Africa, and the West Indies.
He wrote that ‘‘contacts with foreign peoples and foreign problems and
the combination of these problems with the race problem here [in the
United States] was forced into one line of thought by the Second World
War.’’ These conditions, Gerald Horne has shown, helped strengthen Du
Bois’s conviction to ‘‘meld the naacp with the Pan-African movement’’
and ultimately ‘‘devote the rest of his life’’ to ‘‘the liberation of Africa and
world peace.’’
∑≥
By 1944 the di√erences that Du Bois had had with Garvey were water
under the bridge, and he was more than willing to ‘‘cooperate’’ with
Garvey’s widow ‘‘in any possible way.’’
∑∂ For her part, Jacques Garvey had
told Du Bois that ‘‘personal feelings must be forgotten in the Unity of
e√ort that is being forged for Africa.’’ As activists on the same political
stage, they were both stimulated by the exigencies of World War II and
ever more committed to international questions of diasporic racism and
colonial exploitation of Africa. Recognizing the demands placed on Du
Bois, who was now seventy-ﬁve years old and highly selective about his
political undertakings, Jacques Garvey returned to a theme from her
earlier community feminism. She wrote Du Bois that she wished that she
knew his wife personally, because she ‘‘would try to get her busy, making
you see what a ﬁne opportunity presents itself ’’ for ‘‘international Service,’’
by writing a memorandum. Always believing that wives had an inordinate
amount of inﬂuence over their husbands, Jacques Garvey was unaware
that Du Bois had initially been attracted and ‘‘held’’ to his wife, Nina
Gomer, because of her ‘‘rare beauty and excellent household training.’’
Mrs. Du Bois appreciated his work, but he thought that she was too ‘‘busy
to share [in it] because of cooking, marketing, sweeping and cleaning and
the endless demands of children.’’ When his wife su√ered a cerebral hem-
orrhage in 1945, Du Bois wrote a family friend that he believed it had been
brought on because she ‘‘worked so hard cleaning and washing.’’
∑∑
No stranger to household obligations herself, Jacques Garvey told Du
Bois that she was able to ‘‘combine housework, the support of my boys,
and my work for my Race.’’ Since the early days of the Garvey movement,
she had juggled multiple responsibilities and she inaccurately assumed,


--- PAGE 175 ---
162 a decade of unity
perhaps, that this was the lifestyle of other women married to prominent
leaders. All wives of race men were drawn into the movement, Jacques
Garvey believed; thus, she just could not imagine that Du Bois had an
apolitical wife. Nevertheless, she also knew the costs wives and families
sometimes had to pay: ‘‘I know that Mdme DuBois, has many a time been
sacriﬁced on the altar of Service to Race .’’
∑∏ Whatever the reasons—her
inability to fully recover from the death of their ﬁrstborn was undoubt-
edly a major factor—Mrs. Du Bois was not a part of the helpmate tradi-
tion that Jacques Garvey had advocated over the years. It was not until
after the death of his wife in 1950 and his marriage to writer, artist, and
longtime friend, Shirley Graham, that Du Bois would ﬁnd a political
partner.
Du Bois’s attention to Jacques Garvey’s Memorandum request was side-
tracked by his need to prepare for the ﬁrst session of the United Nations
Conference, scheduled to be held in San Francisco in May–June 1945.
Black desegregationalists and Pan-Africanists alike believed that a col-
lective black agenda could galvanize anticolonial forces at the meeting,
whose overall purpose was to build an international organization to main-
tain peace and security worldwide. At Du Bois’s suggestion, the naacp
had sent telegrams to an array of African American organizations (labor
and community groups and clubs) soliciting their views on what should
be included in their platform. Armed with a cadre of ideas, the Afri-
can Americans attending the conference had high hopes for the session.
Jacques Garvey was also excited and had predicted to Adam Clayton
Powell Jr. that ‘‘the United States of America, the greatest Democracy in
the world, and as such, still keeps up a yearly record of lynchings of her
dark skinned citizens, will not blush to give us’’ a vote for decolonization.
Unfortunately, their hopes were quickly replaced with frustration. The
delegation was led by President Harry S. T ruman and the inexperienced
secretary of state Edward R. Stettinius Jr. naacp leader Walter White was
stunned when Stettinius announced that the American delegation had
‘‘decided neither to introduce nor support a human rights declaration as
an integral part of the charter which the nations had gathered to draft.’’
The secretary’s lack of ‘‘bold moral leadership,’’ White points out, caused
the United States to lose political inﬂuence.
∑π
Though disappointed in the stands taken by the U.S. delegates, Jacques
Garvey was impressed by the progressive positions on racism and colonial-
ism embraced by representatives from Russia and China. Earlier she had
anticipated that ‘‘China being a Colored Race, just emerging from racial


--- PAGE 176 ---
a decade of unity 163
abasement will cast her vote for us’’ and that Russia’s ‘‘sixteen States, made
up of one hundred and seventy two di√erent races, cultures, and creeds,
[and now being] autonomous Republics, free to develop, along their own
culture and racial lines—will certainly give us number two vote.’’ Rupert
Lewis points out that although Jacques Garvey’s ‘‘formulation’’ was in-
accurate, she recognized ‘‘the fundamental fact that natural and racial
oppression had been uprooted in the USSR. She did not fall into the
narrow anti-communist outlook of so many Nationalists who claim to be
Garveyites.’’
∑∫
The African American ‘‘consultants’’—including W. E. B. Du Bois and
Mary McLeod Bethune, in addition to delegates from Haiti, Liberia, and
Ethiopia—did their best to pressure the body to address political repres-
sion in Nigeria, Sierra Leone, South Africa, and the Rhodesias but were
unsuccessful.
∑Ω In the end, all were disappointed by the failure of the
conference to place all colonial possessions under United Nations trustee-
ship, which would have guaranteed a path to independence.
∏≠ Yet anti-
colonial lobbying at this meeting did permit another beneﬁt: intimate
and personal interactions among the various delegates. Jacques Garvey
missed out on this because she was absent—Jamaica did not send a delega-
tion to the meeting. At times like this—and especially during pivotal
negotiations—living on the island exacerbated her feelings of isolation.
This is why she put so much e√ort into stimulating a discourse—and a
forum for it—that she could participate in from her home. Though her
locale often positioned her outside important Pan-African conversations,
her cosmopolitan thinking and dedication to the cause of black empower-
ment made her just as astute as other anticolonial stalwarts.
By July 1945 the Memorandum Correlative had been printed, and the
next order of business was to make it available to the public. While
Marcus Garvey was in prison, he had instructed his wife to send copies of
Philosophy and Opinions and his pardon materials to ambassadors, con-
suls, and a host of American leaders. Having witnessed the power of mass
distribution, she wanted nothing less for the Memorandum. As an organi-
zational woman with only one solid base of support—the Garvey Club of
New York—Jacques Garvey once again aggressively pushed for its assis-
tance. She encouraged club secretary Alice Allman to ‘‘co-operate with
others in selling the Memorandum books, which were piled up at the
back of the o≈ce, so that the persons who loaned the moneys can get
some back. I think they could be sold at street meetings and at halls and
churches.’’ Allman responded that the club had sent several hundred


--- PAGE 177 ---
164 a decade of unity
copies to unia divisions but had ‘‘not received any word on how the sales
are going as yet, when we do we will be glad to tell you.’’ Evidence that the
Memorandum Correlative was falling into the hands of intended parties
ﬁnally appeared when Jacques Garvey received a note from Ambassador
Guillermo Belt of Cuba indicating that he had obtained her document by
mail and looked ‘‘forward with great interest to reading the Memoran-
dum.’’
∏∞
The Memorandum was just the beginning of Jacques Garvey’s renewed
dedication to the Pan-African cause. Ironically, the death of her husband
had reinvigorated her political commitment, and as she grew more con-
ﬁdent in her leadership abilities and conversant as an intellectual on Pan-
African a√airs, she began once again to write essays and editorials, as she
had done for the Negro World some twenty years earlier. This intellectual
work in turn strengthened her analysis of Pan-Africanism as an ideology
and sharpened her understanding of how to put it into practice. There-
fore, when the Fifth Pan-African Congress opened in Manchester, En-
gland, in October 1945, she was well suited to serve as its convenor.


--- PAGE 178 ---
9 The Fifth Pan-African Congress, 1945
A
my Jacques Garvey’s political rebirth depended on her ability to
destabilize and navigate established chauvinistic politics.
The depth of her commitment and her sustained political
e√orts are revealed by her role in organizing the Fifth Pan-
African Congress, held in Manchester, England, in Octo-
ber 1945. The four previous congresses (1919, 1921, 1923, 1927) all had been
structured around the struggle against imperialistic political, economic,
and territorial domination. Initially, the congresses were a by-product of a
movement begun by T rinidadian lawyer Henry Sylvester Williams in
1900 and revived by W. E. B. Du Bois. Over the years the congresses had
been hampered by minimal African and working-class participation, but
the 1945 meeting was attended by several young African leaders (Kwame
Nkrumah, Nnamdi Azikiwe, and Jomo Kenyatta) as well as working-class
delegates, many of whom had attended the World T rade Union Con-
ference in France just days before. The result was the most powerful
gathering of Africans and peoples of African descent ever assembled, all
working together to defeat imperialism.
W. E. B. Du Bois, by this time a√ectionately known as the ‘‘father of
Pan-Africanism,’’ had proposed this ﬁfth meeting. After she had asked
him to write a ‘‘one-man Memorandum,’’ Du Bois had requested that
Jacques Garvey serve as co-convener. For most of her political life, Jacques
Garvey had struggled to have her ideas taken seriously by her peers. Often
she found herself at the center of activities but, ironically, at the same time
on the margins of the decision-making body. Du Bois’s proposal, and
even more signiﬁcantly the fact that he wanted her ‘‘reaction and sugges-
tions’’ to an enclosed draft letter to call the congress after the war, signaled
that she was ﬁnally being included among the vanguard.
∞
Excited about the prospective meeting, Jacques Garvey believed that
Du Bois’s ‘‘esteem [for] and conﬁdence’’ in her would ‘‘be helpful to those


--- PAGE 179 ---
166 the fifth pan-african congress
whom we serve, and in turn our collaboration will encourage others to
submerge personalities and close ranks for the common weal.’’≤ Her close
working relationship with Du Bois at this time demonstrates just how far
both of them had come from their bitter disputes of the 1920s. For exam-
ple, during the Second Pan-African Congress (1921), which paralleled the
heyday of the Universal Negro Improvement Association (unia), Du Bois
was annoyed when the press confused the congress with the unia, which
he superciliously characterized as a ‘‘people’s movement rather than a
movement of intellectuals.’’ The Garveys’ determination to bring to-
gether Africans the world over was laudable, but the unia’s weakness, Du
Bois wrote, ‘‘lay in its demagogic leadership, its intemperate propaganda,
and the natural fear which it threw into the colonial powers.’’
≥
Although time had transformed Du Bois and Jacques Garvey’s hostile
relationship, Du Bois was still squeamish about instilling revolutionary
‘‘fear’’ in colonists. The goal of the Fifth Congress, he wrote, ‘‘shall be for
consultation and information,’’ to set ‘‘before the world the needs of
African Negroes and of their descendants overseas.’’ He made it clear that
‘‘no political changes in relation between colonies and mother countries
will necessarily be contemplated except in cases where it is evident that no
freedom of development is possible under present circumstances.’’ How-
ever, George Padmore, chairman of the International African Service
Bureau, who was joint secretary (with Du Bois) of the congress and
its planning mastermind, spoke with a di√erent voice. He informed Du
Bois that the Provisional Committee in London had ‘‘every reason to
believe that there will be unanimous agreement upon the fundamental
aims and objects’’ of the congress. These were, simply stated, that ‘‘politi-
cal consciousness naturally assumes the form of National liberation, self-
determination, self-government—call it what you may. They [Africans]
want to be able to rule their own countries.’’
∂
On this point Jacques Garvey’s thinking was closer to Padmore’s; she
was also ambivalent about Du Bois’s ‘‘thin’’ intentions, believing that the
‘‘broadest objective should be stated and nothing more.’’ Her two lengthy
letters, written two days apart, further critiqued Du Bois’s draft letter. As
the only proposed female co-convener, she joined an impressive entou-
rage: Du Bois; Dr. Harold Moody, president of the League of Colored
People and former president of the London Missionary Society; Paul
Robeson, chairman of the Council of African A√airs; and Max Yergan,
executive director of the Council of African A√airs. In spite of their
elevated political status, Jacques Garvey did not doubt her own opinions


--- PAGE 180 ---
the fifth pan-african congress 167
and expressed them without hesitation. To her, it was regrettable that the
congress ‘‘could not be held before the war is over, so that United Africa
would speak as never before.’’ She was concerned that after World War II,
‘‘the Nations of the world would be in a state of complacency and do not
care how we burn, as long as they are no longer being bombed and
blasted.’’
∑
Jacques Garvey also proposed that the congress organize a permanent
body called a Pan-African Union ‘‘to watch over the interest of our people
the world over.’’ In addition to eschewing the term ‘‘Negro,’’ she sug-
gested that the group avoid the word ‘‘native’’ when referring to Africans
or West Indians, which was also ‘‘o√ensive.’’ She wrote, ‘‘Africans argue,
and rightly so, that one does not refer to the natives of England, or the
natives of France, why then are they called natives, with the inference of
contempt for their condition of handicap and suppression[?]’’ Carefully
naming and accurately locating peoples (in Central and South America,
the West Indies, America, London, and Africa) was an obsession with
Jacques Garvey, because ‘‘the slightest word can be misinterpreted, pur-
posely of course, to upset a magniﬁcent e√ort for the future of our Race.’’
She learned this lesson from her ‘‘dealings with men of big a√airs in
Europe.’’
∏
Further, it was of ‘‘vital importance, from all angles,’’ that a ‘‘born
African’’ be named one of the conveners of the congress. She identiﬁed
Nnamdi Azikiwe, a Nigerian, who was the editor-and-chief of four news-
papers and chairman of the West African Press Delegation. Her sugges-
tion was well reasoned, for Azikiwe ‘‘adore[d] Garveyism.’’ Indeed, he had
argued that the Garvey philosophy, ‘‘with its elements of race pride, race
consciousness, nationalism and its correlant of economic stability, appeals
to the modern political enthusiast, who keeps his head clear and steers
away from chauvinism or enthocentricism; for it will aid in ameliorating
various political, economic, social, and other problems which a√ect this
modern age.’’ Determined to revolutionize African journalism, Azikiwe
in 1937 had founded the West African Pilot, a newspaper he used to guide
public opinion on the Nigerian independence movement. I. F. Nicolson
points out that ‘‘Zik’s own nationalism had in it ideological elements of
something wider than nationalism-pan-Africanism, international social-
ism, and the old West African Nationalism of the Lagos intelligentsia of
the twenties.’’ Educated at Lincoln and Howard Universities, Azikiwe was
a formidable athlete, poet, and businessman, as well as journalist. In the
eyes of Jacques Garvey, there was no African more stellar—it did not hurt


--- PAGE 181 ---
168 the fifth pan-african congress
his case that he had completed her memorandum request. Despite these
attributes, he had a ‘‘variable character, with great charm on occasions,
but on others di≈cult and unpredictable.’’ Aware of Azikiwe’s ﬁnicky
personality, Jacques Garvey warned Du Bois, ‘‘If you me[e]t him, perhaps
you may not like him personally, but we have long ceased to allow person-
alities to hamper unity of e√orts, in this great and wide-spread work.’’
π
Somewhat embarrassed by the length of her letters to Du Bois, Jacques
Garvey wrote: ‘‘T ry not to be bored. . . . I want you to thoroughly under-
stand my thinking regarding our people, so that in your plans will be
implemented my thoughts, that are worth-while, even if hazily expressed
by letter.’’ Correspondence thus served its purpose, but Jacques Garvey
also believed that it was no substitute for a ‘‘heart to heart,’’ face-to-face
talk. To further ensure that Du Bois had a thorough grasp of her ideas, she
told him to read a ‘‘letter over twice, so that you can catch the unexpressed
references.’’ Jacques Garvey used repetition and long explanations to vali-
date her points so that Du Bois would not dismiss her intellectual contri-
bution. This was a real possibility not only because her comments cri-
tiqued his letter, but also because during the 1940s, race men seldom
worked on a par with race women, and W. E. B. Du Bois was no excep-
tion. For instance, at the ﬁrst session of the United Nations, he had
referred to the remarks by his co-consultant, Mary McLeod Bethune
(president of the National Council of Black Women and former ap-
pointee to President Roosevelt’s cabinet) as a harmless ‘‘nuisance.’’
∫
For virtually all of her political life, Amy Jacques Garvey had had ﬁrst-
hand experience with chauvinistic men. Perhaps this is why she concluded
her last missive to Du Bois with the statement: ‘‘Now dear Professor, per-
haps you may misunderstand the tone of my letters, as I have been so ac-
customed to talk with M. G. and take part in Conferences with men, as
‘man to man’ that I don’t think or act, as if I ‘were just a woman.’ ’’ Such
phrasing suggests that Jacques Garvey’s sense of herself positioned her out-
side those constraints based on an assumed fundamental ‘‘natural’’ dichot-
omy between men and women. The ‘‘natural attitude,’’ Mary Hawkes-
worth has shown, ‘‘implicates gender in the ideology of procreation.’’
This, however, was not a problem for Jacques Garvey, who believed that
the body and sexuality were biological features (male and female hor-
mones, reproductive organs). This ‘‘natural’’ view also meant that there
were culturally speciﬁc characteristics associated with masculinity and
femininity. In her 1920s editorials, Jacques Garvey had charged black men
to be ‘‘real’’ men—breadwinners with strong backbones—socially con-


--- PAGE 182 ---
the fifth pan-african congress 169
structed masculine attributes. Joan Scott argues that the ‘‘idea of mas-
culinity rests on the necessary repression of feminine aspects—of the
subject potential for bisexuality—and introduces conﬂict into the opposi-
tion of masculine and feminine.’’
Ω At the same time, Jacques Garvey
advocated more ﬂexible feminine attributes that allowed women to func-
tion as both helpmates and leaders. But recognizing that her thinking on
this point di√ered from other radicals, she felt the need to clarify what
might appear to Du Bois as an ‘‘unnatural’’ feminine position.
Jacques Garvey appropriated a masculine identity to ensure common
understanding between herself and Du Bois. For some reason she did not
want to alienate him in the way she had done when she clashed with male
unia leaders. Perhaps she had more respect for him because of his unques-
tionable commitment to ‘‘uplift’’ the race, as well as the deference af-
forded him by other leaders whom she respected. Her aggressive and
forthcoming ‘‘tone’’ had previously been interpreted as bossy and uncom-
promising; to a chauvinistic mind, her voice was a ‘‘nuisance’’ at best and
‘‘unfeminine’’ at worst. By explaining her conﬁdence and intellectual
demeanor as being outside the scope of ‘‘just’’ an average woman, Jacques
Garvey failed to critique the false notion that the political/public do-
main was best suited for men. At the same time, though, her explana-
tion undercuts the claim that masculine and feminine ‘‘traits’’ are ﬁxed, in
that locating herself outside of ‘‘woman’’ ruptured gendered classiﬁca-
tions. To be sure, Jacques Garvey was not making a universal claim, but
her self-perception fundamentally undermined essentialist viewpoints of
‘‘woman,’’ which were grounded in archaic ideas of femininity.
Du Bois did not respond to her letters, and there is no surviving record
of the ﬁnal letter of invitation; thus it is unclear if he implemented any of
her suggestions in response to his draft of the letter convening the Fifth
Pan-African Congress. A year passed before she resumed correspondence
regarding the meeting. By July 1945 she had received a letter from George
Padmore on behalf of the Provisional Committee in London o≈cially
inviting the unia to participate. Already ahead of the game, Jacques Gar-
vey had enlisted the services of New York Garvey Club president B.
Gibbons to arrange a meeting to choose a delegate and collect funds for
travel expenses to London. She urged Gibbons to select a person who was
‘‘educated, honest and courageous.’’ Measuring up in ‘‘statesmanship’’
was the only way to ‘‘make our contribution.’’ Four Jamaicans met these
qualiﬁcations, and L. A. Thoywell-Henry (who was also active in the
People’s National Party) was the number one delegate. Jacques Garvey did


--- PAGE 183 ---
170 the fifth pan-african congress
her best to facilitate his travel plans, as well as arranging a rushed meeting
for him to address in New York. As delegates from Garvey’s African
Communities League, Jacques Garvey named V. G. Hamilton and K.
Boxer; from the unia she tapped Alma La Badie.
∞≠
As the only scheduled female co-convener, Jacques Garvey took on the
issue of female participation at the congress. She had asked Padmore to
have invitations sent to Una Marson, who ‘‘could represent West Indian
Women,’’ and Ivy T racy Timothy, who was born ‘‘of an English mother
and West Indian father, and has su√ered from the inequalities meted out
to English-born Colored people.’’
∞∞ In many ways Marson and Timothy
were personiﬁcations of Jacques Garvey herself. Marson was a middle-
class social reformer, poet, and journalist who came to prominence during
the 1938 Jamaica rebellion. Her reports on the conditions faced by mid-
dle- and working-class women, published in the Jamaican Standard in
1938, gave insight into the need for social services. Despite her e√orts,
Marson’s critique was not taken seriously by many middle-class male
activists who viewed women like Marson as a ‘‘thorn in the[ir] ﬂesh.’’
They wished to protect the ‘‘helpless’’ working-class woman and assert
their own ego against the presumed emasculating structure of the domi-
nant culture. Rarely were women included in Jamaica’s leadership since
these men believed that women were best suited to deal exclusively with
‘‘apolitical, social concerns.’’ Marson, nonetheless, persevered and, like
Jacques Garvey, she was uncomfortable with—and often rejected—those
dominant cultural deﬁnitions of black women’s work that stiﬂed their
agency to develop as political leaders. Yet Marson and Jacques Garvey
were never fully able to transcend middle-class values, and their outlook
during this period too often failed to address wholeheartedly the needs of
poor women, though they attempted to represent such experiences in
their writings. Timothy, on the other hand, was a mulatta who had ‘‘suf-
fered’’ as a mixed-race person. Jacques Garvey now identiﬁed herself as
‘‘one hundred per cent African,’’ but she was indeed ‘‘brown’’ in Jamaica
and still sensitive to culturally loaded issues surrounding mixed racial
identities.
∞≤
Seeking to ensure that the congress had the best Pan-African minds
available, Jacques Garvey also contacted W. A. Domingo, another enemy
of her husband. Domingo had been the ﬁrst editor of the Negro World but
eventually became a member of the Socialist Party and an outspoken
critic of Marcus Garvey. ‘‘From a purely impersonal attitude or opinion,’’
Jacques Garvey was able to contact Domingo, since she herself preached


--- PAGE 184 ---
the fifth pan-african congress 171
and practiced unity. His ‘‘knowledge of world a√airs as it a√ects our
people,’’ his ‘‘ability as a journalist,’’ and his ‘‘contacts in America and
West Africa—well ﬁts [him to be] a Representative of our Race, and the
Nationalist Movement.’’
∞≥
Later she explained to George Padmore that she had mailed sugges-
tions to Du Bois some time ago but had not heard from him. Insisting,
once again, that Azikiwe should be a co-convener, she enclosed a copy to
Padmore of the document that echoed her Memorandum Correlative con-
cerns to the congress. Anticipating comments concerning the level of her
participation at the meeting, she included a brief section entitled, ‘‘Why
Should Mrs. Garvey Sponsor Such a Resolution?’’ Her answer was simple
and direct: her husband’s role as founder of the unia/acl and in dignify-
ing Africans and people of African descent justiﬁed her presence and, she
hoped, would silence all critics.
∞∂
When the Fifth Pan-African Congress ﬁnally opened in the Chorlton
Town Hall, Manchester, England, on 15 October 1945, Mrs. A. Garvey
was present, but unbeknownst to many, it was Amy Ashwood Garvey
who took her seat, not Amy Jacques Garvey. Jacques Garvey was unable to
attend because she ‘‘did not have a cent to go.’’ Once again, she had
missed a crucial opportunity for interpersonal dialogue with leading Pan-
African intellectuals. To her displeasure, Ashwood was present at the
invitation of W. E. B. Du Bois. In the years after Ashwood’s contested
divorce—beginning as early as 1924—she occasionally wrote to Du Bois,
and in January 1945 he had resumed their correspondence.
∞∑
Ashwood and Jacques Garvey were both steadfast Pan-Africanists, and
though aware of the tension between them, Du Bois apparently had
dismissed Jacques Garvey’s comments in April 1944 that she ‘‘was sur-
prised to hear that M. G.’s Ex-wife ‘Amy Ashwood’ is in America, from
1920 she has lost no time in vilifying him, and ridiculing his movement,
now blossoms forth as his widow, and the Brains of the Garvey movement.
Professor don’t we realize that the dead has no power!!’’ T wenty days later,
she added, ‘‘please refer to me as A. Jacques Garvey, and omit the Christian
name of ‘Amy,’ as M. G.’s Ex-wife, is in America, impersonating ‘the
widow,’ and she has a bad rep, for rackets and schemes, I would never like
to be further mistaken for her. . . . [S]he purposely misleads the public so
as to exploit them with her schemes and rackets.’’
∞∏
Although they were dissimilar in appearance, mistaken identity fol-
lowed both women; their shared ﬁrst name and surname generated much
confusion. Moreover, Ashwood perpetuated this misunderstanding by


--- PAGE 185 ---
172 the fifth pan-african congress
calling herself Garvey’s widow. Even those Garveyites who were not
around during the divorce ﬁasco were confused, for ‘‘Miss Amy Ashwood’s
allies were telling people about her two sons in Jamaica,’’ even though the
ﬁrst Mrs. Garvey had never had children. Wanting to reassure Jacques
Garvey, Gibbons wrote ‘‘we ourselves know better’’ but to put the confu-
sion to rest, he asked her to send him a ‘‘picture taken with yourself,
Winston and Marcus together, so that queries may be satisﬁed.’’
∞π
Jacques Garvey admitted to all who would listen that she was ‘‘very
sensitive on this matter,’’ as Ashwood ‘‘caused my family much pain.’’ Her
pain escalated to hostility when she received a clipping from the Amster-
dam News picturing Ashwood with the caption ‘‘Garvey’s Widow.’’ Livid,
Jacques Garvey sought to quickly clarify the situation by writing the
editor. C. B. Powell responded that he would give her statement ‘‘pub-
licity as soon as possible.’’
∞∫ Though Jacques Garvey believed that the
damage was already done, she further attempted to stop the recycling of
the photograph by writing New York’s People’s Voice and Chicago’s De-
fender that Ashwood was not Garvey’s widow.
Ashwood was in a sense a widow of Garvey, but it is unusual for an ex-
spouse to take on this identiﬁcation. It is unclear what she hoped to
gain. Perhaps the notoriety and the spoils that sometimes followed were
enough for her to continue this charade. Jacques Garvey was told, for
example, that in Monrovia, Liberia, Ashwood ‘‘posed’’ as her and ‘‘appar-
ently accepted money from the British Government [and] leased several
houses to sublet for (9) years.’’ Tony Martin points out that the Garvey
name guaranteed her attention, adulation, and even celebrity status.
∞Ω
Maintaining distance from Ashwood was the easiest way for Jacques
Garvey not to confront their unacknowledged connectedness, for her
anger closed o√ any possibility that she would deal directly with their
problematic relationship. Audre Lorde, who has thought seriously about
tensions between black women, surmises that they often fall into the
trap of thinking, ‘‘I must attack you ﬁrst before our enemies confuse us
with each other.’’ Lorde maintains that ‘‘black women should try to see
each other more clearly, as opposed to stewing in a passion of aversion.’’
On the surface, Jacques Garvey claimed that she was motivated by self-
protection; her beleaguered body and wounded soul struggled against the
ﬁend, Ashwood. But no matter how hard she tried to justify her harshness
and cruelty toward the woman, Jacques Garvey recognized that her anger
contradicted the core of her call for unity. Jacques Garvey cautioned
Azikiwe ‘‘to look out for her [Ashwood]’’ not because of a ‘‘personal axe,


--- PAGE 186 ---
the fifth pan-african congress 173
if she was honest to Race and Homeland, we would only be glad to use
her, despite what she had done in the past, but she is slippery and most
immoral. I have risen above personal feelings in all of my e√orts for
Africa.’’
≤≠
This assessment of Ashwood—and of Jacques Garvey’s feelings toward
her—were not altogether true. Ashwood was a bit unconventional: her
schemes to earn a livelihood were erratic, and her adventurous spirit
kept her on the move; throughout her adult life she never stayed in one
country more than four years.
≤∞ But she was just as dedicated as Jacques
Garvey when it came to advancing the political interests of African peo-
ples and standing up for women’s issues. At the last session of the Fifth
Pan-American Congress, for example, Ashwood gave a moving speech
exposing the sexist agenda of the meeting. ‘‘Very much has been written
and spoken of the Negro, but for some reason very little has been said
about the black woman.’’ The black woman ‘‘has been shunted into the
social background to be a childbearer. This has been principally her lot.’’
Most concerned with the fact that Jamaican women’s wages were much
lower than men’s, she felt that black men were ‘‘largely responsible, as they
do little to help the women to get improved wages.’’
≤≤
In theory, Jacques Garvey would not have taken issue with Ashwood’s
comments, but her anger made it di≈cult for her to acknowledge Ash-
wood’s positive and timely contribution. Similar political agendas do
not automatically generate sincere, open communication; moreover, in
the case of Ashwood and Jacques Garvey, their tension was stoked by
their loss of the male companion Marcus Garvey. Both women had com-
plained about his moody temperament and other character ﬂaws, but, as
Audre Lorde points out, ‘‘we have also been taught that a man acquired
was the sole measure of success, and yet they almost never stay.’’
≤≥ Garvey’s
death was not enough to achieve closure on their mutual hostility; it just
evolved into another level of rage.
The Fifth Pan-African Congress went down in history as the most
important point in the Pan-African movement’s turning from a ‘‘passive
to an active stage.’’ Indeed, the Congress Resolutions were sophisticated
intellectual indictments of political, economic, and social imperialism.
‘‘The complete and absolute independence of the peoples of West Africa
is the only solution to the existing problems,’’ proclaimed the ninety
delegates. Each geographic region had speciﬁc resolutions, although West
Africa was the most powerful bloc present. Since U.S. representation was
minimal, the New York Garvey Club organized a special session. Frater-


--- PAGE 187 ---
174 the fifth pan-african congress
nal greetings were o√ered by A. Philip Randolph; Jones Quarterly, secre-
tary of the African Student Association of America and Canada; and
Lester Taylor, secretary of the International Convention of African Peo-
ples of the World. Finally, a special supplementary resolution was pre-
sented by delegates of the Garvey Club. Padmore assured Jacques Garvey
that he read her ‘‘comprehensive memorandum’’ for African redemption.
A condensed version of her enclosure to Padmore, which addressed the
need to create a Federation of the British West Indies and to remove
barriers and restrictions—especially connected with transportation and
‘‘entering our Motherland’’—was entered into the ﬁnal proceedings.
≤∂
After the congress, Jacques Garvey continued to correspond with lead-
ing Pan-African intellectuals like Padmore and Azikiwe, whom she en-
couraged to work together and arrange an African Goodwill Mission, a
tour of speakers throughout the continent. Sticking to her agenda to fold
Garveyism into existing organizations, she cautioned them not to change
‘‘the methods of various societies and organizations of our people abroad,
but that their e√orts should be channeled toward support of the National-
ist Movement.’’
≤∑ Jacques Garvey’s urging of these leaders to respect dif-
ferent organizations’ autonomy was an ongoing example of her organiz-
ing spirit. Yet however invigorated by the blossoming of Pan-African
leaders, she undoubtedly su√ered a great deal for having missed the con-
gress, especially since the reason was lack of money. She had been able to
maintain a middle-class Jamaican lifestyle (a gardener and maid one day a
week) via her inherited rental property, but it was not enough to permit
travel o√ the island. Growing ever more accustomed to disappointment,
Jacques Garvey was constantly readjusting to the idea that although she
was ‘‘bottled-up’’ in Jamaica,
≤∏ Garveyism need not be. She reasoned that
she could best disseminate her redemptive African philosophy through
journalistic work, which had always been her chief mode of production.
Acutely aware of her restricted circumstances, she once again funneled
energy into writing.


--- PAGE 188 ---
10 Essays and Literature for a Pan-African World
I
n the years following the Fifth Pan-African Congress, Amy Jacques
Garvey’s determination to create an intellectual interest in Africa
persisted, as she once again began to produce essays and editorial
commentary. Her writing thus became her avenue of participation
in the stimulating Pan-African dialogue that blossomed during and
after World War II. Not only was she able to generate internationally
focused discourse that circulated well beyond Jamaica, but also her work
as editorial consultant for The African: Journal of African A√airs was an-
other way to disseminate Garveyisque ideas. Further, as an activist in-
vested in the e≈cacy of an educated constituency, she revived her hus-
band’s African Study Circle. These speciﬁc activities advanced her general
purpose: that a well-informed citizenry of Africa and of the African dias-
pora should and would recognize their connection to one another and be
willing to struggle for a common liberation.
By 1944 the The African, printed in New York, and the West African
Pilot, a daily newspaper published in Nigeria, had become the main
vehicles for Jacques Garvey’s discourse. The wartime atmosphere gave
her writing a new sense of urgency, and her release from the restrictive
clutches of male leaders of the Universal Negro Improvement Association
(unia) freed her to direct her more caustic rhetoric away from them and to
the real enemies of the ‘‘Darker Races’’ of the world. In one essay, for
example, she wrote that the nation that ‘‘boasts of being ‘most civilized’ ’’
because of its ability to ‘‘manufacture automobiles, warships, bombers
and jet propelled planes’’ is ‘‘usually hypocritical in actions, vague in
manifestations, and contradictory in principles.’’
∞
Overall, the bulk of her political essays articulated the possibilities of
the coming era and the necessity for New World diasporians to actively
participate in the decolonization of Africa. The Garveys’ treatises on
anticolonial measures had been extensive. As Rupert Lewis points out,


--- PAGE 189 ---
176 literature for a pan-african world
Marcus Garvey was an anticolonial champion long before it was in vogue
to explore race consciousness and advocate decolonization. More speciﬁ-
cally, Jacques Garvey’s 1920s essays had detailed the horrendous status of
women under colonial rule in Africa, China, and India. Notably, how-
ever, in the 1940s gender-speciﬁc discussions in Jacques Garvey’s writ-
ings were minimal. In fact, the twofold (helpmate/leadership) concept of
community feminism faded from Jacques Garvey’s political vocabulary.
Instead, she mainly advocated refocusing the battle against Germany and
Japan to include postwar decolonization for Africa. As she put it, ‘‘approx-
imately 300,000,000 peoples of African blood (100% and 1% inclusive)’’
were giving ‘‘their best services’’ and the ‘‘wealth and resources of their
lands to [the war] e√ort.’’ Indeed, between 1936 and 1938 annual imports
of strategic material from Africa to the United States grew about 2.3-fold,
and between 1938 and 1942 Britain increased imports of chromium ore
from Africa from 172,000 to 328,000 tons, and steel from 300,000 to
530,000 tons.
≤
In the war against fascism Africans undoubtedly had made huge sacri-
ﬁces of material and human resources, but colonists did not perceive their
contributions as down payments toward independence. As progressive
forces around the world contemplated how Africans would beneﬁt from
the battle, their inquiries, Jacques Garvey contended, were ‘‘side-tracked,
with assertions, which amount to this, ‘Boys, if you don’t help us, put out
this forest ﬁre, we will all be burnt alive.’ So on the job.’’ As she located
herself ﬁrmly in a battle against men ‘‘drunk with material power’’ and
‘‘bereft of spiritual grace,’’ her typewriter became her weapon of choice
and her ideas the arsenal.
≥
By words and implication, Jacques Garvey interpreted the real postwar
agenda of Western Europe to be nothing short of ﬁguratively swallowing
up Africa. Imperialist aggression would, moreover, hinder the progress of
New World diasporians because ‘‘citizenship of a minority member in any
country does not guarantee full rights, unless that person belongs to a
strong nation, whose heavy arm the government of the would-be mob-
sters fear or from whom they want to court favor.’’ Africans abroad were in
a precarious position, she warned, and lack of protection could make
them victims akin to the Jews in Germany. Would the ‘‘six million Jews’’
massacred ‘‘by civilized, Christian Europeans’’ have been ‘‘decimated with
impunity, if after 1914–1918, they had ﬁtted themselves for the years ahead
by uniting under their own vine and ﬁg tree?’’ The Jews after World War I,
she argued, ‘‘ignored Palestinian Nationalism and remained European


--- PAGE 190 ---
literature for a pan-african world 177
minorities, mere toys at the mercy of temperamental majorities—played
with, then tossed aside, dismembered, dying in human dump heaps.’’
The Jews had ‘‘proven to their own sorrow and loss’’ to all who were
doubtful how ‘‘futile it is for any people to weaken their national existence
by being absorbed in alien countries.’’ ‘‘Overseas Africans’’ needed to
acknowledge a kinship to the African continent and ‘‘service her in her
rehabilitation’’ so that they could ‘‘beneﬁt from Africa’s national prestige
and protection wherever you choose to live.’’
∂ Jacques Garvey was careful
not to bluntly blame the Jewish victims of the Holocaust. The tragic
plight of some ﬁve hundred Jewish refugees was brought home to her in
1941, when the British government granted them sanctuary in Jamaica.
But her analysis of their diasporic community complicated the indict-
ment of Adolf Hitler commonly pronounced by her contemporaries.
Proliﬁc commentary about Hitler by black writers around the world
had accelerated when he refused to shake the hands of black Olympians
during the 1936 games. Most noticeable was his unﬂinching dismissal of
African American Jesse Owens, who had broken several track-and-ﬁeld
world records. Hitler’s public display of racial contempt convinced many
black people that they could expect nothing from the Nazis except possi-
ble enslavement. In fact, Hitler never downplayed his desire to exploit
Africa’s resources once he had access to the continent; as early as 1938,
rumors circulated that British prime minister Neville Chamberlain was
considering that the best way to satisfy Hitler’s aspirations was to give
him an African territory. Thousands of East Africans from Tanganyika
marched through the streets protesting these reported plans.
∑
Despite the evidence of Hitler’s racism, in the United States ‘‘Aryan’’
propaganda had tried to rouse African Americans against the Jews. Here,
a transformed Hitler was depicted as struggling to free black people from
Semitic economic exploitation. ‘‘Capitalizing on the dissatisfaction of
disfranchised and underpaid American Negroes,’’ Mercer Cook wrote,
‘‘the Fascists have attempted to convince them that they could be no
worse o√ under a nazi government.’’ Although no respectable black leader
accepted this disinformation, it did complicate the thinking of some. In
1939, for example, Cook, W. E. B. Du Bois, Countee Cullen, and other
African Americans sponsored a campaign to assist Senegalese and French
West Indian soldiers. But one black columnist denounced this move to
support the ‘‘French’’ and accused African Americans of having sold out
as a result of Parisian openness to black culture. The writer asked: ‘‘What
had France done that made her more noble than Germany?’’ Why should


--- PAGE 191 ---
178 literature for a pan-african world
aid be given to Senegalese soldiers who were helping a white nation to
exploit other Africans? Was the campaign to save France inspired by
‘‘the fact that some of [them] may have ﬂirted with a blonde or two in a
Paris café?’’
∏
Communist Ben Davis was most forceful in campaigning across the
country against the ‘‘imperialist [Allied] war.’’ He told black people not to
become ‘‘cannon fodder’’ to ‘‘smash Hitlerism,’’ when ‘‘Hitlerism is en-
forced against [them] at home.’’ Those who were skeptical of Allied anti-
fascism charged that the world of black Britons was no better; William
Harrison, secretary for the International African Service Bureau, wrote
that black people in England were ‘‘subjected to an indignity which no
black visitor to Nazi Germany has ever received.’’
π Racial prejudice thus
became an Achilles’ heel in U.S. and British foreign policy, weakening the
crusade against fascism.
Because Africans at home and abroad had never been treated well
by Europeans, unrelenting prejudice had made ‘‘the Negro even more
Negrocentric than segregation and exploitation have forced him to be.’’
∫
But Negrocentric or black nationalist zeal did not necessarily evolve into
the Pan-African, anticolonialist thinking that Jacques Garvey envisioned.
The e√ort of African peoples’ to participate fully in World War II illus-
trates this point. African Americans organized to wear military uniforms
as well as to work in defense industries, for they reasoned that their
participation in these war e√orts would win them rights as full-ﬂedged
citizens. Executive Order 8802, which prohibited racial discrimination in
U.S. defense industries, was a major victory for them. In London, pro-
gressive activists who were otherwise opposed to African and Caribbean
troops’ ‘‘doing the white man’s work’’ nevertheless demanded that the
armed services drop the color bar. Their Negro Welfare Association suc-
ceeded in placing black o≈cer candidates in the Air Ministry, two of
whom were children of Dr. Harold Moody, the Jamaican activist who had
requested Jacques Garvey to write the Memorandum Correlative.
Ω
A similar lack of concern for African independence was evident on the
Continent. Both France and Britain conscripted hundreds of thousands
of Africans. As one Kenyan explained, ‘‘we had been told that unless we
joined up and helped the Government, Kenya would be occupied by
Germans and Italians.’’ So, ‘‘to keep out these ‘monsters,’ and also to
escape the boredom and di≈culty of being unemployed in Nairobi,’’ he
enlisted. Rita Headrick has demonstrated that the ‘‘universal desires’’ of
African enlistees were better food, more money, and a vocational educa-


--- PAGE 192 ---
literature for a pan-african world 179
tion.∞≠ The French sweetened their package by promising voting rights to
all Africans who signed on. Africans were far from waving an imperial ﬂag
nor were they cooperating in their own oppression, but building a Pan-
African nation was incidental to their more profound needs: trade skills
and the rights associated with full-ﬂedged citizenship.
Jacques Garvey was not critical of people of African descent struggling
for their human rights via their full participation in the war e√ort. She
had also encouraged black Jamaicans to ﬁght for empowerment on their
island. But ‘‘no matter what progress our people make as a minority group
anywhere, or even as a majority in small islands,’’ she wrote, ‘‘as long as
Africa, our ancestral home with its teeming millions of our people are
exploited and kept in ignorance, just so long will their condition reﬂect
discreditably on the progressives of our race.’’
∞∞ Jacques Garvey thus con-
tended that no real achievement could occur until the most downtrodden
members of the race (i.e., those who lived in Africa) were empowered on
their own terms. An imagined Africa had to be at the center of diasporic
thinking to recover all that was noble in African culture, as well as to pro-
tect what Africans had achieved abroad. In 1948 diasporic Jews fervently
supported—politically, ﬁnancially, and emotionally—the new State of Is-
rael and Jacques Garvey expected nothing less from the African diaspora.
The fundamental reason why New World diasporians had not gal-
vanized support for Africa, she reasoned, was because ‘‘cunning oppres-
sors’’ had ‘‘fooled and befuddled’’ them into believing that they were not
‘‘units of a mighty whole whose center is Africa.’’ The Caribbean area is
called the ‘‘West Indians,’’ but ‘‘are they Indians? No, their forebears were
brought from West Africa, so, truthfully speaking they are West Africans,
not Indians.’’ Central and South America’s African children ‘‘are absorbed
in the Spanish and Portuguese population’’ and taught to ‘‘turn their
backs on Africa.’’ Latin American culture is a compilation of ‘‘African-
Spanish-Portuguese,’’ and when one considers what ‘‘North Africa has
contributed to Spain and Portugal in the past, then Central and South
American culture is basically African,’’ Jacques Garvey argued. And in
the United States, 14 million ‘‘sons and daughters of Africa are called
‘Negroes’ ’’ by whites. The word Negro has been so ‘‘debased that new
words such as ‘niggard’ have been coined from it to mean a low, mean
person.’’ It was no wonder, she proclaimed, that a white settler in South
Africa had the nerve to ‘‘suggest that legislation should be passed there to
call Africans ‘Negroes’ and that the white settlers alone should enjoy the
honorable name of Africans.’’
∞≤


--- PAGE 193 ---
180 literature for a pan-african world
Jacques Garvey’s analysis is clearly a questionable assessment of racial
identities, as well as a distorted analysis of history in order to portray the
all-absorbing power of imperialism. A prominent East Indian commu-
nity did indeed reside throughout the Caribbean, and it is ahistorical to
argue that the North African inﬂuence in Latin American culture was
enough to describe Latin America as ‘‘basically African.’’ Jacques Garvey
was in the habit of molding her arguments to suit her purpose, even if that
meant oversimplifying her case so as to reveal her prejudices. But her
decision to transﬁgure and homogenize multiethnic/racial peoples into
an African body demonstrated her fervent political determination to mo-
bilize a scattered race.
The ‘‘ties of blood that bind us transcend all national boundaries,’’ she
wrote. Moreover, di√erences in dialects and languages were ‘‘being over-
come as all of us are learning the language of freedom,’’ which resulted
from an emancipated mind.
∞≥ Marcus Garvey had been fond of pointing
out that there was a thin line between ‘‘mental slaves’’ and ‘‘chattel slaves,’’
and his widow, guided by his inspirational spirit, continued this conversa-
tion by terming liberating linguistic distinctions ‘‘the language of free-
dom.’’ She held that an individual of the dominant race maintained ‘‘his
vaulted position of superiority’’ by keeping other human beings ignorant
or ‘‘hypnotized victims,’’ who ‘‘act against their own interest.’’ In contrast,
Garvey had ‘‘taught his race to think for itself, to work for itself and to love
itself ’’; he had freed their minds and given them a goal: economic and
political liberation. Jacques Garvey hoped to see that work continued.
∞∂
In 1945, before the war ended, she saw promising signs that Garvey’s
and her goals were being taken up in the Nigerian workers’ strike. One
month before Japan surrendered, 200,000 Nigerian workers activated
one of the few weapons available to colonial subjects, a large-scale strike.
After the British government refused to grant a 50 percent wage increase,
which would have paid them ﬁfty cents per day, the workers closed down
all transportation and governmental services. A. O. Imoude, president of
the Railway Workers Union, and Nnamdi Azikiwe, Jacques Garvey’s in-
tellectual comrade, were the commanding ﬁgures to rise from this strug-
gle. People of African descent worldwide took up the charge to support
the demonstrators and ﬁght for a free press in Africa. Jacques Garvey
viewed this strike as an example of African unity against the British Em-
pire and as a crucial step toward the liquidation of imperialism through-
out the Continent. She was proud of Azikiwe and told him to begin a
lecture tour, for ‘‘everyone wanted to see the leader of the Nigerian strike.’’


--- PAGE 194 ---
literature for a pan-african world 181
Three years later, another leadership notch was added to Azikiwe’s belt,
when he opened the African Continental Bank, after it had ‘‘dawned on
[him] that political freedom was not enough; economic freedom must be
won also.’’
∞∑ For Jacques Garvey, this marked the beginning of the post–
World War II Pan-African liberation movement. Azikiwe’s revolutionary
leadership and the collective activism of the black masses gave her hope
for a united, free Africa in her lifetime.
Though in theory Jacques Garvey was sympathetic to all Pan-African
and Pan-Asian liberation movements, when she observed Chinese agents
in Jamaica ‘‘collecting funds from the Chinese people, for the Nationalist
Party in China,’’ she privately shared her concern with Azikiwe: ‘‘in the
name of God, why must our substance be wasted. Black Chinese, Brown
Chinese all supporting China.’’ The agents’ motivation to involve their
people was honorable, yet, in her eyes, the brown and black Chinese,
who had equal percentages of African and Chinese blood, proudly called
themselves ‘‘overseas Chinese’’ and had dismissed their African heritage.
∞∏
These observations were the catalyst for her 1945 article, ‘‘China Milks
Africa in the Caribbean,’’ published in Azikiwe’s West African Pilot, which
was by then netting the largest newspaper sales in West Africa. In this
essay, Jacques Garvey linked the ﬁnancial success of ‘‘7,000 Chinese’’
living in Jamaica to the exploitation of islanders. She explained how
people of African descent were often forced to swap their produce for
essentials at grocery stores at ‘‘give-away prices,’’ enabling the Chinese to
become ‘‘a produce dealer at a handsome proﬁt.’’ Black Jamaicans were
manipulated to ‘‘underwrite’’ ﬁnancial contributions to China. She cau-
tioned: ‘‘Peoples of African descent, these islands are yours, because you
and your fathers have toiled and bled for them. Take hold of your eco-
nomic controls.’’ Otherwise, she admonished, the Caribbean might be-
come the ‘‘colonies of China.’’
∞π
Although the Chinese were a minority population and had ﬁrst immi-
grated to Jamaica in 1853 as indentured servants, by the 1940s they were
mostly prosperous entrepreneurs. Their patriotic activities were much
appreciated by the Chinese government, and to Jacques Garvey they
modeled the possibilities for nationalist allegiance. They demonstrated to
scattered Ethiopia how to ‘‘contribute of your means and ability to the
rehabilitation of the land of your forebears, the continent of Africa.’’ Yet
Jacques Garvey also claimed that Chinese in the Caribbean exhibited
colonizers’ oppressive tendencies. What she saw as the presumed eager-
ness of the Chinese to exploit black Jamaicans was due to myths of black


--- PAGE 195 ---
182 literature for a pan-african world
inferiority, which translated into a lack of respect for them. This is why
successful Chinese traders ‘‘who owe all to these islands . . . give all to
China.’’
∞∫
In her concern about relations between the Chinese and the black
diaspora, Jacques Garvey was not alone. In 1948 Layle Silbert explored
mainland Chinese racial prejudice toward black people. For example,
postwar visitors to Shanghai were greeted by ‘‘grinning blackface’’ adver-
tisements of ‘‘Darky’’ toothpaste on billboards along the main streets.
Enterprising Chinese businessmen unapologetically explained that white
teeth against dark skin showed the e√ectiveness of ‘‘Darky’’ toothpaste.
‘‘But as the Chinese customers brightened their teeth they darken[ed]
their minds with the repeated association of Negroes to an odious word’’
and with a picture based on ‘‘a false cult of inferiority.’’
∞Ω Silbert’s discus-
sion on the spread of bigotry against blacks in China during the 1940s
attributed the phenomenon to the same forces as did the Garveys’ compa-
rable study of the late 1920s—Anglo-American foreign inﬂuence. Signs of
racism had appeared in large cities where Western powers had staked out
concessions during the world wars. And as the American government
poured money into Nationalist China, exporting popular cultural media
(books, movies, and magazines) bearing implicit assumptions of black
inferiority, the seeds of race hatred toward blacks germinated. The African
diaspora, thousands of miles away, in Europe and the Americas had no
means to correct these false images.
T ensions surrounding Chinese identity in the Caribbean persisted, so
much so that in 1959, when the ﬁrst ‘‘Miss Jamaica’’ of color, Sheila Chong,
was crowned, a petition surfaced asserting that a Jamaican woman had
never been crowned ‘‘Miss China,’’ so a Chinese woman had no claim
to be ‘‘Miss Jamaica.’’ These questions regarding Caribbean identity—
whether aesthetic, political, or economical—were really about representa-
tion and the lack thereof. As late as 1960, Jacques Garvey still had an
ambivalent relationship to this group, reportedly saying that black men
and women should ‘‘acquire the economic stability that [their] 90% of the
population should have in relation to the 30,000 Chinese here.’’
≤≠ Al-
though she never turned her eyes away from Africa, she a≈rmed that
wherever black people lived—especially in the Caribbean, where they
were the majority—they had to stand up for their entitlements.
Based on her timely articles on diasporic issues—as well as her journal-
istic experience and editorial work—Jacques Garvey was consulted by sev-
eral magazine editors for various purposes. She worked most closely with


--- PAGE 196 ---
literature for a pan-african world 183
the sta√ of The African, soon becoming one of its contributing editors.≤∞
By 1947 she was an associate editor, with David A. Talbot and George S.
Schuyler, a conservative writer and former foe of Marcus Garvey. Because
The African su√ered from lack of ﬁnancial support, Jacques Garvey was
initially consulted on how to increase its revenue. She promptly stated
that although she appreciated her complimentary copy of the periodical,
the sta√ could not a√ord to send many free copies ‘‘as the Magazine must
be made to carry itself.’’ In the same letter, though, she provided a list of
people who did deserve unsolicited copies, including Nnamdi Azikiwe;
George Padmore; Sylvia Pankhurst, editor of the Ethiopian News and New
Times; D. G. Tackie, editor of the Gold Coast Independent; C. V. Jarrett,
editor of the African Standard in Freetown, Sierra Leone; Mons Lescott,
president of Haiti; and secretariats in Washington, D.C., that were a≈li-
ated with the Central and South American republics.
After recommending a list of ‘‘honest’’ people who could serve as
‘‘agents’’ (distributors) and the names of other editors who could be con-
sulted, she provided two contacts at Jamaican bookstores who wanted to
order the magazine. Jacques Garvey’s list served the magazine well, as
agents reported back to her on their progress. Eventually, she collected the
monies that Caribbean magazine agents received from sales. She kept
meticulous records on these funds, which she dispatched in lump sums to
The African o≈ce.
≤≤
As another way to generate revenue, Jacques Garvey suggested that The
African sell postcards of the Garvey family. Five hundred postcards were
printed at a cost of $10.71, paid for by the editor, ‘‘as a token of our appre-
ciation for your [Jacques Garvey’s] kind assistance to the magazine—for
Editorial services and otherwise.’’
≤≥ The postcards were so popular that a
second batch of one thousand was printed, and Jacques Garvey received a
percentage of all the sales.
When The African was reorganized under the editorship of Ridley A.
Lewis, he informed Jacques Garvey that ‘‘we have reached a large number
of persons in the higher intellectual bracket but in my opinion we have
missed the great middle class to whom the magazine is really aimed.’’ It is
unclear if the ‘‘higher intellectual bracket’’ meant the elite, or if Lewis
viewed the middle class as a mediocre-thinking lot, but who could ﬁnance
the journal. Either way, Jacques Garvey was concerned by this statement,
responding that she hoped he would ‘‘not lower the Africans intellectual
standard’’ by changing the format to accommodate the middle class.
≤∂
Most magazines seeking middle-class readers, such as the West Indian


--- PAGE 197 ---
184 literature for a pan-african world
Bulletin or Ebony, highlighted local social events and individualistic mes-
sages regarding wealth and prestige. As a political journalist, Jacques
Garvey had always ridiculed this type of reporting, and since she sought to
inspire the impoverished masses, she resisted any apparent equation of
class with intelligence.
These initial exchanges between The African editors and Jacques Gar-
vey opened a ﬂoodgate of her demands for improvements. In an authori-
tarian tone, she advised the editorial board to ‘‘put two staples to hold the
magazine, one is not enough. T ry to get issues out regularly, as ﬁnances
permit. And do not lessen the high tone and cultural outlook of the
magazine.’’ In terms of content, she proposed her new mandate: that
there be ‘‘three main features of news, apart from the feature articles etc.’’
She identiﬁed speciﬁc revisions, including the need to change ‘‘West
Indian Topics’’ to ‘‘Caribbean News.’’ Concerned that news about Africa
was sadly lacking in other periodicals, she challenged the editors to out-
shine them in this area. This could be done with a news feature called
‘‘The African Horizon,’’ for which every e√ort must be made to get news
from all parts of Africa. A feature on ‘‘The American Front’’ was also
needed because when ‘‘the war is over, Aframericans will be still ﬁghting’’
for their rights. She speciﬁcally identiﬁed the Caribbean islands, Africa,
and the United States because this is where ‘‘our people are in large
numbers.’’
≤∑
Jacques Garvey was metamorphosing from an isolated political woman
into an organizational player. This was not an easy feat, because she was
strongly attached to her own ideas. In this case, not all of her suggestions
were taken up: The African continued to refer to the Caribbean area as
the West Indies, and did not introduce news features on Africa and the
United States. However, the magazine did adopt her suggestion to start a
column for ‘‘pen-pals.’’ Here she was on ﬁrm ground, since it had become
abundantly clear at the Fifth Pan-African Congress that most Africans, at
home and abroad, knew little about the rest of the African world. Acutely
aware of this, and of the fact that many Africans lived in relatively remote
areas where reading materials were not easily accessible, Jacques Garvey
advocated an African pen-pal column to address this problem. This sec-
tion would help Africans to get information and make contacts with
‘‘more progressive elements of our people.’’ Conversely, knowledge of
Africans and their lives would encourage black people in the New World
to strive to uplift their race. Such ‘‘exchange of views, information and
ideas is one of the best means of creating fellowship and love between


--- PAGE 198 ---
literature for a pan-african world 185
Africans at home and abroad.’’≤∏ The editorial sta√ was sold on this idea,
and the pen-pals section became a regular feature of The African.
In addition to her magazine work, Jacques Garvey’s other main project
during the postwar years was reviving the African Study Circle, initially
founded by her husband. Pointing out that contact with others broadens
the outlook and increases the intellect, Jacques Garvey proposed that the
Study Circle was another way to move beyond the colonial propaganda
that kept peoples of African descent divided and ignorant of each others’
accomplishments. As she put it, ‘‘Knowledge dispels the Ignorant fumes
that becloud Reason.’’ The immediate purpose of the Study Circle was to
develop interest in African history and to counter the ‘‘misinformation,
much distorted information in respect to the historical background of
black people of the world.’’
≤π
This agenda of Jacques Garvey’s—uncovering ‘‘one’s true self ’’ and
‘‘pinpointing . . . one’s centre’’—has subsequently become a central orga-
nizing principle in contemporary Afrocentric scholarship.
≤∫ Critics of this
discourse point out that slavery and colonialism—phenomenal periods of
victimization and exploitation—are in some part erased from a neatly
packaged, ancient heroic African narrative. Jacques Garvey’s reconstruc-
tion of the African landscape, however, included texts on slavery and
colonialism, because she did not interpret these tragic moments as nega-
tive reﬂections on the identity of peoples of African descent, but as expres-
sions and outgrowths of an unjust capitalist, political, and racial power.
By studying the history of both Africans and New World diasporians, she
wanted to show a common racial origin and history that would inspire
common understanding and mutual progress.
Although Jacques Garvey indicates that the long-term goal of the Study
Circle was to promote participants’ pride in the achievements of their race
and to expand their honorable legacy, she was also clearly motivated by
heuristic ideas. High levels of illiteracy engulfed the black world, and
helping others to learn would give rise to literate communities. As an
intellectual who never underestimated the potency of dialogue as well as
the transforming power of literature, Jacques Garvey continued her tradi-
tion of educating the mind and soul for action.
Her ﬁrst step in this e√ort was to write a circular letter for the Study
Circle; she then expended considerable energy trying to get it printed. Yet
her very commitment to the ‘‘principles and ideas that Marcus Garvey
enunciated, fought, struggled and died for’’ had produced restrictions


--- PAGE 199 ---
186 literature for a pan-african world
against her that were so tight, she was not even permitted to print the
circular letter in Jamaica. She explained this with, ‘‘war, of course is an
excuse for every handicap.’’ As usual, she turned to the New York Garvey
Club for assistance, as there was ‘‘no other group that [she could] depend
on like [them].’’ Explicitly detailing how she wanted the four typed pages
prepared, she asked that ﬁve thousand copies be printed and sent to her as
follows: ‘‘see that in each package, you put all the pages to make up a letter,
whether it is numbered 1,2,3 and 4 pages, all must be in the one package,’’
and then ‘‘mail two of the packages every week to ensure delivery.’’ The
Garvey Club was to keep two hundred letters and wait for further instruc-
tions on how to have them ‘‘distributed among member’s relatives in
other cities, or the Caribbean.’’
≤Ω
Once the letters were printed, Jacques Garvey apparently contacted
unia divisions directly, but there is no surviving correspondence seeking
input or approval from any member at the national headquarters. She
instructed individual chapters to organize their members ‘‘to educate our
people about their history, and teach them to take the right pride in their
race.’’
≥≠
In her attempt to realize her vision of a Study Circle, Jacques Garvey
was building on an established history of literary societies. Internation-
ally, groups were formed and collaborative e√orts were devised, beginning
in the nineteenth century, to concentrate individual interests in common
purposes of study. On the whole, these activities were educational, pro-
viding a forum for intimate intellectual dialogue and literary investiga-
tion, as well as possible channels for publication. Political and social
concerns sometimes crept into these conversations, moving the partici-
pants to address these issues.
≥∞ The Study Circle should be placed within
this philological tradition. Its format was both formal (Jacques Garvey
advised participants to elect a chairman, secretary, and treasurer) and
intimate (meetings took place in private homes, churches, or clubs). She
envisioned that small units of black people worldwide would gather to
study books by and about black people. Dramatizations, plays, and other
means of expression would also be used to ‘‘develop social interest in
things African.’’
≥≤ Essentially, Jacques Garvey’s Study Circle combined
creative performance and critical debate in the pursuit of knowledge.
Although her 1940s articles had become less gender-oriented than her
earlier writings and community feminism as a mobilizing concept had
vanished, this would seem to be largely because she no longer had Marcus
Garvey to produce an analysis of the overall Pan-African program. Thus


--- PAGE 200 ---
literature for a pan-african world 187
she herself took charge, which left her little room to do anything else.
When it came to the Study Circle, however, she once again overtly tar-
geted women. She told B. Gibbons to ‘‘get an intelligent group of women
to start Circles in their homes, so that during the winter seasons, [they]
could do real study work and cultural work.’’
≥≥
Bringing together like-minded women for literary fellowship was not
a new phenomenon. In fact, Jacques Garvey’s suggestion to organize gen-
derized units was fully in step with the history of Western literary socie-
ties. Since men and women were presumed to be di√erent, masculine and
feminine literature maintained their di√erences. Western white women
were located in a domesticated arena, where ‘‘academic’’ education—
studies in the classics, history, mathematics, and the physical sciences—
was ‘‘most visibly absent.’’ Genderized literature of the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries had helped to maintain socially constructed
roles, and separating men and women into the public and private spheres,
respectively, was the subtext of related discourse.
≥∂ But on the cusp of the
1940s, women were reading more diverse forms of literature, and Jacques
Garvey wanted to capitalize on this trend by providing controversial,
stimulating studies to ignite them into action for racial upliftment. Fur-
ther, during this personally and politically transformative moment, the
Study Circle showed how community feminist ideas remained funda-
mental to Jacques Garvey’s way of thinking (even though they were no
longer overtly promoted in her writing, she remained convinced that
literate women developed literate families for a progressive black nation).
Cross-culturally, literate women should come together in circles as
‘‘sisters’’ to talk over texts for self-improvement and community uplift.
Anne Knupfer’s analysis of African American women’s literary clubs at the
turn of the century holds true for the 1940s in that, in addition to litera-
ture, most ‘‘clubs included the study of philanthropy, home, education,
art and music.’’ Jacques Garvey recognized that such clubs’ leisure reading
and other activities were forms of ‘‘classical’’ high culture. Knupfer’s dis-
cussions clarify how, given the racialized history of the United States and
the Caribbean, it is not surprising that ‘‘classical’’—as opposed to ‘‘folk’’—
studies were color and class-coded. Privileged women participated in
these clubs and generally excluded others, largely based on color, class,
or other subjective ‘‘deﬁciencies.’’
≥∑ Jacques Garvey attempted to break
such boundaries between women by creating reading groups in which all
women could participate. In doing so, she attacked the notion that read-
ing was a leisurely activity of the well-to-do, usually elite whites. She also


--- PAGE 201 ---
188 literature for a pan-african world
challenged the foundational structure that kept literature and a certain
form of language—which Carolyn Cooper terms a ‘‘primal facilitator’’ in
the ‘‘process of self-deﬁnition and articulation—away from the masses.’’
≥∏
To guarantee that participants read the proper texts, Jacques Garvey
told them to contact responsible authorities on African history through
the Garvey Club of New York or Dr. L. D. Reddick, curator of the
Schomburg Collection of the New York Public Library. She also provided
a book list including but not limited to Selwyn Jones, South of the Congo
(1943); Negley Farson, Behind God’s Back (1941); J. A. Rogers, Sex and
Race: Negro-Caucasion Mixing in All Ages and All Lands (1941, 1967) and
One Hundred Amazing Facts about the Negro (1957); Melville Herskowitz,
The Myth of the Negro Past (1941); W. E. B. Du Bois, Black Folk: Then and
Now (1939); Donald Pierson, Negroes in Brazil: A Study of Race Contact a
Bahia (1942); Xavier Herbert, Capricornia: A Novel (1943); Paul Laurence
Dunbar, The Complete Poems  (1913); Denis Saurat, Watch Over Africa
(1941); and Nnamdi Azikiwe, Renascent Africa (1968).
≥π In compiling this
list, Jacques Garvey pulled together cutting-edge scholarship by black and
white writers, documenting a range of experiences—European, African,
and African diaspora—and past achievements.
Most of the texts she selected have become literary classics, but some
presented grossly inaccurate information and were saturated with racist
language. For example, Pierson’s Negroes in Brazil argued that humane
and intimate relations were the general rule during slavery and that bar-
baric and extreme cruelty were relatively rare. Negley Farson, based on his
travels throughout Africa, opined in Behind God’s Back that Africans had
the ‘‘best chance of progress’’ under the English and unabashedly re-
marked that the laws of the Belgian Congo were ‘‘too lenient to be re-
garded as real punishment by the native,’’ because ‘‘the native needs a
good beating.’’
≥∫ The fact that Jacques Garvey recommended these texts
and others that include bigoted and false conclusions suggests that she
wanted to instigate lively debates about not only African splendor, but
also slavery, colonialism, and future possibilities for the race, as opposed
to having participants memorize a static narrative of ancient African ad-
vancements and achievements. In other words, she had by no means
slipped into a revisionist mode, wherein readers obsessed with origin and
myth may disregard any narrative presumed to represent an antithesis to
the ‘‘glory’’ of African civilization.
≥Ω
Since many books from her reading list were published on the eve of
and during World War II, they also helped to deepen Study Circle partici-


--- PAGE 202 ---
literature for a pan-african world 189
pants’ understanding of why the world was falling apart. For instance,
J. A. Rogers’s work determined that the drive to create a ‘‘pure’’ and
‘‘superior’’ race with the ‘‘right to enslave and use the rest of humanity’’
was created from ‘‘scraps of false philosophies of past centuries; a quota-
tion from this or that prejudiced traveller; lines from this and that semi-
ignorant divine of colonial days,’’ passages from the Bible or from some
‘‘badly mixed-up ethnologist, all jumbled together with catch-phrases
from greedy plantation owners, slave-dealer and other tra≈ckers in hu-
man ﬂesh.’’ This combination had brought to life a ‘‘monster . . . to ravage
and slaughter: His name: Adolf Hitler. His purpose: World Domination.’’
To replace the conglomerate of myths about African people with veri-
ﬁable facts about their contributions to humankind became one intel-
lectual purpose of Study Circle groups. Jacques Garvey encouraged them
to publish small pamphlets on the ‘‘Black man’s contributions in all
parts of the world’’ to help deﬂect criticism about their potential for self-
government.
∂≠ Overall, her reading guide included sophisticated and
meticulous—while at times, racist—scholarship in her e√ort to draw to-
gether a disparate population. Her idea was that the uniﬁcation of African
peoples for the decolonization of Africa was the ultimate way to bring the
order of self-rule out of the chaos of World War II.
Establishing reading circles was an ingenious way to cultivate liter-
ate communities. But it was also a daunting task to implement on an
international scale, because wherever black people lived, formal, orga-
nized schools were few in number. In Africa, colonial education had
mostly generated ‘‘native elites’’ through selective recruitment of students.
French West Africans were usually admitted to the best schools after they
had signed a pledge to serve for several years in the colonial adminis-
tration—where they would be given separate jobs and unequal pay. Peggy
Sabatier documents that in 1940, only about 0.5 percent of the children of
the general Francophone West African population were enrolled in pri-
mary school, and 0.01 percent of the total population had attended sec-
ondary schools.
∂∞
Africans often attempted to satisfy their desire for education and in-
formation through newspapers. The unparalleled growth of African-
controlled newspapers in Kenya between 1945 and 1952 partly fulﬁlled this
need for political news and reading material from an African source,
considered ‘‘more attractive than information controlled by Europeans
and government.’’ Nnamdi Azikiwe alone owned four newspapers in
West Africa. One Study Circle from Guachapali reported that its mem-


--- PAGE 203 ---
190 literature for a pan-african world
bers read ‘‘both local and foreign newspapers and from correspondence,’’
especially since it was di≈cult to obtain several copies of the same book
after World War II.
∂≤
It was not long before the British colonial administration connected
the spread of scholarly knowledge to decolonization movements. And
because it was inconceivable to the colonial mind that Africans would
struggle for self-determination on their own, the administration believed
that the growth of Zikist nationalism in Nigeria and Kwame Nkrumah’s
appointment as general secretary of the United Gold Coast Convention
in 1948 were the result of Cold War communist inﬁltration into Africa.
Determined to resist what they perceived as the spread of communism,
the British began their particular Cold War witch-hunt by suspecting the
extramural lecturers and the Oxford University Delegacy of Extramural
Studies to Ghana and Nigeria. Most tutors of nonvocational adult educa-
tion wanted to sustain British power in West Africa, but a few agents in
the delegacy refused to become another propaganda outlet for colonial
aggression. Their progressive, ‘‘left-wing’’ politics were identiﬁed as sub-
versive by colonial administrators determined to stop this succor to politi-
cal independence. O≈cials would curtail the already minimal access to
adult education and possibly disrupt Study Circles because they ﬁlled an
educational need.
In the United States, illiteracy among African Americans was wide-
spread, aided by the parlous state of public schooling. Similar to the
whole of Africa, good schooling in the South, where the majority of
African Americans still lived, remained a privilege, not a constitutional
right. The teacher-to-student ratio substantiates this. In 1945 in Mis-
sissippi, for six months out of the year only three black teachers taught 190
children in all subjects in grades ﬁve through eight. In 1944–45 southern
states spent about $40.00 annually per white pupil but only $10.00 to
educate a black child. Underfunded districts, underpaid teachers, a short-
age of classroom space, and ‘‘a kind of curricular and programmatic bank-
ruptcy steeped in intellectual confusion about what was needed in the
postwar era summed up the state of public education between 1946 and
1960.’’ These conditions produced a southern populace with almost a
million people over the age of twenty-ﬁve who had not ﬁnished a single
year of school.
∂≥
Closer to home, Jacques Garvey’s Study Circle can also be understood
as a response to contemporary debates surrounding secondary education
in Jamaica, where educational reform began after the 1938 labor rebellion.


--- PAGE 204 ---
literature for a pan-african world 191
In the 1940s the Kandel Commission of Enquiry into Secondary Educa-
tion proposed two systems. The ﬁrst maintained the elitist tradition of
secondary education for a wealthy few. The second proposal was an at-
tempt to liberalize and expand secondary education for the ‘‘lower middle
and subordinated classes’’ by establishing a Common Entrance Examina-
tion for secondary schools. In theory, this test would ‘‘guarantee equal
access for every child.’’ Heated debates, however, stopped the imple-
mentation of the second proposal, which threatened to unlock the upper
and middle classes’ hegemony over secondary schooling.
∂∂ By advocating
reading groups, Jacques Garvey positioned herself politically outside the
Jamaican bourgeoisie. She was acutely aware that there were few avenues
for exposing working-class children to nonvocational literature, and this
concern fueled her argument that forming Study Circles would be most
beneﬁcial to the young. She explained the ‘‘great amount of good that it
will do to educate our people, especially the younger ones, to the truth of
Race, and so enable them to be inspired to live up to the past achieve-
ments of our people, it will give them a goal, it will give them Hope, it will
give them Faith in the possibilities of our Race.’’
∂∑ Thus the Study Circle
was not just to enrich or broaden the intellectual identity of adults, but to
awaken or catalyze an informed, positive identity in children as well.
The principal forum for exposure to the Study Circle were full-page
advertisements placed in The African. Even though Jacques Garvey was
aware that the magazine needed paid endorsements, and she remained
concerned that the editors did not accept ‘‘cheap advertisements’’ to
‘‘maintain its dignity,’’ she nevertheless wanted free space. She justiﬁed
her request by arguing that her name, as a contributor, would ‘‘cause
many of our members to take this magazine.’’ She was further convinced
that the publication would thereby ‘‘have the advantage of drawing from
the Circle an intelligent following that will be easier to lead, and more
willing to support the magazine.’’
∂∏ Jacques Garvey believed that better-
prepared readers would be better positioned to appreciate the logic of
Pan-Africanism and anti-imperialist struggles. These arguments, com-
bined with the fact that she did not receive payment for her articles,
swayed the editors to let her swap free advertisement for her services.
The few surviving records of the Study Circles indicate that, although
they did function, some groups needed more guidance than others. This
is not surprising since Jacques Garvey provided only a basic structure and
reading lists, as opposed to speciﬁc logistical suggestions such as how
often they should meet or how discussions should proceed. For example,


--- PAGE 205 ---
192 literature for a pan-african world
Irene Ford of Cleveland, Ohio, the home of the unia national headquar-
ters, wrote, ‘‘we want to hear more a bout the Circle so we can go forward
in the work of it.’’ Ford concluded: ‘‘We get ready to get the books and
litture we can get. So we can get rite down to study them. So we want to
hear from you as soon as you can.’’ But other circles did not rely on
Jacques Garvey, taking it upon themselves to create and implement their
own activities. For instance, Daiziel Fuller, assistant secretary of the Afri-
can Study Circle, auxiliary of the Guachapali Division, reported how her
group sponsored an ‘‘all isthmus competition on Negro History among
the youth of our race.’’ Enclosed with the letter was a copy of the questions
that they hoped met with Jacques Garvey’s approval.
∂π
Jacques Garvey’s vision was that as micro-units of a grand, African-
centered whole, Study Circle members would share in the responsibility of
creating collaborative learning communities. It was her hope that the
Study Circle would thus help to generate an antiracist, anti-imperialist,
African-identiﬁed constituency. Although she recognized that New
World diasporians could not, as Stuart Hall puts it, ‘‘travel back through
the eye of the needle,’’ Jacques Garvey did believe that a reconnection to
an imagined African community was possible, indeed, desperately needed
for the decolonization movement.
∂∫ She also wanted Africans to be ex-
posed to, and learn from, the multiple experiences of the Pan-African
world. In this sense she continued to carry out Garvey’s program, which
linked education and the absorption of certain developments of Western
civilization to the rise of Africa, an Africa entitling all of its members across
class and gender divides.
Essentially, the Study Circle was another way for Jacques Garvey to merge
all of the ethnic and cultural di√erences of the African world—as well
as seal the profound rupture that diasporian Africans had su√ered—into
a uniﬁed nation, ready to mount an attack on the political forces that
kept them separate, divided, and weak. This dialectical ﬂow and ex-
change, Paul Gilroy explains, resulted partly ‘‘from the a≈liation of dias-
pora cultures to Africa and the traces of Africa that those diaspora cultures
enclose.’’
∂Ω
But pulling together this eclectic black world required more than
learning the ‘‘language of freedom’’ at its most fundamental level. Collab-
oration and exchange would require key players to be multilingual, and
this was the major problem with the Study Circle reading lists. All of
Jacques Garvey’s selected literature was in English; thus, the targeted


--- PAGE 206 ---
literature for a pan-african world 193
Africans, as well as African diasporians, were limited to those who had
been colonized by British-Anglo forces. In all fairness to Jacques Garvey,
she was not ﬂuent in other languages, and she tried to remedy this linguis-
tic problem by also identifying Puerto Rican Arthur Schomburg’s massive
multilingual, international history collection for the reference of Study
Circle participants. But in general, all other languages were marginalized,
and English was clearly dominant.
During this period of the 1940s, in addition to investing a considerable
amount of time and energy in creating an intellectual Pan-African reader-
ship and community, Jacques Garvey also began to assume a more active
role in Jamaican politics. As the next chapter explores, over the next
several decades she became a constant presence at political meetings on
the new Jamaican government. Her activism in Jamaican politics o√ers
yet another window on her intellectual and political world.


--- PAGE 207 ---
11 Activism Closer to Home
A
quintessential criticism—both current and historical—
of professional public intellectuals is that they are not
grounded in the speciﬁc, lived realities and communities
of the people they pledge to serve. W. E. B. Du Bois, for
example, was reserved in manner, which he unapologet-
ically characterized as withdrawing ‘‘sometimes ostentatiously from the
personal nexus.’’ To put it baldly, he rarely spoke to his New York neigh-
bors; he even admitted that his ‘‘leadership was a leadership solely of
ideas.’’ His attitude was characteristic of other black intellectuals who
frequently made disparaging comparisons between themselves and the
masses. Such self-imposed alienation ensured these theorists marginal
status in their black communities.
∞ But marginality was not (nor is) the
common fate for all black thinkers. Jacques Garvey’s political activity—
both in her local neighborhood and in the larger Jamaican community—
demonstrates that her Pan-African vision was not besmirched by such
arrogance and elitism. Moreover, the main obstacle to her involvement in
both Jamaican politics and in the Pan-African struggles (with the e√orts
of other black nationalists, Pan-Africanists, and leftists) was ﬁnally the
onslaught of a larger international event, the Cold War.
After her husband’s death in 1940, Jacques Garvey and her children
settled into her mother’s charming bungalow on the outskirts of Kings-
ton, on the same land where she and her siblings had been born and
raised. Although many years had passed since she and her father had
kept stray cattle away from their property, Jamaican society in 1943 was
still split along complicated racial and ethnic lines. Distinct groups con-
tinued to characterize the population: blacks (78.1 percent), ‘‘browns’’
(17.5 percent), East Indians (2.1 percent), whites (1.1 percent), and Chi-
nese (1.0 percent). Generally, Jacques Garvey continued to be classiﬁed
among the culturally and biologically diverse ‘‘brown’’ population, and


--- PAGE 208 ---
activism closer to home 195
she lived in a ‘‘brown’’ community. Finally, her family’s rental property
not only continued to be her chief source of income, but also led others to
perceive her as comfortably middle-classed.
≤ Despite this appearance,
Jacques Garvey’s lifestyle was not pretentious, and she was just as con-
cerned about the rudiments of daily living as those Kingston residents
who were conﬁned within the city’s pens of poverty.
Unemployment, underpayment, and lack of access to the means of
production had generated striking economic di√erences in Jamaican so-
ciety. A redistribution of wealth and institutional resources—particularly
higher education—were profoundly needed to balance this divide. More-
over, at this time employers seldom displayed regard for the care of their
workers. For example, both peasant farmers who worked on estates and
urban workers received little or no ﬁnancial compensation after an injury.
More hazardous even than the workplace were Kingston’s roads. The
majority had been carved out of mountainsides, and continual masonry
was needed to buttress dangerous points. When it rained there were never
enough workers to keep the roads safe, and avalanches were frequent.
Poorly kept roads were a reﬂection of larger municipal problems; Kings-
ton was then undergoing a transition from using both tramcars and mo-
tor buses to using buses exclusively. Motor buses were cheaper than trains
to maintain, required no steel tracks, provided curb service, and o√ered
easier expansion of routes.
≥ But with the convenience and reliability of
buses came heavier wear on the roads, especially in the suburbs, and
maintenance was increasingly inadequate.
The roads leading to Jacques Garvey’s property were no exception;
since her children left home for school daily, and she traveled at least three
times a week by bus to attend political meetings, she was especially con-
cerned.
∂ After a man was killed by a trucker rounding one of the curves,
she led a campaign to have dangerous areas of the street repaired. Mount-
ing a one-woman challenge to a system that had minimal consideration
for the well-being and personal safety of black people, she wrote to the
director of the Public Works Department on behalf of twenty-one resi-
dents, who also signed her complaint: ‘‘for the safety of the traveling
Public, we respectfully ask that you survey the area.’’
∑
Although most of her writings addressed international activities,
Jacques Garvey never distanced herself even from neighborhood struggles
in Jamaica. But with characteristic energy, her main political e√orts were
expended in the broader local arena by visibly supporting the People’s
National Party (pnp). The pnp had been formed in 1938 after middle-class


--- PAGE 209 ---
196 activism closer to home
Jamaicans—teachers, professionals, and civil servants—became politically
mobilized by the successful working-class rebellion of 1938. Essentially the
pnp was a nationalist vehicle to expand local political leadership with the
goal of universal adult su√rage and independence from imperial policy.
Norman Manley, a ‘‘light-brown’’ member of the Queen’s Counsel and a
lawyer, led this charge of the intelligentsia. By 1944 Manley had called
for the state to intervene and control ‘‘public works . . . investment of
money . . . and the national economy to the extent of securing work for
everybody.’’
∏ The pnp’s mild form of socialism also criticized the large
capitalist estates that cut o√ the peasant farmers’ access to the means of
production. Overall, the pnp argued that freedom from the Crown would
stimulate economic and social reforms.
Given that the core of the pnp platform was political independence
from Britain, during the November 1944 campaign Jacques Garvey
‘‘routed’’ for the party. This meant that she spoke to and covered two to
three group meetings each night. Her observations were chronicled, but
the Daily Gleaner refused to print them. Accustomed to its censorship,
Jacques Garvey understood all too well how the paper’s ‘‘policy of reason-
able excuse[s] for not publishing views from [her] pen’’ kept the public
uninformed about competing ideas.
π
Opposing the pnp was the Jamaican Labor Party (jlp), under the dic-
tatorship of Alexander Bustamante, Manley’s cousin. The jlp had been
launched in 1943 as the political arm of Bustamante’s Industrial T rade
Union (bitu), founded during the 1938 strike. Bustamante had posi-
tioned himself as a leader in the rebellion, since workers had responded to
his charisma and populist rhetoric. He had organized the jlp to narrowly
address bread-and-butter issues, o√ering an immediate better life to Ja-
maican workers and denouncing the pnp as a party diluted by middle-
class intellectuals and Marxists. If that charge were not enough to taint the
character of the pnp as unresponsive to the masses, ‘‘Busta’’ proclaimed
that its objective of self-government would mean ‘‘brown man rule,’’ an
idea that was extremely unpopular among the predominately black mem-
bers of the bitu.
∫ With the approaching December 1944 election, the ﬁrst
to include universal adult su√rage (property and income qualiﬁcations
had been eliminated) and a popularly elected House of Representatives
inaugurating a limited form of self-government, the pnp and jlp fought a
highly contested and, at times, malicious campaign.
Ω
Jacques Garvey wrote, ‘‘Abuse and violence seem to be the program of
Bustamante.’’ Such criticism had to surprise many, since jlp candidates


--- PAGE 210 ---
activism closer to home 197
often compared Bustamante to Marcus Garvey. Bustamante’s spellbind-
ing oratory, self-conﬁdence, and courage were in the tradition of Garvey,
who was still an inspiring political ﬁgure for the black masses. In fact,
attempts to ‘‘destroy’’ Bustamante were compared to the elitist attacks
that had been leveled against Garvey. Bustamante was a warrior to many
working-class people who had faith in him and celebrated his willingness
to take to the streets and march. ‘‘Busta’’ proclaimed that he was the voice
of workers, and in turn they chanted, ‘‘We will follow Bustamante until
we die!’’
∞≠
But as an independent thinker Jacques Garvey could not be drawn in
by emotional rhetoric or co-opted by popular will. She looked beyond
Bustamante’s charm to analyze the core of the jlp platform. jlp candidates
recited the desires and needs of laborers—higher wages and improved
working conditions—but they opposed state intervention in the econ-
omy. Bustamante did not rally around occupational, safety, and health
measures in addition to an acceptable minimum wage. The ruling elite
was also attracted to Busta’s conservative capitalist solutions for the ﬂedg-
ling economy, remedies that failed to address larger political objectives
necessary for self-government. Thus the conservative Daily Gleaner’s bias
in favor of Bustamante explains its refusal to print Jacques Garvey’s criti-
cism of him.
Ironically, as Rex Nettleford notes, pnp leader Norman Manley viewed
the bitu and pnp as ‘‘two sides of the same coin.’’ In fact, Manley ad-
mitted that it was di≈cult for him to accept some of Jacques Garvey’s
ideas.
∞∞ Manley held democratic views, but his assumptions about self-
government were largely based in the British parliamentary tradition, and
Jacques Garvey questioned European paradigms as a means to achieve
self-determination. Moreover, Manley precariously argued that the labor-
ing classes measured independence by their relationship to the Crown,
but as a practical intellectual, Jacques Garvey understood that workers
linked their independence to the ability to directly bargain for their liveli-
hood. This might be the reason why the Jamaican voting masses, who
were politically articulate, repeatedly challenged pnp candidates to ex-
plain what socialism meant for them.
∞≤
Indeed, Manley had trouble connecting with black peasants, small
tradesmen, and landless laborers, who perceived him as aloof. Observers
point out that his di≈culties were also due to the pnp’s unwillingness to
openly link color with poverty. Ken Post observes that the party’s na-
tionalism was based more on a concept of shared Jamaican history and


--- PAGE 211 ---
198 activism closer to home
culture than on racial unity; thus pnp Marxists resisted using race as a
rallying mechanism.∞≥ Jacques Garvey contested many of Manley’s posi-
tions but this one most adamantly. For years she had emphasized that
racial unity was essential to confront European imperialism directly. Al-
though African peoples were divided culturally, linguistically, and geo-
graphically, they were ‘‘united by nature.’’ For Jacques Garvey, national-
ism in Jamaica was not just a nation-state struggle, but a part of other
liberation movements resounding throughout Africa and the diaspora.
She always reasoned that the best way to politicize the masses for a power-
ful independence movement was through a call for racial unity, rather
than for building electoral machines. A racialist agenda, she argued, was
imperative to address color stratiﬁcation and move across class di√erences
to produce an impenetrable political bloc. But her ideas were not easily
assimilated, as Carl Stone poignantly notes: party a≈liation, not race
or class, was the organizing mechanism for political consciousness in
Jamaica during this period.
∞∂
These philosophical di√erences between Manley and thinkers like
Jacques Garvey created an untidy pnp political base. It also positioned
Jacques Garvey as a person loathed by some but needed within the party
ranks. Since close to 80 percent of the Jamaican population was black, its
vote had to be courted for the pnp’s survival—and who better to do
it than an intellectual who could connect with them on the basis of
black identity and whose sincerity was unquestioned. This was important
because a news story in the Daily Gleaner had charged Manley and the
pnp with ‘‘insincerity to their promises to the laboring classes of Jamaica
[and] insincerity in their promises of a Utopia through their method of
Government.’’
∞∑
The Daily Gleaner’s editors and other critics of the pnp forced Jacques
Garvey and other progressive pnp activists to maximize neighborhood
cluster meetings to attract supporters for canvassing purposes and to
ensure a large voter turnout on election day. pnp activist Daphne Camp-
bell explained that when her group met, political matters were discussed
and attempts at community advancement were made by ‘‘the training of
people in di√erent aspects.’’ Campbell also recalled that more women
were attracted to the cluster groups because ‘‘women were anxious to ﬁnd
a way out.’’ Since they were at ‘‘the base of the ladder,’’ they wanted ‘‘to
ﬁnd somewhere, they need[ed] to ﬁnd somewhere to align themselves, to
associate and ﬁnd a better life, because in these groups there [were] a lot of
little opportunities . . . like ﬁnding jobs and that kind of thing.’’
∞∏


--- PAGE 212 ---
activism closer to home 199
Women like Jacques Garvey and Campbell were not merely rallying
around a nationalist male leadership, they believed that the pnp could
enhance the well-being of all Jamaicans, regardless of class and color.
Speciﬁcally, Jacques Garvey argued that the pnp had ‘‘to ﬁght ignorance,
which is being used by selﬁsh interests to destroy our future, through
ignorant, or self-seeking men.’’ She wanted to ‘‘see that vested interest[s]
do not put their puppets into the New House of Representatives, nor
can we allow ignoramuses under the guise of Labor, to misrepresent us
there.’’
∞π In many ways, Jacques Garvey protected the pnp from alienating
the working class while she performed as a ‘‘vote-catcher,’’ keeping the
‘‘brown’’ intermediate class in a dominant position.
Yet she was not a pnp puppet; she was not oblivious to her role, and
she used it to show pnp leaders how racial issues were connected to the
class divide. Clearly, her political agency was dialectical, as can best be
understood from Aggrey Brown’s analysis of the pnp and jlp. ‘‘The big-
gest irony,’’ Brown notes, was that ‘‘only a handful of intellectuals ques-
tion[ed] the covert and overt manipulation of the Jamaican population by
the country’s political cum labor leaders, only to have those very tech-
niques used against them in justiﬁcation of their ostracism by those lead-
ers.’’ In the end, Bustamante prevailed: the jlp won 41.4 percent of the
votes, the pnp 23 percent. T wenty-two House of Representative seats went
to the jlp and ﬁve to the pnp.
∞∫
In pointing out the pnp’s failure to deal with the racial-class nexus,
Jacques Garvey tapped into the underlying shortcoming of this middle-
class movement—a deﬁciency that continues to resonate in the Pan-
African world. As Cornel West put it, middle-class activists are generally
‘‘concerned with racism to the degree that it poses constraints on upward
social mobility.’’
∞Ω Thus, as the hue of the urban political tier darkened,
the middle-class activist movement did not guarantee that the issues that
kept the majority of black Jamaicans on the periphery would be su≈-
ciently addressed.
Her highly charged local and international activities began to take a
toll on Jacques Garvey’s health. A spectrum of illnesses ravished her body
in the 1940s: T eeth were extracted, her eyesight was failing, and earaches,
throat troubles, rheumatism in her wrists, and full-blown inﬂuenza over-
whelmed her. It seemed that she endured one crisis after another. For
instance, soon after Jacques Garvey was bitten by a dog, her leg became
arthritic. Her unstable ﬁnancial situation required that she attend to her
ailments ‘‘according to [her] means,’’ and she often paid her medical fees


--- PAGE 213 ---
200 activism closer to home
in installments. Sharing her hardships with Nnamdi Azikiwe, she wrote
that she was ‘‘weakened in body, but strong in mind.’’ Over the years,
Jacques Garvey’s mental strength had often compensated for her physical
problems, but she recognized the need for a long vacation to rest and
rejuvenate her body. She hoped, once the war ended, to be permitted to
spend a summer in the United States and Canada with her sons.
≤≠
But a vacation o√ the island was costly, and although her family was
well-o√, extra money had to be saved for her boys’ schooling. Living on a
tight budget was nothing new, yet Jacques Garvey admitted that her
family lived ‘‘very humbly since [Garvey’s] death, in my Mother’s home,
and I work too. But I never anticipated that I would have it so hard after
his death.’’
≤∞ She does not elaborate on what type of work she did, but
evidently it did not greatly enhance her purse. Moreover, the monthly
stipend of $50 to $100 promised her by the parent body of the Universal
Negro Improvement Association (unia) never materialized.
After James Stewart was elected acting president-general of the unia in
1940, he had sent a circular letter asking that the association’s divisions ‘‘by
special collection and contribution, raise a substantial amount and for-
ward [it] to the Parent Body’’ so that each month money could be sent to
Jacques Garvey and her children. Although Stewart stated ‘‘with regret
[that] . . . so few divisions . . . reported as they should in this direction,’’
members did not believe him; neither did Jacques Garvey. She received
many letters from Garveyites complaining about Stewart and the fact that
they had sent money, once a week in some cases, speciﬁcally for her family.
One member wrote, ‘‘I am worried—very much re[garding] the admin-
istration of the unia presently[,] for we have the most selﬁsh-arrogant and
highminded president the unia has ever had.’’
≤≤ Stewart’s response to
criticism substantiates much of the gossip. When one member clariﬁed
that he was in fact only ‘‘Acting’’ president-general, Stewart responded
that ‘‘subordinate o≈cers’’ had made an ‘‘error’’ when they had ordered
unia letterhead referring to his position as acting. ‘‘Acting,’’ he said, im-
plied that the position was temporary and that the permanent person
would return. ‘‘I am sure that you can readily agree that the person in
whose stead I am delegated to act will not return to us. Hence my author-
ity is absolute as President.’’ Stewart also had problems with Executive
Council members. Minutes from council meetings reveal confusion, ac-
cusations, and dissension within the ranks.
≤≥
Committed Garveyites were worried about the welfare of Jacques Gar-
vey and her children and held Stewart accountable for the crisis, demand-


--- PAGE 214 ---
activism closer to home 201
ing a plain explanation. In a ﬂagrant, and slightly facetious show of con-
cern, Stewart ran a full-page photograph of Marcus Jr. and Julius Winston
in the New Negro World, the unia monthly magazine, posing the ques-
tion, ‘‘Have You Forgotten Them?’’ This 1942 piece gave no information
on the status of the boys; worse, the picture was taken when they were
around the ages of ﬁve and eight when they were already nine and twelve.
Stewart deliberately distanced himself from Jacques Garvey. To members
who threatened to withhold support from the parent body until this
matter (and others regarding unia ﬁnances) was resolved, he haughtily
remarked, ‘‘Mrs. Garvey is not quite in the position to inform you . . .
[about] irregularities.’’ All information should be obtained from him, he
insisted, as ‘‘others are apt to become confused in mind by inquiry of
something for which they lack facts at their disposal.’’
≤∂ It was this kind of
arrogance and deceitful behavior that caused many Garveyites to reject
Stewart as a leader and label him a fraud.
Loyal members who dismissed Stewart’s directives communicated di-
rectly with Jacques Garvey and did everything in their power to assist her.
They would send her small sums of money, and during the Christmas
holiday, she could count on larger donations of twenty-ﬁve to thirty
dollars from a variety of divisions. She was always extremely gracious and
thankful, explaining that the money would be spent on household goods,
books, and so forth. The New York Garvey Club was particularly atten-
tive to her needs; during the summer of 1946 they raised enough money to
pay for her and her sons’ vacation in the United States and Canada. Her
visit to New York was timed to correspond with the Eighth International
Convention of African Peoples of the World, sponsored by the club.
As Jacques Garvey prepared for the trip, Jamaica was in disarray. Busta-
mante was on trial for manslaughter as a result of a riot waged by union
members, and sanitation workers had just gone on strike, leaving garbage
piled high in the city streets. It was surely a relief for Jacques Garvey and
her sons to be able to leave the turmoil and arrive by plane in Miami on
July 11 and in New York two days later.
≤∑
Jacques Garvey had already told Garvey Club members that she wanted
to stay in an inexpensive place, ‘‘as I do not want a show, we need every
penny to buy things we need and to get recreation we longed for.’’ But her
primary concern was her children’s safety, and because of her hostile
interaction with Stewart, she identiﬁed him as a source of trouble. ‘‘I trust
Stewart & his gang will not try to hurt my children,’’ she wrote. Stewart
was an alleged thief and of questionable character, but to accuse him


--- PAGE 215 ---
202 activism closer to home
of possibly harming her children was extravagant, unless Jacques Garvey
was aware of threats not evident in the historical record. As a protective
mother, she tried to anticipate problems that could arise during their visit.
She speciﬁcally requested that they reside in a private location so ‘‘that
the public should not know where we stay, so that the boys can go back
and forth to take shows, museums, Libraries etc., without dread of be-
ing hurt.’’
≤∏
It had been seventeen years since Jacques Garvey had been in the
United States, but she still believed that if her work was made known, it
would be ‘‘hampered by the watchful eye of imperialists’ Agents.’’ On the
surface, this might explain her concern for the boys’ safety; ‘‘real work is
dangerous,’’ she argued. It also suggests that she perceived herself as a
rebel-rousing political agent in the United States, and with that status, she
knew, harassment and stalking followed. But despite her repeated plea for
anonymity, her instructions to Chairman Gibbons reveal that she ex-
pected to be noticed: ‘‘press conferences and other interviews’’ should be
held at the Garvey Club, she reminded him.
≤π Jacques Garvey wanted to
be acknowledged on this trip as the widow of Marcus Garvey and a leader
in her own right—but she also wanted to control and secure the setting.
When the Eighth International Convention of African Peoples of the
World opened on 4 August 1946, three thousand people took their seats in
the Golden Gate Ballroom on Lenox Avenue. In the tradition of the unia
annual conventions held in the 1920s, the meeting opened with a parade
through Harlem led by o≈cials riding on horseback. The convention
delegates resolved to demand that President T ruman establish a federal
inquiry to investigate recent lynchings in Georgia and that the ﬁndings be
made public. Chairman Gibbons also called for political and economic
security for all people of African descent, declaring that ‘‘swords shall be
unsheathed for but one purpose—death to Africa’s enemies.’’ At another
mass gathering on 25 August, Jacques Garvey was one of the principal
speakers, along with Mexican consul general Enriu L. Elocondo and the
Cuban consul general Reinaldo Fernandez Rebull. At this meeting, at-
tendees discussed a resolution to support Ethiopia’s claims for payment of
reparations from Italy. Once again, Gibbons said that he was excited
about the wholehearted willingness of representatives of the republics to
go on record in favor of freedom for Africa.
≤∫
On at least one occasion during the month-long convention, Jacques
Garvey gave an inspiring lecture that she later claimed helped ‘‘launch the
African Nationalist Movement’’ in the United States ‘‘so as to better able


--- PAGE 216 ---
activism closer to home 203
carry on the African program.’’ Entitled ‘‘Can Black People’s Future Be
Made Safe?’’ and delivered at St. Augustine’s Church in the Bronx, the
speech was an overwhelming success. One listener recounted how his
‘‘heart and spirit was moved as never before . . . having heard many
women speak, but never and before in life like you.’’ When he left the
meeting, ‘‘a deep feeling of regret crept over [his] soul thinking . . . only if
[he] would have been blessed to have . . . [touched] the hem of [her]
garment.’’ Such reactions provide some evidence that Jacques Garvey’s
sense of self-importance as a leader was not an illusion, even though, as
Winston James has shown, ‘‘Many Caribbeans shared a marked tendency
to exaggerate and gloat about what they perceived to be their contribution
to the struggle.’’ Her lecture was followed by musical numbers performed
by Marcus Jr. and Julius Winston.
≤Ω
On arriving home, Jacques Garvey gave a report to the Daily Gleaner
on her travels, analyzing the post–World War II climate. She applauded
the ‘‘advancements’’ made by black people living in the United States and
Canada but lamented juvenile delinquency in America, which she di-
rectly linked to absentee mothers. World War II had given mothers and
elder sisters, particularly white women, opportunities for gainful employ-
ment in the defense industries, and thus children were not given the
attention they had previously received. This produced an increase of
‘‘rage’’ among youth, she argued. Community o≈cers and law enforce-
ment agencies also contended that working mothers were the main cata-
lyst for child neglect and juvenile delinquency. Statistics do suggest that
the war had a direct inﬂuence on juvenile behavior in every city in the
nation, resulting in more arrests and cases brought to court. But Karen
Anderson properly warns that juvenile misconduct also received more
attention during and after World War II, which led to tighter enforce-
ment and arrests, thereby exaggerating the public’s perception of delin-
quency. Notably, the idea that mothers ﬁgured more prominently than
fathers in the delinquency of youngsters was a popular notion, one that
continued to resonate decades after the war.
≥≠
At this time, however, Jacques Garvey was wise enough not to place all
the blame on mothers. She explained, ‘‘I think another contributory
cause to this state of a√airs is the dangerous lethal weapons which so
many hardware stores’’ displayed. Furthermore, ‘‘attractive advertise-
ments encourag[ed] [youngsters] to ‘buy switch blades, [and] dagger-
shaped knives.’’ These observations reﬂect that Jacques Garvey had no-
ticed how war magniﬁed masculine socialization for aggressiveness and


--- PAGE 217 ---
204 activism closer to home
violence. In every U.S. city, ‘‘so-called commando gangs of boys’’ mim-
icked militaristic organizations and their accompanying violence. These
gangs were ﬁrmly rooted in American society by the war’s end: ‘‘even
young children are forced to join’’ clubs or societies ‘‘at the risk of being
beaten to death by other club members.’’
≥∞
The circumstances that created juvenile delinquency were not unique
to the United States. In Jamaica, discrimination and mobility, especially
movement from the country to the city, were also cited as important
etiological factors in a 1950 study. Personal aggression, rather than prop-
erty o√enses, characterized the behavior of wayward youth. As unemploy-
ment rose, working-class areas featured gangs of boys who fought with
knives.
≥≤ Jacques Garvey responded to these mushrooming di≈culties by
keeping her own sons on a tight schedule and under close supervision.
She had speciﬁc goals for them and was determined that they remain
focused on school. She felt that providing the best education for her sons
was her most important responsibility.
Educating children was no easy feat in Jamaica, since secondary schools
were still reserved for the middle and upper classes. Curbing the growth of
formal schooling had been an early strategy of the Jamaican Assembly—
planters, businessmen, lawyers, and merchants—to control the labor sup-
ply. The 1943 census conﬁrmed that primary education had diminished
illiteracy considerably, with 71.2 percent of males and 75.0 percent of
females between the ages of 6 and 14 attending public schools. But second-
ary schooling continued to be an exclusive realm, with only 7.7 percent of
males and 8.3 percent of females between the ages of 15–19 attending.
≥≥
Jacques Garvey struggled to ensure that her sons would be a part of that
7.7 percent.
With no disposable income, Jacques Garvey was always looking for
ways to drum up money for her sons’ books, fees, and uniforms. One of
her ideas was to reprint Philosophy and Opinions. While in New York, she
had received an estimate for printing costs from the William Frederick
Press Company: $2,450 for the ﬁrst 1,000 copies and $1,525 for an addi-
tional 1,000. She also needed $65 for spacing the text and illustrations per
thousand, and the publisher wanted half the money on deposit. Although
the Garvey Club o√ered to help ﬁnance the reprints, the project was just
too costly, so Jacques Garvey prepared her children for scholarship exams
instead. She explained that ‘‘this is the only means by which they can be
educated. . . . [S]econdary education costs a lot out here. Some schools
charge as high as seven pounds per quarter of three months.’’
≥∂


--- PAGE 218 ---
activism closer to home 205
All of her preparations paid o√, for one year after Garvey’s death,
Marcus Jr. won a scholarship at Calabar High School. Jacques Garvey
proudly exclaimed that ‘‘he got the highest marks in the entire school in
Latin and honors in Spanish.’’ He was the youngest boy in his class and his
teachers described him as ‘‘brilliant.’’ Three years later, Jacques Garvey
prepared Julius for his scholarship test for Wolmers Boys’ School. In the
end his young age prevented him from winning the full award, but he did
receive a partial scholarship. Jacques Garvey had a more di≈cult time with
Julius and periodically was disappointed with his academic performance.
In communication with Wolmers’ headmaster, Jacques Garvey shared
that she ‘‘tried very hard to impress in [Julius] the serious consequence of
laxity in his work.’’ She believed that her son needed regular reminders
that he had to make the most out of his Wolmers opportunity.
≥∑
At age ﬁfteen, Marcus Jr. passed the Cambridge University senior ex-
amination. Although he liked to write, his mother was against this profes-
sional choice, ‘‘as that d[id] not pay’’ in Jamaica; she was ‘‘keen on eco-
nomics, as this is really the base of all activities, industrial, commercial,
and banking.’’ As a practical intellectual, she instructed her sons that their
schooling was not just about acquiring knowledge, but maintaining a
class position. Occupational choice was important to her, and she con-
veyed that it was only obtainable if they worked hard. Unlike many
parents, however, Jacques Garvey did not transfer her own unfulﬁlled
aspirations onto her children, nor did she articulate that their employ-
ment was a means to secure her old age, a sentiment often voiced by
working-class parents.
≥∏
She also kept her sons busy in a variety of extracurricular activities. On
weekends they played football and cricket. Marcus Jr.’s foot had fully
recovered, but his mother ‘‘always [had] to keep him nourished and warm
at nights, yet getting fresh air.’’ The boys also enjoyed sea bathing and
sometimes a movie. In England they had acquired a ‘‘taste for good act-
ing’’ and were ‘‘rather critical’’ of most ﬁlms they saw in Jamaica. (It is
somewhat remarkable that they could even recall living in London, since
they were only ﬁve and eight years old at the time. Clearly, their mother
was largely responsible for their remembrances; as an adult, Julius de-
scribed how she read letters sent to him by his father, ‘‘some repeated so
often [that Julius] began to imagine [he had] been there.’’) In the summer,
her children required more of her attention; on one occasion she wrote
that having them ‘‘home for two months vacation, [she] could not write
[her] article.’’
≥π


--- PAGE 219 ---
206 activism closer to home
Mothering her sons was not the only caregiver role that Jacques Garvey
performed during these years. In the last months of her aunt’s life, Jacques
Garvey nursed her when she became ill, ‘‘as old folks do not want to go to
the Hospitals out here.’’ Although her aunt was also supported by other
siblings, sometimes familial responsibilities took their toll on Jacques
Garvey and she became worn out from having to ‘‘carry the entire burden’’
of her family.
≥∫
While she negotiated the roles of dutiful mother and niece in her
private life, Jacques Garvey continued her activism in Jamaican politics.
Since the 1920s she had been acutely aware of the power of nationalism,
but by the late 1940s she became particularly sensitive to class issues. It
had become increasingly clear to her that the political framework of both
the pnp and the jlp impeded the development of racial and class mobili-
zation among the laboring masses, largely due to these parties’ ﬂirtation
with conservative elites. The pnp’s ine√ectiveness was exacerbated by the
onset of the Cold War. During this period the propaganda against Marx-
ists increased substantially, and Norman Manley buckled under pressure
from international and national communities to purge their hard-core,
left-wing activists. The harassment against pnp progressives—Ken Hill,
Frank Hill, Richard Hart, and Arthur Henry—climaxed with their expul-
sion from the party in 1952, when they were accused of disseminating
communist doctrine.
The following year, the pnp refused to criticize the British invasion
of Guyana, which ousted the progressive People’s Political Party from
power.
≥Ω Thus, even though the pnp had acquired more mass support
since the 1944 election, the shedding of its left-wing activists and so-
cialist policies made it quite similar to the jlp. Not surprisingly, center
and right-wing middle-class elements soon began to dominate the pnp,
quickly eliminating the party’s key economic aim of state participation in
the economy. By 1954 the jlp and pnp di√ered on few issues—and only in
degree, not substance. The modern Jamaican movement had been started
by workers in 1938 but ended in the hands of upper-middle-class leaders,
who by the 1950s had abandoned the workers’ interests.
As Jacques Garvey became increasingly disillusioned by the pnp, she
also found herself progressively cut o√ from the rest of the world. During
World War II the black press in the United States had enjoyed unprece-
dented power because of its voluminous international circulation. A New
York City post o≈ce examiner observed ‘‘the undue feeling of triumph
the [N]egro is experiencing over the fact that he is ﬁghting back’’ through


--- PAGE 220 ---
activism closer to home 207
black publications. Walter White, president of the National Association
for the Advancement of Colored People (naacp), explained that the war
gave African Americans a sense of kinship with other colored peoples of
the world and that their struggle ‘‘is part and parcel of the struggle against
imperialism and exploitation in India, China, Burma, Africa, the Philip-
pines, Malaya, the West Indies, and South America.’’
∂≠ Jacques Garvey
agreed with this idea and clamored for reading material in order to accu-
rately interpret international events. But as U.S. Cold War inﬂuences
reached hemispheric proportions, capitalist nations worldwide aligned
against the perceived threat of communism. As a result of this ideological
warfare, dissenting publications and activists considered sympathetic to
communist ideas were tagged ‘‘red’’ and subversive.
‘‘America [spent] billions of dollars yearly to ﬁght communism—an
ideology,’’ Jacques Garvey observed. In fact, an inordinate amount of
money was used to persecute progressive activists and their organiza-
tions. The naacp was one of the ﬁrst targets. The ‘‘aim was to desta-
bilize the naacp, drive friendly whites from it on the grounds that they
were likely to be reds, and intimidate Blacks from joining on similar
grounds.’’ Under Walter White’s leadership, the naacp’s militancy waned,
and he too began to view W. E. B. Du Bois as his nemesis. Du Bois had
refused to buckle under the anticommunist attack, continuing to advo-
cate equality and socialism. Determined to extinguish all controversial
ﬂames, White ousted Du Bois from the naacp in 1948, accusing him of
‘‘radical thought.’’
∂∞
Walter White was not the only leader who sheltered himself against
anticommunist propaganda by becoming a watered-down progressive.
A. Philip Randolph separated the ‘‘interest of Black labor from the radical
left,’’ since Marxists were now perceived as inﬁltrators. Like a number of
other African American leaders, Randolph wanted political support from
the T ruman administration, since the president had proposed to ‘‘increase
federal assurance of civil rights for the black majority’’—but this assurance
came ‘‘while curtailing black radical dissent.’’
∂≤
Essentially, to expand their civil rights on the domestic front, many
African Americans elected to subscribe to anticommunist rhetoric. This
agenda articulated by designated African American leadership, inﬂuential
journalists, and intellectuals ‘‘eclipsed’’ the Pan-African politics that had
characterized the immediate post–World War II period.
∂≥
Cold War victory necessitated a consensus of opinion, and so where
foreign policy ideas were concerned, the U.S. O≈ce of Censorship wanted


--- PAGE 221 ---
208 activism closer to home
a monolithic press. When the press underwent an overarching about-face,
black journalists who had been critical of colonialism and supportive of
African diasporic issues found themselves ‘‘blacklisted or dropped from
leading African American papers.’’ Medias that stimulated intellectual
exchange were squashed, as radicals insulated themselves against undemo-
cratic tactics. By 1950, Penny Von Eschen persuasively argues, ‘‘there was
a fundamental transformation of anticolonial discourse and a dramatic
narrowing of coverage of Africa and the Caribbean in the black Ameri-
can press.’’
∂∂
The United States had been an important venue for Jacques Garvey’s
literature. With the demise of the nation’s radical black press, it became
more di≈cult for her to keep abreast of African and anticolonial discus-
sions. Although she continued to work as a journalist, her recorded out-
put pales compared to her production in the 1940s. Still serving as the
collector agent for The African and African Opinion magazines, she main-
tained her commitment to distribute these journals, but readership de-
clined and sales dropped.
∂∑ This caused publication to be sporadic, and in
1951 African Opinion was no longer distributed due to lack of capital. ∂∏
U.S.-inﬂuenced bans against literature in Jamaica also became widespread
in 1959, when Fidel Castro ousted dictator Fulgencio Batista, a former
‘‘friend’’ of the United States. Ninety miles north of Jamaica, Castro
berated U.S. imperialism and resolved to reduce Cuba’s economic and po-
litical dependence on America. Overall, the Cold War curtailed not only
the leftists’ political function, but that of nationalists and Pan-Africanists
as well.
With few avenues—including The Drum, published in Johannesburg,
South Africa—to circulate her articles, much of Jacques Garvey’s writing
simply became a defense of Marcus Garvey’s character against slanderous
statements and false facts, printed mainly in the Daily Gleaner. Still inun-
dated with endless requests concerning Garvey and Garveyism by stu-
dents, teachers, and political activists, she also spent a great deal of time
replying to inquiries. The record suggests that she answered every letter
with care. Establishing a ritualized response, she ﬁrst wanted to know if
the writer was ‘‘white or colored’’ and what prompted him or her to take
an interest in Marcus Garvey, apart from just collecting historical infor-
mation. She never explained why these questions were important, nor do
the records indicate that she gave di√erent answers depending on the race
of the questioner. She seemed to be most interested in who the people
were; to her, their race was important to their identity.
∂π


--- PAGE 222 ---
activism closer to home 209
Almost everyone who requested information from Jacques Garvey
stated that they were writing theses, dissertations, or books. David Cro-
non led this pack of scholars with the publication of Black Moses: The Story
of Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association (1955).
Jacques Garvey answered all of Cronon’s questions, and he acknowledged
that she had freely given of her time, providing factual information about
her husband along with scarce copies of his publications. For her part,
Jacques Garvey was impressed with Cronon’s research and applauded the
citations that enabled readers to follow up all of his references for a deeper
understanding of Garvey and his motives. But reading the book was
di≈cult for her, because it vividly brought to her mind ‘‘the horrors of the
past years,’’ and she found herself defending Garvey. She had received a
copy of Black Moses while ‘‘under-going ﬁnancial di≈culty, and to read
again the concerted e√orts to destroy Garvey, while [she] su√er[ed] that
stark reality of his years of giving all’’ was excruciating.
∂∫
Her praise of Cronon notwithstanding, Jacques Garvey detailed the
shortcomings of his book in an extensive critique that centered on the
author’s characterization of the unia as a program of ‘‘escape, either emo-
tional or physical.’’ It was di≈cult for her to imagine how Cronon could
write that the movement was an escapist program for African Americans
after he had read ‘‘so much of Garvey’s utterances and writings.’’ She told
him that his analysis seemed to be an ‘‘e√ort to appease Black American
leadership.’’ That is, by presenting the unia as a movement outside Afri-
can American political life at the turn of the century, Cronon portrayed
Marcus Garvey and his followers as somewhat reactionary, apolitical ‘‘for-
eigners.’’ Garvey had ‘‘dared to come into their theater of action and steal
the show,’’ Jacques Garvey wrote, and African American leaders were jeal-
ous of his ability to lead millions when they could only sway hundreds.
∂Ω
Jacques Garvey also wished that Cronon had consulted her on the
Ashwood question. He had written that she and Amy Ashwood had been
friends in Jamaica and that Ashwood had invited her to the United States.
Jacques Garvey explained that she met Ashwood ‘‘for the ﬁrst time in New
York City,’’ and that they never had a ‘‘past relationship.’’ It was ‘‘very
painful’’ to be so associated with Ashwood, because ‘‘her way of life has
been entirely di√erent to mine.’’ This analysis was not altogether true.
Having two children produced a stationary, but not static, lifestyle for
Jacques Garvey, whereas Ashwood was free to live a nomadic existence.
But they had both remained steadfast Pan-African intellectuals; Jacques
Garvey’s activism was connected to dispersing ideas of empowerment,


--- PAGE 223 ---
210 activism closer to home
and Ashwood tied her political work directly to ﬁnancial schemes. In the
end, Jacques Garvey thanked Cronon for his ‘‘work and e√ort to place
Garvey in an historical setting of American life and development,’’ and
she sent kudos to the University of Wisconsin Press ‘‘for being broad-
minded enough to publish same.’’
∑≠
As Cronon’s Black Moses rolled o√ the press, Jacques Garvey had only
three copies of Philosophy and Opinions in her possession. unia president
James Stewart had never returned the three hundred volumes he had
taken in 1940, and this loss magniﬁed her ﬁnancial despair. Furthermore,
she was constantly bombarded with requests for these books. Jean Black-
well, curator of the Schomburg Collection in New York City, indicated
that the two volumes of Philosophy and Opinions in the collection’s posses-
sion were ‘‘almost worn to shreds and we are anxious to obtain fresh
copies.’’
∑∞ Once again, Jacques Garvey investigated the possibility of pub-
lishing reprints to meet these demands.
Jacques Garvey and William Sherrill, who was back at the unia helm,
discussed how they could get the books back in circulation. Although
willing to pay interest on money loaned to her for the reprints, as well as
giving the unia a certain number of the books to sell as reimbursement,
Jacques Garvey refused to give up the copyright. The fact that the copy-
right was even mentioned appalled her; in disbelief she asked, how could
these men ‘‘bare-facedly’’ try to take her copyright away? Sherrill clariﬁed
that there must have been a misunderstanding between Jacques Garvey
and unia o≈cers—he did not oppose her maintaining the copyright ‘‘to
this[,] your brain-child.’’ But he did regret that she ‘‘felt it necessary to
speak so bitterly’’ about the attitudes of the present unia leadership. He
explained that she was not the only one experiencing personal hardships;
as president, he received no pay and only expenses in the ﬁeld.
∑≤
To say that Jacques Garvey was su√ering ﬁnancial hardships was an
understatement. By 1956 both her sons were attending universities, where
it was nearly impossible to keep them, especially Julius Winston, who
attended medical school in Canada: ‘‘[W]ith fees raised and instruments
and books at a height I cannot stomach the petty meanness of Negro men
toward us.’’ She contended, ‘‘I cannot publicly denounce them [the unia
leadership], but when I get a chance as this, I have to point out to them
their unworthiness.’’
∑≥ Thirty years earlier she had denounced many black
men in her Negro World editorials on these same grounds, but this time
around she believed that demeaning public comments were politically
inappropriate, especially since her unity philosophy discouraged internal


--- PAGE 224 ---
activism closer to home 211
Amy Jacques Garvey viewing the bust of Marcus Garvey erected in Jamaica on
4 November 1956. Photographer unknown. Schomburg Center for Research in
Black Culture.
bickering. Still, Jacques Garvey’s personal history reveals that when she
felt attacked, she defended herself, to the surprise of many.
In the midst of this turmoil, Jacques Garvey ﬁnally saw the fruits of her
labor rewarded when the Jamaican government acknowledged the heroic
nature of Marcus Garvey’s lifework by unveiling a bust of him in King


--- PAGE 225 ---
212 activism closer to home
George VI Memorial Park. Although George Padmore commented that
the ceremony revealed a ‘‘typical West Indian mentality to make a big
show of erecting public statues to men,’’ and that the money could be
better spent by endowing a scholarship or building a school, Jacques
Garvey was more optimistic and thankful for the organizing committee’s
e√ort to ‘‘commemorate the worth and work’’ of her husband.
∑∂ As a
compulsive organizer, she made herself available to the committee, but
her suggestions to hire a Jamaican sculptor, as well as her concerns about
who should write the program, were bureaucratically bypassed. No doubt
she was perturbed by the stando≈sh behavior of the committee and its
decision not to involve her directly. If the members were not aware of her
skills in the beginning, her letters to them revealed that she was capable of
sound suggestions. One has to wonder why they tactfully disallowed her
participation. Perhaps they had heard that she was opinionated and di≈-
cult to work with. Did they fear that she would take over the project? Or
maybe they did not see her as a ‘‘legitimate’’ organizer of big a√airs.
Whatever the reason, during most of the planning stages her voice was
silenced by others in positions of power. One year later they ﬁnally in-
vited her ‘‘to be associated with the committee,’’ and Jacques Garvey
graciously replied that she was glad to be of service. The lavish ceremony
took place on 4 November 1956. Jacques Garvey sat on the platform,
without her sons—who were abroad at school—but with a host of digni-
taries. Evidently she was not asked to speak, but she was introduced to the
audience.
∑∑
This event was a high point for Jacques Garvey. Only nine months
later, in August 1957, her mother became ill and died. ∑∏ Although she
seldom referred to their personal relationship, Jacques Garvey’s mother
had been an important support system for her and her sons, especially
after Garvey’s death. Her loss appears to have prompted Jacques Garvey to
reﬂect on her own life: it was at this time that she began to seriously write
the ﬁrst chapters of her memoir. Cronon’s book had not satisﬁed inquir-
ing minds about Marcus Garvey, and who was in a better position to set
the record straight than his widow? Instead of rescinding her commit-
ment to the anticolonial struggle during the repressive Cold War, as oth-
ers had done, she took this opportunity to focus on it and to remember
her life with Garvey, while simultaneously defending his character and
motives to the world.


--- PAGE 226 ---
12 The Progressive Radical
I
n the last period of her life, Amy Jacques Garvey continued to focus
on preserving and spreading the legacy of Garveyism, especially the
Pan-African concept. At the same time, her increasingly leftist po-
litical perspective was revealed on her long-awaited trip to Africa, as
well as in her commentary on the Jamaican political scene follow-
ing independence. These e√orts absorbed all of her time and energy in the
1960s and until her death in 1973.
Since the 1920s, Jacques Garvey’s organizing activities had sought to
further the decolonization of West African nations as people of Afri-
can descent endeavored to restructure their societies. The antecedents
of these largely nationalist movements were well established in the Pan-
African struggle that came into its own during the early 1940s—in-
cluding the Fifth Pan-African Congress and Jacques Garvey’s memoran-
dums—as well as in other power shifts around the globe: the rise of
the Soviet Union, liberation struggles in Indochina, the independence
of China and India, and the Asian-African Bandung Conference. In-
deed, within this political milieu, ‘‘West African nationalism and various
brands of Pan-Africanism,’’ Hakim Adi poignantly argues, ‘‘could mix
with everything from Fabian Socialism [to] Marxism-Leninism.’’ The
Cold War undoubtedly induced colonial o≈cials to quicken the pace of
self-government in the commonwealth as a defense against the real and
imagined ‘‘threat’’ of communism. Thus, although the decolonization
process was a hard-won ﬁght, driven by Africans to remove imperialist
footholds in Africa, it was largely channeled by British colonial admin-
istrators into establishing new forms of control, primarily through eco-
nomic regulation, the ‘‘Africanization’’ of civil service positions, and the
direct grooming—by Europeans—of future politicians.
∞
‘‘Despite the greed of the colonialists ﬁghting among themselves to
keep Africa in perpetual suppression and oppression,’’ Jacques Garvey


--- PAGE 227 ---
214 the progressive radical
said in 1960, ‘‘Africa shall be free.’’ And when her longtime friend Nnamdi
Azikiwe invited her to attend his inaugural ceremonies as the ﬁrst African
governor-general and commander in chief of the Federation of Nigeria,
she eagerly seized the opportunity to visit—for the ﬁrst time in her life—
the continent that she had written about for over forty years. Marcus
Garvey had always been denied entry into Africa, ‘‘so the dearest wish in
his heart was not accomplished’’; Jacques Garvey thus viewed this oppor-
tunity ‘‘with gratiﬁcation and joy.’’ It would have been out of character,
though, for her simply to go to Africa as a tourist; she described her travels
as a ‘‘West African good-will tour.’’
≤
With ﬁnancial assistance from her adult sons, Jacques Garvey was able
to make the trip, arriving at the Lagos airport on 11 November 1960 for the
installation ceremony. The historic oath taking took place on 16 Novem-
ber, and all of the other inaugural events, including a thanksgiving service
at the Cathedral Church of Christ, were a royal operation. Over 37 Afri-
can heads of state, about 170 distinguished international ﬁgures from
countries outside the continent of Africa, and more than 32,000 Nige-
rians were present.
≥
Although appointed by Queen Elizabeth II to the post, Azikiwe as-
serted that his governorship was ‘‘an instrument of constitutional author-
ity,’’ as opposed to ‘‘an instrument of absolute authority’’ as it had been
during the colonial era. That is, as a constitutional ruler, Azikiwe avowed
that he exercised power to ‘‘reﬂect the wishes of a democratically con-
stituted authority.’’ But Jacques Garvey was most impressed with his
belief that ‘‘the existence of a stable and constitutional government in
Nigeria [could] become a motive power for the revival of the stature of
man in Africa and an impelling force for the restoration of the dignity of
man in the world.’’ This paraphrase from Azikiwe’s lengthy inaugural
speech, along with other extracts, Jacques Garvey explained, should be
taught to school children not only in Nigeria, but also all over the Pan-
African world. Children of African descent should ‘‘learn the words and
be able to recite them just as American children are taught Abraham
Lincoln’s Gettysburg speech. This would inspire them to leadership and
service.’’
∂
At one point during the weeklong activities—and in the company of
Mr. Mildred F. Johnson, ﬁrst vice president of the Afro-West Indian
A√airs and founder of the Afro-West Indian Society in London, and
W. B. Williams, federal member of the West Indian Parliament—Jacques
Garvey delivered a public lecture in which she ‘‘preached’’ the ‘‘philoso-


--- PAGE 228 ---
the progressive radical 215
phy of Garveyism.’’ She discussed the Universal Negro Improvement
Association (unia) slogan ‘‘Africa for the Africans’’ (those at home and
those abroad) and motto ‘‘One God, One Aim, One Destiny.’’ Johnson
followed with a talk ‘‘to promote goodwill and understanding between
the West Indians and their African ancestors.’’ Then together they left Ni-
geria for Ghana at the invitation of President Kwame Nkrumah. Jacques
Garvey was just as elated about this last leg of her journey as she had been
about visiting Nigeria, for she looked ‘‘forward to meet[ing] many of [her]
relatives that [she had] not seen for two hundred years,’’ referring to her
‘‘Ghanaian ancestors’’ who had been taken from West Africa as slaves and
deposited in the Western Hemisphere.
∑
This yearning of Jacques Garvey’s—to return ‘‘home’’—has become an
integral part of the Pan-African theme. A return home harks back to the
ﬁrst generation of Africans who were uprooted from the continent and
absorbed into the transatlantic slave trade. Whether in the form of re-
patriation petitions or returning one’s spirits in a ritual or ceremony or
ashes in death, diverse records, folklore, and myth all speak to the attempt
to ‘‘go home.’’ But the Garveys’ desire to foster a relationship with Africa,
in conceiving of an African nationality and of Africa as a homeland,
should not be understood as the popular but misapplied idea that they
advocated a romantic ‘‘Back to Africa’’ movement.
∏ This is an important
distinction, because they argued that an Africa redeemed from colonial
rule would give New World Africans international inﬂuence and strength
to demand fair and equal treatment for themselves wherever they lived.
The Garveys were fully aware that the majority of black diasporians had
no desire to return to another oppressive setting and, moreover, that most
of them were unequipped to build up Africa in practical ways.
By 1960, however, diasporic Africans were taking an interest in the
motherland as never before, and African leaders were encouraging both
short- and long-term emigration. On one occasion in Harlem, St. Clair
Drake recalls Nkrumah inviting ‘‘almost ten thousand people . . . to come
to Africa as teachers and technicians.’’ This had been the Garveys’ call
since the 1920s—a fact that may help to explain why Jacques Garvey had
no ambivalent reactions toward Africa during her stay there. This in itself
was unusual, as Leslie Alexander Lacy notes: ‘‘Black bodies in exile’’ often
developed a ‘‘refugee’’ mentality. More speciﬁcally, in Ghana, Lacy re-
membered, ‘‘the moves you make appear to reﬂect political acumen, but
in reality they are based on acute anxiety, blind acceptance of an ideology
you vaguely comprehend, a confused fusion of the political rhetoric you


--- PAGE 229 ---
216 the progressive radical
learned back home (which of course has nothing to do with the present
political culture), and equally irrelevant, what you read in the daily news-
paper.’’ Similarly, on a visit to Ghana Richard Wright constantly experi-
enced a sense of dislocation that prompted him to pose the question,
‘‘How much am I a part of this?’’
π
Admittedly, Jacques Garvey often wrote about Africa from the perspec-
tive of a united race, downplaying di√erences to emphasize a common
heritage, mission, and future. An end to colonial rule constituted the core
of both her and her husband’s diatribe; thus, it is no surprise that Kwame
Nkrumah wrote in his highly circulated autobiography, ‘‘of all the litera-
ture that I studied, the book that did more than any other to ﬁre my
enthusiasm was Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey  published in
1923.’’ When Nkrumah named Ghana’s national shipping line the ‘‘Black
Star Line Limited,’’ the Garveyesque connection was sealed. Fundamen-
tally, Nkrumahism, as Michael Williams points out, is an ‘‘assimilation,
advancement and reﬁnement of Garveyism.’’
∫ In many ways Garvey was a
modern mentor, in that Garveyism was a political program directed to-
ward the redemption of Africa, although later Garveyism became in some
ways a mere shadow of its former self, manipulated to meet the diverse
objectives of later thinkers and activists.
Many of Jacques Garvey’s colleagues brought the complementary na-
ture of Nkrumahism and Garveyism to her attention. Jean Blackwell,
curator for the Schomburg Collection in Harlem, wrote her, ‘‘It must
warm your heart to have lived to see him so appreciated after all these
years.’’ Blackwell, like so many of Jacques Garvey’s comrades, had failed to
interpret this political surge as also being an e√ect of Jacques Garvey’s own
contribution to the Pan-African e√ort. Fortunately, both Azikiwe and
Nkrumah were perceptive enough to acknowledge not only Jacques Gar-
vey’s historic role in the movement, but also her contemporary impor-
tance in the next phase of African liberation; hence, they took it upon
themselves to invite her ‘‘home’’ as a guest of their respective govern-
ments. Yet Jacques Garvey saw her ‘‘return’’ as representing something
beyond herself. In fact, she stated that ‘‘to the African I represented the
spirit of Marcus Garvey—the ‘Returned One.’ ’’
Ω
Even prior to landing in Accra, Jacques Garvey said that she was ‘‘glad
to see the progress Ghana has made since her independence.’’ It had only
been three years since Nkrumah had been named president of the re-
public, but his proposal to rebuild its economy along socialist lines and to


--- PAGE 230 ---
the progressive radical 217
produce a self-reliant, democratic state addressing the needs of the people
was in full swing. Most notable were the substantial numbers of new hos-
pitals and schools that had been built. Since education had always been a
high priority for Jacques Garvey, her itinerary included a visit to the
Bureau of Ghana Languages. Housed under the Ministry of Education,
the bureau had been set up by Nkrumah to ‘‘facilitate the achievement of
his Pan-Africanist goals.’’
∞≠ Nkrumah understood that communication
was the key to building a united Africa; so the bureau was composed of
schools to teach languages, particularly English and French, as well as
translator skills. In addition, African languages were studied as degreed
subjects. Essentially the bureau, later called the Ghana Institute of Lan-
guages, was a unique setting for higher learning, promoting the idea that
‘‘through the teaching and learning of modern languages, . . . communi-
cation competence, cultural understanding and general economic de-
velopment among the comm[uni]ty of nations, particularly in Africa,’’
would come to pass.
∞∞
Jacques Garvey ‘‘marvelled’’ at the ‘‘rapid development and progress of
Ghana.’’ She attributed it to Nkrumah’s ‘‘dynamism, in both personality
and in leadership,’’ along with the fact that he ‘‘also mixed freely with
the people.’’ Jacques Garvey was not alone in her assessment of Nkru-
mah’s personality. C. L. R. James, secretary of the West Indian Fed-
eral Labor Party, remarked that ‘‘thanks to Nkrumah’s unselfconscious
autobiography, the Ghana revolution shows . . . the relation between
people and leader,’’ including his ‘‘sympathy for the ordinary people, his
intuitive understanding of them, his respect for them.’’ However, one
scholar points out that the many accolades for Nkrumah were in fact an
indication that so many activists’ ‘‘own reputation[s]’’ were ‘‘invested in a
certain image of Nkrumah’s signiﬁcance as a Pan-African leader and as the
living embodiment of the International African Service Bureau.’’
∞≤
In Ghana, Jacques Garvey was equally interested in the Women’s Divi-
sion of Nkrumah’s Convention People’s Party (cpp). Years before her trip,
she had befriended Evelyn Amarteiﬁo, secretary for the Federation of
Women in Accra, regarding the need to expand the federation to include
women in the diaspora. She charged Amarteiﬁo to ‘‘explain to Dr. Nkru-
mah how important it will be as a link between all Units of the Race—in
the West Indies, United States, and the Homeland, not only for women’s
pursuits but as a means of publicizing Africa’s national activities to the
Western World.’’ This expansion would make it ‘‘possible to get ﬁnancial


--- PAGE 231 ---
218 the progressive radical
aid for social services, as well as technicians and scientists’’ in Africa.∞≥ As
an activist who always looked toward securing the future, she appealed to
her natural constituency, women, to serve as leaders.
Stability and prosperity in Ghana—along with other West African
states—required a thriving economy that was coordinated with regional
developments. It was through the T rade Union Congress (tuc)—so inte-
gral to the cpp that one membership card was used for both organiza-
tions—that both Nkrumah and Jacques Garvey addressed workers on
29 November 1960. In a number of speeches Nkrumah clariﬁed that
‘‘public o≈cers and state workers’’ not only had to ‘‘reali[z]e their obliga-
tion to the State, but also accept fully the responsibility which they share
for the task of reconstruction in which we are engaged. The nation ex-
pects from you all maximum dedication to its service.’’ (A national mini-
mum wage was established, but workers were expected to maintain a
forty-four-hour workweek, and in 1961 all wage earners would lose 5
percent of their income to supplement the welfare programs.) Following
Nkrumah’s lead, Jacques Garvey urged her audience at a tuc meeting to
undertake every job assignment with a ‘‘deep sense of responsibility in the
interest of the country and its people.’’ Although in awe of Nkrumah, she
knew that he could not carry the burden of a free Ghana alone. Every
citizen had to do his or her part to unite as ‘‘one people, one race with one
destiny’’ to ensure its promise.
∞∂
No longer the young woman who avoided the limelight, Jacques Gar-
vey was a conﬁdent activist, always willing to speak to an organized
gathering. At every turn she gave her opinion on issues related to the Pan-
African struggle, and on 29 November 1960, while in Ghana, she ad-
dressed the impending crisis in the Congo.
On 30 June 1960 the Belgian Congo had become independent, largely
due to the stoic leadership of Patrice Lumumba. A brilliant thinker and
orator, Lumumba exempliﬁed the ideological sophistication that Africa
needed. But like other Europeans, the Belgians never intended to relin-
quish power, and one month before independence they reinforced their
military might in the Congo to ensure neocolonial domination. As prime
minister, Lumumba refused to be a puppet of the new state and ordered
the Belgian troops to leave the Congo, condemning their ‘‘external ag-
gression’’ and ‘‘colonialist machinations.’’ The troops refused to go, ignit-
ing a crisis that drew in the United Nations and the United States as allies
with Belgium. The Belgian authorities called Lumumba an unscrupulous
communist who had to be contained because he was serving Soviet inter-


--- PAGE 232 ---
the progressive radical 219
ests. (He had accepted Soviet assistance, but during the height of the
alleged Soviet intervention, only about 380 Soviets and Czechoslovaks
were up against 14,000 United Nation troops, which essentially func-
tioned as U.S. agents, and thousands of Belgian military o≈cers.)
∞∑
People of African descent the world over were in sympathy with Lu-
mumba and the Congolese. Nkrumah sent troops and spoke out in sup-
port of the prime minister: ‘‘no outside power—not even the United
Nations—has the right to unseat [Lumumba] by military force or intrigue
with other Congolese, no matter how hard they ﬁnd it to work with
[Lumumba].’’ To Africans and to the sympathetic diaspora, the future of
African liberation required that the people of the Congo make their own
decision through Parliament or their assembly. Nkrumah tried to support
Lumumba, but behind the scenes Ghana’s many white o≈cers held di√er-
ent sympathies. Nkrumah’s Congo policy soon became shaded by com-
plicated Cold War politics. Jacques Garvey, however, was free from the
policy-making fray, unhesitantly proclaiming it ‘‘the responsibility of Af-
ricans, not Europeans, to see that the law and order was maintained in the
Congo.’’ But the enemies of African liberation proved too strong, and
Lumumba was assassinated on 17 January 1961, with the U.S. Central
Intelligence Agency playing a major role in the murder.
∞∏
Jacques Garvey’s trip to Nigeria and Ghana appears to have been a
major highlight of her intellectual life. As soon as she was back in Jamaica,
she began chronicling her impressions of African nationalism in a num-
ber of unpublished essays, as well as in her personal correspondence. Since
she had been so closely connected to Africa for decades, she rejoiced in
experiencing the ‘‘atmosphere of the Old and New Africa.’’ Essentially,
she had been renewed by her trip to the motherland. Aimé Césaire’s
poetic verse from his ‘‘notebook of a return to the native land’’ in many
ways captures what she must have felt: ‘‘Suddenly now strength and life
assail me like a bull and the water of life overwhelms the papilla of the
morne, now all the veins and veinlets are bustling with new blood and the
enormous breathing lung of cyclones and the ﬁre hoarded in volcanoes
and the gigantic seismic pulse which now beats the measure of a living
body in my ﬁrm conﬂagration.’’
∞π
Everywhere she went, Jacques Garvey reported, she had been ‘‘treated
royally’’ and acknowledged as Mrs. Garvey, the wife of the man who was a
‘‘son of Africa’’ and who had ‘‘used every means available to enlighten
world opinion of the facts and truth’’ about Africa that had been ‘‘sup-
pressed by white news agencies.’’ African leaders gave Garvey full credit


--- PAGE 233 ---
220 the progressive radical
‘‘for his prophetic warnings and declarations.’’ In fact, one prominent
Nigerian told Jacques Garvey that ‘‘whatever our leaders say today, Gar-
vey said more than forty years ago.’’
∞∫
Jacques Garvey’s articles and letters from this period return in style to
her 1920s ‘‘impressionistic’’ reporting. They capture the diversity of Africa
and its peoples, yet remain committed to her unity theme. In this ‘‘New’’
Africa, all belonged to the ‘‘whole, yet sharing it, with the joy of knowing
that they are masters of their destiny in their own country.’’ Although she
provided details on the e≈ciency of the railroads and buses, ten-story
o≈ce buildings, and modern equipment like air conditioners and eleva-
tors, she pointed to the fact that every aspect of African life was ‘‘manned
by Africans.’’
∞Ω Self-reliance was imperative to a prosperous Africa and
could be used to unite regional countries and, eventually, the entire con-
tinent. A reciprocal relationship between ideas and economy produced
like minds similarly dedicated to the Pan-African goal. Jacques Garvey’s
essays considered these ideas in the context of the magnitude of change
worldwide.
She also described how black diasporians’ freedom and national iden-
tity were located in Africa’s liberation. More speciﬁcally, she discussed the
direct links between freedom struggles in Africa and the civil rights move-
ment in the United States, making use of the example provided by the
problems faced by African ambassadors to the United Nations. By 1960
the United Nations had become the chief mechanism through which
racial disputes were addressed within an international format, and since it
was headquartered in New York, America’s Jim Crow practices had be-
come the focus of world attention. When African diplomats were treated
with the same contempt that African Americans experienced daily, it
became a highly visible matter, calling into serious question the U.S.
human rights record. For instance, in December 1960, when a Nigerian
diplomat was refused restaurant service, the National Council of Nigeria
and the Cameroons issued a statement indicting the United States: ‘‘A
country devoid of respect for human dignity, a country with completely
bankrupt racial policy, a country which still lives in the dark ages, had no
claim to leadership of free men.’’ Other African envoys recounted how
housing discrimination a√ected their ability to function as statesmen.
The Ghana embassy even ﬁled a complaint with the State Department
regarding racial harassment.
≤≠ In her essays Jacques Garvey explained that
American civil rights laws were altered, in part, due to the presence of
African representatives at the United Nations and because embassies and


--- PAGE 234 ---
the progressive radical 221
consulates generated ‘‘constant embarrassment to the State Department
when they were mistaken for and mistreated as American Negroes.’’ ≤∞
Numerous contemporary Cold War scholars also point out how African
criticism of America’s racial problems helped break down Jim Crow by
exposing the contradictions of U.S. foreign policy compared to its domes-
tic laws.
≤≤
The Garveys had always articulated how racial problems throughout
the diaspora could not be resolved without engaging issues of African
independence and self-determination, especially since, as Jacques Garvey
put it, black people are ‘‘all one in the eyes of the white world.’’ So ‘‘lets us
[sic] clasp hands across the seas—the U.S.A., the West Indies, Central &
South America, and right across to the continent of Africa. All of one
blood, what happens to one Unit, a√ects the prestige of the others.’’ The
1960s proved this hypothesis correct, as calls for freedom and liberation
echoed simultaneously throughout Africa and the black diaspora. Nor
were the Caribbean territories left out of this equation, as in 1962 both Ja-
maica and T rinidad and Tobago were the ﬁrst British holdings to achieve
political independence.
≤≥
Since 1944 the march toward self-government in Jamaica had been
slow, with each step announced as the ‘‘ﬁnal’’ one such that—as Gordon
Lewis notes—‘‘colonialism, for Jamaicans,’’ ended ‘‘not in a bang but a
whimper.’’ But Jacques Garvey contended that the main reason ‘‘why the
West Indies [had] not attained independence after many years of talking
about it, [was] because of the false propaganda about Africa and Afri-
cans.’’ She argued that misinformation about Africans helped to ‘‘swell’’
the Jamaican ‘‘ego, and make them feel that there is nothing in their
ancestral continent for them to emulate, and that they are more civilized
than Africans.’’
≤∂ Once again, the importance of black diasporians locat-
ing their center in Africa was seen as fundamental to their progress as
individual nations.
When Jamaica became independent on 6 August 1962, the two-party
system of representation completely took hold of the island. The Jamai-
can Labor Party (jlp) and the People’s National Party (pnp), which had
been formed during the World War II period, were unchallengeable.
With independence, the ‘‘browns’’ supplanted the whites in political rep-
resentation. Yet the ‘‘browns’’ were internally divided into conservative
and leftist camps, with the conservative upper-middle classes wanting to
maintain a hegemonic power; under no uncertain terms did they want to
revolutionize Jamaican society. Although Jamaica was desperately poor,


--- PAGE 235 ---
222 the progressive radical
its conservative leaders were ‘‘even more desperately determined to copy
Western social and economic patterns.’’ Jacques Garvey agreed that there
could be no ‘‘progress unless the means of livelihood is guaranteed and
secure,’’ but she was critical of a Western blueprint for advancement. She
encouraged Jamaicans to embrace the new ‘‘African personality’’—one
who ‘‘refuse[d] to be a copy plate of the European.’’ By ‘‘unearth[ing] his
ancient history, long hidden from him; he applies his traditions and
customs to the demands and tempo of the times,’’ building ‘‘character in
his people [and] giving them incentives and ambitions to become full
ﬂedged men and women.’’
≤∑
Bourgeoisie interests nonetheless retained their hold, and social ar-
rangements that kept upper-middle-class ‘‘browns’’ in a dominant posi-
tion over the black masses continued. The adoption of Western models
for redevelopment initially translated into a Jamaican economic boom
based on the production of cosmetics, textiles, cement, and containers of
all sorts for export markets. This period is often referred to as the ‘‘miracle
years.’’ Most factories were located in the Kingston metropolitan area,
where the economy was heavily infused with foreign capital, primarily
from North America. But during this time the rate of absolute poverty
grew considerably; it is estimated that between 1958 and 1968 the absolute
income of 30 percent of the population fell from J$32 to J$15 per capita.
Unquestionably, the rich got richer and the poor got poorer at the hands
of foreign investors. Seemingly, Jamaican leaders desired to ‘‘become he-
roes in colonial garb.’’ For her part, Jacques Garvey remained adamantly
opposed to governmental administrative ‘‘manipulation of the economic
interest of the submerged black masses by an alien economic elite.’’ By
this time clearly identiﬁed with the left, she criticized the government for
not dealing with workers’ issues: ‘‘Those who have bread and a little
butter should not get more butter, while the majority do not know where
the regular daily bread is coming from.’’
≤∏
Even though Jamaican workers were plentiful, and thus to the capital-
ist mind, exploitable, they did not assume a passive stance and, in fact,
grew increasingly rebellious under the system. In 1960 Reverend Claudius
Henry, leader of a Rastafarian group, in conjunction with an armed New
York–based organization, planned a coup against the Jamaican govern-
ment. Although this attempt ended in dismal failure, other working-class
rebellions followed.
≤π (T revor Munroe points out that in countries like
Jamaica, the ‘‘relative weakness of the working class’’ can be attributed
to ‘‘its isolation from the world revolutionary process, and predominance


--- PAGE 236 ---
the progressive radical 223
of non-proletarian ideologies in the national-liberation movement,’’ as
well as ‘‘its deep and many-sided ties with small land holding and petty
commodity production.’’) The escalating violence was often centered in
Kingston, where Jacques Garvey lived. Anthony Payne argues that ‘‘the
violence served to arm and, above all, politicize sections of the Kingston
lumpenproletariat.’’ Jacques Garvey was extremely disturbed by the polit-
ical upheaval on the island, which she blamed in part on the Jamaican
government for having stiﬂed ‘‘peaceful protest and demonstrations’’
through legislation that regulated meetings and marches. ‘‘It’s impossible
for any opponent of the two political parties—the jlp and pnp (and I am
an unrelenting opponent of these two institutions and their policies) to
make his voice heard in the country,’’ she proclaimed.
≤∫
As the years of independence multiplied, so did Jacques Garvey’s dis-
gust with the Jamaican government. ‘‘Brown’’ and middle-class herself,
she nevertheless felt a strong sense of solidarity with the black workers.
‘‘The blood and tears of black people have enriched Jamaica, [so] why
should they be at the bottom of the economic ladder?’’ she asked. ‘‘The
facade of political independence’’ produced a setting where ‘‘food, cloth-
ing and housing,’’ the ‘‘three essentials necessary to man’s existence,’’ were
all ‘‘controlled by minority groups (Chinese, Syrians and Jews),’’ along
with ‘‘foreign cartels and companies.’’ These conditions made her hold
even more ﬁrmly to the legacy that she had helped her husband create. Al-
though she did not insulate herself from current political happenings, she
increasingly narrowed her concentration to give the public what she felt it
needed to make the most of revolutionary times. Dusting o√ her memoir,
‘‘Garvey and Garveyism’’ (she had completed a ﬁrst draft in 1955), Jacques
Garvey was more determined than ever to have it published. Both this
text and Philosophy and Opinions, she believed, ‘‘would inculcate a sense of
pride in black awareness, dignity, love and unity[,] qualities that make for
good citizens’’ that were essential for racial progress.
≤Ω
In 1957 Jacques Garvey’s memoir was rejected for publication. This
must have surprised her, since she had reworked the earlier draft speciﬁ-
cally to ‘‘appeal to white publishers.’’ It is unknown exactly how Jacques
Garvey revised the manuscript once she had decided to publish the book
herself; by 1962 she had rewritten it a total of ﬁve times. At that point she
began to solicit support from friends with access to publishers.
≥≠ After
unia President William Sherrill received her letter, he made an appoint-
ment to see noted Afrocentric scholar J. A. Rogers in order to obtain
names of printers and ‘‘other information relative to having [her] book


--- PAGE 237 ---
224 the progressive radical
printed.’’ Rogers reported, however, that he had to ‘‘ﬁnd money and
publish’’ every one of his books himself.≥∞ Realizing that she would have
to take a similar route, Jacques Garvey felt pressed for time, especially
since she continued to su√er from ill health. She believed that when she
‘‘passed on, much of the authentic story of his [Garvey’s] life will be lost.’’
Yet her narrative went beyond securing Garvey’s place in history—the
preservation of her own political legacy was also at stake. Fortunately, her
ﬁnancial appeals were soon answered when two African American Gar-
veyites—George Willis and L. B. Fraser—consented to loan her more
than half of the cost of the printing and a few hundred dollars for other
expenses.
≥≤ These funds were combined with her life savings to publish
her book, which was printed in Kingston in 1963.
Overall, the appearance of Garvey and Garveyism  went almost un-
noticed.≥≥ Her cluttered narrative was plagued by poor organization and
many undocumented quotations. Since her husband’s death, she had
called herself the authentic voice of Marcus Garvey, and she ‘‘could quote
for hours from his speeches’’; thus, she apparently felt no need to pro-
vide citations.
≥∂ The lack of scholarly support and recognition of the
book—there were no reviews of it in academic journals—did not alto-
gether dampen her spirits. In fact, she took the few praiseworthy state-
ments about the book and inserted them on her circular letter/mail order
form.
≥∑ This type of advertisement had been her principal form of dis-
seminating information in the past, reminiscent of the African Study
Circle’s circular. Finally, she used the last of her savings to send free copies
to libraries throughout the world. ‘‘This was a ﬁnancial loss,’’ Jacques
Garvey wrote of her own investment, ‘‘but it paid o√ in terms of per-
petuating the memory of Garvey and his work.’’
≥∏
Garvey and Garveyism also gave the world an extensive, introspective
view of Jacques Garvey herself. Her personal life, which she had always
labored to keep private, is revealed in surprising ways. The pain and frus-
tration of living both with and without Marcus Garvey, the ﬁnancial dep-
rivation, and the ridicule and sneers that she had felt from misinformed
people are woven throughout the memoir. Her sense of urgency and her
belief that she had not only participated in but also helped to create
signiﬁcant historic moments underscore the narrative. This text conﬁrms
the degree to which Jacques Garvey had invested in securing herself a
place in the black radical tradition.
After publishing the memoir, she turned her attention to retrieving her
husband’s body from London, where it had been held in a vault since his


--- PAGE 238 ---
the progressive radical 225
death in 1940. After World War II, Amy Ashwood Garvey had begun a
battle with Jacques Garvey in the British courts over who was actually the
‘‘rightful kin’’ of Marcus Garvey and therefore entitled to his remains.
When George Padmore reported in the Chicago Defender that the wives of
Garvey were ﬁghting over his dead body, B. Gibbons, on behalf of the
New York Garvey Club, wrote Padmore a scathing letter accusing him of
bringing ‘‘the attention of the world on the action introduced by Amy
Ashwood into the Chancery Court relative to the question of the posses-
sion of Marcus Garvey’s remains.’’
≥π Although Ashwood Garvey had con-
tested her divorce from Garvey in 1922, he believed that the action was
legal and married Amy Jacques several months afterward. Decades later,
though, Ashwood still refused to accept this judgment because she had
never signed a divorce decree.
Over the years both women had appropriated Garvey, and their com-
peting interpretations of his legacy was another site of their dispute.
A 1960 article entitled ‘‘The Ghost of Marcus Garvey: Interviews with
Crusader’s T wo Wives,’’ which appeared in the popular African American
magazine Ebony, reveals their di√erences and helps to substantiate the
impression that Ashwood was just as entitled as Jacques to his legacy. The
author describes Jacques as ‘‘thin and intense’’ and Ashwood as the ‘‘heav-
ier’’ one who ‘‘wears African tribal robes,’’ but both were ‘‘persuasive
conversationalists.’’
≥∫
The two wives agreed on Garvey’s main contributions to the modern
world, in terms of awakening the black masses to the importance of ra-
cial unity, but in separate interviews each gave di√erent opinions on
other features of Garveyism. For example, Ashwood believed that Garvey
would have ‘‘adjusted his program to changed conditions,’’ but Jacques
denied that he would have altered it, because ‘‘every plank in his plat-
form . . . is valid.’’ No doubt since the 1920s, both women had spent
countless hours sharing their opinions about Garvey. Jacques Garvey even
felt comfortable saying during the interview that ‘‘when I talk, I talk for
Garvey. I feel I can interpret how he would feel if he were alive.’’ But
talking about Garvey, at least for Jacques Garvey, was not an easy ex-
perience. There were moments when reliving her years with him could
be quite painful; Rupert Lewis recalled that after giving interviews, she
would sometimes become physically ill from being ‘‘emotionally caught
up in evoking his spirit.’’
≥Ω
Once the Ebony article appeared, Jacques was disturbed to ﬁnd that it
also featured Ashwood. ‘‘You did not tell me that you intended to write a


--- PAGE 239 ---
226 the progressive radical
symposium,’’ she admonished the author. Her son Julius agreed that it
was ‘‘not fair to give Amy Ashwood’s statement place beside [his mother’s]
as he ha[d] read and heard so much of her campaign to ‘down Garvey’
since they were divorced.’’
∂≠ The inheritance and regulation of Garvey’s
body was indeed a literal and ﬁgurative question.
Despite Jacques Garvey’s e√orts, her husband’s remains were not re-
turned until the Jamaican government wanted them for ceremonies that
would proclaim him the country’s ﬁrst national hero. Jamaican o≈cials
were unaware of the history between Jacques and Ashwood, but when
they began the proceedings to recover his remains, they found themselves
in an ‘‘embarrassing position’’ with the British government, which ‘‘de-
manded proof of ownership’’ of Garvey’s body. Ashwood, who was living
in Spain, returned to England and contacted her personal attorney in
New York, who proved, to the satisfaction of British o≈cials, that she and
Garvey had never received a ﬁnal legal decision; therefore ‘‘neither one’’
was divorced. Ashwood quickly signed the necessary paperwork to release
his body in 1964. No doubt she was motivated by a promise (which never
materialized) from Jamaican politician Leslie Alexander to ‘‘sponsor the
publication of her book on the biography of Marcus Garvey and that she
would be given recognition at the ceremony and a gift of $1,000 to cover
her expenses in coming from Spain to sign the agreement.’’
∂∞
Meanwhile, Jacques Garvey was unaware not only that the Jamaican
government was orchestrating the return of Garvey’s body, but also that
Leslie Alexander had begun a campaign to collect money from merchants
and businessmen for that purpose. Once she learned of Alexander’s ac-
tions, she told him to ‘‘stop this sort of thing, and to refund moneys
subscribed, for myself and two sons do not want it said that it was through
the benevolence of business men that M. G.’s body was brought back
home.’’ By this time (1964), she was so disgusted with her government’s
unwillingness to deal with the economic crisis of the black masses that she
had a change of heart and now wanted Garvey’s remains shipped to an
African country where a shrine could be built. When she informed Alex-
ander of her plans, he ‘‘got angry . . . and said that [she] was a disloyal
Jamaican.’’ After this encounter, Jacques Garvey received a message that
the Jamaican minister of development and welfare wanted to see her. For
the ﬁrst time, in the minister’s o≈ce, she was informed that ‘‘his Govern-
ment had decided to bring Garvey’s body here for reinterment, and that
Mr. Alexander was [her] Agent.’’
∂≤


--- PAGE 240 ---
the progressive radical 227
It is mind-boggling to consider that the Jamaican government would
set out to remove Garvey’s twenty-four-year-old remains without notify-
ing his widow. The explanation that communications may have simply
broken down between the two parties is hard to swallow. Rather, the omis-
sion seems to have been a deliberate slight of Jacques Garvey, who, al-
though involved in Jamaican politics and absorbed in global Pan-African
networks, continued to be marginalized politically on the island. In addi-
tion, she had been critical of conservative Jamaican leadership. Changing
times had shifted the political tide to embrace some Pan-African ideas, but
in Jamaica there was still no social or ideological space for the likes of
Jacques Garvey. To some she must have appeared an oddity, possessing a
black consciousness but occupying an explicitly ‘‘brown’’ and middle-class
hegemonic position. She had no political instrument that could be used
on her behalf and that would give her visibility and public recognition.
Clearly, Jacques Garvey understood that she was outnumbered and over-
powered. In the end she cooperated ‘‘against odds’’ with the government,
still stipulating that ‘‘this young nation should conduct this whole pro-
cedure with dignity, sincerity and decorum.’’
∂≥ To add insult to injury,
Amy Ashwood had positioned herself to release Garvey’s body and the
Jamaican government recognized her at the London ceremonies celebrat-
ing his removal.
When his remains were ﬁnally returned to Jamaica in November 1964,
Marcus Garvey was pronounced by the government to be an o≈cial
national hero. As Gordon Lewis has shown, Garvey served ‘‘the need of
every newly independent nation to create its own national Pantheon of
father ﬁgures.’’ But not all Jamaicans were elated about his elevated status,
and some voiced their objections. Misinformation about him heated the
controversy, and a substantial portion of Jamaicans were of the opinion
that the core of Garvey’s message, embracing an African identity, was
unacceptable. Jacques Garvey sent rebuttal letters to dissenters and wrote
two articles for the Daily Gleaner on ‘‘Garvey’s Activities for Jamaicans.’’
∂∂
Her articles set the stage for the ceremonial activities surrounding the
reburial of his remains. Garvey’s body was ﬁrst visually surveyed by his
son, Dr. Julius Winston Garvey, who as the representative of his ‘‘family
and with the o≈cial approval of the Ministry of Development and Wel-
fare . . . [did] not think that it should be [an] opened [casket] to the view
of the public.’’
∂∑ A group of Jamaican dignitaries, led by the prime minis-
ter, took part in the Victoria Pier ceremony and the procession conveying


--- PAGE 241 ---
228 the progressive radical
the body to Holy T rinity Cathedral, where it stayed for ﬁve days. After a
Mass was celebrated on 15 November 1964, the participants proceeded to
King George VI Memorial Park for the reburial. An estimated thirty
thousand people gathered at the park, and a pamphlet based on Garvey
and Garveyism was distributed free of charge. Jacques Garvey delivered a
message and her sons, Marcus Jr. and Julius, read the epistle and the
gospel. The ‘‘reinterment proceedings were important,’’ Jacques Garvey
wrote, ‘‘because many of those paying homage’’ were ‘‘white men, brown
men, and even black men in good social position, who in the 1920s and
1930s laughed at Garvey’s determined task to lift the Black masses every-
where economically, socially, and politically at the stature of other races. It
is a triumph for Garvey and Garveyism.’’
∂∏
The continual spread of Garveyism, evidenced through Jamaican and
West African independence, gave Jacques Garvey cause to celebrate the
vindication of her husband, and by 1965, the civil rights movement in the
United States was added to her slate. With the advent of the Black Power
movement, largely nationalistic in political orientation, African Ameri-
can activists had shifted the direction of their struggle. More speciﬁcally,
when Willie Ricks prompted Stokely Carmichael to voice the slogan
‘‘Black Power’’ at the 1966 James Meredith March, it marked the public
division between the professed ‘‘non-violent, direct action’’ protest led by
Martin Luther King Jr. and a more militant stance in which activists
argued that ‘‘a non-violent approach to Civil Rights is an approach Black
people cannot a√ord and a luxury white people do not deserve.’’ Jacques
Garvey believed that this public split was positive, describing it as ‘‘the
younger group of freedom ﬁghters’’ separating from the ‘‘conservative
interracial groups, such as the N.A.A.C.P . and the Urban League’’ in their
demand for Black Power—‘‘a drive to mobilize the black communities, as
the only way to achieve meaningful change.’’
∂π Jacques Garvey was so
inspired by this movement that she wrote an essay to historically situate
the source and course of Black Power in the United States.
The outlines of this essay germinated when a researcher asked her to
respond to a series of questions about the impact of Marcus Garvey on
leaders like Malcolm X and Martin Luther King Jr. Other scholars were
also posing this question, having pointed out that Garvey was the modern
mentor of black nationalists and that mainly his ideology had inspired
West African nationalism, Pan-Africanism, and ultimately Black Power,
all of which redeﬁned political, social, and economic boundaries within


--- PAGE 242 ---
the progressive radical 229
societies in West Africa as well as the black diaspora. Jacques Garvey
contributed to this body of thought, allowing King and Malcolm X to
speak for themselves by citing their speeches commenting on Garvey’s
inﬂuence. Discussing Malcolm X, she had especially strong evidence on
her side: both of his parents had been active members of the unia in
Detroit, and Malcolm had said that ‘‘every time you see another nation on
the African continent become independent, you know that Marcus Gar-
vey is alive.’’
∂∫
Jacques Garvey recalled the time she had met King when he visited
Jamaica in 1965. King had laid a wreath at Garvey’s shrine and told a
crowd of over two thousand how ‘‘Marcus Garvey was the ﬁrst man of
color in the history of the United States to lead and develop a mass
movement. . . . You gave Marcus Garvey to the United States and he gave
to the million of Negroes of the United States a sense of personhood, a
sense of manhood, and a sense of somebodiness.’’ At this event Jacques
Garvey gave King a copy of Garvey and Garveyism. Jacques Garvey wrote
of this ﬁrst recipient of the Marcus Garvey Prize for Human Rights: ‘‘The
Rev. King had the ﬁnancial support and sympathy of inﬂuential white
Americans . . . and he was doing what he was guided to do in the interest
of Civil Rights for Negro Americans . . . [but] he was stopped forever, in
the midst of his work by an assassin’s bullet.’’
∂Ω
Given that bullets kill people, Jacques Garvey argued that Black Power
was an e√ective ‘‘weapon of defense’’ against injustices. Moreover, an ‘‘ide-
ology (whether it is red/communist or black/nationalist), in the minds of
people’’ cannot be destroyed. Throughout most of her adult life, Jacques
Garvey had witnessed how ideas can empower and motivate people to
struggle for change, and in this essay on Black Power she once again
identiﬁed the importance of cross-fertilization of Pan-African thought.
She pointed out that because African Americans were roused to struggle
for liberation and took an interest in ‘‘African nationalism all over the
world,’’ they gained, as a minority in the United States, ‘‘prestige and
international backing.’’ Geographic alignments were no longer rigid bor-
ders, as Africans worldwide viewed their struggles as one. It was this black
unity, Jacques Garvey asserted, that generated Black Power. She con-
cluded that ‘‘Black unity is black power, the only power a despised,
oppressed minority is capable of attaining.’’ As an intellectual with a
dynamic mind, she encouraged activists to create strategies that allowed
them mobility and ‘‘ﬂexib[ility] in expression and pronouncements so as


--- PAGE 243 ---
230 the progressive radical
to cope with the exigencies of the moment, keeping the goal always in
mind—to change an existing system that holds them down.’’ After this
essay appeared in a two-part series in The Star, Jacques Garvey wanted it
to reach a wider audience, so she personally published it, along with two
other essays—‘‘Marcus Garvey’s Impact on Jamaica and Africa’’ and ‘‘The
Power of the Human Spirit’’—in a pamphlet entitled Black Power in
America (1968).
∑≠
Jacques Garvey went on to write several essays o√ering her opinion on
economic conditions in Jamaica, the United States, and Africa, as well as
on Marcus Garvey’s impact on world events.
∑∞ But in 1970, when primary
unia documents turned up in New York City, the frustration that she had
felt over the years reached the boiling point. After struggling for decades
to ensure that the Garvey legacy was understood within the larger scope
of Pan-African and anticolonial history, Jacques Garvey was unprepared
for what must have seemed to her crass, opportunistic appropriation of
their heritage.
Boxes of unia documents were discovered by members of a commu-
nity-based group, ‘‘The Community Thing,’’ directed by a Mrs. Sims.
Scholar Robert Hill informed Jacques Garvey that the papers were the
‘‘remaining records of the unia Headquarters in NY.’’
∑≤ After receiving
several telephone calls regarding the ﬁnd, Jacques Garvey understood that
Jean Huston, curator of the Schomburg Collection, had ‘‘paid a man
$2,000 for a large portion of the papers, and these are now safely housed
at the Library.’’ The remainder of the documents, Jacques Garvey be-
lieved, had been turned over to famed sociologist Dr. Kenneth Clarke.
Jacques Garvey immediately informed Clarke that she had ‘‘exhausted’’
herself ‘‘preserving and interpretating the work of Marcus Garvey.’’ More-
over, she had ‘‘made available to Researchers, Students, and writers all the
material’’ kept at her home and papers that she had sent to the West
Indian Reference Library. ‘‘Never’’ had she ‘‘charged any one,’’ and there-
fore she wanted ‘‘to see all the papers, documents, letters, etc.’’ in his
possession ‘‘turned over to Mrs. Jean Huston, Curator . . . so that they can
be easily available to the public.’’
∑≥
In response, Clarke wrote Jacques Garvey that approximately ‘‘one-
third of the total amount of these materials were in the possession of
Mrs. Sims and her associate Mr. Tatum’’ and that ‘‘they were in complete
control of the [papers].’’ He, Clarke, did not ‘‘have the power, nor can


--- PAGE 244 ---
the progressive radical 231
I assume any right or responsibility to turn this material over to anyone.’’
Soon Jacques Garvey received a cablegram from Mrs. Sims informing her
that the culprits who initially ‘‘stole’’ the papers were associated with the
Schomburg Library. In addition, Sims warned, the Schomburg archival
facilities were deteriorating; she thus proposed to place the materials
elsewhere, and Jacques Garvey agreed.
∑∂
Between telephone calls and letters from a variety of scholars, activists,
publishers, and archivists, Jacques Garvey was overwhelmed by the ﬁ-
asco.
∑∑ Now seventy-four years old and in poor health, she was in no shape
to travel to the United States to clarify matters. Perhaps this is why she
ultimately decided that the materials were not a serious ﬁnd. One reporter
wrote that Jacques Garvey threw ‘‘cold water on the recent claim that a
cache of papers belonging to her late husband represented a gold mine.’’ It
was speculated that Jacques Garvey believed that their value was exagger-
ated ‘‘so that people could cash in on them as Garvey Papers.’’
∑∏ She also
concluded that if the materials included personal correspondence, then
they belonged to her, according to the terms of Garvey’s will. In the end,
these documents were cataloged at the Schomburg Library; they represent
a major collection of unia business and archival documents.
This experience soured Jacques Garvey’s perceptions of some scholars,
who, she believed, were making a career ‘‘trading’’ on Garvey’s name for
ﬁnancial reward. Eventually she accused both Robert Hill and John Hen-
rik Clark of giving ‘‘speeches on Garvey’’ to increase their professional
status for proﬁt. The fact that $10,000 was eventually paid for the Garvey
Papers and that scholars were earning incomes o√ the propagation of
Garveyism must have been infuriating to Jacques Garvey. For close to ﬁfty
years, she had made herself freely available to researchers, students, and
political activists, even though she continued to su√er monetary hardship
during the last years of her life.
∑π Since she was motivated solely by her
commitment to keep the philosophy of Garveyism (and of course her
own intellectual work) alive in the minds of black people, the earning
power (no matter how meager) of others was, in her mind, a prostitution
of Garveyism. On one occasion, she remarked that ‘‘the pickings using the
name of Garvey is good these days.’’
∑∫
Openly bitter during the last years of her life, in a 1972 interview,
recalling her di≈culty in publishing Garvey and Garveyism, Jacques Gar-
vey said, ‘‘I had to send my manuscript back ﬁve times and had no help,
neither from my children nor from friends; they did not feel the way I felt


--- PAGE 245 ---
232 the progressive radical
about the movement. . . . I can truly say I had no help in all this trouble
and no one to thank.’’ Although she may not have had the support she
desired, the evidence that two former Garveyites loaned her part of the
money for publication counters this accusation. But again, her comments
are important because they express how she at times felt about the people
around her and her belief that she was in the trenches alone. That belief
was substantiated by the fact that prior to the advent of noted Garvey
scholars, Jacques Garvey had done much of the major work to preserve
and disseminate Garveyisque ideas. She was correct in stating that ‘‘the
rebirth of Garveyism in the United States and all over the world, was
brought about by my intelligent and dedicated actions in bringing about
or having these books published at great cost to me physically, emo-
tionally and mentally.’’
∑Ω Even though almost every prominent scholar
credited her for keeping that legacy alive and for interpreting Garveyism
to the world, she still felt unappreciated.
∏≠
Jacques Garvey’s emotions were mirrored by other black female activ-
ists who gave their lives to political struggles. For example, Ida B. Wells-
Barnett’s autobiography o√ered similar melancholic sentiments regarding
lack of recognition.
∏∞ Physically and mentally worn out at the end of their
lives, Jacques Garvey and Wells-Barnett both believed that others under-
stood neither the passion of their commitment nor their sacriﬁces for
their causes. Perhaps their unyielding dedication made them hyperjudg-
mental of others who appeared less committed or more motivated by
greed and prestige.
The last few years of Jacques Garvey’s life, however, o√ered notable
redeeming moments. In 1971 she won the Musgrave Gold Medal, which
honors ‘‘distinguished eminence.’’ Established by the Board of Governors
of the Institute of Jamaica in commemoration of Sir Anthony Musgrave,
the medal acknowledges leaders in promoting literature, science, or art of
the West Indies, especially Jamaica. Jacques Garvey was selected ‘‘in rec-
ognition of her dedicated and distinguished contributions to the peoples
of African descent and particularly for her erudite dissertations on the
philosophy of Garveyism, which have earned her a lasting place in the
ﬁeld of historical writings.’’ In 1972 the ﬁrst hall at the Jamaican College
of Arts, Science, and T echnology (cast) to be named after a woman was
named after her. At the ceremony, Jacques Garvey placed the sign bearing
her name on the wall. It was reported that she addressed the gathering ‘‘on
the role of women in Jamaican society and encouraged the residents of the
Hall to win the respect of their male counterparts.’’
∏≤ She had worked


--- PAGE 246 ---
the progressive radical 233
toward this goal on various levels since joining the unia in 1919; ﬁfty-two
years later, she still believed it was an important undertaking for women.
Her last award came directly from the Jamaican government, which
voted in 1973 to give Widows of National Heroes a $6,800 annual tax-free
pension. Cabinet members believed that she was entitled to the funds not
only as Marcus Garvey’s widow, but also in view of her ‘‘own distin-
guished contribution to the progressive movements of black people of
the world, along with [her] work in advancing black consciousness and
awareness.’’ Although grateful for their ‘‘assessment of [her] worth to [her]
race and [the Jamaican] nation,’’ it was impossible for Jacques Garvey to
compromise her principles by accepting the pension. At age seventy-
eight, she still lived on a tight budget, a limit she attributed to the Jamai-
can government’s unwillingness to regulate the economy. No amount of
‘‘money’’ was ‘‘adequate compensation’’ for the personal sacriﬁces and the
‘‘harassment’’ she had su√ered from the ‘‘governmental administrators
whose lust for political power and personal aggrandisment’’ transﬁgured
her into ‘‘an implacable enemy’’ because she opposed their manipulation
of the economy.
∏≥ Jacques Garvey understood why the black masses lived
on the economic edge and felt that this issue merited publicity, so she took
the opportunity to critique economic policy. In an extended essay, she
asserted that ‘‘the priorities for ﬁnancial help should go to those who have
no proper shelter . . . lack of opportunities to earn daily bread and the
necessities of life.’’
∏∂
In touch with a world where progressive Africans were rejecting ‘‘all the
things originating from metropolitan powers, including capitalism as
an appropriate economic form,’’ Jacques Garvey was inﬂuenced by this
thinking, especially since over the years she had witnessed the ‘‘high
price paid’’ to develop African capitalism by exploiting the working black
masses. Her essay advocates that the government should function as a
‘‘wholesaler’’ to end monopolization and to ensure the fair distribution of
resources. Overall, her criticism reﬂects her ‘‘e√ort to have a Better Ja-
maica from the grass-roots up.’’
∏∑ Yet because this was a scathing at-
tack against the government, several Kingston publishers refused to print
it ‘‘for fear of political victimization.’’ This pained Jacques Garvey ‘‘to
the point of tears’’; yet she persisted, including having a limited edition
mimeographed for the public.
∏∏
Jacques Garvey had experienced many disappointments in her politi-
cal life, and she believed that eventually these emotions and frustrations
had registered in her body. She had ‘‘reached a point after all of these


--- PAGE 247 ---
234 the progressive radical
years,’’ Rupert Lewis remembered, where she described her body as being
‘‘like asbestos’’ and just as ‘‘inﬂammable.’’ The last two weeks of her life
were ‘‘wrecked with excruating pain’’ as a result of cancer. On 25 July 1973
she died from the disease, which she had with characteristic vividness
‘‘connected to the personal impact of the twists and turns of the black
liberation struggle, in particular its setbacks, on her life.’’
∏π


--- PAGE 248 ---
conclusion
It is di≈cult to situate the life and work of an activist like Amy Jacques
Garvey. At ﬁrst blush, one remembers how she interpreted the regional
politics of Jamaica, the Jim Crow divides of America, or the international
contexts of diasporic citizens. However, after tracing her geographic
movements throughout the world, one sees not only the making of a black
radical subject, but also the making of a diasporic consciousness that was
just as ﬂuid as her sojourning body. In this biography, I have studied her
published writings, her private correspondence, and the historical context
to reconstruct and represent an Amy Jacques Garvey who reﬂects her
person—a woman who embraced her own thoughts, acknowledged the
worthiness of her ideas, and massaged her rhetoric into an impressive
canon of Pan-African discourse.
To most observers, Jacques Garvey entered the political landscape
through her husband’s legacy. Similar to the work of most politically
active wives of famous men, her inﬂuence on Garveyism has seldom been
examined for its own merit or celebrated for its contribution to progres-
sive politics. In fact, it is surprising how many Garvey scholars have failed
to grasp Jacques Garvey’s crucial role in shaping the ideological frame-
work of Garveyism—a strain of black nationalism and the basis of Pan-
Africanism.
Jacques Garvey was not merely an emissary for the cofounder, Marcus
Garvey, but labored daily to keep Garveyite ideas in the forefront of black
nationalist and Pan-African conversations well after his demise. This ded-
ication was no easy feat considering the ‘‘haters’’ of black people in general
and Marcus Garvey in particular. She defended attacks against Garvey the
man and Garveyism the ideology by rebutting critiques at every turn. The
fact that Garveyism is so pronounced today is due primarily to the life-
long work of Amy Jacques Garvey. Her e√orts resonate in the Rastafarian
movement, the Nation of Islam, the Moorish Science T emple, and a
variety of political sects that all pay homage to Garveyism.


--- PAGE 249 ---
236 conclusion
Moreover, it is because of Jacques Garvey’s scholarship that we know so
much about Garvey himself. As a popular cultural phenomenon, Marcus
Garvey (second only to Malcolm X) is a hip-hop icon, and his 1920s slo-
gan, ‘‘One God, One Aim, One Destiny,’’ continues to resonate through-
out the African diaspora, largely due to Jacques Garvey’s passionate pres-
ervation of his image. Not without ego, she understood that her work,
which kept Garvey at the center of Garveyism, was also an investment in
her own historical importance and immortality. By constantly involving
Garvey, one of the most controversial and inﬂuential personalities of
the twentieth century, in Pan-African discussions, Jacques Garvey posi-
tioned herself as an inﬂuential strategist of progressive political ideas.
Initially, her writings replicated her husband’s every utterance. But it was
not long before she penned her own thoughts, which deviated—at times,
considerably—from Garvey’s. Di√erences aside, she rightfully claimed
ownership of his intellectual production, making it clearly her political
property. This stance was important because it gave her a certain omnipo-
tent authority over his rhetoric. No one, in her opinion, could interpret,
analyze, or unpack the meaning of his words better than she. This point,
whether real or imagined, meant that Jacques Garvey saw herself as the
most knowledgeable Garveyite, the person who could move Garveyism to
new heights.
Always forward-looking in her work, and determined to generate an
intellectual interest in the black world, Jacques Garvey explored the
cross-fertilization of Pan-African ideas in her writings. She viewed Africa
and the diaspora as a dialectical equation: if Africans on the continent
were exploited, then their condition reﬂected on their ‘‘family’’ scattered
throughout the far corners of the globe. To produce a strong, uniﬁed
Africa, an Africa that all people of African descent could not only call
home but also seal with a legal nationality, Jacques Garvey believed that a
redemptive philosophy was essential.
She argued that an informed constituency invested in the motherland
could liberate Africa from the clutches of Europeans. Determined to
educate the mind and the soul for action, whether it was through the
African Study Circle or coalescing forces to produce the Memorandum
Correlative of Africa, the West Indies, and the Americas , Jacques Garvey
believed that the sharing of ideas—theorizing—was an important form of
activism that would not only inspire a collective political movement but
also stimulate a genuine fellowship of love among black people.
Using repetition and long explanations to unravel the political, eco-


--- PAGE 250 ---
conclusion 237
nomic, cultural, and social features of the Universal Negro Improvement
Association (unia) program, Jacques Garvey simultaneously unleashed an
arsenal against racism, colonialism, and imperialism. A rigorous thinker
who enjoyed serious dialogue and debate, her ideological reservoir ex-
panded with each succeeding decade. Bold and aggressive, she continued
the tradition of black radical thought by claiming wholeheartedly that
people of African descent were entitled to the material resources necessary
to ensure a good life.
Amy Jacques Garvey’s lifelong commitment to the Pan-African strug-
gle illustrates how one actually becomes a black radical and the steadfast
determination it takes to remain committed to dynamic political ideas.
She often worked in isolation and had few close friends, but her desire to
see a free Africa, a place that its diasporic family could call home, fueled
her intellectual attachment to progressive politics. Reﬂecting on her ac-
complishments, she wrote, ‘‘I only regret that I have one life to give, but
rest assured it has been, it is, and will be a full life, for the ancestral Home
and my people everywhere.’’
∞ Jacques Garvey’s legacy is recorded in her
proliﬁc editorials, essays, pamphlets, and books—written words pregnant
with multiple meanings; it is just as eclectic as the diaspora of black people
whom she loved so dearly.


--- PAGE 251 ---



--- PAGE 252 ---
notes
Abbreviations
AJG
Amy Jacques Garvey
AJG Papers
Amy Jacques Garvey Papers, Fisk University Special Collections,
Nashville, T enn.
Du Bois Papers
W . E. B. Du Bois Papers, Microﬁlm Collections, Manuscripts and Archives,
Sterling Library, Yale University, New Haven, Conn.
FRUS
U.S. Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United States
Garvey/UNIA Papers
Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers,
7 vols., ed. Robert A. Hill (Los Angeles: University of California Press,
1983–86, 1989–90).
MG
Marcus Garvey
MGC
Marcus Garvey Collection, FBI Reading Room, Washington, D.C.
NA
National Archives
UNIA Papers
Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers, 1921–86, Western Reserve
Historical Society, Cleveland, Ohio
Introduction
1. J. A. G., ‘‘10 Minutes with Mrs. Marcus Garvey,’’ Negro World, 17 March 1923,
6; copy in box 12, ﬁle 1, AJG Papers.
2. AJG, ‘‘The Role of Women in Liberation Struggles,’’ Massachusetts Review
(Winter–Spring 1972): 109–12.
3. E. U. Essien-Udom and AJG, eds., More Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus
Garvey (Great Britain: Frank Cass, 1977), 247.


--- PAGE 253 ---
240 notes to pages 5–10
4. Rupert Lewis, ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey: A Political Portrait,’’ Jamaica Daily
News, 29 July 1973.
Chapter One
1. Rupert Lewis and Maureen Warner-Lewis, ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey,’’ Jamaica
Journal 20 (1987): 39; H. P . Jacobs, A Short History of Kingston: Vol. 1, 1692–1871
(Kingston, Jamaica: Ministry of Education, 1976), 54.
2. ‘‘Amy Euphemia Jacques was born 31/12/1895 in Kingston.’’ Ms. J. Brown for
C.E.O. Registrar General & Deputy Keeper of the Records, Registrar General’s
Department, Jamaica, W .I., to author, 4 October 2001.
3. Jacobs, Short History of Kingston , 30; E. M. Bacon and E. Aaron, The New
Jamaica (New York: Walbridge and Co., 1890), reprinted in Working Miracles:
Women’s Lives in the English-Speaking Caribbean, ed. Olive Senior (Mona, Jamaica:
Institute Social and Economic Research, 1991), 108.
4. Kingston began as a parish in 1693; it became a city in 1801 and ﬁnally the
island’s capital in 1872. The Common Council Proceedings (1803–15) listed an
unidentiﬁed mayor as early as 1808. Frank Cundall wrote, ‘‘John Jacques, the
mayor, was one of Kingston’s three representatives.’’ Cundall, Historic Jamaica
(London: Institute of Jamaica, 1915), 103.
5. For example, in 1864, out of a population of close to 440,000, only 1,903
persons were eligible to vote for members of the Jamaican House of Assembly. See
Johnston, The Negro in the New World, 255.
6. Ibid., 255–56.
7. Edward Brathwaite, The Development of Creole Society in Jamaica, 1770–1820
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971), 59.
8. Lewis and Warner-Lewis, ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey,’’ 39; Hon. W . Fawcett, ‘‘T o-
bacco in Jamaica,’’ West Indian Bulletin (1907): 227.
9. Lewis and Warner-Lewis, ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey,’’ 48, 40; George Samuel
Jacques, ‘‘Last Will and T estament,’’ Spanish T own Archives, 3 August 1913; Jacobs,
Short History of Kingston, 35.
10. AJG stated that her father had ‘‘illegitimate children, but in those days they
didn’t count.’’ Quoted in Ida Lewis, ‘‘Mrs. Marcus Garvey Talks with Ida Lewis,’’
Encore, May 1973, 68. In 1906 the percentage of ‘‘illegitimate births’’ was 65 out of
every 100. Johnston, The Negro in the New World, 275.
11. B. W . Higman, Slave Population of the British Caribbean, 1807–1834  (Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984), 19. Higman states that the Cayman
Islands was the only place in the British Caribbean where color distinctions were
not recorded. Some records simply state distinctions between black and colored,
but in others more detailed gradations are noted.
12. Arnold A. Sio, ‘‘Race, Color, and Miscegenation: The Free Colored of Ja-
maica and Barbados,’’ Caribbean Studies 16 (April 1976): 8.
13. Higman, Slave Population of the British Caribbean, 109.


--- PAGE 254 ---
notes to pages 10–14 241
14. H. G. DeLisser, Twentieth Century Jamaica (Kingston, Jamaica: Jamaican
Times, 1913), 53.
15. Lewis and Warner-Lewis, ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey,’’ 40.
16. Irma Watkins-Owens, Blood Relations: Caribbean Immigrants and the Har-
lem Community, 1900–1930 (Bloomington: University of Indiana Press, 1996), 13.
17. DeLisser, Twentieth Century Jamaica, 52.
18. Ida Lewis, ‘‘Mrs. Marcus Garvey Talks with Ida Lewis,’’ Encore, May 1973, 68.
19. AJG, ‘‘The Role of Women in Liberation Struggles,’’ Massachusetts Review
(Winter–Spring 1971): 110. Parents as agents in their o√spring’s educational de-
velopment was nothing new. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, middle-
and upper-class children often obtained formal schooling at home from their
parents or paid tutors. Moreover, highly educated women usually came from fam-
ilies, and especially had fathers, who supported girls’ education. See Nancy Wal-
lace, Better Than School: One Family’s Declaration of Independence (New York: Lar-
son, 1983), 28. Signiﬁcantly, newspapers were considered a luxury for the average
working-class Jamaican. See ‘‘Charles S. Shirley to the Gleaner,’’ in Garvey/UNIA
Papers, 1:47–48.
20. Millicent Whyte, A Short History of Education in Jamaica (London: Hodder
and Stoughton, 1977), 51–52.
21. Wolmers School, Kingston, Wolmers Bicentenary Souvenir, 1729–1929
(Kingston, Jamaica: Committee, 1929) (quotation). Wolmers began when a Kings-
ton goldsmith left in his will £2,360 for the founding of a free school. Clinton
Black, The Story of Jamaica: From Prehistory to the Present (London: Collins, 1965),
187. Ethlin Jacques died as a young adult; she is noted as deceased in the Wolmers
Bicentenary Souvenir.
22. It was not until 1920 that the British government introduced a grant-in-aid
scheme for secondary schools. At this time, 42 percent of Jamaican women were
working on banana plantations, struggling primarily due to their lack of a formal
education. See Joan French and Honor Ford Smith, Women, Work, and Organiza-
tion in Jamaica, 1900–1944  (Mona, Jamaica: Sistern Research Institute of Social
Science, 1986), 44; Johnston, The Negro in the New World, 270.
23. Marlene Hamilton, Wolmers Alumni Association of the U.S.A.: Wolmers,
1729–1979 (Souvenir Programma, 1979), 17–25 (quotations, p. 23). Jamaicans com-
monly associated with individuals of the same class. See DeLisser, Twentieth Cen-
tury Jamaica, 51.
24. Etienne Balibar and Immanuel Wallerstein, Race, Nation, Class: Ambiguous
Identities (London: Verso, 1991), 94.
25. Stuart Hall, ‘‘Minimal Selves,’’ in Black British Cultural Studies: A Reader, ed.
Houston A. Baker, Manthia Diawara, and Ruth H. Lindeborg (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1996), 116.
26. Joyce Bennett Justus, ‘‘Women’s Roles in West Indian Society,’’ in The Black
Woman Cross-Culturally, ed. Filomina Steady (Cambridge, Mass: Schenkman,


--- PAGE 255 ---
242 notes to pages 14–18
1981), 437 (ﬁrst quotation); Ida Lewis, ‘‘Mrs. Marcus Garvey Talks with Ida Lewis,’’
68 (second quotation). Amy’s sister, Ida Repole, also referred to their mother as
‘‘quiet and soft.’’ Mrs. Ida Repole, interview by author, Kingston, Jamaica, 15
November 1990.
27. Justus, ‘‘Women’s Role in West Indian Society,’’ 436.
28. T erry Smith, ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey: Portrait of a Courageous Woman,’’
Jamaican Housewife, Winter 1964, 23.
29. Ida Lewis, ‘‘Mrs. Marcus Garvey Talks with Ida Lewis,’’ 68.
30. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism (London: Collier-Macmillan, Ltd., 1970), 112–
13 (ﬁrst quotation); Ida Lewis, ‘‘Mrs. Marcus Garvey Talks with Ida Lewis,’’ 68.
31. George Samuel Jacques, ‘‘Last Will and T estament,’’ 1–2. These properties
included ‘‘Jacques Villa on Long Mountain Road, 35 Weldman St., a Bryand Loss
Same, 5 Rumbus Lane, and a piece of land on the S.E. corner of Bre St. and Black
St. in Brown L— —.’’
32. Ibid., 3–4.
33. Lewis and Warner-Lewis, ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey’’; Nicholas J. White, ‘‘Ma-
laria,’’ in Manson’s Tropical Disease, ed. Gordon Cook (London: WB Saunders Co.,
Ltd. 1996), 1088; Simeon Margolis, ed., Johns Hopkins Symptoms and Remedies
(New York: Rebus, Random House, 1995), 521; Mark F. Boyd, ‘‘Historical Intro-
duction to the Symposium on Malaria,’’ in Human Malaria, ed. Forest Ray Moul-
ton (Washington, D.C.: American Association for Advancement of Science, 1941),
14, 17; Mrs. Ida Repole, interview by author, Kingston, Jamaica, 16 November
1990; William Bispham, Malaria: Its Diagnosis, Treatment, and Prophylaxis (Balti-
more: Wm and Wilkins Co., 1944), 70 (‘‘sudden collapse’’); Paul Russel, Malaria:
Basic Principles Brieﬂy Stated  (Oxford: Scientiﬁc Publishers, 1952), 33; Bernard
Nocht and Martin Mayer, Malaria: A Handbook of Treatment, Parasitology, and
Prevention (London: John Bale Medical Publishers, 1937), 5 (last quotation). In the
southern United States, primarily the coastal regions, malaria was still evident but
not epidemic.
34. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 113.
35. Watkins-Owen, Blood Relations, 23 (ﬁrst quotation), 22 (second quotation);
AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 113 (last quotation).
36. Index of Passenger Manifests, ‘‘States Immigration O≈cer at Port of Ar-
rival’’ (26 April 1917), line 2, NA—Northeast Region. Rupert Lewis and Maureen
Warner-Lewis (‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey,’’ 39) state that AJG left Jamaica to ‘‘stay with
a paternal cousin’’ in New York.
37. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 113, 53.
Chapter Two
1. Calvin B. Holden, ‘‘The Causes and Composition of West Indian Immigra-
tion to New York City, 1900–1952,’’ Afro-Americans in New York Life and History 2
(January 1987): 2–27.


--- PAGE 256 ---
notes to pages 18–21 243
2. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism (London: Collier-Macmillan, Ltd., 1970), 113.
3. AJG listed her occupation as ‘‘typist’’ on the immigration records at Ellis
Island.
4. T erry Smith, ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey: Portrait of a Courageous Woman,’’ Ja-
maican Housewife, Winter 1964, 24; Garvey/UNIA Papers , 2:168; Beverly Reed,
‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey: Black, Beautiful, and Free,’’ Ebony, June 1971, 48; AJG,
Garvey and Garveyism, 113.
5. Cheryl Harris, ‘‘Finding Sojourner’s T ruth: Race, Gender, and the Institution
of Property,’’ Cardoza Law Review 18 (November 1996): 317.
6. Eighty-two percent of immigrants came from the English-speaking Carib-
bean. See Irma Watkins-Owen, Blood Relations: Caribbean Immigrants and the
Harlem Community, 1900–1930 (Bloomington: University of Indiana Press, 1996),
4. After 1924 Congress set quotas to curtail immigration. See Holden, ‘‘Causes and
Composition of West Indian Immigration,’’ 7–27; David Hellwig, ‘‘Black Meets
Black: Afro-American Reactions to West Indian Immigrants in the 1920s,’’ South
Atlantic Quarterly 77 (1978): 233; Thomas Sowell, ed., Essays on Data on American
Ethnic Groups (Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute, 1978), 41–49.
7. Ira De A. Reid, The Negro Immigrant: His Background, Characteristics, and
Social Adjustment, 1899–1937  (ca. 1939; reprint, New York: Arno Press, 1969), 235,
app. A, table III, an adapted report by the Commission of Immigration and the
Secretary of Labor, U.S. Department of Labor, 1899–1937.
8. Watkins-Owen, Blood Relations, 19.
9. Carole Marks, Farewell—We’re Good and Gone: The Great Black Migration
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989).
10. Reid, Negro Immigrant, 122.
11. Mrs. Ida Repole, interview by author, Mona, Jamaica, 15 November 1990;
Watkins-Owen, Blood Relations, 45.
12. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Com-
merce, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1919 (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1920),
822–23; Jacqueline Jones, Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and
the Family, from Slavery to the Present (New York: Vintage Books, 1985), 164; Paule
Marshall, ‘‘Black Immigrant Women in Brown Girl, Brownstones,’’ in Female
Immigrants to the United States: Caribbean, Latin America, and African Experiences,
ed. Delores M. Mortimer and Roy S. Bryce-Laporte (Washington, D.C.: Smithso-
nian Institution, RIIES Occasional Papers No. 2, 1981), 6; T era Hunter, To Joy My
Freedom: Southern Black Women’s Lives and Labors after the Civil War (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1997).
13. T erry Smith, ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey.’’
14. Joyce T oney, ‘‘The Perpetuation of a Culture of Migration: West Indian
American Ties with Home, 1900–1979,’’ Afro-Americans in New York Life and
Culture 13 (January 1989): 53.
15. Watkins-Owen, Blood Relations, 155 (ﬁrst quotation); Carol Boyce Davies,


--- PAGE 257 ---
244 notes to pages 22–29
Black Women Writing and Identity: Migration of the Subject (New York: Routledge,
1994), 20.
16. Marshall, ‘‘Black Immigrant Women in Brown Girl,’’ 8.
17. Ibid., 8–9.
18. Watkins-Owens, Blood Relations, 155.
19. ‘‘The Case against Marcus Garvey Is Making History,’’ Negro World, 16 June
1923, 8; J. A. Rogers, World’s Great Men of Color (New York: J. A. Rogers, 1947),
2:602.
20. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 39, 41.
21. Lionel M. Yard, Biography of Amy Ashwood Garvey, 1897–1969: Co-Founder of
the UNIA (Washington D.C.: Associated Publisher, 1990), 16, 14.
22. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 1:162.
23. Ibid., 69, 100.
24. ‘‘Marcus Garvey to T . A. McCormack,’’ in ibid., 193.
25. ‘‘Active Members Wanted for the Universal Negro Improvement Association
of Jamaica,’’ Daily Chronicle, November 1915, reprinted in ibid., 168.
26. Yard, Amy Ashwood Garvey, 68–69.
27. Ibid., 33; T ony Martin, Race First: The Ideological and Organizational Strug-
gles of Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association (Westport,
Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1976), 7, 23 (quotation); Garvey/UNIA Papers, 1:cxiii,
2:76; Watkins-Owen, Blood Relations, 113.
28. Yard, Amy Ashwood Garvey, 70.
29. Winston James, Holding Aloft the Banner of Ethiopia: Caribbean Radicalism
in Early Twentieth-Century America (London: Verso Press, 1998), 134–35.
30. Rev. George A. Weston, a former vice president of the UNIA’s New York
Division, concurs with Ashwood’s story. Weston, however, found himself in sharp
conﬂict with AJG. In March 1926 he was publicly ousted from the organization on
charges of rebellion at Liberty Hall. See Elton C. Fax, Garvey: The Story of a Pioneer
Black Nationalist (New York: Dodd, Mead, 1972), 110. For the feud between AJG
and Weston, see Garvey/UNIA Papers, 6:364, 395, 433, 453.
31. Yard, Amy Ashwood Garvey , 82; T ony Martin, ‘‘Amy Ashwood Garvey:
Wife No. 1,’’ Jamaica Journal 30 (August–October 1987): 33; Garvey/UNIA Papers,
2:636.
32. Paul Mitchell, ed., Race Riots in Black and White  (Englewood Cli√s, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1970); Peter H. Rossi, ed., Ghetto Revolts (New Brunswick, N.J.:
Aldine Publishing Co., 1973); Craig Wyn Wade, The Fiery Cross: The Ku Klux Klan
in America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987), 151; Garvey/UNIA Papers, 1:lxi.
33. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Fourteenth Census of
the United States T aken in the Year 1920: Volume 2, Population, Reports by States, New
York. Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1923. This record conﬁrms that Jacques was a
lodger in their home.
34. Ibid.


--- PAGE 258 ---
notes to pages 29–34 245
35. Amy Ashwood Garvey Collection MS 1977B, box 7, ‘‘Marcus Garvey Chap-
ter II,’’ 21, National Library of Jamaica, Kingston.
36. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 43.
37. AJG, ed., The Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey; Or, Africa for the
Africans (Dover, Mass.: Majority Press, 1986), 124.
38. Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1993), 26.
39. Honor Ford Smith, ‘‘Women and the Garvey Movement in Jamaica,’’ in
Garvey: His Work and Impact, ed. Rupert Lewis and Patrick Bryan (Mona, Jamaica:
Institute of Social and Economic Research, 1988), 77.
40. Marcus Garvey v. Amy Ashwood Garvey , Supreme Court of New York
County, no. 24028, NNHR, 15 July 1920.; Garvey/UNIA Papers, 2:408 n. 2; AJG,
Garvey and Garveyism, 43.
41. ‘‘The Case against Marcus Garvey Is Making History,’’ Negro World, 16 June
1923, 8; William Seraille, ‘‘Henrietta Vinton Davis and the Garvey Movement,’’
Afro-Americans in New York Life and History  (July 1983): 7–24; Reports of FBI
Agents Mortimer J. Davis and James Amos, 6 March 1922, book 1, MGC; AJG,
Garvey and Garveyism, 197.
42. Martin, Race First, 334 n. 7.
43. AJG, Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey, 2:87.
44. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 43.
45. See Mary Helen Washington’s introduction to Anna Julia Cooper, A Voice
from the South (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), xxxvi.
46. Martin, ‘‘Wife No. 1,’’ 32–33.
47. E. Frances White, ‘‘Africa on My Mind: Gender, Counter Discourse, and
African-American Nationalism,’’ Journal of Women’s History 2 (Spring 1990): 93.
48. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 2:641 (ﬁrst quotation), 638 (last quotation); Martin,
‘‘Wife No. 1,’’ 33 (second quotation).
49. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 3:724.
50. Davies, Black Women Writing, 17; Gilroy, Black Atlantic, 34; Horace Camp-
bell, ‘‘Garveyism, Pan-Africanism, and African Liberation in the T wentieth Cen-
tury,’’ in Garvey: His Work and Impact, ed. Rupert Lewis and Patrick Bryan (Mona,
Jamaica: Institute of Social and Economic Research, 1988), 172; Julian F. Ja√ee,
Crusade against Radicalism: New York during the Red Scare, 1914–1924 (Port Wash-
ington: Kennikat Press, 1972); Theodore Kornweibel, ed., Federal Surveillance of
Afro Americans, 1917–1925: The First World War, the Red Scare, the Garvey Movement
(Frederick, Md.: University Publications of America, 1986).
51. Kenneth O’Reilly, Racial Matters: The FBI’s Secret File on Black America,
1960–1972 (New York: Free Press, 1989).
52. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 2:638, 641.
53. Martin, ‘‘Wife No. 1,’’ 33; W . E. B. Du Bois, ‘‘Marcus Garvey,’’ Crisis,
December 1920, 60.


--- PAGE 259 ---
246 notes to pages 34–41
54. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 3:237–38.
55. Martin, Race First, 184–85; Garvey/UNIA Papers, 3:723 n. 1.
56. Marlene D. Beckman, ‘‘The White Slave T ra≈c Act: The Historical Impact
of a Criminal Law Policy on Women,’’ Georgetown Law Journal 72 (1984): 1112 n. 3.
57. Ibid., 1124, 1111–12, 1128.
58. Ibid., 1115 (quotation); Deborah Gray White, Ar’n’t I a Woman (New York:
Norton, 1985).
59. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 3:716, 721, 728–29.
60. Cyril Briggs, editorial, Crusader, November 1921, 13. Also, the aims of the
African Blood Brotherhood were to ‘‘cement into one great universal brotherhood
all persons possessing in any degree the glorious heritage of African blood. T o work
for a free Africa and the immediate protection and ultimate liberation of Negroes
everywhere. T o secure absolute race equality—political, economic, and social; and
to see that there is an equal application of the laws where ever Negroes have to live
and work. T o develop commercial enterprises among Negroes in various parts of
the world. T o gain for Negro labor the full reward of its toil and prevent capitalist
exploitation and oppression of the workers of the race.’’ Crusader, December 1921,
1322.
61. Ueda Reed, ‘‘West Indians,’’ Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic
Groups, ed. Stephan Thernstrom (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1980),
1020–27 (quotation, p. 1025).
62. Decree of Divorce granted on 15 June 1922, box 4, ﬁle 7, AJG Papers.
63. Report of FBI Agent Andrew Battle, 1 August 1922, book 2, MGC.
64. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 88–89.
65. Fax, Garvey, 160.
66. Amy Garvey v. Marcus Garvey, Action for Absolute Divorce, 24 August 1922,
New York State Supreme Court Case ﬁle, New York County Clerk Index 31291/
1922 (quotation); Report of FBI Agent Mortimer J. Davis, 31 March, 24 April 1923,
book 3, MGC.
67. Stephanie Shaw, What a Woman Ought to Be and to Do: Black Professional
Women Workers during the Jim Crow Era (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1996), 41–67.
68. Winston James, Holding Aloft the Banner of Ethiopia, 96.
69. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 39.
70. Joy James, Transcending the T alented T enth: Black Leaders and American
Intellectuals (New York: Routledge, 1997), 46.
71. Shaw, What a Woman Ought to Be and to Do, 41–67.
Chapter Three
1. T ony Martin, Race First: The Ideological and Organizational Struggles of Mar-
cus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association  (Westport, Conn.:
Greenwood Press, 1976), 14–16; Cheryl Louise T ownsend Gilkes interview with


--- PAGE 260 ---
notes to pages 42–46 247
‘‘Audley (Queen Mother) Moore,’’ in The Black Women’s Oral History Project, ed.
Ruth Edmonds Hill (London: Meckler, 1991), 8:120–23.
2. Martin, Race First, 930 (ﬁrst quotation), 925 (second and third quotations);
Garvey/UNIA Papers, 4:989.
3. Garvey/UNIA Papers , 4:934–42 (ﬁrst quotation, p. 1037); Evelyn Brooks
Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent: The Women’s Movement in the Black Baptist
Church, 1880–1920 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993), 196.
4. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 4:934–41 (quotations, p. 936).
5. Ida B. Wells-Barnett, Crusade for Justice: The Autobiography of Ida B. Wells
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972); Garvey/UNIA Papers, 4:936.
6. Ula Y. Taylor, ‘‘As-Salaam Alaikum, My Sister: The Honorable Elijah Mu-
hammad and the Women Who Followed Him,’’ Race & Society 1 (1998): 177–96.
7. The NAACP and the National Urban League did not have separate leader-
ship positions designated exclusively for women.
8. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 4:1037.
9. Barbara Bair, ‘‘T rue Women, Real Men: Gender, Ideology, and Social Roles in
the Garvey Movement,’’ in Gender Domains: Rethinking Public and Private in
Women’s History, ed. Dorothy O. Helly and Susan M. Reverby (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cor-
nell University Press, 1992), 155.
10. George L. Mosse, Nationalism and Sexuality: Respectability and Abnormal
Sexuality in Modern Europe (New York: Howard Fertig, 1985), 19–20.
11. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 4:788.
12. Ibid., 1038.
13. Carole Boyce Davies, Black Women, Writing, and Identity: Migrations of the
Subject (New York: Routledge, 1994); E. Frances White, ‘‘Africa on My Mind:
Gender, Counter Discourse, and African American Nationalism,’’ Journal of Wom-
en’s History 2 (1990): 86.
14. AJG, ed., The Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey; Or, Africa for the
Africans (Dover, Mass: Majority Press, 1986), 1:preface. Randall Burkett has argued
that the language in Garvey’s August 1921 speech, for example, was ‘‘altered by Mrs.
Garvey so that the familiar passage from Psalms 68:31 is substituted in place of
some of Garvey’s more rhapsodical passages concerning Jesus.’’ He adds that ‘‘nu-
merous other changes from the Negro World versions have been made in this and
many of the speeches published in Philosophy and Opinions.’’ It is understandable
why Burkett o√ered this conclusion. His analysis centered on comparing a speech
printed in the Negro World with a reprint in Philosophy and Opinions. Substantial
changes are indeed evident but not because Jacques was a copious editor. Garvey
gave an inordinate number of speeches, and Burkett mistakenly compared two
entirely di√erent ones that Garvey had given days apart. Several phrases in both
texts are the same, and Garvey even gave an explanation for the identical phrasing
by introducing a section of his second speech with, ‘‘I said some nights ago.’’
Considering the fact that Burkett analyzed dissimilar texts, it is no wonder that


--- PAGE 261 ---
248 notes to pages 46–50
he found that Jacques Garvey had made numerous changes in her husband’s
speeches. See Burkett, Black Redemption: Churchmen Speak for the Garvey Move-
ment (Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 1978), 185 n. 11.
15. AJG, Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey, 1:preface.
16. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 4:324.
17. Ibid., 1:xciv.
18. Martin, Race First, 152–53; Judith Stein, The World of Marcus Garvey: Race
and Class in Modern Society (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1986),
70–71.
19. Stein, World of Marcus Garvey, 93.
20. W . E .B. Du Bois, ‘‘Marcus Garvey,’’ Crisis, January 1921, 112–15. See also
Stein, World of Marcus Garvey, 84.
21. Cyril V . Briggs, ‘‘Lessons in Tactics: For the Liberation Movement,’’ Crusa-
der, November 1921, 15; Stein, World of Marcus Garvey, 74.
22. ‘‘Report of UNIA Meeting,’’ Negro World, 17 July 1920, reprinted in Garvey/
UNIA Papers, 2:410–11.
23. ‘‘J. E. Hoover to John B. Cunningham,’’ 10 August 1922, reprinted in Garvey/
UNIA Papers, 4:841.
24. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 5:374; J. A. Rogers, World’s Great Men of Color (New
York: J. A. Rogers, 1947), 2:605; Reports of FBI Agents James E. Amos and Mor-
timer J. Davis, 6 March 1922, and FBI Agent James E. Amos, 15 March 1922, book
2, MGC.
25. ‘‘Garvey Wins Fight to Have His Wife T estify at T rial,’’ Negro World, 6 June
1923, ‘‘Object to Garvey’s Wife as Witness!,’’ The Times, 7 June 1923, and ‘‘Garvey
Wins Fight to Have His Wife T estify at T rial,’’ Negro World, 6 June 1923, copies in
box 8, ﬁle 2, Newspaper Clippings, AJG Papers.
26. ‘‘Garvey Plays a Queen in Court,’’ Sun and Globe, 6 June 1923, copy in box 8,
ﬁle 2, Newspaper Clippings, AJG Papers (‘‘much younger than Garvey’’); ‘‘Garvey
Wins Fight to Have His Wife T estify at T rial,’’ Negro World, 6 June 1923, copy in
box 8, ﬁle 2 (Garvey ‘‘opened no mail’’); ‘‘Object to Garvey’s Wife as Witness!,’’ The
Times, 7 June 1923, copy in box 8, ﬁle 2; ‘‘The Case against Marcus Garvey Is
Making History,’’ Negro World, 16 June 1923, 8 (‘‘appeared extremely nervous,’’
‘‘broke down’’).
27. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 5:375.
28. ‘‘Wife of UNIA Leader Advocate of Calm Counsel—I Am Here to T ell You
to be Calm and Quiet in All Your Words and Actions,’’ Pittsburgh American, 20 July
1923; Hotel T alter, 12 August 1923, copy in box 13, ﬁle 1, Scrapbook, AJG Papers.
29. David Cronon, Black Moses: The Story of Marcus Garvey and the Universal
Negro Improvement Association (1955; reprint, Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press, 1969), 100.
30. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 41, 38. For the impact of the Black Star Line on
the UNIA, see Stein, The World of Marcus Garvey.


--- PAGE 262 ---
notes to pages 51–55 249
31. Joy James, Transcending the T alented T enth: Black Leaders and American Intel-
lectuals (New York: Routledge, 1997), 46 (‘‘feminine gentility’’); T erry Smith, ‘‘Amy
Jacques Garvey: Portrait of a Courageous Woman,’’ Jamaican Housewife, Winter
1964, 24 (‘‘fear and sorrow’’).
32. ‘‘Garvey’s Wife Hits Detention [of ] Provisional President of African Re-
public Imprisoned for Political Reasons, She Declares,’’ Commercial Fortune Cin-
cinnati, 21 May 1923; copy in box 8, ﬁle 1, MG Memorial Collection, Fisk Univer-
sity Special Collections, Nashville, T enn. (ﬁrst quotation); Garvey/UNIA Papers,
5:700 (second quotation); AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 121 (last quotation).
33. Report of FBI Agent James W . Dillion, 11 September 1923, book 5, MGC.
34. Garvey/UNIA Papers , 5:453 (Garvey); George McGuire, ‘‘Out of the
T ombs,’’ Negro Churchman 1 (September–October 1923): 11.
35. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 5:453; George Mosse, The Image of Man: The Creation
of Modern Masculinity (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), 149.
36. Michael Kimmel, Manhood in America: A Cultural History (New York: Free
Press, 1996), 7.
37. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 129.
38. Ibid., 130.
39. ‘‘Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey Writes of Her Interesting Experiences,’’ Negro
World, 17 November 1923, 2.
40. Quoted in Theodore G. Vincent, Voices of a Black Nation: Political Journal-
ism in the Harlem Renaissance (San Francisco: Ramparts Press, 1973), 16.
41. ‘‘Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey Writes of Her Interesting Experiences,’’ Negro
World, 27 October 1923, 2; Kathleen M. Blee, Women of the Klan: Racism and
Gender in the 1920s (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), 30, 94, 146–47
(quotation).
42. AJG, ‘‘The Value of Propaganda,’’ Negro World, 6 March 1927; AJG, Philoso-
phy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey, 1:98.
43. ‘‘Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey Writes of Her Interesting Experiences,’’ Negro
World, 10 November 1923, 5; ‘‘Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey Writes of Her Interesting
Experiences,’’ Negro World, 17 November 1923, 2.
44. Miriam Brody, Manly Writing: Gender, Rhetoric, and the Rise of Composition
(Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1993), 62.
45. ‘‘Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey Writes of Her Interesting Experiences,’’ Negro
World, 17 November 1923, 7.
46. Glenda Elizabeth Gilmore, Gender and Jim Crow: Women and the Politics of
White Supremacy in North Carolina, 1896–1920 (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1996), xxii.
47. ‘‘Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey Writes of Her Interesting Experiences,’’ Negro
World, 3 November 1923, 2.
48. ‘‘Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey Writes of Her Interesting Experiences,’’ Negro
World, 27 October 1923, 2.


--- PAGE 263 ---
250 notes to pages 55–63
49. Carol Mattingly, ‘‘Woman-T empered Rhetoric: Public Presentation and the
WCTU,’’ Rhetoric Review 14 (Fall 1995): 51; AJG, ‘‘Leaving Beautiful California for
the Wild South on a T rip across the Continent,’’ Negro World, 2.
50. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 131.
51. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 5:700 (Garvey); ‘‘Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey Writes of
Her Interesting Experiences,’’ Negro World, 3 November 1923, 2.
52. McGuire, ‘‘Out of the T ombs’’; Martha H. Verbrugge, Able-Bodied Woman-
hood: Personal Health and Social Change in Nineteenth-Century Boston (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1988), 107.
53. New York Age, 25 March 1921.
54. ‘‘Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey Writes of Her Interesting Experiences,’’ Negro
World, 3 November 1923, 2.
55. Verbrugge, Able-Bodied Womanhood, 106.
56. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 162.
57. Ibid., 166.
58. Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent, 147.
59. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 164.
60. Ibid.
61. Ibid., 165.
62. Ibid.
63. Report of Agent James E. Amos, 26 October 1926, Re: MG, New York ﬁle
36/60, NA—Suitland, Md.
64. H. C. Heckman, Administrative Assistant to Warden John W . Snook, 13
November 1926, and O. H. Luhring to Postmaster General, 30 November 1926, in
Re: MG, New York ﬁle 36, NA—Suitland, Md.; Snook to Heckman, Assistant to
Superintendent of Prisons, Department of Justice, 16 November 1926, and Harry S.
New, Postmaster General, to Attorney General, 23 December 1926, ibid.
65. Report of Agent James E. Amos, 26 October 1926, in Re: MG, New York ﬁle
36, NA—Suitland, Md.
66. MG to Hon. J. W . Snook, Warden, 15 November 1926, ibid.
67. AJG, ‘‘Petition for Naturalization,’’ 6 July 1926, U.S. Department of Labor,
New York City.
68. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 167.
69. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 5:361.
70. Gypsey Da Silva, ‘‘The Copy Editor and the Author,’’ in Editors and Editing:
What Writers Need to Know about What Editors Do, ed. Gerald Gross (New York:
Grove Press, 1993).
71. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 168. For other statements regarding AJG’s poor
health and MG’s attitude toward her complaints, see Garvey/UNIA Papers, 6:265,
274, 350, 417, 425–26.
72. Honor Ford Smith, ‘‘Women and the Garvey Movement in Jamaica,’’ in


--- PAGE 264 ---
notes to pages 64–70 251
Garvey: His Work and Impact, ed. Rupert Lewis and Patrick Bryan (Mona, Jamaica:
Institute of Social and Economic Research, 1988), 78.
Chapter Four
1. Penny A. Weiss, ‘‘Feminist Reﬂections on Community,’’ in Feminism and
Community, ed. Penny A. Weiss and Marilyn Friedman (Philadelphia: T emple
University Press, 1995), 3.
2. J. A. G., ‘‘10 Minutes with Mrs. Garvey,’’ Negro World, 17 March 1923, 6, copy
in box 12, ﬁle 1, AJG Papers.
3. Quoted in ‘‘Mrs. Garvey Conﬁned to Her Home,’’ Negro World, 29 Novem-
ber 1924, 8. The Negro World, established in January 1918 and published in Harlem,
was the UNIA’s most e√ective weekly propaganda newspaper.
4. AJG, ‘‘Away with Lip Service,’’ Negro World, 6 February 1926, 7; Margaret
Ward, Unmanageable Revolutionaries: Women and Irish Nationalism  (London:
Pluto Press, 1983), 2.
5. ‘‘Look Out for Mud,’’ Negro World, 14 July 1923.
6. ‘‘Mrs. Garvey Replies to the Negro World—Defends Herself against Refer-
ences to Her Being Helpless,’’ Negro World, 21 July 1923. Following this reply, no
other articles about AJG’s leadership role in the UNIA appeared in the Negro World.
7. AJG, ‘‘Talk to Yourself If You Must Talk,’’ Negro World, 23 January 1926, 7.
8. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 6:365.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid., 368.
11. AJG, ‘‘Away with Lip Service.’’
12. AJG, ‘‘God Give Us Men!,’’ Negro World, 2 January 1926, 7.
13. AJG, ‘‘Women as Leaders Nationally and Racially,’’ Negro World, 24 Octo-
ber 1925, 7; AJG, ‘‘Send in Your Articles for This Page,’’ Negro World, 6 February
1926, 7.
14. Chicago Defender, 23 September 1916, 15 July 1916; New York Age, 5 January
1918 (‘‘Wedding Invitations’’), 26 January 1918 (‘‘For Stout Figure’’).
15. AJG, ‘‘Our Page Is Three Years Old,’’ Negro World, 12 February 1927, 7; AJG,
‘‘Send in Your Articles for This Page,’’ Negro World, 6 February 1926, 7; AJG, ‘‘Have
a Heart,’’ Negro World, 7 June 1924.
16. W . E. B. Du Bois, The Education of Black People: T en Critiques, 1906–1960
(Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1973), 32; AJG, ‘‘Have a Heart.’’
17. Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reﬂections on the Origins and
Spread of Nationalism (London: Verso, 1983), 16.
18. AJG, ‘‘Can Ghandhi’s Fasting Unite Moslems and Hundus?,’’ Negro World, 4
October 1924, 6.
19. Eleanor Hinton Hoytt, ‘‘International Council of Women of the Darker
Races: Historical Notes,’’ Sage 3 (Fall 1986): 54.


--- PAGE 265 ---
252 notes to pages 71–77
20. AJG, ‘‘Enslave the Mind and You Enslave the Body,’’ Negro World, 20 June
1925, 7.
21. Ibid.
22. James D. Anderson, The Education of Blacks in the South, 1860–1935 (Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1988), 28.
23. AJG, ‘‘Black Women’s Resolve for 1926,’’ Negro World, 9 January 1926, 7.
24. AJG, ‘‘Women’s Function in Life,’’ Negro World, 12 December 1925; AJG,
‘‘Lifting Up Filipino Women,’’ Negro World, 22 November 1924, 8; AJG, ‘‘Have
Scientiﬁc Achievements of Negroes Beneﬁtted Our Race?’’ Negro World, 8 Novem-
ber 1924, 10; AJG, ‘‘Going to Africa?,’’ Negro World, 16 April 1927, 7.
25. AJG, ‘‘No Sex in Brains and Ability,’’ Negro World, 27 December 1924, 8.
26. Anna Julia Cooper, A Voice from the South (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1988), 78–79.
27. Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent: The Women’s Movement
in the Black Baptist Church, 1880–1920  (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1993), 28.
28. Cooper, Voice from the South, 172.
29. Kevin K. Gaines, Uplifting the Race: Black Leadership, Politics, and Culture in
the Twentieth Century (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996), 133.
30. AJG, ‘‘Women’s Function in Life.’’
31. AJG, ‘‘No Sex in Brains and Ability.’’
32. AJG, ‘‘Will the Entrance of Woman in Politics A√ect Home Life?,’’ Negro
World, 14 June 1924, 12.
33. AJG,‘‘Woman as Man’s Helper,’’ Negro World, 28 February 1925.
34. AJG, ‘‘The Joy of Living,’’ Negro World, 21 June 1924, 12.
35. Jean Bethke Elshtain, ‘‘Feminism, Family, and Community,’’ in Feminism
and Community, ed. Penny A. Weiss and Marilyn Friedman (Philadelphia: T emple
University Press, 1995), 260; Deborah Gray White, T oo Heavy a Load: Black Women
in Defense of Themselves (New York: Norton, 1999), 44. See Paula Giddings, When
and Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Women on Race and Sex in America  (New
York: Morrow, 1984).
36. AJG, ‘‘Duties of Parents to Children,’’ Negro World, 9 May 1925. The black
women’s club movement between the 1890s and 1920s encompassed a wide variety
of activities, from o√ering protection to young women from exploitative employers
to bourgeoisie teas. For more on the black club movement, see Dorothy Salem, To
Better Our World: Black Women in Organized Reform, 1890–1920 (Brooklyn, N.Y.:
Carlson Publishers, 1990); Mildred I. Thompson, Ida B. Wells-Barnett: An Explora-
tion Study of an American BlackWoman, 1893–1930 (Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Pub-
lishers, 1990); and Beverly Washington Jones, Quest for Equality: The Life and
Writings of Mary Eliza Church T errell, 1883–1954 (Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Pub-
lishers, 1990).
37. ‘‘Universal African Black Cross Nurses,’’ Negro World, 2 August 1924.


--- PAGE 266 ---
notes to pages 77–85 253
38. AJG, ‘‘Women as Cannon Fodder,’’ Negro World, 9 February 1924, 10.
39. ‘‘The Obligations of Motherhood—Mothers Are Examples for Children and
Should Be Guarded in Behavior and Speech,’’ Negro World, 29 March 1924.
40. Pierce and Williams, ‘‘And Your Prayers Shall Be Answered.’’
41. Reprints came from a variety of newspapers and magazines including the
Chicago Tribune, New York Evening Post, New York American, Daily Worker, New
Republic, and Survey Graphic.
42. ‘‘Five Essential Qualities in a Negro Woman,’’ Negro World, 2 August 1924.
43. ‘‘Politics Puriﬁed by Women’s Entry,’’ Negro World, 14 June 1924.
44. ‘‘Women Legislate for Better Living Conditions,’’ Negro World, 14 June 1924.
45. ‘‘Will Women Neglect Race Propagation for Public Life?,’’ Negro World, 14
June 1924.
46. ‘‘Our Women Getting into the Larger Life,’’ Negro World, 14 June 1924.
47. ‘‘Women in the Home—T wentieth-Century Freedom for Women Is World
Slogan,’’ 9 February 1924.
48. Ibid.; ‘‘Girls Should Be Taught to Keep House Properly,’’ Negro World, 19
April 1924.
49. Paulette Pierce and Brackette F. Williams, ‘‘And Your Prayers Shall Be An-
swered through the Womb of a Woman,’’ in Women Out of Place: The Gender of
Agency and the Race of Nationality, ed. Brackette F. Williams (New York: Routledge,
1996), 187.
50. ‘‘What Makes a Good Wife?,’’ Negro World, 16 August 1923.
51. ‘‘The Ideal Wife,’’ Negro World, 15 April 1924.
52. Hazel V . Carby, Race Men (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1998), 20.
53. AJG, ‘‘Listen Women!,’’ Negro World, 9 April 1927.
54. Deborah Gray White, ‘‘The Cost of Club Work, the Price of Black Femi-
nism,’’ in Invisible Women: New Essays on American Activism, ed. Nancy Hewitt and
Suzanne Lebsock (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1993), 253; AJG, ‘‘The Negro
Race Needs T rained Men,’’ Negro World, 3 July 1926.
55. AJG, ‘‘Listen Women!.’’
56. AJG, ‘‘Are Negro Women More Easily Satisﬁed than White Women?,’’ Negro
World, 9 May 1925; AJG, ‘‘Listen Women!.’’
57. Hazel V . Carby, ‘‘ ‘It Jus Be’s Dat Way Sometime’: The Sexual Politics of
Women’s Blues,’’ Radical America 20, no. 4 (1986): 9–22 (quotations, p. 20).
58. AJG, ‘‘The Negro Race Needs T rained Men.’’
59. Anne Witte Garland, Women Activists Challenging the Abuse of Power (New
York: Feminist Press, 1988), xvi–xvii.
60. AJG, ‘‘Women as Leaders Nationally and Racially,’’ Negro World, 24 Octo-
ber 1925; AJG, ‘‘Are Negro Women More Easily Satisﬁed Than White Women?’’;
AJG, ‘‘Listen Women!.’’
61. Deborah Gray White, ‘‘The Cost of Club Work,’’ 254; ‘‘Black Women’s Part
in Race Leadership,’’ Negro World, 19 April 1924.


--- PAGE 267 ---
254 notes to pages 85–92
62. Deborah Gary White, ‘‘The Cost of Club Work,’’ 254; Gerda Lerner, Black
Women in White America (New York: Vintage Books, 1992), 341.
63. AJG, ‘‘Do Negro Women Want to Express Themselves?,’’ Negro World, 11
April 1925 (ﬁrst quotation); AJG, ‘‘The Busy Have No Time for T ears,’’ Negro
World, 18 June 1927.
64. Carol Boyce Davies, Black Women Writing and Identity: Migrations of the
Subject (New York: Routledge, 1994), 50.
65. Of course, there is no single, monolithic form of patriarchy, but common
factors include male control over female labor power, sexist ideology, and a gender
hierarchy in which men are authoritarian and aggressive.
66. Stephanie Shaw, What a Woman Ought to Be: Professional Black Women
during the Jim Crow Era (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), 119.
67. Ibid.; Elsa Barkley Brown, ‘‘Mothers in Mind,’’ in Double Stitch: Black
Women Write about Mothers and Daughters, ed. Patricia-Bell Scott et al. (New York:
Harper Perennial, 1991), 86–89 (quotation, p. 87).
68. Cynthia Enloe, Bananas, Beaches, and Bases: Making Feminist Sense of Inter-
national Politics (Los Angeles: Pandora Press, 1989), 61, 42, 62.
69. See, e.g., Lois A. West, ed., Feminist Nationalism (New York: Routledge,
1997); Andrew Parker, Mary Russo, Doris Sommer, Patricia Yaeger, eds., National-
isms and Sexualities (New York: Routledge, 1992); Margaret Ward, Unmanageable
Revolutionaries: Women and Irish Nationalism  (London: Pluto Press, 1983); and
Paula Gilbert Lewis, ed., Traditionalism, Nationalism, and Feminism: Women Writ-
ers of Quebec (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1985).
70. Partha Chatterjee, The Nation and Its Fragments: Colonial and Postcolonial
Histories (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1993), 148.
71. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 188.
72. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:45.
73. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 190.
Chapter Five
1. Carl Stone, ‘‘Race and Economic Power in Jamaica,’’ in Garvey: His Work and
Impact, ed. Rupert Lewis and Patrick Bryan (Mona, Jamaica: Institute of Social and
Economic Research, 1988), 248–49. By the end of 1930 only 1.5 percent of blacks
had access to a postsecondary education.
2. Rupert Lewis, ‘‘Garvey’s Perspective on Jamaica,’’ in Garvey: His Work and
Impact, ed. Rupert Lewis and Patrick Bryan (Mona, Jamaica: Institute of Social and
Economic Research, 1988), 236 (quotation), and Marcus Garvey: Anti-Colonial
Champion (T renton, N.J.: African World Press, 1988), 200.
3. ‘‘Liberty Hall Meeting,’’ Negro World, 28 March 1925, 3.
4. See Ralph Ellison, Shadow and Acts (New York: Vintage Books, 1972); Hazel
V. Carby, Reconstructing Womanhood: The Emergence of the Afro-American Woman
Novelist (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987); and Karen Sanchez Eppier,


--- PAGE 268 ---
notes to pages 93–99 255
T ouching Liberty: Abolition, Feminism, and the Politics of the Body (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1993).
5. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:43.
6. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 190.
7. Ibid.
8. Rupert Lewis, Anti-Colonial Champion, 199.
9. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 190; J. A. Rogers, ‘‘Marcus Garvey Interviewed
by Negro Journalist Discusses Di≈culties Facing the Race,’’ Negro World, 6 Octo-
ber 1928.
10. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 191.
11. Hakim Adi, West Africans in Britain, 1900–1960: Nationalism, Pan-African-
ism, and Communism (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1998), 3.
12. Edmund Cronon, Black Moses: The Story of Marcus Garvey and the Universal
Negro Improvement Association (1955; reprint, Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press, 1968), 145–46 (press report); AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 191–92; Hakim
Adi, West Africans in Britain, 46 (Solanke).
13. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 192.
14. Ibid.
15. Charles V . Hamilton, ‘‘Pan-Africanism and the Black Struggle in the U.S.,’’
in Pan-Africanism, ed. Robert Chrisman and Nathan Hare (New York: Bobbs-
Merrill, 1974), 146.
16. AJG, ‘‘What Has the League of Nations Accomplished?,’’ Negro World, 3
October 1925, 7; AJG, ‘‘Premier Painleve Flies to Africa,’’ Negro World, 20 June 1925,
4.
17. MG, ‘‘Hon. Marcus Garvey, Writing from France, Discusses T reatment
Accorded Negroes There and in Other Countries of the World,’’ Negro World, 11
August 1928, 1; ‘‘Garvey in Paris Speaks to Famed Club de Faubourg,’’ Negro World,
27 October 1928.
18. MG, ‘‘United Race for 1924, Wish of Head of Great Organization,’’ Negro
World, 5 January 1924, 1; MG, ‘‘Writing from France,’’ 1; Tyler Stovall, Paris Noir:
African Americans in the City of Lights (New York: Houghton Mi∆in, 1996), 25–81.
19. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 193.
20. Phillipe Dewitte, Les Mouvements Nègres en France, 1919–1930  (Paris: Edi-
tions L ’Harmattan, 1985), 172. I am grateful to Douglas Palacios for this citation.
21. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 193; MG, ‘‘German Thoroughness Impressed
Garvey,’’ Negro World, 25 August 1928, 1.
22. AJG, ‘‘What Germany Wants,’’ Negro World, 8 September 1928.
23. Michael Burleigh and Wolfgang Wipperman, The Racial State: Germany,
1933–1945 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 44–73; Je√rey Herf,
Reactionary Modernism: T echnology, Culture, and Politics in Weimar and the Third
Reich (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984).
24. T ony Martin, Race First: The Ideological and Organizational Struggles of


--- PAGE 269 ---
256 notes to pages 99–105
Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association (Westport, Conn.:
Greenwood Press, 1976), 59.
25. ‘‘Garvey and Mussolini,’’ Negro World, 5 November 1927, 4; J. A. Rogers,
World’s Great Men of Color (New York: J. A. Rogers, 1947), 602, 610.
26. AJG, ‘‘Experiments in Government,’’ Negro World, 24 September 1927, 4.
27. Francine M. King, ‘‘Marcus Garvey’s View of Fascism as It Relates to the
Black Struggle for Equal Rights: An Analysis of Commentaries from the Black
Man, 1935–1939,’’ Proceedings and Papers of the Georgia Association of Historians 10
(1989): 28, 30.
28. Carol Aisha Blackshire-Belay, ‘‘Historical Revelations: The International
Scope of African Germans T oday and Beyond,’’ in The African-German Experience:
Critical Essays, ed. Blackshire-Belay (London: Praeger, 1996), 110–11.
29. Eva Aldred Brooks, ‘‘A Pure, Healthy, Uniﬁed Race, Plea of Women: Mis-
cegenation Destroys Race Pride—Produces Weak O√-Spring,’’ Negro World, 23
May 1925, 7.
30. William S. McFreely, Frederick Douglass (New York: Norton, 1991), 327;
Claude McKay, A Long Way from Home (New York: Arno Press, 1969), 239; George
Padmore, ed., History of the Pan-African Congress (London: Hammersmith Book-
shop, Ltd., 1947), 36 (Armattoe).
31. ‘‘Liberty Hall Meeting,’’ Negro World, 28 March 1925, 3; AJG, ‘‘British Ne-
groes in England Rated as Aliens, Why?,’’ Negro World, 30 January 1926, 7.
32. ‘‘Mrs. Garvey Delivers Ringing Message to White Women of London at
Great Meeting: T ells of Insults and Su√ering,’’ Negro World, 22 September 1928.
33. Ibid.; ‘‘The Greatest Negro Woman of Our Race,’’ Negro World, 3 November
1928, 3.
34. ‘‘Marcus Garvey T ells English People Some Striking T ruths . . . ,’’ Negro
World, 29 September 1928, 2.
35. ‘‘Full T ext of U.N.I.A. Petition to League of Nation,’’ Negro World, 27 Octo-
ber 1928 (second petition); Petition of the UNIA African Communities League to
the League of Nations, Geneva, Switzerland (ﬁrst petition), and Lewis W . Haskell,
American Consul, to Hon. Joseph C. Gres, American Minister, 18 September 1922,
both in MG Decimal File 800.4016/19, NA—Suitland, Md.
36. MG, ‘‘Great Drive for Freedom Planned,’’ Negro World, 3 November 1928, 1;
AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 193.
37. ‘‘The Greatest Negro Woman of Our Race,’’ 3; AJG, Garvey and Garveyism,
194 (the schedule ‘‘allowed no rest’’); ‘‘Philadelphia Pays Fine T ribute to Mrs.
Garvey Back from Europe,’’ Negro World, 10 November 1928.
38. ‘‘Mrs. AJG on Visit to New York City Gets Uproarious Welcome,’’ Negro
World, 10 November 1928.
39. ‘‘Philadelphia Pays Fine T ribute to Mrs. Garvey.’’
40. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 195.
41. See Garvey/UNIA Papers , 2:xxxix; AJG,  Garvey and Garveyism , 195; and


--- PAGE 270 ---
notes to pages 105–8 257
Cronon, Black Moses, 150. Walter Rodney has brilliantly shown how Liberians were
deceived by Firestone and the role of the United States in the underdevelopment
of Africa. Walter Rodney, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa  (London: Bogle-
L ’Ouverture Pub., 1972).
42. MG, ‘‘Garvey Linking Hoover and Firestone in Sinister Liberians Rubber
Project Urges Negroes to Vote for Smith,’’ Negro World, 1 September 1928; MG,
‘‘Every Negro with a Ballot Must Vote for Alfred Smith,’’ Negro World, 20 October
1928; ‘‘Canada and Garvey,’’ Negro World, 17 November 1928; ‘‘Article in the Mon-
treal Gazette,’’ 1 November 1928, reprinted in Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:228.
43. Mopsie [AJG] to Popsie [MG], 29 October 1928, box 4, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers;
AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 195.
44. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 195; ‘‘Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey at Bermuda,’’
Negro World, 1 December 1928, n.p.
45. ‘‘Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey at Bermuda,’’ n.p.
46. Joy James, Transcending the T alented T enth: Black Leaders and American
Intellectuals (New York: Routledge, 1997), 184; AJG, ‘‘Wanted-Missionaries for
Africa,’’ Negro World, 21 February 1925, 7 (last quotation).
47. Partha Chatterjee, The Nation and Its Fragments: Colonial and Postcolonial
Histories (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1993), 6.
48. ‘‘Mrs. Amy Jacques Garvey at Bermuda,’’ n.p.; ‘‘Mrs. A. J. Garvey in Inter-
view T ells Cincinnati Commercial T ribune Her Husband Was Imprisoned for
Political Reasons,’’ Negro World, 30 May 1925, 7.
49. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 191.
50. Negro World 4, 25 May, 1 June 1929, n.p.; Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:316.
51. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:417 n. 1; AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 196.
52. Marcus Garvey served as managing editor for the Negro World from 1918
until he split from the UNIA New York Division in the early 1930s. No issues of the
newspaper have been found after October 17, 1933. Blackman began as a daily
newspaper but by 1930 was published weekly; by February 1931 it ceased publica-
tion. See Robert A. Hill and Barbara Bair, eds., Marcus Garvey Life and Lessons: A
Centennial Companion to the Marcus Garvey and UNIA Papers (Los Angeles: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1987), 362, 413–14. Many articles and announcements in
Blackman focused on issues relevant to women—e.g., ‘‘A Mother’s Prayer,’’ 15 April
1929; ‘‘The Black Woman,’’ 20 April 1929; ‘‘Woman’s Progress through the Ages,’’
22 April 1929; ‘‘Insulting Negro Womanhood,’’ 17 May 1929; ‘‘Women Who Do a
Man’s Work Should Get a Man’s Pay,’’ 22 June 1929; ‘‘Women and Modern Life,’’ 13
June 1929; ‘‘Birth Control,’’ 6 August 1929; ‘‘A Night for Women, Come Listen to
Their Views,’’ 7 August 1929; ‘‘Madame MLT DeMena Speaks,’’ 22 February 1930;
and ‘‘U.S. Garveyites Hear Lady Davis,’’ 24 January 1931. The incomplete micro-
ﬁlm reels of Blackman published during 1929–February 1931 are available at the
Institute of Jamaica, Kingston.
53. For instance, within a two-week period AJG’s ﬁve editorials in Blackman


--- PAGE 271 ---
258 notes to pages 109–13
were entitled ‘‘Make Opportunities out of Misfortunes’’ (6 May 1929), ‘‘He That
Endureth to the End’’ (8 May 1929), ‘‘Women and World Peace’’ (11 May 1929),
‘‘Experiments in Government’’ (15 May 1929), and ‘‘They Conquer Who They
Believe They Can’’ (20 May 1929). She had published four of these articles in the
Negro World with the same title and slight modiﬁcations: ‘‘He That Endureth to the
End’’ (17 January 1925), ‘‘Women and World Peace’’ (31 January 1925), ‘‘Experiment
in Government’’ (September 1927), and ‘‘They Conquer Who They Believe They
Can’’ (26 September 1925).
54. AJG, ‘‘Poverty Is Slavery,’’ Blackman, 22 June 1929, 4; R. Palme Dutt, Fascism
and Social Revolution  (New York: International Publishers, 1934), 235, 240. AJG
published an editorial entitled ‘‘Poverty Is Slavery’’ in the Negro World on 21 August
1926 with an abridged text.
55. AJG, ‘‘Some Fallacies about Children,’’ Blackman, 29 August 1929.
56. Rupert Lewis, Anti-Colonial Champion, 220.
57. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:318 nn. 2–3, 315.
58. Ibid., xl–xli, 292.
59. Ibid., 328–29.
60. Rupert Lewis, Anti-Colonial Champion, 209.
61. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:xxxix, 341, 346–47.
62. Rupert Lewis, Anti-Colonial Champion, 223; AJG, Garvey and Garveyism,
209–10. Their home was not actually mortgaged until 1934.
63. Rupert Lewis, Anti-Colonial Champion, 226.
64. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:339 n. 1.
Chapter Six
1. There is evidence that women used birth control methods throughout the
United States in the early twentieth century. In addition, female activists are often
cited for their e√orts to delay motherhood and deliberately space the birth of their
babies. See John D. Emilo and Estelle B. Freeman, Intimate Matters: A History of
Sexuality in America (New York: Harper and Row, 1988).
2. Recent studies have documented that the conventional attitude among Ca-
ribbean women is to view a childless woman as a ‘‘mule’’ and ‘‘beyond the pale of
society.’’ In addition, a common belief that took root in the early twentieth century
was that a childless woman would have poor health and be subject to ‘‘numerous
disorders ranging from headaches to madness.’’ Mother Brown, who was born in
Jamaica in 1861, recalled that she was ‘‘advised by her doctor that marriage and
childbearing was the cure’’ for her severe headaches. Finally, in the 1920s and 1930s
psychoanalytic theorists argued that ‘‘normal’’ women desired children, and those
who elected not to be mothers were rejecting femininity. Olive Senior, Working
Miracles: Women’s Lives in the English-Speaking Caribbean (Mona, Jamaica: Institute
of Social and Economic Research, 1991), 68; Erna Brodber, ‘‘Afro-Jamaican Women
at the T urn of the Century,’’ Social and Economic Studies  35 (1986): 35. See also


--- PAGE 272 ---
notes to pages 113–19 259
Madeline Kerr, Personality and Conﬂict in Jamaica  (Liverpool, U.K.: University
Press, 1952), 25, and Evelyn Nakano Glenn, Grace Chang, and Linda Rennie
Forcey, Mothering: Ideology, Experience, and Agency (New York: Routledge, 1994), 9.
3. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 219, 210–11.
4. Ibid., 211, 218.
5. Ibid., 218–19.
6. W . R. Garside, British Unemployment, 1919–1939: A Study in Public Policy
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 198; Thomas Holt, The Problem of
Freedom: Race, Labor, and Politics in Jamaica and Britain, 1832–1938  (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992), 358–65.
7. G. E. Cumper, ed., The Economy of the West Indies  (Kingston, Jamaica:
Institute of Social and Economic Research, 1960), 9, 178.
8. Gisela Eisner, Jamaica, 1830–1930: A Study in Economic Growth  (London:
Manchester University Press, 1961), xviii, 325. Households also spent 13.9 percent
on rent, 12.9 percent on other consumer goods, 12.1 percent on clothing, 9.6
percent on personal services, and 2.1 percent on passenger transport.
9. Kerr, Personality and Conﬂict in Jamaica, 118–19 (Anglican Church); ‘‘Chris-
tening of Marcus Garvey Jr. T uesday,’’ Blackman, 8 November 1930, 1; AJG, Garvey
and Garveyism, 219.
10. U.S. Congress, House, Committee on Immigration and Nationalization, H.
Rept. 898, 2 pts., 71st Cong., 2d sess., 1930.
11. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:552–53.
12. Holt, Problem of Freedom, 372, 374.
13. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:421, 422 n. 4; Ngugi Thiong’o, ‘‘Language, Writing,
and Politics,’’ Oxford Lecture Series, University of California, Berkeley, 12 Novem-
ber 1996.
14. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 196–97.
15. Economic theory may provide the best scholarly analysis of AJG’s response to
her husband’s behavior. Since MG was the patriarchal head, she expected him to
reduce his own consumption and his contributions to other family members. Gary
S. Becker, ‘‘A Theory of Social Interactions,’’ Journal of Political Economy 82 (1974):
1077, 1076.
16. Brodber, ‘‘Afro-Jamaican Women at the T urn of the Century,’’ 48 n. 29.
17. Alec Waugh, Love and the Caribbean: T ales, Characters, and Scenes of the West
Indies (New York: Farrar, Straus and Cudahy, 1958), 131; AJG, Garvey and Garvey-
ism, 196.
18. George W . Roberts and Sonja A. Sinclair, Women in Jamaica: Patterns of
Reproduction and Family (New York: KTO Press, 1978), 150–51.
19. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 219.
20. I viewed the Blackman newspaper on microﬁlm at the Institute of Jamaica
for the period 30 March 1929–24 January 1931. The ﬁlm may be incomplete, but it
is a good representation of the newspaper as a whole.


--- PAGE 273 ---
260 notes to pages 119–21
21. I viewed the New Jamaican for the period July–9 September 1932. This
newspaper did not have a woman’s page, but it did contain articles on women’s
issues: e.g., ‘‘Employment of Children’’ (26 May 1933), ‘‘Birth Control Clinics’’ (6
July 1933), and ‘‘Sterilization of the Unﬁt’’ (2 August 1933). Due to a landlord debt,
the New Jamaican ceased publication on 15 September 1933.
22. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:537 (‘‘racially dead’’); AJG, Garvey and Garveyism,
220.
23. Nancy Etco√ has scientiﬁcally established that beauty can be a source of
‘‘women’s power,’’ and Camille Paglia points out that supreme moments through-
out the history of civilization, such as ‘‘Ancient Egypt, Classical Athens or Renais-
sance Florence, were always accompanied by the worship of beauty.’’ Although
AJG’s attractiveness may not have had ‘‘power,’’ it had inspired MG to take notice
of her as well as project on her other pleasing attributes. It seems that human beings
are more deeply ‘‘wired’’ for visual attraction than the capacity to assess positive
qualities through other means; many contemporary studies have shown that it is
not unusual for people from various cultures to assume that aesthetically beautiful
people somehow also possess a wider range of attractive personality traits. Karen
Springen, ‘‘Eyes of the Beholders,’’ Newsweek, 3 June 1996, 68 (Etco√, Paglia);
Laura C. Longo and Richard D. Ashmore, ‘‘The Looks-Personality Relationship:
Global Self-Orientations as Shared Precursors of Subjective Physical Attractiveness
and Self-Ascribed T raits,’’ Journal of Applied Social Psychology (1 March 1995): 371–
99; and Michael R. Cunningham, Alan R. Roberts, Anita P . Barbee, Perrie B.
Druen, and Cheng-Huan Wu, ‘‘Their Ideas of Beauty Are, on the Whole, the Same
as Ours: Consistency and Variability in the Cross-Cultural Perception of Female
Physical Attractiveness,’’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology  (February
1995): 261–80.
24. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 222 (‘‘over a year’s taxes’’); Garvey/UNIA Papers,
7:lxxvi. Julius Caesar (Roman statesman and general) and Winston Churchill
(British statesman and later prime minister) were powerful leaders who faced their
share of controversy. Caesar was both a defender of the people’s rights and an
ambitious demagogue who used vicious tactics to force his way to power. Churchill
was undoubtedly one of the greatest public ﬁgures of the twentieth century, a bold
military leader who was willing to use any measure to maintain Britain as a great
imperial power. But Churchill was extremely conservative, and his role in the Boer
War indicates that he was deﬁnitely anti-African. See Robert Rhodes James, Chur-
chill: A Study in Failure, 1900–1939 (New York: World, 1970); Henry Pelling, Wins-
ton Churchill (New York: Dutton, 1974); Lily Ross Taylor, Party Politics in the Age of
Caesar (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1961); and AJG, Garvey and Gar-
veyism, 222.
25. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 222–23.
26. Mrs. Ida Repole, interview by author, Kingston, Jamaica, 17 November
1990.


--- PAGE 274 ---
notes to pages 122–28 261
27. Kerr, Personality and Conﬂict in Jamaica, 1.
28. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 223.
29. Evelyn Nakano Glenn, ‘‘Social Constructions of Mothering: A Thematic
Overview,’’ in Mothering: Ideology, Experience, and Agency, ed. Evelyn Nakano Glenn,
Grace Chang, and Linda Rennie Forcey (New York: Routledge, 1994), 22–23.
30. The Black Man was published for one year in Jamaica. When Garvey moved
to London in 1935, he took the magazine with him. The Black Man was more a
quarterly magazine, and a total of twenty-four issues appeared over ﬁve and a half
years. The publication ceased in 1939 due to ﬁnancial di≈culties. For reprints of
the magazine, see MG, The Black Man: A Monthly Magazine of Negro Thought and
Opinion (New York: Kraus Thomson Organized, Ltd., 1975). The introduction,
written by Robert Hill, provides an excellent chronological discussion placing the
political emphasis of the magazine in historical context.
31. Joan French and Honor Ford Smith, Women, Work, and Organization in
Jamaica, 1900–1944  (Jamaica: Sistern Research and Institute of Social Science,
1986), 216.
32. For a detailed discussion of the variety of activities of these women, see ibid.,
216–26.
33. Ibid., vi–vii, 170.
34. Jill Watts, Shout the Victory: The History of Father Divine and the Peace
Mission Movement, 1879–1942 (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1989),
332–39; Mark Naison, Communists in Harlem during the Depression  (New York:
Grove Press, 1983); Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:xlvi.
35. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:xlvi.
36. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 231–32.
Chapter Seven
1. Edna Brodber, ‘‘Afro-Jamaican Women at the T urn of the Century,’’ Social
and Economic Studies 35 (1986): 35; Evelyne Huber Stephens and John D. Stephens,
Democratic Socialism in Jamaica: The Political Movement and Social Transformation
in Dependent Capitalism (London: Macmillan, 1986), 13; Samuel J. Hurwitz and
Edith F. Hurwitz, Jamaica: A Historical Portrait (New York: Praeger, 1971), 194.
2. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 231, 236.
3. Ibid., 236.
4. Robert S. McElvaine, ed., Down and Out in the Great Depression: Letters from
the Forgotten Man (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1983), 53–65.
5. AJG, ‘‘Listen Women!,’’ Negro World, 9 April 1927.
6. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:742.
7. Sudhanshu Handa, ‘‘The Determinants of Female Headship in Jamaica:
Results from a Structural Model,’’ Economic Development and Cultural Change 44
(June 1996): 811.
8. Lee Gang and Joseph Hraba, ‘‘Economic Reform in the Czech Republic:


--- PAGE 275 ---
262 notes to pages 128–38
Economic Strain, Depression, Hostility, and the Di√erence in Coping Strategies,’’
Sociological Inquiry (Winter 1994): 103–13.
9. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 70.
10. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:743.
11. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 236.
12. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:742 (quotation); Dad [MG] to Mopsie [AJG], May
23 [1937], box 4, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers; AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 236. AJG wrote on
an envelope (in box 4, ﬁle 2) that she left Jamaica with their children on 8 June 1937.
For a reprint, see Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:742.
13. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 314, 232.
14. Ibid., 244.
15. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:745.
16. Ibid., 816.
17. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 316, 245.
18. Ibid., 245–46.
19. Ibid., 246, 241.
20. Ibid., 248.
21. Ibid.
22. Ibid.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid., 249.
25. Thomas Holt, The Problem of Freedom: Race, Labor, and Politics in Jamaica
and Britain, 1832–1938 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1992), 376, 375.
26. Stephens and Stephens, Democratic Socialism in Jamaica, 14; Ken Post, Arise
Ye Starvelings: The Jamaican Labour Rebellion of 1938 and Its Aftermath  (London:
Martinus Nijho√, 1978), 276–82.
27. Wendell Bell, Jamaican Leaders: Political Attitudes in a New Nation (Berke-
ley: University of California Press, 1964), 16; Post, Arise Ye Starvelings, dedication
page.
28. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 249.
29. Ibid., 249–50.
30. Ibid., 251.
31. Ibid., 242, 251.
32. MG sent letters addressed to each boy with identical messages: Dad to
Chubbie [Julius] and Dad to Junior [Marcus], 8 December 1938, box 4, ﬁle 3, AJG
Papers; letter to Julius reprinted in Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:900.
33. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 252.
34. AJG to Ethel Collins, 7 August 1944, box 1, ﬁle 4, AJG Papers; AJG, Garvey
and Garveyism, 287.
35. Both handwritten letters from Junior and Julius to MG, 11 January 1939, are
in box 4, ﬁle 3, AJG Papers.
36. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:928, 905, 902.


--- PAGE 276 ---
notes to pages 138–44 263
37. There are thirty-six surviving letters written by MG, or typed by his secretary
with his signature, to Junior and Julius between 8 December 1938 and 1 June 1940 in
box 4, ﬁle 3, AJG Papers.
38. AJG to Ethel Collins, 7 August 1944; AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 251.
39. Joan French and Honor Ford Smith, Women, Work, and Organization in
Jamaica, 1900–1944 (Mona, Jamaica: Sistern Research Institute of Social Science,
1986), 63.
40. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:xlvii.
41. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 261.
42. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:939; Daisy Whyte to AJG, 9 June 1940, and a post
o≈ce telegram to AJG, 11 June 1940, both in box 4, ﬁle 6, AJG Papers.
43. ‘‘First Message to the Negroes of the World from Atlanta Prison,’’ 10 Febru-
ary 1925, in AJG, ed., The Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey; Or, Africa for
the Africans (Dover, Mass: Majority Press, 1986), 2:238.
44. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:932, 950.
Chapter Eight
1. Paul C. Rosenblatt, R. Patricia Walsh, and Douglas A. Jackson, Grief and
Mourning in Cross-Cultural Perspective (New Haven, Conn.: HRAF Press, 1976), 8.
The fact that she was not living with MG at the time of his death had to inﬂuence
her reaction to it. Rosenblatt argues that ‘‘the more roles a deceased person oc-
cupied and the more important these roles were, the more disruptive the death will
be to organizations and groups of which the deceased was a member.’’ The ﬁrst
stage of widowhood, Joan M. Rawlins points out in her study on Jamaican women,
is usually marked by a lack of companionship that leaves a void in their lives and
foments a consequent loneliness. How widows cope with loneliness depends ‘‘to
a great extent on whether there were young children in the home,’’ concludes
Sakinah Salahu-Din in her contemporary study on African American widows. AJG
did not record feeling lonely, most likely because her children were present. Nor
did she share other feelings produced by death such as anxiety, depression, fear,
confusion, rage, and helplessness. As a proud person, AJG elected to grieve pri-
vately. Ibid.; Sakinah N. Salahu-Din, ‘‘A Comparison of Coping Strategies of
African American and Caucasian Widows,’’ Omega: Journal of Death and Dying 33
(1996): 114; Virginia Montero Seplowin and Egilde Seravalli, ‘‘A Historical Perspec-
tive on Bereavement,’’ in Loss, Grief, and Bereavement, ed. Otto S. Margolis (New
York: Praeger, 1985), 47.
2. Juan L. T urner, ‘‘Personal Reﬂections of the African American Experience,’’ in
Ethnic Variations in Dying, Death, and Grief, 201; Richard A. Kalish and David K.
Reynolds, Death and Ethnicity: A Psychocultural Study (Los Angeles: University of
Southern California Press, 1967), 31.
3. Hosea L. Perry, ‘‘Mourning and Funeral Customs of African Americans,’’ in
Ethnic Variations in Dying, Death, and Grief , 63; ‘‘Elaborate Memorial Service Is


--- PAGE 277 ---
264 notes to pages 145–50
Held for Marcus Garvey Here,’’ New York Age , 27 July 1940, 1; Garvey/UNIA
Papers, 7:951.
4. Ethel Collins to AJG, 28 June 1940, box 4, ﬁle 6, AJG Papers; Garvey/UNIA
Papers, 7:955 (UNIA commissioners). For an example of a letter sent by AJG to
UNIA divisions, see AJG to Thomas I. Clarke, Secretary Guachapali, Division
Canal Zone, 9 August 1940, box 1, ﬁle 4, AJG Papers.
5. AJG, ‘‘Opening Message to the UNIA,’’ box 4, ﬁle 6, ibid., reprinted in
Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:952.
6. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:953; ‘‘Address of Hon. Marcus Garvey Delivered at
T rinity Auditorium, Los Angeles, California, Monday Evening, June the 5th, 1922,’’
book 2, MGC.
7. Garvey/UNIA Papers, 7:953.
8. Ibid., 957, n. 1.
9. Ibid., 6:365–66.
10. AJG to N. H. Grissom, Commissioner, Wisconsin UNIA, 1 May 1945, box 2,
ﬁle 2, AJG Papers.
11. James Stewart to AJG, 19 June 1942, box 4, ﬁle 6, ibid.
12. N. H. Grissom, Commissioner, Wisconsin UNIA, to AJG, 8 May [1945],
box 2, ﬁle 2, ibid.
13. AJG to Grissom, 1 May 1945; E. M. Collins to AJG, 19 October 1942, box 1,
ﬁle 1, AJG Papers.
14. AJG to B. Gibbons, President of the Garvey Club, 6 March 1945, box 1, ﬁle
12, ibid.
15. See stationary letterhead, AJG to Mr. A. Balfour Linton, Editor, The African,
3 July 1944, box 1, ﬁle 1, ibid.
16. AJG to Mr. B. Gibbons, 20 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 12, ibid.
17. J. Bowlby, ‘‘Processes of Mourning,’’ International Journal Psychoanalysis 42
(1961): 317–40; Marcia Kraft Goin, R. W . Burgoyne, and John M. Goin, ‘‘Timeless
Attachment to a Dead Relative,’’ American Journal Psychiatry 136 (July 1979): 988–
89; AJG to Mr. B. Gibbons, 17 March 1944, box 1, ﬁle 12, and copy of the African
Study Circle of the World circular letter, box 10, ﬁle 5, AJG Papers.
18. AJG to Mr. Geo. Covington, 2 May 1946, box 1, ﬁle 5, ibid. (ﬁrst quotation);
AJG to B. Gibbons, 20 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 12, ibid. (second quotation); AJG to
Mr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, 14 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 2, ibid. (third quotation); AJG to
Mr. Wyalt Dougherty, 17 January 1945, box 1, ﬁle 7, ibid.
19. AJG to Mr. Blades, 14 August 1944, box 1, ﬁle 3, ibid.
20. AJG to A. Philip Randolph, President of the Brotherhood of Sleeping
Porters, 11 February 1944, box 3, ﬁle 1, ibid.
21. ‘‘Statement Issued to the Press by President Roosevelt,’’ 14 August [1941], in
FRUS, Diplomatic Papers: General and the Soviet Union, 1941 (Washington, D.C.:
GPO, 1958), 1:368; Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston S. Churchill, ‘‘The Atlanta
Charter,’’ in Yearbook of the United Nations, 1946–1947 (New York: Department of


--- PAGE 278 ---
notes to pages 150–54 265
Public Information, United Nations, 1947), 2; Francis Loewenheim, Harold Lang-
ley, and Manfred Jonas, eds., Roosevelt and Churchill: Their Secret Wartime Corre-
spondence (New York: Saturday Review Press, 1975), 71 n. 1.
22. ‘‘The Declaration by United Nations,’’ in Yearbook of the United Nations,
1946–1947, 1; ‘‘The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State,’’ 9 June 1942,
in FRUS, Diplomatic Papers: The Near East and Africa, 1942  (Washington, D.C.:
GPO, 1963), 4:105; James W. Ford, The Negro People and the New World Situation
(New York: Workers Library Publications, 1941), 15.
23. Rochelle Chadako√, ed., Eleanor Roosevelt’s My Day: Her Acclaimed Columns,
1936–1945 (New York: Pharos Books, 1989), 334; ‘‘Issues Dealt with by Mrs. Roose-
velt in Press Conference,’’ Daily Gleaner, 9 March 1944, 4; AJG to Adam Clayton
Powell Jr., 13 March 1944, box 2, ﬁle 13, AJG Papers.
24. ‘‘Statement Issued to the Press by President Roosevelt,’’ 16 December 1942,
in FRUS, Diplomatic Papers: Europe, 1942 (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1962), 483;
Chadako√, Eleanor Roosevelt’s My Day, 266 (radio message).
25. ‘‘Churchill to Roosevelt,’’ 22 September 1942, in Loewenheim, Langley, and
Jonas, Roosevelt and Churchill, 255, 54.
26. Eric Larrabee, Commander in Chief: Franklin Delano Roosevelt, His Lieuten-
ants, and Their War (New York: Harper and Row Pub, 1987), 625.
27. Neil Hickney and Ed Edwin, Adam Clayton Powell and the Politics of Race
(New York: Fleet Publishing Corp., 1965), 76; Adam Clayton Powell Jr., Adam by
Adam (New York: Dail Press, 1971), 68; Charles V . Hamilton, Adam Clayton Powell,
Jr.: The Political Biography of an American Dilemma  (New York: Maxwell Mac-
millan International, 1992), 124, 141.
28. Adam Clayton Powell Jr. to AJG, 14 February 1944, box 2, ﬁle 13, AJG Papers.
29. AJG to Adam Clayton Powell Jr., 13 March 1944, ibid.
30. Ibid.; AJG to Mr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, 14 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 2, ibid.
31. AJG to Mr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, 14 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 2, ibid.
32. AJG to Adam Clayton Powell Jr., 13 March 1944; Claudia Jones, Jim-Crow in
Uniform (New York: New Age Publishers, 1940), 7.
33. Keith E. Byerman, Seizing the Word: History, Art, and Self in the Work of W . E.
B. Du Bois  (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1994), 90; Claudia Jones, Jim-
Crow in Uniform, 7; ‘‘The Atlantic Charter and British West Africa, Memorandum
on Post-War Reconstruction of the Colonies and Protectorates of British West
Africa,’’ August 1943, AJG Papers. See also ‘‘The National Council of Nigeria and
the Cameroons Memorandum on the New Constitution for Nigeria,’’ 27 March
1945, in box 13, ﬁle 6.
34. AJG to W . E. B. Du Bois, 31 January 1944, reel 56, frame 104, and Du Bois to
AJG, 9 February 1944, reel 56, frame 107, Du Bois Papers.
35. AJG to Mr. B. Gibbons, 4 July, 16 May 1944, box 1, ﬁle 12, AJG Papers. A
copy of the Memorandum Correlative of Africa, West Indies, and the Americas is in
box 13, ﬁle 7.


--- PAGE 279 ---
266 notes to pages 154–60
36. AJG, Memorandum Correlative, 1.
37. AJG to Mr. A. Alladin, 1 June 1947, box 1, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers.
38. Roi Ottley, New World a-Coming (New York: Literary Classics, Inc., 1943),
343; AJG, Memorandum Correlative, 12; W . E. B. Du Bois, Color and Democracy:
Colonies and Peace (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1945), 17.
39. AJG to W . E. B. Du Bois, 24 April 1944, reel 56, frame 111, Du Bois Papers;
Stokely Carmichael and Charles Hamilton, Black Power: The Politics of Liberation
in America (New York: Vintage, 1967), 36–37; Du Bois, ‘‘The Name ‘Negro,’ ’’
Crisis, March 1928.
40. Ruth W . Grant and Marion Orr, ‘‘Language, Race, and Politics: From
‘Black’ to ‘African American,’ ’’ Politics & Society 24 (June 1996): 138, 140, 139.
41. At the bottom of ‘‘Garvey’s African Communities League’’ stationary, AJG
stenciled, ‘‘PS. Please send me any Newspapers, Magazines, or Books about Africa,
Africans, people of African descent (commonly called Negroes).’’
42. Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1993), 112.
43. AJG to Mrs. Allman, 6 November 1946, box 1, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers.
44. AJG to Mr. B. Gibbons, 7 May 1944, box 1, ﬁle 12, ibid.
45. AJG to Mr. James Blades, 14 August 1944, box 1, ﬁle 3, and AJG to Mr. B.
Gibbons, 7 May, 20 June 1944, box 1, ﬁle 12, ibid.
46. AJG to Mr. Azikiwe, 24 October 1944, box 1, ﬁle 2, ibid.
47. MG, ‘‘The American Negro,’’ Black Man, November 1938; T ony Martin,
Race First: The Ideological and Organizational Struggles of Marcus Garvey and the
Universal Negro Improvement Association  (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press,
1976), 348–50; Ethel Wolfskill Hedlin, ‘‘Earnest Cox and Colonization: A White
Racist’s Response to Black Repatriation, 1923–1966’’ (Ph.D. diss., Duke University,
1974), iii.
48. AJG to Mr. Gibbons, 20 June 1944, box 1, ﬁle 12, Earnest S. Cox to AJG, 18
December 1947, box 1, ﬁle 5 (Bilbo), and James A. Blades to AJG, 7 August 1944,
box 1, ﬁle 3, all in AJG Papers.
49. AJG to Mr. Brown, 31 October 1947, box 1, ﬁle 1, and N. H. Grissom to AJG,
20 June 1945, box 2, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers. For the relationship between Earnest Cox
and MG, see Hedlin, ‘‘Earnest Cox and Colonization.’’
50. AJG to Mr. James A. Blades, 14 August 1944, box 1, ﬁle 3, AJG Papers.
51. Mr. B. Gibbons, President Garvey Club, to AJG, 13 November 1944, and
AJG to Brother Gibbons, 23 November 1944, box 1, ﬁle 12, ibid.
52. AJG to W. E. B. Du Bois, 4 April 1944, reel 56, frame 108, Du Bois Papers;
AJG to Du Bois, 4 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 8, AJG Papers; Du Bois, ‘‘A Lunatic or a
T raitor,’’ Crisis, May 1924, 8–9, reprinted in The Seventh Son: The Thought and
Writings of W . E. B. Du Bois, ed. Julius Lester (New York: Random House, 1971),
2:184–85.


--- PAGE 280 ---
notes to pages 161–68 267
53. Lester, Seventh Son, 2:734; Gerald Horne, Black and Red: W . E. B. Du Bois
and the Afro-American Response to the Cold War, 1944–1963 (New York: State Uni-
versity Press, 1986), 42, 113.
54. W . E. B. Du Bois to AJG, 9 February 1944, reel 56, frame 107, Du Bois
Papers.
55. Lester, Seventh Son, 729; W . E. B. Du Bois to Miss Allison Burroughs, 7
January 1946, reel 58, frame 644, Du Bois Papers.
56. AJG to W . E. B. Du Bois, 4 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 8, AJG Papers.
57. AJG to Adam Clayton Powell, 13 March 1944, box 2, ﬁle 13, ibid.; Walter
White, A Man Called White: The Autobiography of Walter White (New York: Viking,
1948), 295; Horne, Black and Red, 36.
58. AJG to Adam Clayton Powell, 13 March 1944; Rupert Lewis, ‘‘Amy Jacques
Garvey: A Political Portrait,’’ Jamaican Daily News, 29 July 1973.
59. Horne, Black and Red, 36; W . E. B. Du Bois to Chairman of Liberian and
Haitian Delegation, 29 April 1945, reel 58, frames 51–52, Du Bois Papers. Only four
nations from the African continent were represented at the session: Ethiopia, Li-
beria, Egypt, and South Africa.
60. Leland M. Goodrich, The United Nations in a Changing World (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1974), 179–201 (chap. 9, ‘‘The Passing of Coloni-
alism’’).
61. AJG to Mrs. Allman, 6 November 1946, and Allman to AJG, 12 November
1946, box 1, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers; Mr. Guillermo Belt to AJG, 13 July 1945, box 1, ﬁle 3,
ibid.
Chapter Nine
1. W . E. B. Du Bois to AJG, 8 April 1944, reel 56, frame 110, Du Bois Papers.
2. AJG to W . E. B. Du Bois, 24 April 1944, reel 56, frame 111, ibid.
3. George Padmore, ed., History of the Pan-African Congress  (London: Ham-
mersmith Bookshop, Ltd., 1947), 17–18.
4. W . E. B. Du Bois to AJG, 8 April 1944, reel 56, frame 110, enclosure, and
George Padmore to Du Bois, 17 August 1945, reel 57, frame 1040, Du Bois Papers.
5. AJG to Mr. Gibbons, 5 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 12, AJG Papers.
6. AJG to W . E. B. Du Bois, 24 April 1944, reel 56, frames 111–12.
7. Nnamdi Azikiwe, My Odyssey: An Autobiography (New York: Praeger, 1970),
162; I. F. Nicolson, The Administration of Nigeria, 1900 to 1960: Men, Methods, and
Myths (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1969), 252; Sir James Robertson, Transition in
Africa: From Direct Rule to Independence (New York: Harper and Row, 1974), 189
(‘‘variable character’’); AJG to W . E. B. Du Bois, 26 April 1944, reel 56, frame 113,
Du Bois Papers.
8. AJG to W . E. B. Du Bois, 24 April 1944, reel 56, frame 111, Du Bois Papers;
Gerald Horne, Black and Red: W. E. B. Du Bois and the Afro-American Response to


--- PAGE 281 ---
268 notes to pages 169–74
the Cold War, 1944–1963  (New York: State University Press, 1986), 37 (harmless
‘‘nuisance’’).
9. AJG to W . E. B. Du Bois, 26 April 1944, reel 56, frame 113, Du Bois Paper;
Mary Hawkesworth, ‘‘Confounding Gender,’’ Signs 22 (Spring 1997): 654; Joan
Scott, ‘‘Gender: A Useful Category of Historical Analysis,’’ American Historical
Review 91 (December 1986): 1063.
10. George Padmore to AJG, 9 July 1945, box 2, ﬁle 2, and AJG to Brother
Gibbons, 28 July, 17 September 1945, box 1, ﬁle 12, AJG Papers; Padmore, History of
the Pan-African Congress, 72.
11. AJG to Mr. Padmore, 28 July 1945, box 2, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers.
12. Joan French and Honor Ford Smith, Women, Work, and Organization in
Jamaica, 1900–1944 (Mona, Jamaica: Sistern Research Institute of Social Science,
1986), 237–39.
13. Robert Hill and Barbara Bair, eds., Marcus Garvey Life and Lessons: A Centen-
nial Companion to the Marcus Garvey and UNIA Papers  (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1987), 378; AJG to Mr. Domingo, 28 July 1945, box 1, ﬁle 7, AJG
Papers.
14. AJG to Mr. Padmore, 28 July 1945.
15. AJG, interview by Dabu Gizenga, 10 January 1973, Kwame Nkrumah Collec-
tion 128-1–128-2, Moorland Spingard Library, Howard University, Washington,
D.C.; Amy Ashwood Garvey to W . E. B. Du Bois, 8 September 1924, reel 13, frame
744, Du Bois Papers.
16. AJG to W . E. B. Du Bois, 4, 24 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 8, AJG Papers.
17. B. Gibbons to AJG, 4 June 1946, box 1, ﬁle 13, ibid.
18. AJG to Editor, Amsterdam News, 4 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 2, ibid.; C. B. Powell,
Editor, Amsterdam News, to AJG, 12 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 1, ibid.
19. N. H. Grissom to AJG, 9 April 1947, box 2, ﬁle 2, ibid.; T ony Martin, ‘‘Amy
Ashwood Garvey, Wife No. 1,’’ Jamaica Journal 30 (August–October 1987): 35–36.
20. Audre Lorde, Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches (Freedom, Calif.: Crossing
Press, 1984), 169; AJG to Mr. Azikiwe, 28 November 1944, box 1, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers.
21. Martin, ‘‘Wife No. 1,’’ 33.
22. Padmore, History of the Pan-African Congress , 52. Miss Alma La Badie,
representing the UNIA, was the only other female voice recorded in the proceed-
ings. La Badie also elaborated on the problems of Jamaican women, connecting the
‘‘high illegitimate birth rate’’ to the fact that ‘‘women have little means of liveli-
hood, and, therefore, get into di≈culties.’’
23. Lorde, Sister Outsider, 167.
24. Padmore, History of the Pan-African Congress , 4; AJG interview, Kwame
Nkrumah Collection, 128-1–128-2.
25. AJG to Mr. Azikiwe, 28 November 1945, box 1, ﬁle 32, AJG Papers.
26. AJG to W . E. B. Du Bois, 24 April 1944, reel 56, frame 111, Du Bois Papers.


--- PAGE 282 ---
notes to pages 175–82 269
Chapter T en
1. AJG, ‘‘Be Prepared,’’ The African, May 1946, 12.
2. Rupert Lewis, Marcus Garvey: Anti-Colonial Champion (T renton, N.J.: Afri-
can World Press, 1988); AJG, ‘‘The Coming Era: Africans View of a World under
Demolition and Reconstruction,’’ The African , August 1944, 5; Wang Qinmei,
‘‘Africa Contributes to World War II Victory,’’ Beijing Review 38 (15 June 1995): 20.
3. AJG, ‘‘Be Prepared’’; AJG, ‘‘The Coming Era.’’
4. AJG, ‘‘Where Are My Children?,’’ The African, June 1946, 11.
5. Paul Bartrop, ‘‘From Lisbon to Jamaica: A Study of British Refugee Rescue
during the Second World War,’’ Immigrants & Minorities  (1994): 48–64; ‘‘Hit-
ler Conveniently Avoided Congratulating Jesse Owens,’’ Chicago Defender, 8 Au-
gust 1936; ‘‘Hitler Won’t Shake Hands,’’ Afro-American, 8 August 1936; James R.
Hooker, Black Revolutionary: George Padmore’s Path from Communism to Pan-
Africanism (New York: Praeger, 1967), 55; ‘‘Hitler Wants Part of Africa from Britain:
British Cabinet Pondering over Consideration of New Issue,’’ Chicago Defender, 5
November 1938; ‘‘Africans in Demonstration against Nazi Germany,’’ Chicago De-
fender, 5 November 1938.
6. Mercer Cook, ‘‘The Negro Knows Fascism,’’ Free World, November 1942,
147–50.
7. Gerald Horne, Black Liberation/Red Scare: Ben Davis and the Communist
Party (Newark, N.J.: University of Delaware Press, 1994), 81; ‘‘Britain Has Its
Hitlers: English Color Bar Stirs Deep Hatred of Colonials,’’ Afro-American, 26
November 1938.
8. Cook, ‘‘The Negro Knows Fascism,’’ 148.
9. Hooker, Black Revolutionary, 59.
10. Rita Headrick, ‘‘African Soldiers in World War II,’’ Armed Forces and Society
(1978): 505, 503.
11. AJG, ‘‘Garveyism as a Philosophy of Life,’’ West African Pilot, 26 April 1945.
12. AJG, ‘‘Where Are My Children?’’
13. AJG, ‘‘Africans at Home and Abroad,’’ West African Pilot, 28 September 1945.
14. AJG, ‘‘Garveyism as a Philosophy of Life.’’
15. Harold Preece, ‘‘Africa Awakes,’’ Crisis, December 1945; Nnamdi Azikiwe,
‘‘Address Delivered at the Inauguration of the African Continental Bank, Septem-
ber 1, 1948,’’ in Colonial Rule in Africa: Readings from Primary Sources , ed. Bruce
Fetter (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1979), 114 (quotations).
16. AJG to Mr. Azikiwe, 28 November 1945, box 1, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers.
17. AJG, ‘‘China Milks Africa in the Caribbean,’’ West African Pilot, 28 Decem-
ber 1945.
18. Ibid.
19. Layle Silbert, ‘‘We Export Race Prejudice to China,’’ Crisis, July 1948, 208.
20. Natasha B. Barnes, ‘‘Face of the Nation: Race, Nationalism, and Identities


--- PAGE 283 ---
270 notes to pages 183–88
in Jamaican Beauty Pageants,’’ Massachusetts Review (Autumn–Winter 1994): 483;
Rex M. Nettleford, Mirror, Mirror: Identity, Race, and Protest in Jamaica (Jamaica:
William Collins and Sangster, 1970), 13.
21. AJG also o√ered editorial suggestions to Nnamdi Azikiwe’s West African Pilot
and West African Opinion.
22. The AJG Papers, box 1, ﬁle 1, contain numerous handwritten notes calculat-
ing the funds received by agents. For other money exchanges for The African, see
AJG to Mrs. Iris Davis, Hannah T own, Kingston, 12 March 1947, and Davis to
AJG, 3 October 1947, box 1, ﬁle 7, AJG Papers.
23. J. L. Brown to AJG, 20 March 1947, box 1, ﬁle 1, AJG Papers.
24. Ridley Lewis to AJG, 4 April 1945, and AJG to Lewis, 19 April 1945, ibid.
25. AJG to Mr. James L. Brown, 6, 26 September 1944, ibid.
26. AJG to Mr. Ridley Lewis, 9 April 1946, and AJG to Mr. James Brown, 21
November 1946, ibid.
27. ‘‘African Study Circle of the World’’ circular letter, The African, November–
December 1944.
28. Moleﬁ Kete Asante, Kemet, Afrocentricity, and Knowledge  (T renton, N.J.:
African World Press, 1990).
29. AJG to Mr. Wyatt Dougherty, Secretary of Union of People of African
Descent, American Section Black International, 17 January 1945, box 1, ﬁle 7 (ﬁrst
quotation), and AJG to Mr. Wright, Attention Mr. Gibbons, 17 March 1944, box 1,
ﬁle 12, AJG Papers.
30. AJG to Mr. Wm. Douglas, Secretary of UNIA, Panama, June 20 1944, box 1,
ﬁle 7, ibid.
31. Harrison Ross Steeves, Learned Societies and English Literary Scholarship: In
Great Britain and the United States (New York: AMS Press, 1970), xiv.
32. ‘‘African Study Circle of the World,’’ advertisement, The African, Novem-
ber–December 1944.
33. AJG to Mr. Gibbons, 20 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 12, AJG Papers.
34. Mary Kelley, Private Woman, Public Stage: Literary Domesticity in Nine-
teenth-Century America  (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984); Frances B.
Cogan, All-American Girl: The Ideal of Real Womanhood in Mid-Nineteenth-
Century America (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1989), 67 (quotation).
35. Anne Meis Knupfer, T oward a T ender Humanity and a Nobler Womanhood
(New York: New York University Press, 1996), 114; Carolyn Cooper, ‘‘Race and the
Cultural Politics of Self-Representation: A View from the University of the West
Indies,’’ Research in African Languages 27 (Winter 1996): 100; Dorothy B. Porter,
‘‘The Organized Educational Activities of Negro Literary Societies, 1828–1846,’’
Journal of Negro Education (October 1936): 569.
36. Cooper, ‘‘Race and the Cultural Politics of Self-Representation.’’
37. AJG suggested these books for the ﬁrst series: Selwyn Jones, South of the
Congo; Nagley Farson, Behind God’s Back ; J. A. Rogers, Sex and Race in the Old


--- PAGE 284 ---
notes to pages 188–92 271
World, Sex and Race in the New World, and One Hundred Amazing Facts about the
Negro; Melville Herskowitz, The Myth of the Negro Past; W . E. B. Du Bois, Black
Folk; Donald Pierson, Negroes in Brazil ; Xavier Hebert, Capricornia (Australia);
Paul Laurence Dunbar, The Complete Poems; Denis Saurat, Watch Over Africa; and
Bronze Booklet, Negro Art Past and Present —located at the Crisis Book Shop in
New York. AJG informed Nnamdi Azikiwe that she was going to ‘‘include your two
books, ‘Renascent Africa’ and the other on Liberian Politics, for our Circle second
series of readings and discussions.’’ AJG to Azikiwe, 24 October 1944, box 1, ﬁle 1,
AJG Papers.
38. Donald Pierson, Negroes in Brazil: A Study of Race Contact at Bahia (Carbon-
dale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1967), 46, 50; Negley Farson, Behind God’s
Back (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1941), 471.
39. Asante, Kemet, Afrocentricity, and Knowledge.
40. J. A. Rogers, Sex and Race: Negro-Caucasian Mixing in All Ages and All Lands
(St. Petersburg, Fla.: Helga M. Rogers, 1968), 1; ‘‘African Study Circle of the
World,’’ advertisement, The African, November–December 1944.
41. Peggy R. Sabatier, ‘‘ ‘Elite’ Education in French West Africa: The Era of
Limits, 1903–1945,’’ International Journal of African Historical Studies 11 (1978): 256.
42. Fay Gadsden, ‘‘The African Press in Kenya, 1945–1952,’’ Journal of African
History 21 (1980): 516 (ﬁrst quotation); Daiziel Fuller, Secretary of African Study
Circle, Auxiliary of the Guachapali Division, #244, to AJG, 21 December 1947, box
1, ﬁle 10, AJG Papers.
43. John Egerton, ‘‘The Pre-Brown South,’’ Virginia Quarterly Review 70 (Au-
tumn 1994): 604; Robert A. Dentler, ‘‘School Desegregation since Gunnar Myr-
dal’s American Dilemma,’’ in The Education of African Americans , ed. Charlie V .
Willie, Antonie M. Garibaldi, and Wornie L. Reed (New York: Auburn House,
1991), 29 (quotation).
44. Joseph Woolcock, ‘‘Class Conﬂict and Class Reproduction: An Historical
Analysis of the Jamaican Educational Reforms of 1957 and 1962,’’ Social and Eco-
nomic Studies 33 (1984): 52. There had been so much resistance to opening up
secondary schools to the masses of black Jamaicans that even though the Common
Entrance Examination was formally adopted in 1943, it was not implemented until
1957.
45. AJG to Mr. Gibbons, 20 June 1944, box 1, ﬁle 12, AJG Papers.
46. AJG to Mr. J. L. Brown, Circulation Manager for The African, 1 May 1944,
and AJG to Mr. A. Balfour Linton, 4 July 1944, box 1, ﬁle 1, ibid.
47. Miss Irene Ford, Cleveland, Ohio, to AJG, 18 January 1945, box 1, ﬁle 7,
ibid.; Daiziel Fuller to AJG, 21 December 1947.
48. Stuart Hall, ‘‘Negotiating Caribbean Identities,’’ New Left Review (January–
February 1995): 11.
49. Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1993), 199.


--- PAGE 285 ---
272 notes to pages 194–97
Chapter Eleven
1. W . E. B. Du Bois, Dusk of Dawn (New York: Kraus Thomson Organization,
Ltd., 1975), 303; David Levering Lewis Collection, ‘‘Voices from the Renaissance
T ranscripts,’’ box 1, ﬁle 2, Schomburg Library Special Collections Unit, New York;
Sanford Pinsker, ‘‘The Black Intellectuals’ Common Fate and Uncommon Prob-
lems,’’ Virginia Quarterly Review (Spring 1994): 235.
2. Wendell Bell, Jamaican Leaders: Political Attitudes in a New Nation (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1964), 8; AJG to Mr. Haynes, 4 June 1946, box 3, ﬁle
4, AJG Papers.
3. R. W . Thompson, Black Caribbean (London: Macdonald and Co., 1946), 211;
Carol Mae Morrissey, ‘‘Ol’ Time T ram and the T ramway Era 1876–1948,’’ Jamaica
Journal 6 (November 1983): 12–21.
4. The location of election meetings was listed daily in the Daily Gleaner along
with the proposed speakers.
5. AJG to Mr. W . Y. Reurtado, A.M.I.C.E., Director of Public Works Depart-
ment, 5 November 1947, box 5, ﬁle 8, AJG Papers. The department replied that the
‘‘matter was receiving consideration by the government,’’ 3 January 1948, box 5, ﬁle
2.
6. ‘‘P .N.P . Holds Big Meeting at Halfway T ree,’’ Daily Gleaner, 13 November
1944, 9.
7. AJG to Mr. Andronicus Jacobs, 12 December 1944, box 2, ﬁle 5, and AJG to
Editor, Daily Gleaner, 23 March 1944, box 31, ﬁle 13, AJG Papers.
8. Ken Post, Arise Ye Starvelings: The Jamaican Labour Rebellion of 1938 and Its
Aftermath (London: Martinus Nijho√, 1978), 423; C. Paul Bradley, ‘‘Mass Parties in
Jamaica: Structure and Organization,’’ Social and Economic Studies 9 (December
1960): 393.
9. This political power block was so well ﬁnanced that it eliminated the pos-
sibility for a formidable third party, despite the e√orts of conservative planters who
formed the Jamaican Democratic Party for ‘‘free enterprise.’’ Ironically, this was the
only party that put forth a Charter for Women. See ‘‘Charter for Women,’’ Daily
Gleaner, 14 November 1944, 5.
10. AJG to Mr. Mitchell, Colon, 24 October 1947, box 2, ﬁle 9, AJG Papers;
‘‘Large Crowd Cheer Dr. Fagan at Meeting,’’ Daily Gleaner, 25 November 1944, 13;
Frank Hill, Bustamante and His Letters  (Kingston, Jamaica: Kingston Publishing
Ltd., 1976), 34.
11. Diane Austin, Urban Life in Kingston, Jamaica: The Culture and Class Ideology
of Two Neighborhoods (New York: Cordon and Breach Science Publishers, 1984), 13
(‘‘two sides of the same coin’’); T . R. Makonnen, Editor, Pan-Africa, to AJG, 18
February 1947, box 5, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers.
12. Aggrey Brown, Color, Class, and Politics in Jamaica (New Brunswick, N.J.:
T ransaction Books, 1979), 111; a series of editorials and commentary in the Daily
Gleaner, November 1944.


--- PAGE 286 ---
notes to pages 198–203 273
13. Post, Arise Ye Starvelings, 453.
14. Carl Stone, Class, Race, and Political Behavior in Urban Jamaica  (Mona,
Jamaica: Institute of Social and Economic Research, 1973).
15. Morris E. Parkin, ‘‘P .N.P . and Bustamante,’’ Daily Gleaner, 6 November
1944, 6.
16. Linnette Vassell, ‘‘Women of the Masses: Daphne Campbell and ‘Left’
Politics in Jamaica in the 1950s,’’ in Engendering History: Caribbean Women in
Historical Perspective, eds. Verene Shepherd, Bridget Brereton, and Barbara Bailey
(New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1995), 322.
17. AJG to Mr. Brown, Editor, The African, 11 December 1944, and AJG to Mr.
Azikiwe, 30 November 1944, box 1, ﬁle 1, AJG Papers. The following year she sent
Azikiwe a news clipping on the Jamaican elections. AJG to Mr. Azikiwe, 10 April
1945, box 1, ﬁle 2, ibid.
18. Aggrey Brown, Color, Class, and Politics in Jamaica , 116; Bell, Jamaican
Leaders, 19.
19. Cornel West, ‘‘Marxist Theory and the Speciﬁcity of Afro-American Op-
pression,’’ in Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture , ed. C. Nelson and L.
Grossbert (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1988), 276.
20. E. M. Collins to AJG, 19 October 1942, and AJG to Mrs. Carmen Cordoza,
Executive Secretary of the UNIA, 26 February 1945, box 1, ﬁle 5, AJG to Brother
Gibbons, 28 July 1945, box 1, ﬁle 3; AJG to Mr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, 14 April 1944, box
31, ﬁle 2; AJG to Mr. Dougherty, 14 November 1945, box 1, ﬁle 7—all in AJG Papers.
21. AJG to Sylvester Uguru, Lagos, Nigeria, 18 December 1944, box 3, ﬁle 8, ibid.
22. James Stewart, President General, to Mrs. Beulah McDonald, New Orleans,
La. Division, 5 June 1941, roll 1, folder 3, UNIA Papers; Box 3, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers.
23. James Stewart to Thomas Clarke, Ancon Division, Canal Zone, 9 Septem-
ber 1941, roll #1, folder 4, and Executive Council minutes, Roll 6, folder 42, UNIA
Papers.
24. ‘‘Have You Forgotten Them?,’’ New Negro World 1 (December 1942), in roll
15, folder 92, and James Stewart to Steve Braithwait, Glace Bay, Nova Scotia, 5 June
1941, roll 1, folder 3, UNIA Papers.
25. New York Age, 6, 13, 20 July 1946; ‘‘Garvey Returns,’’ New York Age, 13 July
1946; ‘‘Mrs. Garvey Gets Warm Greeting from Friend,’’ New York Amsterdam News,
3 August 1946, 8.
26. AJG to Mr. A. L. Crawford, 28 May 1946, box 1, ﬁle 6, AJG Papers.
27. AJG to Mr. T . R. Mackonen, 8 December 1946, box 2, ﬁle 8, AJG Papers;
AJG to Mr. A. L. Crawford, 28 May 1946.
28. ‘‘UNIA Convenes Aug 4th,’’ New York Age, 20 July 1946; ‘‘30-Day Conven-
tion Opens in Harlem,’’ New York Times, 5 August 1946, 22.
29. AJG to Mr. Clark, 30 September 1949, box 31, ﬁle 4, AJG Papers; ‘‘Mrs.
Garvey Speaks,’’ New York Age, 7 September 1946; Mr. Berry Byl[?] to AJG, 25
August 1946, box 1, ﬁle 3, AJG Papers; Winston James, Holding Aloft the Banner of


--- PAGE 287 ---
274 notes to pages 203–7
Ethiopia: Caribbean Radicalism in the Early Twentieth-Century America (London:
Verso Press, 1998), 3; ‘‘Mrs Garvey Speaks.’’
30. AJG, ‘‘Wartime Neglect of U.S. Children Blamed for Delinquency,’’ Daily
Gleaner, 19 October 1946; Karen Anderson, Wartime Women: Sex Roles, Family
Relations, and the Status of Women during World War II (Westport, Conn.: Green-
wood Press, 1981), 95–96; Walter A. Lunden, Statistics on Delinquents and De-
linquency (Springﬁeld, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas, Publishers, 1964), 167–68; Shel-
don Glueck and Eleanor Glueck, Family Environment and Delinquency (Boston:
Houghton Mi∆in, 1962), 109–12.
31. AJG, ‘‘Wartime Neglect of U.S. Children Blamed for Delinquency’’; Karen
Anderson, Wartime Women, 96 (‘‘so-called commando gangs’’).
32. A. W . Burke, ‘‘A Cross Cultural Study of Delinquency among West Indian
Boys,’’ International Journal of Social Psychiatry 26 (1980): 81; Austin, Urban Life in
Kingston, Jamaica, 53.
33. Guy Standing, Unemployment and Female Labour: A Study of Labour Supply
in Kingston, Jamaica (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1981), 88, 93–95.
34. AJG to Mr. Grissom, 7 October 1948, box 2, ﬁle 2; B. Gibbons to AJG, 29
August 1945, box 1, ﬁle 12; AJG to Miss Ethel Collins, 7 August 1944, box 1, ﬁle 4;
AJG to Mr. Gibbons, 20 April 1944, box 1, ﬁle 12—all in AJG Papers.
35. AJG to Miss Ethel Collins, 7 August 1944 (‘‘the highest marks’’); AJG to Mr.
W . H. Douglass, 26 December 1944, box 3, ﬁle 7; AJG to Mr. Booth, 17 January
1945, box 1, ﬁle 3; AJG to Headmaster, [Wolmers], 8 September 1947, box 5, ﬁle 5—
all in AJG Papers.
36. ‘‘Passes University Exams,’’ New York Age , 22 June 1946, 5; AJG to Mr.
Anderson, 31 October 1947, box 1, ﬁle 1, AJG Papers; Nancy Foner, Status and Power
in Rural Jamaica: A Study of Educational and Political Change (New York: T eachers
College Press, 1973), 61.
37. AJG to Mr. L. Booth, 17 January 1945, box 1, ﬁle 3 (‘‘keep him nourished’’),
and AJG to Nnamdi Azikiwe, 5 February 1945, box 1, ﬁle 1 (‘‘taste for good acting’’),
AJG Papers; Julius Garvey, Essence 17 (November 1986): 63; AJG to Mr. James L.
Brown, 6 September 1944, box 31, ﬁle 1, AJG Papers (last quotation).
38. AJG to Mr. Alladin, 1 June 1947, box 1, ﬁle 1, ibid.
39. Mark Figueroa, ‘‘The Formation and Framework of Middle Strata Leader-
ship in Jamaica: The Crisis of the Seventies and Beyond,’’ Caribbean Studies: Puerto
Rico 21 (1988): 46.
40. Patrick S. Washburn, A Question of Sedition: The Federal Government’s Inves-
tigation of the Black Press during World War II (New York: Oxford University Press,
1986), 5 (post o≈ce examiner); Walter White, A Rising Wind  (1945; Westport,
Conn.: reprint, Negro University Press, 1971), 144.
41. AJG to Mr. Fishel, 1 September 1965, MG UNIA Collection, State Historical
Society of Wisconsin; Gerald Horne, Black and Red: W . E. B. Du Bois and the Afro-


--- PAGE 288 ---
notes to pages 207–14 275
American Response to the Cold War, 1944–1963  (New York: State University Press,
1986), 66–67.
42. Manning Marable, Race, Reform, and Rebellion: The Second Reconstruction
(Jackson: University of Mississippi Press, 1991), 21 (ﬁrst quotation); Brenda Gayle
Plummer, Rising Wind: Black Americans and U.S. Foreign A√airs, 1935–1960
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996), 194.
43. Penny M. Von Eschen, Race against Empire: Black Americans and Anti-
colonialism, 1937–1957 (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1997), 145.
44. Ibid., 146.
45. E. L. Pierre, an agent for the African Opinion magazine, was informed by the
publishers to send the $6.06 he collected from sales to AJG. Pierre to AJG, 15 May
1950, box 2, ﬁle 11, AJG Papers. Mr. Alladin sent AJG a check for $12.00 for sales of
The African. Alladin to AJG, 19 May 1950, box 1, ﬁle 2, ibid.
46. J. L. Brown, Editor, African Opinion, to AJG, 31 March 1951, box 1, ﬁle 1,
ibid.
47. AJG to Daily Gleaner, 20, 26 July, 10 August 1952, 27 July 1957; AJG to J.
Johnson, Editor, Ebony, 18 July 1952—all in box 1, ﬁle 9, AJG Papers; AJG to Mr.
Boronme, 14 March 1953, AJG to George Shepperson, 11 September 1952, and AJG
to Samuel A. Hayes, 15 May 1950, box 1, ﬁle 3, AJG Papers.
48. AJG to David Cronon, 28 Marcus 1955, box 10, ﬁle 6, AJG Papers.
49. Ibid.
50. Ibid.
51. J. L. Brown to AJG, 25 August 1950, and AJG to Mr. M. Taylor, 21 July 1956,
box 5, ﬁle 3; Jean Blackwell to AJG, 16 April, 29 July, 9 September 1952, box 3, ﬁle
2—all in AJG Papers.
52. AJG to Mrs. Taylor, Secretary General, UNIA, 9 September 1957, box 3, ﬁle
4, and William Sherrill to AJG, 21 September 1957, box 33, ﬁle 4, AJG Papers.
53. AJG to William Sherrill, 24 September 1957, box 33, ﬁle 4, ibid.
54. George Padmore to AJG, 3 October 1950, box 33, ﬁle 11, ibid.
55. Daily Gleaner, 8 November 1956.
56. ‘‘Division News Kingston,’’ Garvey’s Voice, August 1957, in Western Histori-
cal Reserve Society, Cleveland, Ohio.
Chapter Twelve
1. Walter Rodney, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa (Washington, D.C.: How-
ard University Press, 1982), 277–78; Hakim Adi, West Africans in Britain, 1900–
1960: Nationalism, Pan-Africanism, and Communism  (London: Lawrence and
Wishart, 1998), 186, 160–70.
2. [AJG], ‘‘Unite as One People, One Race with One Destiny,’’ Evening News, 29
November 1960, 5 (‘‘Africa shall be free’’); AJG, ‘‘Destiny Being Fulﬁlled,’’ manu-
script, box 5, ﬁle 13, AJG Papers.


--- PAGE 289 ---
276 notes to pages 214–17
3. ‘‘Notables to Witness Zik’s Ceremony,’’ West African Pilot, 15 November 1960;
‘‘Zik’s Inauguration as Gov-Gen to Be Filmed,’’ West African Pilot, 9 November
1960, 1; ‘‘Botsio Attends Swearing In of Azikiwe,’’ Ghanaian Times, 16 November
1960. AJG had also been invited to attend Kwame Nkrumah’s inauguration cele-
bration in 1957 but did not have the plane fare. See AJG to Kwame Nkrumah,
Prime Minister, 18 February 1957, box 2, ﬁle 10, AJG Papers.
4. Respect for Human Dignity: An Inaugural Address Delivered by His Excellence
Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe: Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief , 16 November
1960, 2, 5, in University of Ghana Balme Library, Accra, Ghana; ‘‘Garvey Suggests
Extracts from Zik’s Speech Should Be Taught to School Children,’’ West African
Pilot, 25 November 1960.
5. ‘‘She Flies in at Osagyefo’s Invitation,’’ Ghanaian Times, 25 November 1960, 5;
‘‘Garvey Suggests Extracts from Zik’s Speech Should Be Taught to School Chil-
dren’’; ‘‘Mrs. Garvey for Ghana T omorrow,’’ Daily Express Lagos, Nigeria, 22 No-
vember 1960; ‘‘Garvey’s Wife in Ghana,’’ Ghanaian Times, 24 November 1960.
6. St. Clair Drake, ‘‘Diaspora Studies and Pan-Africanism,’’ in Global Dimen-
sions of the African Diaspora , ed. Joseph E. Harris (Washington, D.C.: Howard
University Press, 1982), 361–62; James E. T urner, ‘‘Historical Dialectics of Black
Nationalist Movements in America,’’ Western Journal of Black Studies 1 (September
1977): 165.
7. St. Clair Drake, ‘‘Diaspora Studies and Pan-Africanism,’’ 350; Leslie Alex-
ander Lacy, ‘‘The Rise and Fall of the Proper Negro,’’ in A Stranger in the Village:
Two Centuries of African-American Travel Writing, ed. Farah J. Gri≈n and Cheryl J.
Fisher (Boston: Beacon Press, 1998), 158; Richard Wright, Black Power: A Record of
Reactions in a Land of Pathos (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1954), 57.
8. Kwame Nkrumah, The Autobiography  (London: Panaf Books, 1957), 37;
‘‘Black Star Line: Now a Ghanaian Enterprise,’’ Ghanaian Times, 26 July 1960, 1;
Michael W . Williams, ‘‘Marcus Garvey and Kwame Nkrumah: A Case of Ideologi-
cal Assimilation, Advancement, and Reﬁnement,’’ Western Journal of Black Studies
7 (1983): 94.
9. Jean Blackwell to AJG, 18 March 1957, Schomburg Center for Research in
Black Culture Collection, New York, N.Y.; ‘‘She Flies in at Osagyefo’s Invitation’’;
AJG, ‘‘Destiny Being Fulﬁlled,’’ unpublished essay, box 5, ﬁle 13, AJG Papers.
10. ‘‘Mrs. Garvey for Ghana T omorrow’’; Basil Davidson, Black Star: A View of
the Life and Times of Kwame Nkrumah (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1989), 2; ‘‘A
Visit to Bureau,’’ Daily Graphic Ghana , 25 November 1960; Ghana Institute of
Languages Admission Guide, 2, in possession of author.
11. Ghana Institute of Languages Admission Guide, 2. Ghana made some impor-
tant educational gains under Nkrumah’s leadership. By 1964, the number of stu-
dents receiving primary schooling was almost seven times greater than it had been
in 1950; the number of children in middle school was four times higher, and


--- PAGE 290 ---
notes to pages 217–21 277
secondary school attendance was ten times greater. See Davidson, Black Star, 160.
Unfortunately, this educational model would be contested by elites who under-
stood education as a way to guarantee their privileges. One participant in the coup
that overthrew Nkrumah in 1966 claimed that the action was justiﬁed because
‘‘Nkrumah’s rule had planted havoc . . . in the ﬁeld of education [by] a crippling or
lowering of educational standards.’’ Although it is true that the quality of education
failed to keep abreast with the expansion of schools, criticism of its ‘‘quantity at the
expense of quality,’’ Davidson argues, was merely ‘‘another angle of discontent,
essentially a political angle’’ (160–61).
12. ‘‘Dr. Nkrumah Is Osagyefo for the World—Mrs. Garvey,’’ Ghanaian Times, 5
December 1960, 5–6; C. L. R. James, Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution (West-
port, Conn.: Lawrence Hill and Co., 1977), 106, 119; Kent Worchester, ‘‘C. L. R.
James and the Development of a Pan-African Problematic,’’ Journal of Caribbean
History 27 (1993): 70.
13. AJG to Mrs. Evelyn Amarteiﬁo, Secretary, Federation of Women, 26 January
1958, box 1, ﬁle 1, AJG Papers.
14. Kwame Nkrumah, ‘‘Appeal to National Workers, on 2nd April, 1962,’’ in The
Eleventh Party Congress, Kwame Nkrumah, 29 July 1962; Davidson, Black Star, 176;
[AJG], ‘‘Unite as One People, One Race with One Destiny,’’ 5.
15. David N. Gibbs, The Political Economy of Third World Intervention: Mines,
Money, and U.S. Policy in the Congo Crisis (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1991), 99.
16. Prof. St. Clair Drake, ‘‘Why Nkrumah Supports Patrice Lumumba,’’ New
Ashanti Times, 26 November 1960, 7; W . Scott Thompson, Ghana’s Foreign Policy,
1957–1966: Diplomacy, Ideology, and the New State (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1969), 129, 131; [AJG], ‘‘Unite as One People, One Race with One
Destiny,’’ 5.
17. AJG, ‘‘Destiny Being Fulﬁlled,’’ unpublished essay, box 5, ﬁle 13, AJG Papers;
Clayton Eshleman and Annette Smith, ed., Aimé Césaire: The Collected Poetry
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983), 77.
18. AJG, ‘‘Destiny Being Fulﬁlled.’’
19. Ibid.
20. Vernon McKay, Africa in World Politics (New York: Harper and Row, 1963),
402–3 (quotation, 403); ‘‘Southern Hospitality,’’ Crisis, February 1961, 100.
21. AJG, ‘‘New Africa and the West Indies,’’ box 14, ﬁle 1, AJG Papers. There is
no evidence that this essay was published, but AJG did receive one letter, dated 1
June 1961, from the Bureau of Ghana Languages indicating that her article with the
same title was well received. See letter in box 1, ﬁle 3, ibid.
22. See, e.g., Gerald Horne, Black and Red: W . E. B. Du Bois and the Afro-
American Response to the Cold War, 1944–1963  (New York: State University of
New York Press, 1986); Penny Von Eschen, Race against Empire: Black Americans


--- PAGE 291 ---
278 notes to pages 221–24
and Anticolonialism, 1937–1957 (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1997); and
Brenda Gayle Plummer, Rising Wind: Black Americans and U.S. Foreign A√airs,
1935–1960 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996).
23. AJG to Mr. Bennett, 6 May 1960, box 5, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers; Von Eschen, Race
against Empire, 56; David Watts, The West Indies: Patterns of Development, Culture,
and Environmental Change since 1942 (London: Cambridge University Press, 1987),
522.
24. Gordon K. Lewis, The Growth of the Modern West Indies  (New York:
Monthly Review Press, 1968), 186; AJG, response to George Hopewell’s article,
‘‘New Africa and the West Indies: Who Leads?,’’ Daily Gleaner, 11 June 1961, box 1,
ﬁle 14, AJG Papers.
25. G. E. Cumper, ed., The Economy of the West Indies  (Kingston, Jamaica:
Institute of Social and Economic Research, 1960), 181; AJG, handwritten notes on a
speech by Harold Macmillan, Conservative British prime minister, in Cape T own,
3 February 1961, box 2, ﬁle 8, AJG Papers.
26. A. Lynn Bolles, Sister Jamaica: A Study of Women, Work, and Households in
Kingston (New York: University Press of America, 1996), 27; Gordon K. Lewis,
Growth of the Modern West Indies, 186 (‘‘heroes in colonial garb’’); AJG to Michael
Manley, Prime Minister of Jamaica, 6 April 1973, box 5, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers.
27. Anthony Payne, Politics in Jamaica (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1994), 20.
28. T revor Munroe, ‘‘From Marxist Study Groups to the Proletarian Vanguard,’’
World Marxist Review 23 (November 1980): 29; Payne, Politics in Jamaica, 20; AJG
to Michael Manley, Prime Minister of Jamaica, 6 April 1973.
29. AJG to Michael Manley, 6 April 1973.
30. William Sherrill to AJG, 28 December 1957, and AJG to William Sherrill, 24
September 1957, box 3, ﬁle 4, AJG Papers; Jeannette Smith-Irvin, Marcus Garvey’s
Footsoldiers of the Universal Negro Improvement Association (T renton, N.J.: African
World Press, 1989), 85; AJG to T . A. McKay, 3 May 1957, box 5, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers.
31. William Sherrill to AJG, 7 January 1958, box 3, ﬁle 4, AJG Papers.
32. AJG, statement dated December 1962, box 5, ﬁle 13, and AJG to Ndugu Cecil
Elombe Brath, Director, AJASS, 20 May 1970, box 2, ﬁle 2, ibid.
33. Daily Gleaner, 28 August 1963, announced that the book had been published.
34. Lerone Bennett Jr., ‘‘The Ghost of Marcus Garvey: Interviews with Crusa-
der’s T wo Wives,’’ Ebony, March 1960, 54.
35. The following names and organizations were featured on the circular letter
in support of Garvey and Garveyism : Vivian Durham, London journalist; Jaja
Nwokocha, Nigerian journalist; E. L. Allen, Minister of Education, Jamaica; H. P .
Jacobs, Daily Gleaner; Henry Gorden, New York City; and New Day magazine. A
copy of the letter is located in MG UNIA Collection, State Historical Society of
Wisconsin.
36. AJG to Ndugu Cecil Elombe Brath, 29 May 1970, box 2, ﬁle 3, and AJG to
Dr. Norman Hodges, 29 May 1970, box 3, ﬁle 2 AJG Papers.


--- PAGE 292 ---
notes to pages 225–30 279
37. B. A. Barker to L. A. Thoywell-Henry, 31 January 1946, and B. Gibbons to
George Padmore, 23 February 1946, box 4, ﬁle 9, ibid.
38. Bennett, ‘‘The Ghost of Marcus Garvey,’’ 54.
39. Ibid., 58, 54; Rupert Lewis, interview by author, Los Angeles, Calif., 18
February 1998.
40. AJG to Mr. Bennett, 6 May 1960, box 5, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers.
41. Lionel M. Yard, Biography of Amy Ashwood Garvey, 1897–1969: Co-Founder of
the UNIA (Washington, D.C.: Associated Publisher, 1990), 208.
42. AJG to Hon. Alexander Bustamante, 21 October 1965, box 4, ﬁle 11, AJG
Papers.
43. Rupert Lewis interview, 18 February 1998; AJG to Hon. Alexander Busta-
mante, 21 October 1965.
44. Gordon K. Lewis, Growth of the Modern West Indies, 176; W . A. Domingo,
‘‘Garvey,’’ Public Opinion, 9 October 1964; W . A. Domingo, ‘‘Evaluating Garvey,’’
Daily Gleaner, 12 October 1964; V . L. Arnett, ‘‘Garvey,’’ Public Opinion, 30 October
1964; AJG, Public Opinion, 23, 28 October 1964; AJG, ‘‘Garvey’s Activities for
Jamaicans,’’ Daily Gleaner, 7, 9 November 1964.
45. ‘‘Son, 3 Govt. Ministers Look at His Face,’’ Daily Gleaner, 12 November
1964.
46. AJG, ‘‘The Re-Interment of the Body of Marcus Garvey in Jamaica West
Indies,’’ box 4, ﬁle 11, AJG Papers.
47. Stokely Carmichael and Charles V . Hamilton, Black Power: The Politics of
Liberation in America  (New York: Vintage Books, 1967), 53; AJG, Garvey and
Garveyism (London: Collier-Macmillan, Ltd., 1970), 312.
48. AJG to Dr. Fishel, 15 August 1966, box 1, ﬁle 4, AJG Papers; Akinsola
Akiwowo, ‘‘Racialism and Shifts in the Mental Orientation of Black People in West
Africa and the Americas, 1856 to 1956,’’ Phylon 31 (1970): 264; T urner, ‘‘Historical
Dialectics of Black Nationalist Movements in America,’’ 173; AJG, Garvey and
Garveyism, 307.
49. ‘‘Garvey First to Give Negroes Sense of Dignity-King,’’ Daily Gleaner, 23
June 1965; AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 308.
50. AJG, Garvey and Garveyism, 313, 309, 312, 307. AJG reprinted the pamphlet,
Black Power in America  (Kingston, Jamaica: Amy Jacques Garvey, 1968), in the
epilogue of Garvey and Garveyism (1970 ed.).
51. See AJG, ‘‘Is Religion a Spent Force?,’’ Daily Gleaner, 19 January 1969; AJG,
‘‘Is Materialism Crushing T ruth?,’’ Public Opinion, 11 April 1969; AJG, ‘‘A Widow’s
Portrait of Marcus Mosiah Garvey,’’ Negro Digest, May 1969; AJG, ‘‘Economic
Straight Jacket of Black Jamaicans’’ (1970), box 5, ﬁle 1, ‘‘American Blunders in Asia
and Africa’’ (1970), box 5, ﬁle 11, and ‘‘Does the Mind of Mankind Determine the
T rend of Civilization?’’ (1969), box 14, ﬁle 1, all in AJG Papers.
52. Robert Hill to AJG, 21 May 1970, box 2, ﬁle 3, AJG Papers.
53. AJG to Dr. Kenneth Clarke, 9 May 1970, ibid.


--- PAGE 293 ---
280 notes to pages 231–37
54. Ibid.; AJG to Dr. Kenneth Clarke, 19 May 1970, box 2, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers. I
was unable to locate AJG’s reply in which she stated her ‘‘stand and opinion on
certain aspects of this matter.’’
55. AJG received telephone calls from Joy Elliott of Washington, D.C., Benton
Arnowits of Macmillan/Collier Books, Shirley Hunter, John Henrik Clark, Robert
Hill, and Dr. Vincent Harding. AJG to Dr. Kenneth Clarke, 9 May 1970, box 2, ﬁle
3, AJG Papers.
56. ‘‘Papers Found in Harlem Were Not Lost,’’ Daily Gleaner, 10 July 1970.
57. AJG to Dr. Vincent Harding, 7 September 1970, box 3, ﬁle 1, and AJG to
Ndugo Cecil Elombe Brath, 20 May 1970, box 32, ﬁle 3, AJG Papers. Rupert Lewis
conﬁrmed that she still experienced some ﬁnancial hardship in the last years of her
life. Rupert Lewis interview, 18 February 1998.
58. AJG to Ndugu Cecil Elombe Brath, 20 May 1970.
59. Smith-Irvine, Marcus Garvey’s Footsoldiers, 85.
60. See Theodore G. Vincent, Black Power in the Garvey Movement (San Fran-
cisco: Ramparts Press, 1971); John Henrik Clarke, Marcus Garvey and the Vision of
Africa (New York: Random House, 1974); Gordon K. Lewis, Growth of the Modern
West Indies.
61. See Ida B. Wells-Barnett with Alfred Duster, ed., Crusade for Justice: The
Autobiography of Ida B. Wells  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970), 365,
374, 382, 395, 414.
62. John A. Aarons, ‘‘Recognizing Excellence: The Musgrave Medals of the
Institute of Jamaica,’’ Jamaica Journal 22  (May–June 1989): 19–23; ‘‘Musgrave
Medals Presented to Seven,’’ Daily Gleaner, 8 May 1971; Newsletter of the College
of Arts, Science, and T echnology (CAST), 19 June 1970, box 5, ﬁle 8, AJG Papers.
63. AJG to Hon. Michael Manley, Prime Minister of Jamaica, 6 April 1973, box
5, ﬁle 4, AJG Papers.
64. AJG, Why Mrs. Garvey Refused the $6,800 Pension (Mona, Jamaica: Student
Union, UWI, 1973). This pamphlet is located in the Special Collections Unit of the
University of West Indies (UWI), Jamaica.
65. Ibid.
66. Rupert Lewis, ‘‘AJG: A Political Portrait,’’ Jamaican Daily News, 29 July 1973.
67. Ibid.
Conclusion
1. AJG to Nnamdi Azikiwe, 24 October 1944, box 1, ﬁle 2, AJG Papers.


--- PAGE 294 ---
selected bibliography
Archives
Accra, Ghana
Ghana Balme Library
Cleveland, Ohio
Western Reserve Historical Society
Universal Negro Improvement Association Papers, 1921–86
Kingston, Jamaica
National Library of Jamaica
Amy Ashwood Garvey Collection MS 1977B
Madison, Wisconsin
State Historical Society of Wisconsin
Mona, Jamaica
University of West Indies
Special Collections Unit
Nashville, T ennessee
Fisk University Special Collections
Amy Jacques Garvey Papers
Marcus Garvey Memorial Collection
New Haven, Connecticut
Sterling Library, Yale University
Microﬁlm Collections, Manuscripts and Archives
W . E. B. Du Bois Papers
New York, New York
Schomburg Center Special Collections Unit
David Levering Lewis Collection, ‘‘Voices from the Renaissance T ranscripts’’
Spanish T own, Jamaica
Spanish T own Archives
Suitland, Maryland
National Archives
Marcus Garvey Decimal File 800.4016/19


--- PAGE 295 ---
282 selected bibliography
Washington, D.C.
Federal Bureau of Investigation Reading Room
Marcus Garvey Collection, 6 books
National Archives—Northeast Region
Index of Passenger Manifests
Naturalization Petitions
Pamphlets
Garvey, Amy Jacques. Black Power in America. Kingston, Jamaica: Amy Jacques
Garvey, 1968.
— — —. Memorandum Correlative of Africa, the West Indies, and the Americas.
Kingston, Jamaica, May 1944.
— — —. Why Mrs. Garvey Refused the $6,800 Pension. Mona, Jamaica: Student
Union, UWI, 1973.
Ghana Institute of Languages Admission Guide. Accra, n.d.
Hamilton, Marlene. Wolmers Alumni Association of the U.S.A.: Wolmers, 1729–
1979. Souvenir Program, 1979.
Respect for Human Dignity: An Inaugural Address Delivered by His Excellence Dr.
Nnamdi Azikiwe: Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief. University of
Ghana Balme Library, Accra, Ghana, 16 November 1960.
Wolmers School, Kingston. Wolmers Bicentenary Souvenir, 1729–1929. Kingston,
Jamaica: Committee, 1929.
Reports, Proceedings, and Court Records
Marcus Garvey v. Amy Ashwood Garvey, Supreme Court of New York County,
no. 24028, NNHR, 15 July 1920.
Mortimer, Delores M., and Roy S. Bryce-Laporte, eds. Female Immigrants to the
United States: Caribbean, Latin America, and African Experiences. Washington,
D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, RIIES Occasional Papers No. 2, 1981.
Proceedings and Papers of the Georgia Association of Historians 10 (1989).
U.S. Congress. House. Committee on Immigration and Nationalization. Report.
71st Cong., 2d sess., 1930. H. Doc. 898, 2 pts.
U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce.
Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1919. Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1920.
— — —. Bureau of the Census. Fourteenth Census of the United States T aken in the
Year 1920, Volume 2: Population, Reports by States, New York. Washington,
D.C.: GPO, 1923.
U.S. Department of State. Foreign Relations of the United States, 1941. Vol. 1,
Diplomatic Papers: General and the Soviet Union. Washington, D.C.: GPO,
1958.
— — —. Foreign Relations of the United States, 1942. Vol. 2, Europe. Washington,
D.C.: GPO, 1962.


--- PAGE 296 ---
selected bibliography 283
— — —. Foreign Relations of the United States, 1942. Vol. 4, The Near East and Africa.
Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1963.
Yearbook of the United Nations, 1946–1947. New York: Department of Public
Information, United Nations, 1947.
Interviews
Rupert Lewis. Interview by author. Los Angeles, 1998.
Mrs. Ida Repole. Interview by author. Kingston and Mona, Jamaica, November
1990.
Newspapers and Journals
The African
Afro-American
Amsterdam News
Blackman
Black Man: A Monthly Magazine of Negro Thought and Opinion
Crisis
Crusader
Daily Gleaner
Ghanian Times
Jamaican Daily News
Negro World
New Ashanti Times
New Jamaican
New York Age
New York Times
Public Opinion
The Times
West African Opinion
West African Pilot
Books
Adi, Hakim. West Africans in Britain, 1900–1960: Nationalism, Pan-Africanism,
and Communism. London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1998.
Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: Reﬂections on the Origins and Spread
of Nationalism. London: Verso, 1983.
Anderson, James D. The Education of Blacks in the South, 1860–1935. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1988.
Anderson, Karen. Wartime Women: Sex Roles, Family Relations, and the Status of
Women during World War II. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1981.
Asante, Moleﬁ Kete. Kemet, Afrocentricity, and Knowledge. T renton, N.J.: African
World Press, 1990.


--- PAGE 297 ---
284 selected bibliography
Austin, Diane. Urban Life in Kingston, Jamaica: The Culture and Class Ideology
of Two Neighborhoods. New York: Cordon and Breach Science Publishers,
1984.
Azikiwe, Nnamdi. My Odyssey: An Autobiography. New York: Praeger, 1970.
Baker, Houston A., Manthia Diawara, and Ruth H. Lindeborg, eds. Black British
Cultural Studies: A Reader. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.
Balibar, Etienne, and Immanuel Wallerstein. Race, Nation, Class: Ambiguous
Identities. London: Verso, 1991.
Barnett, Ida B. Wells. Crusade for Justice: The Autobiography of Ida B. Wells.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970.
Belay, Carol Aisha Blackshire, ed. The African-German Experience: Critical Essays.
London: Praeger, 1996.
Bell, Wendell. Jamaican Leaders: Political Attitudes in a New Nation. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1964.
Bispham, William. Malaria: Its Diagnosis, Treatment, and Prophylaxis. Baltimore:
Wm and Wilkins Co., 1944.
Black, Clinton. The Story of Jamaica: From Prehistory to the Present. London:
Collins, 1965.
Blee, Kathleen. Women of the Klan: Racism and Gender in the 1920s. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1991.
Bolles, Lynn A. Sister Jamaica: A Study of Women, Work, and Households in
Kingston. New York: University Press of America, 1996.
Brathwaite, Edward. The Development of Creole Society in Jamaica, 1770–1820.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971.
Brody, Miriam. Manly Writing: Gender, Rhetoric, and the Rise of Composition.
Carbondale: Southern Illinois Press, 1993.
Brown, Aggrey. Color, Class, and Politics in Jamaica. New Brunswick, N.J.:
T ransaction Books, 1979.
Burkett, Randall K. Garveyism as a Religious Movement: The Institutionalization of
a Black Civil Religion. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1978.
Burleigh, Michael, and Wolfgang Wipperman. The Racial State: Germany, 1933–
1945. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Byerman, Keith E. Seizing the Word: History, Art, and Self in the Work of W . E. B.
Du Bois. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1994.
Carby, Hazel V . Reconstructing Womanhood: The Emergence of the Afro-American
Woman Novelist. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
Carmichael, Stokely, and Charles Hamilton. Black Power: The Politics of
Liberation in America. New York: Vintage Books, 1967.
Chadako√, Rochelle, ed. Eleanor Roosevelt’s My Day: Her Acclaimed Columns,
1936–1945. New York: Pharos Books, 1989.
Chatterjee, Partha. The Nation and Its Fragments: Colonial and Postcolonial
Histories. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1993.


--- PAGE 298 ---
selected bibliography 285
Chrisman, Robert, and Nathan Hare, eds. Pan-Africanism. New York: Bobbs-
Merrill, 1974.
Clarke, John Henrik. Marcus Garvey and the Vision of Africa. New York: Random
House, 1974.
Cogan, Frances B. All-American Girl: The Ideal of Real Womanhood in Mid-
Nineteenth-Century America. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1989.
Cook, Gordon, ed. Manson’s Tropical Disease. London: W . B. Saunders Co., Ltd.,
1996.
Cooper, Anna Julia. A Voice from the South. New York: Oxford University Press,
1988.
Cronon, David. Black Moses: The Story of Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro
Improvement Association. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1969.
Cumper, G. E., ed. The Economy of the West Indies. Kingston, Jamaica: Institute of
Social and Economic Research, 1960.
Cundall, Frank. Historic Jamaica. London: Institute of Jamaica, 1915.
Davidson, Basil. Black Star: A View of the Life and Times of Kwame Nkrumah.
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1989.
Davies, Carole Boyce. Black Women, Writing, and Identity: Migrations of the
Subject. New York: Routledge, 1994.
DeLisser, H. G. Twentieth Century Jamaica. Kingston: Jamaican Times, 1913.
Dewitte, Phillipe. Les Mouvements Negres en France, 1919–1930. Paris: Editions
L ’ Harmattan, 1985.
Du Bois, W . E. B. Color and Democracy: Colonies and Peace. New York: Harcourt,
Brace, 1945.
— — —. Dusk of Dawn. New York: Kraus Thomson Organization, Ltd., 1975.
— — —. The Education of Black People: T en Critiques, 1906–1960. Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press, 1973.
Dutt, R. Palme. Fascism and Social Revolution. New York: International
Publishers, 1934.
Eisner, Gisela. Jamaica, 1830–1930: A Study in Economic Growth. London:
Manchester University Press, 1961.
Ellison, Ralph. Shadow and Acts. New York: Vintage Books, 1972.
Emilo, John D., and Estelle B. Freeman. Intimate Matters: A History of Sexuality
in America. New York: Harper and Row, 1988.
Enloe, Cynthia. Bananas, Beaches, and Bases: Making Feminist Sense of
International Politics. Los Angeles: Pandora Press, 1989.
Eppier, Karen Sanchez. T ouching Liberty: Abolition, Feminism, and the Politics of
the Body. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993.
Eshleman, Clayton, and Annette Smith, eds. Aimé Césaire: The Collected Poetry.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983.
Essien-Udom, E. U., and Amy Jacques Garvey, eds. More Philosophy and Opinions
of Marcus Garvey. Great Britain: Frank Cass, 1977.


--- PAGE 299 ---
286 selected bibliography
Farson, Negley. Behind God’s Back. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1941.
Fax, Elton C. Garvey: The Story of a Pioneer Black Nationalist. New York: Dodd,
Mead, 1972.
Fetter, Bruce, ed. Colonial Rule in Africa: Readings from Primary Sources. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1979.
Foner, Nancy. Status and Power in Rural Jamaica: A Study of Educational and
Political Change. New York: T eachers College Press, 1973.
Ford, James W . The Negro People and the New World Situation. New York:
Workers Library Publications, 1941.
French, Joan, and Honor Ford-Smith. Women, Work, and Organization in
Jamaica, 1900–1944. Mona, Jamaica: Sistern Research Institute of Social
Science, 1986.
Gaines, Kevin K. Uplifting the Race: Black Leadership, Politics, and Culture in the
Twentieth Century. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996.
Garland, Anne Witte. Women Activists Challenging the Abuse of Power. New York:
Feminist Press, 1988.
Garside, W . R. British Unemployment, 1919–1939: A Study in Public Policy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Gibbs, David N. The Political Economy of Third World Intervention: Mines,
Money, and U.S. Policy in the Congo Crisis. Chicago: University of Chicago,
1991.
Gilmore, Glenda Elizabeth. Gender and Jim Crow: Women and the Politics of
White Supremacy in North Carolina, 1896–1920. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1996.
Gilroy, Paul. The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1993.
Glenn, Evelyn Nakano, Grace Chang, and Linda Rennie Forcey. Mothering:
Ideology, Experience, and Agency. New York: Routledge, 1994.
Glueck, Sheldon, and Eleanor Glueck. Family Environment and Delinquency.
Boston: Houghton Mi∆in, 1962.
Goodrich, Leland M. The United Nations in a Changing World. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1974.
Gordon, Lewis K. The Growth of the Modern West Indies. New York: Monthly
Review Press, 1968.
Gri≈n, Farah J., and Cheryl J. Fisher, eds. A Stranger in the Village: Two Centuries
of African-American Traveling Writing. Boston: Beacon Press, 1998.
Gross, Gerald, ed. Editors and Editing: What Writers Need to Know about What
Editors Do. New York: Grove Press, 1993.
Harris, Joseph E., ed. Global Dimensions of the African Diaspora. Washington,
D.C.: Howard University Press, 1982.
Helly, Dorothy O., and Susan M. Reverby, eds. Gender Domains: Rethinking Public
and Private in Women’s History. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1992.


--- PAGE 300 ---
selected bibliography 287
Herf, Je√rey. Reactionary Modernism: T echnology, Culture, and Politics in Weimar
and the Third Reich. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984.
Hewitt, Nancy, and Suzanne Lebsock, eds. Invisible Women: New Essays on
American Activism. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1993.
Hickney, Neil, and Ed Edwin. Adam Clayton Powell and the Politics of Race. New
York: Fleet Publishing Corp., 1965.
Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks. Righteous Discontent: The Women’s Movement in
the Black Baptist Church, 1880–1920. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1993.
Higman, B. W . Slave Population of the British Caribbean, 1807–1834. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984.
Hill, Frank. Bustamante and His Letters. Kingston, Jamaica: Kingston Publishing,
Ltd., 1976.
Hill, Robert A., ed. Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement
Association Papers. 7 vols. Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1983–86,
1989–90.
Hill, Robert, and Barbara Bair, eds. Marcus Garvey: Life and Lessons: A Centennial
Companion to the Marcus Garvey and UNIA Papers. Los Angeles: University of
California Press, 1987.
Holt, Thomas. The Problem of Freedom: Race, Labor, and Politics in Jamaica and
Britain, 1832–1938. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992.
Hooker, James R. Black Revolutionary: George Padmore’s Path from Communism to
Pan-Africanism. New York: Praeger, 1967.
Horne, Gerald. Black and Red: W . E. B. Du Bois and the Afro-American Response to
the Cold War, 1944–1963. New York: State University of New York Press, 1986.
— — —. Black Liberation/Red Scare: Ben Davis and the Communist Party. Newark,
N.J.: University of Delaware Press, 1994.
Hunter, T era. T o Joy My Freedom: Southern Black Women’s Lives and Labors after
the Civil War. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1997.
Hurwitz, Samuel J., and Edith F. Hurwitz, Jamaica: A Historical Portrait. New
York: Praeger, 1971.
Irish, Donald, Kathleen Lundquist, and Vivian Nelson, eds. Ethnic Variations in
Dying, Death, and Grief: Diversity in Universality. London: Taylor and Francis,
1993.
Irvin-Smith, Jeannette. Marcus Garvey’s Footsoldiers of the Universal Negro
Improvement Association. T renton, N.J.: African World Press, 1989.
Jacobs, H. P . A Short History of Kingston: Vol. 1, 1692–1871. Kingston, Jamaica:
Ministry of Education, 1976.
Jacques Garvey, Amy. Garvey and Garveyism. Memoir. London: Collier-
Macmillan, Ltd., 1963, 1970.
— — —, ed. The Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey; Or, Africa for the
Africans. 1923, 1925. Reprint, Dover, Mass.: Majority Press, 1986.


--- PAGE 301 ---
288 selected bibliography
Ja√ee, Julian F. Crusade against Radicalism: New York during the Red Scare, 1914–
1924. Port Washington, N.Y.: Kennikat Press, 1972.
James, C. L. R. Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution. Westport, Conn.: Lawrence
Hill and Co., 1977.
James, Joy. Transcending the T alented T enth: Black Leaders and American
Intellectuals. New York: Routledge, 1997.
James, Winston. Holding Aloft the Banner of Ethopia: Caribbean Radicalism in
Early Twentieth-Century America. London: Verso Press, 1998.
Johnston, Sir Harry S. The Negro in the New World. New York: Macmillan, 1910.
Jones, Beverly Washington. Quest for Equality: The Life and Writings of Mary
Eliza Church T errell, 1883–1954. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishers, 1990.
Jones, Claudia. Jim-Crow in Uniform. New York: New Age Publishers, 1940.
Jones, Jacqueline. Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and the
Family, from Slavery to the Present. New York: Vintage Books, 1985.
Kalish, Richard A., and David K. Reynolds. Death and Ethnicity: A Psychocultural
Study. Los Angeles: University of Southern California Press, 1967.
Kelley, Mary. Private Woman, Public Stage: Literary Domesticity in Nineteenth-
Century America. New York: Oxford University Press, 1984.
Kerr, Madeline. Personality and Conﬂict in Jamaica. Liverpool, U.K.: University
Press, 1952.
Kimmel, Michael. Manhood in America: A Cultural History. New York: Free Press,
1996.
Knupfer, Anne Meis. T oward a T ender Humanity and a Nobler Womanhood. New
York: New York University Press, 1996.
Kornweibel, Theodore, ed. Federal Surveillance of Afro Americans, 1917–1925: The
First World War, the Red Scare, the Garvey Movement. Frederick, Md.:
University Publications of America, 1986.
Larrabee, Eric. Commander in Chief: Franklin Delano Roosevelt, His Lieutenants,
and Their War. New York: Harper and Row, 1987.
Lester, Julius, ed. The Seventh Son: The Thought and Writings of W . E. B. Du Bois.
2 vols. New York: Random House, 1971.
Lewis, Paula Gilbert, ed. Traditionalism, Nationalism, and Feminism: Women
Writers of Quebec. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1985.
Lewis, Rupert. Marcus Garvey: Anti-Colonial Champion. T renton, N.J.: African
World Press, 1988.
Lewis, Rupert, and Patrick Bryan, eds. Garvey: His Work and Impact. Mona,
Jamaica: Institute of Social and Economic Research, 1988.
Loewenheim, Francis, Harold Langley, and Manfred Jonas, eds. Roosevelt and
Churchill: Their Secret Wartime Correspondence. New York: Saturday Review
Press, 1975.
Lorde, Audre. Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches. Freedom, Calif.: Crossing Press,
1984.


--- PAGE 302 ---
selected bibliography 289
Lunden, Walter A. Statistics on Delinquents and Delinquency. Springﬁeld, Ill.:
Charles C. Thomas, Publishers, 1964.
Marable, Manning. Race, Reform, and Rebellion: The Second Reconstruction.
Jackson: University of Mississippi Press, 1991.
Margolis, Otto S., ed. Loss, Grief, and Bereavement. New York: Praeger, 1985.
Margolis, Simeon, ed. Johns Hopkins Symptoms and Remedies. New York: Rebus,
Random House, 1995.
Marks, Carole. Farewell—We’re Good and Gone: The Great Black Migration.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989.
Martin, T ony. Race First: The Ideological and Organizational Struggles of Marcus
Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association. Westport, Conn.:
Greenwood Press, 1976.
McElvaine, Robert S., ed. Down and Out in the Great Depression: Letters from the
Forgotten Man. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1983.
McFreely, William S. Frederick Douglass. New York: Norton, 1991.
McKay, Claude. A Long Way from Home. New York: Arno Press, 1969.
McKay, Vernon. Africa in World Politics. New York: Harper and Row, 1963.
Mitchell, Paul, ed. Race Riots in Black and White. Englewood Cli√s, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1970.
Mosse, George L. The Image of Man: The Creation of Modern Masculinity. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
— — —. Nationalism and Sexuality: Respectability and Abnormal Sexuality in Modern
Europe. New York: Howard Fertig, 1985.
Moulton, Forest Ray, ed. Human Malaria. Washington, D.C.: American
Association for Advancement of Science, 1941.
Naison, Mark. Communists in Harlem during the Depression. New York: Grove
Press, 1983.
Nelson, C., and L. Grossbert, eds. Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1988.
Nettleford, Rex M. Mirror, Mirror: Identity, Race, and Protest in Jamaica. Jamaica:
William Collins and Sangster, 1970.
Nicolson, I. F. The Administration of Nigeria, 1900 to 1960: Men, Methods, and
Myths. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1969.
Nkrumah, Kwame. The Autobiography. London: Panaf Books, 1957.
Nocht, Bernard, and Martin Mayer. Malaria: A Handbook of Treatment,
Parasitology, and Prevention. London: John Bale Medical Publishers, 1937.
O’Reilly, Kenneth. Racial Matters: The FBI’s Secret File on Black America, 1960–
1972. New York: Free Press, 1989.
Ottley, Roi. New World a-Coming. New York: Literary Classics, Inc., 1943.
Padmore, George, ed. History of the Pan-African Congress. London:
Hammersmith Bookstore, Ltd., 1947.


--- PAGE 303 ---
290 selected bibliography
Parker, Andrew, Mary Russo, Doris Sommer, and Patricia Yeager, eds.
Nationalism and Sexualities. New York: Routledge, 1992.
Payne, Anthony. Politics in Jamaica. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1994.
Pierson, Donald. Negroes in Brazil: A Study of Race Contact at Bahia. Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press, 1967.
Plummer, Brenda Gayle. Rising Wind: Black Americans and U.S. Foreign A√airs,
1935–1960. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996.
Post, Ken. Arise Ye Starvelings: The Jamaican Labour Rebellion of 1938 and Its
Aftermath. London: Martinus Nijho√, 1978.
Powell, Adam Clayton, Jr. Adam by Adam. New York: Dail Press, 1971.
Reid, Ira De A. The Negro Immigrant: His Background, Characteristics, and Social
Adjustment, 1899–1937. Ca. 1939. Reprint, New York: Arno Press, 1969.
Roberts, George W ., and Sonja A. Sinclair. Women in Jamaica: Patterns of
Reproduction and Family. New York: KTO Press, 1978.
Robertson, Sir James. Transition in Africa: From Direct Rule to Independence. New
York: Harper and Row, 1974.
Rodney, Walter. How Europe Underdeveloped Africa. London: Bogle-L ’Ouverture
Pub., 1972.
Rogers, J. A. Sex and Race. Vol. 1, Negro-Caucasian Mixing in All Ages and All
Lands. St. Petersburg, Fla.: Helga M. Rogers, 1968.
— — —. World’s Great Men of Color. Vol. 2. New York: J. A. Rogers, 1947.
Rossi, Peter H., ed. Ghetto Revolts. New Brunswick, N.J.: Aldine, 1973.
Russel, Paul. Malaria: Basic Principles Brieﬂy Stated. Oxford: Scientiﬁc Publishers,
1952.
Salem, Dorothy. T o Better Our World: Black Women in Organized Reform, 1890–
1920. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishers, 1990.
Senior, Olive. Working Miracles: Women’s Lives in the English-Speaking Caribbean.
Mona, Jamaica: Institute of Social and Economic Research, 1991.
Shaw, Stephanie. What a Woman Ought to Be and to Do: Black Professional Women
Workers during the Jim Crow Era. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.
Shepherd, Verene, Bridget Brereton, and Barbara Bailey, eds. Engendering History:
Caribbean Women in Historical Perspective. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1995.
Sowell, Thomas, ed. Essays on Data on American Ethnic Groups. Washington,
D.C.: Urban Institute, 1978.
Standing, Guy. Unemployment and Female Labour: A Study of Labour Supply in
Kingston, Jamaica. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1981.
Steady, Filomina, ed. The Black Woman Cross-Culturally. Cambridge, Mass.:
Schenkman, 1981.
Steeves, Harrison Ross. Learned Societies and English Literary Scholarship: In Great
Britain and the United States. New York: AMS Press, 1970.
Stein, Judith. The World of Marcus Garvey: Race and Class in Modern Society.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1986.


--- PAGE 304 ---
selected bibliography 291
Stephens, Evelyne Huber, and John D. Stephens. Democratic Socialism in
Jamaica: The Political Movement and Social Transformation in Dependent
Capitalism. London: Macmillan, 1986.
Stone, Carl. Class, Race, and Political Behavior in Urban Jamaica. Mona, Jamaica:
Institute of Social and Economic Research, 1973.
Stovall, Tyler. Paris Noir: African Americans in the City of Lights. New York:
Houghton Mi∆in, 1996.
Thompson, Mildred I. Ida B. Wells-Barnett: An Exploration Study of an American
BlackWoman, 1893–1930. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson, Publishers, 1990.
Thompson, R. W . Black Caribbean. London: Macdonald and Co., 1946.
Thompson, Scott W . Ghana’s Foreign Policy, 1957–1966: Diplomacy, Ideology, and
the New State. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1969.
Verbrugge, Martha H. Able-Bodied Womanhood: Personal Health and Social
Change in Nineteenth-Century Boston. New York: Oxford University Press,
1988.
Vincent, Theodore G. Black Power and the Garvey Movement. San Francisco:
Ramparts Press, 1971.
— — —. Voices of a Black Nation: Political Journalism in the Harlem Renaissance. San
Francisco: Ramparts Press, 1973.
Von Eschen, Penny M. Race against Empire: Black Americans and Anticolonialism,
1937–1957. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1997.
Wade, Craig Wyn. The Fiery Cross: The Ku Klux Klan in America. New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1987.
Wallace, Nancy. Better Than School: One Family’s Declaration of Independence.
New York: Larson, 1983.
Ward, Margaret. Unmanageable Revolutionaries: Women and Irish Nationalism.
London: Pluto Press, 1983.
Washburn, Patrick S. A Question of Sedition: The Federal Government’s
Investigation of the Black Press during World War II. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1986.
Watkins-Owen, Irma. Blood Relations: Caribbean Immigrants and the Harlem
Community, 1900–1930. Bloomington: University of Indiana Press, 1996.
Watts, David. The West Indies: Patterns of Development, Culture, and
Environmental Change since 1942. London: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Watts, Jill. Shout the Victory: The History of Father Divine and the Peace Mission
Movement, 1879–1942. Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1989.
Waugh, Alec. Love and the Caribbean: T ales, Character, and Scenes of the West
Indies. New York: Farrar, Straus and Cudahy, 1958.
Weiss, Penny A., and Marilyn Friedman, eds. Feminism and Community.
Philadelphia: T emple University Press, 1995.
West, Lois A., ed. Feminist Nationalism. New York: Routledge, 1997.
White, Deborah Gray. Ar’n’t I a Woman. New York: Norton, 1985.


--- PAGE 305 ---
292 selected bibliography
— — —. T oo Heavy a Load: Black Women in Defense of Themselves. New York:
Norton, 1999.
White, Walter. A Man Called White: The Autobiography of Walter White. New
York: Viking, 1948.
— — —. A Rising Wind. 1945. Reprint, Westport, Conn.: Negro University Press,
1971.
Whyte, Millicent. A Short History of Education in Jamaica. London: Hodder and
Stoughton, 1977.
Williams, Brackette F., ed. Women out of Place: The Gender of Agency and the Race
of Nationality. New York: Routledge, 1996.
Wright, Richard. Black Power: A Record of Reactions in a Land of Pathos. New
York: Harper and Brothers, 1954.
Yard, Lionel M. Biography of Amy Ashwood Garvey, 1897–1969: Co-Founder of the
UNIA. Washington, D.C.: Associated Publisher, 1990.
Articles and Dissertations
Aarons, John A. ‘‘Recognizing Excellence: The Musgrave Medals of the Institute
of Jamaica.’’ Jamaica Journal 22 (May–June 1989): 19–23.
Barnes, Natasha B. ‘‘Face of the Nation: Race, Nationalism, and Identities in
Jamaican Beauty Pageants.’’ Massachusetts Review (Autumn–Winter 1994):
471–92.
Bartrop, Paul. ‘‘From Lisbon to Jamaica: A Study of British Refugee Rescue
during the Second World War.’’ Immigrants & Minorities (1994): 48–64.
Becker, Gary S. ‘‘A Theory of Social Interactions.’’ Journal of Political Economy
82 (1974): 1063–93.
Beckman, Marlene D. ‘‘The White Slave T ra≈c Act: The Historical Impact of a
Criminal Law Policy on Women.’’ Georgetown Law Journal 72 (1984): 1111–42.
Bennett, Lerone, Jr. ‘‘The Ghost of Marcus Garvey: Interviews with Crusader’s
T wo Wives.’’ Ebony, March 1960, 54.
Bowlby, J. ‘‘Processes of Mourning.’’ International Journal of Psychoanalysis 42
(1961): 317–40.
Bradley, C. Paul. ‘‘Mass Parties in Jamaica: Structure and Organization.’’ Social
and Economic Studies 9 (December 1960): 375–416.
Brodber, Erna. ‘‘Afro-Jamaican Women at the T urn of the Century.’’ Social and
Economic Studies 35 (September 1986): 23–50.
Burke, A. W . ‘‘A Cross Cultural Study of Delinquency among West Indian Boys.’’
International Journal of Social Psychiatry 26 (1980): 81–87.
Cook, Mercer. ‘‘The Negro Knows Fascism.’’ Free World, November 1942, 147–
50.
Cooper, Carolyn. ‘‘Race and the Cultural Politics of Self-Representation: A View
from the University of the West Indies.’’ Research in African Literatures 27
(Winter 1996): 97–106.


--- PAGE 306 ---
selected bibliography 293
Cunningham, Michael R., Alan R. Roberts, Anita P . Barbee, Perrie B. Druen, and
Cheng-Huan Wu. ‘‘Their Ideas of Beauty Are, on the Whole, the Same as
Ours: Consistency and Variability in the Cross-Cultural Perception of Female
Physical Attractiveness.’’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology (February
1995): 261–80.
Egerton, John. ‘‘The Pre-Brown South.’’ Virginia Quarterly Review 70 (Autumn
1994): 603–23.
Fawcett, Hon. W . ‘‘T obacco in Jamaica.’’ West Indian Bulletin (1907): 209–28.
Figueroa, Mark. ‘‘The Formation and Framework of Middle Strata Leadership in
Jamaica: The Crisis of the Seventies and Beyond.’’ Caribbean Studies: Puerto
Rico 21 (1988): 44–66.
Gadsden, Fay. ‘‘The African Press in Kenya, 1945–1952.’’ Journal of African History
21 (1980): 515–35.
Gang, Lee, and Joseph Hraba. ‘‘Economic Reform in the Czech Republic:
Economic Strain, Depression, Hostility, and the Di√erence in Coping
Strategies.’’ Sociological Inquiry (Winter 1994): 103–13.
Goin, Marcia Kraft, R. W . Burgoyne, and John M. Goin. ‘‘Timeless Attachment
to a Dead Relative.’’ American Journal Psychiatry 136 (July 1979): 988–89.
Grant, Ruth W ., and Marion Orr. ‘‘Language, Race, and Politics: From ‘Black’ to
‘African American.’ ’’ Politics and Society 24 (June 1996): 137–52.
Hall, Stuart. ‘‘Negotiating Caribbean Identities.’’ New Left Review n. 209
(January–February 1995): 3–14.
Handa, Sudhanshu. ‘‘The Determinants of Female Headship in Jamaica: Results
from a Structural Model.’’ Economic Development and Cultural Change 44
(June 1996): 793–815.
Harris, Cheryl. ‘‘Finding Sojourner’s T ruth: Race, Gender, and the Institution of
Property.’’ Cardozo Law Review 18 (November 1996): 309–409.
Headrick, Rita. ‘‘African Soldiers in World War II.’’ Armed Forces and Society
(1978): 501–26.
Hedlin, Ethel Wolfskill. ‘‘Earnest Cox and Colonization: A White Racist’s
Response to Black Repatriation, 1923–1966.’’ Ph.D. diss., Duke University,
1974.
Hellwig, David. ‘‘Black Meets Black: Afro-American Reactions to West Indian
Immigrants in the 1920s.’’ South Atlantic Quarterly 77 (1978): 206–24.
Holden, Calvin B. ‘‘The Causes and Composition of West Indian Immigration to
New York City, 1900–1952.’’ Afro-Americans in New York Life and History 2
(January 1987): 2–27.
Hoytt, Eleanor Hinton. ‘‘International Council of Women of the Darker Races:
Historical Notes.’’ Sage 3 (Fall 1986): 54–55.
Jacques Garvey, Amy. ‘‘The Role of Women in Liberation Struggles.’’
Massachusetts Review (Winter–Spring 1972): 109–12.
Lewis, Ida. ‘‘Mrs. Marcus Garvey Talks with Ida Lewis.’’ Encore, May 1973, 68.


--- PAGE 307 ---
294 selected bibliography
Lewis, Rupert. ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey: A Political Portrait.’’ Jamaica Daily News,
29 July 1973.
Lewis, Rupert, and Maureen Warner-Lewis. ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey.’’ Jamaica
Journal 20 (August–October 1987): 39–43.
Longo, Laura C., and Richard D. Ashmore. ‘‘The Looks-Personality
Relationship: Global Self-Orientations as Shared Precursors of Subjective
Physical Attractiveness and Self-Ascribed T raits.’’ Journal of Applied Social
Psychology (March 1995): 371–99.
Martin, T ony. ‘‘Amy Ashwood Garvey: Wife No. 1.’’ Jamaica Journal 30 (August–
October 1987): 32–36.
— — —. ‘‘Discovering African Roots: Amy Ashwood Garvey’s Pan-Africanist
Journey.’’ Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa, and the Middle East 17,
no. 1 (1997): 118–26.
Mattingly, Carol. ‘‘Woman-T empered Rhetoric: Public Presentation and the
WCTU.’’ Rhetoric Review 14 (Fall 1995): 44–61.
Morrissey, Carol Mae. ‘‘Ol’ Time T ram and the T ramway Era, 1876–1948.’’
Jamaica Journal 16 (November 1983): 12–21.
Munroe, T revor, ‘‘From Marxist Study Groups to the Proletarian Vanguard.’’
World Marxist Review 23 (November 1980): 28–32.
Pinsker, Thomson. ‘‘The Black Intellectuals’ Common Fate and Uncommon
Problems.’’ Virginia Quarterly Review (Spring 1994): 220–38.
Porter, Dorothy B. ‘‘The Organized Educational Activities of Negro Literary
Societies, 1828–1846.’’ Journal of Negro Education (October 1936): 555–76.
Qinmei, Wang. ‘‘Africa Contributes to World War II Victory.’’ Beijing Review
38 (15 June 1995): 19–20.
Reed, Beverly. ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey: Black, Beautiful, and Free.’’ Ebony, June
1971.
Sabatier, Peggy R. ‘‘ ‘Elite’ Education in French West Africa: The Era of Limits,
1903–1945.’’ International Journal of African Historical Studies 11 (1978): 247–
66.
Salahu-Din, Sakinah N. ‘‘A Comparison of Coping Strategies of African
American and Caucasian Widows.’’ Omega: Journal of Death and Dying
33 (1996): 103–20.
Scott, Joan. ‘‘Gender: A Useful Category of Historical Analysis.’’ American
Historical Review 91 (December 1986): 1053–75.
Seraille, William. ‘‘Henrietta Vinton Davis and the Garvey Movement.’’ Afro-
Americans in New York Life and History 7 (July 1983): 7–24.
Sio, Arnold A. ‘‘Race, Color, and Miscegenation: The Free Colored of Jamaica
and Barbados.’’ Caribbean Studies 16 (April 1976): 5–21.
Smith, T erry. ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey: Portrait of a Courageous Woman.’’ Jamaican
Housewife, Winter 1964, 23.
Springen, Karen. ‘‘Eyes of the Beholders.’’ Newsweek, 3 June 1996, 68.


--- PAGE 308 ---
selected bibliography 295
Taylor, Ula Y. ‘‘As-Salaam Alaikum, My Sister: The Honorable Elijah
Muhammad and the Women Who Followed Him.’’ Race & Society 1 (1998):
177–96.
T oney, Joyce. ‘‘The Perpetuation of a Culture of Migration: West Indian
American Ties with Home, 1900–1979.’’ Afro-Americans in New York Life and
History 13 (January 1989): 39–55.
T urner, James E. ‘‘Historical Dialectics of Black Nationalist Movements in
America.’’ Western Journal of Black Studies 1 (September 1977): 164–83.
White, E. Frances. ‘‘Africa on My Mind: Gender, Counter Discourse, and African
American Nationalism.’’ Journal of Women’s History 2 (1990): 73–97.
Williams, Michael W . ‘‘Marcus Garvey and Kwame Nkrumah: A Case of
Ideological Assimilation, Advancement, and Reﬁnement.’’ Western Journal of
Black Studies 7 (1983): 94–102.
Woolcock, Joseph. ‘‘Class Conﬂict and Class Reproduction: An Historical
Analysis of the Jamaican Educational Reforms of 1957 and 1962.’’ Social and
Economic Studies 33 (December 1984): 51–99.
Worchester, Kent. ‘‘C. L. R. James and the Development of a Pan-African
Problematic.’’ Journal of Caribbean History 27 (1993): 54–80.


--- PAGE 309 ---



--- PAGE 310 ---
index
Note: ‘‘Amy Jacques Garvey’’ is abbre-
viated ‘‘AJG’’ throughout the index.
Adi, Hakim, 213
Africa: diasporic awareness of, 4, 33,
184–93, 215–16, 220–21, 235, 236;
liberation movement, 4, 88, 96, 102,
106, 107, 152–57, 162, 165, 166, 173–
79, 189, 190, 192, 202–3, 208, 213–
15, 228, 229; UNIA members in, 41;
diasporic return aim, 48, 145, 153,
156–59, 215; education in, 72, 189,
217; diasporic awareness vs. return
movement, 105–6, 215; Atlantic
Charter and, 151; ‘‘Six Freedoms’’
memorandum and, 152; AJG essays
on, 155, 175–76, 220; Bilbo repatria-
tion bill and, 157, 158–59; United
Nations Conference and, 163–64;
newspapers and, 167, 175, 181, 183,
184–85, 189–90; term ‘‘native’’ and,
167; strategic resources of, 176, 177;
World War II and, 176, 177–78;
Cold War and, 190, 208, 213, 218–19;
AJG visit to, 213, 214–20. See also
Colonialism; Pan-Africanism
‘‘Africa for the Africans’’ (slogan), 145,
156, 178, 215
African, The: Journal of African A√airs,
175, 183–84, 191, 208
African Americans: Jim Crow and, 1,
39, 52, 54–56, 102, 155, 157; migra-
tion to North, 20, 39, 68–69; Afri-
can Caribbean prejudice and, 22; ra-
cial consciousness and, 28; uplift
aims and, 36, 39, 43, 47, 64, 68–69,
72, 73, 76, 87, 92, 127, 169, 180, 187;
critics of Garvey among, 36, 42, 47–
48, 65–66, 160, 166; monolithic
view of, 39; health concerns of, 57;
education and, 71–72, 190; elite atti-
tudes among, 87–88, 194; empower-
ment and, 109; terminology for,
156–57, 179; African repatriation
bill, 157, 158–59; United Nations
Conference and, 162–64; Pan-
Africanism and, 166–67, 173–74,
202–3; World War II and, 177–78,
206–7; post–World War II status
of, 203–4, 206–8; civil rights move-
ment and, 207, 220, 228, 229; anti-
communism and, 207–8;
Garveyism inﬂuence on, 228–29.
See also Racism
African Blood Brotherhood, 36
African Caribbeans, 17, 20–22, 37–39.
See also British Caribbean; Jamaica
African Communities League, 148, 149,
156, 170
African Continental Bank, 181
African Freedom Charter and Council,
4, 152, 154
African Study Circle, 175, 185–93, 224,
236


--- PAGE 311 ---
298 index
Afrocentric scholarship, 185, 223–24,
230–32
Afro–West Indian Society, 214
Alexander, Leslie, 226
Algeria, 96
Allman, Alice, 163–64
Amarteiﬁo, Evelyn, 217
American Baptist Home Mission So-
ciety, 72
American West Indian Ladies Aid So-
ciety, 21
Amsterdam News, 172
Anderson, Benedict, 33
Anderson, James D., 71
Anderson, Karen, 203
Anglicanism, 11, 102, 115, 121
Anticolonialism. See Africa: liberation
movement
‘‘Appeal to the Souls of White Amer-
ica, An’’ (Garvey), 62–63
Armattoe, Raphael, 101
Ashwood, Amy: AJG relationship
with, 23–34, 172–73, 209–10; back-
ground of, 24, 25; UNIA activities,
25–26, 28, 42, 44; marriage to/sepa-
ration from Garvey, 26–32; divorce
countersuit, 33–34, 37–38, 171, 225,
226; claims as Garvey’s rightful
widow, 38, 173, 224–27; mistaken
for AJG, 171–72; at Fifth Pan-
African Congress, 171–73
Ashwood, Claudius, 29
Atlanta University, 161
Atlantic Charter, 4, 150–51, 155, 160
Azikiwe, Nnamdi, 5, 152, 158, 165, 171–
74, 180–81, 183, 188, 200, 216; back-
ground and aims of, 167–68; news-
papers owned by, 189; inaugural
ceremonies for, 214
‘‘Back to Africa’’ movement, 215
Bacon, Edgar Mayhem, 6
Bailey, Amy, 123, 139
Bair, Barbara, 44
Balibar, Etienne, 12–13
Bandung Conference, 213
Batista, Fulgencio, 208
Becman, Marlene, 35
Behind God’s Back (Farson), 188
Belgian Congo, 188, 218–19
Belt, Guillermo, 164
Berlin Conference, 108
Bermuda, 105–6
Bethune, Mary McLeod, 163, 168
Bilbo, Theodore G., 157, 158–59
Birth control, 258 (n. 1)
Black Baptist Church, 43, 59
Black capitalism, 3, 4, 47–48, 115–16
Black Confraternity, 23–24
Black Cross Nurses, 44, 77
Black feminism, 82
Black Folk: Then and Now (Du Bois),
188
Black identity: AJG and, 25, 30–31, 38–
40, 52–53, 76, 92–93, 198, 210–11,
220, 227; ‘‘good woman’’ qualities,
81–82; ‘‘one drop’’ rule, 152; deﬁning
characteristics, 156–57. See also
Black nationalism; Garveyism; Pan-
Africanism
Blackman, 108, 119
Black Man: A Monthly Magazine of
Negro Thought and Opinion, 123, 129
Black Moses: The Story of Marcus
Garvey and the Universal Negro Im-
provement Association (Cronon),
209–10, 212
Black nationalism: patriarchism and,
29–30, 44–46, 81, 124; FBI suspi-
cion of, 33–34; community femi-
nism and, 69–70, 86–89; AJG vs.
Garvey view of, 73; AJG and, 93,
106, 149, 202–3, 235; white racial
uplift supporters and, 95–96; fas-


--- PAGE 312 ---
index 299
cism compared with, 99; women
participants, 123, 198–99; and anti-
communism, 163; Pan-Africanism
vs., 178; African American shift to,
228, 229; Garvey and, 228–29. See
also Black identity; Garveyism
Black Power, 156, 228, 229
Black Power in America, 230
Black pride, 185, 223
Black Star Line Limited, 216
Black Star Line Steamship Company,
3, 32, 34, 41, 47–50, 60, 65
Blackwell, Jean, 210, 216
Black women: empowerment program
and, 2, 79; limited job opportunities
for, 20–21, 72, 118; Jezebel/harlot
image of, 35; club movement and,
36, 69, 76–77, 82, 85–86, 123; moral
uplift and, 36, 43, 64, 72, 73, 76, 87;
as UNIA activists, 42–46, 123–24;
interracial relations and, 43; health
problems of, 57; Baptist preaching
and, 59; woman’s pages for, 63, 64,
68–90; education and, 71–72, 77;
child-rearing concerns, 76–78; femi-
nism and, 82; male chauvinism and,
82–85, 168, 173; Jamaican social
work by, 123–24; as single household
heads, 125, 127; wage demands of,
139; as Pan-American Congress par-
ticipants, 170; tensions among, 172–
73; colonial rule and, 176; Study
Circles and, 187–88; Jamaican poli-
tics and, 198–99; activists’ lack of
recognition, 232; childlessness and,
258–59 (nn. 1, 2); widowhood stud-
ies among, 263 (n. 1). See also Com-
munity feminism; Gender-speciﬁc
roles; Motherhood; Patriarchy
Blades, James A., 159
Blee, Kathleen, 53
Blues singers, 83
Bowlby, J., 148
Boxer, K., 170
Briggs, Cyril, 20, 36, 47–48
British Caribbean: racial classiﬁcation
in, 9, 91; British lifestyle in, 12; emi-
gration from, 17, 19; UNIA mem-
bers in, 41; black poverty in, 91, 108–
11, 118, 125, 195, 221–22; emancipa-
tion centenary in, 134–35; capitalism
in, 135, 181, 197, 222; contributions
of, 155; term ‘‘native’’ and, 167; Pan-
African Congress and, 174; ethnic
population of, 179, 180; indepen-
dence in, 221; view of childless
women, 258–59 (n. 2). See also Ja-
maica
British Jamaicans Benevolent Associa-
tion, 21, 39
Brodber, Edna, 125
Brown, Aggrey, 199
Brown, Elsa Barkeley, 87
Burkett, Randall, 247–48 (n. 14)
Bustamante, Alexander, 196–97, 201
Byerman, Keith, 153
Caesar, Julius, 260
Calabar High School, 205
Cambridge Local Examinations, 11, 12
Cambridge University, 205
Campbell, Daphne, 198, 199
Campbell, Gwendolyn, 30
Canada, 34, 41, 103, 105, 132–33, 201,
210
Capitalism, 87, 91, 93, 135, 197, 222;
black, 3, 4, 47–48, 115–16
Capricornia: A Novel (Herbert), 188
Carby, Hazel V ., 81, 83
Caribbean area. See British Caribbean;
Jamaica
Carmichael, Stokely, 156, 228
Carter, Rev. G. E., 79–80
Castro, Fidel, 208


--- PAGE 313 ---
300 index
Césaire, Aimé, 219
Chatterjee, Partha, 88, 106
Chiang Kaishek, 153
Chicago Defender, 57, 172, 225;
‘‘Woman’’ column, 68–69
China, 150, 153, 162–63, 181–82, 213
Chinese (ethnic), 91, 181–82, 194, 223
Chong, Sheila, 182
Chrisman, Robert, 53
Churchill, Winston, 121, 150, 153
Civil rights movement, 207, 220, 228,
229
Clark, John Henrik, 231
Clarke, Kenneth, 230–31
Class. See Color/class system
Cleveland, Ohio, 146, 192
Club women, 36, 76–77, 82, 84–85,
123, 187
Cold War, 190, 194, 206–8, 212, 213,
218–19, 221
Collins, Ethel M., 137, 145, 147
Colonial Development Act (1929;
G.B.), 114
Colonialism, 33, 96–97, 99–100, 161,
185; British, 100, 176, 178, 190, 213;
critiques of, 102, 106, 108–9, 155; At-
lantic Charter and, 151, 153; Fifth
Pan-African Congress and, 166; Af-
rican Study Circle reading list and,
188; education and, 189. See also Af-
rica: liberation movement
Color and Democracy (Du Bois), 155
Color/class system, 9–13, 91, 136, 206;
AJG and, 10–11, 25, 26–27, 38–39,
92, 115, 118, 120, 121–22, 194–95, 205,
227; education and, 12, 13; ‘‘passing’’
and, 17; black identity movements
and, 25, 39; Garvey and, 30–31, 93,
120, 121, 122; work opportunity and,
91, 92, 223; reading groups and, 187–
88; Jamaican politics and, 199, 221–
22
Comité de Defense de la Race Nègrer,
96
Communism, 33, 206–7; African re-
patriation and, 106–7; AJG view of,
162–63; African decolonization and,
190, 213. See also Cold War
Communist Party, 33, 110–11, 124, 150,
178
Community feminism, 67, 69–70, 74–
79; deﬁnition of, 2, 64; AJG articles
on, 2, 73–79; AJG retreat from, 4, 5,
112, 124, 176, 186; black nationalism
and, 69–70, 86–89; helpmate role
and, 75–76, 81, 85, 87, 103, 114, 120,
124, 141, 162, 169, 187; AJG demon-
stration of, 103, 133, 161–62
‘‘Community Thing, The,’’ 230
Complete Poems, The (Dunbar), 188
Congo, 188, 218–19
Convention People’s Party, Women’s
Division, 217–18
Cook, Mercer, 177
Coolidge, Calvin, 89
Cooper, Anna, 72, 73
Cooper, Carolyn, 188
Council of African A√airs, 166
Cox, Ernest, 159
Crisis, 34
Cronon, David, 209–10, 212
Crusader, 36
Cuba, 208
Cullen, Countee, 177
Cumberbatch, Allan, 32
Daily Chronicle, 24–25
Daily Gleaner, 15, 24, 107, 196, 197, 198,
203, 208, 227
Davies, Carol Boyce, 21, 33, 45
Davis, Ben, 178
Davis, Henrietta Vinton, 30, 31, 37,
42–43, 45, 110, 112
Deaconess Home School, 11, 12


--- PAGE 314 ---
index 301
Delany, Martin, 29
DeMena, Madame, 103, 123
Democratic Party, 104
Diaspora: importance of homeland in,
157; Jewish/African comparison,
175–76, 179. See also Africa; Pan-
Africanism
Domingo, W . A., 20, 170–71
Dougherty, Wyalt, 149
Douglass, Frederick, 100
Drake, St. Clair, 215
Drum, The, 208
Du Bois, Nina Gomer, 161–62
Du Bois, Shirley Graham, 162
Du Bois, W . E. B., 5, 34, 36, 39, 42,
47, 72, 177, 188; ‘‘talented tenth’’
concept, 69; gender roles and, 82,
161–62; AJG and, 154, 155, 156, 160–
62, 165–66, 168, 169, 171; Pan-
Africanism and, 154, 155, 161, 165–
66; on ‘‘Negro’’ as term, 156; United
Nations Conference and, 162, 163;
Ashwood and, 171; personal reserve
of, 194; ouster from NAACP , 207
Dunbar, Paul Laurence, 42, 188
Dutt, R. Palme, 108–9
Earle, Satire, 123
East Indians, 179, 180, 194
Ebony, 184, 225
Education: in Jamaica, 11–12, 13, 190–
91, 204; African Americans and, 71–
72, 77, 190; in Africa, 72, 189, 217;
AJG views on, 106, 109, 185, 217
Ehrenstein, R., 111
Eighth International Convention of
African Peoples of the World, 201,
202–3
Elocondo, Enriu L., 202
Elshtain, Jean Bethke, 76
English language, 192–93, 217
Enloe, Cynthia, 88
Escridge, Hazel, 94, 96, 102, 103, 105
Etco√, Nancy, 260 (n. 23)
Ethiopia, 99–100, 163, 202
Eurocentrism, 10, 151, 222
Farson, Negley, 188
Fascism, 98–100, 176
Father Divine, 124, 131
Faulhaber, F. B., 32–33, 34
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
3, 32–37, 48–49
Federation of Women in Accra, 217
Feminism, 1, 76, 82, 86, 123. See also
Community feminism
Fernandez Rebull, Reinaldo, 202
Fifth Pan-African Congress (1945), 164,
165–74, 184, 213
Firestone, Harvey, 105
Ford, Irene, 192
Ford, James, 150
Ford-Smith, Honor, 123
Foreign-Born Citizens Alliance, 21
Fortune, T . Thomas, 65
Foucault, Michel, 56
France, 96–98, 100, 101, 151, 177–78,
179, 189
Francis, Lilly, 17, 18, 20
French, Joan, 123
Fuller, Daiziel, 192
Gaines, Kevin, 73
Gambia, 152
Gangs, 204
Garcia, Elie, 50
Garside, W . R., 114
Garvey, Julius Winston (son), 122, 126,
130, 132, 134, 172, 194, 203; color of,
121–22, 129; relationship with father,
129, 137, 138, 141, 205; UNIA funds
and, 147, 200, 201–2; education of,
204–5, 210; as adult, 212, 214, 226,
231; father’s reburial and, 227, 228


--- PAGE 315 ---
302 index
Garvey, Marcus, 8, 19, 20, 176; AJG as
private secretary of, 1, 22, 23, 33–34;
FBI surveillance of, 3, 32–37, 48–49;
prison sentence, 3, 50–52, 58, 59–60,
62, 65, 66, 111; death of, 4, 141, 143–
44, 147, 224–28; marriage to Ash-
wood, 24–30; move to Harlem, 25–
26; AJG’s beauty and, 30–31, 120–
21; separation/divorce from Ash-
wood, 30–34, 37–38; immorality
charges against, 35–36; African
American critics of, 36, 42, 47–48,
65–66, 160, 166, 170; Ashwood/AJG
legitimate widow dispute and, 38,
173, 224–27; AJG and legacy of, 46–
47, 148, 149, 154, 208–9, 216, 224,
225, 231–32, 236–37; mail fraud in-
dictment of, 46–50, 51, 66, 160; ﬁ-
nances and, 47, 48, 51, 60–61, 104–
5, 108, 110–13, 117–21, 124; as pro-
pagandist, 53–54; tarnished reputa-
tion of, 65–66; prison sentence
commutation, 89; deportation order
against, 89–90, 103; return to Ja-
maica by, 91–114; actions vs. ideas
of, 93–94; European tour of, 96–
103; fascism and, 98–100; British
citizenship of, 101; anticolonial peti-
tion by, 102; antileftist tilt of, 107;
publications of, 108, 119, 121, 123,
129; political organization and, 110–
11, 115, 136; health problems of, 111,
132; fatherhood and, 112, 115, 129,
130, 132, 137, 139, 141, 205; labor
rhetoric of, 116–17; background of,
121; move to London, 124, 125, 127–
28; bankruptcy of, 124, 126; exces-
sive complaints by, 128; stroke of,
139–40; African Communities
League and, 148, 149, 156, 170; white
supremacists and, 159; Cronon book
on, 209–10; Jamaican memorial
bust of, 211–12; African leaders’ trib-
utes to, 219–20; Ashwood on legacy
of, 225; as o≈cial Jamaican hero,
227–28; legacy of, 228–30, 232, 235.
See also Garveyism; Garvey–AJG
marriage; Negro World; Pan-
Africanism; Universal Negro Im-
provement Association
Garvey, Marcus, Jr. (son), 122, 130, 172,
194, 203, 212, 214, 231; birth of, 113,
114, 117, 118; rheumatic fever of, 131,
132–34, 139–40; relationship with
father, 137, 138, 141; UNIA funds
and, 147, 200, 201–2; education of,
204–5, 210; father’s reburial and, 228
Garvey and Garveyism (AJG), 117–18,
120, 223–24, 228, 229, 231–32
Garveyism: as ideology, 3; AJG dis-
semination of, 3, 5, 143–64, 175–93,
208, 213, 215, 228, 232, 235; gender-
speciﬁc roles and, 44–45, 86, 117–18;
African American critics of, 65–66;
fascism/Nazism comparison, 99; Ja-
maican liberal feminists and, 123;
African leaders and, 167, 174; Afri-
can independence and, 216;
Nkrumahism and, 216; inﬂuences
of, 228; scholarship and, 230–32. See
also New York Garvey Club; Pan-
Africanism; Philosophy and Opinions
of Marcus Garvey, The; Universal
Negro Improvement Association
Garvey–AJG marriage, 1, 37; wedding
ceremony, 38; rightful widow claims
and, 38, 173, 224–27; demands on
AJG, 50–52, 57–58, 63, 89–90; AJG
ﬁnancial contribution to, 51, 60,
104–5, 111, 113, 118–19, 138–39; com-
fortable lifestyle in, 60, 93–94, 105,
115, 118, 127, 128, 138, 174, 195;
gender-role expectations and, 87, 88;
strains in, 90, 94, 104–5, 113–14,


--- PAGE 316 ---
index 303
119–21, 122, 125, 131–32, 134, 141; fa-
milial responsibilities and, 127–28;
London household, 129–34; Junior’s
illness and, 131–32; breach in, 134,
137–40, 141; Garvey’s death and, 141,
143
Gender-speciﬁc roles: AJG view of, 1, 2,
51, 63, 73–75, 82–84, 88, 124, 127, 132,
145–46, 168–69, 203–4; in Jamaica,
13, 123–24, 170; AJG upbringing and,
13–14, 17, 117–18; Garvey’s expecta-
tions of, 29–30, 44, 45, 51–52, 74, 87,
88, 93–94, 124, 138; black women’s
concerns about, 43, 76; public/ fa-
miliar spheres and, 44, 73–75, 117–18,
139, 187; Pan-Africanism and, 45–46,
81, 86, 88; UNIA and, 52, 58–59, 66–
68, 78–84, 141, 145–46; public speak-
ing and, 55, 56, 101; women’s educa-
tion and, 71–72; AJG vs. Garvey view
of, 74–75, 82–83, 87, 88; race-
consciousness movements and, 168–
69; AJG self-exception from, 169; lit-
erary societies and, 187–88. See also
Community feminism; Patriarchy
Germany, 97–99, 100, 150, 151, 176,
177, 178
Ghana, 190, 215–20
‘‘Ghost of Marcus Garvey, The: Inter-
views with Crusader’s T wo Wives,’’
225–26
Gibbons, B., 148, 154, 157, 159, 160,
169, 172, 187, 202, 225
Gilmore, Glenda, 54
Gilroy, Paul, 29, 33, 157, 192
Glenn, Evelyn Nakano, 122
Gold Coast, 152, 190
Grant, Ruth, 156
Great Britain, 114–15, 150, 153; UNIA
and, 41, 94–95, 101, 128–30, 133–34;
Africa and, 100, 176, 178, 190, 213–
14; Garvey’s relocation to, 124, 127–
34; AJG’s life in, 129–34; blacks in,
130, 178; Fifth Pan-African Congress
in, 171–73; Garvey’s body in, 226.
See also British Caribbean; Jamaica
Great Depression, 114, 125, 127, 135
Greater Liberian Bill (Bilbo’s Bill), 157,
158–60
Grissom, N. H., 147, 159
Hall, Stuart, 13, 192
Hamilton, Charles, 95–96, 156
Hamilton, V . C., 170
Harlem, 1, 17–27, 202–3, 215; UNIA
branch in, 22–23, 41, 124, 131;
Garvey memorial service in, 145; po-
litical organization in, 151–52
Harlem Renaissance, 52
Harper, Frances, 73
Harris, Cheryl, 19
Harrison, Hubert, 20
Harrison, William, 178
Hart, Richard, 206
Hawkesworth, Mary, 168
Headrick, Rita, 178
Helpmate/leadership interplay. See
Community feminism
Henry, Arthur, 206
Henry, Claudius, 222
Herbert, Xavier, 188
Herskowitz, Melville, 188
Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks, 43, 59
Hill, Frank, 206
Hill, Ken, 206
Hill, Robert, 47, 139, 231, 261 (n. 30)
Hip-hop icon, 236
Hitler, Adolf, 98, 99, 150, 177, 178, 189
Holocaust, 176, 177
Holt, Thomas, 116, 135
Hoover, Herbert, 105
Hoover, J. Edgar, 33, 48–49
Hope, Lugenia Burns, 73, 88
Horne, Gerald, 161


--- PAGE 317 ---
304 index
‘‘Housewiﬁsation’’ ideology, 123
Housing conditions, 118, 220
Human rights, 162, 220
Huston, Jean, 230
Illiteracy. See Literacy
Immigration Act (1917; U.S.), 18
Independent Negro Nations and
Communities, 28
Industrial T rade Union, 96
Institute of Jamaica, 232
International African Service Bureau,
166, 178
International Council of Women of
the Darker Races, 70
Israel, 179
Italy, 99–100, 202
Jackson, Fannie, 31
Jacques, Charlotte Henrietta (mother),
8, 10, 13–16, 17, 25, 93; helps AJG,
113, 114, 118, 136–39, 194, 200, 212;
death of, 212
Jacques, Cleveland (brother), 15, 34,
35–36
Jacques, Ethlin (sister), 12, 15
Jacques, George Samuel (father), 6, 7–
8, 10, 11, 13–17, 121, 138
Jacques, Ida (sister) (later Repole), 15,
16, 20, 113, 118, 121
Jacques, Joscelyn (sister), 15
Jacques Garvey, Amy: political writing
of, 1, 4–5, 52–56, 63, 64–89, 108,
154–59, 163–64, 168–69, 174, 175–
85, 196–97, 208, 220–21, 227–30,
233, 236, 237; birth of, 1, 7; criticism
of black men by, 2, 82–84, 127, 138,
168–69; assessment of achievements
of, 3, 4–5, 235–37; ill health of, 3, 17,
18, 56–57, 58, 63, 85, 86, 89, 112, 113,
132, 199–200, 224, 233–34; eco-
nomic views of, 4; as single parent,
4, 124, 125–42; political rebirth of, 4,
148–64; in post–World War II pe-
riod, 5, 213–34; early life of, 6–17;
family background of, 7–8, 14–15,
115, 121–22; light color of, 10, 25, 30–
31, 120, 121; domineering personality
of, 14, 17, 19, 20, 120, 146–47, 184; in
United States, 17–90; intelligence
of, 20, 23, 31; Ashwood relationship,
23–34, 171–72, 209–10, 225–26; ra-
cial consciousness of, 25, 38–40, 92–
93; physical appearance of, 30–31,
56, 120, 260 (n. 23); U.S. nationali-
zation of, 36–37, 61–62; as Garvey’s
editor, 46–47, 62–63; ﬁnancial
problems of, 51, 60–61, 108, 111, 113,
117–19, 120–21, 124, 125–29, 134,
138–39, 145, 174, 183, 199–201, 204,
209, 210, 231, 233; public speaking
by, 55, 56, 59, 63, 103, 105–6, 202–3,
214–15, 218; as intellectual, 65, 131,
141, 229–30; political perspective of,
73, 213–34; African Study Circle
and, 75, 175, 185–93; contradictions
in thought of, 87; returns to Ja-
maica, 90, 91–111, 113, 138–39; Euro-
pean tour of, 96–103, 155; North
American tour of, 103–7; mother-
hood role of, 111–42, 204–5; memoir
by, 117–18, 120, 212, 223–24, 231–32;
entitlement feelings of, 126–28; fam-
ily’s aid to, 138–40; bitterness of,
140, 231–32; antagonisms toward,
146–47; use of term ‘‘Negro’’ and,
156–57; Fifth Pan-African Congress
and, 164, 166–74; sale of postcards
of Garvey family and, 183; sense of
self-importance of, 203; African trip
of, 213, 214–20; death of, 213, 234;
last years of, 231–37; awards and
honors, 232–33. See also Community
feminism; Garvey, Julius Winston;


--- PAGE 318 ---
index 305
Garvey, Marcus, Jr.; Gender-speciﬁc
roles; Pan-Africanism; Universal
Negro Improvement Association
Jamaica, 1, 6–17, 29, 91–114, 118, 125,
150–51, 163, 169–70, 221–22;
middle-/upper-class lifestyle in, 8–
11, 13, 25, 38, 115, 194–95; education
system in, 11–12, 190–91, 204;
Garvey deportation to, 89–90; eth-
nic minorities in, 91, 181–82, 194,
223; political parties in, 110–11, 115,
136, 193, 194–99, 206–7, 221–22,
227; women’s social work in, 123–24;
female-headed households in, 125,
128; 1938 rebellion in, 134–35, 139,
170, 190, 196; economic disparity in,
195; hazardous roads in, 195; inde-
pendence movement in, 196, 197–
98; juvenile delinquency in, 204;
Garvey memorials in, 211–12, 227–
28; independence in, 221, 228. See
also Color/class system
Jamaican College of Arts, Science, and
T echnology, 232
Jamaican Gazette, 17
Jamaican Labor Party, 196–97, 206,
221, 223
James, C. L. R., 217
James, Joy, 39
James, Winston, 38–39, 203
Jarrett, C. V ., 183
Jews, 91, 100, 151, 176–77, 179, 223
Jim Crow: AJG and, 1, 39, 52, 54–56,
102, 155, 157; factors in breakdown
of, 220–21
Johnson, Mildred F., 214, 215
Jones, Claudia, 153
Jones, Selwyn, 188
Juvenile delinquency, 203–4
Kandel Commission of Enquiry into
Secondary Education (Jamaica), 191
Kenyatta, Jomo, 165
Kimmel, Michael, 52
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 228, 229
King George VI Memorial Park, 211–
12, 228
Kingston. See Jamaica
Kirkwood, R. L. M., 116
Knupfer, Anne, 187
Kohn, Arim, 89
Koyuate, Tiemolo Garan, 97
Ku Klux Klan, 53, 65–66
La Badie, Alma, 170
Labor. See Working-class issues
Lacy, Leslie Alexander, 215–16
Lamos, Enid, 34, 52
Language, 192–93, 217; political signif-
icance of, 156–57, 167, 179
League for the Defense of the Negro
Race, 97
League of Colored People, 166
League of Nations, 41, 100, 102, 106
Lescott, Mons, 183
Let My People Go (Cox), 159
Lewis, Gordon, 221, 227
Lewis, Ridley A., 183
Lewis, Rupert, 94, 163, 175–76, 225,
234
Liberia, 41, 48, 105, 163, 172; African
American repatriation bill, 157, 158–
59
Lightbody, Philip, 111
Literacy, 12, 18, 19, 185, 187, 190
Literary societies, 186, 187
London Missionary Society, 154, 166
Lorde, Audre, 172, 173
Los Angeles, Calif., 53, 54
Lugenia Hope Burns: Black Southern
Reformer (Rouse), 88
Lumumba, Patrice, 218–19
Lynchings, 32, 39, 43, 53, 58, 162,
202


--- PAGE 319 ---
306 index
Mack, Julian, 49
MacMillan, T . R., 16
Malcolm X, 228, 229, 236
Manhood, 52. See also Patriarchy
Manley, Norman, 136, 196, 197–98,
206
Mann Act (1910; U.S.), 35–36
Manning, Sam, 31–32
Marcus Garvey Prize for Human
Rights, 229
Marke, George O., 110
Marshall, Paule, 21–22
Marson, Una, 123, 139, 170
Martin, T ony, 99, 172
Masculine power. See Patriarchy
Mattingly, Carol, 55
McGuire, George, 51, 56
McKay, Claude, 100–101
Mee, Arthur, 132
Memorandum Correlative of Africa, the
West Indies and the Americas (AJG),
4, 154–60, 162–64, 171, 178, 213,
236
Mies, Marie, 123
Miscegenation, 31, 43, 159
‘‘Miss Jamaica,’’ 182
Mixed-race people, 31, 92, 152, 170
Moody, Harold, 154, 166, 178
Moore, Audley (Queen Mother), 41
Moorish Science T emple, 235
Moral uplift. See Racial uplift
Morgan, T . J., 72
Mosse, George, 44, 52
Motherhood, 73–74, 76–78, 112–23,
134, 203–4
Muhammad, Elijah, 43
Mulattoes. See Mixed-race people
Munroe, T revor, 222–23
Musgrave Gold Medal, 232
Mussolini, Benito, 99, 100
Myth of the Negro Past, The
(Herskowitz), 188
National Association for the Advance-
ment of Colored People (NAACP),
42, 161, 162, 207
National Association of Colored
Women, 70
Nationalist movements: patriarchal
emphasis of, 29, 44–46, 81, 88;
women participants in, 66; fascism
and, 99; core feature of, 106. See also
Africa; Black nationalism; Pan-
Africanism
Nation of Islam, 43, 235
‘‘Native,’’ 167
Nazism, 98–99, 150, 177, 178
‘‘Negro,’’ 156–57, 167, 179
Negroes in Brazil (Pierson), 188
Negro Factory Corporation, 34
Negro Welfare Association, 178
Negro World, 1, 97, 99, 103, 104, 170,
247–48 (n. 14), 257 (n. 52); Garvey
articles in, 46–47, 60, 62–63, 68;
AJG articles in, 52, 53, 67–68, 108,
155, 210; ‘‘Health Talks’’ column in,
57; AJG woman’s page in, 63, 64–89,
100; ﬁnancial problems of, 107
Nettleford, Rex, 197
New Jamaican, 119, 121, 123, 260
(n. 21)
New Negro, 27–28
New Negro Woman, 71–72, 73, 79, 85
‘‘New patriarchy,’’ 88
New World a-Coming (Ottley), 155
New York Age, 57, 69
New York Garvey Club, 146–47, 149,
154, 157–59, 160, 163–64, 169, 173–
74, 186, 188, 201, 202, 204, 225
New York UNIA Inc., 131
Nicolson, I. F., 167
Nigeria, 152, 163, 167, 175, 190, 219,
220; workers’ strike in, 180; ﬁrst Af-
rican governor-general of, 214–15
Nkrumah, Kwame, 5, 165, 190, 215–19


--- PAGE 320 ---
index 307
Olympic Games (1936), 177
One Hundred Amazing Facts about the
Negro (Rogers), 188
Orr, Marion, 156
Ottley, Roi, 155
‘‘Our Women and What They Think,’’
63, 64–89, 100
Overseas Chinese, 91, 181–82, 194, 223
Owen, Chandler, 36, 42
Owens, Jesse, 177
Oxford University, 190
Padmore, George, 5, 166, 169, 170, 171,
174, 183, 212, 225
Paglia, Camille, 260 (n. 23)
Palestine, 151, 176–77, 179
Pan-Africanism: as AJG cause, 2–6, 54,
70, 71, 73, 76–77, 82, 149–64, 186–
87, 198, 213, 220–21, 230, 235–37; as
Garvey message, 4, 39–40, 141, 153,
156, 228–29, 235; basic aim of, 4,
106; UNIA promotion of, 26, 48,
162–64; post–World War I climate
for, 28; patriarchy and, 44–46, 81,
88; short- and long-term goals of,
95–96; coalition of groups in, 149–
50; United Nations and, 150–53; Du
Bois and, 154, 155, 161, 162, 165–66;
white racist supporters of, 159–60;
Fifth Congress (1945), 164, 165–74,
184, 213; Second Congress (1921),
166; turning point in, 173; black na-
tionalism and, 178, 228, 229; post–
World War II inception of, 181;
Study Circles and, 185–93; Cold
War and, 194, 207–8; black middle-
class outlook and, 199; ‘‘return home
to Africa’’ theme of, 215. See also
Universal Negro Improvement As-
sociation
Pan-African Union, 167
Pankhurst, Sylvia, 183
Parham, Saydee, 79
‘‘Passing,’’ 17
Paternalism, 36, 121
Patriarchy, 2, 3, 13–14, 121, 254 (n. 65);
nationalistic ideologies and, 29, 44–
46, 81, 88; AJG view of, 74–75, 81–
89, 122, 168–69, 173; in United
States, 87; ideal vs. reality of, 124. See
also Gender-speciﬁc roles
Patterson, Mrs. Robert, 85
Payne, Anthony, 223
Peace Mission movement, 131
People’s Committee (Harlem), 151–52
People’s National Party (PNP), 69, 136,
195–99, 206, 221, 223
People’s Political Party (PPP), 110, 111,
115, 136, 206
People’s Voice, 151, 172
Perry, Hosea, 144
Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus
Garvey, The (AJG, ed.), 3, 46–47,
62–63, 129, 163, 204, 210, 216, 223,
247–48 (n. 14)
Pickens, William, 36, 42
Pierce, Paulette, 81
Pierson, Donald, 188
Post, Ken, 197–98
Powell, Adam Clayton, Jr., 150, 151,
160, 162
Powell, C. B., 172
Public/private spheres, 44, 73–75, 117–
18, 139, 187
Quarterly, Jones, 174
‘‘Question of Love, The’’ (Garvey),
119–20
Race Nègre, La, 97
Racial classiﬁcation, 9, 152, 194–95
Racial discrimination, 91, 100–101, 178,
220–21
Racial integration, 73, 87–88, 162


--- PAGE 321 ---
308 index
Racial nationalism. See Black national-
ism
Racial purity, 99
Racial relations, 73, 157–58
Racial riots, 28, 39
Racial unity. See Pan-Africanism
Racial uplift, 36, 43, 64, 72, 73, 76, 87,
92, 169, 180; work ethic and, 127;
Study Circles and, 187
Racism, 20, 27–28, 35, 39, 73, 237;
Euro-American, 100; Atlantic Char-
ter and, 151; Pan-Africanism and,
153; black culture and, 157; AJG’s al-
leged collusion in, 159; United Na-
tions and, 162–63; Hitler and, 177;
World War II and, 177–78; Chinese
antiblack, 181–82; Study Circle read-
ing list and, 188–89; middle-class
black concerns and, 199. See also Jim
Crow; Lynchings
Radical feminists, 76
Randolph, A. Philip, 42, 149, 160, 174,
207
Rastafarians, 222, 235
Rawlins, E. Elliott, 79
Rawlins, Joan M., 263 (n. 1)
Reddick, L. D., 188
Red Scare, 33
Renascent Africa (Azikiwe), 188
Rhodesia, 163
Ricks, Willie, 228
Roberts, Alonso, 29
Robeson, Paul, 166
Rogers, J. A., 49, 94, 99, 188, 189, 223–
24
‘‘Role of Women in Liberation Strug-
gles, The’’ (AJG), 2
Roosevelt, Eleanor, 105, 127, 150–51
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 127, 150, 151
Rosenblatt, Paul C., 263 (n. 1)
Rouse, Jacqueline, 88
Rubber plantations, 105
Sabatier, Peggy, 189
St. Luke’s Anglican Church, 115, 121
Salahu-Din, Sakinah, 263 (n. 1)
Saurat, Denis, 188
Schomburg, Arthur, 193
Schomburg Collection, 188, 193, 210,
216, 230, 231
Schuyler, George S., 183
Scott, Joan, 169
Second Pan-African Congress (1921),
166
Senegal, 177–78
Senghor, Lamine, 97
Sex and Race (Rogers), 188, 189
Sherrill, William, 67–68, 146, 210,
223–24
Sierra Leone, 152, 163
Silbert, Layle, 182
Silver, Edward S., 61
‘‘Six Freedoms,’’ 152
Sixth International Convention of Af-
rican Peoples of the World, 103
Skin color. See Color/class system
Slavery, 9, 10, 185, 188; Caribbean
emancipation centenary, 134–35
Slave trade, 7, 100, 108, 215
Smith, Al, 104, 105
Smith, Honor Ford, 63
Snooks, Warden, 61
Socialism, 107, 196, 197, 216–17
Socialist Party, 170
Socialization, 11, 14–15, 17, 203–4
Solanke, Ladipo, 95
South, Frank, 8
South Africa, 163, 179, 208
South of the Congo (Jones), 188
Soviet Union, 150, 153, 162–63, 213,
218–19
Spencer, Adina, 123
Stalin, Joseph, 153
Stannard, Harold, 118
Stein, Judith, 48


--- PAGE 322 ---
index 309
Stettinius, Edward R., Jr., 162
Steward, J. Hume, 115
Stewart, James, 146–48, 200–202, 210
Stone, Carl, 198
Stovall, Tyler, 96–97
Study Circle. See African Study Circle
Tackie, D. G., 183
Talbot, David A., 183
‘‘Talented tenth’’ concept, 69, 87
Taylor, Lester, 174
T errell, Mary Church, 54, 73
Thiong’o, Ngugi, 116–17
Thompson, O. M., 50
Thoywell-Henry, L. A., 169–70
Timothy, Ivy T racy, 170
T obias, George, 50
T omlinson, Leila, 12
T oney, Joyce, 21
T rade Union Congress, 218
‘‘T ragic mulatta,’’ 92
T ruman, Harry S., 162, 202, 207
T urner, Victoria W ., 44
Union of People of African Descent,
149
United Fruit, 135
United Nations, 4, 150–55, 157, 218–21;
San Francisco Conference, 162–64,
168
Universal Black Cross Nurses, 44, 77
Universal Negro Improvement Asso-
ciation (UNIA), 1, 22–38, 90, 229;
AJG role in, 3, 4, 6, 20, 22, 28, 39,
40, 42, 51–52, 58–59, 63, 65–67, 69,
101, 103–7, 130, 133–34, 141–42, 151–
52, 237; Black Star Line and, 3, 32,
34, 41, 47–50, 60, 65; skin color and,
25; Ashwood role in, 25–26, 28, 42,
44; peak membership/branches of,
27, 41–42, 89; Garvey’s domination
of, 27–28, 42; rise and expansion of,
33; FBI investigation of, 33, 61–62;
London o≈ce of, 41, 94–96, 101,
128–30, 133–34; platform of, 41, 105–
6, 215; nationhood symbols of, 41–
42; 1922 convention, 42; women
and, 42–46, 88, 123–24; ﬁnances of,
48, 61, 104–5, 107, 110, 124, 126, 201;
African settlement plans of, 48, 159;
masculine emphasis of, 52, 66–68,
83–84, 141, 145–46; critics of, 65–66,
166; AJG’s feminism and, 86; Jamai-
can branch of, 91–92, 110, 123–24,
143; British white women supporters
of, 95–96, 101–2, 159; European re-
cruitment tour and, 96–103; anti-
colonial petitions of, 102;
American/Jamaican split in, 110,
126, 143; rival organizations and,
124, 131; membership decline of, 126,
131, 143; 1938 convention, 132; 1940
convention, 141–42; AJG widow-
hood and, 141–48; Garvey memorial
service and, 144; AJG ﬁnancial sup-
port by, 145, 146, 147, 200, 201; post-
Garvey changes in, 145–48, 200–
202, 210; Cleveland headquarters of,
146, 192; white racists and, 158–59;
Fifth Pan-African Conference and,
169, 170; Cronon characterization
of, 209; disposal of documents by,
230–31. See also Community femi-
nism
Veitch, Felix Gordon, 111
Verbrugge, Martha, 56
Voice from the South, A (Cooper), 72
Von Eschen, Penny, 208
Wallace, Marion L., 80
Walrond, Eric, 129
Ward, Margaret, 66
Washington, Booker T ., 72, 127


--- PAGE 323 ---
310 index
Washington, Margaret Murray, 70
Watch Over Africa (Saurat), 188
Wells-Barnett, Ida B., 43, 50, 53, 232
West, Cornel, 199
West Africa. See Africa
West African Pilot, 152, 167, 175, 181
West African Press Delegation, 167;
Memorandum, 152, 153
West Indian Bulletin, 183–84
West Indian Committee on America,
21, 54
West Indian Reference Library, 230
West Indian Reform Association, 21
West Indies. See British Caribbean; Ja-
maica
West Indies Sugar Company, 116, 135
Weston, George, 67–68, 244 (n. 30)
Westwood High School, 24
White, Alice, 76
White, Deborah Gray, 76, 82
White, E. Frances, 32, 45
White, Walter, 162, 207
White America (Cox), 159
White American Society, 159
White men, 82, 83
White slavery, 34, 35–36
White Slave T ra≈c Act (1910; U.S.),
35–36
White supremacy, 39, 53–54, 73, 159
White women: black women’s wariness
of, 43; AJG view of, 84, 101–2, 159;
UNIA support by, 95–96, 101–2,
159; genderized literature and, 187;
World War II employment of, 203
Whyte, Daisy, 130, 133, 134, 137, 139,
141, 144
Widows of National Heroes, 232
Williams, Brackette, 81
Williams, Fannie Barrie, 84–85
Williams, Henry Sylvester, 165
Williams, W . B., 214
Wolmers Boys’ School, 205
Wolmers Girls’ School, 12, 15
Woman’s pages, 63, 64, 68–69
Women: nationalist movements and,
66; beauty as power thesis and, 260
(n. 23). See also Black women; Com-
munity feminism; Gender-speciﬁc
roles; White women
Women’s Social Service Club, 123
Work ethic, 127
Working-class issues: AJG identiﬁca-
tion with, 4, 120, 218, 223; patriarch-
ism and, 13, 44–45; African
Caribbean conditions and, 91, 118,
135; Garvey rhetoric on, 116–17;
female-headed households and, 125;
Jamaican rebellions and, 136, 139,
170, 190, 196, 222–23; Pan-
Africanism and, 165, 170; Jamaican
education system and, 191; Jamaican
politics and, 197–98, 206, 222–23
World T rade Union Conference, 165
World War I, 18, 19–20, 96, 97, 98,
100, 176–77
World War II, 143–44, 153, 161, 167,
175, 176–80; Atlantic Charter and,
4, 150–51, 155, 160; African Ameri-
cans and, 177–78, 206–7; African
colonies and, 178–79, 180; Study
Circle reading list and, 188–89; juve-
nile delinquency and, 203
Wright, Richard, 216
Yard, Lionel, 25
Yergan, Max, 166
Young Communist League, 153
Zikist nationalism, 190
Zionism, 151


--- PAGE 324 ---
gender  & american culture
The Veiled Garvey: The Life and Times of
Amy Jacques Garvey, by Ula Yvette Taylor
(2002)
Working Cures: Health, Healing, and Power
on Southern Slave Plantations, by Sharla
Fett (2002)
Southern History across the Color Line, by
Nell Irvin Painter (2002)
The Artistry of Anger: Black and White
Women’s Literature in America, 1820–
1860, by Linda M. Grasso (2002)
T oo Much to Ask: Black Women in the Era of
Integration, by Elizabeth Higginbotham
(2001)
Imagining Medea: Rhodessa Jones and
Theater for Incarcerated Women, by Rena
Fraden (2001)
Painting Professionals: Women Artists and
the Development of Modern American
Art, 1870–1920, by Kirsten Swinth
(2001)
Remaking Respectability: African American
Women in Interwar Detroit, by Victoria
W . Wolcott (2001)
Ida B. Wells-Barnett and American Reform,
1880–1930, by Patricia A. Schechter
(2001)
T aking Haiti: Military Occupation and the
Culture of U.S. Imperialism, 1915–1940,
by Mary A. Renda (2001)
Before Jim Crow: The Politics of Race in
Postemancipation Virginia, by Jane
Dailey (2000)
Captain Ahab Had a Wife: New England
Women and the Whaleﬁshery, 1720–1870,
by Lisa Norling (2000)
Civilizing Capitalism: The National
Consumers’ League, Women’s Activism,
and Labor Standards in the New Deal
Era, by Landon R. Y. Storrs (2000)
Rank Ladies: Gender and Cultural Hierarchy
in American Vaudeville, by M. Alison
Kibler (1999)
Strangers and Pilgrims: Female Preaching in
America, 1740–1845, by Catherine A.
Brekus (1998)
Sex and Citizenship in Antebellum America,
by Nancy Isenberg (1998)
Yours in Sisterhood: Ms. Magazine and the
Promise of Popular Feminism, by Amy
Erdman Farrell (1998)
We Mean to Be Counted: White Women and
Politics in Antebellum Virginia, by
Elizabeth R. Varon (1998)
Women Against the Good War: Conscientious
Objection and Gender on the American
Home Front, 1941–1947, by Rachel
Waltner Goossen (1997)
T oward an Intellectual History of Women:
Essays by Linda K. Kerber (1997)


--- PAGE 325 ---
Gender and Jim Crow: Women and the
Politics of White Supremacy in North
Carolina, 1896–1920, by Glenda
Elizabeth Gilmore (1996)
Delinquent Daughters: Protecting and
Policing Adolescent Female Sexuality in the
United States, 1885–1920, by Mary E.
Odem (1995)
U.S. History as Women’s History: New
Feminist Essays, edited by Linda K.
Kerber, Alice Kessler-Harris, and
Kathryn Kish Sklar (1995)
Common Sense and a Little Fire: Women and
Working-Class Politics in the United
States, 1900–1965, by Annelise Orleck
(1995)
How Am I to Be Heard?: Letters of Lillian
Smith, edited by Margaret Rose Gladney
(1993)
Entitled to Power: Farm Women and
T echnology, 1913–1963, by Katherine
Jellison (1993)
Revising Life: Sylvia Plath’s Ariel Poems, by
Susan R. Van Dyne (1993)
Made From This Earth: American Women
and Nature, by Vera Norwood (1993)
Unruly Women: The Politics of Social and
Sexual Control in the Old South, by
Victoria E. Bynum (1992)
The Work of Self-Representation: Lyric Poetry
in Colonial New England, by Ivy
Schweitzer (1991)
Labor and Desire: Women’s Revolutionary
Fiction in Depression America, by Paula
Rabinowitz (1991)
Community of Su√ering and Struggle:
Women, Men, and the Labor Movement in
Minneapolis, 1915–1945, by Elizabeth
Faue (1991)
All That Hollywood Allows: Re-reading
Gender in 1950s Melodrama, by Jackie
Byars (1991)
Doing Literary Business: American Women
Writers in the Nineteenth Century, by
Susan Coultrap-McQuin (1990)
Ladies, Women, and Wenches: Choice and
Constraint in Antebellum Charleston and
Boston, by Jane H. Pease and William H.
Pease (1990)
The Secret Eye: The Journal of Ella Gertrude
Clanton Thomas, 1848–1889, edited by
Virginia Ingraham Burr, with an
introduction by Nell Irvin Painter
(1990)
Second Stories: The Politics of Language,
Form, and Gender in Early American
Fictions, by Cynthia S. Jordan (1989)
Within the Plantation Household: Black and
White Women of the Old South, by
Elizabeth Fox-Genovese (1988)
The Limits of Sisterhood: The Beecher Sisters
on Women’s Rights and Woman’s Sphere,
by Jeanne Boydston, Mary Kelley, and
Anne Margolis (1988)

