=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Ancient Egyptians People of the Pyramids.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 193
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:52:56.858164
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Ancient
Egyptians
PEOPLE OFTHE PYRAMIDS


--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---
Ancient
Egyptians
PEOPLE OF THE PYRAMIDS
ROSALIE F. AND CHARLES F. BAKER III
OXPORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS


--- PAGE 5 ---
In loving appreciation of
Joseph and Rose Ferreira
OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
Oxford New York
Athens Auckland Bangkok Bogota Buenos Aires Cape Town
Chennai Dar es Salaam Delhi Florence Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi
Kolkata Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi
Paris Sao Paulo Shanghai Singapore Taipei Tokyo Toronto Warsaw
with associated companies in Berlin Ibadan
Copyright © 2001 by Rosalie F. and Charles F. Baker III
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise, without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging in-Publication Data
Baker, Rosalie F.
Ancient Egyptians : people of the pyramids /
Rosalie F. and Charles F. Baker.
p. cm. - (Oxford profiles)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13 978-0-19-512221-3
ISBN 0-19-512221-6
1. Egypt—History—To 332 B.C.—
Biography. I. Baker, Charles F. II. Title. III. Series.
DT83.B25 2001
920.032—dc21 2001021209
3579864
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper
On the cover; Djoser's Step Pyramid; inset (clockwise from top left)
Menkaure, Hatshepsut, Senwosret III
Frontispiece: Nackht, a scribe and priest during the reign ofThutmose IV
(18th Dynasty), commissioned this hunting scene for the wall of his
•,/••! \ r i Design: Sandy Kaufmantomb. Nackht aims his throw-stick (similar to a boomerang) at a fowl Layout: Loraine Machlin
while his family watches. Picture research: Patricia Bums


--- PAGE 6 ---
Preface 7
Maps
The World of Ancient Egypt 8
Ancient Nubia 9
The Eastern Mediterranean 10
Part I. Tradition and Grandeur
(Old Kingdom, about 2686-2181 B.C.) 13
Djoser 15
Imhotep 20
Snefru 25
Khufu 29
Ptahhotep 34
Weni 37
Pepi II 41
Harkhuf 45
More Ancient Egyptians to Remember 50
Part 2. Disruption and Rebirth
(Middle Kingdom, about 2040-1782 B.C.) 55
Nebhepetre MentuhotepI  56
Amenemhet I 61
Senwosret I 66
Senwosret III 71
Amenemhet III 75
More Ancient Egyptians to Remember 80
Part 3. Growth and Expansion
(New Kingdom, about 1570-1440 B.C.) 83
Ahmose, Son of Ebana 85
Hatshepsut 89
Senenmut 95
Thutmose III 99
Rekhmire 105
More Ancient Egyptians to Remember 109
Contents


--- PAGE 7 ---
Part 4. Splendor and Revolution
(New Kingdom, about 1440-1293 B.C.) 112
Amenhotep III 114
Tiye 119
Akhenaten. 123
Nefertiti 130
Tutankhamun 134
Horemheb 140
More Ancient Egyptians to Remember 145
Part 5. Conquest and Decline (New Kingdom—
Ptokmaic Period, about 1325-245 B.C.) 147
Seti I 148
Ramesses II 154
Nefertari 160
Ramesses III 164
More Ancient Egyptians to Remember 170
Appendix: I. An Egyptian Rulers Five Names.. 174
Appendix 2. Foreign Rulers of Ancient Egypt.. 175
Appendix. 3. Timeline of Events
in the Egyptian World 178
Glossary 180
Further Reading and Websites 182
Index of Ancient Egyptians by Position 185
Index 186


--- PAGE 8 ---
Preface
Ancient Egyptian civilization has fascinated people for centuries.
Even today, archaeological discoveries in Egypt become headline
items throughout the world. What is it about these ancient people
that so intrigues us? Is it the massiveness of the tombs and temples
they built? The elaborate preparations they made to enjoy the next world? The
enduring nature of their system of government? Certainly there is no one answer.
Unfortunately, the stories of the people who nurtured this civilization are
incomplete, because few records of their feelings and ideas have been uncovered
thus far. The vast majority of written materials to survive have been found
inscribed on temple and tomb walls, stelae (monumental stone pillars), and
boundary markers. Whereas the dry, hot sand of the lands beyond the Nile acts
as a natural preserver, the humidity of the riverbanks and the Delta region is
destructive. As a result, the tomb complexes and religious structures, built tradi-
tionally away from the Nile, have survived. The villages, towns, and cities that
lay along the riverbanks have not lasted, so we lack substantial documentation
of the home and working lives of the ancient Egyptians. Several chance finds,
such as letters written on papyrus, notes scribbled on broken pieces of clay, and
the like have helped broaden our understanding of ancient Egypt.
Because the Egyptians left no dictionaries or detailed explanations of their
beliefs, Egyptologists are sometimes unable to understand the significance of
words and phrases they have been able to translate. By comparing a variety of
sources and texts, some conclusions may be drawn. But Egyptologists do not
always agree on translations or on the meaning of specific passages. Nor do they
always agree on dates or even the transliteration of Egyptian names.
We have tried to follow the consensus of opinion among Egyptologists. As
regards dates, we have used those suggested by respected Egyptologist William
J. Murnane in his book, The Penguin Guide to Ancient Egypt (1996). The translit-
eration of Egyptian names generally follows Murnane's transliterations. For
translations of historical documents, we are principally indebted to James Henry
Breasted's universally accepted four-volume work, Ancient Records of Egypt (1906).
Each profile combines personal information with details of Egyptian life and
customs. In order not to repeat traditional rituals such as the mummification
process and the "Opening of the Mouth" ceremony, each of these topics is treat-
ed once in detail and referred to briefly in other biographies. Detailed explana-
tions can be found by looking up the ritual in the index.
The full biographies begin with Djoser, the ruler whose Step Pyramid set the
standard for pyramid building. They end with Ramesses III, the last of the great
kings. The names of some characters are familiar: Khufu, who built the Great
Pyramid; the beautiful Nefertiti; and Ramesses the Great. Others are not so well
known: Ptahhotep, for example, whose maxims are timeless. Each of the book's
five parts ends with a section called More Ancient Egyptians to Remember. Pro-
files of Menes, the ruler credited with unifying Upper and Lower Egypt, and of
Manetho, the historian whose list of kings became the standard in Egyptology,
can be found in this section of the first and last parts respectively.
To help you locate the places mentioned in this book, three maps are
included. Suggested readings appear at the end of most profiles. At the' back of
the book, a more general list of Further Reading and Websites will guide you as
you delve deeper into the rich civilization of the ancient Egyptians.
Rosalie F. and Charles F. Baker
New Bedford, Massachusetts


--- PAGE 9 ---



--- PAGE 10 ---



--- PAGE 11 ---



--- PAGE 12 ---



--- PAGE 13 ---
For more than 25 years, a special crew worked to restore Khufu's cedarwood boat.The 1,224 dismantled and marked pieces
of wood were uncovered in a pit near Khufu's pyramid.Today, the reassembled boat is housed in a specially constructed museum
next to the Great Pyramid.
12 • ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 14 ---
Tradition
and Grandeur
(Old Kingdom,
about 2686-2181 B.c.)
The fifth-century B.C. Greek historian and traveler Herodotus cap-
tured the essence of the country when he wrote, "Egypt is the gift
of the Nile." The story of Egypt and the Egyptians cannot be treat-
ed independently from the geography of the Nile. The Nile River
basin—the land drained by the Nile River and its tributaries—includes about
one-tenth of the entire continent of Africa. Rising first in the highlands of Bu-
rundi, the Nile flows north to Lake Victoria, north again to the Sudan, then
northeast into Ethiopia, back into the Sudan, and finally north into Egypt. Ap-
proximately 100 miles before the Nile reaches the Mediterranean Sea, it fans
out into several branches that stream across the rich, fertile area known as the
Nile Delta.
Along the route, its name changes several times. It begins as the Kagera
River, then changes to the Victoria Nile, the Albert Nile, the Mountain Nile,
and the White Nile. The last joins with the Blue Nile, which rises in the high-
lands of central Ethiopia, and together they become the Nile, proper. Many
other rivers, large and small, join with the Nile along a course that extends for
more than 4,000 miles, making the Nile the longest river in the world.
For the Egyptians, past and present, the Nile represents life. The early Egyp-
tians dug channels that brought the waters of the Nile into the barren desert.
This system of irrigation, still used today, created fertile strips where farmers
planted and harvested their crops. In time, the river became a highway that al-
lowed for the transportation of goods, materials, and people.
Yet the river was not always hospitable to those living along its banks. They
could count on its waters to rise every year, but they could not predict how
high. A below-normal rise threatened drought and famine. If the waters rose too
high, floods and widespread destruction resulted. But the unchanging fact of life
that the Nile would rise gave the people a sense of unity, stability, and confi-
dence that came to be reflected in their beliefs and customs.
The early Egyptians ascribed the flooding to deities whom they believed fa-
vored them with an abundance of natural resources. To show their appreciation
DJOSER
IMHOTEP
SNEFRU
KHUFU
WEN I
PTAHHOTEP
PEPI
HARKHUF
TRADITION AND GRANDEUR 1 3
1
II


--- PAGE 15 ---
for such gifts, the Egyptians developed special symbols and rituals to honor these
supernatural individuals. A set of religious beliefs gradually evolved, with one of
the principal deities being the sun god Re. The Egyptians often introduced ani-
mal figures in their symbolism and even represented their deities with animal
heads.
To be sure, the respect the Egyptians paid nature was merited, for it was na-
ture that isolated and. protected them, and it was nature that could destroy
them. To the west and east of the narrow strip of land that bordered the Nile lay
the dry and forbidding desert. To the south lay more desert and six treacherous
cataracts (scattered groups of rocks along the Nile that make navigation almost
impossible at the Fourth, Second, and First Cataracts). To the north was the
Mediterranean Sea.
In fact, nature and the Nile were so much a part of Egyptian thinking that
the people used both to orient themselves. "To go downstream" meant to go
north, since the Nile flows north to the Mediterranean. "To go upstream" meant
to go south, toward the source of the Nile. The Egyptians called the fertile strip
of black mud directly abutting the river Kmt (pronounced Kemet), or "black
land." The dry desert areas that lay just beyond the Kmt and gave the landscape
a reddish tinge they called Dsrt (pronounced Deshret), or "red land."
According to surviving ancient Egyptian accounts, sometime between 3400
and 3100 B.C., two independent kingdoms emerged. The delta area to the north
was known as Lower Egypt, and its king wore a red crown that had a distinctive
coil. The bee and the papyrus plant were its symbols, and Edjo, the cobra god-
dess, its patron deity. The land that bordered the Nile between the delta and
the First Cataract to the south was called Upper Egypt. Its king wore a tall bulb-
shaped white crown. The sedge and the lotus flower were its symbols, and
Nekhbet, the vulture goddess, its patron deity.
Part 1 of Ancient Egyptians profiles men and women who established the tra-
ditions that endured for centuries and built the monuments that have come to
symbolize the spirit of this magnificent civilization.
1 4 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 16 ---
Djoser
CREATOR OF
A TRADITION
t some time around 2686 B.C., the rulers
of Upper and Lower Egypt united the two
areas. An era of prosperity followed, and
leaders such as Djoser emerged. Unfortu-
nately, only a few brief inscriptions and re-
liefs carved on rocks have survived to tell us about this era.
Egyptologists have been unable to confirm the king list for
this period, which has come to be known as the 3rd Dynasty.
Some sources consider Djoser the founder of the dynasty;
others suggest that either Nebka or Sanakht might have
been the first leader. Still others believe that Nebka and
Sanakht are the same person. The identity of Djoser's par-
ents is also in question. Some believe his mother was Queen
Nimaathap, the wife of Khasekhemwy, the last ruler of the
2nd Dynasty.
According to records uncovered in the Sinai Peninsula,
just east of Egypt, Djoser and his predecessors sent expedi-
tions to the area to find turquoise mines. As a result of such
ventures, the Egyptians came to control the local Bedouin
Following custom, Djoser ordered this life-size statue of himself
placed in his tomb's serdob, a small sealed chamber The realistic
reproduction would receive offerings throughout eternity.
DJOSER 1 5
A


--- PAGE 17 ---
Djoser (left) makes an offering to the god
Khnum for ending a seven-year famine, in
this relief above the king's decree of
thanksgiving. Archaeologists found this
stela on the island of Sehel in the cataract
region of the Nile. It dates to the reign of
the Ptolemies, more than 2,400 years
after Djoser ruled.
tribes. Further expansion and conquest
did not seem important to the rulers of
the lands along the Nile. They consid-
ered their land truly blessed by the gods
and gave thanks that, every year, the
waters of the great river deposited a
life-giving bounty of silt along the
riverbanks. The Egyptians thought
their rulers were mortal incarnations of
divine power. Although an earthly king
could not be deemed equal to the great
gods of creation, birth, and death, he
was still considered a god.
Djoser accepted his divinity as fact,
but he was well aware of his limita-
tions. His body was mortal and would
die. Only the essence that made him a
god-king was immortal; upon his death,
this part of him would enter the heav-
ens and share in the eternal life of the
gods. Immortality was a king's privilege.
Djoser's royal name (the name he
assumed when he became king), Net-
jerykhet, meaning "godlike of body"
reflected this belief. The sky god Horus
was manifest on Earth as the king. In-
terestingly enough, the name Djoser
was first associated with the name Net-
jerykhet in records written 1,000 years
after Djoser lived. Egyptologists believe
that Djoser, which means "holy one,"
was his birth name.
Djoser gave the architects of his
burial complex a simple order: Build a
tomb worthy of a god-king. Egyptians
believed that those buried near the
royal tomb might be able to share in
the king's afterlife, and it soon followed
that the highest honor any Egyptian
could receive was permission to build
his tomb in the shadow of the king's.
Concern about the afterlife also
motivated Egyptian workers and
artisans. They believed that, if their
work pleased the king on Earth, they
might be allowed to serve him in
his afterlife.
The tomb site would require
enough open area around it so that oth-
ers might be buried near Djoser and so
the tomb could be stocked with every-
thing he might need in the next life. A
few high-ranking officials, nobles, and
kings had substantial tombs at a rocky
plateau called Saqqara, which lay just to
the west of the royal palace in White
Wall (later Memphis). Djoser's immedi-
ate predecessors had preferred the royal
1 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 18 ---
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
[PJIants, herbs, and trees shall bend beneath [the weight of]
their produce .... Starvation will end, and the emptiness of
the granaries shall come to an end.
—Khnum's words to Djoser in a dream, inscribed at Sehel
cemetery at Abydos in Upper Egypt,
more than 200 miles from White Wall.
Djoser elected not to have his tomb
there; instead, he chose Saqqara.
Djoser followed a newer tradition
when he selected a site on the west
bank of the Nile. In recent generations,
the Egyptians had come to associate
their kings with both Horus and Re.
Because Re brought life and prosperity
to the lands along the Nile, it seemed
only fitting that Egypt's kings should be
related to him. Burial on the west bank
also seemed appropriate because the sun
set, or left the earth every day, in the
west. According to the Egyptians, a
king buried on the west bank could join
Re more easily. The two could then
travel along the dark nightly journey
and "come alive" again at daybreak.
Djoser's burial chamber, like those
of his predecessors, lay deep within the
tomb—approximately 94 feet below
ground level. Workers carefully lined
this chamber with specially cut pink
granite casing slabs and then cut a hole
in one side so that Djoser's corpse could
be placed in the chamber. As a seal for
the hole, workers carved a granite plug
that weighed three tons.
These preparations had one pur-
pose: to protect Djoser for eternity by
providing his ka (life force) with a suit-
able home. But preparing a beautifully
constructed, sealed burial chamber as a
suitable home for the ka was only the
first step in a long process of readying
a king's tomb for his human body. Be-
cause the human body decays quickly,
arrangements had to be made for its
preservation. In Djoser's time, mummi-
fication was the accepted method of
caring for a dead king's body. When the
French Egyptologist Jean-Philippe
Lauer cleared Djoser's burial chamber
in 1934, he found a mummified left
foot. Further investigation proved that
the tomb had been robbed of its con-
tents in antiquity. Many Egyptologists
believe it is Djoser's.
Djoser also made sure that his
tomb site had a proper place for food
offerings. In general, tomb structures
had a chamber called the serdab (a
walled room with no doors). Djoser's
serdab housed a life-size seated statue of
him, dressed in a long white cloak and
wearing the royal striped head cloth
over a large bushy wig that reached
across his shoulders onto his chest and
back. The sculptor gave Djoser's statue
a stern face, prominent cheekbones,
thick lips, and a heavy jawline. The
sculptor also carved the traditional
"royal beard." Rectangular in shape, it
extended from Djoser's chin to his right
arm, which reached across his chest
and touched his left upper arm. Djoser's
left hand rested, palm down, on his
thigh. Drilled into one stone wall of
the serdab were two holes so that Djos-
er could "look" with his rock-crystal
Djoser
POSITION
King of Egypt
ACTIVE DATES
About 2668-49 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Highly skilled at governing; his
ability to lead kept Upper and
Lower Egypt a unified, peaceful
nation; ordered the building of a
tomb complex—the so-called Step
Pyramid—that was radically differ-
ent in design from those of his
predecessors and that set the prece-
dent for future pyramids
DJOSER 1 7


--- PAGE 19 ---
eyes and "see" the offerings left for him
during the funeral. Robbers later
gouged out the eyes, and time wore
away the brilliant colors of the tomb
workers' paint, but the statue still
catches the attention of all who visit
Egypt's Cairo Museum. (Today, a copy
sits in Djoser's serdab.)
Within the tomb and around the
burial chamber, Djoser and his archi-
tects had workers cut several shafts and
passageways—a few led to the burial
chamber, others led to small rooms.
Some of the walls were inlaid with
bright blue glazed tiles that were rec-
tangular in shape to imitate the colored
reed mats hanging in the palace. Other
walls were painted with scenes showing
Djoser performing royal rituals. In one,
he wears the red crown of Lower Egypt;
in another, he wears the white crown
of Upper Egypt. According to Egyptian
belief, representing the ruler's image
and name throughout the tomb area
ensured the survival of his spirit in the
afterlife.
Life must have fairly bustled as
work proceeded on Djoser's burial com'
plex. Originally, Djoser had approved
the traditional mostaba-type tomb for
his own. In modern times, mastaba, an
Arabic word meaning "bench," has
been used to refer to the mud-brick su-
perstructure the ancient Egyptians
placed over a burial pit in the sand.
This superstructure not only prevented
the wind from blowing sand away from
the tomb and exposing the body, it also
protected the possessions that had been
placed alongside the deceased for use in
the afterlife. As the centuries passed,
Egyptian rulers built larger and larger
mastabas, adding separate burial cham-
bers and rooms to house these various
objects. They began to decorate the
rooms to imitate the dead person's
earthly home and to erect small tombs
for those who had helped the deceased
in this life.
Because Djoser wanted everything
that might be of service to him in the
afterlife placed in the rooms about his
mummified body, he planned to have
artisans paint the walls with representa-
tions of these objects, as well as with
images of his servants and of food. Reli-
gious beliefs of the time told him that
prayer and the special rituals performed
by those who remained on Earth would
make these images come alive and sus-
tain him in death.
A traditional mastaba would be too
small to accommodate what Djoser
would need in the afterlife. In addition
to a larger structure, he would also need
an architect who was innovative, some-
one who was not afraid to work with
new materials or to test the strength
and durability of stone. The traditional
mud bricks would not be suitable be-
cause mud-brick structures could be
only so tall before they would collapse
on themselves. To undertake the task,
Djoser chose Imhotep, an architect who
was willing to test new theories.
As work progressed on the tomb,
workers paid particular attention to the
Heb-Sed court just south of the pyra-
mid. In Djoser's time, Heb-Sed celebra-
tions lasted five days. Held at specific
intervals (which varied over the cen-
turies), the festival reaffirmed a king's
ability to rule. The principal event
involved the king running around a
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
18


--- PAGE 20 ---
special courtyard in the presence of his
subjects to show that his physical pow-
ers were still in order. For the race, the
king wore a special short white gar-
ment that completely covered his torso
and arms—the same type of garment
that Djoser's serdab statue wore. Ac-
cording to Egyptian belief, Djoser's ka
would continue to perform this ritual
ceremony in the afterlife. Exactly how
many times Djoser performed the ju-
bilee ritual in this life is not known. It
could not have been many, considering
that sources say he died in the 19th
year of his reign.
In death, he continued to be hon-
ored and remembered. Some 2,400
years after Djoser ruled Egypt, an arti-
san carved into a large rounded block
of granite at Sehel, near the First
Cataract, an inscription that explained
why the area just south of the island of
Elephantine was sacred to the god
Khnum. (In Egyptian mythology,
Khnum created the first human out of
straw and clay and fashioned him on a
potter's wheel.) The inscription said
that Djoser granted Khnum the land as
a thanksgiving offering for ending a
seven-year famine.
According to the inscription, Djos-
er had not worshiped Khnum properly,
and so the god had stopped the Nile's
waters from flooding the Two Lands
(that is, Upper and Lower Egypt) for
seven years. As reports of widespread
famine reached the palace, Djoser sent
a message to Madir, the governor at
Elephantine:
Year 18 of the king of Upper and
Lower Egypt, Netjerykhet [the 18th
year of Djoser's reign] . . .
This is to inform you that I am
distressed as I sit on the Great Throne,
and I feel for those who dwell in the
palace, because the waters of the Nile
have not risen to their proper height
for seven years. Grain is very scarce,
there are no garden vegetables at all,
and extremely little remains of every-
thing that was used for food. Every
man has robbed his neighbor. No one
can walk anymore. The children are
wailing; the young people barely move
along. The hearts of the old men are
broken down with despair. ... The of-
ficials, too, are in need and the tem-
ples hold nothing but air. ... I asked
Imhotep, the Chief Lector Priest:
"Where is the birthplace of the
Nile? What deity rules there?"
According to the inscription,
Imhotep read the king's message and
began studying about the Nile. He re-
ported his findings to Djoser, who said:
[Imhotep] gave me information about
the rise of the Nile and told me what
men had written concerning it....
There is a town in the middle of the
river from which the Nile makes its
appearance, named Elephantine ....
Here the Nile-god lives in the form
of Khnum.
Content with the information
Imhotep had brought to him, Djoser
fell asleep. In a dream, Khnum ap-
peared to him, saying
I am Khnum, who fashioned you. ...
I know the Nile. I will make the Nile
rise for you, and in no year shall it fail
.. . and plants, herbs, and trees shall
bend beneath [the weight of] their
produce.. . . Starvation will end, and
the emptiness of the granaries shall
come to an end.
After this dream, Djoser decreed
that lands and gifts be given to the
temple of Khnum. He also ordered that
every farmer, fisherman, hunter, and ar-
tisan (except those who crafted images
of the gods) pay one-tenth of their in-
come to the temple. He told his arti-
sans to position a granite rock in the
temple's sanctuary and to carve the
words of the decree on it. Above the
hieroglyphs, the artisans were to fash-
ion a representation of Khnum and his
companions. And it was to be made
very clear that anyone who refused to
obey the decree was to be punished.
Whether this decree refers to actu-
al events is unknown, but it does prove
the high regard later kingdoms and
rulers had for Djoser. Scholars have
used the passage that links Netjerykhet
with Djoser as positive proof that
both names refer to the same ruler.
Another source, although not as reli-
able, also identifies the two as one per-
son: Some 1,000 years after Djoser
died, a tourist visited Netjerykhet's
pyramid at Saqqara and scribbled the
name "Djoser" on the steps.
FURTHER READING
Lehner, Mark. The Complete Pyramids,
pp. 84-93. New York: Thames & Hudson,
1997.
Pace, Mildred Mastin. Pyramid: Tombs for
Eternity, pp. 20-33, 34-41, 138-39. 1974.
Reprint, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981.
DJOSER 1 9


--- PAGE 21 ---
Imhotep
ROYAL ARCHITECT
AND HEALER
eal bearer of the King of Lower Egypt, First after
the King of Upper Egypt, Administrator of the
Great Palace, Hereditary Lord, High Priest of
Heliopolis, Builder, Sculptor and Vase Maker in
Chief—such were the titles King Djoser heaped
on his most valued adviser, Imhotep. Proof of Djoser's confi-
dence in Imhotep came when Egyptologists uncovered a
partially ruined statue of Djoser. Carved in hieroglyphs on
the base were all of Imhotep's titles. Succeeding generations
of Egyptians, however, would honor Imhotep not for his
building expertise but instead for his healing powers. They
would even elevate him to the ranks of the divine and wor-
ship him as their god of medicine.
Yet, for a person so esteemed by contemporaries and
descendants, little is known about Imhotep himself. Some
scholars say he was the son of an architect from Upper
Egypt named Ka-fer; others say he was a noble; still others
maintain that he was a commoner whose intelligence and
ability as an architect won Djoser's admiration. Records
from ancient times show that Egyptian society was quite
flexible and that commoners could easily rise from a lowly
social status to a position of prominence.
To be sure, Imhotep was an exceptionally skilled person
who cared deeply about his country and its people. The
titles bestowed on Imhotep indicate that Djoser considered
him his vizier and conferred with him on all matters of im-
portance. As vizier, Imhotep was both Chief Treasurer and
Chief Justice. Thus, he served as the official link between
the central government and the various nomes, or districts,
of Upper and Lower Egypt. He was also the High Priest.
Imhotep's office was in the royal palace, where scribes kept
records of every transaction—including tax accounts, con-
tracts, and wills—throughout the Two Lands.
An inscription dating to around 200 B.C. names
Imhotep as the person who advised King Djoser to end a
seven-year drought by giving lands and gifts to the temple
of Khnum, the god honored as the creator of the human
race. The inscription tells how the annual flooding of the
Nile had been below normal for seven years and starvation
and death stalked the people. By following Imhotep's
advice, Djoser pleased Khnum, and the normal flood levels
returned, as did the plentiful harvests.
Although the priests of Khnum may have written the
inscription to defend their claim to a certain parcel of land,
the wording proves the high regard later generations had for
Imhotep's wisdom. Djoser, too, valued Imhotep, and sought
his advice on an important decision soon after he was
named king.
20 • ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
s


--- PAGE 22 ---
Sculptors usually depicted Imhotep seated
with an open papyrus scroll across his
knees. He won acclaim not only as an ar-
chitect but also as a physician.
Following precedent, the new king
Djoser began making plans for his
tomb. He knew well the religious tradi-
tions governing royal tomb design: a
burial chamber and surrounding rooms
sunk deep into bedrock with a mud-
brick superstructure covering them.
Today, Egyptologists refer to these tomb
structures as mastabas, from the Arabic
word mastaba, meaning "bench"—and
they do indeed have a benchlike shape.
Djoser was also well acquainted with
the colorful exteriors of these tombs,
especially the mud-brick paneling,
which was painted in bright colors to
resemble the matting found outside
Egyptian homes.
Djoser had no intention of chang-
ing the basic design. The burial vault
was to be the same; so, too, were the
accompanying rooms where everything
that his ka needed for the afterlife
could be stored. Nor did he intend to
change the "false door" through which
the deceased's ka (life force) could
leave the tomb whenever it wished and
reenter the world of the living. Djoser
also approved the building of other
small tombs, where those who would
care for him throughout eternity would
be buried. What Djoser wanted
changed was the exterior.
To create such a complex, Djoser
looked to the one person he trusted
most—Imhotep. Unfortunately, no ar-
chitectural plans have survived, no pur-
chase orders, no records of workers'
hours—nothing that would give any
indication of the processes involved in
building the first great stone building in
the world.
What has survived are sections of
the pyramid and burial compound. By
studying the stones and other artifacts
uncovered during excavations and field
work, Egyptologists have learned that
Djoser's pyramid was built in several
stages and that each is an enlargement
of a prior stage. They also discovered
that some of the outlying structures
were "false" buildings. That is, their
fronts were beautifully fashioned, but
the interiors were filled with rubble.
Because these buildings were meant to
provide the setting for the eternal
pageantry of the dead king's ka, the
Egyptians focused on a well-designed
and ornamented exterior and saw no
need to recreate the interiors.
To organize a crew of workers, to
find skilled artisans to fashion the radi-
cal new design, and to craft new tools
required foresight, leadership skills, and
a keen understanding of stone and
other buildings materials. Imhotep had
all three qualifications.
The basic layout of the burial
complex was simple and followed tradi-
tion. Imhotep's job involved redesign-
ing the tomb structure itself, and this is
where he made radical changes. First,
he did not use sun-dried mud bricks,
because he realized that they could not
support the weight and pressure of the
enormous monument he planned to
build. Because innovation requires
IMHOTEP 2 1


--- PAGE 23 ---
Imhotep's tomb complex for Djoser,
known today as the Step Pyramid, con-
tains underground shafts, galleries, and a
granite burial vault.
experimentation, Imhotep built Djos-
er's tomb in stages.
His selected site was a rocky
plateau at Saqqara, an area just west of
White Wall (later called Memphis),
where the royal palace was located.
The land was bedrock with no defects
or crevices. It was also above the level
of the Nile but close enough to the
river for boats to bring building materi-
als almost directly to the work site.
After choosing the exact spot,
Imhotep ordered a vertical shaft dug
straight down through the bedrock to a
depth of approximately 95 feet. He des-
ignated the area at the bottom of the
shaft as the royal burial chamber and
ordered it lined with pink granite slabs.
Imhotep ordered an opening made in
this "box" he had created so that, dur-
ing the burial rituals, workers could
place Djoser's mummified body in the
chamber. As a permanent seal for this
opening, Imhotep had a granite plug
that weighed more than three tons spe-
cially made. This plug would act as a
permanent seal.
With plans for the burial chamber
complete, Imhotep turned to the tomb
covering, that is, the mastaba itself. The
dimensions of his design—approximate-
ly 27 feet high and 212 feet along each
side—were too large for mud bricks to
be used effectively. Therefore, he had
workers make the mastaba's inner core
of rubble that was composed of desert
2 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 24 ---
stone set into clay. Imhotep did not
cover the mastaba with plaster, as was
the tradition, but rather polished white
limestone slabs from Tura (an area just
to the east of present-day Cairo). The
thickness of the limestone cover was to
be approximately 10 feet. To provide a
storage area for everything Djoser might
need in the afterlife and to create burial
chambers for family members, Imhotep
followed custom and sank a series of
shafts and passageways along the east-
ern, outside edge of the mastaba.
The result, as unique as it was, still
seemed too small, and so a new plan
was developed, one that called for ex-
tending each side of the tomb complex
about 14 feet. But each extension was
to be slightly lower than the original
mastaba. Workers then applied a sec-
ond facing of limestone to the "fin-
ished" structure.
Imhotep and Djoser were not satis-
fied with this tomb complex. Imhotep
kept the step design that he had creat-
ed with the two levels, but he also or-
dered a second extension, which was to
be placed only on the east side. Ap-
proximately 28 feet long, this extension
protected the shafts previously dug
along the eastern perimeter of the
mastaba. Because this addition was
even lower than the previous one, the
east side now had three steps. Still the
design did not create an impressive ef-
fect. Set back as it was from the
Saqqara ridge, Djoser's tomb did not
dominate the skyline. Furthermore,
anyone approaching the complex could
not see the tomb because of the tradi-
tional enclosure wall that was being
built around the entire compound.
At regular intervals along this mas-
sive wall were recessed and jutted
areas—196 in all. The wall measured
about 1,800 feet long, more than 900
feet wide, and about 33 feet high. To
mark the boundaries of the wall,
Imhotep used boundary stelae (pillar-
like stone slabs) engraved with the
name of Netjerykhet (Djoser's royal
name) and the names of his daughters
Hotpe-her-nebti and Intkawes.
Imhotep liked the look of stone and
the strength and durability it gave the
structure, but he did not wish to aban-
don all traditional architectural forms.
In small rectangular niches along the
upper reaches of the wall, he had arti-
sans carve stone slabs. These slabs were
cut to resemble the wood beams used
to strengthen the mud-brick walls
found in buildings throughout Egypt.
Although the wall design had 14
apparent entrances, only the entrance
in the southeastern corner was genuine.
The other 13 were fake. Because this
was not a building meant for everyday
use and because large numbers of peo-
ple would not be entering the complex,
the doors, like the exteriors of the out-
lying buildings, were facades.
Just inside the one real entrance,
and to the right, Imhotep positioned a
narrow colonnade of 40 columns, each
more than 22 feet high. Again Imhotep
chose stone as his medium, and he gave
orders that the columns be worked to
resemble the reed bundles used to
strengthen the walls and doorways of
Egypt's traditional reed and wattle (in-
terwoven twigs and sticks) buildings.
Although columns of wood had recent-
ly replaced the reed bundles, Imhotep
recognized wood as a temporary and
weak building material.
Combining creativity and ingenu-
ity, Imhotep faced the columns with
limestone slabs that had been finely
carved to imitate reeds. Instead of set-
ting them as freestanding columns, he
ordered them joined to the walls on ei-
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Imhotep
POSITION
Architect and physician
ACTIVE DATES
About 2700-2649 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Designed King Djoser's Step Pyra-
mid, the first great stone building in
the world; his reputation as a skilled
physician led later Egyptians to
worship him as the god of medicine
IMHOTEP 2 3


--- PAGE 25 ---
ther side of the entrance area with
limestone blocks. In the centuries that
followed, reed-imitating columns would
become a standard design feature of
Egyptian architecture.
For the columns in the Heb-Sed
court just to the north of the colon-
nade, Imhotep based his design on nat-
ural features. He ordered workers to
craft each capital (the top part of a col-
umn) in the form of lotus buds, papyrus
flowers, and palm leaves. This, too,
became a standard feature of Egyptian
architecture.
The mastaba itself was a radical
new design—a pyramidal structure with
a series of steps, each narrower than
the one below. Imhotep liked what he
saw, but the size was still not right, and
for the fourth time, he had workers en-
large the original design. The result was
the so-called Step Pyramid, a four-
tiered structure approximately 202 feet
high. Imhotep used the east side of the
four-step pyramid as his base, then ex-
tended the other three sides before cre-
ating a six-step pyramid. By design, the
base of the pyramid was not a square.
To ensure its stability, Imhotep had
workers slant the rows of stone slabs,
all of which had been cut from desert
rock. He did so because he wanted the
stones to act as internal wall supports.
Scholars estimate that workers
used more than 850,000 tons of stone
to create Imhotep's Step Pyramid.
Some blocks weighed as much as 16
tons. For miles around, Egyptians must
have been able to hear the noise of
stones being quarried at Tura and
pulled to the riverbank where they
were loaded onto boats that ferried
them across the Nile to Saqqara. There
workers unloaded the stones, smoothed
the sides to ensure a perfect fit, and
hauled the heavy loads up earthen
ramps to their final setting. To com-
plete the project, Imhotep ordered each
step of the tomb's exterior covered with
finely polished white limestone slabs.
Though Djoser recognized Imhotep
as a master craftsman whose originality
and boldness in design made him the
best of architects, later generations of
Egyptians preferred to honor Imhotep
as a great healer. No records exist of
his medical activities, but uncovered
hieroglyphs, written some 1,200 years
after Imhotep's death, indicate that he
held the position of court physician
under Djoser. Because Imhotep was also
a priest, he was thought to have magi-
cal powers.
By custom, the papyrus rolls on
which scribes wrote information about
diseases, cures, and prescriptions were
kept in temples. Egyptians who wished
to be cured of an illness or disease visit-
ed temples dedicated to deities with
healing powers. Thus it followed that,
some 2,000 years after Imhotep's death,
Egyptians began to worship Imhotep as
a god. They visited temples built in
Imhotep's honor and followed a pre-
scribed ritual while there: They prayed,
then slept, hoping to dream of him. If
Imhotep did appear to them in a
dream, they believed that his healing
powers would cure them.
Six annual festivals were held in
Imhotep's honor, and many Egyptians
made pilgrimages to Saqqara, where
tradition said Imhotep was buried (his
tomb has not yet been found). There
they left offerings, either in thanksgiv-
ing for a cure or as a petition for a
cure. Scholars believe that some of the
thousands of mummified ibises found in
the sacred animal cemetery near Djos-
er's tomb complex were such offerings.
The ibis, a large, long-legged wading
bird with a long, thin, curved bill, was
associated both with Imhotep and with
Thoth, the Egyptian god of wisdom,
writing, and learning.
In time, the Egyptians began to
fashion stylized statues of Imhotep,
which showed him seated on a high,
decorative chair. The back of the chair
was fairly low, and Imhotep's feet rested
on a low pillow-like block. On his lap
lay an open scroll. According to tradi-
tion, Egyptian scribes honored
Imhotep's great wisdom by sprinkling
the area around them with a few drops
of ink before they began to write.
FURTHER READING
Lehner, Mark. The Complete Pyramids, pp.
84-93. New York: Thames & Hudson,
1997.
Pace, Mildred Mastin. Pyramid: Tombs for
Eternity, pp. 20-33. 1974. Reprint, New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1981.
2 4 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 26 ---
Snefru
THE BENEFICENT
KING
nefru wandered aimlessly about the palace; he
was bored. It occurred to him that Djadja-
emankh, a learned man who was the chief lector
priest and the court magician, might help him.
Snefru ordered several servants to ask him to
come at once to the king's chambers.
When the chief priest arrived at the palace, Snefru ex-
plained his plight and waited for a recommendation. Djadja-
emankh suggested that the king order a boat made ready for
an excursion on a beautiful lake, whose shores were dotted
with fields and gardens, and order 20 of the most beautiful
ladies at the royal court to row it—not those regularly as-
signed to the task. The chief priest pointed out that Snefru's
pleasure would be twofold: the rowers would entertain him,
and he could enjoy the pretty lake.
Snefru liked the suggestion and ordered his servants to
make the preparations. As they did so, the chief priest and
Snefru made two more requests. The ladies were to wear
clothes made of nets, and the paddles were to be inlaid with
gold and silver.
When all was ready, Snefru gently stepped into the boat
and sat down. As the maidens began rowing, his boredom
vanished and he could feel himself relaxing. After a while
the rowing stopped, to Snefru's surprise. An oar handle had
become entangled in the long hair of one of the maidens,
and as she tried to free herself, one of her hair ornaments
had fallen into the lake. Upset by the loss, the maiden had
stopped rowing. So, too, had her seatmates and all the other
With a whip in his left hand to guide his team of oxen, a farmer uses his right hand to sow grain seeds in the fertile lands along the
Nile River.This tomb painting dates to the 4th dynasty and the reign of Snefru, a time of prosperity and relative peace.
SNEFRU 2 5
s


--- PAGE 27 ---
At Saqqara, just north of Djoser's Step
Pyramid, excavators uncovered this rose-
granite statue of Metjen, a provincial
magistrate under Snefru.The piece is
about 18 inches high.
rowers. Snefru offered to buy her a new
ornament or attempt to retrieve the
lost one. When the maiden replied that
she wanted the lost ornament, Snefru
asked Djadja-emankh for help.
Djadja-emankh began reciting
magic words and spells. As he did so,
the waters of the lake parted, and the
boat settled gently on the floor of the
lake. Djadja-emankh stepped over
the side of the boat and picked up
the lost ornament. After returning it
to the maiden, he again recited the
magic words and spells, and slowly the
waters returned to their normal levels.
Pleased with the unique amusement
Djadja-emankh had provided, Snefru
thanked his adviser by giving him "all
good things."
This story is inscribed on what is
known today as the Westcar Papyrus,
written probably during the 12th
Dynasty—more than 500 years after
Snefru's reign. Like many ancient
Egyptian documents uncovered in
modern times, it was named for one of
its first owners, a Miss Westcar of
Whitchurch, England. •
Snefru was a son of the Egyptian
king Huni, and his mother was proba-
bly a minor wife named Meresankh.
Egyptian rulers often had several wives,
one of whom was considered above the
others and known as the Great Royal
Wife. Through her, both the divine
and human characteristics of the god-
king's nature were passed to the heir to
the throne. Snefru married Huni's
daughter, Hetep-heres, probably be-
cause her royal blood would strengthen
his claim to the throne of Egypt by
linking him and their children with the
deities. However, because the bloodline
was not direct, later Egyptians did not
consider Snefru a ruler in the same dy-
nasty as his father. Instead, the Egypt-
ian historian Manetho and at least two
king lists (ancient lists of Egyptian
rulers presented in chronological order)
name Huni as the last king of the 3rd
Dynasty and Snefru as the first king of
the 4th Dynasty. According to many
scholars, the fourth was the most im-
portant of dynasties three through six,
which are collectively known as the
Old Kingdom.
Surviving records from the period
indicate that Snefru was constantly in-
volved in a major project, whether it
was construction, organizing trade expe-
ditions, or expanding Egypt's control
over its neighbors. Certain inscriptions
credit Snefru with several successful
military expeditions. Details about these
conquests were found carved on a stone
known today as the Palermo Stone (the
largest surviving fragment of which is
housed in Palermo, Sicily). According
to the hieroglyphs, which were carved
during the 5th Dynasty and list the
kings and major events of the preceding
dynasties, Snefru's advance south into
Nubia (modem Sudan) to crush a re-
volt yielded 7,000 prisoners (men and
women) and 200,000 heads of cattle,
sheep, and goats. The hieroglyphs
also credit Snefru with similar results
after a successful drive west into neigh-
boring Libya.
Another rock carving, which sur-
vives on the Sinai Peninsula, also por-
trays Snefru as a victorious king. In one
hand he holds an upraised war club,
and in the other, the hair of a defeated
enemy. Having forced the captive to
his knees, Snefru prepares to strike
him with the club. In the centuries
that followed, artists frequently used
this pose of a ruler smiting a defeated
enemy in order to portray the power
of Egypt's rulers.
Nubia, Libya, and Sinai were
strategically and economically impor-
tant. Egypt's rulers looked south to
Nubia for gold to decorate their
palaces and tombs. Nubia was also an
important trade center, and through
it passed central African goods such
as ebony, ivory, incense, ostrich eggs,
and animals.
Libya, however, posed a military
threat. The barren desert areas along
2 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 28 ---
the country's western boundaries made
Libya's tribal chiefs look east to pros-
perous Egypt. Determined to keep all
Egypt under his control, Snefru kept a
careful watch on Libyan activities and
was prepared to stop any incursion into
his land.
Since at least the 1st Dynasty,
Egyptians had looked east to the Sinai
for its supply of turquoise. By Snefru's
time, Egypt was also importing mala-
chite and copper ore from the region.
Snefru recognized the importance of
keeping the trade routes and the mines
that produced these commodities open.
He sent soldiers to subdue the local
tribes and stationed Egyptian garrisons
at key points in the Sinai to protect his
nation's interests.
Snefru did not always rely on the
battlefield to solve his problems. He
promoted peaceful trading practices
with Byblos in Phoenicia (modem
Lebanon). The "cedars of Lebanon," a
very strong wood with a distinctive
sweet fragrance, came from Byblos.
A contemporary account tells of 40
boats returning to Egypt laden with
cedarwood. Other inscriptions note that
Snefru commissioned the building of
several ships, each approximately 175
feet long. These vessels transported
more cedar to Egypt. Snefru liked to use
wood as a decorative element in his
palace, temples, and burial complexes.
Egypt had some native lumber—pine,
juniper, hardwoods, and ornamental
woods such as cherry and plum—but
those who could afford to do so pre-
ferred using the cedars of Lebanon.
Snefru began making plans for a
tomb early in his reign. Delaying this
task might cause problems. For the
Egyptians, life, both here and in the af-
terworld, depended on the safe passage
of their ruler from this existence to the
next. A royal tomb provided a bridge
between the two worlds and gave the
ruler's ka (life force) a home.
Snefru followed the traditional de-
sign, but made several significant
changes. He chose not to follow Djos-
er's plan of a walled-in tomb complex,
which consisted of a tomb and build-
ings with decorated facades and fake,
rubble-filled interiors. Snefru also had
three (some say four) burial sites. The
first was at Meidum, an area about 30
miles south of Saqqara. Graffiti scrib-
bled by a visitor some 1,000 years after
Snefru's reign claims that the tomb
belonged to King Snefru, but archaeo-
logical finds seem to indicate that the
Meidum tomb predates the two tombs
he built at Dahshur. Some Egyptolo-
gists think that the Meidum structure
originally belonged to Snefru's father
and that Snefru completed it after his
father's death. Whatever the case, the
Meidum pyramid shows how the plan
for the royal tomb evolved.
Begun as a step pyramid, it origi-
nally had seven outer levels or "steps."
Later it was enlarged and became an
eight-step pyramid. As with Djoser's, a
casing of dressed stone covered the
steps. The radical change came when
Snefru's architects ordered workers to
encase the entire structure a second
time. This new casing was not to follow
the step design but rather to form four
straight sides that reached toward the
sky at an incline. No longer was a
ruler's burial structure just a series of
steps leading to the heavens. It had
also become a representation of the
sun's rays shining down on earth.
The ancient Egyptian word for
"pyramid" is mer, meaning "Place of
Ascension." Our word "pyramid" is
from the Greek noun pyramis, meaning
"wheaten cake." When the Greeks
began traveling in Egypt some 2,000
years after Snefru ruled, they called
the structures pyramides because they
looked like the Greeks' wheaten cakes.
The four smooth sides were not the
only changes in the pyramid's design.
The Heb-Sed court was gone, and
the burial chamber was built into the
superstructure rather than the substruc-
ture. Also, two new buildings had been
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Snefru
POSITION
King of Egypt
ACTIVE DATES
About 2613-2589 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Led campaigns into Nubia and
Libya; subdued local tribes in the
Sinai Peninsula; supported trade
with Byblos in Phoenicia; most
likely responsible for finishing
Huni's pyramid at Meidum—the
first true pyramid; built the south-
ern (Bent) and northern (Red)
pyramids at Dahshur
SNEFRU 2 7


--- PAGE 29 ---
Snefru, Great God, who is
given satisfaction, stability,
life, health, all joy forever.
—Inscription on the rock
walls at Wadi Maghara in
the Sinai Peninsula
added. Along the east face of the pyra-
mid stood a mortuary temple, where
offerings were left and rituals performed.
A causeway linked this temple to the
valley temple, which stood near the
river. Snefru assigned a staff to the com-
plex to perform the required rituals.
Some made offerings on a regular basis.
Others guarded the royal tomb com-
plexes and their contents. To raise the
money needed to support these people,
Snefru granted tracts of farmland to the
temple and decreed that the revenue
from these estates would pay for the
upkeep of the royal tomb site. An entry
on the Palermo Stone credits Snefru
with creating 35 estates and 122 cattle
farms. In the valley temple of another
of his tombs, the one at Dahshur, a
relief shows a procession of peasant
women. Each woman carries a tray of
offerings, and written on her head is the
name of the estate she represents.
Naturally, such tomb sites were
tremendous undertakings and involved
tens of thousands of workers and arti-
sans as well as tremendous quantities of
materials. That Snefru had the time
and the means to complete more than
one tomb proves that Egypt was, at the
time, a unified, prosperous nation
whose people firmly believed in the
divinity of their king.
Recognizing this loyalty and devo-
tion, Snefru considered it his duty to
build monuments that reflected his
dual role as king and god. However,
before the Meidum pyramid was com-
plete, Snefru ordered work on the site
stopped. He wanted another tomb
built, and this time he chose Dahshur
as the site.
The design of this new tomb,
called "gleaming pyramid of the south"
by the ancient Egyptians, had several
innovative elements. Of all the Old
Kingdom pyramids, it alone had two
entrances—the traditional north-face
entrance and an east-face entrance.
The roof above the burial chamber was
corbelled, with each row of blocks, be-
ginning at a certain height, set so that
it projected inward until the two rows
almost met. Since the tremendous
weight of the pyramid structure might
cause the stones to fall in on the burial
chamber, the architects designed these
chambers to distribute the weight of
the superstructure. In addition, they
reduced the possibility of a cave-in.
This southern pyramid has sides
that extend upward from desert rock
for approximately 165 feet at an angle
of 54°31'. The incline of the sides then
decreases to 43°21' for the next 175 or
so feet. The pyramid's shape gave it the
modern nickname "Bent Pyramid."
Snefru then built a second pyramid
at Dahshur. This northern pyramid has
the nickname "Red Pyramid" because
the evening sun gives the stone a red-
dish cast. As proof that it was built by
Snefru, archaeologists point to the
mastaba tombs of several of Snefru's rel-
atives and high-ranking officials that
lie nearby. Archaeologists have also
found Snefru's name written in red ink
on casing blocks. (When archaeologists
uncovered the corner blocks of stone of
the southern pyramid, they found that
quarry workers had carved Snefru's
name into each.) Further proof is an
inscription from a decree issued by Pepi
I, who ruled approximately 350 years
after Snefru's death. In it, Pepi exempt-
ed the priests who cared for the "Two
Pyramids of Snefru" from paying taxes.
Although no sarcophagus has yet been
found, Egyptologists favor the Red
Pyramid as Snefru's actual tomb.
Snefru must have felt a great sense
of pride and accomplishment when he
looked at his pyramids rising above the
desert sands. His trading ventures had
brought him cedar for the beams in the
passageways between the chambers and
elsewhere. The copper mines in the
Sinai allowed his workers to use sharp
copper cutting tools on the stone and
other building materials. Artisans had
used Nubian gold to fashion and deco-
rate vases, personal items, and furniture
that would be placed in the pyramid
complex. In addition, Snefru's strong
rule had ended Libyan raids and
brought peace and stability to Egypt.
In the 29th year of his reign (some
accounts say the 24th), Snefru died.
Soon after, his reputation as a kind
ruler with a pleasant personality won
him the title of "the Beneficent King."
Later Egyptian writers would refer to
his reign as the Golden Age of Egypt,
and for some 2,000 years Egyptians
would continue to worship and honor
him. Throughout Egyptian history,
no other king or queen ever command-
ed the respect or honor given Snefru.
In fact, to gain the trust and affection
of the people, many later rulers com-
pared themselves and their deeds to
those of Snefru.
In recent times, archaeologists dig-
ging at Wadi Maghara in the Sinai un-
covered an inscription that refers to
Snefru as a god. At Dahshur, excava-
tors found a small dish, dating to the
Middle Kingdom—approximately 600
years after Snefru's time. It still held
the charcoal offering an Egyptian had
long ago dedicated to Snefru.
FURTHER READING
Lehner, Mark. The Complete Pyramids,
pp. 97-106. New York: Thames &
Hudson, 1997.
Pace, Mildred Mastin. Pyramid: Tombs for
Eternity, pp. 70-88. 1974. Reprint, New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1981.
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
28


--- PAGE 30 ---
Khufu
BUILDER OF THE
GREAT PYRAMID
or years, Khufu's pyramid site at Giza echoed
with the sounds of granite blocks being
pulled, pushed, and expertly maneuvered into
place. Indeed, the noise of copper chisels,
stone pounders, papyrus-twine ropes, and
wooden rollers could be heard everywhere. Almost 20 years
had passed since the king had decided not to have his mor-
tal remains buried at Saqqara, Meidum, or Dahshur—royal
cemeteries that housed the great tomb complexes of his pre-
decessors. As his final resting place, Khufu had chosen a site
never before used for royal burials—Giza, a high rocky ridge
just west of the Nile and approximately 15 miles north of
the capital city of Memphis.
King Khufu, dressed in a loincloth, wears the red crown of Lower
Egypt (a white crown represented Upper Egypt). His horus name,
the first of an Egyptian ruler's five names, is carved beside the
statuette's right leg.
KHUFU 2 9
F


--- PAGE 31 ---
The floor of the grand gallery at Khufu's
Great Pyramid was so steep that exca-
vators of Napoleon's expedition (1798-
1801) had to crouch to climb it.
Following his accession to the
throne after his father Snefru's death,
Khufu had consulted with his archi-
tects about his own tomb. Although he
believed that he, like his predecessors,
was part divine, he knew his physical
body would die. For Egyptians, the
royal tomb provided the proper setting
for a god-king to pass from this world
to the next. It was an eternal home
where the royal ka (life force) could
continue to celebrate the same rituals
the king had celebrated while on Earth.
The Egyptians of the Old Kingdom
looked to their god-king as an interme-
diary between themselves and the gods,
both in this life and in the next. It was
a king's duty to intercede for the securi-
ty and prosperity of all Egyptians.
Khufu accepted this responsibility just
as his predecessors had, and he was de-
termined to have his tomb complex re-
flect the majesty and might of his of-
fice.
However, unlike his father, Khufu
devoted his energies to building only
one great tomb complex for himself. So
successful was his endeavor that the
second-century B.C. Alexandrian schol-
ar Philo of Byzantium labeled Khufu's
tomb one of the seven wonders of the
ancient world.
The Greek historian Herodotus
wrote an account of Khufu's reign 300
years before Philo's time. In an effort to
obtain accurate details, Herodotus trav-
eled to Egypt and spoke with Egyptian
priests and others. According to
Herodotus's account, "Cheops [for thus
did the Greeks call Khufu] closed the
temples, and forbade all Egyptians to
sacrifice, forcing them instead to labor,
one and all, in his service. . . . One
hundred thousand men worked con-
stantly, and were relieved every three
months by a new crew." For hundreds
of years, Herodotus's representation of
Khufu as a cruel, self-centered individ-
ual persisted. But much of Herodotus's
information was based on questionable
stories that been passed down by word
of mouth for almost 2,000 years. Only
since the French scholar Jean Fran£ois
Champollion deciphered hieroglpyhs
in the early 1800s have archaeologists
gained a better understanding of
this monarch.
Still, the facts are few. In 1903, an
excavation team headed by the
renowned English Egyptologist Sir
Flinders Petrie uncovered a two-and-a-
half-inch headless statue in the old
temple of the god Osiris at Abydos.
After a careful look at the hieroglyphs
carved near the legs, he identified the
statue as Khufu's. Because the neck
break seemed fresh, Petrie ordered all
work at the site stopped and had his
crew sift through the rubble where the
statue had been uncovered. After three
weeks of sifting, they found a tiny
head—approximately three-quarters of
an inch in height—wearing the red
crown of Lower Egypt. This beautifully
carved ivory statue is believed to be the
only surviving likeness of Khufu. The
strong features of the face show a ruler
who was self-assured, full of energy, and
very determined.
Khufu must have needed such a
personality to oversee the building of
the world's greatest pyramid. Rising 481
feet (today it measures 451 feet) above
the desert sands of Giza, it could be
seen for miles around. The Egyptians
called it Akhet-Khufu, or "the Horizon
of Khufu." According to engineers'
estimates, Khufu's workers used
2,300,000 stone blocks, averaging 2.5
tons each in weight, with the largest
weighing 15 tons.
To attain such perfection in design,
the workforce had to be well organized,
with workers and supervisors knowing
and understanding every task that was
required of them. Khufu's chief advisor,
Hemiunu, headed the team of archi-
tects and engineers. Khufu later showed
3 0 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 32 ---
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
All life and protection are
with him [Khufu].
—Inscription on the rock
walls of Wadi Maghara on
the Sinai Peninsula
his respect for Hemiunu's expertise by
allowing him to build his mastaba tomb
close to the royal pyramid at Giza.
Following tradition, the official en-
trance to Khufu's pyramid was planned
for the north face. From here, a de-
scending corridor led to the burial
chamber, a rectangular chamber cut out
of solid bedrock. Khufu, Hemiunu, or
some other architect decided later not
to locate the burial chamber beneath
the pyramid but rather inside the pyra-
mid itself. Workers dug a new corridor,
then a passageway from the corridor to
a room that seems to have been the
second choice for Khufu's sarcophagus;
but it, too, was abandoned in favor of a
chamber built even deeper into the
pyramid structure itself.
As the work progressed, a third
corridor was designed. Known today as
the Grand Gallery, it was 153 feet long
and 28 feet high. To disperse the
tremendous weight of the stones resting
on its ceiling, the architects designed
the side walls so that each row of
blocks would jut out three inches
above the row below. At floor level,
the corridor measured seven feet. It
then gradually narrowed to 31/2 feet at
ceiling level—truly, a masterpiece of
design. At the end of the gallery was
Khufu's burial chamber, lined com-
pletely with pink granite.
While Khufu's architects focused
on how best to incorporate their inno-
vative ideas into the master plan, the
site was cleared, and the task of quarry-
ing, hauling, smoothing, and fitting the
heavy stone blocks began. Because this
construction project would take years
to complete, Khufu and his advisers
approved a permanent "pyramid town"
in the valley, with accommodations for
as many as 4,000 skilled craftsmen.
Provisions were also made for tempo-
rary quarters to house as many as
20,000 laborers during Akhet, the sea-
son from July to October when the
Nile overflowed its banks and farming
was impossible. During that period,
able-bodied Egyptian men below the
social rank of a scribe were called for
this duty.
Khufu must have been pleased that
the work on his pyramid was going so
well. What he could not foresee were
the robbers who, within centuries,
would desecrate both his tomb and his
body. To him, the three granite stones
that workers would use to plug the en-
trances after his burial seemed suffi-
cient to deter any thief. Each was five
feet long and weighed approximately
seven tons. Nevertheless, robbers twice
avoided the plugs and dug their own
entrances—once in ancient times and
again in the ninth century A.D. Khufu,
however, would be relieved to know
that one of his statues survived. Ac-
cording to Egyptian belief, a person's ka
needed a home to continue existing in
the afterlife. For this reason, the Egyp-
tians had adopted the practice of plac-
ing statues of the dead in their tombs.
If someone or something destroyed the
body, the statue, made in the exact
likeness of the dead person, would pro-
vide a substitute home for the ka.
Another part of Khufu's burial site,
however, remained untouched until
1954, when a public works crew began
building a road near the pyramid. On-
site, at the time, was a young architect-
archaeologist named Kamal el-Mallakh.
As he watched workers clearing debris
Khufu
POSITION
King of Egypt
ACTIVE DATES
About 2589-66 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Sent campaigns into Nubia; main-
tained control of the mines in the
Sinai; kept Egypt a unified nation;
his policies brought prosperity to
Egypt; built the so-called Great
Pyramid at Giza
KHUFU 3 1


--- PAGE 33 ---
How powerful is the White Crown ofKkufu.
—Inscription carved into a block of the Great Pyramid
from the area, he noticed that the pyra-
mid's southern boundary wall seemed
closer to the baseline of the pyramid
than the other three walls. Because the
margin of error was small throughout
the pyramid complex, el-Mallakh
sought a reason for this discrepancy. He
found one. Beneath a section of the
wall lay an enormous pit covered by 41
limestone blocks—some weighing more
than 15 tons.
An archaeological crew was sent
immediately to the site, and the work-
ers began removing the blocks. In the
pit they found a 143-foot wooden boat,
dismantled into 1,224 well-preserved
pieces. Using the hieroglyphic symbols
written on each piece as a guide to fit-
ting the pieces together, workers slowly
reassembled "Khufu's boat." Approxi-
mately 95 percent of the wood was
cedar from Lebanon. Throughout histo-
ry, the so-called cedars of Lebanon
were prized for their durability. Ancient
Egyptian texts noted that even the
worm borers of the Nile left this type of
cedar alone.
Archaeologists later uncovered a
second boat pit on the south side of the
pyramid. Using modern technological
equipment to "see" inside the pit, sci-
entists have learned that the chamber
is no longer airtight—a beetle is scam-
pering about in one of the photos.
Egyptologists hope the boats will
reveal clues about their purpose. Some
believe that the excavated boat was the
one used for brief excursions on official
state occasions; others think that it
may have carried Khufu's body up the
Nile to the Valley Temple. Still others
believe that it was made and buried in
the pit for Khufu to use in the next life.
Enormous resources would be need-
ed to build such a tomb and to keep the
country's economy prosperous, so Khufu
sent campaigns south into Nubia to
keep the trade routes open. He also
continued to maintain garrisons in the
mining districts of the Sinai Peninsula
and sent campaigns against Libya.
Khufu, however, did not wish to
spend all his time preparing for death
or handling affairs of state. Like his fa-
ther, he, too, sought a diversion from
the daily routine. On one occasion,
according to a passage in the Westcar
Papyrus, which was written more than
500 years after Khufu's reign, Khufu's
sons were taking turns entertaining
their father with tales of the supernat-
ural. After Khafre and Bauefre each
told of magicians who lived in previous
reigns, Hordedef stood up and said the
following:
My father, you have listened to deeds
of magicians who are dead and gone.
Hear my tale of a magician who still
lives and whom you do not know. He
is a man named Djedi. He lives at
Djed Snefru and is 110 years old. He
eats 500 loaves of bread and a side of
beef. He drinks 100 jugs of beer unto
this very day. This Djedi knows how
to reattach a head to the body from
which it has been cut off. He knows
how to make a lion follow him while
the rope with which he is tied drags
behind him on the ground and he
knows the number of the secret cham-
bers of Thoth [the god of writing,
learning, magic, and the god credited
with inventing hieroglyphs].
Khufu was intrigued. So he said to
Hordedef, "My son, go and bring that
magician to me."
When the ships were ready, Hor-
dedef set sail. As he approached the
shore near Djed Snefru, he disem-
barked and was carried the rest of the
way in a sedan (chair) made of ebony
wood and decorated with gold. He
found Djedi lying on a mat near his
home. One servant was holding his
head and fanning him while another
rubbed his feet. Hordedef greeted the
magician and commented on his good
health. He told Djedi that Khufu re-
quested his presence at the palace.
Djedi immediately made preparations
to return with Hordedef, asking only
that a second boat be made ready for
his children and his books.
Hordedef did as instructed, and
when they arrived Khufu asked Djedi,
"Is it true, as they say, that you know
how to rejoin a head to the body from
which it has been cut off?"
Djedi replied, "Yes, my lord king."
"Then let a prisoner be brought to
me so that his death sentence may be
carried out."
But Djedi said, "Please, sir, not on
a man. Let there be no command to do
such to a human being."
Khufu agreed and ordered a goose
brought to Djedi. After the animal's
head was cut off, servants placed the
body on the right side of the chamber
and the head on the left side. Djedi re-
cited certain magic phrases, and the
body immediately rose up and waddled
toward its head, and the head moved
toward the body. When the two came
close together, the head leaped onto
the body, and the goose stood up on its
legs and honked.
Djedi did the same with a second
goose Khufu had brought to him, and a
third time with an ox.
3 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 34 ---
When Khufu asked Djedi about
the chambers of Thoth, the magician
replied that he did not know how
many there were, only where they
were—in a box of flint within a sand-
stone block in Heliopolis (the center of
worship for the sun god Re). Before
Khufu could speak, Djedi added that he
was not the one who could provide the
king with information, that the eldest
of the three sons to be born to Red-
dedet was the person.
Puzzled, Khufu asked, "Who is
Reddedet?" Djedi replied, "She is the
wife of a priest of Re and is pregnant
with the sons of Re." Djedi added that
Re himself had told Reddedet that her
sons would hold the highest office in
the land.
At these words, Khufu became sad.
"Why so sad, my lord? Is it because of
the three children? Do not say so, for
I say to you: your son . . . [will become
king, then] ... his son, and then one
of hers."
This second part of Djedi's tale cer-
tainly could not have been entertaining
for Khufu, since it predicted the end of
his line. And, indeed, it happened as
Djedi had said: After his sons Khafre
and Menkaure ruled Egypt, a "son of
Re" did ascend the throne. Thus, it
seems reasonable to suggest that this
tale was told by the next family of kings
(the so-called 5th Dynasty) as a way of
proving their right to the throne. And
the 5th Dynasty kings were the first to
call themselves Re's children.
Khufu, however, saw his sons as his
successors. For this reason, he devoted
himself and his country's resources to
keeping Egypt the land favored by the
gods. Believing that he was both
human and divine, Khufu saw his life
on Earth as a time when he could help
guide a nation blessed by the gods. And
as his name, Khufu-Khnum, suggests,
he was "the one protected by Khnum,"
the god of creation.
FURTHER READING
Hart, George. Pharaohs and Pyramids: A
Guide Through Old Kingdom Egypt, pp.
89-104. London: Herbert, 1991.
Jenkins, Nancy. The Boat Beneath the Pyra-
mid: King Cheops' Royal Ship. New York:
Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1980.
Lehner, Mark. The Complete Pyramids, pp.
108-20. New York: Thames & Hudson,
1997.
Pace, Mildred Mastin. Wrapped for Eternity:
The Story of the Egyptian Mummy, pp. 20-
28, 58-61, 180-184. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1974.
Excavators uncovered this set of cone-
shaped cups, long-necked containers, and
a wand inscribed for Khufu in a Giza
temple.They were used in the Opening
of the Mouth ritual, a series of rites that,
according to Egyptian religious beliefs,
allowed the deceased person to come
alive in the afterlife.
KHUFU 3 3


--- PAGE 35 ---
Ptahhotep
NO ARTIST IS
EVER PERFECT
my sovereign lord! Old age has come. The
limbs are painful and strength has given
way to weariness. The eyes are weak and
the ears are deaf. The mouth is silent and
cannot speak. The mind is forgetful and
cannot remember what happened yesterday. The bones are
full of pain. The nose is blocked and does not breathe. Stand-
ing and sitting are equally difficult. All that was good is now
bad. What old age does to people is evil in every respect.
Therefore, issue a command for this servant (that is, my-
self) to have a pupil on hand for old age. Let my son stand in
my place in order that I may teach him the wisdom and
thoughts of those who have gone before and have served the
ancestors in times past. They then shall do the same for you
so that all conflict may be gone from the people and the Two
Riverbanks [all Egypt] may serve you.
The words were clear and to the point. The speaker was
asking King Izezi of Egypt for permission to retire from public
Reliefs on tomb-chapel walls such as this one of a herdsman with his bulls in the chapel of the vizier Ptahhotep mirror everyday life
in the 5th Dynasty.
3 4 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
0


--- PAGE 36 ---
Do not be arrogant because you are knowkdgeabk.
—Ptahhotep's Instructions
life. But was the plea really Ptah-
hotep's, as the Prisse Papyrus states?
This document, the oldest surviving
text that includes these words, dates to
the Middle Kingdom (around
2040-1782 B.C.) and not to the Old
Kingdom (2686-2181 B.C.), the period
when Ptahhotep is believed to have
lived. The text might be a revised edi-
tion. Or it may even be a document
written during the Middle Kingdom
and credited to the Old Kingdom in
order to give its message more signifi-
cance. Later Egyptians considered the
Old Kingdom to be Egypt's Golden
Age, a time when loyalty, honesty, and
wisdom were highly valued traits.
Ptahhotep held the honored posi-
tion of vizier, the highest public office
in Egypt, and his authority was second
only to the king's. The Prisse Papyrus
lists Ptahhotep's honors and titles:
hereditary noble and count, beloved of
the God (a religious title that
is most likely a reference to the king),
the eldest son of the king (an honorary
title considering that Izezi was not
Ptahhotep's biological father), governor
of the city (Memphis), and vizier.
When Ptahhotep asked that his son be
allowed to succeed him, the king had
replied: "Instruct your son in the wis-
dom of the past. May he set an exam-
ple to the children of the great and
may obedience enter into him and
good judgment also. Speak to him, for
no one is born wise."
In his address, Ptahhotep does not
mention war, nor does he praise warlike
characteristics. He does not talk about
finance or matters of state. Rather, he
concentrates on the experience he has
gained from living and working with
people, and emphasizes that a person
should try to be disciplined, moderate,
kind, honest, unselfish, and compas-
sionate. Such advice is what he consid-
ers the most important instruction
he can give his son. He gives it in
the form of 37 maxims, including the
following.
8. If you are a trustworthy person,
whom one great man sends to anoth-
er, act rightly in the matters he sends
you. Deliver his message as he said it.
Do not lie with your words, for that
might set one powerful person
against another. Hold to the truth
and do not exaggerate. Angry words
spoken by anyone should not be re-
peated. Bad words should not be spo-
ken against anyone, whatever his po-
sition. The ka [a person's life force]
hates that.
11. Follow your heart as long as you live,
and do no more than is ordered . . .
for it offends the ka if its [the heart's]
time is lessened. Do not use more
daytime than is necessary to do your
household chores. When riches
come, follow your heart, for riches
will do no good if work is abandoned.
21. When you are well-to-do and estab-
lish a household, love your wife at
home as is fitting. Feed her well;
clothe her back. Ointment is sooth-
ing to her body. Make her heart
happy as long as you live.
24- If you are a wise man, and have a
seat in the council chamber of the
master, concentrate your mind on
the proceedings in order to arrive at
a wise decision. Be silent, for silence
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Ptahhotep
POSITION
Vizier and writer of maxims
ACTIVE DATES
About 2400 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Credited as the author of a set of 37
maxims, entitled Instructions; Egyp-
tians used his maxims as a school
text for hundreds of years
PTAHHOTEP 3 5


--- PAGE 37 ---
These wood cases held a scribe's writing
instruments, including reed pens, a palette
with paints (usually black and red), and a
container of water for mixing the paints.
Consult the unskilled, person as well as the shifted person.
—Ptahhotep's Instructions
is better than talking too much.
Speak when you know what argu-
ments can be made to counter your
words. To speak in the council cham-
ber requires skill and experience.
Speech is harder than any craft. The
person who understands speaking
makes it serve [his purpose].
30. If you have become great after com-
ing from little, and have achieved
wealth after having been poor in the
city which you know, forget not how
it was with you in the past. Trust not
in your riches, which came to you as
a gift from God.
Ptahhotep ends his delivery of the
maxims with the following advice:
If you hear all this that I have spoken
to you, all your affairs will be as good
as the affairs of those who have gone
before you. In their truth is nobility
and value.
and a prayer:
May you reach me [in the next world]
and be sound in body and the king
satisfied with all that has been done.
May you pass many years of life. It is
not small what I have done on earth.
I have had 110 years in life, as a gift
of the king, and years surpassing those
of the ancestors, because I acted right-
ly for the king until the blessed state
[of old age].
It is finished from its beginning
to its end, as that which was found
in writing. [This is the traditional for-
mal phrase used by ancient Egyptian
scribes at the end of a text.]
The ancient Egyptians enjoyed
works such as Ptahhotep's. For them,
wise sayings were a teaching text and
helped a person lead a successful life.
Ptahhotep's advice was not just for his
son but for every Egyptian. In a world
controlled by the Nile River, the
deities, and the king, Ptahhotep's max-
ims offered a set of instructions that re-
flected the Egyptian picture of the uni-
verse. And so it was only natural that
his work, known as the Instructions, be-
came a standard schoolroom text. Pub-
lic officials believed that learning such
precepts would teach young Egyptian
boys about good manners and proper
conduct. In fact, it became the mark of
a well-educated person to be able to
quote Ptahhotep. For more than 1,200
years, Egyptian philosophical texts and
royal documents often quoted the say-
ings of the wise vizier, and in time,
Ptahhotep's name became a synonym
for wisdom.
FURTHER READING
Lichtheim, Miriam. Ancient Egyptian
Literature: A Book of Readings, vol. 1, pp.
61-80. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1973.
Pritchard, James B., ed. The Ancient Near
East: An Anthology of Texts and Pictures,
pp. 234-237. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1958.
3 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 38 ---
Weni
TRUSTED EMISSARY
was a child . . . under the majesty of Teti. My
rank was that of overseer and I filled the office
of inferior custodian of the king's estates."
Thus begins the inscription cut more than
4,000 years ago into the tomb walls of Weni, a
highly respected official who served under Teti, Pepi I, and
Mernere—the first three kings of the 6th Dynasty. Today,
this text forms one of the longest narrative pieces to have
survived from the period known as the Old Kingdom. The
passages are historically significant because they prove that
in Egyptian society a hardworking, honest official could
advance up the political ladder and be appointed to one of
the nation's highest-ranking positions.
Although nothing is known about Weni's parents, he
seems to have proved quite quickly that he was a capable
and loyal administrator. Teti's successor, Pepi I, certainly rec-
ognized Weni's abilities. Soon after his accession to the
throne, Pepi promoted Weni to the rank of companion and
General Mesehti commissioned this set of 40 miniature wooden Egyptian soldiers holding spears and shields made of hides to
accompany him in the afterlife.
WENI 3 7
UT


--- PAGE 39 ---
Field workers prepare for the flood season in this temple mural from Weni's time.The
ebb and flow of the Nile's waters dictated the three seasons in ancient Egypt: inunda-
tion, seed, and harvest.
deputy priest of the town that housed
the artisans working on the royal pyra-
mid complex. Some time later, Pepi
granted Weni another promotion, this
time to a judgeship. This position was a
powerful one, because Weni, accompa-
nied only by the chief judge and the
vizier, would now hear every private
case that involved the king, the royal
queens, and the Six Great Houses
(courts of justice).
For centuries, high-ranking public
officials had built tomb complexes. Be-
fore Weni could begin work on his, he
needed Pepi's approval to claim an area
for himself. The Egyptians considered
their king the earthly representative of
Horus and, as such, the owner of all
Egyptian land. Weni must have felt
confident of his relationship with Pepi
because he asked for permission not just
to build at Abydos but also to order a
sarcophagus made of white limestone
from the quarries at Tura. Egyptian arti-
sans considered Tura limestone the best.
Pepi readily agreed to both re-
quests, and he even ordered his keeper
of the royal seal, assisted by a team of
workmen, to accompany the barge
bringing the sarcophagus from Tura to
Abydos. When the group arrived in
Abydos, they had more than just the
sarcophagus. They also had a cover for
the sarcophagus, slabs for the "false"
door (a doorway painted on the wall of
the burial chamber through which the
deceased's ka, or life force, re-entered
the tomb to obtain the provisions
needed for survival), and a small table
for offerings. Custom dictated that
offerings be brought to the tomb to
provide the ka with nourishment
throughout eternity. According to
Weni, nothing of the sort had ever
been done before for a king's servant.
Once the basic structure was com-
pleted, work began on the interior.
Adopting a recent practice, Weni
arranged for artisans to cover the walls
of his tomb with hieroglyphs that
recorded his many achievements.
These inscriptions would keep "alive"
his deeds, in much the same way Egyp-
tians believed that statues of a dead
person provided a "home" within the
tomb for a person's ka and allowed the
ka to continue living. Thus, surviving
inscriptions provide a unique view of
Egyptian life during this period. They
also help Egyptologists better under-
stand the sequence of political and his-
torical events.
Whether Weni prepared the text
himself is unknown. What is certain is
that Weni had every one of his accom-
plishments recorded, beginning with
his post as a low-ranking public official
and ending with his acceptance of a
position of the highest order. Weni
also wanted the traditional phrases in-
corporated into the text, phrases that
reflected the admiration and respect
Pepi had for his deeds and his person.
Repeated several times in the wall in-
scriptions were hieroglyphs that trans-
late, respectively, as, "I was able and
acceptable to the heart of his majesty,"
"his majesty praised me exceedingly,"
and "The heart of his majesty was satis-
fied with me."
Weni proved his loyalty to Pepi
when a scandal threatened to disrupt
palace life. Because the case concerned
a royal wife who was involved either in
a conspiracy or some other treasonous
act, it had to be handled carefully and
secretly. Many Egyptologists believe this
wife most likely conspired with a prince
or other member of the royal family
against the king. No details have ever
surfaced, but Weni did mention the
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
38


--- PAGE 40 ---
I was a person more perfect
to the heart of his majesty
than any official of his, than
any noble of his, than any
servant of his.
—Inscription in Weni's
tomb
incident, noting that Pepi appointed
him, along with another judge, to arbi-
trate the case. He also said that "never
before had one like me heard a secret of
the king's harem." Although he did not
reveal the sentence passed, Egyptologists
suppose it was the traditional penalty for
treason—death. From the little that is
known about the case, Pepi's actions
definitely prove he had complete trust
in Weni's judgment and integrity.
Unfortunately, Pepi had little time
to relax after the scandal ended. Trou-
ble was brewing to the east, and the sit-
uation needed his immediate attention.
The Bedouins (nomadic desert tribes),
or "sand dwellers" as the Egyptians
called them, were revolting, and Pepi
prepared to send an army against them.
The Sinai area was closely linked
to Egypt's welfare, especially because it
acted as a buffer between Egypt and the
Middle East. To keep this policy in
place, Pepi had to keep the Bedouins
from invading his eastern lands. The
Sinai's rich mines provided Egypt with
turquoise, malachite, and copper—all
of which were in short supply in Egypt.
Because Egyptian craftsmen used the
three materials regularly in their work,
Pepi had to protect the trade routes
between the two areas if he wished to
preserve stability and prosperity
throughout Egypt.
As a show of Egypt's military
power, Pepi recruited tens of thousands
of troops from Upper and Lower Egypt
and from the land of Nubia to the
south and ordered them into action
against the Bedouins. He named his
trusted official Weni to the post of gen-
eral. Whereas other magistrates were
responsible for individual regiments, it
was Weni's job to devise and imple-
ment all military maneuvers. At this
point in the narrative, Weni inserts the
phrase, "but it was I who planned tac-
tics for them, although my rank was
only that of overseer of the royal es-
tates." He continues, "No one quar-
reled with his neighbor, no one stole
the food or sandals from any traveler,
no one stole bread from any town, and
no one stole a goat from any people."
Weni's discipline and strategies
must have worked well, as he soon laid
waste the land of the Bedouins and re-
turned home victorious. His tomb walls
told how "this army returned in peace,
having thrown down the fortresses of
the 'sand dwellers'; this army returned
in peace, having cut down their fig-
trees and vines; this army returned in
peace, having thrown fire on all their
large structures; this army returned in
peace, having slain the soldiers there
in many tens of thousands; this army
returned in peace, bringing back with
it vast numbers of fighting men as
prisoners."
Pepi was so pleased with the man-
ner in which Weni had conducted this
military campaign that whenever the
sand dwellers revolted he ordered Weni
to raid their lands. Weni did this five
times, and each time his expedition
met with success.
The sand dwellers, however, were
not Egypt's only foreign problem. Re-
ports reached the royal palace of wild
desert tribes to the north (believed to
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Weni
(also spelled Uni)
POSITION
Judge, general, governor, expedition
leader
ACTIVE DATES
About 2300 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Served three kings (Teti, Pepi,
Mernere) in important administra-
tive positions; investigated a plot
involving a royal wife; led successful
military expeditions against
Bedouins in the Sinai Peninsula;
first Egyptian commander on record
to lead expeditions into southern
Palestine; led trading expeditions
into Nubia; organized digging of
five canals alongside First Cataract
to transport stone for building
pyramids
WENI 3 9


--- PAGE 41 ---
I was a person beloved of
his father and praised of
his mother and gracious to
his brethren.
—Inscription in Weni's
tomb
be a reference to southern Palestine and
Syria) threatening Egypt's presence in
the area. Again Weni was the general
chosen to lead the punitive raid. After
assembling his troops, he ordered them
aboard large transport ships and set sail
for the far end of the mountain range
that lay north of the sand dwellers. Dis-
embarking once he reached the chosen
port, he advanced against the rebels on
foot and killed every one. This is the
first recorded account of an Egyptian
attack against Palestine.
Pepi I died shortly after Weni's
victory in the north. Pepi's son and
successor, Mernere, appointed Weni to
one of the nation's most powerful
posts—the governorship of southern
Egypt. Control of this area was critical
to Egypt's economic prosperity because
it was home to the trade route linking
Nubia and Egypt. Weni's talents, how-
ever, were too valuable to keep him
working only in this position. In search
of specific supplies for his pyramid,
Mernere asked Weni to sail to Ibhat at
the Second Cataract on the Nile.
There Weni was to find the items on
Mernere's list, including stone for Pepi's
burial complex, a sarcophagus, and the
capstone for the pyramid known to the
Egyptians as "Mernere shines and is
beautiful" (thought to be the pyramid
of one of Mernere's queens). Mernere
also requested that Weni go to Ele-
phantine (present-day Aswan) for addi-
tional pyramid-related supplies, includ-
ing a stone table for offerings. After
loading the requested items on six
cargo boats, three barges, and three
floats, Weni sailed north, accompanied
by a warship for protection.
Mernere must have been pleased
with Weni's efforts because, soon after,
he sent him on another expedition—
this time to Hatnub, a stone quarry site
in Nubia. Weni was to bring back a
great alabaster altar. To accommodate
the altar on the return trip, Weni had
his workers build a special barge of aca-
cia wood that was approximately 100
feet long and 150 feet wide. In the third
month of the third season (that is, No-
vember), Weni and his crew placed the
altar on board and sailed north—a task
that Weni prided himself on accom-
plishing in only 17 days. Weni also
boasted that he had brought the altar
safely to the pyramid even though the
Nile was not in its flood stage, and
there was no water on the riverbanks.
Pleased with the success of Weni's
mission, Mernere was eager to send
him on more expeditions to the south.
Weni willingly complied with every
one of Mernere's requests, but one
problem persisted—the cataracts along
the Nile. These rocky crags held up
river traffic at six different places, forc-
ing traders and travelers to leave their
vessels and proceed overland around
the cataracts.
To bypass these troublesome areas,
Weni assigned workers to dig five
canals. He also gave orders for three
cargo boats and four barges to be made
of acacia wood. Working with him
jointly on this project were several Nu-
bian chiefs who supplied the wood for
his workshops. A year later, the task
was complete and Weni was traveling
through his canals on his return trip
north to Egypt from Nubia. With him
were vessels laden with huge slabs of
stone for the royal pyramid.
Through the years, Weni had re-
peatedly proved himself a loyal and
obedient servant of the king. Thus it
seemed only fitting that he inscribe on
his tomb's walls, "Whenever His
Majesty gave an order for anything to
be done, I carried it out thoroughly ac-
cording to the order that His Majesty
gave concerning it."
FURTHER READING
Lichtheim, Miriam. Ancient Egyptian
Literature: A Book of Readings, vol. 1, pp.
18-23. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1973.
4 0 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 42 ---
PepiII
LONG-LIVED
MONARCH
ut into a rock on the Sinai Peninsula at Wadi
Maghara were hieroglyphs that read "Nefer-
kare, who lives forever, like Re." This was ex-
actly what Egyptologists had been seeking—
an ancient document linking Pepi II with the
important copper and turquoise mines in the area. No
carved image of Pepi accompanied the inscription on the
rock, but that was not necessary. Neferkare was Pepi's "offi-
cial name," the one he had assumed when he ascended the
throne. It was also his "Son of Re" name, the name that re-
flected the Egyptian belief that every king was the earthly
manifestation of the sun god Re. Pepi was actually his
nomen, or birth name. Only 2,000 years later would the
Greeks add numerals to differentiate between the father,
Pepi I, and the son, Pepi II.
Before the find at Wadi Maghara, Egyptologists had al-
ready uncovered much about Pepi II and how he came to
rule Egypt. The office of kingship was hereditary—usually
the eldest son of a king's Great Royal Wife succeeded his
This alabaster statue depicts Pepi II as an adult wearing the royal
headdress and sitting on his mother's lap. Pepi II had ascended
the throne as a young child.
PEPI II 4 i
c


--- PAGE 43 ---
Nut [the sky goddess], make
this Pepi a spirit-soul in you,
kt him not die.
—inscription on Old
Kingdom pyramid wall
father on the throne. Sometimes, espe-
cially if the Great Royal Wife had no
sons, the son of a senior wife might
claim the title. (A senior wife was one
whose family and bloodline ranked her
above those of other royal wives.)
Thus, the sons of senior wives custom-
arily spent their youths preparing to
rule. Circumstances, however, had al-
lowed Pepi II little time to prepare.
Late in his reign, Pepi I had mar-
ried two daughters of a noble from
Abydos. Both women were called
Ankhesenmerire, and each bore Pepi I
a son. Mernere was the older of the two
boys, and he succeeded Pepi I to the
throne. The other son, who was named
Pepi after his father, succeeded
Mernere. According to most accounts,
Pepi was only six years old at the time.
For approximately 88 years he would
wear the crown—the longest reign in
Egyptian history.
At first, Pepi II was ruler in name
only. His mother, Queen Ankhesen-
merire II, acted as regent and her
brother, Djau, assumed the post of
vizier, the highest-ranking government
official. Other close members of the
royal family and experienced public
magistrates also helped to maintain
stability and unity throughout the
Two Lands.
Hieroglyphs carved on the facade
of the tomb belonging to Harkhuf, a
caravan leader, tell of an incident that
happened when Pepi was eight years
old. Harkhuf had sent word to the
palace about a pygmy he had found on
an expedition. Pepi was so intrigued by
the find that he gave detailed instruc-
tions about how Harkhuf and his men
were to care for the pygmy. Pepi want-
ed the little person to reach the royal
palace safely and in good condition.
Gradually Pepi II assumed more re-
sponsibility. His mother continued to
help him whenever necessary, and as
mother of a god-king, she commanded
the highest respect of the people. In
fact, one of the most unusual statues to
have survived from this period is a
small (approximately 15 inches tall),
beautifully carved alabaster figure of
Ankhesenmerire holding Pepi in her
lap. The expressions of mother and son
are calm and regal with an overriding
air of confidence. Pepi's face, however,
is not one of a child, or even of a
young boy, but that of a grown man.
Crowning his head and symbolizing his
position as king is the royal striped
headdress known as the nemes.
Pepi proved himself an involved
ruler. Following the example of his pre-
decessors, he sent expeditions south
into Nubia. Harkhuf was one of the
men he assigned to lead these expedi-
tions. Such trips must have involved a
bit of adventure, especially when the
Egyptians faced hostile natives, blind-
ing sandstorms, and the unrelenting
rapids of the cataracts along the Nile.
To bypass the cataracts, expedition
members had to carry vessels and goods
overland until the river's waters be-
came calmer and water travel was again
possible. Traders usually traveled along
the oases on the trip south, and down
the Nile for the return home.
Records also indicate that Pepi
sent traders down the Red Sea to the
fabled land of Punt. Although the
exact location of Punt is still a matter
of debate, most historians believe it in-
cluded the coastal areas of present-day
Somalia and maybe parts of Ethiopia
and Djibouti.
An account from Pepi II's reign
also tells of an expedition organized to
rescue the body of a nobleman who
had been killed while building a ship
for an expedition to Punt. Most expedi-
tions, however, were trade related. And
4 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 44 ---
it was the rewards of these ventures
that made everyone involved minimize
the dangers. In Egypt, the royal family,
nobles, and high-ranking officials ea-
gerly awaited such prized items as in-
cense, ivory, ebony, oil, leopard and
cheetah skins, and gold. So, too, did
the artisans who needed the imports to
craft their exquisite works.
Because the Egyptians believed
that everyone, not only the king, had a
ka, family members regularly brought
offerings to the tombs of their loved
ones—in the hope that these offerings
would sustain the deceased person's ka
in the afterlife. While tomb offerings
had no time limit, as the centuries
passed and the number of tombs in-
creased, the bringing of daily or even
periodic offerings became burdensome,
and a new practice developed. Kings
began to set aside royal tracts of land
and decreed that the revenue from
these lands—that is, from harvests and
other related products—would be used
to provide offerings for their ka and to
support the priests they charged with
caring for the lands and performing the
required tomb rituals. In time, kings
also began granting tracts of land to
nobles and then to high-ranking offi-
cials as rewards for loyal service. Be-
cause these lands were tax-exempt,
none of the revenue derived from them
returned to the nation's treasury.
By Pepi H's reign, the amount of
land held by temples, nobles, and high-
ranking officials was considerable. In
addition, many of the nomarchs (gover-
nors of names, or districts) who held
land had passed their right of owner-
ship to their children.
What followed was a reduction in
royal income and a gradual weakening
of the king's power. The king's expens-
es, on the other hand, kept increasing,
because he not only had to build his
own tomb but also had to repair and
care for the burial complexes of his pre-
decessors and construct tombs for the
royal family.
Pepi faced this problem as well as
others. Egyptians who were responsible
for a royal burial complex lived in a
"pyramid-city" and were exempt from
taxes. Very often they were also ex-
cused from "forced-labor" duty. This
meant that they did not receive the an-
nual royal summons requiring all Egyp-
tians below the rank of scribe to work
for a specific period of time on the
king's pyramid.
With less money, less land, and
fewer workers, the king's strength de-
creased. The power of the nobles, on
the other hand, increased with each
generation and with each new grant of
land. The nobles were well aware of
this change in the balance of power
and wealth, and although they still
paid homage to the king, they began
attending more openly to their own
concerns. They also began to think
that nonroyals might enjoy a limited
form of existence within the walls of
their tombs. Thus, instead of hoping
for a burial site near the royal pyramid,
many officials now located their tombs
closer to their nome.
An energetic and forceful ruler,
Pepi must have sensed this eroding of
the king's power. But he had too many
responsibilities to rely solely on himself
or on one vizier. To rule efficiently, he
had to delegate power to others. In-
stead of having one vizier, Pepi divided
the duties of the position between two
viziers, one for Upper Egypt and one
for Lower Egypt. He made each respon-
sible for the collection of taxes, the
tending of the land and livestock, the
deeds for land ownership, and the en-
forcement of laws and royal decrees in
his area. While this measure gave great
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Pepi II
POSITION
King of Egypt
ACTIVE DATES
About 2278-2184 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Longest-ruling monarch in Egyptian
history; sent trading expeditions
into Nubia and farther south to
Punt; expanded trade to both the
south and the east; kept the econo-
my stable and repressed revolts; had
so-called Pyramid Texts carved into
the walls of his tomb
PEPI II 4 3


--- PAGE 45 ---
powers to two rather than one person,
it also contributed to the peace and sta-
bility experienced by those whom Pepi
II ruled.
As his burial site, Pepi chose South
Saqqara, a necropolis (ancient ceme-
tery) used by several of his predeces-
sors. Unfortunately, none of the trea-
sures and artifacts buried with Pepi
have survived. Ancient tomb robbers
burrowed through the beautiful lime-
stone exterior and cut through the in-
terior construction, which was made of
rubble held together with mortar made
from Nile mud. These thieves were not
the first people in Egyptian history to
desecrate a tomb, nor were they the
only ones to plunder Pepi's site. During
the Middle Ages and later periods, ar-
chitects and engineers reused tons of
stone blocks and other materials from
Pepi's pyramid in the construction of
their buildings.
By the time French archaeologist
Gustave Jequier discovered Pepi's tomb
in 1926, it was in ruins. As he cleared
the debris, he found a large number of
fragments inscribed with hieroglyphs.
Realizing that they had once adorned
the walls of the ancient royal tomb, he
meticulously recorded each find. After
months of work, Jequier placed the frag-
ments in their proper position along the
walls of the inner chambers. Today they
are known as the "Pyramid Texts," be-
cause similar texts have been found
only on pyramid walls. They consist of
spells or magic incantations designed to
help the king enter the afterlife, where
he would be welcomed as the equal of
the gods. Some of the spells are meant
to be spoken by the king; others by the
priests. One tomb passage reads: "O Re,
commend me to the ferryman of the
Winding Waterway, so that he may
bring me his ferryboat... in which he
ferries the gods... to the eastern side
of the sky."
The Pyramid Texts are the world's
earliest known religious document.
Pepi, however, was not the first to in-
clude them in a tomb. King Wenis,
who ruled less than 100 years before
Pepi, has that distinction. Such texts
were also found on the walls in the
pyramids of Pepi's three queens. This
find suggests that, in Pepi's time, the
Egyptians believed that a queen as well
as a king would share a divine afterlife
in the company of the gods.
To make sure that the inscribed
hieroglyphs, artifacts, and scenes drawn
on the tomb's inner walls would come
to life and help the deceased in the af-
terlife, the Egyptians developed special
rituals. These rites allowed inanimate
objects within the tomb to come to
life. They also activated the Pyramid
Texts. Used at first only with kings,
nonroyals adopted these practices for
themselves in the decades following
Pepi's rule. As part of the final burial
ceremony within the tomb proper, the
officiating priest sprinkled the mummy
with water and perfumed it with in-
cense. He then touched an adze to
the face, hands, and feet both of the
mummy and of the statues of the de-
ceased. In later times, the designated
son and heir performed the Opening
of the Mouth ceremony.
A close look at the figures carved
into Pepi's tomb walls shows that the
Egyptians believed all within the tomb
would come to life. To prevent any po-
tentially harmful animal from coming
to life and attacking the deceased king,
artisans "cut" images of poisonous
snakes in half with a line of plaster.
They also smeared plaster across the
Nut, grant you that this
Pepi may be in you like an
imperishable star.
inscription on Old
Kingdom pyramid wall
rear parts of carved oxen, lions, and
elephants to render them harmless.
After Pepi died, his priests per-
formed the Opening of the Mouth cere-
mony on his mummy and prayed that
peace would mark his transition from
this life to the next. More concern,
perhaps, should have been given to a
peaceful transition in this world. In the
last years of his long reign, Pepi might
have grown too old to govern effective-
ly, for he did not stop the foreign tribes
invading Egypt's borders to the north-
east. Nor did he stop the powerful gov-
ernors of Upper Egypt from forming al-
liances or from fighting with their
neighbors. In the years after his death, a
period of chaos and instability descend-
ed upon the lands bordering the Nile.
FURTHER READING
Lehner, Mark. The Complete Pyramids,
pp. 161-63. New York: Thames &
Hudson, 1997.
4 4 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 46 ---
Harkhuf
INTREPID
CARAVAN LEADER
ount, Governor of the South, Bearer of
the Royal Seal, Lord of Nekheb, Ritual
Priest, Caravan Leader . . ." So read the
newly carved inscription on the facade of
Harkhuf's tomb. The hieroglyphs were
clear and easy to read, and for centuries to come, anyone
passing by the area would be able to read how Harkhuf had
proved his loyalty to Egypt and to the king.
When choosing his tomb site, Harkhuf had followed a
new practice among high-ranking government officials. He
opted for a cemetery in the nome (district) where he had
held his official posts, instead of in the royal necropolis. In
accordance with Egyptian tradition, Harkhuf had artisans
immortalize his accomplishments by writing them in hiero-
glyphs on the stone of his tomb site.
Harkhuf did not expect to share an afterlife with the
gods—that privilege belonged only to the royals. But he did
The sailor to the right holds the heels of a crewmate who has fallen overboard during a fight with the crew from another boat.The
inscription at the top of this stuccoed, limestone relief includes one sailor's frantic cry,"His back is broken." Not all expeditions along
the Nile were friendly.
HARKHUF 4 5
"C


--- PAGE 47 ---
This tablet, found in a tomb at Giza and
measuring only 1/2" by 3/4" by 3 5/8", lists
the seven sacred oils used in the embalm-
ing process, and has an indentation to
hold a drop of each. Heknu-oil, one of the
goods Harkhuf brought back from a cam-
paign, is second from the left.
not believe that death ended his exis-
tence. Rather, he envisioned his ka (life
force) enjoying a limited existence in
the afterlife, perhaps within the tomb
itself. For this reason, custom said that
the deceased's family and servants
should perform certain rituals and bring
food offerings to the tomb regularly.
As a backup measure, in case the living
could not bring their offerings at the
appointed time or hold a proper ritual,
the Egyptians carved on the tomb
walls inscriptions and reliefs of whatev-
er the deceased might need. During
the funeral ceremony, the symbolic
rituals would bring these representa-
tions to life, ready to meet the lea's
every need.
Thus, it was with great care that
Harkhuf chose as his tomb site Qubbet
el-Hawa (Arabic for "Dome of the
Winds") near Yebu (modern Aswan).
There, high above the west bank of
the Nile River, he had workers cut his
tomb into the rock. To make sure all
who passed knew who was buried
within, Harkhuf had his titles carved
above the entrance door. He also had
them inscribe a few facts about his
good deeds:
I built a house, I set up the doors, I
dug a lake, and I planted sycamore
trees. The king praised me and my
father made a will for me.... I was
one whom everyone loved. ... I gave
the hungry man food, and clothes to
the naked. ... Anyone who shall
enter this tomb improperly, I shall
seize him like a bird, and he will be
judged for his action by the Great
God.... I was a person who spoke
what was good.... I never spoke any
evil word about anyone to another
who was more powerful.... Nor did I
ever judge two brothers in such a way
that either one was robbed of his fa-
ther's property.
Harkhuf's efforts and those of his
workers brought the results he desired.
Today, more than 4,000 years later,
his name and deeds are still read
and studied around the world. In fact,
4 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 48 ---
Egyptologists and historians have used
the information gathered from the in-
scriptions to gain a better understand-
ing of the southern trade routes and of
the products imported from the upper
reaches of the Nile and beyond.
If the account is true and not just a
series of flattering phrases, Harkhuf was
a gentle, compassionate, determined,
and honest man. But he did not con-
sider these personal traits his most
noteworthy accomplishment, even
though he did want them recorded for
all posterity. Rather, it was on the in-
scriptions flanking the sides of the
doorway, at a level that was much easi-
er to read, that Harkhuf preferred to
focus the reader's attention. Here he
had the artisans carve hieroglyphs
detailing his four caravan expeditions
to Nubia. Following the custom of the
time, Harkhuf made no mention of any
failures or personal defeats.
Harkhuf considered himself one of
Egypt's best caravan leaders. His profes-
sion was a respected one, and a presti-
gious one as well. In recent decades,
high-ranking officials and merchants in
Upper Egypt, where Harkhuf lived, had
become increasingly powerful. In fact,
during Pepi IFs reign, their authority in
the area, and especially in their own
nome, or district, closely rivaled that of
the king's.
A major factor contributing to this
increase in power was the profitable
trade route linking Nubia and Egypt.
Nubian stone was sought by those re-
sponsible for building the royal burial
complexes, and Nubian gold was in
great demand, both by jewelers and
other artisans. Additional prized im-
ports—including incense, ebony, oil,
ivory, and ostrich feathers—came from
the lands south of Nubia.
The officials who organized trading
expeditions and regulated the trade
routes naturally became leaders in the
area. Imports played a dominant role in
Egyptian life, and the king looked for
people on whom he could rely to keep
the imports coming on a regular basis,
people who did not hesitate to find
their way around the dangerous
cataracts on the Nile. The king also
wanted people who would not hesitate
to be aggressive and take advantage of
new trading opportunities. Harkhuf was
such a man, and both Mernere and
Pepi II readily employed his services.
Harkhuf had welcomed every order
to lead an expedition and had faced all
difficulties with courage and the will to
succeed. Danger was his constant com-
panion. Enemies might attack or desert
storms strike on the route south. Water
shortages could prove fatal. Organiza-
tion was important, as were strong legs
and hardy feet, because members of a
caravan traveled on foot, accompanied
by pack-carrying donkeys, and a trip
lasted from seven to eight months.
Harkhuf's account of his first expe-
dition reflects the pride he felt in a mis-
sion well done: "His Majesty Mernere
sent me, together with my father, to
Yam [the land south of the Second
Cataract] in order to open up the road
into this country. I made the journey in
seven months. I brought back gifts of all
kinds from that place . . . and there was
very great praise to me for it."
With no pause in the inscription to
indicate the end of an expedition,
Harkhuf continued:
His Majesty sent me a second time by
myself. I started on the Yebu road and
returned from Arthet, Mekher, Terres,
and Artheth in a period of eight
months. I brought back very large
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Harkhuf
POSITION
Caravan leader, explorer, trader,
and local governor of a district in
Upper Egypt
ACTIVE DATES
About 2275 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Led four trading expeditions into
Nubia and lands farther south;
successfully aided the Nubians in a
battle against a neighboring enemy;
brought back a pygmy from Punt
HARKHUF 4 7


--- PAGE 49 ---
I never spoke an evil ward
against anyone to another
who was mare powerful.
—Inscription on the fa^
cade of Harkhuf's tomb
quantities of offerings from this coun-
try. Never before were such things
brought to this land [Egypt]. . . .
Never before had any companion
or caravan-leader who went to Yam
done this.
The third expedition Harkhuf un-
dertook for Mernere was by far the most
adventurous and the most profitable.
Once again, the orders were to go to
Yam. Harkhuf did so, but when he ar-
rived in the region, he learned that the
local ruler had recently advanced his
troops against the neighboring Tjemeh.
Determined that his expedition would
be a success, Harkhuf immediately set
out to find and aid the local ruler, even
though this meant entering unknown
and perhaps even hostile territory.
Although the inscription does not
provide a detailed explanation of
Harkhuf's campaign, it does note that
he was successful and returned to Egypt
with 300 pack donkeys laden with in-
cense, ebony, heknu oil, grain, panther
skins, elephant tusks, throwing sticks,
and other valuable trade items.
Egyptologists reading this account
noted Harkhuf's reference to throwing
sticks. It was not the first time they had
read of throwing sticks in ancient texts.
A few had been found in tombs, and
uncovered wall reliefs show hunters
holding curved sticks (mostly from
later periods). Knowing exactly how
they were used was the question. To
settle the problem, several researchers
devoted considerable time and energy
to replicating these ancient weapons.
Their findings indicate that throwing
sticks acted as the perfect weapon to
hunt waterfowl. If the stick failed to hit
the bird, it returned to the thrower,
somewhat like a boomerang.
Soon after Harkhuf's successful
third expedition, messengers arrived in
Upper Egypt with news of Mernere's
death. Because his reputation as a fear-
less explorer and intrepid caravan
leader was well known at the royal
palace, Harkhuf did not worry about
losing his position. He had served
Mernere well and looked forward to
serving his successor, Pepi II.
About two years after Pepi II as-
cended the throne, Harkhuf received a
royal command to lead an expedition
into Nubia and beyond. It was this trip
that Harkhuf considered the highlight
of his career and, for his work, he re-
ceived a personal letter from the king
himself. So pleased was Harkhuf with
Pepi's response that he ordered his arti-
sans to reproduce the letter on the wall
flanking the entrance to his tomb.
Harkhuf reported regularly to the
king about his activities. On this par-
ticular trip, however, his news was
not about objects or trade items but
instead about a dancing pygmy. Pepi
was about eight years old and Harkhuf
was sure he would be delighted with
his find. Pepi was pleased, and he
wrote Harkhuf a letter that was far
different in tone from the usual stern
and heavy royal missives. Instead, this
letter clearly reflects the young king's
joy and excitement.
Year 2 [of Pepi's reign], third month of
the first season [usually translated as
'autumn'], the 15th day. The Royal
Decree to Harkhuf... leader of the
caravan. I have understood the words
of this letter which you made to the
king in his chamber to inform him
that you have returned in peace from
Yam, together with the soldiers who
were with you.. . . You say in your let-
4 8 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 50 ---
I gave bread to the hungry, clothing to the naked, and one
who had no boat, 1 ferried across the river.
—Inscription on the facade of Harkhuf 's tomb
ter that you have brought back a
pygmy who can dance the dance of
the god.
Pepi, it seems, could barely contain
his excitement. No caravan leader, gen-
eral, or trader had brought such a trea-
sure to the court since the seal-bearer
Bauwerdjed brought a pygmy to Djed-
kare-Izezi (a ruler of the 5th Dynasty)
about 100 years earlier. Pepi calms him-
self, however, and before continuing
with his own commands, he shows the
royal reserve when he acknowledges
Harkhuf's staunch loyalty. In return for
such devotion, Pepi promises to confer
many honors on Harkhuf, honors that
shall be hereditary and thus pass from
Harkhuf to his son and grandson.
Pepi again seems unable to control
his joy and his excitement. The tone of
the letter quickly changes from the for-
mal language of commands and praise
to that of a young boy eager to receive
a new toy:
Come down the river at once to the
royal residence. Bring with you this
pygmy whom you have brought from
the land of the horizon-dwellers,
alive, strong, and healthy, to dance
the dance of the god, and to cheer
and gratify the heart of King Nefer-
kare [Pepi], who lives forever. When
he comes down with you in the boat,
appoint trustworthy people to be with
him on both sides of the boat, to
prevent him from falling into the
water. When he is asleep at night, ap-
point trustworthy people to sleep by
his side in his tent. See that he is
checked ten times each night. My
Majesty [Pepi] wishes to see this
pygmy more than any offering from
the countries of Sinai and Punt.
Fearing that something might hap-
pen to deprive him of such a wonderful
gift, Pepi adds promises of additional re-
wards if Harkhuf brings the pygmy to
the palace safe and in good health. He
reminds Harkhuf of the great honors
Djedkare-Izezi conferred on Bauwerdjed
and says that those he has planned for
Harkhuf are even greater. Harkhuf must
have fulfilled Pepi's request and Pepi
must have kept his promises—other-
wise Harkhuf most likely would not
have recorded the incident on his tomb
wall. Thus, what the Egyptians believed
about immortality is, to a certain extent,
true. Inscribing one's achievements on a
surface that endures will grant a person
"immortality" for as long as there are
people to read the inscription.
FURTHER READING
Lichtheim, Miriam. Ancient Egyptian Liter-
ature: A Book of Readings, vol. 1, pp.
23-27. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1973.
HARKHUF 4 9


--- PAGE 51 ---
More Ancient
Egyptians to
Remember
enes (active about 3050 B.C.) is the
name most often used for the Egyptian
ruler credited with uniting Lower and
Upper Egypt into one kingdom around
3050 B.C. Some Egyptologists believe
Narmer was the name of the king responsible for the unifica-
tion. Many think that Narmer and Menes are the same per-
son, hence the name Narmer-Menes that is sometimes used.
The 5th-century B.C. Greek historian Herodotus wrote that
Narmer-Menes banked up the Nile River at the junction of
Lower and Upper Egypt just south of where he planned to
build his future capital and royal residence. Narmer-Menes
then ordered a new river channel dug for the Nile and
King Narmer grabs a kneeling enemy by the hair and prepares to
strike him in this relief on one side of the Narmer Palette.The
figure to the left is holding the king's sandals, and to the right six
papyrus plants are growing out of a marshland. A falcon, the
symbol of the god Horus and the king, sits on top of papyrus
plants, representing Lower Egypt
50 • ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
M


--- PAGE 52 ---
established his capital city on the re-
claimed land. The site, which he called
White Wall, later became Memphis, the
capital of Egypt in the Old Kingdom.
Excavations at Nekhen (later
known by its Greek name Hierakonpo-
lis) have uncovered various artifacts
that provide clues to this formative pe-
riod in Egyptian history. Perhaps the
most important is a slate palette (votive
offering) with a relief carved along the
top portion of each side of the palette,
showing two human heads with cow's
horns flanking the hieroglyphs repre-
senting the name Narmer. Because the
predominant figure in the scenes is
Narmer, the palette appears to be hon-
oring his feat of uniting Egypt. One side
represents Narmer as the ruler of south-
ern Egypt. On his head is the hedjet, the
tall white crown that later became the
symbol of Upper Egypt. Narmer holds a
defeated enemy by his scalp and pre-
pares to kill him with his mace. To
Narmer's right, the relief shows a falcon
standing on marshes and leading a
marsh dweller by the nose. The latter is
most likely a reference to Lower Egypt
and the marshy Delta region. Below
Narmer are two corpses, believed to rep-
resent the towns he conquered. The re-
verse side shows Narmer wearing the
deshret, the red crown that later became
the symbol of Lower Egypt. Flag bearers,
each carrying a standard with the in-
signia of a nome, precede Narmer as he
inspects two rows of headless enemies
on a battlefield. Below, a bull tears down
a town wall and tramples on the enemy.
Hetep-heres (active about 2600
B.C.) was the wife of King Snefru and
the mother of Snefru's successor,
Khufu. Hetep-heres was also Snefru's
half-sister—their father was Huni, the
last king of the 3rd Dynasty. Because
Hetep-heres's mother, not Snefru's, had
been Huni's senior queen, it was
Hetep-heres's blood, not Snefru's, that
carried the true nobility. Little was
known about this woman who played
such an important role in the Old
Kingdom until February 9, 1925. On
that day, a photographer who was help-
ing the American Egyptologist George
Reisner survey tombs near the Great
Pyramid suddenly lurched forward
when one of the legs of his tripod
slipped into a hole. Workers slowly
cleared limestone blocks from the
hole—a shaft almost 100 feet in length.
After a little more digging, they re-
moved a block of wall filling and
peered into a small room—Hetep-
heres's burial chamber. The beautiful
sealed alabaster sarcophagus was empty.
Yet everything the queen might need
in the afterlife was here for her use, in-
cluding a bed, a carrying chair, and two
armchairs. There was even a frame for
a canopy bed, with gilded wooden rods
topped with carved papyrus buds and
wooden roofing-ties. Most likely, reed
mats or light curtains would have
swung from the rods to provide a cool
breeze for the queen. Copper tools were
also uncovered. Egyptologists think
that tomb workers may have left them
behind by mistake. Their presence of-
fers a reason for Snefru's interest in pro-
tecting Egypt's claim to the Sinai cop-
per mines. The furniture was simple yet
elegant in design and fashioned of
ebony wood with an overlay of gold.
Restorers later followed the excavation
team's meticulous notes and created
exact replicas using new wood and the
original gold leaf.
The chamber also contained many
personal items, such as a manicure set
made of gold, razors, a gold sewing nee-
dle, eight alabaster jars filled with oils
and kohl eye makeup, and a box with
20 silver bracelets still hanging on two
tapered wooden shafts. In a niche sealed
with plaster and stone blocks, excava-
tors found an alabaster box that had four
compartments inside. One contained
some decaying organic material. The
other three contained a yellowish liquid.
Under analysis, the mixture proved to
be that of the remains of the queen's in-
ternal organs and a 3-percent solution of
MORE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS TO REMEMBER 5 1


--- PAGE 53 ---
During his excavations of Menkaure's
pyramid complex at Giza, American Egyp-
tologist George A. Reisner uncovered
many sculptured pieces, including this fine-
ly detailed portrait head.
natron (a sodium carbonate) in water.
This was the first such find of embalmed
and mummified organs dating to the
Old Kingdom.
Hemiunu (active about 2570 B.C.)
held the important office of vizier under
Khufu. In control of both administrative
and judicial departments, Hemiunu was
second in command and reported direct-
ly to Khufu. Most historians agree that
Hemiunu was not the son of Khufu but
rather a nephew—the son of Khufu's
brother, Nefermaet. Like Nefermaet,
who had held the position of master ar-
chitect and had designed Huni's tomb,
so Hemiunu held the post of the King's
Master of Works and designed Khufu's
tomb. Khufu was so pleased with Hemi-
unu's work that he granted Hemiunu
the honor of building his tomb close to
his own. As was the custom, Hemiunu
constructed a mastaba for himself—in
the 4th Dynasty only a god-king could,
by right, have a pyramid tomb. When
workers excavated Hemiunu's tomb,
they found a seated statue of him carved
of unpainted limestone. If we can judge
that the sculptor accurately captured his
subject's character traits, then Hemiunu
was a resourceful man with a strong
personality.
Khafre (active about 2558-32 B.C.)
is best known as the son and successor
of Khufu. But he was not his father's im-
mediate successor. Djedefre, a younger
half-brother by a lesser queen, had fol-
lowed Khufu. After Khafre ascended the
throne, he chose as his burial site an
area southeast of his father's Great Pyra-
mid. Because the ground here was high-
er, Khafre's pyramid appeared to be taller
than his father's, although it was actual-
ly 10 feet shorter. As the polished white
limestone of the two structures glistened
in the sun, they must have seemed
appropriate burial sites for rulers who
called themselves the "son of Re."
Djedefre had been the first ruler in
Egyptian history to adopt this title as
one of his official royal names. Khafre
did the same, and so did all succeeding
rulers of ancient Egypt.
Following custom, Khafre wanted
tomb statues carved in his exact like-
ness and had sculptors fashion as many
as 23 seated statues of himself. All these
he had placed in his Valley Temple
(where priests performed the burial
rites) in specially recessed areas. Work-
ers then cut shafts through the stone of
the temple so that the rays of the sun
and the moon entered the temple and
shone light on each statue. However,
these statues were small in comparison
with the one Khafre commissioned to
stand just east of the Valley Temple.
Here, out of the natural outcrop of
limestone that had remained after quar-
rying the blocks for Khufu's pyramid,
sculptors carved the crouching body of
a lion with a human head. Many Egyp-
tologists believe the face was shaped to
resemble Khafre. Centuries after Khafre
died, visiting Greeks called it a Sphinx.
The word might come from the Egypt-
ian phrase for "living image of the
Atum (creator of the world)": shesep
an/ch Atum.
Menkaure (active about 2532—04
B.C.) inherited a stable kingdom from
his father, Khafre. His pyramid, situated
just southeast of Khafre's, was consider-
ably smaller than those of his father or
grandfather (Khufu)—only 228 feet in
height. Menkaure and his architects,
however, did make a few changes. They
covered the lower courses of the pyra-
mid with red granite from Aswan and
the upper courses with gleaming white
Tura limestone.
According to the 5th-century B.C.
Greek historian Herodotus, Menkaure
was a more compassionate ruler than
either Khufu or Khafre. Herodotus also
wrote about Menkaure's grief when his
only child, a daughter, died. According
5 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 54 ---
to the story, Menkaure had artisans
craft as her sarcophagus a hollow wood-
en cow in a reclining position, with
its legs underneath its body. The
exterior of the cow he ordered covered
with gold.
Herodotus recounted a second tale
about Menkaure that explained how
the king outwitted the oracle of Buto
who had said he had only six years left
to live. Menkaure ordered that candles
be kept burning every night. Thus, ac-
cording to his reckoning, although he
lived only the allotted six years, the
"daylight" he enjoyed was equivalent to
twelve years.
Pepi I (active about 2332-2283
B.C.) enjoyed one of the longest reigns
in ancient Egypt—50 years, according
to the Egyptian historian Manetho
(35 to 40, according to modern Egyp-
tologists). He sent military expeditions
under the command of Weni against
the Bedouins in the Sinai Peninsula
and into southern Palestine. Surviving
inscriptions found at quarries and
carved into rocks in Nubia tell of
Pepi's trading activity in the area.
To lead these expeditions, Pepi again
called on Weni.
As the site of his burial complex,
Pepi chose South Saqqara. The name
of his pyramid was Men-nefer-Pepi,
which means "Pepi is established and
beautiful." Little remains of the pyra-
mid because succeeding generations of
Egyptians used the stone facing blocks
and the inner construction materials
for their own building projects. Ar-
chaeologists have found wall fragments
inscribed with passages, known today as
Pyramid Texts from Men-nefer-Pepi.
As was the custom, Pepi had sever-
al wives. Two were sisters with the
same name. Pepi's immediate successor,
Mernere, was the son of Ankhesen-
merire I, and Pepi II was the son of
Ankhesenmerire II. A five-foot,
nine-and-a-half-inch-tall statue of the
king, standing with a staff in hand and
his feet in a walking position, was un-
covered at Nekhen. It was fashioned by
hammering sheets of copper onto a
wooden form.
Pepinakht (active about 2220 B.C.),
according to most historians, was
Harkhuf's successor as governor of the
south, the land beyond the First
Cataract on the Nile River. Following
the custom of the time, Pepinakht or-
dered that his tomb be cut into the rock
cliffs at Qubbet el Hawa, near Yebu. He
commissioned artisans to inscribe his
deeds and victories on the inner walls.
As an introduction, he had the artisans
list the titles he held under Pepi II.
These included "wearer of the royal
seal, priest, caravan leader, governor of
the pyramid-town, and judge."
What distinguishes Pepinakht from
other officials is his elevation to the
status of god, which came within
decades of his death. The ancient
Egyptians even dedicated a cult to him
on the island of Elephantine, near the
First Cataract. Members of the cult re-
ferred to Pepinakht by his nickname,
Heqaib, meaning "He who is master of
the heart." Many Egyptologists think
that the Egyptians deified Pepinakht
because of the daring expeditions he
led against foreign tribes who were at-
tacking Egypt's outlying districts.
Pepinakht had the artisans record these
deeds on his tomb wall: "I slew a great
number there including the chiefs'
children and commanders of the top
units. ... I brought a great many rebels
to the royal palace as living prisoners."
Pepinakht also had his artisans write of
the campaign he led to Byblos. Pepi
had ordered Pepinakht to retrieve the
body of an Egyptian official who had
been murdered there while overseeing
the building of a boat for an expedition
to Nubia.
The face of Pepi I wears a mysterious
smile in this detail from a life-size statue
made of hammered copper plates nailed
to a wooden support The eye sockets are
inlaid with limestone and obsidian.
MORE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS TO REMEMBER 5 3


--- PAGE 55 ---
Only an eroded mass of mud brick remains of Amenemhet Ill's pyramid at Dahshur: Later generations of Egyptians took the original
limestone casing blocks for their own building projects.
54 • ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 56 ---
Disruption
and Rebirth
(Middle Kingdom,
about 2040-1782 B.C.)
Practices such as granting land to loyal followers and priests in
charge of royal burial complexes slowly eroded the king's authority.
As Pepi II grew older and less forceful, the nomarchs (governors of
Egypt's nomes, or districts) assumed more power. The few records
that survive from the period following Pepi IPs reign tell of great turmoil
throughout the land. One Egyptian who yearned for happier times wrote,
"Laughter is dead and sorrow walks across the land."
Pepi's immediate successors, the rulers of the 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th Dynas-
ties, could not reverse the deteriorating situation. In Upper Egypt, several strong
governors saw the problem as an opportunity to increase their own power bases.
They sought ways to ally themselves with weaker neighbors and, in this way,
gain control over a larger area. But their actions served only to intensify the di-
visions within Egypt. Egyptologists would later refer to these years of disunity
and turmoil as the First Intermediate Period, because they considered them a
bridge between two great eras in Egypt's early history—the Old Kingdom and
the Middle Kingdom.
The Middle Kingdom technically begins with the reunification of the lands
along the Nile under Nebhepetre Mentuhotep, an energetic and powerful no-
march from Upper Egypt (though some Egyptologists argue that Mentuhotep II
deserves the credit for the reunification). The years of conflict and uncertainty,
however, had left their mark on Egyptian society. The people's way of thinking
had changed, especially concerning immortality, and they no longer wished to
return to life as it had been under the early kings. Eternal life, they reasoned,
was not just the prerogative of the king. Governors and other powerful figures
could now look forward to the same privilege, and, in the years to come, all
Egyptians would do the same.
Part 2 of Ancient Egyptians focuses on the Middle Kingdom and the individ-
uals responsible for returning stability, unity, and prosperity to the lands of
Upper and Lower Egypt.
NEBHEPETRE
MENTUHOTEP
AMENEMHET
SENWOSRET I
SENWOSRET
AMENEMHET III
DISRUPTION AND REBIRTH 5 5
2
IN THIS PART


--- PAGE 57 ---
.Nebhepetre
Mentuhotep
I
UNITER OF
THE TWO LANDS
entuhotep, the powerful nomarch (gover-
nor) of Thebes in Upper Egypt, was well
aware of the widespread turmoil that had
followed Pepi IPs death. Because Men-
tuhotep believed that Egypt could not
progress as a nation until the present problems were ad-
dressed, he resolved to reunite the names, or districts, in
Upper and Lower Egypt. His three predecessors, all of whom
went by the name of Intef, had favored Thebes as Egypt's
When Egyptologist Howard Carter found this statue of
Nebhepetre Mentuhotep I, it lay wrapped in fine linen in an
unfinished room at the bottom of a shaft just in front of his
mortuary temple.
5 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
M


--- PAGE 58 ---
capital city. The powerful magistrates
in Lower Egypt, however, vehemently
opposed this choice. They wanted their
city of Heracleopolis, which lay closer
to the area they ruled, to be the coun-
try's capital. Unable to resolve the
conflict, the two sides moved their
differences to the battlefield, and so
the struggle for reunification had begun
in earnest with the first Intef. Because
the problem was a difficult one, it took
many years to resolve.
When Mentuhotep succeeded the
third Intef to the throne, he controlled
only the area in Upper Egypt that
stretched from the First Cataract to the
tenth norm (there were 16 norms in
Upper Egypt). The northern norms of
Upper Egypt and those of Lower Egypt
remained under the control of other
nomarchs and nobles. In time, Men-
tuhotep extended his control over all
the lands that bordered the Nile, de-
feating those who had made Hera-
cleopolis Egypt's capital and officially
establishing his own capital at
Thebes.
When Mentuhotep learned that
opponents to his rule had sought refuge
at the Dakhla Oasis, an important
trade center in the desert west of the
Nile, he sent soldiers to capture them.
He allowed those nobles and nomarchs
who remained loyal to him to keep
their posts, and he appointed locals to
political positions in their own area.
He believed that locals served their
communities more effectively and effi-
ciently than outsiders. In addition,
their ties to the area would encourage
loyalty and respect among their sub-
jects and provide less reason for resent-
ment or conflict. To other posts, espe-
cially key ones, Mentuhotep appointed
trusted southerners. He also reinstated
the powerful position of vizier, or chief
minister. Surviving records from that
time name Dagi and Ipi as two of Men-
tuhotep's viziers.
Although no records of Men-
tuhotep's progress toward reunification
have yet been uncovered, references
mark Year 14 as the turning point. In
that year, he advanced his troops
against Heracleopolis. Inscrip-tions also
indicate that Mentuhotep felt his
achievements merited recognition.
Over the years, he assumed three offi-
cial royal titles: "He Who Breathes Life
into the Heart of the Two Lands,"
"Lord of the White Crown" (a refer-
ence to Upper Egypt, the land of his
birth), and "Uniter of the Two Lands."
Some sources note that he took the
third title in Year 39—the year in
which he considered the unification
complete and deemed that he alone
had the right to rule Egypt.
Unification, however, did not
mean Mentuhotep could disband his
army. The Two Lands were at peace,
but leaders of tribes beyond the borders
of Upper and Lower Egypt had taken
advantage of the turmoil and launched
raids into Egypt. To ensure the safety of
his people and to alert outsiders to his
intent, Mentuhotep marched his troops
north and east against the Bedouins.
Following the example set by his prede-
cessors, he sent troops west against the
Tjemehu and Tjehenu Libyans and
welcomed reports of Egyptian victories.
Mentuhotep also sent soldiers
south into Nubia, annexing Lower
(northern) Nubia as far as the Second
Cataract. The Nubian campaign proved
beneficial to the economy, as the
strong Egyptian presence in the area
ensured safe passage for caravans travel-
ing the trade routes to and from Egypt.
As a result, trade relations with Nubia
improved and imports increased. Egypt
depended on the imports from Nubia's
quarries and mines—especially the gold
mines—for its building projects and
royal burial complexes. Nubia was also
a major African trade center, exporting
to Egypt a wide variety of products
from the interior of the continent.
Without question, Mentuhotep
may be called one of Egypt's great
"warrior kings." Succeeding generations
Behold, no one can take his
possessions with him.
—Believed to have been
carved in a mortuary chapel
of an 1 Ith-Dynasty king
NEBHEPETRE MENTUHOTEP I 5 7


--- PAGE 59 ---
A painted-wood foreman oversees ser-
vant figures grinding grain, sifting flour; mix-
ing dough, and stoking ovens. Model
scenes such as this one found among the
burial equipment of Mentuhotep I were
commonly placed in tombs during the
Middle Kingdom.
would recall the great deeds of Men-
tuhotep and praise him as the reunifier
of the Two Lands. Still later, historians
would look to Mentuhotep as the
founder of the Middle Kingdom, the
ruler whose forcefulness and
determination ended the chaos and
conflict of the period that followed
Pepi IPs reign.
In the 1920s, excavations near
Mentuhotep's mortuary temple in Deir
el Bahri, an area just across the Nile
from Thebes, produced positive proof of
his aggressiveness. Archaeologists un-
covered a burial site containing the
remains of 60 soldiers killed in battle—
one of the world's first war cemeteries.
Analysis of the remains, as well as the
tomb's nearness to Mentuhotep's tem-
ple, suggests that these soldiers had
been sent to fight the Nubians, that
they died in battle, and that their re-
mains were brought back to Egypt for
burial.
Once Mentuhotep had Egypt
under his firm control, he began to
focus attention on new building pro-
jects. After establishing his official resi-
dence at Thebes, he gave his architects
orders to design a suitable royal palace.
He then approved the restoration of
many old temples. In el Kab, Gebelein,
Deir el Ballas, Dendera, and Abydos,
the hum at construction sites reflected
a new era in Egypt. At el Tod, Men-
tuhotep ordered workers to prepare ad-
ditional adornments for the sanctuary
of his namesake, the god Montu, the
Theban god of war. (Mentuhotep's
name means "Montu is content.")
As the site for his burial complex,
Mentuhotep did not choose one near
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
58


--- PAGE 60 ---
Behold, there was never anyone who, having died, was able
to come back again.
—Believed to have been carved in a mortuary chapel of
an lltlvDynasty king
the tombs of his predecessors, but
instead opted for one farther south at
Deir el Bahri. The location was a dra-
matic one, as it lay in an enclosed area
at the foot of great rock cliffs. The de-
sign was also different from that of his
predecessors' tombs. Unfortunately,
much of the complex lies in ruins
today. This is chiefly because, about
500 years after Mentuhotep's death, the
18th-Dynasty ruler Hatshepsut allowed
her workers to use Mentuhotep's com-
plex as a quarry for building materials.
While the basic layout of Mentu-
hotep's burial complex followed that
established by the rulers of the Old
Kingdom, the design did not. A cause-
way and ramp passing through a grove
of trees led to a massive podium rising
above the desert sands. On top of the
podium stood a temple surrounded by
square-cut pillars inscribed with Men-
tuhotep's name. Although positive evi-
dence is lacking, some Egyptologists
believe that a pyramid stood on a plat-
form near the temple. Behind it, at
the base of the cliffs, was a roofed
structure supported by a row of
columns. Here was a garden with
tamarisks and large sycamore-fig trees
positioned to provide shade for the
stone statues of Mentuhotep.
In the early 1900s, directly in front
of the temple, Egyptologist Howard
Carter uncovered an entrance to a
deep tunnel—now called Bab el Hosan,
meaning "Gate of the Horseman."
After some careful excavation work,
Carter discovered a chamber beneath
the temple. A finely painted and carved
stone statue of Mentuhotep majestical-
ly sat there. It wore the red crown of
Lower Egypt and the traditional white
garment worn by rulers for the Heb-
Sed ritual.
The statue's hands lay folded across
the chest area in what Egyptologists
refer to as the Osiris position. By Men-
tuhotep's time, Egyptians had turned
increasingly to the worship of Osiris,
the god of the dead and of fertility. Ac-
cording to legend, Osiris had once
ruled the lands along the Nile, and it
was he who had given the Egyptians
the gifts of civilization and agriculture.
After Osiris's brother Seth tore him
apart in a jealous rage, Osiris's wife, Isis,
lovingly gathered the scattered limbs
and magically reunited her husband's
body. For this reason, the Egyptians
worshiped him as the god of the
underworld and the dead, and began to
believe that they, too, like Osiris, could
continue to exist after death.
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Nebhepetre
Mentuhotep I
POSITION
King of Egypt
ACTIVE DATES
About 2060-10 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Reunified the lands of Upper and
Lower Egypt; sent military expedi-
tions into Nubia, the Sinai Penin-
sula, and Libya; annexed northern
Nubia; opened the trade routes be-
tween Nubia and Egypt; promoted
the arts and ordered the building
and restoration of several temples;
built a huge temple-tomb for him-
self at Deir el Bahri
NEBHEPETRE MENTUHOTEP I 5 9


--- PAGE 61 ---
I shall not fear in my body for words and magic will over-
come this evil for me.
—From Coffin Texts found in an 11 tl> Dynasty tomb
In the cliffs behind Mentuhotep's
burial complex, archaeologists found a
honeycomb of tombs that belonged to
the king's nobles and high-ranking offi-
cials, including the tomb of Men-
tuhotep's vizier Dagi. Further digging
revealed Dagi's limestone sarcophagus.
The interior was covered with inscrip-
tions, known today as "Coffin Texts."
They are a later version of the Pyramid
Texts that the kings of the Old King-
dom had carved into the walls of their
tombs. According to the Egyptians, a
person had to recite magic spells and
prayers to make the journey from this
world to the next less strenuous. If a
dead person forgot the words or the
proper order of the words, that person
might not be able to share in an after-
life. To prevent such a terrible fate, the
Egyptians adopted the practice of writ-
ing the spells and prayers on the interi-
or and exterior of their coffins. They
also inscribed a map of the underworld
to help guide the deceased along the
correct path. As an additional safety
measure, the Egyptians began to paint a
pair of eyes on the left side of the cof-
fin. With these eyes, the deceased
could "look" to the outside of the coffin
and read the texts. The eyes could also
see and take in the food offerings the
priests and relatives had left for them,
as well as the food offerings depicted
on the walls of the tomb.
But the Coffin Texts did not pro-
vide everything that was needed for an
Egyptian to do exactly what he had
done in this life. So the Egyptians
placed in the tomb small, often wood-
en, statues of workers performing a vari-
ety of tasks, from plowing to breadmak-
ing, to fishing, to brewing beer. The
Egyptians believed that if they recited
magic spells and prayers, these "people"
would come alive and do whatever the
deceased asked them to do.
Some of the best servant models
ever uncovered were found in a secret
chamber in the tomb of Mentuhotep's
chancellor and chief steward, Meketre.
All the figures were dutifully working
at their special tasks, just as they had
been for thousands of years.
During the Middle Kingdom, some
years after Mentuhotep, the belief in
an afterlife kingdom ruled by Osiris
became increasingly widespread, and
a new type of servant figure, the
ushebti, appeared. According to some
etymologists (people who study words),
ushebti comes from the Egyptian verb
usheb, meaning "to answer" or "to
respond." Found in the tombs of
wealthy Egyptians, the ushebti are
mummiform figures often inscribed
with their owner's name. The Egyptians
believed that should Osiris himself
summon helpers to prepare his Field of
Reeds in the underworld, a dead person
could send the appropriate ushebti to do
the work.
FURTHER READING
Lehner, Mark. The Compkte Pyramids, pp.
166-67. New York: Thames & Hudson,
1997.
6 0 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 62 ---
Amenemhet
I
RETURN TO TRADITION
AND UNITY
hen shall come a king from the South.
Ameni, the triumphant, will be his name. He
will take the white crown [of Upper Egypt],
and wear the red crown [of Lower Egypt]. He
shall unite the Two Powerful Ones [the vul-
ture goddess Nekhbet of Upper Egypt and the cobra goddess
Wadjet of Lower Egypt] and delight the Two Lords [the gods
Horus and Seth] with what they love.
So reads the prophecy of a fictional ancient Egyptian
priest named Neferti. Since the name Ameni is a shortened
form of Amenemhet, it is believed that the author used
Ameni to indicate that Neferti was referring to Amenemhet
I. In fact, many Egyptologists believe that Amenemhet him-
self most likely commissioned the author to write the tale.
Thus, it is not the prophecy but the tale itself that intrigues
Egyptologists.
More than 20 copies of the prophecy survive, but all
date to the 18th Dynasty, approximately 500 years after
Amenemhet ruled Egypt. Passages from the prophecy have
The Sacred Lake at Karnak. Every Egyptian temple had a sacred lake where, several times a day, the temple priests bathed and
washed the implements they used for rituals.
AMENEMHET I 6 1
T


--- PAGE 63 ---
Archaeologists uncovered this painted de-
tail of Amenemhet I's head carved on a
block over the doorway into his mortuary
temple at Lisht
also been uncovered on two writing
boards and on various pieces of clay.
These also date to the 18th Dynasty.
But according to the text, Neferti
lived during the reign of Snefru, a 4th
Dynasty ruler who preceded Amen-
emhet by approximately 600 years.
In the tale, Sneferu asks Neferti to
speak of "what is going to happen" and
prepares to write the priest's words on a
scroll of papyrus paper. Neferti foresees
a time when people will know no hap-
piness, a time when the land will live in
an uproar and there will be no grain.
The future ruler, Ameni, will bring
order and justice to this world. Neferti
says he will be born in Upper Egypt and
that his mother is from the land
to the south, the land of Nubia. (Actu-
ally, nothing is known about Amen-
emhet's mother. As for his father, an in-
scription at Kamak notes that he was a
commoner named Senwosret.) Neferti
asks the people of Ameni's time to re-
joice because their king is one who will
make his name known for all eternity.
This wording has led Egyptologists
to believe that the prophecy was writ-
ten to establish Amenemhet's right to
the throne of Egypt. Records indicate
that Amenemhet did not inherit the
throne, but rather succeeded to it by
some unofficial means. To justify his
actions, Amenemhet had to align him-
self with a ruler and a time period that
all Egyptians respected and honored.
The natural choice was Snefru, because
Egyptians considered his reign a Gold-
en Age and referred to Snefru by the
honorary title of "Beneficent King."
The details of how Amenemhet
came to power are sketchy. Nebhepetre
Mentuhotep I had united the lands
bordering the Nile, but his successors—
Mentuhotep II and Mentuhotep III—
lacked his strength and drive. Because
the situation would only worsen,
Amenemhet had decided to act. A
powerful nomarch, or governor, in
Upper Egypt, he knew well the work-
ings of Egypt's government. Under
Mentuhotep III, he had held the post
of vizier. An inscription uncovered at
Wadi Hammamat, an area east of
Thebes, describes what was probably
Amenemhet's last official assignment as
Mentuhotep's vizier.
The king was planning his burial
complex and had ordered Amenemhet
to travel to the stone quarries at Wadi
Hammamat to find a stone block for
the lid of his royal sarcophagus. To help
Amenemhet complete the task, Men-
tuhotep placed an army of 1,000 sol-
diers under his command. According to
the inscription, a pregnant gazelle ap-
peared before Amenemhet and led him
6 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 64 ---
to an enormous rock. Recognizing the
excellent quality of the stone, Amen-
emhet ordered his men to cut a huge
block from the rock and arranged for it
to be taken to Mentuhotep at Thebes.
Soon after, Amenemhet, with the sup-
port of his soldiers, claimed the throne
for himself. (Neither the lid, nor the
sarcophagus, nor Mentuhotep's tomb
has yet been discovered.)
To consolidate his power, Amen-
emhet sailed a fleet of ships up and
down the Nile and successfully defeat-
ed those nomarchs who opposed his
rule. Because good government de-
pended on cooperation at all levels,
Amenemhet revived some of the an-
cient titles and awarded them to de-
serving officials. To curb the influence
of the nomarchs, he redistributed the
norms by assigning a different set of
cities to most of the nomarchs. Amen-
emhet also established new rules re-
garding registration of land and land
ownership. His aim was to reduce the
possibility of conflict between the no-
marchs and the king.
Amenemhet took as his Horus
name Wehem-mesut ("He who repeats
births"), which clearly meant that he
considered himself the first of a new
royal line. Egyptologists now recognize
Amenemhet as the first king of the
12th Dynasty. As his capital city, he
chose a site about 20 miles south of the
old capital of Memphis and named it
Amenemhet-itj-tawy, which translates,
"It is Amenemhet who has conquered
the Two Lands." In time, the name was
abbreviated to Itj-tawy. The exact site
has not been found, but archaeologists
believe that it was located somewhere
near present-day el Lisht.
Uniting the "two Egypts" political-
ly and militarily was important, but it
was not enough. Amenemhet also had
to protect Egypt's commercial interests
in the turquoise and copper mines on
the Sinai Peninsula. Like his predeces-
sors, Amenemhet was well aware that
Egypt's architects and artisans depend-
ed on the steady import of raw materi-
als not found in the lands along the
Nile. The sand dwellers, or desert tribes
living on the Sinai Peninsula, saw cara-
vans moving along the trade routes as
easy prey. To prevent attacks, Amen-
emhet ordered a line of fortresses built
in the Wadi Tumilat, a fertile area
along the eastern edge of the Delta.
This Wadi led to the Bitter Lakes,
which, in turn, led to the Red Sea, a
key maritime trade route for the an-
cient Egyptians. History often refers to
Amenemhet's defense system as the
"Walls of the Prince." Archaeologists
have uncovered no trace of these
fortresses, probably because they were
built of mud bricks.
Amenemhet also turned his atten-
tion south to the lands beyond the First
Cataract. Here lay Nubia, rich in gold
and other natural resources. Nubia was
also the gateway to the interior of the
African continent and its great variety
of products.
Not all Egyptians, however, ac-
knowledged Amenemhet as the new
leader of the Two Lands. Segerseni re-
fused to do so and sought the title for
himself. To eliminate this potentially
serious rival, Amenemhet sent a fleet
of 20 ships, under the command of a
loyal nomarch named Khnumhotep,
against Segerseni. The expedition was
successful, and Amenemhet rewarded
Khnumhotep with increased political
responsibilities. To protect himself and
Egypt against further rebellion, Amen-
emhet reinstated compulsory military
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Amenemhet I
POSITION
King of Egypt
ACTIVE DATES
About 1991-62 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Reunited Upper and Lower Egypt;
built defensive wall of fortresses
(Walls of the Prince) along the
eastern edge of the Delta; sent two
military expeditions into Nubia and
extended Egyptian control as far as
the Second Cataract; established a
new capital at Itj-tawy; refurbished
and built several temples; estab-
lished the worship of Amun
throughout Egypt
AMENEMHET I 6 3


--- PAGE 65 ---
I caused the person who was
nothing to reach his goal, to
be like the person who was
of some social standing.
—The Instruction
ofAmenemhet
service. This meant that, in any emer-
gency, he would have a corps of soldiers
trained and ready for action.
As peace and prosperity gradually
returned to the lands along the Nile,
Amenemhet directed a variety of build-
ing projects. These included a granite
altar dedicated to Osiris, the god of the
underworld, at Abydos; a granite gate-
way consecrated to Hathor, the gocjdess
of the sky, at Dendera; and a temple
built in honor of Ptah, the god of cre-
ation, at Memphis. In honoring the
many deities of Egypt, Amenemhet
followed a precedent set by a number
of his predecessors. Yet he differed
from them in his worship of the god
Amun. For centuries, the chief god
worshiped in Upper Egypt had been
Montu, the god of war. Osiris and the
sun god Re had been the principal
deities in both Upper and Lower Egypt.
Amenemhet, however, felt a special de-
votion for Amun, who was worshiped
mainly in Thebes. Even Amenemhet's
name, which means "Amun is in the
lead," reflected his close relationship
with Amun.
Amenemhet commissioned archi-
tects to adorn a temple to Amun at
Thebes. He also ordered that a shrine
to Amun be constructed on the east
bank of the Nile at Ipet-isut, "the most
select of all places." (Ipet-isut is known
today as Karnak, a name taken from
that of a neighboring modern village.)
In time, Amun would become the prin-
cipal god of the Egyptian nation, and
Karnak would become the religious
center of all Egypt.
Amenemhet then turned to a more
personal construction project—his bur-
ial complex—and chose a site near his
new capital. In an attempt to recall
the glories of past generations, he chose
the pyramid style for his own tomb.
Though his would not be as grandiose
as that of Khufu or other Old Kingdom
rulers, it would have a temenos, or en-
closure wall, surrounding the pyramid
area, a mortuary temple, and over 100
mastaba tombs for high-ranking offi-
cials. And, just as in the past, these
mastaba tombs would be located close
to the royal pyramid.
To construct the inner core of the
pyramid, Amenemhet's architects had
workers take limestone blocks from the
royal burial complexes at Giza and
Abusir. To face the pyramid's exterior,
workers used white limestone brought
from the quarries at Tura. Today these
blocks are gone because later builders
did exactly what Amenemhet's workers
had done—they removed and reused
the limestone for their construction
projects.
Having provided for his afterlife,
Amenemhet looked to the future of
Egypt and began to make provisions for
a successor. Because he believed that
unity depended on a smooth transition
of power from one ruler to the next, in
Year 20 (of his rule), he named his el-
dest son, Senwosret, as his co-regent.
This meant that the two would rule to-
gether until Amenemhet's death. No
Egyptian monarch had ever had a co-
ruler, but Amenemhet's new policy set
a precedent that all rulers of the 12th
Dynasty would follow.
For Amenemhet, the position of
co-regent was not an honorary one. He
saw it as an opportunity to provide
Senwosret with on-the-job training and
experience. Therefore, he named Sen-
wosret his chief assistant and, more im-
portant, gave him command of the
army. Amenemhet even drew up a de-
tailed list of duties and responsibilities
for his son. Records show that three
years after his appointment, Senwosret
64 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 66 ---
led a military campaign south into
Nubia and extended Egyptian rule be-
yond the First Cataract. The following
year, the Egyptian army defeated
Bedouin tribes in the Sinai and reaf-
firmed Egyptian dominance in the area.
At the same time, Amenemhet and
Senwosret renegotiated trade treaties
with Byblos and other trade ports in
the eastern Mediterranean Sea. Ship-
ments of cedars of Lebanon (a hard,
strong wood that was especially good
for boatbuilding), wine, vegetable oil,
and textiles were traded for such Egyp-
tian exports as ivory, precious stones,
and ostrich shells.
In Year 29 of Amenemhet's rule,
Senwosret led a second campaign into
Nubia and extended Egyptian rule far-
ther south. To mark Egyptian presence,
he established a fort at Semna at the
southern end of the Second Cataract.
The following year, Senwosret led a
campaign west across the desert sands
against the Libyans. Again he met suc-
cess, but his joy soon turned to sorrow
and anger when reports reached him
that his father had been assassinated.
Exactly what happened is not clear,
but several surviving documents in-
clude details of the plot. Because each
of these writings dates to some 500 or
more years after Amenemhet died,
they must be viewed with reservation.
Nevertheless, close analysis of the pas-
sages proves that the ancient Egyptians
knew of the conspiracy. In fact, school-
masters used the account entitled The
Instruction of Amenemhet as a writing
exercise and as a textbook on rules
for leaders.
Amenemhet is the narrator of
The Instruction and speaks in the first
person to his son Senwosret. At first,
Egyptologists thought that Amenemhet
wrote the document after surviving an
Harden yourself against all subordinates. Do not approach
them alone.
—The Instruction of Amenemhet
assassination attempt. Now it seems
more probable that Senwosret ordered
a scribe to compose the text after his
father's murder. The purpose was
twofold: to reveal the conspiracy and
to establish a written record of Amen-
emhet's advice to his son on the duties
and responsibilities of a king.
As the text begins, Amenemhet
tells Senwosret to trust no one—not
even a brother or a friend because such
relationships profit a ruler nothing.
After more comments about the
wickedness of people and the corrup-
tion of society, Amenemhet tells of his
good deeds: "I gave to the beggar, I
nourished the orphan." He adds, "He
who ate my food raised opposition
against me. The one in whom I placed
my trust used it to plot."
Amenmehet actually describes his
murder, although briefly:
It was after the evening meal, night
had come. I had taken an hour of rest
and laid myself on my bed. . . .
Weapons that were for my protection
were turned against me. ... I awoke
to fight, utterly alone . . . one cannot
fight alone and success cannot come
to me without you.
From this passage it seems clear
that the conspirators achieved their
goal. Yet, in the next passage, Amen-
emhet says that the assassination
attempt happened before the officials
had heard he was handing his power
over to Senwosret. As a result, some
historians feel this statement refers
to an earlier assassination attempt
that failed.
The text does not end with more
details about the plot but instead with
Amenemhet's own list of accomplish-
ments: "I sent to Elephantine [a town
on the boundary between Egypt and
Nubia], I reached the delta, I stood at
the borders of the land, I inspected its
interior. ... I was the one who culti-
vated grain. . . . The Nile honored me
on every field, no one went hungry
while I was king, no one was thirsty."
Amenemhet even includes a de-
scription of his palace at Itj-tawy. "I
made a palace adorned with gold. Its
ceilings are of lapis lazuli [a semi-
precious blue stone], the walls within of
silver . . . the doors of copper, and the
door-bolts of bronze. This house is built
for endless time and prepared for eterni-
ty." The Instruction . . . ends with a look
to the future, as Amenemhet wishes his
son "life, prosperity, and health."
FURTHER READING
Parkinson, R. B. Voices from Ancient Egypt:
An Anthology of Middle Kingdom Writings,
pp. 48-52. Norman: University of Okla-
homa Press, 1991.
AMENEMHET I 6 5


--- PAGE 67 ---
Senwosret I
AN EFFICIENT LEADER
t was he who subdued the foreign lands while
his father was within the palace. . . . He is a
champion who acts with his own mighty arm,
a fighter without equal."
With these words Sinuhe praised Senwos-
ret I, the reigning king of Egypt. It had been many years
since Sinuhe lived in Egypt, but as old age crept into his
bones, he felt the need to return home. He wanted to be
buried in Egyptian soil and needed time to prepare his tomb.
For Sinuhe, only a proper burial in Egypt, with all the atten-
dant rites and customs, could offer him true peace and hap-
piness in the next life. Yet it had been Sinuhe's choice to
leave Egypt and live in Palestine.
Years earlier, as a high-ranking official in the court of
Senwosret's father, Amenemhet I, Sinuhe had been assigned
to care for Amenemhet's daughter, the princess Neferu. Be-
cause Amenemhet saw his descendants as his successors, he
followed custom and arranged a marriage between Neferu
and his son, Senwosret. Later, Amenemhet had also named
Senwosret his co-regent and placed him in charge of the
army. For 10 years father and son ruled the lands along the
Nile together, with Amenemhet attending to domestic issues
and Senwosret to foreign matters.
Of concern to both were the trade routes leading south
into Nubia. To ensure the continued dominance of Egypt
and Egyptian traders in the region, Senwosret sent an army
into Nubia and took control of several important areas, in-
cluding a quarry at Wadi Tushka. In Year 4 of his co-regency,
Senwosret led an expedition against the sand dwellers, the
ancients' name for the Asiatics, nomadic tribes who lived on
the Sinai Peninsula.
Six years later, Senwosret led his army west against the
Libyans. Victory was swift, and Senwosret soon gave the
order to return to Egypt. With him on this campaign was
Sinuhe. When a messenger reported to Senwosret that his
father had been murdered, Sinuhe was close enough to hear
the message. Sinuhe also heard Senwosret swear his loyal at-
tendants to secrecy about the murder before he set out for
the palace. Not knowing any of the details, Senwosret con-
solidated his position first before taking control of Upper
and Lower Egypt and prosecuting those responsible for his
father's death.
Sinuhe panicked and fled to the Sinai Peninsula. Schol-
ars suspect he may have feared that Senwosret would think
him one of the conspirators and arrest him on charges of
treason. Sinuhe migrated to Palestine, where he married a
chieftain's daughter and soon became a respected leader in
the area.
66 • ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
UT


--- PAGE 68 ---
As the years passed, Sinuhe's
thoughts turned increasingly to Egypt.
Unhappy with the prospect of his body
being buried in foreign soil, he wrote to
Senwosret, begging the king's pardon
and requesting permission to return.
Senwosret gladly granted Sinuhe's re-
quest and replied: "What have you
done, that anyone should act against
you?. . . This plan of yours [to live in
exile] carried away your heart; I had
nothing against you. . . . Come back to
Egypt. . . . You shall not die in a foreign
land and Asiatics will not be the es-
corts at your burial. You shall not be
placed in a sheep-skin and earth
mounded over you. . . . Consider your
dead body and return."
Rejoicing at the warmth of Sen-
wosret's answer, Sinuhe settled his af-
fairs in Palestine and returned home.
Senwosret gave him a house and had
meals sent to him every day from the
palace kitchen. Senwosret even ordered
a pyramid tomb built for Sinuhe and
assigned his best engineers to design it.
Senwosret also instructed his artisans to
fashion a statue of Sinuhe and to over-
lay the body with gold leaf and the kilt
with fine gold. In surviving accounts,
Sinuhe noted that Senwosret treated
no other commoner in this manner.
For Egyptologists, Sinuhe's tale re-
veals much about the life and customs
of Senwosret's time. But its author is
never mentioned, and no reason for the
text's existence is ever given. Genera-
tions of Egyptians enjoyed reading it,
and many schoolmasters used it as a
text. Certainly, the message was one
that Egyptians wished their children to
know and appreciate: The political
foundations of Egypt were sound and
worthy of praise and respect. So, too,
were the nation's rulers. The tale also
contained a subtler message: It clearly
identified how Egypt surpassed—at
least, to the Egyptian way of thinking—
other lands in customs, refinement, and
civility. Other texts, such as The Prophe-
cy of Neferty and The Instruction of
Amenemhet also told of Egypt's greatness
under Senwosret and his father.
When Amenemhet died, Senwos-
ret became the sole ruler. His plan was
to follow up on the campaigns he had
led as co-regent. For centuries, Egypt
had had a fortress at Elephantine (mod-
ern-day Aswan), just north of the First
Cataract on the Nile River. Egyptian
influence was strong here, as merchants
regularly led trading expeditions into
Nubia as far as Kerma, which lay south
of the Third Cataract. By Year 5 of Sen-
wosret's reign, a large Egyptian fort,
measuring about 504 feet by 464 feet,
had been established at Buhen at the
Second Cataract. Senwosret now
pushed Egypt's boundary line even far-
ther south beyond the Second Cataract.
To establish Egyptian presence and as a
sign of his control of Lower Nubia, Sen-
wosret had his commanders build addi-
tional forts and fortify several towns in
the areas he conquered.
In the west, Senwosret took mea-
sures to prevent Libyan raids onto
Egyptian land. Even more important to
him, however, was establishing Egyp-
tian control of the five oases in the
desert sands between the Nile and the
border with Libya. These oases were
fertile regions where Egyptians raised
cattle and harvested such crops as
grapes and dates. And although their
proximity to the border with Libya
made them natural military outposts,
they were also great trading centers.
Because Senwosret considered Kharga,
the oasis farthest west, key to Egypt's
military supremacy in the area, he took
special care to maintain close links
with its officials.
An energetic king, Senwosret
kept himself well informed about de-
velopments throughout his kingdom.
This finely detailed wooden statue of
Senwosret I, holding a crook-topped staff
called a hekat and wearing the white
crown of Upper Egypt, measures 23 inch-
es high.This and a similar statue, with the
king wearing the red crown of Lower
Egypt, were found in a high priest's tomb
just east of Senwosret's pyramid.
SENWOSRET I 6 7


--- PAGE 69 ---
This piece of an inscription found on the
walls of Senwosret I's chapel at Karnak
records the names of Egypt's names or
districts (top row), deity of the nome (sec-
ond row), number of cattle in the nome
(third row), and length of the nome along
the Nile (bottom section).
Because the nation's economic welfare
also depended on laborers doing their
job in areas to the east of the Nile, he
monitored all work at the gold mines
in Coptos and at the quarries in Wadi
Hammamat and in Hatnub.
Following the precedent set by
his father, Senwosret had military con-
tingents carefully maintain the gar-
risons in this area east of the Nile.
Copper and turquoise imports from the
Sinai played an important role in the
nation's economy, and Senwosret in-
tended to keep Egypt the dominant
power in the area. To promote interna-
tional trade prospects, Senwosret en-
couraged peaceful relations with Syria
and Palestine. If the political references
in Sinuhe's tale are true, Senwosret
wanted to maintain diplomatic rela-
tions with Asian countries and had no
plans to send troops beyond the Sinai.
Like his father and so many of
his predecessors, Senwosret saw
6 8 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 70 ---
construction projects as a mirror of the
country's strength. In Year 3, he or-
dered the rebuilding of a temple at He-
liopolis, an ancient religious center
dedicated principally to the worship of
the sun god Re. An inscription from
this temple, which was written on a
roll of leather, named Senwosret I as
the individual responsible for building
the temple and praised him as a king
who performed many good works. It
listed the various procedures involved
in planning such a structure.
Senwosret also had his laborers and
artisans adorn more than 25 sites along
the Nile River between Nubia and the
Mediterranean Sea, including the reli-
gious complex dedicated to the sun god
at Karnak. Only a few of Senwosret's
building efforts have survived. One,
Senwosret's processional temple, is con-
sidered an excellent example of the ar-
chitecture of the Middle Kingdom even
though the building, as it stands today,
is a reconstruction. Archaeologists who
were working on a pylon (grand gate-
way leading to an Egyptian temple or
religious building) at Karnak realized
that the limestone blocks used as fillers
had actually been taken from another
site. After carefully removing and mea-
suring each block, the archaeologists
recreated the original temple—using
the same blocks. Within the temple,
four pillars flank the stone pedestal
that once served as a resting station
for the sacred boat that held the god
Amun's statue. During major festivals,
priests would walk in the procession,
carrying the boat and statue. The
carved reliefs and inscriptions on the
temple pillars indicate that the struc-
ture was designed for Senwosret's Heb-
Sed jubilee.
A ruler rarely lived until the 30th
year of his reign to celebrate the first
Heb-Sed in this world—that is, unless
he altered the rules, and some did.
Therefore, kings who did celebrate it
considered the festival one of the most
important events of their reign. To
commemorate such a significant event
in his reign, Senwosret erected other
structures as well. In front of the tem-
ple to Re that he had refurbished years
earlier at Heliopolis, he now had engi-
neers erect two 66-foot'high red gran-
ite obelisks. Each was a solid block of
stone and weighed 121 tons. Only one
has survived, and it is the oldest obelisk
still standing in Egypt.
Obelisks are large upright stone
columns with four sides. The top sec-
tion resembles a pyramid with its sides
tapering to a point. Used as religious
symbols, they were associated with the
worship of the sun god—hence Sen-
wosret's decision to erect obelisks at
Heliopolis. The Egyptians called them
tekhenu. Many centuries later, Greek
visitors to Egypt referred to them as
obelisks, from their word obeliskos,
meaning "a small spit." The Romans
adopted the Greek term, and so, too,
did the English language.
Following the example of his fa-
ther, Senwosret named his son Amen-
emhet (later Amenemhet II) co-regent.
For the next 150 or so years, the de-
scendants of the first Amenemhet
would continue the practice of naming
their sons co-regents in the final years
of their reign.
As the site of his burial complex,
Senwosret chose el Lisht. Unfortu-nate-
ly, years of water seepage have com-
pletely flooded the internal chambers of
the pyramid and made it impossible for
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Senwosret I
POSITION
King of Egypt
ACTIVE DATES
About 1971-28 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Extended Egyptian control of Nubia
to the Second Cataract and estab-
lished forts to protect Egypt's inter-
ests in the area; secured access to
the copper and turquoise mines on
the Sinai Peninsula; extended his
authority over the five oases in the
western desert areas; stopped Libyan
incursions into Egypt; promoted
trade with Syria and Palestine;
oversaw a massive building program
SENWOSRET I 6 9


--- PAGE 71 ---
The land is mine; I am its lord.
—Inscription on a wall in Re's temple at Heliopolis
excavators to gain access to the interi-
or. Study of the complex, however, re-
veals that it followed the traditional
design used for royal tomb complexes—
a pyramid with a mortuary temple
nearby. In fact, it was almost identical
to the one built by Pepi II more than
200 years earlier.
Inside the pyramid, excavators
found several limestone statues of Sen-
wosret. Ten of them had carved into
their sides a relief that historians be-
lieve reflects the union of Lower and
Upper Egypt. In the center is a pole
with horizontal lines that represent
both the word lungs and the verb to
unite. The hieroglyphs in the oval disk
"sitting" atop the "lung-pole" represent
one of Senwosret's royal names. To the
left of the pole is a relief of the god
Horus and a clump of papyrus—the
symbols of Lower Egypt. To the right of
the pole is a relief of the god Seth and
a clump of reeds—the symbols of
Upper Egypt. To symbolize the union of
the Two Lands and the unity kings
such as Senwosret promoted, Horus
and Seth tie a knot about the pole.
Excavators at the site also found the
remains of nine small pyramids that had
been built for ladies of the royal house-
hold. As was fitting, the pyramid of
Queen Neferu, the Great Royal Wife,
was slightly larger than the others.
In the nearby tomb of Imhotep,
the High Priest of Heliopolis, archaeol-
ogists uncovered two 23-inch wooden
statues of Senwosret, one wearing the
red crown of Lower Egypt and the
other wearing the white crown of
Upper Egypt. Both depict the king in a
standing position, with one foot placed
ahead of the other. However, the best
representation of Senwosret to have
survived was uncovered by the French
archaeologists J. E. Gauthier and Gus-
tave Jequier in 1894. Although in poor
condition, the black granite torso ap-
pears quite realistic in its detail. The
broad face and firm lips seem to reflect
a determined man who understood au-
thority and how and when to use it.
FURTHER READING
Lichtheim, Miriam. Ancient Egyptian Liter-
ature: A Book of Readings, vol. 1, pp.
115-18. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1973.
7 0 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 72 ---
Senwosret
m
STRONG AND
DETERMINED
ifteen hundred years after Senwosret Ill's
death, the Egyptian historian Manetho de-
scribed him as an outstanding warrior who
stood more than seven feet tall. Manetho may
have just been quoting long-accepted details,
but Senwosret's bravery and his height were legendary, and
both attributes must have worked to his advantage as he set
about restructuring the government and advancing new
military policies. Whether Senwosret served as official co-
regent with his father Senwosret II is not stated explicitly in
the records, but he did have the same goals as his father: He
wanted to rule the Two Lands as one nation, and he intend-
ed to protect the country's international trade interests.
Nubia, the land to the south of Egypt, claimed his at-
tention first. For years, the Egyptians had controlled several
Nubian mines and had set up fortresses to guard their inter-
ests in the region. Still, the skirmishes had continued, with
Nubian troops attacking Egyptians both in Nubia and in
Egypt itself. Senwosret's great-grandfather, Senwosret I, had
successfully curbed the rebellious activities of the Nubians
and built fortresses to establish Egyptian presence and
power. Senwosret's grandfather and father had reinforced
these defense measures.
Sculpted from black granite, this head lacks identifying inscrip-
tions, but its features are clearly Senwosret Ill's.
SENWOSRET III 7 1
F


--- PAGE 73 ---
He is like a dike that keeps
back the rivers floodwaters.
—Third Hymn to
Senwosret III
Senwosret III resolved to strength-
en Egypt's position and ordered a string
of fortresses built south of the Second
Cataract. To make sure these forts were
provisioned properly, Senwosret fo-
cused on the cataracts (especially the
First Cataract) because they forced
troops and merchants to abandon river
travel and proceed around the area by
land. This meant a loss of time and
money; it also exposed troops and
goods to attacks from hostile tribes.
Centuries earlier, Egyptian rulers
had ordered canals cut around the First
Cataract at Yebu (present-day Aswan),
and Senwosret decided to follow suit.
He sent workers to widen and deepen
the ancient channels. Sometime later,
when reports reached him that river
traffic through the canals had slowed,
Senwosret again sent workers to reme-
dy the situation.
For Senwosret, however, the First
Cataract was not an appropriate south-
ern boundary. To ensure safe travel
routes for Egyptian merchants and their
caravans, he wanted full control of the
mine-rich areas farther south. For this
reason, Senwosret considered the Sec-
ond Cataract a better boundary. In Year
8, he ordered a stele (stone column or
pillar) set up at Semna, a town just
south of the Second Cataract. He had
artisans inscribe on the stele a decree
that named Semna as Egypt's southern
boundary. The inscription also made
clear Senwosret's order forbidding any
Nubian from "crossing [the boundary],
by water or by land, with a ship, or
with any herds, except a Nubian who
shall come to trade in Iken [a fortress
site at Mirgissa at the Second Cataract]
or with an official message."
Senwosret also sent a military ex-
pedition with orders to set up forts
south of the Second Cataract. Accord-
ing to ancient accounts, there were 13,
and all were made of mud bricks. The
largest was L-shaped and measured ap-
proximately 426 feet square. When the
Great High Dam was built at Aswan in
the 1960s, many of these mud-brick
fortresses were drowned by the newly
created Lake Nasser. Prior to the dam's
construction, archaeologists were grant-
ed time to record information about
sites that would be submerged.
The Nubians did not accept for-
eign domination without a struggle,
and on several occasions, Senwosret
had to send military expeditions to
quell unrest. Finally, in Year 15, his
troops overwhelmingly defeated the
Nubians. To commemorate this deci-
sive victory, he erected a red granite
stele at Semna and a duplicate stele at
the newly built fortress on the neigh-
boring island of Uronarti. The hiero-
glyphs carved into the stelae clearly ex-
press Senwosret's feelings:
I have made my boundary beyond
that of my father's. I have increased
that which was left to me. I am a king
who speaks and acts; that which my
heart conceives is that which comes
to pass by my hand. ... I have carried
off their [that is, Nubian] subjects.. ..
I have taken their grain and set fire
to it. ... As my father lives in me
[the words used when taking an oath]
I speak the truth, without a lie com-
ing out of my mouth.
Senwosret also had a stern warning
engraved on the stelae:
As for every son of mine who shall
maintain this boundary, which my
majesty has made, he is my son... .
As for him who shall neglect the
boundary, and shall not fight for it, he
is not my son.
In 1844, German Egyptologist Karl
Lepsius found the Semna stele, dam-
aged and in two pieces. After recording
the find, he carefully wrapped each
piece in paper and prepared to ship
them back to Berlin, Germany. By mis-
take, Lepsius's workers left one piece on
the riverbank at Semna, where it lay
forgotten until another archaeologist
discovered it approximately 50 years
later—wrapped just as Lepsius had left
it. The "lost" piece was shipped to Ger-
many and remains there today, in the
Egyptian collection at the Staatliche
Museen in Berlin.
The power of the nomarchs had be-
come an increasing concern for Egypt's
kings. Over the centuries, nomarchs had
gradually come to treat their positions
as hereditary and had even been grant-
ed the right to maintain their own mil-
itary troops and fleets of unarmed ships.
Some 100 years earlier, several no-
marchs had usurped the king's power
and brought disunity to the lands along
the Nile. Furthermore, the legitimacy
of Senwosret's dynasty was question-
able: its founder, Nebhepetre Men-
tuhotep I, had himself been a nomarch
who extended his control over Upper
and Lower Egypt. Because succeeding
kings had been careful not to offend
the nomarchs, the power of these
provincial governors had continually
increased. Realizing the potential dan-
ger to his rule, Senwosret ended many
nomarch privileges, including the prac-
tice of building lavish tombs.
To further strengthen the kingship,
Senwosret revamped the administra-
tion of the provinces, dividing the
country into three warets, or districts:
Upper Egypt, Lower Egypt, and Ele-
phantine and Lower Nubia. In charge
of each waret was a high-ranking offi-
cial who reported to the vizier. Each of
7 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 74 ---
How great is the lord of his city: he is tike a mountain that
shuts out the storms blast when the sky rages.
—Third Hymn to Senwosret III
the three officials had his own assistant
and a council of senior magistrates who
reported on the economic, agricultural,
and military matters that affected the
waret under his control. Senwosret
opened the newly created positions to
artisans, farmers, merchants, and
traders. The result was an increase in
the power of the middle class.
Senwosret's policies also had an ef-
fect on religious thinking. For genera-
tions now, the middle class had ques-
tioned the Egyptian belief that only
kings and nobles could enjoy an after-
life. Some had even begun to look for-
ward to an afterlife for themselves. This
thinking accelerated under Senwosret,
and soon all Egyptians would consider
the afterlife a real possibility.
Accompanying these changes was
an increasing devotion to Osiris, the
god of the dead and the underworld.
According to Egyptian beliefs, Abydos
was the site of Osiris's tomb, and the
belief had developed that direct con-
tact with Abydos would enhance a
dead person's chances of spending eter-
nity in Osiris's kingdom, the "Field of
Reeds." Therefore, considering the role
Osiris and other deities played in the
afterlife, it seemed only proper that, as
the riches from the trade with Nubia
swelled the state treasury, Senwosret
should use this wealth to build new
temples and rebuild old ones. Excava-
tions at Abydos have unearthed a
stele erected by Ikhernofret, Senwos-
ret's chief treasurer. On it, artisans
had carved an inscription that told
how Senwosret had commissioned
Ikhernofret to go upriver to Abydos.
There he was to build monuments for
Osiris and to adorn Osiris's burial place
with Nubian gold.
To learn more about Senwosret's
personal life and traits, historians have
spent much time analyzing the six life-
size statues Senwosret had artisans
sculpt of himself dressed in the neme.
Senwosret had these statues set up on
the lower terrace of Nebhepetre Men-
tuhotep I's temple in Deir el Bahri.
Compared to the statues of Egypt's
early kings, those of Senwosret (as well
as those of his immediate predecessors)
were much more realistic. This change
in treatment, that is, this preference for
realism, was also affecting how Egyp-
tians regarded their king. No longer
was he considered a god-king. He was
but an ordinary human, a human
whom the gods had chosen to rule
their beloved nation.
Thus it seemed only fitting that
Senwosret's face and stance should re-
flect strength and determination. A
closer look at the statues, however, re-
veals a feeling of weariness, a weariness
that seems to say this king assumed the
burden of ruling because he cared
deeply about the land and its people.
As the years passed, Senwosret
followed the custom of his predecessors
and named his son Amenemhet co-
regent. After his death, succeeding
generations of Egyptians honored Sen-
wosret's memory and achievements. By
the fifth century B.C., he had become a
legendary figure and was known to the
ancient Greeks as Sesostris, the king
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Senwosret III
POSITION
King of Egypt
ACTIVE DATES
About 1878-41 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Sent several military expeditions
into Nubia; ordered a string of
fortresses built south of the Second
Cataract; had a canal re-dug around
the First Cataract; revamped the
central government; divided Egypt
into three districts, each headed
by a vizier; decreased the power of
the nomarchs
SENWOSRET III 7 3


--- PAGE 75 ---
A match between an Egyptian wrestler
and a Nubian wrestler is the theme of this
carefully drawn scene, which decorated
the wall of a nomarch's tomb around the
time of Senwosret III.The sport of
wrestling dates back to very ancient times.
Aggressiveness is the sign of
bravery. Retreat is the sign of
cowardice.
—From a boundary stele
of Senwosret III, Year 16
who "conquered every people who fell
in his way."
For his burial complex, Senwosret
followed his father's example and chose
Dahshur. Senwosret also followed his
father when he ordered a pyramid built
for his final resting place and had
builders incorporate a natural outcrop
of rock into the design. The architects
set stone retaining walls on the rock
and used mud bricks to fill in the empty
areas. As a covering for the entire pyra-
mid, Senwosret had his builders use a
layer of fine Tura limestone.
In 1894, French archaeologist
Jacques de Morgan excavated Senwos-
ret Ill's tomb complex. While de Mor-
gan did not find Senwosret's mummy or
treasures, he did uncover the tombs of
Mereret, Senwosret's queen, and of the
princess Sit-Hathor, Senwosret's sister.
Ancient robbers had long since entered
these rooms, but in their haste to es-
cape undetected, they missed jewelry
that had been wrapped and placed in
an area apart from the mummies.
De Morgan likewise acted in haste
and did not take time to record exactly
where and how he found the items, nor
did he note the details of their appear-
ance. When the finds arrived at the
Cairo Museum, conservators could not
fit the pieces together. Only when ar-
chaeologists found the remains of simi-
lar jewelry in nearby tombs and careful-
ly recorded each find were conservators
able to reconstruct more accurately the
jewelry that had once belonged to Sen-
wosret's royal ladies. The pieces are
considered among the finest ever found
in ancient Egypt and reflect the high
quality of craftsmanship during Sen-
wosret's reign.
De Morgan moved beyond the en-
closure walls of Senwosret's pyramid
complex to see if he might locate the
original subterranean entrance to the
pyramid. There he found six full-size
wooden boat burials and a wooden
sledge that the ancients had used to
drag the boats from the water's edge to
the burial site. Because the boats were
found near Senwosret's complex, it is
believed that they were part of his fu-
nerary equipment or were used to carry
the equipment from the east to the
west bank of the river. Buried in sand
pits dug expressly for this purpose, the
boats rested on mud bricks and had
their steering oars ready on deck. Ap-
proximately 32 feet in length, the boats
provide a unique glimpse of boatbuild-
ing procedures in ancient Egypt. To
date, the whereabouts of only four of
Senwosret's boats is known. Two are in
the Egyptian Museum in Cairo, Egypt;
a third is at the Carnegie Museum of
Natural History in Pittsburgh, Pennsyl-
vania; and the fourth is in the Field
Museum of Natural History in Chicago,
Illinois.
FURTHER READING
Lichtheim, Miriam. Ancient Egyptian Liter-
ature: A Book of Readings, vol. 1, pp.
118-20. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1973.
Parkinson, R. B. Voices from Ancient Egypt:
An Anthology of Middle Kingdom Writings,
pp. 43-47. Norman: University of Okla-
homa Press, 1991.
7 4 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 76 ---
Amenemhet
ffl
DEVELOPER OF
THE FAIYUM
menemhet III was determined to foil any
thieves who might try to break into his
tomb. As the site for his pyramid, Amen-
emhet chose Dahshur, just as his father,
Senwosret III, had. With great care, workers
followed the custom of the time and used mud bricks to
build the inner core of the pyramid and faced the exterior
with limestone blocks. The structure was enormous, with
the base of each side measuring approximately 342 feet. In-
stead of the traditional entrance on the side facing north,
Amenemhet's architects designed his pyramid with an east-
face entrance.
Amenemhet, however, chose not to have his mummi-
fied remains buried at Dahshur. In checking the Dahshur
site, archaeologists found that some areas of the foundation
are lower than others, and they reason that Amenemhet
may have considered the tomb structurally unsound. Or
Amenemhet may have simply been following the ancient
custom of building two tombs: one for his mummy and one
a cenotaph, or empty tomb, built in his honor. Egyptologists
theorize that this practice of two tombs may have begun
during the Old Kingdom to indicate a king's authority over
This head and the colossal granite statue of Amenemhet III to
which it belonged probably stood originally at Memphis. Cen-
turies later it was taken to the Delta region, where it was found.
AMENEMHET III 7 5
A


--- PAGE 77 ---
Made of semiprecious stones in reds,
blues, and tans, and with an outline in
gold, this pectoral (an ornament worn on
the chest) blazes with colorThe two
standing figures represent Amenemhet III
holding the kneeling enemy by the hair
Above is the vulture goddess Nekhbet,
the guardian deity of Upper Egypt. She
holds an ankh, the Egyptian symbol of life,
in each of her talons.
both Upper and Lower Egypt. Today
the limestone casing of the Dahshur
pyramid is gone, not because of tomb
robbers, but because later generations
used the outer blocks to construct their
own buildings. Only the huge interior
survives, and this crumbling mass has
been nicknamed the "Black Pyramid"
because of its dark color.
As the site for his second pyramid,
Amenemhet chose Hawara, to the
south of Dahshur. For the basic design,
his architects followed precedent—but
not when they came to the inner
chambers and passageways. Here, again,
were "tricks" to foil robbers. Even the
English Egyptologist Sir Flinders Petrie,
who excavated the tomb in the 1880s,
found the task exasperating. There had
to be a "correct" corridor leading to the
burial chamber, but only after spending
much time carefully examining the
floors and walls of every corridor did
Petrie notice a ceiling area that ap-
peared slightly different. Upon closer
investigation, Petrie discovered that
Amenemhet's workers had used a stone
weighing more than 22 tons to conceal
the opening that led to an upper corri-
dor. After sliding the stone sideways, in
just the way ancient builders had de-
signed it to work, Petrie climbed up
and through another passageway. This,
too, he found had been built to foil
robbers because it led nowhere. Search-
ing the ceiling area again, he found an-
other hidden passageway, a door that
led to a third corridor, another sliding
stone block, still another fake passage-
way, and another sliding stone block.
For the clever robber who might
manage to reach this area of the com-
plex, Amenemhet had his engineers
design a few more surprises. Workers
cut two vertical shafts that reached
from the floor straight down into the
pyramid. They filled both with rubble
and sealed them, but did not conceal
them. Amenemhet and his architects
wanted robbers to concentrate their ef-
forts on finding a burial chamber at the
bottom of one of the shafts. Petrie did
exactly that and found nothing.
The actual burial vault was an
enormous piece of quartzite weighing
more than 100 tons and measuring ap-
proximately 22 feet long and 8 feet
wide. Here, again, Amenemhet seems
to have broken with tradition. Instead
of having his royal pyramid house only
his mummy, he appears to have made
plans to have this huge burial chamber
hold both his sarcophagus and that of
his favorite daughter, the princess Ne-
feruptah. Excavators did find two sar-
cophagi in the chamber—one large and
one small, but Egyptologists question
whether the princess was, in fact,
buried with Amenemhet.
Despite all Amenemhet's precau-
tions, robbers did find his burial cham-
ber and his mummy. Petrie and his
crew, on the other hand, found no
bodies and no treasure, but they did
uncover bits of charred remains.
7 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 78 ---
Worship the king Nimaatre
[Amenemhet III], living
forever, with your bodies.
Enthrone his majesty in
your hearts.
—Inscription on the stele
of Sehetepibre, Amen-
emhet Ill's chief treasurer
In the chamber excavators also
found two quartzite chests for holding
canopic jars. Before beginning the
mummification process, an incision was
made along the right side of a dead per-
son's body, and the liver, lungs, stom-
ach, and intestines were removed.
These inner organs were cleaned and
treated with natron, a substance that
acts as a drying agent, then placed in
four special containers (the canopic
jars) made of stone or clay. The stop-
pers sealing these jars resembled human
heads. Beginning with the 18th Dy-
nasty, the stoppers were in the shape of
four different heads, each representing
a son of Horus: human, ape, jackal, and
hawk. Canopic chests were specially
designed to hold the four jars.
Amenemhet's pyramid at Hawara
was enormous, but his mortuary temple
just south of the pyramid was even larg-
er. In fact, the fifth-century B.C. Greek
historian Herodotus referred to the
temple as a labyrinth, and he wrote
that it
surpasses the pyramids. It has twelve
courts, all with roofs, and with gates
set exactly opposite to each other, six
face north and six face south. A single
wall encircles the labyrinth, which
has 3,000 rooms. Fifteen hundred
rooms are under ground and the other
1,500 are above ground. The latter are
constructed on top of the former. . . .
I saw the upper chambers with my
own eyes. . . . Everywhere the roofs
and the walls were of stone. In addi-
tion, the walls were covered with re-
liefs of various figures . . . [and] each
courtyard was faced with white marble
and surrounded by a colonnade.
From Herodotus's account, it seems
likely that Amenemhet considered this
gigantic complex as more than a mortu-
ary temple. It likely was also an admin-
istrative office building and living area
for construction workers and artisans.
Amenemhet, however, did not just
concern himself with burial complexes.
He took great interest in an area that
lay less than six miles northwest of his
burial complex. Known as the Faiyum,
it was a lush fertile area in the midst of
desert sands. Growing and harvesting
enough food to feed his people was
critical to Amenemhet's maintaining
stability and peace throughout the Two
Lands. He had officials keep accurate
counts of the grain supply, especially of
the amount stored in the country's gra-
naries. Should the floodwaters of the
Nile be lower than usual and the har-
vests poor, Amenemhet wanted to be
sure his people would not go hungry.
Surplus food was also good for econom-
ic reasons. Egyptian merchants could
trade the extra food for resources Egypt
lacked and for additional revenue.
Several other fertile areas, or oases,
lay west of the Nile River, but none
were as large as the Faiyum. Every year,
during the inundation period, the
floodwaters of the Nile overflowed the
river's banks. Some of these waters ran
along the Bahr Yosuf River, a tributary
that links the Nile River with the
Faiyum, and spread across the Faiyum.
Over time, the floodwaters had formed
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Amenemhet
m
POSITION
King of Egypt
ACTIVE DATES
About 1842-1797 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Regulated the flow of floodwaters
into the Faiyum and reclaimed
much agricultural land in the area;
promoted the use of nilometers to
determine the height of flooding for
a given year; built two pyramids,
one at Dahshur and one at Hawara;
built an enormous mortuary temple,
later known as the "Labyrinth"; ex-
tended Egypt's southern boundary to
the Third Cataract; brought stabili-
ty and security to Egypt with a min-
imum of military force; protected
Egypt's interest in the turquoise
mines on the Sinai Peninsula
AMENEMHET III 7 7


--- PAGE 79 ---
The one whom the king has
loved will be bkssed. There
is no tomb for one hostile to
his majesty.
—Inscription on the stele
of Sehetepibre, chief trea-
surer to Amenemhet III
a body of water known as Lake Moeris.
(Moeris is the Greek form of the an-
cient Egyptian name Mi-wer, meaning
"Great Channel.") Because the area is
a natural depression, the waters did not
recede in the months that followed the
flood season. Rather, they remained in
the lake and provided the inhabitants
with a water source not available to
other regions.
To provide more arable land in the
Faiyum for farmers to sow and harvest,
Amenemhet had workers drain marsh-
lands and dig irrigation canals that
would carry the water to outlying dis-
tricts. Egyptologists estimate that
Amenemhet may have reclaimed as
much as 150,000 acres or more of land
in the area. The result was greater eco-
nomic prosperity and a greater sense of
security throughout Egypt, but especial-
ly in the north, where low floodwaters
meant smaller harvests.
Amenemhet had a temple built in
the Faiyum to honor Sobek, the croco-
dile god. He also ordered two huge stat-
ues of himself erected at Biahmu, just
north of Hawara. Petrie found traces of
sandstone and of limestone that led
him to believe that each statue was at
least 35 feet high and depicted Amen-
emhet in a sitting position. As each
statue probably rested on a base that
stood at least 21 feet high, they must
have looked awesome to anyone ap-
proaching the Faiyum.
Amenemhet had many other stat-
ues of himself erected throughout
Egypt. One, at Hawara, depicts him
in the early years of his reign, and its
features are youthful, serene, and al-
most smiling. Another, uncovered in
Medinet el Faiyum, portrays him as a
priest with a heavy ritual headdress and
necklace and a leopard-skin cloak. The
serious and stern features of this statue
reflect the forceful and determined
ruler he must have been. Amenemhet,
however, did not spend all his time on
construction projects. The stability and
prosperity of his nation also depended
on secure boundaries and free access to
trade routes.
The mines in Nubia and on the
Sinai Peninsula provided Amenemhet
with hard stone and gold for his many
building projects. Amenemhet recog-
nized the importance of the forts his
father had established beyond the Sec-
ond Cataract, and he kept them well
maintained. However, he thought
Egypt's boundary should be extended
even farther south and ordered his
troops to move the boundary line to
the Third Cataract. Despite such ac-
tion, relations between the Nubians
and the Egyptians remained fairly quiet
during Amenemhet's reign. But on sev-
eral occasions, Anemenhet did find it
necessary to send punitive raids against
the Nubians.
Amenemhet had another reason
for protecting Egypt's interests as far
south as the Third Cataract. He was
very interested in the nilometers (unit
of measure) marked off at various sites
beyond the First Cataract. On stone
slabs, engineers noted the rise in the
Nile's waters at the beginning of every
flood season. By comparing the various
"rises" over the years, they could calcu-
late how high the waters would rise
each year and warn the towns and
cities of Upper and Lower Egypt if
flooding was to be expected.
Like Nubia, the Sinai was also
strategically and economically impor-
tant to Egypt. It formed the nation's
eastern boundary and was rich in
turquoise-producing mines. Because
turquoise was used both for jewelry and
in religious and burial ceremonies,
Amenemhet considered it his duty
to protect Egypt's rights to the
turquoise mines and the people who
worked them. For this reason, he
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
7 8


--- PAGE 80 ---
favored establishing towns with good
water supplies (mainly from wells) for
those who worked in the mines and
ordered garrisons built to protect the
miners against Bedouin attacks.
Having worked hard to increase
Egypt's prosperity, Amenemhet now
looked to the future. Following the ex-
ample set by his great-great-great-grand'
father, Amenemhet I, he, too, made his
son a co-regent. Exactly how long the
two ruled together is not known. Some
evidence suggests that Amenemhet
IV was quite young when he died and
that a queen named Sobeknefru took
command of the Two Lands. As king,
Amenemhet III had proved himself
the worthy bearer of a name that
meant "Justice belongs to Re." Later
generations would recognize his 45-year
rule as one of the great periods in
Egyptian history and agree with the
words Sehetepibre, Amenemhet's chief
treasurer, had inscribed on his stele:
He [Amenemhet] illuminates the Two
Lands more than the sun-disk.
He makes the Two. Lands green more
than a great Nile.
He has filled the Two Lands with
strength.
FURTHER READING
Lehner, Mark. The Complete Pyramids, pp.
181-83. New York: Thames & Hudson,
1997.
This pyramidion (the small stone pyramid
that topped a pyramid) once crowned
Amenemhet Ill's pyramid at Dahshur
Carved in black granite, the design repre-
sents Amenemhet III himself, with his eyes
looking toward the sun god. It is about
four feet, three inches high.
AMENEMHET III 7 9


--- PAGE 81 ---
More Ancient
Egyptians to
Remember
eketre (active about 2030 B.C.) served
as Mentuhotep Fs chancellor and chief
steward. Like so many of his contempo-
raries who held important administrative
posts, Meketre had workers cut his tomb
into the rocky cliff that rose above Mentuhotep's temple and
tomb at Deir el Bahri. In antiquity, robbers stripped the
tomb of all the valuables, but they missed a small chamber.
In 1919-20, excavators found in this room 24 (some say 25)
models of the type that Egyptians gave as gifts to nomarchs
and high-ranking officials. Crafted of wood, they represent,
in minute detail, scenes from daily life, including a two-story
butcher shop with workers preparing cattle for slaughter, a
carpenter's shop, and a bakery. Here also were two beautiful-
ly crafted models of Meketre's house, with its walled garden
and copper-lined pool bordered by leafy trees.
Egyptian fishermen prepare to haul in their catch.They and other servant figures found remarkably well preserved in Meketre's tomb
are housed at the Egyptian Museum in Cairo.
M
80 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 82 ---
Heqanakht (active about 2030
B.C.) was a farmer and prosperous land-
holder under Mentuhotep I. A chance
find of some of his letters and business
accounts in a pack of crumpled papyri
in the cliff tombs overlooking Deir el
Bahri have provided a unique glimpse
into Heqanakht's life. Most of the
papyri appear to be palimpsests, that
is, papyrus paper that has been used
and then washed clean for reuse. The
letters addressed to his eldest son make
it clear that Heqanakht wanted the
workers on their land to work hard for
their wages and to take pride in their
tasks. His attitude to his younger son,
Snefru, is different. Heqanakht wrote
to his eldest son, "If Snefru wants to
look after bulls, then let him look after
bulls. . . . Whatever he wants, you
should let him enjoy it."
In another letter, Heqanakht re-
views the payment of rent on his lands
and then complains about receiving old
grain. From the text, it appears that
Heqanakht's land holdings were near
Thebes and that his income came from
the lands he fanned for himself and his
family and from plots of lands that he
rented to others. Heqanakht appears to
have been a cautious businessman who
watched expenditures closely and kept
careful track of every transaction.
In this letter on papyrus, Heqanakht writes to his family about home
and farm matters. Only a few pieces are missing from this section.
MORE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS TO REMEMBER 8 1


--- PAGE 83 ---
Scenes detailing the Amduot, a book about the sun god's journey through the 11 hours of the underworld, decorated the walls of
Thutmose Ill's burial chamber.This section depicts the fourth hour. Also represented is the descent of the sarcophagus into the tomb.


--- PAGE 84 ---
Growth and
Expansion
(New Kingdom,
about 1570-1440 B.C.)
Under Senwosret III and Amenemhet III, peace and prosperity had
spread across the Two Lands bordering the Nile. The Nubians to
the south and the Bedouins to the east had been subdued, and
trade was booming. The Faiyum had become a rich agricultural
region, and being self-sufficient added to the people's sense of security. The arts
and architecture flourished. But just as the country had experienced disruption
and decline after the long reign of Pepi II some 200 years earlier, now, only a
few years after the death of Amenemhet III, turmoil and uncertainty spread
again across the Two Lands. Even the ancients referred to these two periods as
a time of misery and chaos, although such descriptions seemed to have been en-
couraged by later rulers who wished to confirm their right to sit on the throne.
Egyptologists have labeled the years after Pepi II the First Intermediate Period
and the years after Amenemhet III Second Intermediate Period.
A series of weak rulers gradually led to a decentralization of power. This,
in turn, led to the viziers assuming more power. Still, the nomarchs of the 13th
Dynasty who had their capital at Thebes managed to keep Upper Egypt relative-
ly calm and stable. In the Delta region to the north, however, several leaders
refused to pledge their allegiance to the rulers in Thebes. Instead, they estab-
lished their own rule. The Egyptian historian Manetho called these kings (he
listed 70 of them) the 14th Dynasty.
In the midst of this uncertainty, Egypt came under foreign rule. A people
known as the Hyksos crossed into Egypt from the east and gained control of
Lower Egypt. They also claimed control of Upper Egypt—not directly, but
through Egyptian overlords responsible to them. The name Hyksos is a Greek
variation of the name the Egyptians used for these people—and for other for-
eigners as well—hekau'khasut, meaning "chiefs of foreign lands." Although
Manetho says that the Hyksos conquered Egypt without warning, most Egyptol-
ogists believe that the "takeover" happened gradually. Ongoing excavations at
Avaris, the site of the Hyksos capital, have uncovered important information
that Egyptologists are using to learn more about this period.
AHMOSE,
SON OF EBANA
HATSHEPSUT
SENENMUT
THUTMOSE III
REKHMIRE
GROWTH AND EXPANSION
3
8 3
IN THIS PART


--- PAGE 85 ---
Through the years, the number of Asiatics and other foreigners entering
Egypt from the east had been increasing steadily. Some were prisoners of war,
whereas others were immigrant workers looking for jobs in a prosperous land.
Inscriptions and historical records dating to Amenemhet Ill's reign confirm this
fact. Yet surviving accounts and uncovered artifacts suggest that the Hyksos
rulers did not impose their customs on the Egyptians. Rather, they preferred to
adapt their ways to the traditions of the Egyptians. Nevertheless, the Hyksos did
introduce new ideas and objects to the Egyptians. These included bronze
weaponry, the war horse and chariot, advanced building practices, the vertical
loom, and the lyre. Still, their influence was confined chiefly to the Delta re-
gion of Lower Egypt. Manetho credits the Hyksos with a rule that lasted approx-
imately 100 years, and he grouped their kings into two dynasties, the 15th and
the 16th. The Egyptians, however, refused to accept foreign rule for long.
Part 3 of Ancient Egyptians profiles the individuals who restored control of
the Two Lands to the Egyptians and established a new line of kings that would
extend Egypt's influence and power far beyond the Nile and the confining
borders of the desert sands. And it is with these kings that the Egyptian words
per <wer ("Great House") refer no longer to the royal palace but to the king—
the "pharaoh"—himself.
84 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 86 ---
Ahmose,
Son of
Ebana
FEARLESS WARRIOR
hmose, son of Ebana [and] captain of a crew
of sailors, says: 'I will tell you ... of the fa-
vors conferred on me. Seven times was I
given gold in the presence of the whole
land, and likewise slaves, both male and fe-
male. . . . Gifts of many fields to be held by me forever were
also made to me.'" So begins the long autobiographical in-
scription that Ahmose had his workers carve into the walls
of his tomb at Nekheb (present-day el Kab), an ancient
town on the eastern shores of the Nile River. Ahmose took
pride in his accomplishments and in the recognition and
grand rewards he received from the rulers he served.
As a preface to the main text of the inscription, Ah-
mose explains that he grew up in the city of Nekheb and
that his father, Baba, was an officer in the army of the The-
ban ruler Seqenenre Tao II. Like his father, Ahmose joined
the military and later served as an officer on a ship named
the Wild Bull. After Seqenenre died, Ahmose pledged his al-
legiance to Kamose, Seqenenre's son and successor.
Both Seqenenre Tao and Kamose were native Egyptian
rulers, but neither one could claim control of Lower Egypt.
At the time, a people known to history as the Hyksos ruled
the Delta area. These foreigners had gradually gained con-
At the time of Ahmose, son of Ebana, the king's war chariot most likely resembled this two-wheeled, two-horse chariot, which is
missing the front and sides of the section in which the driver and passenger stood.
AHMOSE, SON OF EBANA
'A
8 5


--- PAGE 87 ---
The relief figures decorating the blade of
Ahmose I's ceremonial axe head depict
the king smiting an Asiatic captive. Below
is the figure of a griffin, a mythical monster
The inscription above translates, "Beloved
of [the war god] Montu."
trol in the region and were looking to
expand their power farther south. At
first, there had been little resistance to
the Hyksos, and Egypt's kings had even
made treaties with them to avoid con-
flicts. As the years passed, a few power-
ful Egyptian families began expanding
the area under their control. Seqenenre
had been one of the first to oppose the
Hyksos militarily, and his son Kamose
continued the drive north, extending
his rule into Middle Egypt.
When Kamose died less than three
years after his father, his brother Ah-
mose (not Ahmose, son of Ebana) as-
cended to the throne. Because the new
king was still quite young, his mother
ruled as regent, and the war against the
Hyksos was downgraded to a matter of
lesser importance. Once Ahmose I be-
came old enough to rule, he gave or-
ders to continue the war against the
"foreign intruders." As a loyal Egyptian
and as a military officer, Ahmose, son
of Ebana, eagerly awaited the chance to
prove his valor on the battlefield.
When the king learned of the son
of Ebana's dedication and military
prowess, he assigned him to the north-
ern fleet. This was an honor, because
only the best troops, both in the army
and in the navy, were sent to fight the
Hyksos. Ahmose also made sure that
his artisans recorded his great pride in
this promotion, which had been grant-
ed because of his bravery and loyalty.
Ahmose even had the artisans carve
on the tomb walls his pledge to follow
the king on foot whenever he made a
journey in his war chariot. This passage
is the first mention of Egyptians using
the chariot and horse, both of which
the Hyksos had introduced into Egypt,
in battle.
Ahmose, son of Ebana, first proved
his bravery against the Hyksos during
the difficult siege of Avaris, the chief
city of the Hyksos. Stressing that he
acted on his two feet, Ahmose, son of
Ebana, told how he performed a re-
markably brave deed in the presence of
his king. While no further details ac-
company this statement, the tomb
hieroglyphs mention that King Ah-
mose was so pleased with the loyal
son of Ebana that he commissioned
him to serve on the ship, the Shining
in Memphis.
Avaris, however, did not fall easily
or swiftly. A second assault had to be
ordered and Ahmose, son of Ebana,
again took his place on the front line—
this time in a canal called Pa-Djedku.
Fighting in hand-to-hand combat, Ah-
mose valiantly overwhelmed a Hyksos
warrior and "brought away a hand."
Following the accepted custom, Ah-
mose had taken the hand of the enemy
he had killed in battle as proof of his
valor. This deed, too, was reported to
the royal herald, who announced it to
the king. As his reward, Ahmose, son
8 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 88 ---
of Ebana, received the "Gold of Valor"
(or Flies of Valor), a gold pendant
shaped like flies or lions.
Avaris, however, remained under
Hyksos control, and so a third battle
followed. Once again Ahmose eagerly
entered hand-to-hand combat with the
enemy. Again, he killed his foe and cut
off his hand—and again he received a
Gold of Valor.
The hieroglyphs that follow tell of
more fighting, this time to the south of
Avaris. Whether Ahmose meant the
land lying just to the south of Avaris, or
whether the phrase refers to a revolt or
problem that occurred closer to home
in Upper Egypt, is unclear. What was
important to Ahmose were the details
of the expedition and the difficulties in-
volved. The fight had taken him to the
other side of a river or stream, where he
managed to capture an enemy alive,
made him his prisoner, and carried him
across the water to the main encamp-
ment. When the royal herald reported
the incident to the king, Ahmose I
honored the son of Ebana with two
more Gold of Valor awards.
This last campaign seems to have
ended the problems in the South,
because Ahmose I (Kamose's brother
and succesor) now turned his attention
to conquering Avaris. Ahmose, son
of Ebana, tells us that in the final
battle he captured four enemies alive—
one man and three women. As a re-
ward, the king gave him the captives
as slaves.
Finally, the long struggle against
the Hyksos was over, and the Two
Lands once again belonged to the peo-
ple who lived along the Nile. Yet Ah-
mose I was not content with his victory
on Egyptian soil. Determined to squash
Hyksos power, he pursued them to the
town of Sharuhen in Palestine, where
they had regrouped. According to the
inscription on the son of Ebana's tomb,
the struggle lasted three years. Many
Egyptologists believe this mention of
three years refers not to a period of
time but to three separate battles.
In Palestine, just as in Egypt, Ah-
mose, son of Ebana, proved himself a
valiant warrior and received more gold
for his actions. He also accepted, as
personal slaves, two women he had
taken as prisoners.
With peace now to the north and
the east, Ahmose I sailed south with
his army to Khent-hen-nefer in Nubia.
Victory followed victory, with the son
of Ebana eagerly joining every battle.
For his efforts, he received more "Gold
of Valor" awards and more slaves.
The unrest in Nubia erupted into
rebellion when a Nubian leader named
Aata led his people against the Egyp-
tians. Ahmose, son of Ebana, seized
two of the enemy from Aata's ship. In
return for his bravery, Ahmose received
the customary rewards, as well as tracts
of land in his city of Nekheb. In his
tomb inscription, Ahmose took care to
have his artisans note on his tomb
walls that he was not the only one who
received such gifts, but that the king
had granted the entire crew of his ves-
sel the same rewards for their bravery.
By now the son of Ebana was a very
wealthy person. He must also have been
a well-known military figure, consider-
ing the number of battles in which he
had served honorably and well. Thus, it
was only natural that the son of Ebana
would be summoned to serve under Ah-
mose I's successor, Amenhotep I.
When reports of Nubian unrest
reached the royal palace, Amenhotep I
followed the example of his predeces-
sors and prepared to march south. Ah-
mose, son of Ebana, joined him. In the
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Ahmose,
Son of Ebana
POSITION
Navy Captain
ACTIVE DATES
About 1535 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Fought under Ahmose I in cam-
paigns aimed at expelling the Hyk-
sos from Egypt; fought under Amen-
hotep I and Thutmose I in Nubia
and in Syria; won many "Gold of
Valor" awards and tracts of land for
his bravery; recorded his exploits on
his tomb walls
AHMOSE, SON OF EBANA 8 7


--- PAGE 89 ---
The name of a man brave and bold in his achievements
shall not perish in this land forever.
—Inscription in Ahmose, son of Ebana's tomb
battles against the Nubians, Ahmose
seems to have distinguished himself
more than ever. His inscription boasts,
"I fought incredibly and the king saw
my bravery. I took two hands and gave
them to his majesty." Amenhotep I
awarded Ahmose for his valor with the
special title of "Warrior of the Crown."
At this point details of his service
under Amenhotep I end, and the focus
of the text shifts to his bravery under
Amenhotep I's successor, Thutmose I.
By this time, Ahmose must certainly
have been one of the older officers, es-
pecially considering that Amenhotep I
ruled for approximately 25 years.
When news of unrest in Nubia
reached Thutmose I, he quickly sailed
with a fleet up the Nile to Khent-hen-
nefre. Ahmose helped guide the Egypt-
ian vessels around the cataracts. For
this service, Thutmose appointed Ah-
mose "Chief of the Sailors."
Yet even after Thutmose finally
subdued the rebellious Nubians and
punished their leaders, he allowed no
time for peace. Instead, he readied his
troops for a march into Retinu (the
Syria-Palestine area). With him was
Ahmose, who, despite his age, still
fought bravely and honorably, winning
two more "Gold of Valor" awards for
his seizure of a chariot, its horses, and
the charioteer.
With the passing years, Ahmose
found that his body could no longer
endure the rigors of military life. The
awards and honors, however, contin-
ued—at least according to the inscrip-
tion on his tomb's walls. Nevertheless,
for Ahmose, the concerns of this life
were over, and he looked to prepare
himself for the next life. In this, too,
he proved successful, because the
"autobiography" he had carved on
his walls brought him enduring fame
and immortality.
FURTHER READING
Lichtheim, Miriam. Ancient Egyptian Liter-
ature: A Book of Readings, vol. 2, pp.
12-15. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1976.
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS8 8


--- PAGE 90 ---
Hatshepsut
THE QUEEN WHO
BECAME KING
series of unexpected circumstances brought
Hatshepsut to the throne of Egypt, but she
readily wielded the power entrusted to her
She did not concern herself with the fact
that she was a woman and that only men
had ruled Egypt. Like her father, Thutmose I, she was strong-
willed. He had not been in direct line for the throne either
but had claimed the right to rule through his wife Ahmose,
who was the daughter of Ahmose I and his Great Royal Wife,
Ahmose Nefertari. In the official king lists of the Egyptian
historian Manetho, Ahmose I founded the 18th Dynasty.
Many of Hatshepsut's statues bear marks of intentional destruc-
tion, but a few small, kneeling figures such as this escaped rela-
tively untouched; even the traditional royal beard is still in place.
HATSHEPSUT • 89
A


--- PAGE 91 ---
Egypt was made to work with bowed head for her, the
excellent seed of the god, who came forth from him.
—Inscription in the tomb of Ineni, an official,
recording the joint ascension of Hatshepsut and
Thutmose III to the throne
Thutmose I had proved himself a
strong leader, and to provide for a
smooth transition of power, he groomed
his two sons by Queen Ahmose, Wadj-
mose and Amenmose, as his successors.
To ensure a supply of royal heirs in case
anything should happen to those next
in line, he married his daughter Hat-
shepsut to her half-brother, Thut-
mose—a son he had fathered with one
of his minor queens. For generations,
kings had arranged such marriages.
Events soon proved that Thutmose
I had acted wisely. Both Wadjmose and
Amenmose predeceased their father,
and Thutmose I died after a brief reign
of approximately six years. No one,
however, considered Hatshepsut an
heir. In the past, queens had acted as
regents and, on occasion, had even gov-
erned the land for short periods of time,
but no woman had ever inherited the
throne of Egypt. Nor had any queen
ever assumed the title of "king." Be-
cause the Egyptians considered
their ruler the son and representative
of the great god Amun-Re and of the
god Horus, how could a female be
king? Thus, it followed that Hatshep-
sut's husband succeeded her father as
Thutmose II.
Records suggest that Thutmose II
had some physical problems, and
although he gave orders to continue
military campaigns into Nubia, his
participation in them was minimal.
Meanwhile, the strong-willed Hatshep-
sut had begun to consolidate her power
and win followers. She also looked to
the future. She and Thutmose II had
only one child, a daughter named Nefer-
ure, but Thutmose also had a son by Isis,
a girl in his harem. Therefore, to ensure
the continuation of the family line, Hat-
shepsut and Thutmose II did just as
their father had done—at least accord-
ing to most Egyptologists: they married
Neferure to her half-brother (Isis's son),
who was also named Thutmose.
Then came the unexpected. Thut-
mose II died in his early 30s. Thutmose
III succeeded his father, but because
he was too young to rule in his own
right, Hatshepsut assumed the role of
regent. No one objected. The precedent
had been set centuries earlier when
several queen mothers had done the
same. What no queen had done, how-
ever, was keep the power for herself. Yet
no documents prove that Hatshepsut
had intended to do so when she first be-
came regent.
Resourceful and intelligent, Hat-
shepsut quickly adapted herself to her
new role. Several of her father's advis-
ers, confident of her ability to rule, con-
tinued in their posts. One was Ha-
puseneb, who held the office of High
Priest of Amun, one of the most power-
ful positions in Egypt. Hapuseneb also
served as Hatshepsut's vizier. There
were new advisers as well, people whom
Hatshepsut had learned to trust. Chief
among these was Senenmut, a com-
moner who had proved his loyalty and
to whom Hatshepsut entrusted the edu-
cation of her daughter, Neferure.
Senenmut was also Hatshepsut's chief
architect and in charge of all royal con-
struction projects.
Hatshepsut had no plans to rival
her father's exploits on the battlefield;
9 0 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 92 ---
nor did she wish to consider military
matters a top priority. She preferred to
devote her energies to projects that re-
flected Egypt's greatness. Her close con-
nections with government officials, first
as princess and then as wife of Thut-
mose II, had taught her the importance
of maintaining a strong Egyptian pres-
ence in Nubia and in the Sinai Penin-
sula. The imports traveling along the
trade routes leading to and from these
areas provided Egypt's artisans and
builders with the necessary raw materi-
als for their projects. In addition, the
revenue from this trade helped sustain
the high standard of living the Egyp-
tians were enjoying.
By all accounts it was Hatshepsut's
choice not to extend Egypt's boundaries
beyond those she had inherited. But
surviving records written by two soldiers
seem to prove that Hatshepsut did not
avoid the battlefield. These soldiers
told of her leading them into battle
against Nubia and taking several chiefs
as prisoners.
As the months passed, Hatshepsut
saw herself, not her stepson Thutmose,
as heir to the throne and proclaimed
herself "king" of Egypt. Yet Hatshepsut
realized that naming herself "king" and
assuming the title was not enough. She
had to prove that she had the right to
sit on the throne, and there was only
one way to do this—Hatshepsut had to
establish a divine connection between
herself and the all-powerful Amun-Re.
Surviving inscriptions and reliefs on
Hatshepsut's funerary temple at Deir el
Bahri, an area that lies to the west of
the Nile and directly across from
Thebes, clearly show how she handled
the situation.
Carved onto the walls are scenes
depicting the story of Hatshepsut's
birth. The god Amun is seated on a
throne, and he is announcing to an as-
sembly of the gods that he intends to
give Egypt a new king. Thoth, the god
of learning and wisdom, recommends to
i Amun that he choose Ahmose, the wife
of Thutmose I, to be the mother of this
new ruler. The next scene shows Amun
and Ahmose seated on the heavens and
facing each other.
Carved onto the wall next to
Amun's relief are the words: "Amun-Re
. . . made his form like the majesty of
the husband Thutmose I. He [Amun]
then found her [Ahmose] as she slept in
the beauty of her palace. She awoke at
the fragrance of the god, which she
smelled in the presence of his majesty."
The relief continues with Amun
telling Ahmose that "Khnemet-Amun-
Hatshepsut shall be the name of this my
daughter, whom I have placed in your
body. . . . She shall exercise great king-
ship in this whole land. My soul is hers
. . . my crown is hers, that she may rule
the Two Lands." It is significant that the
text uses the masculine word "king"
when referring to the official position
but uses the feminine forms for the ad-
jectives and pronouns when referring to
the person who is to become king.
Amun summons Khnum, the god of
creation and childbirth, and asks him to
use his potter's wheel to create his new
daughter and a double to serve as her ka
(life force). After completing the assign-
ment, Khnum says: "I have formed you
of these limbs of Amun, patron of Kar-
nak. ... I have given to you all health,
all lands; I have given to you all coun-
tries, all people . . . while you shine as
King of Upper and Lower Egypt, of
North and South, according as your fa-
ther who loves you has commanded."
Hatshepsut could not have stated
her right to rule more clearly, especially
considering that the artisans had used
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Hatshepsut
POSITION
King of Egypt
REIGN
About 1498-83 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Claimed the hereditary right to rule
Egypt as king; had her tomb built in
the Valley of the Kings; restored di-
rect maritime trade with Punt; or-
dered the construction of a magnifi-
cent mortuary temple at Deir el
Bahri; ordered many new temples
built and old ones restored; had four
giant obelisks erected at Karnak
HATSHEPSUT 9 1


--- PAGE 93 ---
I have no enemy in any
land, all countries are my
subjects.
—Inscription on the base
of one of Hatshepsut's
obelisks at Karnak
the feminine form of the hieroglyphic
sign for "you"—a direct reference to
Hatshepsut, the female "king."
Still, associating herself with Amun
and calling herself "Daughter of the
God" did not seem enough. Hatshepsut
had the artisans follow the birth reliefs
with scenes depicting her coronation.
In this series Amun presents Hatshepsut
to the other gods and she is crowned in
the presence of her father. The Egyp-
tians revered the dead Thutmose I and
considered him one of their great rulers.
Thus, in a sense, the relief would be an
official proclamation of her father's de-
sire that she was his rightful successor.
In the accompanying inscription, Thut-
mose says, "This is my daughter
Khnemet-Amun-Hatshepsut. . . she is
my successor on my throne. . . . She it
is who shall lead you. You shall pro-
claim her word; you shall be united at
her command."
To associate herself even more
closely with her father, Hatshepsut had
a sarcophagus fashioned for her father's
mummy and made plans to place it in
the tomb that she had built for herself.
Because ancient priests later reburied
the royal mummies from this period in a
joint tomb to protect them from tomb
robbers, it is impossible to know
whether Hatshepsut actually did have
her father's mummy transferred from its
original tomb to hers.
Hatshepsut gave orders that two
obelisks be set up in the temple of the
great god Amun, her divine father. Hat-
shepsut's trusted and loyal advisor
Senenmut oversaw this tremendous un-
dertaking. Again the reliefs at Deir el
Bahri provide the details of the task.
At the quarries at Aswan, Senen-
mut supervised the workers who careful-
ly cut and fashioned two solid columns
out of red granite, each approximately
95 feet high. As was the custom, the
top of the obelisk was shaped to resem-
ble a pyramid. Sculptors carved the
figure of Amun with his arm around
Hatshepsut onto each of the four flat
triangular surfaces of the pyramidion
(the term for the top section of an
obelisk). Reliefs of Hatshepsut with her
stepson Thutmose ran up the sides of
the obelisks. When both were in posi-
tion at Kamak, the workers coated the
obelisks with electrum, a light-yellow
alloy of gold and silver. For years after,
the sight of these columns catching the
rays of the sun god Amun-Re and re-
flecting them about the temple area
must have been awe-inspiring.
In Year 15, Hatshepsut ordered an-
other pair of obelisks. These, too, were
to stand at Karnak and honor Amun. In
charge of this project was an official
named Amenhotep, who, according to
surviving records, accomplished the
daunting assignment in only seven
months! (One of this second pair of
obelisks still stands at Kamak and is the
largest obelisk to have survived in
Egypt—approximately 97 feet high.)
Determined as Hatshepsut was to
rule, she had no intention of radically
changing Egyptian customs. Rather, she
labelled herself a king and had sculptors
carve her statues in the same way as
they did for kings, but with her female
face. Surviving statues clearly bear wit-
ness to this fact. In New York's Metro-
politan Museum of Art, a carved stone
sphinx (a mythical creature with the
body of a lion and the head of a man,
ram, or hawk) stares out at the world
from a female face, supposedly fash-
ioned to resemble that of Hatshepsut. A
similar sphinx reclines in a room in the
Cairo Museum in Egypt.
To further identify herself with the
kingship, Hatshepsut assumed all the
emblems and insignia associated with
the office, including a royal Horus
name—this name told all that she, as
"king," was the earthly representative of
the male sky-god Horus. Her statues
show her in the short royal kilt and
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS9 2


--- PAGE 94 ---
crowned with the striped royal nemes.
Attached to her chin is the rectangular
beard that was traditionally included on
statues of kings.
Yet making herself a king was not
Hatshepsut's chief concern. Instead she
focused her energy on governing Egypt
and on adorning the lands along the
Nile with buildings that reflected the
country's greatness, including new tem-
ples and other religious structures.
Hatshepsut also made plans to con-
struct a tomb that reflected her new po-
sition. As "king," Hatshepsut consid-
ered it only proper that she be buried in
ta set oat ("the Great Place")—which is
known today as the Valley of the Kings.
Years earlier, when she was the wife and
queen of Thutmose II, she had had
workers cut a tomb into the rock cliff of
a secluded valley to the west of ta set
oat. It was no longer appropriate, so she
had a second tomb cut into the cliffs at
the eastern end of ta set oat. However,
because the valley was such a narrow
and confined area, the traditional de-
sign of a mortuary temple connected to
the burial structure did not work.
Hatshepsut's father had faced the
same problem. Records indicate that
Thutmose I was the first king to choose
ta set oat as his burial site. In doing so,
he set a precedent that Egypt's rulers
would follow for approximately 500
years. Thutmose's architects had cut his
tomb into the rock in ta set oat, and lo-
cated his mortuary temple on the flat
plain just to the east of the valley's rock
cliffs. Although separated by the cliffs,
both the tomb and the temple lay to
the west of the Nile, that is, on the side
of the Nile that for centuries Egyptians
had associated with the setting sun and
the afterlife.
To design and oversee the construc-
tion of the mortuary temple, Hatshep-
sut chose Senenmut. The plan was sim-
ple, yet grand, and perfectly comple-
mented its backdrop—the salmon-red
rock cliff. The two lower terraces, each
lined with a row of columns, served as a
base for the third terrace, whose
columns were fronted with statues of
Hatshepsut. Standing guard along the
avenue that led to the temple was a row
of sandstone sphinxes. Even today, ap-
proaching visitors feel compelled to
stop, at least for a moment, just to gaze
at this architectural wonder, this mas-
terpiece of Egyptian design. Hatshepsut
The four figures carved into the top of
this stele (a rock slab erected as a
memorial) found near a temple to the
sky goddess Hathor all look human. But
only two represent humans: Hatshepsut
(second from left) and Thutmose III
(second from right).To the far left is
Amun-Re and to the far right is the
Egyptian city ofThebes as a person.
HATSHEPSUT 9 3


--- PAGE 95 ---
named the temple Djeser-djeseru, which
means "Holiest of Holy Places." In the
seventh century A.D., Arabic-speaking
Egyptian Christians built a monastery
on the temple's ruins and called the site
Deir el Bahri.
For Hatshepsut, the temple was
more than a funeral monument; it was a
testament to her right to rule and to her
accomplishments. Besides the reliefs de-
picting her birth, her coronation, and
the fashioning of the obelisks, addition-
al scenes told of other major events.
Chief among them were those detailing
an expedition to the resource-rich land
of Punt that took place late in Year 8 of
Hatshepsut's reign.
By design, the scenes were a travel-
ogue in themselves: The sections that
refer specifically to action taking place
in Punt are located at the south end of
the relief. The bows of the vessels set-
ting sail for Punt point south, while
the bows of the vessels returning to
Egypt from Punt point north. Each ves-
sel is carved with every piece of equip-
ment in its proper place. The detail
proves that the Egyptians built their
vessels for use on the Nile, not for open
waters or high seas.
The captain's command, "Steer to
port," carved above the stern of the last
of five vessels leaving a port on the Red
Sea for Punt, gives the scene a personal
touch. The action quickens as the expe-
dition leader advances to meet Perehu
—the tall and thin Puntite king. Pic-
tured, too, are Perehu's two sons, daugh-
ter, and wife Eti, a fat woman with a
deep curve in her lower back and very
heavy legs. In the background is a vil-
lage with its houses built, as was the
custom, on stilts—the oldest surviving
image of African tribal life.
The scenes that follow bustle with
activity. A group of Puntite villagers ea-
gerly ask, "Why have you come here to
this land, which the people of Egypt do
not know? Did you come down upon
the ways of the heavens, or did you sail
upon the waters, the sea of God's land."
The Egyptian leaders stand near their
tents, ready to start trading. In the
background are the Egyptian ships,
laden with trade items that have al-
ready been brought aboard. Walking
along the planks leading from the port
to the vessels are several men, who
carry a variety of goods, including live
myrrh trees with their roots carefully
wrapped in sacks. Hatshepsut planned
to use them to decorate her monuments
and the colonnaded terraces of her tem-
ple at ta set oat. One Egyptian, who is
afraid that he might loose his footing or
his tree, says to another, "Watch out for
your feet! Watch out now, the load is
very heavy!"
The scene then shifts to Egypt,
where scribes are shown making a
record of every import item. Proud Hat-
shepsut welcomes the returning expedi-
tion and gives thanks to Amun for its
success. An inscription near the image
of Amun has the god saying, "My dear
daughter, Hatshepsut, my favorite, king
of Upper and Lower Egypt... I have
given to you all Punt."
In the sections that follow, Hat-
shepsut takes full responsibility for or-
dering the expedition, announces that
it was a tremendous success, and pub-
licly exhibits the goods imported from
Punt. Hatshepsut ends her speech say-
ing that she has done as Amun, her fa-
ther, commanded her. That is, she has
established a Punt for him in Egypt by
planting the prized myrrh trees in a gar-
den beside his temple.
What is especially interesting about
this Punt relief is the figure of young
Thutmose III offering fresh myrrh to the
sacred boat of Amun that is being carried
by the god's priests. Why Thutmose's
figure was included in the relief is not
known. Thutmose was still king in
name, but even as he grew older, Hat-
shepsut chose not to grant him any
royal power. She did recognize his lead-
ership qualities on the battlefield,
though, and entrusted him with com-
mand of the army.
Hatshepsut, however, could not
control fate. When she died (some
Egyptologists believe she may have
ruled for as many as 20 years), Thut-
mose immediately assumed sole control
of the Two Lands. That no records list
the cause of her death has led some to
believe that Thutmose decided that he,
not she, should be king and took mea-
sures to place himself on the throne.
No proof, however, has ever surfaced to
support this argument.
Some years after her death Thut-
mose ordered Hatshepsut's monuments
torn down and her name erased from all
records throughout Egypt, including the
king lists. Centuries later, others would
recognize her achievements, reinstate
her name on the monuments, and re-
store what had been destroyed. The
hieroglyphs on Hatshepsut's obelisk at
Karnak seem to have foreshadowed her
role in history: "I shall be unto eternity
like an 'Imperishable.'"
FURTHER READING
Roberts, Russell. Rulers of Ancient Egypt,
chap. 2. San Diego, Calif.: Lucent, 1999.
Tyldesley, Joyce A. Hatchepsut: The Femcde
Pharaoh. New York: Penguin, 1998.
9 4 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 96 ---
Senenmut
FOREMAN OF
THE FOREMEN
ho was this man named Senenmut who
became the close confidant and adviser
of Hatshepsut, one of ancient Egypt's
most powerful rulers? How did he rise to
such a position of power and influence?
And why did he suddenly lose favor with the royals?
Surviving records suggest that Senenmut's parents were
commoners, with no titles, and that they lived in Armant, a
city to the south of Thebes. Senenmut may have joined the
Egyptian army under Amenhotep I (Hatshepsut's uncle).
His superiors most likely made his achievements and abili-
ties known to Thutmose II (Hatshepsut's husband), who ap-
pointed him as steward to Hatshepsut. (In ancient Egypt,
stewards were in charge of areas of a royal household or fi-
nancial matters connected with the household.) The rela-
tionship was undoubtedly an agreeable one, for Senenmut
was soon promoted to chief steward, one of the most power-
ful positions in Egypt. Hatshepsut must have trusted him
completely, as she named him the tutor of her daughter Ne-
ferure, whom she considered her heir and successor. Further
proof of the close relationship between these three are the
statues archaeologists have uncovered of Senenmut holding
the young Neferure on his lap.
Scholars suggest that the face on this ostracon (a piece of lime-
stone used as a sketchpad by an Egyptian artist) found in Senen-
mut's tomb is Senenmut himself.
SENENMUT 9 5
w


--- PAGE 97 ---
Hatshepsut's magnificent mortuary temple is terraced into the base of the cliffs at Deir el Bahri. At the far left are the remains of
Mentuhotep I's temple. On the other side of the cliff is the Valley of the Kings.
Hatshepsut also recognized Senen-
mut's ability as a capable engineer and
architect and placed him in charge of
several building projects soon after she
claimed the title of king. One of his
first official duties as "superintendent of
the buildings dedicated to the god
Amun" (a position also known as
"steward of Amun") was a trip up-
stream to the granite quarries at Ele-
phantine (present-day Aswan). There
he was to oversee the cutting of two gi-
gantic obelisks that were to adorn the
great temple dedicated to the god
Amun at Karnak.
Senenmut's position was one of
great honor, but the task proved diffi-
cult and stressful. An obelisk had to be
fashioned from a single solid column of
stone, and the only way to cut such a
column was to find a huge block of
stone with no imperfections—even a
slight fault in the stone might cause it
to split as it was being cut or shaped.
With orders to erect two obelisks (cus-
tom dictated that obelisks be raised in
pairs), Senenmut needed to find two
sites, each with rock solid enough to
produce a column measuring approxi-
mately 95 feet tall. Before any worker
began cutting into stone, Senenmut
must have searched the bed of the
quarry very carefully, talking to all who
had worked the site previously. Finally,
he chose two spots. Both proved to be
good, and workers soon had the
columns cut, maneuvered onto the
sledges, and pulled to the barges that
waited to transport them downstream
to Karnak. Carved onto the walls of
Hatshepsut's mortuary temple at Deir el
Bahri are scenes of Egyptian laborers
ferrying the giant obelisks down the
Nile to Kamak.
Senenmut also had workers carve a
record of his success on the rocks near
the quarry site. The inscriptions ac-
companying the figures of Senenmut
and Hatshepsut state that Senenmut
came to the area as the "hereditary
prince ... who pleases the Mistress of
the Two Lands by his command ... to
inspect the work of two great obelisks.
... It took place according to that
which was commanded . . . [and] be-
cause of the fame of her majesty."
Senenmut's job, however, was not
finished. Although the obelisks were at
Kamak and their upper sections had
been sheathed in electrum, a light-
yellow alloy of gold and silver, as was
the custom at the time, they still had
to be raised and set in position in the
eastern part of Amun's temple. Making
Senenmut's task a little easier was
the fact that years of temple building
had created a pool of skilled laborers.
Time, however, has not been kind to
Senenmut's obelisks, and only their
9 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 98 ---
I was the greatest of the great
in the whok land.
—Inscription on a statue
of Senenmut commis-
sioned by Hatshepsut
bases stand today amid the ruins of
the temple.
Hatshepsut also chose Senenmut
to design and build her mortuary tem-
ple at Deir el Bahri. The site was a dra-
matic one, with great salmon-red rock
cliffs rising up from the dry and dusty
desert sands. Senenmut would have
spent hours surveying the area, focusing
special attention on the funerary com-
plex King Nebhepetre Mentuhotep I
had built on the same site some 500
years earlier. Once the overall plan of
the temple was complete, Senenmut
had his workers use Mentuhotep's com-
plex as a quarry.
Using excellent judgment and a
keen sense of place, Senenmut had the
temple complement, not compete with,
the lofty, natural backdrop of the cliff.
He saw the temple as one with the
cliff—not freestanding, but built direct-
ly into the cliff. He did not include any
pyramid-shaped buildings or single
columns because the rock cliff would
only dwarf such structures. Rather, he
stressed horizontal lines, and thus set
one terrace upon another, much in
the same way that the cliff itself was
composed of rock layer upon rock layer.
A wide ramp, probably lined with trees,
led to the first terrace. A second ramp
led to the next terrace. Along the front
of each terrace was a colonnade (a se-
ries of columns) that gave a sense of
openness, as well as a feeling of oneness
with the cliff behind. Although the
colonnade was horizontal in design, its
columns served to pull in a vertical di-
rection the gaze of anyone approaching
the temple or proceeding up the ramps
from one level to the next.
Senenmut also incorporated into
the design several chapels, including
one in honor of Anubis, the guide in
the afterlife, and another in honor of
Hathor, the protectress of women and
of the cemeteries along the Nile. The
most sacred area in the temple was the
section where three chapels had been
cut directly into the rock cliff. The
most important was the chapel that
held the sacred barque (a small sailing
ship) of the sun god Amun-Re. On fes-
tival occasions, priests placed the image
of Amun-Re in the boat's cabin and, in
solemn procession, carried the barque
and the image on poles laid across their
shoulders. To associate Hatshepsut
more closely with her divine "father,"
Senenmut placed statues of Hatshepsut
in niches cut into the rock that flanked
the chapels.
Senenmut and Hatshepsut took
advantage of the extensive wall space
to record the events they considered
deserved special attention. These in-
cluded a scene that showed Amun-Re
announcing himself as Hatshepsut's
divine father and another that depicted
Thutmose I acknowledging Hatshepsut
as his rightful heir. Other reliefs fo-
cused on the successful expeditions in
which Senenmut played a major role—
such as the obelisk project and the
great trade expedition to the resource-
rich land of Punt. As the overseer of
the storehouse of Amun-Re, Senenmut
had been directly involved in the dis-
tribution of the trade items.
While these images of both reli-
gious and political events confirm Hat-
shepsut's confidence in Senenmut's
advice, it is the personal images of
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Senenmut
POSITION
Adviser to Hatshepsut, chief stew-
ard, architect, tutor
ACTIVE DATES
About 1495 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Rose from commoner to chief stew-
ard under Hatshepsut; believed to
be responsible for the design and
construction of Hatshepsut's mortu-
ary temple at Deir el Bahri; oversaw
the obelisk project—two enormous
obelisks quarried at Aswan and
erected at Karnak; oversaw many
construction projects throughout
Egypt, including at Karnak and Ar-
mant; involved in overseeing the
distribution of trade items imported
from Punt
SENENMUT 9 7


--- PAGE 99 ---
Wearer of the royal seal,
companion, great in love,
chief steward, Senenmut.
—Inscription Senenmut
had carved on rock at the
quarry site for Hatsheput's
obelisks
Senenmut that reveal the close rela-
tionship between the two. Archaeolo-
gists have discovered numerous reliefs
of Senenmut that artisans carved into
the walls of temple niches and door-
jambs. Although these locations made
them difficult to see, that they were
even included in the building design is
surprising. Hatshepsut must have ap-
proved their placement, for it is difficult
to believe that Senenmut would have
done so without consulting her first.
Certainly, no other adviser, no other
nonroyal, had ever been so honored.
Archaeologists have also uncov-
ered more than 20 statues of Senenmut
in other buildings whose construction
he oversaw. Such discoveries have led
Egyptologists to believe that Senenmut
was Hatshepsut's closest adviser and
confidant. On one statue that Hatshep-
sut commissioned and had carved in
Senenmut's likeness, she had the arti-
sans list a few of the more than 80 ti-
tles she conferred on Senenmut. She
also had the artisans inscribe her prais-
es of him: "He was so excellent for the
royal heart. . . strong-hearted, not lax
concerning the monuments of the lord
of the gods . . . master of all people,
chief of the whole land, steward of
Amun, Senenmut. . . revered by the
great god."
Like all Egyptians, Senenmut took
time to prepare for the afterlife. He
chose a site where many nobles of the
period had their tombs. Today the area
is called Sheikh Abd el Qurna. As his
own power and prestige increased,
Senenmut decided that his eternal rest-
ing place should be closer to Hatshep-
sut's and chose a tomb site just north
of her temple at Deir el Bahri. He
planned to locate his burial chamber
directly under the outer court of Hat-
shepsut's mortuary temple. This was
actually quite close to Hatshepsut's
intended burial chamber beneath
he temple. The rock cliff, however,
prevented workers from completing the
tunnel that would have connected
Hatshepsut's tomb site and mortuary
temple. Thus, although Senenmut's
burial chamber was completed as
planned, Hatshepsut's was not.
Architecture and advising Hat-
shepsut were not Senenmut's only in-
terests. Archaeologists have uncovered
artifacts in both of his tombs that
suggest he was a cultured person who
enjoyed literature. Several texts, in-
cluding The Instruction of Amenemhet
and the Tale of Sinuhe, were found in
the Sheikh Abd el Qurna tomb. The
planetarium-like designs on the ceiling
of his tomb at Deir el Bahri point to an
interest in the stars and the workings of
the universe.
After Senenmut has reached the
pinnacle of power—a position second
only to Hatshepsut's—his name sud-
denly disappears from the record. The
reason remains a mystery; he may have
assumed too much power, or, after the
untimely death of Neferure, made an
alliance with Thutmose III.
Approximately three years later,
Hatshepsut herself disappears from the
scene, again for unknown reasons.
However, late in the reign of Thutmose
III, orders were issued throughout the
Two Lands to destroy everything relat-
ed to Hatshepsut. Because Senenmut
had allied himself so closely with Hat-
shepsut, Thutmose also ordered that
Senenmut's name be deleted, erased,
and forgotten as well. Creative talent,
however, is not easily suppressed, and
Senenmut's buildings have "lived" to
immortalize him.
FURTHER READING
James, T. G. H. Pharaoh's People: Scenes
from Life in Imperial Egypt, pp. 31-37.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1984-
9 8 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 100 ---
Thutmose
ffl
WORLD CONQUEROR
atshepsut was dead, and for Thutmose III,
the long years of waiting were over. The
throne of Egypt was finally his alone. It
was true that, since his father's death
some 21 years earlier, he had shared the
throne with Hatshepsut, his stepmother, but he had not
been allowed to really share the royal power. Now he in-
tended to prove that he was worthy of the office and that
he, like his grandfather Thutmose I, would make Egypt "the
superior of every land" (taken from an inscription that
recorded the works of Thutmose I). Soon after Hatshepsut's
death, Thutmose had his chance.
A column of text on the back of this white marble statue identi-
fies it as Thutmose III. Measuring about 11 inches high, it shows
the king making a ritual offering of two round vessels. He wears
the traditional royal pleated kilt and the royal striped headdress,
called a nemes, and cobra-shaped uraeus.
THUTMOSE III 9 9
H


--- PAGE 101 ---
I have not uttered
exaggeration. . . . fl
have not] said "I have
done something," although
... fl] had not done it.
—Inscription on the wall
of Pylon 6, at Karnak
In Syria and Palestine, the king-
doms subdued by Thutmose I had
stopped paying the tribute required of
them by treaty and were making plans
to retake their own lands. Farther to
the east, in the land between the Tigris
and Euphrates valleys, a powerful peo-
ple known as the Mitanni were also
looking to extend their influence. They
even sent envoys to kings in Syria and
Palestine with offers of soldiers and
equipment. Egyptian officials in these
areas began sending Thutmose III re-
ports of enemy troop mobilization, of
former allies uniting against Egypt, and
of enemy alliances being made with the
Mitanni. Then came news that the
prince of Kadesh, a city on the Orontes
River in Syria, was leading his troops
south into Palestine. Because indeci-
sion would further weaken Egypt's posi-
tion, Thutmose immediately called his
troops into action.
His goal was the conquest of
Kadesh. But Kadesh was too far north,
too entrenched in enemy territory. It
made more sense to march east across
the Sinai Peninsula and attack Megid-
do, in Palestine, and other major cities
to the south of Megiddo that had
turned against Egypt. If Thutmose were
victorious, Egyptian troops would have
allies, not enemies, to their rear as they
marched north.
Confident in his mission, Thut-
mose began the first of 17 military cam-
paigns against Syria-Palestine. Thut-
mose had his private secretary inscribe
the events of each campaign on leather
rolls. He later had these accounts tran-
scribed onto the walls of the temple
dedicated to the great god Amun-Re at
Karnak. To record dates, Thutmose had
his scribe use the traditional format,
which meant labeling a year according
to how long the ruling king had been
on the throne. Thus, Thutmose's first
military campaign took place in Year
22. Even though the campaign took
place shortly after he became the sole
ruler, Thutmose counted his regnal
years (his time spent as king) from the
moment he technically succeeded to
the throne after his father's death.
Authors and years, however, are
not as important as the records them-
selves, and those detailing Thutmose
Ill's first campaign are the most com-
plete and the most exciting. Within 10
days of the start of the march, Thut-
mose III had crossed the Sinai and
reached the city of Gaza. An uncov-
ered papyrus manuscript tells how, after
Gaza fell to Egyptian forces, the king
commissioned a general named Dje-
huty to lay siege to Joppa (present-day
Jaffa) while he marched northward.
Djehuty did as he was commanded, but
he could not take the city. According
to the manuscript, Djehuty ordered 200
large baskets made and brought to him
as quickly as possible. After choosing
200 soldiers, he told each to step into a
basket and carefully sealed all 200 lids.
Djehuty commanded other soldiers to
carry the baskets to the gates of Joppa.
There they were to say that they were
carrying the spoils of war captured by
the prince of Joppa. When the gates
opened, the basket carriers were to
calmly walk within the gates. That
night, under cover of darkness, they
were to cut open the basket seals so
that the soldiers inside them could leap
up and open the gates of the city for
Djehuty and his troops. The plan
worked perfectly, and the next day
Thutmose's clever general claimed con-
trol of Joppa.
Thutmose, meanwhile, had
marched to the city of Yehern, where
he called a meeting of his troops about
how best to approach Megiddo. Of the
three possible routes, two went along
level ground and a third cut through a
narrow pass in the hills. The officers
spoke almost in unison against the
third pass: "How is it that [we] should
i o o ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 102 ---
go upon this [third] road, which threat-
ens to be narrow?. , . Let our victorious
commander proceed on the road he
wishes; but cause us not to go by the
difficult path."
Thutmose listened, but refused to
be swayed by the officers' arguments.
Why should he fear any road? "Let
those of you who wish to follow the
[easier] paths do so and let those
who wish to take the narrow path
follow me."
The soldiers shouted their ap-
proval—"We will follow your majesty
wherever you go." Thutmose marched
forward on foot and entered the narrow
pass at the head of the troops. Such
bravery gave strength to the troops
who immediately followed his example.
Thutmose's strategy worked, and
the enemy found themselves unable to
counter the attack. Panicking, they
turned in retreat, abandoning both
their horses and chariots. The people
within the walls of Megiddo, seeing
their army in complete confusion,
barred all entrances to the city. They
hauled their own retreating soldiers
over the walls, "pulling them by their
clothing."
Complete victory seemed certain,
until the glint of gold and other spoils
left by the retreating enemy distracted
the Egyptian soldiers. Instead of pursu-
ing the enemy to the walls and forcing
open the gates, they pillaged the aban-
doned enemy campsites. Thutmose's
scribe wrote in his journal, "If only the
soldiers of his majesty had not given
their heart to plundering the spoils of
the enemy, they would have taken
Megiddo .. . [rather, they] captured
horses, chariots of gold and silver."
Thutmose saw no cause for rejoic-
ing. The chance to defeat those who
had conspired against him was lost be-
cause a desire for profit clouded the
minds of his soldiers. After scolding
them for their unprofessional actions,
he ordered them to lay siege to the city.
Three Syrians bear gifts from their home-
land for their Egyptian king. As Thutmose
III extended Egyptian control north and
east into the Syria-Palestine area, the trib-
ute flowing into Egypt increased.
THUTMOSE III 1 0 1


--- PAGE 103 ---
His majesty [Thutmose III] rejoiced exceedingly when
he saw the great wonders that his father f Amun] had
performed for him.
—Inscription on a large granite stele in the great
temple to Amun-Re at Karnak
For seven months, those within and
without the city's walls waited until fi-
nally the people of Megiddo could re-
sist no longer.
The terms of surrender were quite
lenient. Thutmose demanded tribute
from Megiddo's citizens and placed an
Egyptian governor in charge of the
area. The spoils were considerable and
included "340 living prisoners, 83
hands [by custom, the Egyptians cut off
a hand from every dead enemy], 2,041
mares, 191 foals, 6 stallions, a chariot
adorned with gold that had belonged to
the ruler of Kadesh, a beautiful suit of
bronze armor that belonged to the
chief magistrate of Megiddo, 200 suits
of armor belonging to his wretched
army, 502 bows, 7 wooden poles
adorned with silver that belonged to a
tent of the enemy, 1,929 large cattle,
and 20,500 white small cattle."
This first campaign was relatively
brief—approximately 175 days from the
time Thutmose marched into the Sinai
to the time he returned to the royal
palace at Thebes. Yet the tactics he
used set the standard for all subsequent
campaigns, and "lightning-speed"
marches and sudden attacks became
the trademark of his military style.
After returning to Thebes, Thut-
mose ordered a five-day victory feast,
during which he had great quantities of
food and beer distributed among the
people. He also presented those whom
he considered worthy of special honors
with a variety of gifts. Yet, the most sig-
nificant event for Thutmose seems to
have been his purification in the tem-
ple of Amun-Re. Thutmose had
brought with him on the campaign a
small portable shrine of Amun-Re, but
it was not the same as a temple service.
With the help of the priests who sprin-
kled him with holy water and burned
incense, Thutmose prepared to enter
the innermost section of the temple,
the area known to the Egyptians as the
"Holy of Holies." To purify his mouth
and make it worthy of uttering the
proper prayers, Thutmose chewed a
pellet of natron (a salt substance found
along the banks of the Nile). With the
darkness of the temple brightened only
by the light from oil lamps, Thutmose
opened the wooden door of Amun-Re's
shrine. He looked upon the divine face
of his "father" and performed the spe-
cial ritual reserved only for Egypt's
kings. At the end of the service, Thut-
mose closed the doors, sealed them
shut with a clay seal, and swept the
floor behind him with a broom to elim-
inate all trace of footsteps within the
divine precinct.
Thutmose's scribe did not provide
as much detail for the other 16 cam-
paigns, but the record shows that
Kadesh and its leaders continued to
oppose Egyptian control. The goal of
the sixth campaign was the conquest
of Kadesh, because Thutmose believed
that control of Syria and Palestine
depended on his crushing Kadesh's
opposition.
Having won control of the region
to the south of Kadesh and of neighbor-
ing coastal areas, Thutmose could now
transport his troops by boat from north-
ern Egypt east along the coastline and
up to the port city near Kadesh. After
disembarking his army, he quickly led
them overland and attacked Kadesh.
This time, victory was his, and accord-
ing to his scribe, "the children of the
chiefs and their brothers were brought
to be strongholds [that is, hostages] in
Egypt. When any one of the chiefs died,
his majesty [Thutmose] would return
the son [who has been kept as a hostage
in Egypt] to stand in his place."
This policy of using royal hostages
to keep peace worked well for Thut-
mose and for his successors. Foreign
rulers took the terms of the alliance
treaty they had signed with Egypt very
seriously, as their sons' lives depended
on their allegiance to Thutmose and
Egypt. And keeping foreign princes in
Egypt had a second advantage. These
princes learned the ways of the Egyp-
tians and even adopted many Egyptian
customs as their own. When they in-
herited the throne in their own king-
doms, they naturally felt affection for
the country where they had spent their
youth.
Whenever possible, Thutmose al-
lowed the royal families in conquered
territories to remain in power—as long
as they agreed to maintain peace, pay
an annual tribute, and cooperate fully
with the Egyptian official assigned to
oversee the lands in the area. This ad-
ministrative policy won Thutmose the
loyalty of leaders in lands that were
militarily and economically important
to Egypt. Centuries later, the Romans
would follow this same policy as they
set about organizing their vast empire.
Thumose, however, still faced
opposition, especially in Kadesh and
Mitanni. Therefore, he once again
marched his troops to the coast,
boarded them on seafaring vessels, and
set out for the eastern coast of the
1 0 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 104 ---
Mediterranean. Sailing from harbor to
harbor, he forced city after city to sub-
mit to his rule, gathered what supplies
(especially wheat and fruit) he needed
for his garrisons, and stored provisions
in granaries for future operations.
Thutmose then decided to conquer
the Mitannians and other peoples who
supplied and supported Egypt's enemies
to the east. Unfortunately, his scribe
wrote very little about this eighth cam-
paign, but it was the most extensive.
From Egypt, he sailed his troops along
. the eastern Mediterranean coast to
Byblos, and then took them across the
mountains of Lebanon and through the
Orontes valley. With him were oxen
pulling carts laden with the boats that
would ferry his troops across the Eu-
phrates River. Thutmose defeated the
Mitannians with little difficulty and
took several hundred soldiers as cap-
tives. In honor of his victory, he set up
a commemorative marker near the one
his grandfather Thutmose I had erected
years earlier.
Accepting the Euphrates as the
eastern boundary of his power, Thut-
mose III turned west. Surviving records
tell of a near disaster. Only the quick
thinking of an officer named Amen-
emhab saved Thutmose from being
skewered on the tusks of a charging ele-
phant. Amenemhab had leaped
between the animal and the king and
cut off the elephant's trunk. The ac-
count notes that Amenemhab had also
saved the king's life in the battle for
Kadesh. When the prince of Kadesh
let a mare loose along the front lines
to distract the stallions pulling the
Egyptians' chariots, Amenemhab had
bolted forward and chased the mare
until he killed her. He brought her tail
to Thutmose.
Despite Thutmose's military suc-
cesses, the unrest continued and so,
too, did the campaigns. To patrol the
areas he conquered and to prevent in-
surrections, Thutmose ordered garrisons
built on the coast, on hills, and at
other key sites. Even after he quashed
opposition to his rule in most areas,
Thutmose still organized campaigns—
not as military expeditions, but as in-
spection and intimidation tours. Ac-
counts of these later campaigns focus
chiefly on the tremendous amounts of
tribute and gifts that were pouring into
Egypt, including hardwoods, copper
ore, incense, sweet oils, bronze spears,
and grains.
In Year 50, to keep the trade routes
in and out of Nubia safe and accessible
to Egyptian caravans and merchants,
Thutmose led a campaign south into
Nubia. When he reached the First
Cataract, he was unable to use the
canal dug by Senwosret Ill's workers
because it had filled with sand, silt, and
debris. Thutmose immediately ordered
the canal cleared, and to prevent
blockage in the future, he made clean-
ing the canal the yearly responsibility
of the local fishermen. In Nubia,
Thutmose met success everywhere and
extended Egypt's southern border to
Gebel Barkal, at the Fourth Cataract.
He set up a boundary marker similar to
the one he had left at the Euphrates.
Although much of his time was
spent extending and fortifying Egypt's
borders, Thutmose also focused atten-
tion on construction projects. Follow-
ing his orders, architects, engineers, ar-
tisans, and laborers restored old temples
and built new ones. Special attention
was given to Amun-Re's temple at Kar-
nak. Karnak had served as Egypt's
major religious center for approximate-
ly 500 years, and Thutmose had an offi-
cial king list inscribed on the walls
with 62 names, each accompanied by
an image of the king. Thutmose did
not, however, have the kings listed in
chronological order.
Thutmose also chose Karnak as
the site for a special black granite stele
about six feet in height. On it, he
had his artisans carve his "Hymn of
Victory" (25 lines that celebrate the
victories and conquests of his reign).
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Thutmose III
POSITION
King of Egypt
REIGN
About 1504-1450 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Led 17 military campaigns into the
Syria-Palestine area and brought
the area under Egyptian control;
extended the boundaries of Egypt-
ian rule to the Euphrates; defeated
the Mitannians; established the
foundation of the Egyptian Empire;
led a military campaign against
Nubia and extended Egyptian con-
trol as far as the Fourth Cataract;
cleared the canal that bypassed the
First Cataract; rebuilt and restored
many temples and buildings; refur-
bished the Karnak temple of Amun
and commissioned many new build-
ings erected there; brought peace
to Egypt and the lands under its
control; encouraged trade expedi-
tions; filled Egypt's treasury with
tributes and gifts from conquered
lands and allies
THUTMOSE III 1 0 3


--- PAGE 105 ---
Thutmose's successors followed his ex-
ample and encouraged this new style of
poetic literature.
To design the extensive changes he
envisioned at Karnak, Thutmose chose
a master architect named Ineni, who
had worked there years earlier. Because
Thutmose III wished to disassociate
himself from Hatshepsut, Ineni de-
signed a sandstone covering to hide all
but the tips of the two giant obelisks
Hatshepsut had set up near the en-
trance to the temple area. This "cover-
up" proved a boon for archaeologists
because it preserved the inscriptions on
the obelisks. Thutmose then had an-
other pair of obelisks set up at Karnak.
Today one stands in Istanbul, Turkey,
and the other in Rome, Italy. The
obelisk in New York City's Central
Park dates to Thutmose's reign as well,
but it was commissioned to adorn
Amun's temple at Heliopolis.
Thutmose also had Ineni design
and construct a great Festival Hall.
Here, Thutmose planned to celebrate
the traditional Heb-Sed, a festival that
proved a king's fitness to rule and com-
memorated the unification of Lower
and Upper Egypt. What made Thut-
mose's Festival Hall unique was the de-
sign of the central columns. Each was
shaped like a tent pole and was posi-
tioned so that the thickest part of the
column was at the top. Behind the Fes-
tival Hall, in a small room known as
the "botanical garden," Thutmose had
his artists display flowers and animals
he had seen while on campaign in the
East. One animal that particularly fas-
cinated Thutmose was "a bird that lays
an egg every day" (thought today to be
a chicken).
Thutmose also chose Karnak as the
place to dedicate a special copper plate.
Once, to prove his ability as a marks-
man, Thutmose had ordered his chariot
driver to ride by targets made of copper
plates (according to the records, a plate
measured about four fingers in width).
Each plate was on a pole, and as the
chariot raced by, Thutmose shot an
arrow at a plate. His strength was such
that the arrow flew across the field,
pierced the copper plate, and stopped
only after it poked out the other side.
Sometime late in his reign, Thut-
mose issued orders to erase Hatshepsut's
name from all monuments and records.
Excavators have found countless mark-
ers, inscriptions, and monuments with
the section that once gave praise to
Hatshepsut neatly cut out.
As his burial complex, Thutmose
chose a site halfway up a rock cliff in
the Valley of the Kings. Its design fol-
lowed the traditional pattern for royal
tombs of the period, with an entrance
stairway and a corridor leading down to
a well shaft. Along the walls artisans
painted the kheker frieze (a stylized
motif that resembled a protective type
offence). The ceiling was painted with
stars to simulate the sky. Adorning the
walls of the antechamber, the room
that preceded the burial chamber, were
stick-figure representations of the gods
and goddesses found in the Amduat
("The Book of the Secret Chamber" or
"The Book of What Is in the Under-
world"). Following the practice that
had developed in recent decades, a
short flight of stone steps carved into
the rock cliff led from the antechamber
down to the burial chamber itself.
Recorded on the two columns standing
in the middle of the chamber was the
hymn to the sun god, known as the
"Litany of Re."
Here, too, were scenes representing
the hours as described in the Book of
the Secret Chamber. According to the
Egyptians, every night the sun god
traveled through the 12 divisions of
the underworld, and this journey, in
turn, corresponded to the 12 hours
of night. To represent this concept
graphically, the Egyptians pictured
various deities as the representatives of
each hour. Thus, in Thutmose's tomb, a
series of squatting baboons, each ac-
companied by text designed to help
and instruct the deceased, represents
the first hour. The complete text of The
Book of the Secret Chamber has been
found only in the tomb of Thutmose
III and of his successor Amenhotep II.
About 400 years after Thutmose's
death, the priests in charge of the
royal tombs in the Valley of the Kings
took drastic steps to foil robbers
who were plundering the site. They
entered the tombs and gathered the
mummies, including Thutmose's. They
reburied them in a new site at Deir el
Bahri, where they remained until the
late 1800s.
Thutmose was in his mid to late
60s when he died. His 18-year-old son
and co-regent, Amenhotep, succeeded
him. Modern analysis of Thutmose's re-
mains show that this fearless warrior,
hunter, and ruler was fairly short by
modern standards—no more than five
feet, three inches tall.
Soon after Thutmose's death his
deeds became legendary, and a cult de-
veloped that honored his memory.
Thus, the words he had the god Amun-
Re speak in the "Hymn of Victory"
seem most appropriate:
Thutmose, living forever, who has
done for me all that my ka desired . . .
[y]our monuments are greater than
those of any king who has been.
FURTHER READING
Lichtheim, Miriam. Ancient Egyptian Liter-
ature: A Book of Readings, vol. 2, pp.
29-39. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1976.
Pritchard, James B., ed. The Ancient Near
East: An Anthology of Texts and Pictures,
pp. 175-182. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1958.
1 0 4 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 106 ---
Rekhmire
SECOND ONLY
TO THE KING
s Rekhmire approached the gate to the
royal palace, the chief official cleared the
way before him, and the courtiers bowed
low as a sign of their respect. All knew the
pharaoh, Thutmose III, had summoned
Rekhmire to his audience chamber so that he could official-
ly name him vizier of Egypt. Soon all Egypt would know
Rekhmire's name, as the office of vizier brought with it au-
thority that was second only to the king's. Dressed in his
finest white linen garment to match the solemnity of the
occasion, Rekhmire stood firm and resolute as he listened to
Thutmose's instructions:
Be watchful over all that is done [within the vizier's room].
That is the foundation block of the whole land ... as for the
office of vizier, it is definitely not pleasant. Indeed, it is as
bitter as gall. See to it that you do everything in accordance
with the stipulations of the law and with what is right. . .
consider the person whom you do not know the same as a
person you know. The official who acts in this manner shall
Fine detail and a sense of calm characterize this delicate drawing
of a girl playing the harp. It was just one of many scenes adorn-
ing the walls of Rekhmire's tomb at Sheikh Abd el Qurna.
REKHMIRE 1 0 5
A


--- PAGE 107 ---
Being vizier is definitely
not pkasant. . . it is as
bitter as gdl.
—Inscription on the wall
of Rekhmire's tomb
In this detail from a wall painting in Rehkmire's tomb, two workmen at the lower left
and upper right use ropes and poles to balance heavy loads of stone building blocks on
their shoulders.The figures to the left and above are making mud bricks.
succeed greatly. . . . Do not be angry
at a person unjustly, but be angry con-
cerning those matters about which
you should be angry. ... A just official
is one who truly inspires respect.
Rekhmire knew well the advice
that Thutmose was giving him. Years
earlier, Thutmose had addressed the
same words to Rekhmire's uncle Woser
after naming him vizier. Neither Woser
nor Rekhmire was a member of the
royal family. After the 4th Dynasty,
about 1,000 years earlier, rulers had
abandoned the practice of only naming
members of the royal family to key gov-
ernment positions. In the intervening
centuries, the appointment of compe-
tent people regardless of their social sta-
tus had become the procedure. As a re-
sult, throughout Egypt, many nonroyals
held powerful posts. These officials en-
couraged their children and even their
other relatives to prepare themselves
to inherit the positions. Rekhmire's suc-
ceeding his uncle as vizier was just one
example.
Rekhmire did an admirable job.
Nowhere in surviving texts is there any
hint of scandal; nowhere is there any
mention of his dismissal or replacement
by a more capable person. Thutmose
recognized Rekhmire's loyalty and gave
him permission to build a magnificent
tomb for himself. As the site, Rekhmire
chose the limestone hills on the west
bank of the Nile at Sheikh Abd el
Qurna—a favored burial site with no-
bles and high-ranking officials.
Rekhmire had no desire to be
innovative in the overall plan for his
tomb. Therefore, he ordered his workers
to follow the basic reversed "T" design
used by nobles and officials at the time.
First came an open courtyard or garden.
From here a narrow passageway led into
a broad hall. A second passageway—
1 0 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 108 ---
ANCIENT
When 1 judged a defendant, I was unbiased; nor did 1 act in
any way for the purpose of a reward.
—Inscription from the tomb of Rekhmire
also very narrow—connected the hall
to a corridor approximately 88 feet
long. At the end was another chamber
with a recessed area where, following
custom, Rekhmire would have workers
place a statue of himself. Behind the
statue, workers painted the traditional
"false door" through which Rekhmire's
ka (life force) could reenter the world
of the living and obtain whatever it
needed for its survival.
Excavation teams have not found
Rekhmire's burial chamber or his
mummy, but they did notice the dam-
aged condition of the wall paintings.
Because the damage appears to be a
form of vandalism, some historians
think that Thutmose turned against
Rekhmire, and as a result, Rekhmire's
mummy never entered this tomb.
Along the walls of the corridor,
which was larger and grander than
those found in tombs belonging to oth-
ers of his rank, Rekhmire had artisans
list his duties and responsibilities as
vizier. He also had them adorn the
walls with scenes of events and inci-
dents that had taken place while he
held the office. Included are detailed
descriptions of how, where, and with
whom a vizier should prepare himself
to receive petitioners. The inscriptions
also make it clear that no vizier could
pass new laws or rescind old ones—
such rights belonged solely to the king.
However, it was a vizier's duty to make
sure everyone obeyed the laws and that
those who did not were punished.
As to Rekhmire's role at the judi-
cial hearings, the hieroglyphs are quite
specific:
While holding hearings, the vizier [as
the Chief Judge] shall sit on a [special]
chair, with a reed mat on the floor . . .
a cushion under his back, a cushion
under his feet... a scepter in his hand
and the 40 leather straps shall be open
before him. Then the chiefs of the
South [Upper Egypt] shall stand ... in
front of him, with the Overseer of the
Cabinet on his right, the Supervisor of
Clients on his left, and the scribes of
the vizier at either side—each man at
his proper place. Let one petitioner be
heard after another, without allowing
the petitioner who is behind to be
heard before the one who is in front.
The text continues with more in-
structions for Rekhmire: After he seat-
ed himself and listened to the petition-
ers and then to the overseers, he was to
make his daily report to the king, if the
king was in residence at Thebes at the
time. When Thutmose was away,
Rekhmire kept the king informed
through messages sent by a courier.
Rekhmire's duties included collect-
ing taxes and foreign tribute, receiving
foreign envoys, settling boundary lines,
overseeing the grain supplies, and sur-
veying the land along the Nile after the
flood season so that his engineers could
re-mark the boundary lines and reopen
irrigation canals. Rekhmire was not ex-
pected to accomplish all these tasks by
himself. Following the example of his
Rekhmire
POSITION
Vizier of Egypt
ACTIVE DATES
About 1460 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Fulfilled the duties of vizier—legal,
military, economic, and social—
during the second half of the rule
of Thutmose III and the beginning
of the rule of Amenhotep II; super-
intended the collection of tribute
from conquered peoples, gifts from
allies, and taxes from Egyptians;
built a large tomb at Sheikh Abd el
Qurna; left on his tomb walls a list-
ing of the duties of a vizier, which
has proved to be one of the most
important surviving documents
from ancient Egypt
REKHMIRE 1 0 7


--- PAGE 109 ---
Going forth over the land
every morning to do the daily
favors . . . not preferring the
great above the humble, re-
warding the oppressed . . .
bringing the evil to him who
committed it.
—Inscription on
Rekhmire's tomb
predecessors, he used assistants to gath-
er the information he needed to make
wise and unbiased decisions. Rekhmire
also depended on his aides for news of
problems and internal conflicts.
Because his role in tax- and tribute-
collecting was important, Rekhmire had
the artisans decorate the walls of the
great hall in his burial complex with
paintings of envoys and taxpayers bring-
ing their goods. He also had himself pic-
tured with scribes who were responsible
for recording the items presented, the
name of each presenter, and the coun-
try of origin. Much of this list has sur-
vived, and the entries include huge jars
of honey, strips of cedarwood, weights
of gold, apes, bows, oxen, jewelry, bead
necklaces, chests of linen material,
pigeons, grain, and bread. A Nubian
holds a panther on a leash. Two other
Nubians appear to be coaxing a giraffe
with a monkey climbing on its neck to
move forward. A fourth Nubian carries
a great elephant tusk across his shoul-
ders. Syrian envoys offer beautiful vases
and horse-drawn chariots.
The inscriptions on another wall
area in the tomb focus on Rekhmire's
responsibilities as inspector of all crafts.
Here the artisans depict Rekhmire re-
viewing the work of jewelers, gold-
smiths, coppersmiths, carpenters and
cabinetmakers, crafters of stone vases,
and sculptors. A scene in a goldsmith
shop shows a scribe recording the
weight of each piece of gold given a
goldsmith. (To prevent thievery, offi-
cials weighed every object the gold-
smith fashioned to make sure the
weight of the finished product
matched the weight of the original
piece of gold.)
Carpentry was another trade that
required skill and talent. In Rekhmire's
painted "carpenter's shop," carpenters
work with adzes and saws. They also
brush walls with plaster or a similar sub-
stance. Round about their shops lie fin-
ished objects, including a fan handle, a
headrest, and a table. Other scenes
show carpenters busily crafting shrines
and objects for temple use. An accom-
panying inscription names Rekhmire as
the source of inspiration for the designs
the carpenters will produce. It was
Rekhmire's responsibility to make sure
that all workers observed the prescribed
standards of quality.
Rekhmire worked many hours at
his job, but he also spent time relaxing.
And it was these happy times that he
also wanted with him in the next life.
For this reason, he commissioned scenes
of festival celebrations to be painted on
the walls of the long corridor. In some,
he relaxes at a banquet with his wife
Meryt and their sons and daughters. In
others, dancers whirl about as musicians
play the harp, lute, and drum.
To ensure a smooth passage from
this world to the next, Rekhmire asked
his artisans to depict the traditional
funeral and burial rites along the hall
and corridor walls. One scene shows
his children bringing the traditional
offerings of food and drink. Another
depicts the most important burial
ritual—the Opening of the Mouth
ceremony. The tomb designs that pay
eternal tribute to Rekhmire's achieve-
ments have also given Egyptologists
invaluable information.
FURTHER READING
Lichtheim, Miriam. Ancient Egyptian
Literature: A Book of Readings, vol. 2, pp.
21-24. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1976.
Tooley, Angela M. J. Egyptian Models
and Scenes. Buckinghamshire, England:
Shire, 1995.
1 0 8 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 110 ---
More Ancient
Egyptians to
Remember
eqene.nre Tao II (active about 1574 B.C.) ruled
from Thebes, the chief city in Upper Egypt.
Determined to drive the Hyksos who controlled
Lower Egypt from Egyptian soil, he advanced
against these foreigners. A later folktale gives a
reason for the conflict between Seqenenre and the Hyksos
king Apepi I (also known as Apophis). According to the
tale, Apepi was upset because the roaring of the hippopota-
muses in Thebes was keeping him awake—from 500 miles
away at his palace in Lower Egypt! He wanted Seqenenre to
attend to the matter.
Seqenenre's mummy, uncovered in the royal cache at
Deir el Bahri in 1881, reveals that he died in a violent
struggle. His skull bears the marks of terrible wounds—
gouges inflicted most likely by one or more enemies wield-
ing a dagger, ax, spear, and maybe even a mace. Seqenenre's
two sons, Kamose and Ahmose, continued the struggle
against the Hyksos. Kamose also led forces north and suc-
ceeded in extending Egyptian control as far the Hyksos cap-
ital at Avaris. Inscriptions at Karnak tell of Kamose launch-
ing an offensive against Nubia. His intent was probably to
prevent the Nubian king from helping Apepi by attacking
the Egyptians from the South. Under Ahmose's rule, Seqe-
nenre's goal of expelling the Hyksos became a reality.
Ahmose I (active about 1570-46 B.C.) was quite young
when he succeeded Kamose on the throne. His mother,
Queen Ahhotep, most likely ruled as regent for a while. The
Hyksos took advantage of the situation and began retaking
land they had lost to Kamose. When Ahmose came of age
he quickly proved himself a strong leader. In a series of cam-
paigns, he captured Memphis, the traditional capital of
Upper and Lower Egypt, and forced the Hyksos to retreat
farther north into the Delta region. Ahmose then laid siege
to Avaris. After taking the city, Ahmose drove the intruders
The Egyptians often used wooden sledges on rollers drawn by oxen to transport medium-size stone blocks. Ahmose's workmen
would have used this method in temple restoration.
MORE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS TO REMEMBER 1 0 9
S
u


--- PAGE 111 ---
The images on this painted limestone
honor Ahmose-Nefertari (right), and her
son Amenhotep I (left). It is thought that
the term "pharaoh" was first used to refer
to Egypt's ruler during the reign of
Ahmose-Nefertari's husband, Ahmose I.
out of Egypt and pursued the retreating
army to Sharuhen, a Hyksos stronghold
in Palestine. After a six-year siege,
Sharuhen finally surrendered to Ah-
mose. Years later, one of Ahmose I's
naval officers, Ahmose, son of Ebana,
recorded on the walls of his tomb de-
tails of these battles and of Ahmose's
other campaigns. Ahmose also ad-
vanced his troops into Nubia and
reestablished Egyptian control south of
the Second Cataract. To the east, Ah-
mose sought Egyptian access to trade
routes that crisscrossed the Mediter-
ranean Sea and marched into southern
Palestine. Ahmose then turned his at-
tention to domestic matters. He rebuilt
irrigation systems, restored temples, and
appointed people whom he could trust
to positions of authority.
After a reign of approximately 25
years, Ahmose I died. History remem-
bers him as the founder of the 18th Dy-
nasty and credits him with establishing
the foundation on which the Egyptian
Empire would be built. Ahmose's tomb
site remains to be discovered, but in
1881, at Deir el Bahri, archaeologists
uncovered his mummy, garlanded with
pale blue delphinium flowers. Further
examination revealed that he was a
thin person with excellent teeth but
that he suffered from arthritis, especial-
ly in his knees.
Ahmose-Nefertari (active about
1580-40 B.C.) was the wife of Ahmose
I, the mother of Amenhotep I, and the
mother-in-law of Thutmose I. Most
likely she was also the daughter of
Seqenenre Tao II and his Great Royal
i i o ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 112 ---
Wife. After Ahmose died, she served as
regent for Amenhotep. Later, Amen-
hotep showed her great respect and,
after her death, established a religious
cult in her honor. The people of Deir
el Medina, the village established to
house the skilled artisans who worked
on the royal tombs in the Valley of
the Kings, looked to Ahmose-Nefertari
as their patron deity. For approximately
500 years, her name was included
in the inscriptions carved into the
walls of private tombs and on public
monuments.
In 1881, in the burial chamber now
numbered Tomb DB320 (at Deir el
Bahri), archaeologists found the enor-
mous coffin of Ahmose-Nefertari. It was
fashioned, as was the custom at the
time, in the shape of a human figure,
with feet together, arms crossed over
the chest, and an ankh in each hand.
The cartonnage (a combination of main-
ly linen and plaster) cover on her face
had been shaped to resemble a head
and shoulders and was painted with an
idealized picture of the queen. Because
Egyptian priests some 450 years after
Ahmose-Nefertari's death reburied
many royal mummies in DB320, it is
unclear whether the remains found in-
side the coffin are actually those of the
queen. Further research and testing, es-
pecially of DNA samples, may someday
provide the answers.
Thutmose I (active about 1524-18
B.C.) followed Amenhotep I on the
throne of Egypt. He had served as
Amenhotep's co-regent during the last
years of his reign. He was not the king's
son, but he may have been a relative.
To protect Egypt's interests in Nubia,
he advanced his troops as far as the
Fourth Cataract on the Nile. Thutmose
then looked east, followed the route
the retreating Hyksos had taken into
Syria, and led his troops as far as the
Euphrates River.
In thanksgiving to the gods,
Thutmose placed the master architect
Ineni in charge of refurbishing the
great temple complex dedicated to
Amun-Re at Karnak. Thutmose also
placed Ineni in charge of building his
tomb. Ineni chose a new site—a se-
cluded ravine that is known today as
the Valley of the Kings. Nearby, in Deir
el Medina, a village was established for
the skilled workers on his tomb and
mortuary temple.
Thutmose's reign had been feverish
with activity both on the battlefield
and throughout Egypt. Yet it was a
short reign, lasting just over six years.
To ensure the line of succession, espe-
cially considering that both his sons
by his Great Royal Wife had prede-
ceased him, Thutmose married Hat-
shepsut, his daughter by his Great
Royal Wife, to a son he had fathered
with a minor queen.
A black granite sculpture ofThutmose I, in
a traditional royal pose: seated with his
hands on his lap.
MORE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS TO REMEMBER 1 1 1


--- PAGE 113 ---
Splendor
and Revolution
(New Kingdom,
about 1440-1293 B.C.)
The cities and the rocky cliffs that rose above the sands bordering
the Nile River hummed with construction. Trade caravans and
graceful boats crafted to take advantage of the Nile's current and
light winds crisscrossed Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt with imports
and exports. Egypt's merchants traveled the trade routes of the eastern Mediter-
ranean world as well, and envoys from the Aegean islands brought gifts to
Egypt's rulers. It was a time of prosperity and strength. Egypt had an abundance
of goods such as grains, papyrus, textiles, and dried fish. With these, Egyptian
merchants could barter for whatever goods they needed or wanted. Although
rich in natural resources, Egypt did lack such resources as gold and hardwoods,
both of which were critical to maintaining the high standard of living the Egyp-
tians now enjoyed.
Later historians would refer to this period, the 18th Dynasty, as one of the
grandest of the New Kingdom and, indeed, one of the greatest periods in Egyp-
tian history. Thutmose III had extended Egypt's power and influence east to the
banks of the Euphrates and south to the Fourth Cataract. As a result, tribute
from conquered nations and gifts from those who wished to ally themselves with
so powerful a neighbor added to the country's wealth. Thutmose's son, Amen-
hotep II, had continued his father's policies, although he was more ruthless and
vindictive toward those whom he considered enemies.
However, as Egypt changed from a land centered on activity along the Nile
to an international power, its economy and the lifestyle of its people changed as
well. Because foreign traders and a growing number of prisoners and slaves from
other lands now made their way up the Nile, Egyptians were constantly being
introduced to new languages, new religious ideas, and new customs.
Two constants, however, remained: the annual flooding of the Nile and the
worship of the sun god. Although irrigation canals and other technology had
increased the amount of arable land, a good harvest depended on the annual
deposit of silt left by the floodwaters. The building of new temples and the refur-
bishing of old temples at Karnak and Heliopolis reflected the Egyptian belief
AMENHOTEP III
TIYE
AKHENATEN
NEFERTITI
TUTANKHAMUN
HOREMHEB
1 1 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
4
IN THIS PART


--- PAGE 114 ---
that life depended on the sun god Amun-Re. The king was no longer regarded
as a divine being, but he was still considered the human representative of the
sun god here on Earth.
Part 4 of Ancient Egyptians profiles people who inherited a strong and pros-
perous kingdom and continued the policies that had transformed the Two Lands
along the Nile into a strong empire. It also focuses on a brief period in Egyptian
history when a king's belief in the Aten rather than in Amun-Re temporarily
changed the basic principles of Egyptian tradition.
This relief of Asian and Nubian soldiers was uncovered in Akhenaten's city of Akhetaten. As Egyptian control extended farther south
and east, the troops in Egyptian armies came from many parts of the region.
SPLENDOR AND REVOLUTION 1 1 3


--- PAGE 115 ---
Amenhotep
in
THE MAGNIFICENT
menhotep was about 12 years old when he
succeeded his father, Thutmose IV. Because
of his youth, his mother, Mutemwia, was
named regent. Although she was not of
royal blood, she was, according to most
Egyptologists, the daughter of Egyptians who had close ties
to the royal family. The tradition that the Great Royal Wife
had to be a member of the royal family was no longer as im-
portant. The same was true when Amenhotep's mother and
his advisers made arrangements for him to marry Tiye. Like
Mutemwia, Tiye was a nonroyal and the daughter of influen-
tial Egyptians who held high-ranking government positions.
In the years to come, Tiye herself would become adept at
handling government matters and at advising her husband.
Amenhotep and Tiye had at least two sons and four daugh-
ters. After the death of their oldest son, their second son be-
came Amenhotep's heir and successor. This son would ascend
the throne as Amenhotep IV, although history would remem-
ber him by the name he later chose for himself—Akhenaten.
Unlike his predecessors, Amenhotep III did not need to
prove Egypt's military might. Egypt had become the domi-
nant force in the eastern Mediterranean, and few rulers dared
oppose him. Records tell of some unrest in Year 5 at Ibhet,
in Nubia, that was quickly quelled. On a stele honoring this
victory, Amenhotep had workers carve the following:
[A messenger] came to tell his majesty: "Kush [the Egyptian
name for Upper Nubia] has planned rebellion in ... his
heart." His majesty [Amenhotep] led on unto his victory and
completed it on his first victorious campaign. His majesty
went forth ... like Montu [the Theban god of war]. ..
[Amenhotep] was a fierce-eyed lion and he seized Kush.
Amenhotep also recorded other events—neither politi-
cal nor military—on the underside of large stone scarabs.
Other kings had commissioned artisans to inscribe two or
three words honoring a significant event or achievement on
a scarab, but Amenhotep seems to have been the only one
who issued a series of these scarabs, each with an inscription
recording a specific event. Actually, Amenhotep used his
stone scarabs much like news bulletins, and excavators have
unearthed them at sites as far south as Soleb in the Sudan
and as far north as Ras Sharma in Syria.
The scarab as an art form was an Egyptian tradition. For
centuries, Egyptians had worn amulets (charms with magical
powers thought to ward off evil), and the scarab was one of
the most popular. Made of a hard material such as stone,
gold, or gems, the scarab was shaped to resemble a dung bee-
tle and was identified with the all-powerful, life-giving sun.
The Egyptians saw a beetle push a ball of dung into a hole
114 • ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
A


--- PAGE 116 ---
The battered and worn ruins of this 60-foot statue of a seated Amenhotep
the lasting craftsmanship of the sculptors.
attest to
from which young beetles later
emerged. They did not realize that the
mother beetle laid her eggs in the
dung. For the ancient Egyptians, the
beetle represented the daily rebirth of
the sun because they saw a parallel be-
tween the sun's rise each day and what
they believed was the rebirth of the
beetle. Thus they came to depict the
sun as a round ball being pushed across
the sky by a beetle.
Amenhotep's first scarab dates
to Year 2 of his reign and commemo-
rates his marriage to Tiye. The second
dates to the same year and records
Amenhotep's prowess as a hunter of
wild cattle. Here he followed precedent
—his father and grandfather had both
been great sportsmen.
Amenhotep's favorite sport, how-
ever, seems to have been lion hunting.
In Year 10, Amenhotep ordered a third
scarab issued. This time, the inscription
carved onto the flat underside read as
follows: "Number of lions which his
majesty brought down with his own
arrows from Year 1 to Year 10: fierce
lions, 102."
The fourth scarab was also commis-
sioned in Year 10. This one honored
Amenhotep's marriage to Gilukhepa,
the daughter of Shuttarna II, king of
Mitanni. Because the Mitannians and
the Egyptians had been archenemies
for years, the marriage must have been
a political one. It does not seem to
have affected Queen Tiye's position,
especially since Amenhotep had Tiye's
name and title linked with his own
on this scarab.
The fifth and final scarab told of
Amenhotep's command in "Year 11,
Live . . . Amenhotep, rukr
of Thebes; beloved lard of
Amun . . . given life . . .
that he may rule the Two
Lands, like Re, forever.
—Inscription on the
monument in Amen-
hotep's mortuary temple
at Thebes
AMENHOTEP III 1 1 5


--- PAGE 117 ---
On the underside of Amenhotep Ill's third
commemorative scarab (a stone beetle),
an inscription records that he killed 102
lions in the first 10 years of his reign. The
scarab is about 2 1/4 inches long.
third month of the first season [akhet,
the time when the Nile overflowed its
banks], day 1 ... to make a lake for the
Great King's Wife, Tiye. ... His
majesty celebrated the feast of the
opening of the lake [two weeks later]
when he sailed on the lake in the royal
barge Aten-Gleams." (The Egyptians
considered the god Aten a form of the
sun god Amun-Re.) If the inscription is
accurate, then the laborers must have
completed the entire project in 15
days! Quite an accomplishment, con-
sidering that the lake was just over a
mile long and about a quarter of a mile
wide. Its exact location has been debat-
ed for years, but many historians be-
lieve it lay on the west bank of the
Nile at Thebes.
Temples were also important to
Amenhotep, just as they been to his
predecessors. And Amenhotep did not
confine to Egypt his building of new
temples and repairing of old ones. He
ordered several temples built in Nubia,
including one at Soleb, which he dedi-
cated to himself, Tiye, and the god
Amun-Re. This identification of the
royal couple as deities whom the Nu-
bians should worship set a precedent
that his successors would follow.
The focus of Amenhotep's building
efforts, however, was at Karnak.
Records credit him and his architects—
especially the twin brothers Suti and
Hor—with the construction of the
main portion of the temple at Luxor
and with the great processional avenue
linking this temple with the Karnak
temple to Amun-Re. Bordering each
side of the great avenue was a row of
ram-headed stone sphinxes. The ram
heads were appropriate because the ram
was sacred to Amun-Re.
Amenhotep also added the Third
Pylon (a massive ornamental gateway)
at the entrance to the Karnak temple.
In front of the pylon, workers began
construction on the great hypostyle
hall (a roofed area supported by rows of
pillars) with a central aisle of massive
stone columns that artisans later deco-
rated with brilliantly colored designs.
Skilled craftsmen crowned the columns
with capitals carved to resemble lotus
buds. Once a year, as part of the Festi-
val of Opet rituals, priests carried
Amun-Re's statue from the Karnak
temple to the Luxor temple.
Amenhotep and his architects
seem to have had a special preference
for size, particularly oversize statues.
The ram-headed sphinxes are only one
example. To adorn the colonnade of
the temple at Luxor, Amenhotep had
his artisans sculpt a six-foot-high pink-
quartzite statue of himself. When it was
rediscovered in 1989, the statue was
still intact, its head crowned with the
double crown of Lower and Upper
Egypt and its stance that of a powerful,
confident ruler.
To adorn the temple at Karnak '
that was dedicated to Mut, the great
goddess and wife of Amun-Re, Amen-
hotep had 600 black granite statues
fashioned in the likeness of the lion-
headed goddess Sekhmet. At Soleb in
Nubia, two enormous rose-granite
lions—both in a reclining position—
stood guard before the temple Amen-
hotep dedicated to himself, his wife,
and Amun-Re. The effect must have
been breathtaking, especially if one
considers that an ancient inscription
described the temple as "finished with
fine white sandstone ... its floor
adorned with silver, and all its portals
are of gold." Two enormous stone
statues of baboons that Amenhotep
ordered erected at Hermopolis-Magna
in Upper Egypt also still stand.
Amenhotep also took time to focus
on his personal needs, and he chose a
site at Malkata on the west bank of the
Nile for his palace. This was not, how-
ever, to be a single compound with
rooms only for Amenhotep and his
116 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 118 ---
His eye is the sun, making
brightness for all. . . his two
hands hold power, his word
bears victory.
—Inscription on the
pylon Amenhotep erected
at Kamak
immediate family, but instead a small
city covering more than 80 acres and
including several royal residences. Most
likely one was for Queen Tiye. Another
may have been for his daughter Sit-
amun, whom records suggest he also
married. Here, too, were administrative
quarters, houses for senior palace offi-
cials, and quarters specially designed for
the minor royal wives and other wives
in Amenhotep's harem. One of the
most important areas was the festival
hall where the Sed, or Heb-Sed, cele-
bration was held. He even had his ar-
chitects design guest rooms for all high-
ranking Egyptian officials who would
be attending the festival, as well as for
ambassadors from conquered territories
and from nations whose leaders had
pledged their allegiance to Egypt. As
was the custom, Amenhotep celebrated
his first Sed jubilee in the 30th year of
his reign. He celebrated his second in
Year 34, and a third in Year 37. He
died before he could celebrate another
Heb-Sed in this life.
The palace buildings were mostly
one level. Because they were made of
mud bricks and not stone, little has sur-
vived. Yet here, too, size and grandeur
were the chief characteristics. Decorat-
ing the walls were delightful scenes of
animals and flowers. The design shows
a preference for fine illustration and re-
flects an Eastern influence.
More important to Amenhotep
than his royal palace, however, was his
burial complex. Like his father, he, too,
had his mortuary temple built on the
west bank of the Nile, in an area that
was separated by rock cliffs from his
tomb in the Valley of the Kings. On a
black granite stele positioned within
the mortuary temple Amenhotep had
workers carve the following inscription:
[Amenhotep] made it [the temple] as
his monument for his father, Amun,
lord of Thebes ... an eternal, everlast-
ing fortress of fine white sandstone,
adorned with gold throughout. Its floor
is decorated with silver, all the portals
with electrum. ... It resembles the
horizon in ... heaven when Re rises
therein. ... Its storehouse is filled with
male and female slaves, with children
of the princes of all the countries of
the captivity of his. . . majesty. Its
storehouses contain all good things,
whose number is not known.
For Amenhotep, as for his prede-
cessors, his mortuary temple was exact-
ly what its name indicated, a "house of
millions of years." Unfortunately, some
150 years after his death, a king named
Merneptah ordered his workers to use
Amenhotep's temple as a quarry. Be-
cause Merneptah had chosen to build
his mortuary temple on land just north-
east of Amenhotep's temple, it was eas-
ier to have his workers dismantle
Amenhotep's temple than to have
them quarry new stone blocks and
columns. Merneptah did not, however,
touch the two colossal statues of a seat-
ed Amenhotep placed directly before
the entrance to the temple. Cut from a
single block of stone, each statue mea-
sured approximately 68 feet in height
and weighed about 270 tons.
Today the statues still stand, but
in a much battered state. And they
are not associated with Amenhotep
anymore. Centuries after the king's
death, Greek travelers to Thebes began
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Amenhotep
III
POSITION
King of Egypt
REIGN
About 1886-49 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Ended a revolt in Kush (Lower
Nubia); kept peace throughout the
Egyptian Empire and with foreign
rulers; promoted international trade;
refurbished many temples and mon-
uments throughout Egypt and the
lands controlled by Egypt; built a
new temple to Amun at Thebes;
ordered the avenue linking Karnak
and Thebes lined on both sides with
huge reclining ram-headed sphinxes;
built an enormous mortuary temple
on the west bank at Thebes and had
two colossal seated statues of himself
(the so-called Colossi of Memnon)
placed before the entrance; built an
enormous palace at Malkata
AMENHOTEP III 1 1 7


--- PAGE 119 ---
The leader of his soldiers, the
first of millions.
—Inscription on the pylon
Amenhotep erected
at Karnak
calling the statues "the Colossi of
Memnon." According to Greek
mythology, Memnon was the king of
the Ethiopians and the son of Eos, the
Greek goddess of the dawn. In the
great war fought between the Greeks
and the Trojans (the Trojan War is tra-
ditionally dated to around 1180 B.C.),
Memnon allied himself with the Tro-
jans and was killed by the Greek hero
Achilles. His body was supposedly
buried at the feet of the two statues.
When an earthquake shook the
ground beneath the statues in 27 B.C.,
it created a crack in the stone of the
more northerly statue. Soon after, visi-
tors began noticing that, when the rays
of the sun first fell upon this statue in
the morning, it gave a sound like the
twang of a harp. Imagination came into
play, and the story spread that the
sound was Memnon's voice calling a
morning greeting to his mother Eos.
Around A.D. 200, the Roman emperor
Septimus Severus learned of the crack
and ordered it filled. No records survive
to tell of his reaction when he learned
the statue no longer "moaned" at dawn.
(The scientific explanation of the
"moan" is much different: The noise
was probably the result of the sun's
heat drying up the moisture that had
formed in the crack during the cooler
night hours.)
Amenhotep did not follow prece-
dent when he chose his burial site.
Instead of the East Valley in the Valley
of the Kings, he opted for the West
Valley. But he did have his architects
use the traditional tomb plan and
adorn the walls of the burial chamber
with scenes from the Amduat. Adjoin-
ing the principal burial chamber were
two other burial chambers. One was
most likely intended for Queen Tiye
and the other for Queen Sitamun.
More than 3,000 years later, in 1799,
engineers assigned to accompany the
French emperor Napoleon to Egypt dis-
covered Amenhotep's tomb, but no
mummy. In the 1880s, Egyptologists
discovered two burial places where an-
cient Egyptian priests reburied royal
mummies to keep them from robbers.
Amenhotep's mummy is believed to be
one of the mummies found in these
tombs. Positive identification is diffi-
cult, as his mummy suffered much
abuse through the years and is in poor
condition. The head is now completely
detached, and the front part of the
body is missing. Ancient robbers, in
their ruthless search for treasures, often
used an adze to hack a hole through the
wrappings around the head and in the
center of the chest. Also, the priests
had placed the body thought to be
Amenhotep's in a coffin inscribed with
the name of Ramesses III (a much later
ruler). Even the lid on this sarcophagus
does not belong to Amenhotep, but to
Seti II (another later ruler).
Further study of Amenhotep's
mummy has revealed that he was about
50 years old when he died, an age that
supports surviving accounts that credit
him with a rule of approximately 38
years. His teeth were in terrible condi-
tion—full of holes as a result of cavities
that had, in turn, caused abscesses in
his gums. Amenhotep once asked his
father-in-law, the Mitannian king
Tushratta, to loan him a special statue
of the goddess Ishtar that supposedly
had healing properties. Surviving
records indicate that Tushratta agreed
to the request on the condition that
Amenhotep return it to him when he
was finished. Unfortunately for Amen-
hotep, the statue's "power" did not
work, and his condition worsened.
Amenhotep IV succeeded his father.
Archaeologists have uncovered
more than 337 tablets that date from
the last years of Amenhotep Ill's
rule through some 20 years later, when
Tutankhamun was king. Known as the
Amarna Letters, because they were dis-
covered at the excavation site called
Tell el Amarna, these tablets are diplo-
matic correspondence between Amen-
hotep and his successors and rulers in
the East. They are not written in hiero-
glyphs or hieratic script (a simplified
system of writing also used by the Egyp-
tians), but in cuneiform (wedge-shaped
characters used in ancient Akkadian,
Babylonian, and Persian inscriptions).
The texts on these tablets clearly indi-
cate that Amenhotep's successors fol-
lowed his example in foreign policy.
Full of details not found in any other
records, they provide a unique glimpse
into the lives of peoples and nations
subdued by the Egyptians. In one, a
man named Lab'ayu proclaims himself
innocent of the charge that he had
rebelled against Amenhotep III. He
swears that he had merely defended
himself against overaggressive neigh-
bors. As proof of his unfailing loyalty,
Lab'ayu states that he would kill him-
self should Amenhotep command
that of him.
FURTHER READING
Fletcher, Joann. Chronicle of a Pharaoh: The
Intimate Life of Amenhotep III. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2000.
Lichtheim, Miriam. Ancient Egyptian Liter'
ature: A Book of Readings, vol. 2, pp.
43-48. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1976.
1 1 8 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 120 ---
THE QUEEN
AS DIPLOMAT
ove and marriage were not always synony-
mous in ancient Egypt, especially for members
of the royal family. And Amenhotep III was
no exception. Sometime in the second year
of his rule, his advisers arranged for him to
marry Tiye. Both were quite young—too young, in fact, to
make such a decision for themselves. Amenhotep was about
14 years old, Tiye about 12. Although the match proved to
be an excellent one, it did not conform to the rules ob-
served by many of Egypt's kings.
This face and the uraeus (the cobra shape on the royal head-
dress) belong to Queen Tiye, but the statue represents the god-
dess Isis, who sometimes was given the features of the reigning
queen.The cow's horns circling the solar disk are symbols of the
goddess Hathor
TIYE 1 1 9
Tiye L


--- PAGE 121 ---
Although robbers in ancient times had
entered the tomb ofTiye's parents,Yuya
and Tjuya, the ancients had resealed the
tomb and excavators found many magnifi-
cent objects within, includingTjuya's gilded,
inlaid funerary mask.
Tiye was not Amenhotep's sister, or
even his half-sister. She was not even
of royal blood. Tiye's parents came from
Akhmim in Upper Egypt, which was a
religious center for the fertility god
Min. Tiye's father, a nobleman named
Yuya, was the overseer of the royal sta-
bles and held the position of priest at
the temple at Akhmim. Tiye's mother,
Tjuya, held the honored post of Mis-
tress of the Robes in Min's temple.
Both were nonroyals, but their influ-
ence was considerable, and they wield-
ed much power.
In 1905, archaeologists excavating
in the Valley of the Kings made a sur-
prising discovery. In the area reserved
for Egypt's kings, they found the tomb
of Yuya and Tjuya. Further digging
brought the archaeologists face-to-face
with Yuya and Tjuya. Both mummies
were in good condition—actually, they
are two of the best-preserved mummies
thus far discovered in ancient Egypt.
Tests indicate that Yuya was probably
in his 60s when he died and Tjuya in
her 50s. The embalming process had
turned their hair yellow, but the faces
still had a gentle and serene look.
Yuya's body measured approximately
five feet four inches; Tjuya's body ap-
proximately four feet nine inches.
Both Tjuya's ears appeared to have
been pierced twice for earrings, and
her bones showed signs of arthritis.
Each coffin was beautifully deco-
rated with thin hammered sheets of
gold and silver. About the chamber
were glass inlays, a jewel box, wooden
containers painted to imitate decorated
glass vases, bedsteads painted and
decorated with gold and silver leaf, a
chariot, and a wig basket. The finds
provide a glimpse into the world in
which Tiye lived, a world where arti-
sans crafted objects of great beauty and
had ready access to the resources need-
ed to create them.
Tiye lived a very comfortable life
and had wanted for nothing. Her child-
hood had been privileged, and so, too,
was her adulthood. Yet as Amenhotep's
Great Royal Wife, she proved herself a
queen who welcomed duties and re-
sponsibilities. Soon after their marriage,
Amenhotep commissioned his artisans
to record the event on the flat side of a
large stone scarab. And it must have
been on his orders that the names of
her parents, Yuya and Tjuya, were also
carved on the scarab. Another scarab
describes a pleasure lake that Amen-
hotep had dug so that Tiye might enjoy
a pleasant sail. Inscriptions tell of the
royal couple attending the dedication
ceremonies and enjoying an outing on
the royal barge.
Tiye bore Amenhotep at least six
children, two boys and four girls. Their
oldest son died young, so it was their
second son, Amenhotep, who became
heir to the throne and succeeded
Amenhotep as Amenhotep IV (he
later changed his named to Akhen-
aten). Because surviving records refer
to their daughters Isis and Sitamun as
queens, many Egyptologists believe that
Amenhotep III married both of them.
If he did, the two marriages indicate a
revival of the practice of keeping the
royal bloodline in the family.
Tiye appears to have approved and
even encouraged such unions, because
her name accompanies Amenhotep's
on an inscription announcing his mar-
riage to Sitamun. Tiye's name also
appears with her husband's on the
scarab that announces the arrival of
the Mitannian princess Gilukhepa and
Amenhotep's marriage to her. All
records indicate that Tiye was her
husband's political confidante and ally
1 2 0 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 122 ---
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
as well as a dutiful and caring wife.
Surviving official documents prove that
Amenhotep often ordered Tiye's name
inscribed together with his. He even
commissioned sculptors to fashion a
great sphinx with its head modeled after
Tiye's. At Sedeinga, which lay between
the Second and Third Cataracts in
Nubia, Amenhotep had a temple built
and dedicated to her. He also granted
Tiye the honor of participating in reli-
gious ceremonies and royal rituals that
were traditionally reserved for kings, in-
cluding the Heb-Sed jubilee festival.
Tiye's name appears on several
tablets in the Amarna Letters, a collec-
tion of clay tablets uncovered in
1887—a definite indication that she
was personally involved in foreign af-
fairs. Written in cuneiform, the "let-
ters" were correspondence that rulers in
the area known today as the Middle
East had sent to Amenhotep and two
of his successors, Amenhotep IV and
Tutankhamun. These show that foreign
rulers addressed letters directly to Tiye
as well.
Archaeologists have also uncov-
ered a letter that Tushratta, king of Mi-
tanni, wrote to Tiye after the death of
her husband. In it, Tushratta expressed
his sincere hope that the good relations
he had had with Amenhotep III would
continue under the new king, Tiye's
son Amenhotep IV. In a letter to the
young Amenhotep, Tushratta wrote,
"Your mother, Tiye, knows all the
words that I discussed with your father;
no one else knows them." In another
passage, Tushratta expressed anger
when he referred to two solid gold stat-
ues that Amenhotep III had promised
to send him. He noted that, when the
statues finally arrived in the Mitannian
court, Amenhotep was dead and
Amenhotep IV was on the throne.
He made it very clear that he suspected
the new king of deceit because the stat-
ues were made of wood with only a
gold overlay. Wary of trusting Amen-
hotep IV, Tushratta asked Tiye to in-
volve herself in the problem so that the
matter would be resolved fairly and ac-
cording to the original agreement. No
records have surfaced to tell how this
misunderstanding was resolved.
Tiye's political influence most like-
ly continued during the early part of
Amenhotep IV's reign, and she may
even have acted as regent for Amen-
hotep IV for several years. Sometime
around Year 12 of her son's rule, she
moved to the new palace he had built
on the east bank of the Nile at
Akhetaten (present-day el Amarna).
When she died, Amenhotep IV (now
Akhenaten) had her buried near this
new city. Although no proof supports
these details, most Egyptologists agree
that Tiye spent her last years with
Akhenaten.
Nevertheless, Tiye's stay in the
Akhetaten tomb was quite brief.
Egyptologists believe that after
Akhenaten died, his successor Tu-
tankhamun had Tiye's mummy reburied
in the Valley of the Kings, probably in
the tomb known today as Tomb 55.
One of the most celebrated tomb sites
ever discovered, Tomb 55 is also re-
ferred to as KV55. (The present system
of numbering tombs in the Valley of the
Kings is based on the system devised by
the English Egyptologist John Gardner
Wilkinson in 1827.) When excavators
uncovered the entrance to this tomb in
1907, they found within it a large
wooden panel that had formed part of a
shrine. Covered in gold, it was inscribed
with Tiye's name and had been
shaped to represent the queen. A
mummy was found nearby, but scientific
Tiye
POSITION
Queen of Egypt
REIGN
Around 1370 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Mothered six children, one of
whom, Amenhotep IV (later called
Akhenaten), succeeded their father,
Amenhotep III, as king; won the re-
spect of Egyptians and foreign rulers
who were both allies and leaders of
areas subject to Egyptian rule
TIYE 1 2 1


--- PAGE 123 ---
Live—the Great Kings Wife Tiye, the wife of a mighty king
whose southern boundary is as far as Karoy [in Nubia] and
whose northern boundary is as far as Naharin [Mitanni].
—Inscription on the scarab Amenhotep III commis-
sioned to commemorate his marriage with Tiye
tests proved it was that of a young
man. His identity remains a mystery.
Because the tomb held no body
that could be identified as Tiye's and
none of the traditional funerary equip-
ment that would have accompanied her
mummy in death, Egyptologists now be-
lieve that the queen's remains were
buried a third time to protect them
from robbers—probably in tomb KV35.
Just nine years before the 1907 dis-
covery, a French archaeologist named
Victor Loret was working in the East
Valley of the Valley of the Kings and
uncovered an entrance to tomb KV35.
Inscriptions and other artifacts soon
proved it to be the tomb of Amen-
hotep II. In fact, Loret even found the
king's mummy still in the sarcophagus.
Further digging led Loret and his work-
ers into side chambers where they
found 16 mummies—10 royal and 6
whose remains have not yet been posi-
tively identified. Like the cache of
mummies uncovered at Deir el Bahri in
1881, these, too, had been reburied by
ancient Egyptian priests in an attempt
to protect them from further desecra-
tion by robbers.
When Loret entered the side
chamber with the three unwrapped
mummies, he noticed that one had
long (almost one foot in length), curly
dark brown hair. With no other identi-
fying characteristics, she came to be
known as the "elder woman." Results
from later testing suggest that the
mummy is that of Queen Tiye. Recent
analysis of the mummy's hair also seems
to confirm this theory. Scientists found
that her hair strands match
exactly the strands found in a locket
in Tutankhamun's tomb that are
believed to be Tiye's.
The features of the mummy are
quite fine, with a slightly pointed nose
and chin. The teeth are very worn—a
common problem in ancient Egypt be-
cause tiny particles of sand constantly
became mixed with grain that was
being ground to make bread. Unfortu-
nately, ancient robbers had treated the
remains with little respect. In their at-
tempt to steal the treasures buried in
the wrappings, they pierced the chest
and left a large gaping hole. Despite
their callous actions, the mummy's face
still reflects a royal dignity that Tiye
certainly would have had when she
helped her husband rule Egypt more
than 3,000 years ago.
FURTHER READING
El Mahdy, Christine. Mummies, Myth and
Magic in Ancient Egypt, pp. 39, 46-47.
London: Thames & Hudson, 1989.
1 2 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 124 ---
Akhenaten
THE HERETIC KING
he life and ideas of the Egyptian king who
called himself Akhenaten have intrigued
Egyptologists and others for decades. Who
was this king who tried to radically alter the
religious practices of his people? What moti-
vated him to do so? And why did his successors reverse his
decisions and strike his name from the king list? Archaeolo-
gists and Egyptologists are working to find the answers to
these questions. Certain facts, however, are indisputable.
Akhenaten was the name he gave himself after he had
ascended to the throne as Amenhotep IV. His parents had
called him Amenhotep, but not with the intention that he
should follow his father, Amenhotep III, to the throne. His
older brother, Thutmose, was in line for that honor. Never-
theless, both boys were raised to follow the example set by
their ancestors, a long line of distinguished kings who had
extended Egypt's boundaries and made the nation the center
of a powerful empire. Life took an unexpected turn when
Thutmose died. With little time to reflect on his changed
circumstances, Amenhotep suddenly became the heir to the
throne of Egypt. How he accepted his new role is unknown,
This head from a colossal sandstone statue of Akhenaten bears
characteristics of Amarna art in its elongated face, the shape
of the mouth, and the great curve from the nape of the neck
to the chin.
AKHENATEN 1 2 3
T


--- PAGE 125 ---
Beautiful you are, appearing
in the horizon of heaven, you
living Aten, the one who
gives life.
—"Hymn to Aten,"
thought to be written by
Akhenaten
as no personal letters or documents
have survived. Whether he shared the
rule with his father as co-regent before
becoming sole ruler is also an unknown.
Tablets uncovered in the 1880s re-
veal that his mother, Queen Tiye, out-
lived her husband and continued as a
strong political presence during the first
years of her son's reign. A second domi-
nant personality in Amenhotep's life
was his wife, the beautiful Nefertiti,
who, like Queen Tiye, was a nonroyal.
Nefertiti, however, was not a stranger
to the royal family; nor was she an out-
sider. Records indicate that she may
been have been a close relative of Tiye.
For the coronation ceremony,
Amenhotep followed the traditional
customs and rituals. And during the
months that followed, he commis-
sioned architects to design buildings in
the same massive style that had come
to characterize Egyptian architecture.
At Soleb, in Nubia, he ordered workers
to complete the decoration of his fa-
ther's temple. To commemorate his
opening of the sandstone quarries at
Gebel el Silsila in Upper Egypt, Amen-
hotep commissioned artisans to craft
reliefs of him worshiping Amun-Re.
Gradually, however, Amenhotep
began to focus increasing attention on
another deity, the Aten. Like Amun-
Re, the Aten was also associated with
the sun. For more than 500 years, the
Egyptians had honored the Aten. In
fact, Amenhotep's grandfather, Thut-
mose IV, worshiped the Aten as a war
god, and his father, Amenhotep III,
promoted worship of the solar aspect of
the Aten's nature. Amenhotep III had
even named the magnificent royal
barge Tehen-Aten, or "Aten Gleams."
For Amenhotep IV, the Aten was
the force that produced life itself, the
creative power that extended its
warmth and kindness to the earth. For
him, the Aten was the only deity. He
saw it as the sun's disk that rolled across
the sky every day, rising in the east and
setting in the west. In time, this belief
became the focus of his thoughts, and
he could no longer rule or live as he
had been living. New rules, new rituals,
new styles had to be developed to em-
brace this "new religion."
First came the name change from
Amenhotep, meaning "Amun is satis-
fied," to Akhenaten, meaning "He who
is beneficial for the Aten." As Akhen-
aten, he ordered the name Amun
erased from memory. To do this, he
had statues of Amun destroyed and
the hieroglyphic symbols representing
Amun's name and the word "gods"
cut out of records, inscriptions, and re-
liefs. Nor did Akhenaten confine this
order to the lands of Egypt, as he also
commanded that the same "erasure"
procedures be carried out in Nubia
and beyond the desert sands to the
East as well. His directions even in-
cluded chiseling out the "Amen" in his
father's name.
To represent the Aten, Akhenaten
chose a disk. Sculptors and artists drew
a series of straight lines extending
downward from this disk to represent
the life-giving rays of the sun. At the
1 2 4 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 126 ---
end of each ray was a little hand that
"gave" to Akhenaten and his family
the goodness of the Aten in return for
the family's devotion and worship.
Some hands were represented holding
an ankh ¥, the ancient Egyptian symbol
for life. Akhenaten's intent was clear.
He considered himself the Aten's per-
sonal representative on Earth and the
only one to whom the Aten revealed
himself. Thus he, Akhenaten, was to
serve as the mediator between the
Aten and the Egyptians. No longer
were Egyptians to honor or make offer-
ings to Amun or the other gods.
Rather, they were to worship the Aten
by addressing their prayers to Akhen-
aten, because only Akhenaten, Neferti-
ti, and their daughters received the
goodness of the Aten directly.
As a result of Akhenaten's focus on
the Aten, Egypt's economy began to
suffer, and the normal routines of daily
life were seriously interrupted. Akhen-
aten's predecessors had used much of
the tribute and taxes that poured into
Egypt's coffers to adorn Amun-Re's
temples. They had also granted tracts
of land to the priests of Amun-Re.
These priests, in turn, rented some
of these lands to Egyptian farmers.
Thus, thousands of Egyptians worked,
so to speak, for Amun-Re, and their
welfare was directly tied to the prosper-
ity and well-being of the deity's tem-
ples. The temple sites also included
areas that served as schools, offices, and
hospitals where Egyptians could seek
the aid of physician-priests to cure their
ills. As a result, the power of Amun-
Re's priests had increased steadily
through the years.
Because this situation could lead to
rivalry between the priests and the
king, Akhenaten might have felt that
he had to take measures to curb the
priests' power. Although historians do
not agree on Akhenaten's motives for
worshiping only the Aten, they do
agree that Akhenaten's actions robbed
Amun-Re's priests of their power. Just
as Akhenaten had eliminated the name
of Amun from view, now he eliminated
the god's worship by closing all the
temples dedicated to Amun-Re. Be-
cause Amun-Re's priests were no longer
able to rent out temple lands or employ
workers in a variety of jobs, many
Egyptians suddenly found themselves
out of work. How the people felt
about Akhenaten is not known. At
several sites, including a village built to
house those working on Akhenaten's
Akhenaten relaxes with his wife Nefertiti
and their daughters.The rays extending
downward from the Aten (the sun disk)
represent the abundance of goodness the
Aten pours down on the royal family.
AKHENATEN 1 2 5


--- PAGE 127 ---
construction projects, excavators have
found graffiti that suggest many Egyp-
tians continued to worship Amun-Re.
Still, the changes continued. Im-
ages disappeared of gods that shared
human characteristics and seemed ap-
proachable. Gone, too, were the ani-
mal-headed figures of gods. Akhenaten
preferred the impersonal sun disk as the
representation of his god, the Aten.
Because the sun was readily visible to
all, statues were no longer needed. The
traditional temple form with its open
court leading into closed-in areas and
dark recessed spaces reserved only for
priests and the king also had no place
in his religion.
For centuries, the Egyptian people
had gathered at the great religious festi-
vals to watch the priests carry Amun's
statue in a sacred barque during the
great procession. At all other times, the
boat and statue were inaccessible to
them. Akhenaten wanted no mystery,
no secrecy. His Aten could be seen
daily—one had only to look at the sky
and watch as the Aten rolled by on its
daily journey. To reflect this belief,
Akhenaten ordered his workers to
build the Aten's temples with an en-
tranceway that led to a columned hall
area and a series of inner courtyards.
These courtyards were to have no roofs,
but instead be open to the sky, to the
goodness of the Aten. This openness
allowed the food and drink offerings
placed on the many stone altars set up
in the courtyards to be clearly visible to
the Aten passing above.
Unfortunately, none of Akhen-
aten's temples have survived, not even
as ruins. However, recent excavations
have uncovered some of the blocks
used to build at least two of the
temples dedicated to the Aten. While
digging at Karnak and Thebes, archae-
ologists found more than 36,000 small
sandstone blocks (known as talatat, the
local Arabic nickname for the blocks).
It is the size of the blocks that is espe-
cially interesting. Egyptologists theorize
that Akhenaten and his architects or-
dered small blocks because the work-
force included many unskilled men
who found it easier to work with this
size of block than with the traditional
large blocks of stone.
Religion, however, was not Akhen-
aten's only concern. He also turned his
attention to government policy. The
changes he made in this area must
have caused some uneasiness, especially
among nobles and administrative offi-
cials. Instead of restricting his appoint-
ments to members of the royal family
and others of the "inner circle,"
Akhenaten named new people, people
without political and religious ties, to
the highest offices in Egypt. Although
this new policy was fairer, it came too
quickly and did not allow the newcom-
ers enough time to develop and broad-
en their diplomatic skills. As a result,
the practice weakened Egypt's influ-
ence, especially in the conquered lands
under its control.
One of Akhenaten's most radical
decisions was to abandon Thebes and
Memphis, the traditional religious and
political centers of Egypt. He also
abandoned the royal palace his father
had built at Malkata. As the capital of
his empire, Akhenaten chose an area
that lay about halfway between Thebes
and Memphis and had no ties with any
Egyptian tradition. In fact, no town or
city had ever been built on the land.
Akhenaten named his city Akhetaten,
meaning "Horizon of the Aten" or
"Horizon of the Sun Disk."
To mark the boundaries of this city,
Akhenaten rode about the perimeter of
the area in his "great chariot of elec-
trum." He had large stelae carved at
1 2 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 128 ---
intervals in the rock cliffs that formed a
protective arc east of the city limits.
On each stele was a relief that depicted
the king, with his wife and daughters
by his side, worshiping the Aten. The
accompanying inscriptions stated that
the land was sacred and that all were to
be buried within the boundaries
marked by the stelae.
In 1887, a great find was made at
Akhetaten. An Egyptian woman was
searching the area for old mud bricks to
use as fertilizer on her fields and uncov-
ered a collection of baked clay tablets
inscribed with wedge-shaped writing.
At first, no one considered them gen-
uine. Testing, however, proved that
they were diplomatic correspondence
addressed to the king of Egypt by offi-
cials in Syria, Palestine, Phoenicia, and
other neighboring lands. Some were
addressed to Akhenaten; others to his
father Amenhotep III; and several to
his successor Tutankhamun. Today they
are known as the Amarna Letters, from
el Amarna, the modern name of
Akhenaten's city Akhetaten. Egyptolo-
gists had first called the site Tell el
Amarna, a combination of el Till (a
neighboring village) and Beni Amran
(a local tribe). Today historians also use
Amarna to refer to this period in
Egyptian history.
The Amarna Letters reveal unrest
in the lands conquered by Akhenaten's
predecessors. Unable to protect them-
selves against the Hittites (a warrior
tribe from northern Syria and Asia
Minor), officials in these lands were
pleading with the Egyptian king to
send help. The officials also wanted
Egypt's king to take action against
Egyptians who were extorting unjust
sums from the people they were sent to
govern. The urgency of their requests is
made clear in a letter written by Ribad-
di of Gebal (later Byblos): "If no help
comes, then I am a dead man." This
was the last of several pleas marked
"urgent" that he had sent to Akhena-
ten. Although no historical records
have surfaced that tell of Ribaddi's fate,
accounts do indicate that Akhenaten
preferred to focus his attention on
Akhetaten and on promoting the wor-
ship of the Aten.
In a few reliefs Akhenaten is
dressed as a warrior and grasps captives
by the hair with one hand while
preparing to strike them with a mace,
or heavy metal war club, with the
other. In one relief Nefertiti strikes the
same pose. Yet we have no indication
that Akhenaten ever assumed the role
of a warrior-king. In fact, Akhenaten
seems to have spent most, if not all, of
his time in Akhetaten.
Some 10 years after the Amama
Letters were uncovered, the renowned
English archaeologist Sir Flinders Petrie
and his assistant Howard Carter began
digging at el Amarna. Their work has
provided Egyptologists with a rare
glimpse of city life in ancient Egypt.
Because no one had lived in Akhetaten
before Akhenaten and because the city
was abandoned soon after Akhenaten's
death, all the finds reflect life during
one particular time period—and a very
unique period it was.
To complete the city quickly,
Akhenaten's builders must have
worked at a feverish pace. The Great
Royal Palace had a magnificent throne
room, and the North Palace had a
pool and a small zoo that included an
aviary and animal pens. Akhetaten had
temple complexes, residential areas,
business areas, and to the south, the
Maruaten with its great garden area set
aside for pleasure and worship. A road,
known today as the Royal Road, ran
parallel to the Nile and connected the
main areas of the city.
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Akhenaten
POSITION
King of Egypt
REIGN
About 1350-34 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Changed the focus of Egyptian reli-
gion from the worship of Amun-Re
to the worship of the Aten, the sun
disk; proclaimed himself the media-
tor between humans and the Aten;
built a new capital city north of
Thebes and named it Akhetaten;
kept correspondence from subject
states in the East at Akhetaten
AKHENATEN 1 2 7


--- PAGE 129 ---
In the desert sands, a short dis-
tance from the main city, was a small
square-shaped village area. Archaeolo-
gists believe it probably housed the
workers (and their families) who cut
and decorated the tombs in the rock
cliffs that bordered the city to the east.
A wall surrounded the entire village,
with just one gate for residents to enter
and leave. Sixty-eight of the sixty-nine
houses were the same size and starkly
simple, especially in contrast to the
royal residences and private homes of
the city's officials. (The larger house
probably belonged to the foreman.)
Cut into the wall of one of the
tombs, excavators found the "Hymn to
the Aten":
You rise in the eastern horizon and fill
every land with your beauty.
You are beautiful and great, and
gleam. You rise high above every land.
Your rays, they encircle the lands, so
far as all that you have created.
So unlike the "Hymn of Victory,"
written about 100 years earlier during
the reign of Thutmose III, Akhenaten's
song of praise did not speak of crushing
the enemy but of the greatness of the
Aten. It told, too, how the Aten's rays
brought life and beauty to everyone
and everything, not only in Egypt but
throughout the world.
In reliefs, houses and temples are
brightly painted. Designs on the walls
of buildings and private houses picture
bakers busily kneading bread dough,
women spinning and weaving, and
other typical everyday scenes. Along
the base of many walls, artists painted
graceful illustrations of gardens, and
near the ceiling, they painted bouquets
of flowers. Designs of local plant life
decorated the floor. It is almost as if el
Amarna is a window on ancient Egypt.
Such scenes, however, were not the
predominant focus of the artists. Every-
where were illustrations of Akhenaten
and his family receiving the goodness of
the Aten. The royal family had become
the icons of the age and had replaced
all the gods in the Egyptian pantheon.
There were no scenes of the afterlife.
Rather, the focus was on the present—
on Akhenaten's accomplishments and
his role as representative and inter-
preter of the Aten's will.
The art of the period also reflected
Akhenaten's dislike of the staid and
solemn images of the past and his pref-
erence for topics of a more personal na-
ture. Thus, we see royal family mem-
bers pictured as they never had been
before: Akhenaten gently cradling a
daughter in his arms, Nefertiti playing
with her daughters, and the family at
the dinner table with Akhenaten
gnawing on a bone. Always present in
these illustrations is the round disk
symbolizing the Aten, with its rays ex-
tending downward to the royal family.
Nor was subject matter the only
area in which the painted images at
Akhetaten differed from those of
previous decades. A fluidity of move-
ment carried the curving, wavy lines
from one image to the next. Colors
were more subdued and more delicate,
and there were more of them. As
artists sought to capture scenes from
everyday life, they included birds soar-
ing in flight and papyrus plants waving
in the breeze.
One design element, however, did
not change. Artists continued to por-
tray the human figure partly in profile
form: a side view of the head and neck,
a front view of the torso, and a side
view of the legs. What did change was
the way they depicted the human form,
1 2 8 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 130 ---
especially the bodies of the king and
the royal family. No longer was the
king represented as a powerful, perfect-
ly formed warrior and leader. No longer
was his expression regal and almost im-
passive as he gazed out over his world.
Realism and naturalism were key ele-
ments of the design at Akhetaten. Ac-
tually, this was quite appropriate be-
cause Akhenaten wanted the emphasis
on ma'at (justice), truth, and the right
order of the universe. A stele inscrip-
tion tells how Bek, Akhenaten's chief
sculptor and Master of Works, followed
the king's instructions to draw exactly
what he saw.
Yet whether the elongated skulls
and distorted limbs that are found so
frequently in Amarna art represent a
new style or portray reality is a ques-
tion. Some scientists think that
Akhenaten suffered from Frohlich's dis-
ease, which causes the pituitary gland
to malfunction. If this is true, then
Akhenaten's body would have looked
similar to the way it was depicted in
the art style of the period: an abnor-
mally long, egg-shaped face and head,
slanting eyes, thin neck, sloping shoul-
ders, pot belly, and wide thighs. The
artists may have painted others with
the same physical characteristics so as
not to accentuate the king's abnormali-
ties. Whatever the case, the unique
culture of this period represents the
only real break from tradition in the
long history of ancient Egypt.
Akhenaten's rule of about 17 years
was too short for him to implement all
his ideas. Many of the structures and
tombs at Akhetaten were never fin-
ished. Several members of the royal
family, however, including Akhenaten's
mother, Tiye, and his young daughter,
Mekeaten, were buried in the complex.
Give him very many jubilees with years of peace.
—Prayer for Akhenaten found at Akhetaten
The design of Akhenaten's tomb
may also have reflected his belief in the
Aten. The straight axis of the tomb
was positioned in such a way that the
sun's rays entered the doorway,
"flowed" down a ramp that had a set of
stairs on either side (the first ancient
Egyptian tomb to have a step-ramp-
step entryway), then down the long
corridor, another step-ramp-step pas-
sageway, and into the burial chamber
where they would rest on his sarcopha-
gus. According to present-day observa-
tions, however, the Aten's rays could
not shine directly on the sarcophagus
because the latter was a little off center.
Soon after Akhenaten's death, a
royal decree ordered the statues of
Akhenaten toppled and the names of
Akhenaten and the Aten cut from all
reliefs, inscriptions, and statuary. His
city was abandoned, and later kings
and architects even used it as a quarry
for their building projects. No mention
is made of Akhenaten's mummy, and
its whereabouts remains a mystery.
FURTHER READING
Aldred, Cyril. Akhenaten: King of Egypt.
London: Thames & Hudson, 1988.
Freed, Rita E., Yvonne J. Markowitz, and
Sue H. D'Auria, eds. Pharaohs of the Sun:
Akhenaten, Nefertiti, Tutankhamun. Boston:
Bulfinch, 1999.
James, T. G. H. Akhenaten: Egypt's False
Prophet. London: Thames & Hudson,
2001.
AKHENATEN 1 2 9


--- PAGE 131 ---
.Nefertiti
THE BEAUTIFUL
ONE IS COME
he sculptor Thutmose spent many long hours
chipping away at the limestone block he had
specially chosen for the bust of Nefertiti, the
Great Royal Wife of Akhenaten. And the
result was a masterpiece. The face was beau-
ty personified, and the calm expression told of an inner
sense of security and accomplishment. The painted features
gave it life—black eyebrows perfectly curved and shaped,
gentle but determined dark eyes rimmed with black eyeliner,
as was the custom, and full red lips. For a headdress, Thut-
mose had fashioned a tall blue crown that tilted slightly
backward. He painted a simple, vertically striped band
around the middle of the crown. This was not the traditional
crown of Upper Egypt or of Lower Egypt, but one specially
Among the most famous of ancient Egyptian archaeological finds
is this painted head of Nefertiti that was uncovered in the artist
Thutmose's studio at Akhetaten.
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN
T
1 3 0


--- PAGE 132 ---
designed for Nefertiti. Other artists had
done the same with their images of the
queen. Thutmose's creation, however,
never left his studio.
In 1914, more than 3,000 years
after Thutmose had sculpted the bust,
members of the German Oriental Soci-
ety were clearing the sand and other
debris that had covered the eastern res-
idential section of Akhenaten's city. In
a workshop they identified as belonging
to the sculptor named Thutmose they
found the statue. Part of the right ear
and most of the left were missing, and
so, too, was the left eye.
As the digging continued, more
statuary was uncovered, including a
second bust of Nefertiti. This one was
unfinished and had no crown and no
ears. Still visible were the lines an an-
cient sculptor had drawn on the stone
to mark the eye area and the nostrils
above the lip. Another line ran straight
down the forehead, across the nose,
and over the middle of the lips and
chin. Most Egyptologists agree that this
statue was probably one of many that
Thutmose had used to teach pupils the
art of sculpting. Yet even in its half-
finished form, the beauty of Nefertiti is
ever present. And anyone who looks at
it is left without any doubt that this
queen of Egypt did indeed live up to
her name, which means "the beautiful
one is come."
Although few facts have survived
about Nefertiti's life, it seems certain
that she was a nonroyal. Most likely,
she was a commoner whose parents and
grandparents held high-ranking gov-
ernment positions. Nefertiti's father
may even have been the well-respected
and influential vizier Ay, the brother
of Queen Tiye. Relief inscriptions refer
to Tey, Ay's wife, as Nefertiti's "nurse"
and "governess." Thus, from childhood,
Nefertiti was well acquainted with
men and women who wielded consider-
able power.
Although Egypt's rulers, by tradi-
tion, were men, several royal wives had
proved themselves extremely capable
leaders and advisers. In fact, Egyptian
laws regarding women's rights were far
more liberal than those of many other
nations in the eastern Mediterranean
at the time. Egyptian women could
own property, inherit property, and
bring legal suit in the law courts. They
also held religious positions and played
an active role in the rituals and rites
governing daily life throughout the
Two Lands. Nefertiti definitely fol-
lowed the precedent set by several of
her predecessors.
Sometime in her early teens, Ne-
fertiti married the son of Amenhotep
III. At the time of their marriage, her
husband still used his given name,
Amenhotep. Surviving reliefs and un-
covered bits of evidence suggest that
Nefertiti and Amenhotep were approx-
imately the same age.
When Amenhotep succeeded his
father to the throne, Nefertiti became
the Great Royal Wife. All Egypt now
looked to her as the mother of their
next king. The longed-for son, how-
ever, did not arrive. Nefertiti and
Amenhotep had six children—all of
them girls.
During the first years of marriage,
Nefertiti lived at Malkata, the royal
palace Amenhotep III had built at
Thebes. Life there must have been
quite pleasant because the palace had
every amenity, even an artificial lake
that had been created specially for
Queen Tiye's pleasure. Delightful paint-
ed scenes covered the walls of the huge
complex, and servants were ready to
satisfy any request a royal might have.
When Amenhotep succeeded his father
as Amenhotep IV, the royal family re-
mained at Malkata. But there were
hints of change.
Nefertiti and her husband had been
questioning Egypt's religious beliefs for
some time and were beginning to feel
uncomfortable worshiping the many
gods in the Egyptian pantheon. They
also disapproved of the tremendous
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Nefertiti
POSITION
Queen of Egypt
REIGN
About 1345 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
With her husband, Akhenaten
(Amenhotep IV), ended the wor-
ship of Amun-Re and promoted the
worship of the Aten; with Akhen-
aten oversaw the construction of a
new capital city, Akhetaten, on the
east bank of the Nile; encouraged a
new art form, known today as the
Amarna style
NEFERTITI 1 3 1


--- PAGE 133 ---
The elongated torso and wide thighs are
unmistakable traits of the Amarna style
during the reign of Akhenaten. So, too, is
the realism evident in this beautiful female
torso, thought to be that of Nefertiti.
power wielded by the priests of the
great god Amun-Re. For them, the
Aten was the only deity deserving of
worship. Depicted as the round disk of
the sun, the Aten had been honored
for centuries, but as one of many
deities. In recent years, however, sever-
al rulers, including Amenhotep's father,
had paid more attention to the Aten.
Nefertiti seems to have been espe-
cially keen on promoting the worship
of the Aten, and some Egyptologists
believe that she, more than her hus-
band, was responsible for the religious
reforms that followed. As the royal
couple's feelings toward the Aten in-
tensified, both began to feel that
changes were necessary in their per-
sonal lives.
First, a new capital city was need-
ed, one that had no association with
the traditional Egyptian deities. Their
choice was an area about eight miles
long and three miles wide on the east
side of the Nile River, where no one
had ever built before. They called the
city Akhetaten in honor of the Aten.
Unconcerned about acting con-
trary to custom, the royal couple had
their tombs cut into the rock cliffs to
the east of the city. This was the first
time an Egyptian ruler had chosen a
site that was not located on the west
bank of the Nile River. Nefertiti and
Amenhotep had followed their own
beliefs and chosen the east side of the
river, the direction of the rising sun.
It was around this time also that
Amenhotep took the name Akhenaten,
which means "He who is beneficial for
the Aten." Because Nefertiti's name
had no connection with any deity, she
kept it, but she added a second name
that was more descriptive—Nefernefru-
aten, meaning "Beautiful is the beauty
of the Aten." The royal couple also
incorporated the name of the Aten
into the names of each of their first
four daughters: Meritaten, Meketaten,
Ankhesenpaaten, and Nefernefruaten
(the two youngest were Nefernefrura
and Setepenra).
In the years that followed, the
changes continued as Nefertiti and
Akhenaten sought to concentrate all
religious rituals on the Aten. A new
law stated that sculptors and artists
could no longer draw or carve figures of
Amun-Re or any other deities. Only
the Aten, represented as a sun disk
with lines extending downward, was to
be revered. Pictured beneath the lines,
which represented the sun's rays, were
the figures of the royal family receiving
the goodness of the Aten. Many Egyp-
tians, particularly officials and nobles,
adopted the practice of placing images
of Nefertiti, Akhenaten, and the royal
princesses receiving the rays of the
sun disk in chapels in their homes
and in other places of worship. As a
result, sculptors, like Thutmose, were
kept busy fashioning images of the
royal family.
Along with these changes in reli-
gious practices came a change in the
way artists depicted the human figure.
Long narrow heads now sat atop long
thin necks; stomachs were round and
full like potbellies; and legs resembled
sticks. Artists, however, did not exag-
gerate these areas when drawing Nefer-
titi's form as much as they did with
Akhenaten's figure. Another character-
istic of this new style—the Amarna
style—was its informality. The tradi-
tional stiff, rigid pose was replaced by
one that radiated warmth and sensitivi-
ty. Under previous rulers, scenes of the
royal family at rest or enjoying each
other's company had been considered
inappropriate subject matter for artists.
1 3 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 134 ---
In Amarna reliefs, we see Nefertiti
as a loving mother—cradling a daughter
in her arms, playing with another
daughter, and crying at the death of
Meketaten. We also see her as a faithful
wife—riding in the royal chariot with
Akhenaten, walking hand-in-hand with
Akhenaten to a service, and standing
with her husband as he grants rewards
to faithful officials. In other reliefs, she
is represented as a devoted follower of
the Aten—worshiping the Aten with
her family, receiving the Aten's good-
ness, and officiating at ceremonies.
Because the image of Nefertiti fig-
ures prominently in most reliefs, some
Egyptologists have suggested that she
played the dominant role in the new
religion. To confirm their claim, they
point to several reliefs of Nefertiti, ac-
companied only by a daughter, wor-
shiping the Aten.
Around Year 12 of Akhenaten's
reign, Nefertiti exits the royal scene
and is mentioned no more. No records
survive to tell us why. Some believe
that she fell ill and/or died. Others
think that she had to withdraw from
public view after Akhenaten chose
their daughter Meritaten as his chief
wife. Still others consider her "disap-
pearance" an indication that the royal
couple disagreed about official policy.
Although Nefertiti's disappearance
does not seem to have affected Egypt-
ian life or the worship of the Aten, the
kings who succeeded Akhenaten quick-
ly reinstated the worship of Amun-Re
and the other deities of the Egyptian
pantheon. They also ordered the names
and images of Akhenaten and Nefertiti
cut from all stone inscriptions and re-
liefs. Soon, even the city of Akhetaten
was abandoned.
Egyptologists have located the
royal tomb at Akhetaten, but they
The great crown princess . . . with whose existence the lord
of the Two Lands is well phased . . . his beloved Great
Royal Wife.
—Inscription on a boundary stele at el Amarna
found within it only traces of paint
along the lower and upper edges of the
walls in the main burial chamber. Close
examination of these areas has revealed
that the scenes near the ceiling once
showed the Aten as the sun disk with
lines representing rays extending down-
ward. The scenes near the floor depict-
ed Nefertiti and her husband sacrificing
to the Aten.
For centuries, tales of the "heretic
king and queen" were told and retold.
However, it was the rediscovery of
Akhetaten that sparked a genuine in-
terest in this period and in the royal
couple. News of finding Nefertiti's
sculptured head focused worldwide at-
tention on ancient Egypt, and soon her
beauty became a symbol of the civiliza-
tion itself. At Akhetaten and in muse-
ums around the world, her graceful fig-
ure continues to revere the Aten, the
deity she considered supreme.
FURTHER READING
Aldred, Cyril. Akhenaten and Nefertiti. New
York: Viking, 1973.
Tyldesley, Joyce A. Nefertiti, Egypt's Sun
Queen. New York: Penguin, 2000.
NEFERTITI 1 3 3


--- PAGE 135 ---
Tutankh-
amun
THE BOY-KING
n November 26, 1922, a news bulletin read
as follows: HOWARD CARTER AND LORD
CARNARVON BREAK THE 3,000-YEAR-OLD
SEALS TO TUTANKHAMUN'S TOMB IN THE
VALLEY OF THE KINGS. Soon word of their
discovery was racing about the world, exciting an interest in
Egyptology that continues today.
This was not a chance discovery. For years, Carter had
been digging in Egypt, but the tomb of this little-known
king had eluded him. Nevertheless, he had refused to stop
searching. In 1922, Egyptian officials finally granted Carter
permission to search a small triangular area that lay close to
Ramesses VI's tomb. Carter was optimistic. In 1907 Ameri-
can archaeologists had uncovered linen wrappings and sever-
al large pots in that same area. The fact that one of the pots
had Tutankhamun's throne name (Nebkheprure) inscribed
on it seemed positive proof to Carter that the king's tomb
lay nearby. He believed that the pots were the remains of a
funerary banquet held in honor of the king and that the
linens were some of those the priests had used during the
mummification process of the king's body.
This time Carter's instinct brought almost instant suc-
cess. During the first few days of digging, he and his crew un-
covered a step. More digging uncovered a flight of 16 stairs,
then a sealed door. Seventeen days later, Lord Carnarvon
stood with Carter at the bottom of the stairwell staring at
the seals of Nebkheprure on the lower part of the doorway.
The room looked in order except for signs of some ancient
replastering in the top left-hand corner.
After the team passed through the doorway, they en-
tered a descending corridor that was more than 26 feet in
length and packed with limestone chips. Again they met
signs of intruders—the chips had been tunneled through and
the empty areas later refilled. The team slowly cleared the
corridor of chips and came to a second doorway. This, too,
had been sealed and showed signs of having been entered il-
legally and patched over. When Carter peered through an
opening he had made in the plastered doorway, he quickly
answered Carnarvon's question, "Can you see anything?"
with "Yes, wonderful things."
And, indeed, he did, for Carter had uncovered a tomb
that was virtually untouched. Soon after the king's burial,
robbers had broken the seals on the two doorways and en-
tered the antechamber, taking mostly linens, oils, and per-
fumes. When officials learned of the theft, they immediately
ordered workmen to fill the entrance corridor with limestone
chips—originally the corridor had been left empty—and
then to reseal the doorways. Tomb robbery, however, was
134 • ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
o


--- PAGE 136 ---
Inlaid with colored glass and carnelian (a semiprecious red stone), this small gold coffin
was of one of four used to hold Tutankhamun's internal organs.
such a profitable profession that these
measures failed to deter criminals, and
a second break-in occurred. This time,
the thieves took jewelry and other pre-
cious objects, but evidence suggests
that they were caught in the tomb. In
the antechamber, Carter found a scarf
wrapped and knotted around eight gold
rings—proof, it appears, that the rob-
bers, in their haste to escape capture,
did not leave with all they had man-
aged to grab. Carter also found the
name Djehutymose inscribed on the
bottom of one of the jars. Having seen
traces of this name in other tombs from
the same time period, Carter guessed
that Djehutymose was one of the
scribes responsible for repacking the
contents of the plundered tomb.
Some 200 years after Tutankh-
amun's death, workers preparing the
tomb of the pharaoh Ramesses VI cut
away at the rock cliff above Tutankh-
amun's tomb. The shovelfuls of rock
At last I have made
wonderful discovery in
Valky; a magnificent tomb
with seals intact.
—Howard Carter's 1922
telegram to Lord Carnar-
von after uncovering a
staircase leading to a
blocked and sealed
doorway
and sand they tossed onto the ground
below obscured the entrance to Tut-
ankhamun's tomb.
For Carter, the discovery was just
the beginning of 10 long years of
work—clearing, sorting, labeling, and
moving the incredible treasures he had
uncovered. But there was one great dis-
appointment—nowhere in the four
rooms of the burial complex did Carter
find any papyrus rolls, any literature,
any documents that referred specifically
to Tutankhamun and the times in
which he lived. The hieroglyphs, sym-
bols, and inscriptions carved into the
walls and on the various artifacts un-
covered in the tomb were the same tra-
ditional religious formulas and rituals
found in other tombs. All were intend-
ed to help the deceased make the jour-
ney from this life to the next with the
greatest ease. As a result, many of the
questions Egyptologists had about Tut-
ankhamun remained unanswered.
Indeed, who was this boy-king who
came to the throne at an early age—
perhaps at only eight or nine? Some say
his father was Amenhotep III; others
name Akhenaten. Many Egyptologists
believe his mother, Kiya, was a minor
wife of Akhenaten. Because Kiya's
TUTANKHAMUN 1 3 5


--- PAGE 137 ---
During his lifetime,Tutankhamun wore this
amulet, found under the 12th layer of
bandages on his mummy's chest.The vul-
ture goddess Nekhbet (left) and the
snake goddess Wadjet (right) flank the Sa-
cred Eye of Horus, or Wadjet eye, which
symbolized good health and prosperity
and was thought to protect the wearer
against evil.
name disappears from the records at
about the same time Tutankhamun is
born, many believe that she died in
childbirth or shortly thereafter.
While there is uncertainty about
which ruler Tutankhamun succeeded—
Akhenaten or Smenkhkare—evidence
links Tutankhamun with Akhenaten,
Nefertiti, and the city of Akhetaten.
Tutankhamun's birth name, Tut-
ankhaten, which means "living image
of the Aten," suggests a close associa-
tion with Akhenaten and Nefertiti, the
royal couple who worshiped only the
Aten and not Amun-Re and the other
traditional Egyptian deities. As a mem-
ber of the royal family, Tutankhaten
most likely spent his early childhood
playing in the palaces and gardens of
Akhenaten's new city, Akhetaten.
However, once he became pharaoh, his
advisers had him spend many hours
learning about Egypt and the lands he
now controlled in Nubia, Syria, and
Palestine. His advisers also arranged his
marriage to Ankhesenpaaten, Akhen-
aten's eldest surviving daughter by his
Great Royal Wife, Nefertiti.
Chief among these advisers were
the vizier Ay and the general Horem-
heb. Young Tutankhaten's power to
make decisions was limited, and in
matters of religion, Tutankhaten
probably played no significant role in
reinstating the worship of Amun-Re
and the other deities of the Egyptian
pantheon. The credit for the return to
the traditional religious practices goes
to Ay, Horemheb, and those officials
who believed that worship of the Aten
did not serve the needs of Egypt or
the Egyptians.
In Year 2 of his reign, Tutankhaten
changed his name to Tutankhamun,
meaning "living image of Amun," and
Ankhesenpaaten changed her name to
Ankhesenamun. Name changing, how-
ever, was not enough. A royal decree
followed, ordering architects to design
new temples dedicated to Amun-Re
and to refurbish those that had fallen
into disrepair. Another decree commis-
sioned a great "Restoration" that would
commemorate the return to traditional
religious practices and to the rebuilding
of Amun-Re's temples. The Aten con-
tinued to be worshiped, but not as the
only deity.
On the recommendation of his ad-
visers, Tutankhamun left Akhetaten
with Ankhesenamun and other mem-
bers of the court. Amenhotep Ill's old
palace at Malkata was reopened, and
Tutankhamun stayed there whenever
his presence was required at religious
festivals in Thebes. The royal residence
in Memphis was also made ready, and
Tutankhamun stayed there when gov-
ernment matters required his attention.
Tutankhamun, however, was still only
a figurehead. Ay and Horemheb shared
the responsibilities of governing.
Each had a central office: Ay's was in
Thebes, and Horemheb's was in Mem-
phis. Helping them to implement these
changes were loyal Egyptians whom
they appointed to key posts in Egypt
1 3 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 138 ---
and in the subject territories. In an at-
tempt to associate Tutankhamun more
closely with Akhenaten's predecessors,
Egyptian engineers and workers were
ordered to complete several of the pro-
jects begun under Amenhotep III.
These included the colonnade at the
temple of Thebes, with its beautiful
scenes of the Opet festival and the sec-
ond of a pair of granite lions at Soleb
in Nubia.
Egypt waged successful military ex-
peditions in both Nubia and Syria dur-
ing Tutankhamun's reign. In a relief in
the tomb of Huy, Tutankhamun's vizier
of Nubia, envoys from the South and
the East offer great amounts of tribute
to the king. On a box in the king's
tomb, Howard Carter found reliefs of
the young monarch hunting lions and
gazelles in the desert. In other scenes
Tutankhamun attacks Nubians and
Syrians who fall dead, pierced by well-
aimed royal arrows. Egyptologists find it
highly improbable that Tutankhamun
ever participated in campaigns against
Egypt's southern neighbors or against
the Syrians.
Sometime around Year 9 of his rule,
Tutankhamun died. We know the num-
ber of years he reigned from seals found
on wine jars in his tomb. The highest
year listed is Year 9. Using this date and
analyses of other evidence, Egyptolo-
gists have concluded that Tutankhamun
was about 17 when he died.
Although surviving inscriptions do
not hint at the cause of his death, it
appears to have been completely unex-
pected. The news spread quickly, as
priests, embalmers, and others were no-
tified. The mummification process took
approximately 70 days, leaving those in
charge of the burial little time to pre-
pare a royal tomb. What they needed
was a tomb that was already finished,
The seeds [of the tomb] were those of a king—King
Tutankhamun. And then beyond all doubt we knew
we were on the edge of a great discovery.
—Howard Carter's notes about uncovering the stairway
and sealed doorway, November 1922
or close to being finished. Most likely
the chosen tomb was the one Ay had
prepared for himself. The tomb's size is
appropriate for a noble or high-ranking
state official—not for a king. The fact
that Ay was allowed to construct his
tomb in the Valley of the Kings indi-
cates his high rank and the respect Tut-
ankhamun's government had for him.
Tutankhamun left no heirs. The
two mummified fetuses Carter found in
the young king's tomb were most likely
his children by Ankhesenamun. Re-
cent analysis of the two mummies sug-
gests that both were female and that
one died before birth and the other at
or shortly after birth. Each had been
carefully embalmed and placed in an
inner coffin that was enclosed in an
outer coffin.
With no direct heir to succeed Tut-
ankhamun, Ankhesenamun seems to
have formed a plan. Archaeologists
working in Hattusas, the capital city of
the Hittites (archenemies of the an-
cient Egyptians) found records of a let-
ter sent by a recently widowed Egyp-
tian queen to the Hittite king Sup-
piluliumas. Although there has been
some question as to whether Ankhe-
senamun or Nefertiti wrote the letter,
most Egyptologists believe it was
Ankhesenamun.
In the letter, the widowed queen
explained that her husband had died
and that she had no son. Because she
had heard that Suppiluliumas had
many sons, she was asking him to send
"one of your sons that he might be-
come my husband. I do not wish to
take one of my subjects and make him
my husband."
Suppiluliumas naturally questioned
the queen's motives and sent an official
named Hattuzitis to Egypt to investi-
gate the matter. Upon learning that the
queen did wish to wed his son and
make him king of Egypt, Suppiluliumas
agreed to her request. Unfortunately,
the son was murdered before he en-
tered Egypt.
Again from the records, it seems
that after this plan failed, Ankhesen-
amun married Ay. For Ay, who had no
royal blood flowing through his veins,
marriage to Ankhesenamun provided
the legitimacy he needed to claim the
throne. On the north wall of Tutankh-
amun's burial chamber, Ay had the
tomb artists paint his image wearing the
blue war helmet of Egypt's kings and
performing the Opening of the Mouth
ceremony for Tutankhamun. According
to religious tradition, only the son and
heir of the dead king could perform this
ceremony. By appointing himself to the
task, Ay named himself Tutankhamun's
son and heir.
Ay's reign, however, was brief—
only four years. Horemheb then took
TUTANKHAMUN 1 3 7


--- PAGE 139 ---
command, and in an effort to erase
from history all those connected with
Akhetaten and Akhenaten, he ordered
the names of his three predecessors—
Akhenaten, Tutankhamun, and Ay—
removed from the records. He listed
himself as Amenhotep Ill's successor.
As a result of Horemheb's actions
and those of subsequent kings,
Egyptologists knew very little about
Tutankhamun. Thus it was with great
anticipation that Carter entered the
boy-king's tomb. Within, Carter found
signs of haste. With so little time to
do their job, the artists had decorated
only the walls of the burial chamber.
In addition, the tomb appeared to have
been sealed before the paint had
completely dried. The result was a rise
in the humidity, which, in turn,
damaged some of the objects that had
been placed in the tomb. And these
objects represented everything Tut-
ankhamun might need in the afterlife,
including chests, stools, boxes, beds,
headrests, chairs, and even the Golden
Throne. The back panel of this throne
was fashioned mostly of gold, with a
relief design of Ankhesenamun
anointing Tutankhamun with perfumed
oil. Above the couple is the round sun
disk of the Aten with its rays extending
goodness to the royal couple.
Here, too, were throwing sticks,
which the Egyptians used to hunt
birds and other small animals. It is
thought that Tutankhamun probably
used these sticks, as inscriptions and
surviving images all indicate that he
enjoyed hunting. Also in the tomb
were 35 boat models and 6 of the king's
chariots.
There were also items of a more
personal nature. One was a wooden
form of the king's body, which Egypto-
logists think a tailor might have used
when making the king's garments.
Another was a pair of beautiful sandals,
fashioned with a bound Asian depicted
on one instep and a bound Nubian on
the other. The symbolism is clear—
with every step Tutankhamun took he
was crushing a bitter foe to death.
Other finds included a sling bandage
and a baby's robe with a rolled hem of
incredibly fine hand-sewn needlework.
The robe was just one of 50 or so pieces
of children's clothing that had been
carefully laid to rest with the king.
Dominating the room now called
the Treasury was one of the most
remarkable finds in the tomb—the
canopic shrine that held Tutankh-
amun's embalmed internal organs.
Six-and-a-half-feet high, five feet long,
and four feet wide, the enormous
box-like wooden container stood
majestically on a wooden sledge. Inside
were four finely crafted canopic jars,
each fitted with a stopper that had
been shaped to resemble the head of a
king. Inscribed on each was the name
of Horus's son protecting the organ
within—Imsety, the liver; Hapy, the
lungs; Duamutef, the stomach; and
Qebhsenuef, the intestines. As with so
many of the other items in the tomb,
the stoppers had been fashioned to
hold someone else's remains, but Tut-
ankhamun's sudden death had forced
officials to use what was available at
the time.
As Carter and his crew began
working on the burial shrines that en-
closed Tutankhamun's body, a feeling of
intense excitement filled the tomb. No
royal mummy had ever been found in-
tact or untouched. The task, however,
proved extremely difficult. Measuring
16 feet long, 11 feet wide, and 9 feet
high, the outer burial shrine almost
filled the chamber, leaving just enough
room for a person to squeeze around
the side.
With great care, Carter disassem-
bled the first (the outer) shrine. Within
he found a second shrine, then a third,
and a fourth—all were floorless and
slightly different in design, but all ex-
quisitely decorated in gold.
After months of work clearing and
recording every find, Carter came to the
king's magnificent sarcophagus, carved
from a single block of hard yellow-gold
quartzite. Time constraints again
seemed to have forced those in charge
of the tomb to improvise, because they
used a red granite lid but painted it yel-
low to match the sarcophagus.
To lift the lid, Carter used an intri-
cate pulley system specially designed for
the task. Inside he found a coffin mea-
suring more than seven feet long and
draped with two pieces of linen cloth.
The coffin had been shaped to resem-
ble a human figure, as was the custom,
and was made of wood that had been
covered with gesso (a plaster of Paris
that is mixed with glue and applied to a
surface) and then covered with a layer
of gold. The face was that of Tutankh-
amun, but the arms were positioned to
represent him as Osiris, the god of the
Underworld. That is, the arms were
crossed over the chest area, and the
right hand held a crook and the left
hand a flail.
When Carter lifted the lid of the
outermost coffin, he saw a linen shroud
covered with wreaths of flowers.
Adorning the forehead area was a
beautiful wreath fashioned of olive
leaves, blue lotus petals, cornflowers,
and celery leaves. The colors were so
vibrant that the flowers seemed almost
fresh. They were also very brittle, and
some crumbled to dust when touched.
The basic design of this second coffin
was similar to the first. The facial fea-
tures, however, did not resemble those
of Tutankhamun. Once again, tomb
1 3 8 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 140 ---
workers had used previously prepared
funerary items.
Inside the second coffin lay a third
coffin that was quite similar to the
other two in shape and design, but with
even finer and more elaborately
wrought details. Around the coffin's
"face" was a magnificent floral collar,
made of blue and yellow flowers with
tiny blue-green faience rings and red
and yellow fruits. The royal nemes
headdress was of linen, and over the
coffin from the neck area to the feet lay
a red linen cloth. When Carter lifted
the cloth, he saw that the ancients had
poured a thick, dark resin over the
middle and bottom portion of the third
coffin. Hours of painstaking work fol-
lowed as Carter chipped away at the
hardened resin and uncovered the
inner coffin. Made of gold, it measured
just over six feet in length and weighed
approximately 223 pounds.
Using the golden handles the an-
cients had attached to the coffin's lid,
Carter and his crew lifted the lid and
beheld the boy-king Tutankhamun.
Covering his face was a magnificent
mask crafted of two separate sheets of
gold with the traditional royal beard at-
tached to the chin and the royal nemes
headdress. The ancient artisans had
used inlays of blue glass to make the
stripes on the nemes and to define the
king's eyebrows and eyes. They had
also placed a floral collar about the
chest and neck area and fashioned two
hands made of sheet gold. The hands,
one holding a crook and the other a
flail, had been sewn to the mummy
wrappings in the traditional crossed
position. Between the hands was a
scarab made of black resin. As Carter
carefully unwrapped the burial shroud,
he found 170 items, including amulets,
wreaths, bracelets, an iron dagger—
each designed to help Tutankhamun
pass from this life to life eternal in the
underworld.
Tutankhamun's embalmers fol-
lowed the traditional rules. After re-
moving the internal organs and drying
the body with natron, they stuffed the
cadaver with padding so that it resem-
bled its original shape. However, be-
cause they poured so much of the
resin-based oils over the wrappings,
the wrappings had stuck to the coffin,
making Carter's task extremely diffi-
cult. The areas covered with gold—
Tutankhamun's face, fingers, and
toes—suffered less damage. Each
finger and toe had been bound and
fitted into a gold case. Scientific analy-
sis of the mummy has revealed that
Tutankhamun had a slight build, that
he measured about five and a half feet
in height, and that his third molars
had only just broken through the gums.
His head had been completely shaved,
and he wore a beautifully worked close-
fitting beaded cap.
FURTHER READING
Brier, Bob. The Murder of Tutankhamen: A
True Story. New York: Putnam, 1998.
Caselli, Giovanni. In Search of Tutankh-
amun: The Discovery of a King's Tomb. New
York: Peter Bedrick, 1999.
Green, Robert. Tutankhamun. Danbury,
Conn.: Franklin Watts, 1996.
Hepper, F. N. Pharaoh's Flowers, the Botani-
cal Treasures of Tutankhamun. London:
HMSO, 1990.
James, T. G. H. Tutankhamun. New York:
Friedman/Fairfax, 2000.
Reeves, Nicholas. The Complete Tutankh-
amun. London: Thames & Hudson, 1990.
Ventura, Piero, and Gian Paolo Ceserani.
In Search of Tutankhamun. Morristown,
N.J.: Silver Burdett, 1985.
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Tutankh-
amun
POSITION
King of Egypt
REIGN
About 1334-25 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
On the advice of advisers, left
Akhetaten and had Memphis serve
as the capital city for political mat-
ters and Thebes as the capital city
for religious matters; reinstated the
worship of Amun-Re and of the tra-
ditional gods of the Egyptian pan-
theon; rebuilt many religious struc-
tures; with his advisers, promoted
international trade
TUTANKHAMUN 1 3 9


--- PAGE 141 ---
Horemheb
GENERAL
TURNED KING
oremheb was not a member of Egypt's royal
family, nor was he a nobleman. None of
his family had ever distinguished them-
selves in the service of the king or of the
nation. Home was a small provincial town
just south of the Faiyum oasis. Horemheb's military prowess,
however, had quickly brought him to the attention of his su-
periors, and the promotions came swiftly.
Horemheb served first under Amenhotep III. When
Amenhotep IV followed his father on the throne, he also lis-
tened to reports about Horemheb's military skills and contin-
ued to approve his advancement through the ranks. Even
after Amenhotep changed his name to Akhenaten and with-
drew to a new capital city, Akhenaten turned to Horemheb
as his commander-in-chief of the army. When Tutankhamun
ascended the throne after Akhenaten's death, Horemheb be-
came one of the young boy-king's closest advisers. In the
months that followed, Horemheb's responsibilities steadily
increased, and so, too, did his power. Egyptologists believe
that Tutankhamun's reinstatement of Egypt's traditional gods
and goddesses was the direct result of advice from Horemheb
and another senior adviser named Ay. Both men understood
the difficulties Akhenaten's policies had caused and now
sought to return Egypt to the mighty power it had been
under Amenhotep III.
Horemheb led military campaigns into Syria and Pales-
tine and a diplomatic mission to Nubia that was aimed at re-
solving differences between the two nations. In his Saqqara
tomb, scenes depict victories on the battlefield, Egyptian sol-
diers cleaning and provisioning Horemheb's tent in a mili-
tary encampment, ambassadors from the East pleading before
Tutankhamun for mercy, and Asiatic prisoners of war being
paraded before the king and queen.
In recognition of Horemheb's many achievements, Tu-
tankhamun granted him many titles—hereditary prince,
king's messenger in front of his army to the foreign countries,
fan bearer on the right of the king, wearer of the royal seal,
sole companion (of the king), and overseer of all divine of-
fices. Tutankhamun also conferred many honors on
Horemheb, including the privilege of building his tomb at
Saqqara. Horemheb's tomb site was positioned high on the
plateau and at a distance from the other tombs in the area.
Within were wall paintings that told of his many accom-
plishments and promotions. The scenes were realistic in de-
sign and replaced the staid, traditional figures and decorative
patterns of the past. Following his instruction, the workers
listed the positions Horemheb had held in the government,
the military, and the priesthood. Around Horemheb's neck,
1 4 0 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
H


--- PAGE 142 ---
the artists painted gold collars, the
traditional reward for anyone who
achieved great success. They also de-
picted the "Window of Appearance"
on one wall. By tradition, Egypt's king
stood at this window in the palace dur-
ing certain festivals and distributed
awards to those who had performed
noteworthy deeds. For his loyalty and
accomplishments, Horemheb had been
summoned to pass by the window and
receive his rewards.
Horemheb continued as Tutankh-
amun's adviser even as the boy-king
grew into his teens. But then the unex-
pected happened. After ruling for about
nine years, Tutankhamun died and left
no heirs. Ay took Tutankhamun's Great
Royal Wife as his bride and claimed
the throne.
Within four years of taking com-
mand, Ay, too, was dead. This time,
Horemheb claimed the right to rule.
Because no royal blood flowed through
his veins, Horemheb cited his kinship
with royalty. Records suggest that
his wife, Mutnodjmet, was a close
relative of Ay and of Nefertiti, Akhen-
aten's wife.
Yet royal bloodlines and proper
hereditary lines were no longer critical
in the selection of a new king. What
Egypt needed now was a strong ruler,
one who would foster stability and
prosperity throughout the empire.
The fact that no inscriptions or reliefs
even hint of trouble or dissent when
Horemheb came to the throne suggest
that all approved his kingship.
Using the same determination and
foresight he had shown on the battle-
field, Horemheb now pressed to imple-
ment his reforms. First came orders to
complete the restoration of the temples
of Amun-Re and the traditional gods
and goddesses of ancient Egypt.
Horemheb also reinstated the power
once held by Amun-Re's priests. How-
ever, aware of the need to control the
priests' power, he chose priests from the
army. Because of his close connections
with the military, these were priests he
knew he could trust.
Horemheb also looked to the army
for political appointments. To avoid
granting too much power to one mili-
tary officer, he retained his title of
commander-in-chief and created two
additional posts: Commander of the
Forces in Upper Egypt and Commander
of the Forces in Lower Egypt. Before
naming anyone to these positions,
Horemheb determined the duties of
each post and studied the qualifications
of potential candidates. Loyalty to him
was just one prerequisite; achievement
and ability were the others.
This relief scene depicts a funeral
dance in Horemheb's tomb at
Saqqara. He never used the tomb.
The reason is unknown, but today
workers continue to clear the site,
seeking additional clues to his person-
al life and rise to kingship.
HOREMHEB 1 4 1


--- PAGE 143 ---
I have given to you victory
over the South and victory
over the North.
—Inscription recording
Horemheb's campaign
in Kush
A bound captive, one of the many prisoners of war Horemheb and his troops captured
in the Syria-Palestine campaigns.This relief was found in Horemheb's tomb at Saqqara.
Horemheb saw that centralization
of power in the hands of one person
did not work well unless that person
had loyal and responsible officials to
whom he could delegate duties. There-
fore, he made himself that central
power and chose loyal officials to keep
him informed about what was happen-
ing throughout the kingdom. Once
again, he divided the authority and
named two viziers to oversee the Two
Lands. One vizier was to take charge of
Upper Egypt; the other, of Lower
Egypt. Each vizier was to follow
Horemheb's example and appoint loyal,
hardworking people to positions in his
area. For Horemheb, division of au-
thority was the key to success, but two
positions he did not divide—his own
as king and the office of Chief Priest
of Amun.
To curb unrest among the common
people, who felt harassed by tax collec-
tors, Horemheb enacted a series of
measures aimed at restoring order and
justice throughout the land. He was
1 4 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 144 ---
determined to prevent tax collectors
and other officials from demanding
more than the law required, according
to surviving fragments of his decree.
Known today as the Edict of
Horemheb, the decree begins "[H]is
majesty took counsel with his heart. . .
to expel evil and suppress lying ... his
majesty spent the whole time seeking
the welfare of Egypt and searching out
instances [of oppression]. . . . Then he
seized [his writing materials] and put it
into writing." The list of cases is simple
but direct, and each is accompanied by
prescribed punishments for various of-
fenses. For example, "[I]f the poor man
made himself a craft with sails in order
to be able to serve the king . . . [and he
was robbed of the craft] and stood with-
out any goods and stripped of his many
labors . . . the law shall be executed
against the officer [who took his dues]
and took the craft, in that his nose shall
be cut off and he shall be sent to Tharu
[the marsh country in the Delta]."
Although few records tell of
Horemheb's involvement in overseas
ventures, some refer to successful mili-
tary campaigns both against the Asiat-
ics to the East and against the Nubians
to the South. There are also scenes of
young men being inducted into the
army, and inscriptions that tell of
Horemheb encouraging trading expedi-
tions, including one to the fabled land
of Punt. In a wall relief the chiefs of
Punt present Horemheb with sacks of
gold dust, ostrich feathers, and other
prized trading items.
Horemheb removed the names
of Akhenaten and the three kings
(Smenkhkare, Tutankhamun, and Ay)
from the king lists and official records.
His name now followed Amenhotep
Ill's, and Year 1 of Horemheb's reign
referred to the year immediately follow-
ing Amenhotep's death.
Horemheb also claimed responsi-
bility for the structures built under
Tutankhamun and Ay, including the
Restoration Stele that Tutankhamun
had ordered to celebrate the return to
the worship of the god Amun-Re.
Horemheb had the Aten's Great Tem-
ple at Karnak dismantled block by
block and used these blocks as fill for
the Ninth and Tenth Pylons (monu-
mental gateways) he had built to adorn
Amun-Re's temple at Karnak. (Almost
3,000 years later, archaeologists digging
at Karnak uncovered the blocks, and
with the aid of computer technology,
they are now attempting to re-create
an image of the Aten's temple.)
Horemheb then focused his attention
on the construction of the great hy-
postyle hall (a roofed area supported by
rows of pillars) at Karnak.
Following the policies initiated
during Tutankhamun's reign,
Horemheb kept Thebes as the religious
capital of the Two Lands and made
Memphis in Lower Egypt his political
capital. Thebes was also the city he
chose for his coronation ceremony.
And to make the occasion even more
meaningful, Horemheb scheduled it to
coincide with the Opet festival. This
was the time when the god Amun-Re
"visited" the Opet (Inner Chambers of
the South—the temple dedicated to
Amun-Re at Thebes). A yearly celebra-
tion lasting 11 days (later it was length-
ened to around 27 days), Opet took
place during the second month of the
inundation season when the Nile
flooded its riverbanks.
Opet began with Horemheb travel-
ing in a great royal procession up the
Nile from Memphis to Thebes. The
scene was one of majesty and pomp as
Horemheb sat in the state barge, which
had been specially decorated for the
occasion. At Thebes another proces-
sion followed. The priests of Amun-Re
put the sacred barque that held the cult
statue of the god onto a frame attached
to carrying poles. Placing the poles on
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Horemheb
POSITION
King of Egypt
REIGN
About 1321-1293 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Returned Egypt to the worship of
Amun-Re and reinstated the priest-
hood of Amun-Re; led expeditions
into Syria and Nubia; sent a trading
expedition to Punt and restored
trade relations with the South and
the East; issued the Edict of
Horemheb to address the abuses suf-
fered by the poor, especially exces-
sive taxation; reestablished Mem-
phis as the political capital of
Egypt; inaugurated a building pro-
gram, including a great hypostyle
hall in honor of Amun-Re
HOREMHEB 1 4 3


--- PAGE 145 ---
It is your strength, O good
ruler, that made the coun-
tries into heaps.
—Inscription recording
the campaign in Kush
their shoulders, they solemnly walked
along one of the grand processional
routes paved with stone and lined with
huge reclining statues of sphinxes. The
ram-headed sphinxes along one avenue
linking Amun-Re's temple at Karnak
with the smaller temple of Mut,
Amun-Re's wife, had been added at
Horemheb's request. In fact, the sphin-
xes he commissioned started at the
Tenth Pylon—the pylon that con-
tained the blocks from Akhenaten's
temple to the Aten.
Of all the rituals associated with
the Opet festival, one of the most
solemn was the king's visit to the dark
inner precinct of the temple at Thebes,
There, according to custom, he united
himself in a mystical manner with
Amun-Re. For all Egyptians, this ritual
symbolized the divine relationship be-
tween their ruler and the god Amun-
Re. For Horemheb, it validated his
kingship; it identified him, in a way no
other event or decree could, as the le-
gitimate heir to the throne of Egypt. To
identify himself even further with the
rituals of Opet, Horemheb commis-
sioned artisans working on a temple at
Gebel el Silsila in Upper Egypt to in-
clude in the reliefs a scene of 12 atten-
dants carrying him in the procession on
a frame-like platform.
To further reflect his position as
king, Horemheb ordered a new tomb
site built in the Valley of the Kings. He
did not, however, forget the Saqqara
tomb, and sent artisans to Saqqara with
orders to add a uraeus, a royal symbol
in the shape of a rearing cobra, to the
forehead of every wall image of himself.
Archaeologists think that two of
Horemheb's queens may have been
buried in the Saqqara tomb.
When archaeologists discovered
the entrance to Horemheb's tomb in
the Valley of the Kings in 1908, all the
treasures that Horemheb had had
buried with him were gone, and debris
was everywhere. Even the lid of his
pink granite sarcophagus lay in pieces
on the floor. Only the wall paintings
were intact. Of special interest were
passages from the Book of Gates, a new
royal guide designed to help the de-
ceased pass more easily from this world
to the next. (The name refers to the
gates that were believed to divide the
hours of night.)
As archaeologists continued their
study of the tomb and its wall paint-
ings, they realized that Horemheb's
tomb had been left unfinished. The
skill of the artists, however, is clearly
evident. Master draftsmen had drawn
each scene to scale before enlarging it
to fit the planned wall space. Less-
experienced artisans simply cut the
designs onto the tomb walls and paint-
ed them. To ensure the quality of the
work, these draftsmen regularly
checked the work of the artisans, and
their corrections are clearly evident on
Horemheb's walls. For Egyptologists,
Horemheb's tomb provides a unique
glimpse of a work in progress.
During Horemheb's long reign—27
to 30 years—Egypt enjoyed continued
prosperity and stability. Because he had
no sons or heirs, Horemheb turned, as
he had so often in the past, to the
army. He named as his successor
Pramesse, a career officer whom he had
recently promoted. Time would prove
Horemheb's decision a wise one be-
cause Ramesses (the name Pramesse
took as king) founded one of the great-
est dynasties ever to rule Egypt. It also
proved that Horemheb did indeed live
up to the meaning of his name "Power-
ful bull with wise decisions."
FURTHER READING
Lichtheim, Miriam. Ancient Egyptian
Literature: A Book of Readings, vol. 2, pp.
100-3. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1976.
Reeves, Nicholas and Richard H. Wilkin-
son. The Complete Vattey of the Kings,
pp. 130-33. London: Thames & Hudson,
1996.
1 44 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 146 ---
More Ancient
Egyptians to
Remember
menhotep, Son of Hapu (active about
1370 B.C.) won the admiration and respect
of generations of Egyptians. Approximately
1,000 years after his death, the Egyptians
proclaimed him a god of healing, dedicated
a temple to him at Deir el Bahri, and instituted religious rit-
uals in his honor. Amenhotep was most likely born in
Athribis, a town in the Delta region of Lower Egypt, and
may have been a commoner. He studied to be a scribe,
which was one of the most respected professions in ancient
Egypt, as scribes were among the few who could read and
write. He was also an architect with a keen sense of design.
Amenhotep III commissioned him to design a royal mortu-
ary temple on the west bank of the Nile. This temple did
not survive the centuries, but the two gigantic, seated stat-
ues that Amenhotep, son of Hapu, had carved of the king—
the Colossi of Memnon—remain. Other designs credited to
him are a temple to Amun-Re at Thebes and additions to
the great temple at Karnak. He is also believed to have
played a major role in planning the magnificent royal palace
at Malkata.
To show his appreciation of Amenhotep, son of Hapu,
Amenhotep III granted him the great honor of building a
mortuary temple in Thebes, just a short distance from his
own. Amenhotep III also allowed the son of Hapu to set up
several statues of himself at Karnak. Amenhotep, son of
Hapu, had inscribed on one statue that the king "adorned
my city [of Athribis] greatly and my family on earth as well."
And, indeed, Amenhotep, son of Hapu, loved his native
city of Athribis. As he grew older—records show that he
lived to about 80 years of age—Amenhotep, son of Hapu,
preferred the duties of priest at the temple at Athribis to of-
ficial, public duties.
Surviving statues of Amenhotep, son of
Hapu, depict him in the traditional pose
of a scribe—sitting cross-legged with a
writing tablet spread out on his kilt. In his
left hand he holds the edge of the tablet;
in his right, a pen. A scribe's palette hangs
from a strap on his left shoulder
MORE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS TO REMEMBER 1 4 5
A


--- PAGE 147 ---
The statues of Ramesses II and Nefertari cut into rock on either side of the entrance to the queen's tomb at Abu Simbel dwarf their
visitors. Nefertari is dressed as the sky-goddess Hathor; who was represented with a solar disk between cow horns crowning her head.
ANCIENT EGYPTIAN
146


--- PAGE 148 ---
Conquest
and Decline
(New Kingdom-
Ptolemaic Period,
about 1325-245 B.C.)
Horemheb's decision to groom Pramesse for the throne was a wise
one. Pramesse took the name Ramesses and became the founder of
the 19th Dynasty. His son Seti I and grandson Ramesses II would
be honored as two of Egypt's greatest kings. Golden ages, however,
do not last forever, and periods of unrest began to plague the Two Lands. The
reasons were varied, but the one that threatened even the king himself was the
ever-increasing power wielded by the priests of Amun-Re. Approximately 130
years after Ramesses II's death, a priest of Amun-Re named Herihor proclaimed
himself king. Such internal conflicts weakened the government, but external
problems also threatened the unity of Egypt itself.
Wars far beyond Egypt's borders had forced many to leave their cities and
towns and seek a new homeland. Many of these refugees, some known as the
Sea Peoples, set out for Egypt. Others, especially to the west in Libya and to the
south in Nubia, looked to Egypt not as a place of refuge but instead as a place to
conquer. To them, the unrest in Egypt caused by its internal problems presented
an opportunity to further their own goals. Under such pressures, the Two Lands
could not resist and yielded to foreign control.
Part 5 of Ancient Egyptians focuses on those who were responsible for an-
cient Egypt's last great Golden Age and then on those who guided the nation
through the problems, both internal and external, that beset the Two Lands in
the centuries that followed.
SETI I
RAMESSES
NEFERTARI
RAMESSES
CONQUEST AND DECLINE 1 4 7
5
IN THIS PART


--- PAGE 149 ---
A RETURN
TO GREATNESS
S eti's two years as co-regent with his father,
Ramesses I, had provided him with invaluable
experience. As sole ruler, he had to rely on his
own foresight to set goals and to develop the
means to achieve them. Timing was critical;
but even more important was not to waste time.
Aware of Egypt's illustrious past, Seti wanted the family
line begun by his father to rival those of Egypt's greatest
kings. As his coronation name, he chose Menmaatre—a
combination of Ma'at (the goddess of justice and truth) and
Re (the all-powerful sun god). His choice of deities was sig-
nificant, for both Ma'at and Re were among the oldest
deities worshiped by the Egyptians.
Two rope-bound prisoners—an Asiatic (left) and a Nubian—are
painted on a panel representing sandal soles.The wearer rein-
forced the subservience of these people to Egypt.
148 • ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Setil
 eti's two years as co-regent with his father,


--- PAGE 150 ---
As a native of Lower Egypt, Seti
felt closer to this region and issued
decrees from the capital city of Mem-
phis. He even maintained a palace in
Avaris. Yet he understood that unity
was key to Egypt's stability and never
treated Upper Egypt, especially the
religious center at Thebes, as a less im-
portant area. He often had scribes fol-
low his given name Seti with the epi-
thet, "Beloved of Amun," the chief god
at Thebes.
Seti also concerned himself with
foreign policy. He considered himself
the commander-in-chief of all military
forces, but he placed the troops in
Upper Egypt under one military officer
and those in Lower Egypt under anoth-
er. He did the same with the office of
vizier, and with other offices as well.
Like his predecessor Horemheb, Seti
divided power and responsibility be-
cause it prevented anyone from becom-
ing his equal in authority in any field.
Both Horemheb and Ramesses I
had focused on retaking the lands in
the Syria-Palestine area that had been
lost to foreign invaders under Akhen-
aten and his successors. Seti resolved to
complete the task. His Nebti, or Two
Ladies royal name, "The strong-armed
one who renews births and recaptures
the Nine Bows," clearly told the nation
of his intention to be a warrior king
who would provide Egypt with power-
ful descendants.
Soon after his coronation, Seti as-
sembled an army and marched east
from the border town of Tjel. Almost
immediately, he found himself facing
Shasu Bedouin who were determined to
prevent his passage. Decades earlier,
Egyptian troops had dug nine wells
across the Sinai Peninsula and built gar-
risons to protect them. With a supply of
fresh water guaranteed, Egyptian com-
manders could cross this desert area.
Rallying his forces to battle, Seti wrest-
ed control of first one well and then the
next until he had reclaimed all nine
and arrived in southern Palestine.
Grant that my monuments may endure for me, and my
name may abide upon them.
—Temple inscription, Year 9 of Seti Fs reign
Here, too, the welcome was un-
friendly. But Seti urged his men to
prove their skills and determination
under attack. Later, he would have arti-
sans carve an inscription at Karnak to
commemorate his bravery. "His majesty
marched against [the enemy] like a
fierce-eyed lion, making them carcasses
in their valleys." Victory followed vic-
tory as Seti marched across Palestine,
taking the key cities of Gaza, Pella,
Yenoam, Acre, and Tyre. Fearing de-
feat, the rulers in Lebanon sought an
alliance with Seti rather than face him
on the battlefield. Seti agreed, but he
demanded that they send timber—the
prized so-called cedars of Lebanon—as
tribute to the temples in Egypt.
Seti gave the command to bind the
scores of prisoners he had taken in bat-
tle and begin the long march home.
Artisans would later carve on Seti's
monuments: "The heart of his majesty
. . . rejoices to begin battle ... his
heart is satisfied at seeing blood; he
cuts off the heads of the rebellious-
hearted; he loves an hour of battle
more than a day of rejoicing." This
gory statement would make any poten-
tial enemy consider the consequences
of opposing so powerful a king.
Still, one Syrian stronghold had
not yielded to Seti's might: Kadesh, a
city well known for its rebellious atti-
tude toward the Egyptians. More than
150 years earlier, Thutmose III had
managed to take Kadesh, although with
great difficulty. Kadesh stood high on a
hill, and its massive walls with only one
entrance made it almost impregnable.
Siege tactics did not work because two
SETI I 1 4 9


--- PAGE 151 ---
Great is your fame, O
victorious king; how great
is your strength/ You are
Montu [Theban god of
war] in every country; your
strength is like his form.
—Inscription on the door
of the temple to Amun-Re
at Kamak
moats circled the city and provided the
defenders with a ready supply of water
from the nearby Orontes River. Such
obstacles, however, were not enough to
deter Seti.
Once again, he set out for Syria,
and again he met victory. He followed
this first campaign with three more. On
the fourth and final campaign, the his-
toric first encounter between Egyptians
and Hittites occurred. The Hittites oc-
cupied the land north of Syria and had
allied themselves with the people of
Kadesh. For years the Hittites had
sought to expand their area of influ-
ence and had been encroaching on
Egyptian territory. Determined to elim-
inate the Hittite threat to his country's
interests, Seti marched his troops north
against the enemy. Soon after, he sent
word home of an Egyptian victory. The
Hittites, however, seem to have done
the same, for official records show that
Seti and the Hittite king Mursilis
signed a treaty drawing the line of
Egypt's northern border just south of
Kadesh. Seti's "victory" gave Egypt
control of Palestine and Syria, plus a
pledge of no more Hittite attacks. The
Hittite "victory" stopped the northward
advance of the Egyptians and kept
Kadesh free of Egyptian control.
Seti now turned his attention west
and marched against Libya. Here, too,
just as in Syria, he was successful and
returned home with bound prisoners in
tow to give thanks to Amun-Re. Under
a relief of Amun's foot on a monument
commemorating Seti's achievements,
artisans inscribed, "I give you all lands,
every country is beneath your sandals."
Records indicate that Seti also led
his army south into Nubia and defeated
the chiefs of Kush. An inscription
reads: "[They] fall in their blood by the
might of your father, Amun, who has
decreed for you might and victory."
Egypt was gradually regaining the
power it once had, but there was still
much to be done. To increase trade,
Seti ordered garrisons built to protect
Egyptian interests in the Sinai's
turquoise mines. He also ordered the
mines to the east of Edfu in Upper
Egypt brought up to full operation.
This hot desert area lacked wells or
places where a traveler or worker might
quench his thirst. Seti had remarked,
"How evil is the way without water! . .
. I will make a supply [of water to keep
the workers and travelers here alive] so
that they will thank [Amun] in my
name." Seti also ordered a small village
and a temple built for the workers near
the site.
Seti had inscribed on the temple
walls a series of warnings aimed at any-
one who neglected or tampered with
the mines, water stations, or revenue
from the mines that he had set aside for
the upkeep of his mortuary complex:
"The monument of the violator [of my
monuments and policies] shall itself be
violated . . . the lords of my house shall
punish in an appropriate manner any-
one who acts contrary to the interests
of my people."
One key to Seti's success was his
Nauri Decree, a series of laws that were
drawn up in Year 4 of his reign to help
officials maintain justice and peace
throughout the land. These laws were
quite harsh and unforgiving toward
anyone who disobeyed them. Most ap-
plied to workers on estates that be-
longed to the temple of the great god
Osiris, at Abydos.
Abydos, a city just west of the
Nile, was the site of one of Egypt's an-
cient royal cemeteries. In keeping with
his emphasis on tradition, Seti built a
mortuary temple at Abydos. To ensure
that the workers assigned to this con-
struction project remained on the job,
1 5 0 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 152 ---
he decreed that no official could take a
worker from Abydos and assign him to
another construction site. Reassign-
ments seem to have been a common
practice, and it may have been the only
way to make sure a huge building pro-
ject was completed on time.
In the Nauri Decree, Seti stated
that any official, any overseer of the
fields, any herdsman—in short, any-
one—who attempted to change the
boundary lines for the estates belonging
to the temple at Abydos would be de-
moted to the position of field worker at
the temple and lose both his ears. As
for the "criminal" who prevented a
worker at the temple from snaring his
marshes or catching fish in the pond,
he was to receive 100 lashes and five
open wounds. The person who "kid-
naps" a herdsman from the temple and
forcibly moves him to another place
would be subject to 200 whiplashes and
had to replace every head of cattle that
the herdsman lost during the time he
was away—at a ratio of 100 to 1.
Seti's choice of Abydos was politi-
cally and religiously wise. Abydos was
the religious center of worship for
Osiris, the god of the dead. Since the
Middle Kingdom, some 500 years earli-
er, all Egyptians had looked forward to
triumphing over death, just as Osiris
had done. Kings also honored Osiris
In front of the king list that begins with
Menes and ends with Seti, Seti I (left) and
his son Ramesses II recite hymns from a
papyrus roll.This relief is carved in the
Gallery of Kings in Seti I's temple at
Abydos.
SETI I 1 5 1


--- PAGE 153 ---
and believed that, in death, they be-
came a divine representation of Osiris,
and that their successor on the throne
was the earthly representation of
Osiris's son, Horus.
For centuries, Egyptians had looked
to Abydos as a sacred burial place and
the area had become a pilgrimage site.
Seti, in an effort to associate himself
more closely with tradition and with
the practices of his royal predecessors,
commissioned his architects to design
two structures at Abydos. Instead of
dedicating the principal structure to
himself or to one deity, as was the cus-
tom, he dedicated the building to him-
self and six other deities (Ptah, Re-
Harakhte, Amun, Osiris, Isis, and
Horus). Considered one of the most
beautiful buildings ever constructed in
ancient Egypt, Seti's temple at Abydos
was made of fine limestone on a sand-
stone foundation. The scenes painted
along the walls depict the daily rituals
performed in the temple to honor the
six deities. Here, the artists paid great
attention to such detail as the folds of a
garment, the intricate interlocking of
neckwear fashioned of gold and pre-
cious jewels, the leaves and petals of
flowers and plants, and the feathers
used to fashion fans.
Contrary to custom, the temple's
storerooms were built to the left of the
sanctuaries, not directly behind them.
As a result, the temple resembled a re-
versed, upside-down letter L. Why is
unknown, but the architects may have
wished to avoid the site symbolically
honored as Osiris's tomb. Known as the
Osireion, this structure lay directly be-
hind the sanctuaries. Seti and his ar-
chitects may have wanted the "false"
doors in the temple to lead directly to
the Osireion. Traditionally painted on
the rear wall of sanctuaries, these doors
allowed the ka (life force) of the de-
ceased to pass back and forth between
this world and the next.
Over the centuries, architects had
designed various structures to house
Osiris's tomb, but Seti's was the most
dramatic. Entrance to the underground
tomb was by a shaft that reached down
approximately 30 feet. This, in turn, led
to a long tunnel approximately 336 feet
long. On the west wall, Seti's artisans
painted scenes and passages from the
Book of Gates and other burial texts.
Seti's mummified body would rest
in the Osireion before being transferred
to his tomb in the Valley of the Kings.
His stay here would be brief but signifi-
cant, because his body would lie close
to the sacred tomb of Osiris himself.
And, just as the Osireion was Osiris's
cenotaph (an empty tomb designed to
honor a particular person or deity),
so it was, according to some Egyptolo-
gists, also Seti's cenotaph. For cen-
turies, Egyptian kings had often built
their cenotaph near Abydos and laid
their mummy to rest in a royal tomb
elsewhere.
Seti, however, did not want his
mortuary complex to focus solely on
the next life. Because Egyptians valued
tradition, Seti felt it only appropriate
to include past and future in the reliefs
along the temple walls and had the
artisans list the kings of Egypt on the
wall. Each was to be represented by
his cartouche, which meant that the
hieroglyphs for each king's birth name
and throne name would be enclosed in
an oval circle, bordered by a rope that
was drawn in the shape of a loop with
tied ends.
Seti had strong feelings about
which rulers were to be included in the
list. The first name was Menes, the
ruler credited with uniting Upper and
Lower Egypt some 1,800 years earlier;
the last name was his own. Among
those missing were Hatshepsut and the
four royals associated with the rebel be-
lief in the Aten—Akhenaten,
Smenkhkare, Tutankhamun, and Ay.
Later kings would take this list as the
official royal record and have it in-
scribed in their temples and on their
monuments. Thus, it was Seti's rewrite
of history that persisted for generations.
To connect himself even more
closely with Egypt's royal line, Seti
had the artisans carve his image to the
left of the list. His figure on the same
wall as the king list implied that he re-
spected and honored these 75 great
rulers, and he saw them as his ances-
tors. Yet making himself a royal descen-
dant was not enough. Seti wished to es-
tablish a long line of rulers. To do so,
he needed to align his family with past
royal families.
Unlike many of his predecessors
who had married daughters of kings,
Seti had married the daughter of a mil-
itary officer, a girl named Tuya. Seti
saw a possible successor in their third
child, named Ramesses after his grand-
father. (Seti's and Tuya's first child, a
boy, died young, and their second child
was a girl.) To link his son with the
past, Seti had artisans carve the figure
of young Ramesses next to his figure on
the wall with the king list. To show
that Ramesses was still a youth, the ar-
tisans pictured his head shaved except
for the traditional lock of hair hanging
down the side of his head. (According
to custom, this sidelock was cut off
when a child reached adulthood.)
To pay for the upkeep of his tem-
ple, Seti decreed that the income from
certain royal lands and resources go
directly to the temple. Even though
some of these lands lay beyond Egypt's
1 5 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 154 ---
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
borders and in areas that Seti had con-
quered, the rules set forth in the Nauri
Decree applied to all workers on the
temple's lands.
Karnak was also humming with ac-
tivity. There workers were constructing
the latest addition to the great temple
dedicated to the god Amun-Re—a hy-
postyle hall (a roofed area supported by
rows of pillars) that was grander in size
and design than any ever built in Egypt.
Seti's father, Ramesses I, had started it
and his son, Ramesses II, would oversee
the completion of the work.
One project still remained unfin-
ished—Seti's tomb in the Valley of the
Kings and his mortuary temple just to
the southeast of the Valley at el Qurna.
The temple was massive, although not
as grand as the one at Abydos. The
tomb, too, was massive, and of all the
Egyptian royal tombs thus far uncov-
ered, Seti's is still considered the grand-
est and its wall paintings the finest.
In October of 1817, an Italian by
the name of Giovanni Battista Belzoni
rediscovered Seti's tomb. The wall
paintings so delighted his wife, Sarah,
who was on-site with him, that the
couple—so it is said—made the tomb
their living quarters for several weeks.
Along the corridors were reliefs
representing the rituals involved in
passing from this world to the next. As-
tronomical texts decorated one side of
the ceiling; images of the constellations
and of the deities of the Egyptian pan-
theon adorned the other side. With the
background painted a deep blue and
the constellations gold, the effect was
breathtaking. In his journal, Belzoni
noted that the colors were bright and
fresh and that the figures so fine and
perfect that "one would think they had
been drawn only the day before," not
2,200 years earlier.
The greatest find, however, was
Seti's alabaster sarcophagus. Shaped to
resemble the human form, as was the
tradition, the sarcophagus measured
nine feet five inches in length and
three feet seven inches in width. By de-
sign, the alabaster was only two inches
thick, and was of such a fine quality
that when Belzoni placed a light inside
the sarcophagus, it could be seen shin-
ing brightly from the outside. Artisans
had carved scenes and passages from
the Book of Gates directly into the al-
abaster. To highlight these designs,
they filled them in with a blue paint-
like mixture.
What Belzoni did not find was Seti
himself. It was not until 1881 that
Seti's mummy was discovered among
40 royal mummies that ancient Egyp-
tian priests had reburied at Deir el
Bahri. Close examination has revealed
that Seti was about five feet tall, with
pierced ears and a hooked nose. The
latter seems to have been a family trait,
because the mummies of both his fa-
ther and his son suggest the same nose
shape. Seti's features suggest the per-
sonality of a man who was strong-
willed and determined, a person who
commanded the respect of those about
him but was, at the same time, at peace
with himself and with the world.
FURTHER READING
Lichtheim, Miriam. Ancient Egyptian Liter-
ature: A Book of Readings, vol. 2, pp.
52-57. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1976.
Pritchard, James B., ed. The Ancient Near
East: An Anthology of Texts and Pictures,
pp. 182-83. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1958.
Setil
POSITION
King of Egypt
REIGN
About 1291-78 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Vizier and commander-in-chief of
the military under his father
Ramesses I; crushed Shasu opposi-
tion in the Sinai; led a series of suc-
cessful military campaigns in Pales-
tine and Syria; led the Egyptians for
the first time into battle against the
Hittites and settled Egypt's northern
boundary just south of Kadesh;
ended Libyan raids into Egypt; led
a successful expedition against the
Kushites; inaugurated a massive
building program; built a mortuary
temple at el Qurna; built a great
temple to himself and six deities at
Abydos; rebuilt the Osireion; built a
temple at Abydos dedicated to his
father; principally responsible for
the enormous hypostyle hall in the
temple of Amun-Re at Karnak;
built the grandest and finest tomb
thus far discovered in the Valley of
the Kings
SETI I 1 5 3


--- PAGE 155 ---
Ramesses II
KING OF KINGS
met a traveler from an antique land
Who said: Two vast and trunkless legs of stone
Stand in the desert. Near them, on the sand,
Half sunk, a shattered visage lies, whose frown,
and wrinkled lip, and sneer of cold command,
Tell that its sculptor well those passions read
Which yet survive, stamped on these lifeless things,
The hand that mocked them and the heart that fed;
And on the pedestal these words appear:
"My name is Ozymandias, king of kings:
Look on my works, ye Mighty, and despair!"
Nothing besides remains. Round the decay
Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare
The lone and level sands stretch far away.
Ramesses II might question the name "Ozymandias" in this
sonnet by the nineteenth-century English poet Percy Bysshe
Shelley. However, once he realized that Ozymandias was the
ancient Greek adaptation of his throne name User-maat-re,
he would have liked the "king of kings" phrase, for it reflect-
ed exactly how he saw himself and his reign.
Since the death of his older brother, Ramesses had been
groomed by his father, Seti I, to inherit the throne. When
Ramesses was about 10, Seti named him commander-in-
chief of Egypt's armed forces. At the time this was an hon-
orary title, but a few years later Seti would order Ramesses to
accompany him on military expeditions in the Syria-Pales-
tine area.
Ramesses was probably in his early 20s when he suc-
ceeded his father. Soon after, he attended the annual Opet
festival at Thebes in honor of Amun-Re. There he per-
formed the ritual that officially reinforced his right to inherit
the throne and reestablished his identity as the divine repre-
sentative of the gods on Earth.
The Opet festival, however, mattered little to those be-
yond Egypt's borders. Of far greater interest was how
Ramesses would act politically and militarily. For Egypt's en-
emies, it was a time to watch and wait for an opportunity to
strike. The first conflict came in Year 2. A people known as
the Sherden crossed the Mediterranean Sea and invaded the
Delta region. This was not the first time "Sea Peoples" (for
thus they are known to history) raided the Delta, nor would
it be the last. Ramesses easily defeated the Sherden, but he
did not take the surviving males as captives. Because he
would need additional troops to battle his opponents in the
Syria-Palestine area, Ramesses ordered these foreign soldiers
to join his army. He later commissioned the artisans decorat-
ing his temples and other buildings to depict the Sherden
dressed in their traditional battle armor—round shields and
helmets adorned with two horns.
154 • ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
i


--- PAGE 156 ---
Every country is beneath
your feet, O king, ruler of
the Nine Bows, Lord of the
Two Lands, Ramesses II.
—Inscription on the walls
of the temple to Amun, at
Kamak
Farther east toward Palestine, trou-
ble had been brewing, especially after
Seti died. The rulers in lands abutting
those controlled by Egypt began ex-
tending their own borders. Determined
to control the situation, Ramesses ad-
vanced against the Hittites, a powerful
people to the north of Syria. Ramesses
believed Egyptian control of the strate-
gically located city of Kadesh would
enhance Egyptian might throughout
the region. Kadesh, however, was a
long-term goal. Retaking the area south
of Kadesh was a more immediate con-
cern because Ramesses wanted allies
behind him as he marched north
against the enemy.
After leaving the Egyptian border
town of Tjel, Ramesses moved his army
across the Sinai and into Palestine,
where he returned the lands of Canaan,
Tyre, Byblos, and Amurru to Egyptian
control. Winning the allegiance of
Prince Benteshina of Amurru was
important because the prince of Amur-
ru had previously allied himself with
the Hittites, and his land acted as a
buffer between Hittite territory and
Egyptian territory.
But Ramesses was not one to act
hastily or on impulse. For him, caution
and preparedness spelled success, and so
he halted his march at Nahr al Kelb
(Dog River) near present-day Beirut
and returned to Egypt. In the approach-
ing winter months he planned a new
offensive. When spring and warmer
weather arrived, Ramesses was ready.
Year 5 saw Ramesses marching
east, then north, toward Kadesh. Al-
though he could not rely on the ele-
ment of surprise because enemy scouts
were reporting his position to the Hit-
tites, he could still keep the Hittites
wondering where and when he would
attack, and which route he would
choose. Records prove that Ramesses
did indeed gain the advantage, for the
Hittites seem to have been unaware of
Ramesses's decision to send a contin-
gent of elite troops by a more westerly
route. This division was to march along
Seti I trained Ramesses, shown here as
a child, in the arts of war and peace.
The first lessons were simple, but they
built Ramesses's confidence and in-
stilled in him a sense of how and
when to use authority.
RAMESSES II 1 5 5


--- PAGE 157 ---
This gold ring, often called the "horse
ring," belonged to Ramesses II.The Egyp-
tians enjoyed wearing jewelry and often
placed it on the dead and on statues of
the deities.
the coast of Palestine until they were
well north of Kadesh. There they were
to turn east, then south. If all went
well, these troops and those with
Ramesses would crush Kadesh in a
pincer-like maneuver.
As Ramesses marched north, he
divided his troops into the four
traditional divisions. Each consisted
of approximately 5,000 soldiers and
was named after a powerful Egyptian
deity—Amun, Re, Ptah, and Seth.
As king and Commander-in-chief,
Ramesses led the first division, the
division of Amun.
Ramesses ordered his men to cap-
ture anyone who might be a Hittite
messenger, spy, or scout. When two
Hittites were caught, and both told
the same tale—that the Hittites had
set up camp about 120 miles from
Kadesh—Ramesses felt he could ad-
vance without fear, but he had made
one tactical error. With his thoughts
only on victory, Ramesses had neglect-
ed to verify or even challenge the
information revealed by the Hittites.
As he approached Kadesh, he ordered
the troops to veer a little to the west
and set up camp just outside the city
walls. Joy soon turned to dismay after
two more Hittites were captured.
Under torture, they admitted that the
first two Hittites were spies and that
the great Hittite army of King
Muwatallis, which was "more numerous
than the sand of the shore," was en-
camped just beyond the city walls to
the east. Ramesses immediately sum-
moned a council of war. It was a small
council, as only the troops belonging to
his division were with him. The other
three divisions were still on their way
north.
The Hittites, meanwhile, stood
ready and in position. As soon as the
division of Re crossed the Orontes
River and was quickening its pace to
reach Ramesses, Hittite chariots burst
onto the plain from the east and at-
tacked the middle of the division. The
Egyptians had no time to arm them-
selves or even to position themselves in
a formation that might withstand an
attack. And they could expect no help
from Ramesses, whose division was
some five miles to the north.
Yet even if the soldiers of Re had
had more time to prepare, the odds of
surviving a surprise Hittite chariot
attack were slim. The two armies relied
on very different tactics for success. By
custom, each Hittite chariot carried
three men—a driver, a shield bearer,
and a warrior with a spear or javelin.
The Egyptian chariot, on the other
hand, had only two men—the driver
and a bowman. In addition, the
Hittites seemed to prefer hand-to-hand
combat, using chariots as the means of
advance, whereas the Egyptians
preferred to have their archers send a
volley of arrows from moving chariots,
hit as many targets as possible, and
then allow the foot soldiers to engage
in hand-to-hand combat.
Unaware of the defeat his division
of Re had just suffered, Ramesses was
still meeting with his officers when sur-
vivors from Re's division burst into the
meeting. They had barely finished their
report when Hittite troops broke
through the defensive wall around
Ramesses's camp and headed straight for
the royal tent. Ramesses wasted no time
considering his options. For him, there
was only one choice: defeat the enemy.
"When his majesty saw them, he
was enraged against them, like his fa-
ther, Montu, god of Thebes. He seized
the adornments of battle, and arrayed
himself in his coat of mail. . . . Then he
mounted his horse and led quickly on."
In such a way did the artisan commis-
sioned by Ramesses later tell the
story—not just once, but many times.
Another account reads, "His majesty
. . . charged into the midst of the foe
. . . while he was alone himself, and no
other with him." Ramesses also had the
artisans record his conversation with his
chariot driver, Menna: "When Menna
saw so great a number of chariots had
ringed about me, he felt faint, and fear
entered his limbs. Thus he spoke to his
majesty, 'We stand alone in the middle
of the enemy. The infantry and the
chariots have abandoned us. ... Let us
also leave unharmed.'" But Ramesses
answered: "Steady your heart, Menna. I
shall move in among them just as a
hawk." With these words, Ramesses
charged the Hittites again and again,
"so great was the faith he had in him-
self and in his father Amun."
Although the accounts may be
somewhat exaggerated, Ramesses's
bravery certainly must have rallied the
bewildered Egyptian troops. It definite-
ly won the Egyptians time—time that
allowed the elite forces that had trav-
eled by the more westerly route to
reach the battleground. To the surprise
of the Egyptians, the Hittite soldiers
slowed their assault. Tempted by the
riches of the royal tent and the supplies
abandoned by the Egyptian soldiers,
they ran about snatching what plunder
they could.
1 5 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 158 ---
Soon, what had seemed an easy
Hittite victory turned into a retreat. As
the elite reinforcements joined the
main divisions, Ramesses's troops re-
gained their composure, steadied their
weapons, and regrouped to attack. By
day's end, a calm had settled on the
battlefield and both sides rested. The
following day, the two armies again
took to the battlefield, but neither side
was able to gain the advantage. Recog-
nizing that continued fighting meant
only more death and destruction,
Muwatallis sued for peace and asked,
"O victorious king, peace is better than
war. Give us breath."
Although Ramesses did not take
Kadesh, he considered Egypt's action
victorious and had his version of the
battle inscribed on monuments, temple
walls, and papyrus rolls throughout
Egypt. Often he is shown charging the
enemy in a chariot and has the horses'
reins tied about his waist so that he can
freely use his bow and arrow.
For centuries, historians had only
Ramesses's version of the battle. Then
clay tablets detailing the same battle
were uncovered in the ancient Hittite
capital of Hattusas. The Hittites told a
different story. They claimed that they,
not the Egyptians, had won Kadesh.
The version on the Hattusas tablets
seems closer to the truth, considering
that Kadesh continued under Hittite
control. But the battle did establish
Ramesses as a warrior king and a ruler
who feared no enemy.
Nevertheless, Ramesses's reputa-
tion did not stop the Libyans from at-
tacking Egypt's western border. To stop
these border raids, Ramesses ordered a
line of garrisons constructed from
Rakotis (present-day Alexandria) to
west of what today is el Alamein. Con-
fident that the restless Libyans were
contained within their own borders,
Ramesses again looked east.
In Year 7, he marched north
against the kingdoms of Jericho,
Jerusalem, and Moab.Year 8 and Year 9
saw two more campaigns, each of
which succeeded in extending the fron-
tier of Ramesses's empire. This time, it
was Tunip, Kadesh, and northern
Amurru that fell before Ramesses's
might. Then came news that
Muwatallis had died, and that
Muwatallis's son Urhi-Teshub (Mursilis
III) and his uncle Hattusilis were
locked in a bitter struggle for power.
After deciding that Egyptian inter-
ests would benefit more under Hat-
tusilis, in Year 21 Ramesses's signed a
treaty of cooperation with Hattusilis
that brought a lasting peace between
the two nations. He immediately com-
missioned artisans to carve the terms of
the agreement on temple walls. Hat-
tusilis did the same. Texts uncovered
both in Egypt and in the Hittite capital
make this the earliest recorded treaty to
have survived in its entirety. According
to the provisions, "There shall be no
hostilities between [the Hittites and the
Egyptians] forever." Should a ruler dare
violate these terms, the treaty promised
that "the thousand gods of the land of
[the Hittites], and the thousand gods of
the land of Egypt shall desolate his
house, his land, and his subjects."
To further strengthen the bond be-
tween the two nations, Ramesses mar-
ried one of Hattusilis's daughters. This
was not Ramesses's first marriage. Egyp-
tologists estimate that he had as many
as eight principal wives and numerous
offspring, for whom he commissioned a
gigantic tomb complex diagonally op-
posite his own burial site in the Valley
of the Kings.
Ramesses's favorite wife was Nefer-
tari, whom he had married years before
he ascended the throne. They had sev-
eral children, including at least four
sons. Istnofret was another of Ramess-
es's principal wives, and the accom-
plishments of two of her sons by
Ramesses are well recorded. One was
Khaemwaset, whose dedication to
restoring the temples and monuments
of Egypt's early kings won him renown
Ramesses II
POSITION
King of Egypt
REIGN
About 1279-12 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Reconquered the lands in Palestine
and Syria; signed a peace treaty
with the Hittite king Hattusilis;
ended Libyan raids and ordered a
line of garrisons established along
the western edge of the Delta; im-
proved trade relations with Nubia,
the Sinai, Palestine-Lebanon-Syria,
and the islands in the Mediter-
ranean; oversaw a grand building
program, including the hypostyle
hall at Karnak and his mortuary
temple at Abydos; ordered two tem-
ples cut into the rock cliffs at Abu
Simbel, one in honor of himself and
the other in honor of his wife Ne-
fertari; ordered the building of his
mortuary temple (the Ramesseum)
on the west bank of the Nile near
the Valley of the Kings; ordered
his tomb complex built in the
Valley of the Kings, along with a
huge complex for the burial of his
many children
RAMESSES II 1 5 7
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 159 ---
Ramesses [IIJ, who has made his monuments like the stars
of heaven, whose works mingle with the sky, rejoicing over
which Re rises in his house of millions of years.
—Inscription on an obelisk at Heliopolis
as one of the world's first archaeolo-
gists. The other was Merneptah, who
succeeded Ramesses on the throne.
As soon as Ramesses heard that the
Hittites had arranged for his new bride
to make the journey in wintertime, he
arranged for his army to meet her and
her traveling companions in Palestine
and escort the group to his palace in
the new capital city of Pi-Ramesses.
Ramesses knew well the strategic
importance of the site he had chosen
for his capital. Because Egypt's political
and economic welfare had become in-
creasingly tied to affairs in the Syria-
Palestine area, Ramesses considered
Thebes too removed from the action.
Even Memphis, which had served as
Egypt's capital for centuries and lay at
the entrance to the Delta, seemed dis-
tant. Pi-Ramesses, in the northeastern
corner of the northern Delta region,
seemed perfect.
Surviving contemporary accounts
describe the palace as more magnificent
than any ever built. Everywhere were
inlays of gold, silver, lapis lazuli, and
turquoise. Its rivers and lakes teemed
with fish, and the surrounding fields
produced an abundance of pomegran-
ates, apples, olives, and figs. Because Pi-
Ramesses lay close to a main waterway,
the city was easily accessible to traders
and enjoyed a plentiful supply of im-
ported goods, both from other areas in
Egypt and from abroad.
With the borders settled and no
more wars to fight, Ramesses was able
to employ a large workforce that includ-
ed both Egyptians and foreigners living
in Egypt. Surviving Egyptian records
mention a group of people known as
the Apiru. Some worked in the stone
quarries; others were responsible for
transporting stone temple-blocks; still
others made building bricks. Many his-
torians believe that the Apiru were ac-
tually the Hebrews, and that the Bibli-
cal story of Moses petitioning a king of
Egypt for the right to lead his people
out of Egypt took place during Ramess-
es's reign. Today, archaeologists contin-
ue the search for more evidence in
Egyptian inscriptions to confirm the
Biblical story of the Exodus.
Ramesses concentrated on two
building projects. One was a pair of
temples at Abu Simbel in Nubia; the
other was his mortuary temple on the
west bank near the Valley of the Kings.
At Abu Simbel he dedicated the Great
Temple to Amun-Re, Re-Harakhte
(another aspect of the sun god), and
himself; the Small Temple he dedicated
to the goddess Hathor and to Nefertari.
The facade of the Great Temple rose
to a height of 102 feet. On either side
of the entrance were two gigantic stat-
ues of Ramesses in a sitting position.
Each measured 60 feet tall. Smaller
figures cut from the rock near each of
the statue's feet represented Nefertari
and their children.
A passageway more than 200 feet
in length led from the entrance to the
sanctuary deep within the rock cliff.
Along this corridor were eight standing
statues of Ramesses—four on each side.
They were carved to represent the king
as the god Osiris with arms crossed
over his chest and hands holding the
royal symbols—the scepter and the
flail. Mindful of his victory at Kadesh,
Ramesses had artisans cover the walls
with scenes of the battle.
At the rear of the temple were four
seated statues. One was of Ramesses II;
the others were of Amun-Re, Re-
Harakhte, and Ptah. By design, twice a
year—at the summer solstice (the
longest day of the year) and at the win-
ter solstice (the shortest day of the
year), the rays of the sun stream down
the corridor and rest on the statues of
Ramesses II, Amun-Re, and Re-
Harakhte. No rays shine on Ptah—
quite fitting, as the Egyptians associat-
ed him with the underworld.
For centuries, Ramesses's temples
at Abu Simbel stood as a tribute to
himself and the nation's rich heritage.
In 1955, Egypt's leaders approved the
construction of a Great Dam near the
First Cataract, to control the annual
flooding of the Nile. To hold the waters
backed up by this dam, the architects
designed a lake site (Lake Nasser).
Alarmed that many ancient sites would
be "drowned," archaeologists met to
discuss the possibility of saving some
monuments, including the two temples
at Abu Simbel. What followed was a
modern engineering marvel—workers
cut the two temples into large blocks,
moved the blocks to a site just above
the cliff where they had been situated
originally, and then reassembled them.
Ramesses's mortuary temple was
not so fortunate. Although not affected
by Lake Nasser, it lies mostly in ruins.
Surveys of the site show that the tem-
ple, known today as the Ramesseum,
once measured about 910 feet by 550
feet. Surrounding the temple on all but
1 5 8 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 160 ---
the entrance side were administrative
offices and huge vaulted storage areas.
But it was the 1,000-ton statue Ramess-
es's sculptors had carved in his likeness
that brought Ramesses everlasting
fame—its toppled ruins moved Shelley
to write the poem "Ozymandias." The
poem and the ruins also inspired others
to learn more about Ramesses, the ruler
whose monumental structures won him
the nickname "Ramesses the Great."
By the time Ramesses approached
90 years of age, he had celebrated 14
Heb-Sed jubilee festivals and had out-
lived many of his children. Merneptah
was now next in line, and he was al-
ready in his 60s. For several years
Merneptah had been assuming more
and more responsibility as his father's
health deteriorated. Ramesses's teeth,
especially those in back, were quite
worn and gave him considerable pain.
The arthritis in his hip joints was also a
source of much discomfort. He had
problems walking, and his heart no
longer beat as strongly or as regularly.
When Ramesses's mummy was dis-
covered among those that ancient
Egyptian priests had reburied at Deir el
Bahri, Egyptologists came face-to-face
with a man about six feet tall who
showed signs of a great age. His ears
were pierced, as was the custom, and
his nose was hook-shape, which seems
to have been a family trait. (Those re-
sponsible for mummifying his body had
filled his nose with peppercorns to keep
the arch shape.)
In 1976, fearing that the deteriora-
tion evident around Ramesses's neck
might lead to the total disintegration of
the mummy, Egyptian officials decided
to fly the king to France to be treated
by bacteria experts. When the plane
carrying Ramesses's mummy landed in
Paris, the French honored the ancient
monarch in the same way they would
any visiting royal. Government officials
Ramesses It's mummy lies today in Cairo's Egyptian Museum. Much of the body is still
wrapped in its original resin-soaked bandages.
met him with a full Presidential Guard
of Honor. Following the successful
treatment of his body and an appear-
ance at a special exhibition, Ramesses
made his final journey home, where a
special room had been designed in
Cairo's Egyptian Museum to house
his remains.
FURTHER READING
Kitchen, K. A. Pharaoh Triumphant: The
Life and Times of Ramesses II. Warminster,
England: Aris and Phillips, 1981.
Menu, Bernadette. Ramesses II: Greatest of
the Pharaohs. New York: Abrams, 1999.
Roberts, Russell. Rulers of Ancient Egypt,
chap. 5. San Diego, Calif.: Lucent: 1999.
RAMESSES II 1 5 9


--- PAGE 161 ---
Vefertari
BELOVED WIFE
he temple Ramesses II commissioned archi-
tects to build at Abu Simbel in honor of his
wife Nefertari was an architectural master-
piece. The inscriptions Ramesses's workers
had carved into the stone were true: "of fine,
white, and enduring sandstone—an eternal work" and
"never was done the equal before."
The site, too, was breathtaking, situated as it was in a
rock cliff just beyond the fertile strip of land that ran along
the west bank of the Nile River. For Ramesses, however,
what was more important was that a structure so massive and
For years the identity of this finely detailed bust was uncertain.
In the late 20th century, the discovery of a similar, much larger
statue helped Egyptologists solve the mystery. Both appear to be
Meryetamun, daughter of Nefertari and Ramesses II, who later
became Ramesses ll's Great Royal Wife.
160 • ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
T


--- PAGE 162 ---
so magnificent was being built on Nu-
bian, not Egyptian, soil. Thus, the tem-
ple clearly announced to all Nubians
that Egypt, not Nubia, was the ruling
power in the area.
Yet power was not the only mes-
sage Ramesses hoped to convey.
Ramesses saw the structure as proof of
the great love and respect he had for
Nefertari. Of all his wives—and he had
quite a few—Nefertari was his favorite.
Whether she was a royal is uncertain,
as virtually nothing is known about her
background. According to the records,
Nefertari bore Ramesses several sons,
but all died before Ramesses.
Her temple at Abu Simbel stood
quite close to a larger one honoring
Ramesses and the deities Amun-Re,
Re-Harakhte, and Ptah—only a narrow,
sandy gully separated the two temples.
Because Nefertari's temple was also ded-
icated to Hathor, a sky goddess whom
the Egyptians often associated with the
goddess Isis, the symbolism was clear:
According to tradition, Egypt's king was
the earthly representative of Isis's son
Horus, and the Great Royal Wife
played a role similar to that of Isis.
Thus, Nefertari and Isis were both
mothers of sons whom the Egyptians
honored as rulers of the two lands.
The facade of Nefertari's temple
was approximately 88 feet wide and 39
feet high. On either side of the en-
trance stood two gigantic statues of
Ramesses and one of Nefertari. Into the
rock between these figures, sculptors
had cut several smaller statues repre-
senting their children. While it was
customary to represent royal families
in such a manner, the scale and posi-
tioning of these figures against the rock
cliff was awesome. To make certain
that everyone knew exactly by whom
and for whom the temple was built,
Ramesses had his artisans carve above
the entranceway that it was he, "strong
in Truth . . . [who] made this divine
place for his wife Nefertari, whom he
loves."
The architects followed the tradi-
tional temple design for the interior.
The central corridor led from the en-
tranceway to the sanctuary at the rear
of the complex. This room, known as
the "holy of holies," was where the
statue of the deity (or deities, in the
case of Ramesses's temple) was placed.
The magnificently adorned interior,
however, gave little indication of how
much work the actual construction
had involved.
In the 1960s, when archaeologists
from around the world joined together
to save as many structures as possible
before the new Lake Nasser flooded the
area, all those working to rescue Nefer-
tari's temple and Ramesses's temple
gained a renewed appreciation for the
engineering skills of the ancient Egyp-
tians. Relying on an understanding of
rock formation that had been acquired
through the centuries, Ramesses's engi-
neers pinpointed those areas in the
rock cliffs at Abu Simbel where work-
ers could cut deep into the rock. They
then adapted their design to take ad-
vantage of hard sandstone banks that
alternated with softer rock layers.
Aware that the ceilings and the interior
halls had to bear much weight, the ar-
chitects made sure that their plans had
these areas coincide with the hardest
rock layers. The design also took into
account how high the Nile's flood-
waters reached. Exactness was possible
here because for years the Egyptians
had kept records of water-table and
flood heights.
Nefertari may not have visited her
temple many times, because her name
disappears from the records around Year
24—the same year her temple seems to
have been completed. Whether she
died, became ill, or retired from public
life is unknown. Most Egyptologists be-
lieve that she died at that time.
Architects also rank Nefertari's
tomb among the most magnificent ever
constructed in ancient Egypt. She and
Ramesses chose an area known today as
ANCIENT
Nefertari
POSITION
Queen of Egypt
REIGN
About 1270 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Gave much support to her husband
Ramesses; her role as Chief Royal
Wife and favorite wife led Ramesses
to commission a magnificent temple
built in her honor at Abu Simbel;
her tomb complex in the Valley of
the Queens, especially the wall
paintings, was the most splendid yet
uncovered as of 2001
NEFERTARI 1 6 1


--- PAGE 163 ---
One of several forms of Re, Khepri per-
sonified the young sun at dawn and thus
became a symbol of renewal. Artists por-
trayed Khepri as a dung beetle (scarab)
pushing a ball (the sun) or as a scarab-
headed man (as in this wall painting).
the Valley of the Queens. The Egyp-
tians called it "the Place of Beauty." A
relatively new burial site, it lay on the
west bank of the Nile River, a short
distance southwest of the Valley of the
Kings. Records suggest that Ramesses's
grandfather was the first to bury his
Great Royal Wife here.
Nefertari's pink granite sarcophagus
was designed to lie for all eternity in a
specially dug sunken area flanked by
four square pillars that were decorated
with finely executed scenes representing
passages from the Book of Gates. Painted
reliefs adorned the walls of the corridors
and other chambers in the complex.
1 6 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 164 ---
Ramesses II made as his monument far the Great King's
Wife, Nefertari, beloved o/Mut, a house cut into the pure
mountain of Nubia.
—Inscription on the small temple at Abu Simbel
The warmth and realism they express
make them among the most beautiful
Egyptian artwork to have survived. The
artists were masters of the task and drew
the features of each figure with a sensi-
tivity that brings the paintings to life.
The colors are crisp and rich and the
detail well defined.
A scene in the offering hall (the
first room of the complex) shows Ne-
fertari sitting regally on the throne.
She holds the scepter of power with
one hand and calmly moves a playing
piece on a game board with the other.
A wide tan band extends down the
front of her long white dress. On either
side are narrow, evenly spaced vertical
bands. Decorating the free-flowing
sleeves that reach to her elbows are
narrow horizontal bands. A large collar-
necklace covers her upper chest and
her shoulders.
In the tomb's inner chamber (the
third room in the complex), the reliefs
on one wall show Nefertari offering a
sacrifice to Osiris. Another scene shows
the queen standing before Thoth, the
ibis-headed god of wisdom and writing.
At the same time, she is offering cloth
to the god Ptah and honoring a bull
with seven cows. With white as the
background color of the walls and dark
blue studded with gold stars on the
ceiling, the ancient artisans created an
effect that is still striking today.
Unfortunately, these magnificent
structures tell few personal facts about
Nefertari. We can only guess that she
might have visited Set Maat ("the
Place of Truth"). This village was home
to the skilled tomb workers. Built more
than 200 years earlier, Set Maat was
located between the Valley of the
Queens and the Valley of the Kings.
The workers in the village ranked their
position above that of the unskilled la-
borers. By custom, they were not con-
scripted to work on government pro-
jects for a specific period of time.
Rather, Set Maat was their permanent,
year-round home, and their job was a
highly regarded profession, one that
passed from father to son.
Over the centuries, the rising water
table at Thebes has caused extensive
damage to Nefertari's tomb, and the
buildup of mineral salts in the walls is
pushing the paint off of them. In an ef-
fort to reverse this situation, a group of
concerned Egyptologists, archaeolo-
gists, and scientists has joined with the
Egyptian government to launch an in-
ternational project aimed at preventing
further deterioration and, where possi-
ble, at restoring the paintings in Nefer-
tari's tomb.
FURTHER READING
McDonald, John K. House of Eternity:
the Tomb of Nefertari. Los Angeles, Calif.:
J. Paul Getty Museum, 1996.
Siliotti, Alberto. Guide to the Valley of the
Kings, pp. 80-93. London: Wiedenfeld &
Nicolson, 1996.
NEFERTARI 1 6 3


--- PAGE 165 ---
Ramesses III
IN THE FOOTSTEPS
OF THE GREAT
n Year 5 of the reign of Ramesses III, messengers
brought news to the royal court that the Libyans
were advancing east across the desert sands. For
centuries, Libyan tribes had looked with envy upon
the fertile lands of the Delta in Lower Egypt. And
for centuries they had heard reports of Egyptian granaries
overflowing with surplus food crops. Now they too wanted
some of this land.
About 30 years earlier, Merneptah, the son of Ramesses
II (Ramesses the Great), had crushed a similar invasion, but
the internal turmoil that followed Merneptah's death had
allowed the Libyans to consider another advance on Egypt's
western border. A new leader, an Egyptian named Seth-
nakhte, came to power and restored order to the Two Lands.
Historians list this ruler as the founder of the 20th Dynasty.
After a rule of only three years, he died, and his son
Ramesses III sat on Egypt's throne.
The Libyans did not consider themselves the aggressors.
They claimed they attacked because Ramesses had interfered
with the rights of the Tjemehu (a Libyan tribe) when he
named a child to be their chief. The Libyans, however, had
underestimated their opponent. Ramesses III knew well the
history of his namesake Ramesses II and had chosen, as his
personal goal, to emulate his distinguished predecessor. Ac-
cording to the inscription he later had workers carve on the
outer north wall of his mortuary temple, he marched against
those who shall invade his boundary ... like a flame ... in
dry grass. [They flutter] like wild fowl in the middle of the
net, with legs struggling in the basket.... Their loss is heavy.
. . . Their leaders were carried off, slain. . . . They were made
prisoners... . [Ramesses himself] is like a bull standing in the
field, his eye and his two horns ready and prepared to ram
their rear with his head. ... He is like the lion with the deep
roar upon the mountaintops, whose terror is feared from afar.
1 6 4 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
i


--- PAGE 166 ---
Unable to oppose this powerful
"lion" successfully, the Libyans retreat-
ed. Ramesses, however, had little time
to enjoy the victory. Trouble was brew-
ing in the East. Migrant groups of peo-
ple from different areas in Asia and
other lands bordering the Mediter-
ranean and Aegean Seas, including
many refugees who were fleeing inva-
sions of their own homelands, had
begun pushing their way south—some
by land, and some by sea. (History has
referred to these groups as the "Sea
Peoples.") Accompanying the warriors
traveling by land were their wives and
children, along with oxen pulling
wagonloads of personal belongings.
Unwilling to divide his troops to
counter both the attack by land and
the one by sea, Ramesses took on the
land forces first. He sent couriers with
orders that the troops manning Egypt's
garrisons along the eastern borders with
Syria and Palestine should hold fast
until he could march his army north-
ward. Fearless in the face of the enemy,
Ramesses "marched afar in his advance,
smiting tens of thousands in the space
of an hour. ... He overwhelmed the
combatants like fire, causing all those
who confront him to become [ashes]."
Having met success on land,
Ramesses now looked to do the same
on sea. Because his fleet was not skilled
in this type of fighting, he planned to
draw the enemy into the waterways of
the Delta. When the enemy entered a
main Delta tributary, Ramesses ordered
his fleet to block all escape routes. Thus
"the net was made ready for them, to
ensnare them . . . [and] they fell into
it." Ramesses gave the signal for the
archers he had positioned along the
banks of the river to fire volleys of ar-
rows. After the archers exhausted their
supply of arrows, Ramesses ordered his
sailors to snag the enemy's ships with
huge grappling hooks and reel them
alongside their own ships. Caught un-
awares and with many men already
killed or wounded, the survivors found
themselves overwhelmed and fell swiftly
in hand-to-hand shipboard combat.
Ramesses later had his artisans record
the victory on his mortuary temple,
"My arrow struck, and none escaped my
arms or my hand. I flourished like a
hawk among the fowl; my talons de-
scended upon their heads. Amun-Re
was upon my right and upon my left,
his might and power were in my limbs."
After this sea offensive, which is
often considered the first recorded
naval battle in history, most of the Sea
Peoples withdrew from the Delta re-
gion and settled in areas bordering the
Mediterranean and Aegean Seas. Some
settled in the Palestine area, and later
became known as the Philistines.
Six years later, Libya's rulers again
took up arms and marched east. Joined
by other tribes, including the Mesh-
wesh, the Libyans made a frontal as-
sault on Egypt's border garrisons.
Brave and valiant king . . .
his name has penetrated dl
hearts as far as the limit of
the darkness.
—Inscription on Ramesses
Ill's mortuary temple at
Medinet Habu
Members of the court, far right, watch as
Egyptian, Nubian, and Syrian wrestlers and
stick fighters battle each other This relief
appears on a wall in Ramesses Ill's mortu-
ary temple at Medinet Habu.
RAMESSES III 1 6 5


--- PAGE 167 ---
This is an excerpt from the lengthy Great
Harris Papyrus. Written in hieratic script
(writing derived from hieroglyphs), it in-
cludes records of Ramesses Ill's gifts to
the gods, temple festivals, and military
campaigns.
Ramesses quickly rallied his troops and
fought "hand to hand, his voice up-
raised, shouting like a griffin [a mythical
monster with the body and hind legs of
a lion and the head, wings, and claws of
an eagle]." In the face of such determi-
nation, the enemy "were scattered,
overturned, brought to the ground;
their blood was like a flood, their bodies
[crushed on] the spot, trampled."
So reads the account Ramesses had
inscribed on the walls of his mortuary
temple. The sculptors accompanied the
text with descriptive scenes of the con-
frontation. They showed Ramesses, his
bow drawn, charging the enemy in his
chariot. Two lines of Egyptian chariots
accompany him, as do some foot sol-
diers. The Egyptian infantry, armed
with sword and shield, march in perfect
order ahead of the archers; the enemy,
on the other hand, show no semblance
of order, appearing scattered and con-
fused. Some fall dead, pierced by the
king's arrows; others scramble to escape
their pursuers. After the battle,
Ramesses leaves his chariot to help
bind the captives.
Egypt certainly was not as powerful
as it once had been, but Ramesses's vic-
tories brought a sense of security and
stability to the empire. They also made
rulers in the lands beyond Egypt's bor-
ders aware that the king would not hes-
itate to march his army against them.
On the walls of his mortuary temple,
he proclaimed, "fTjhe lands are in
peace. ... A woman goes about at her
will, with her veil upon her head, her
travels extending as far as she pleases."
Traders definitely benefited from
Ramesses's firm rule, and merchants
freely sent their wares up and down the
Nile and across the Sinai Peninsula
into Palestine, Syria, and Lebanon.
Further exploration of the Sinai's cop-
per mines was encouraged, and Nubia
continued as one of Egypt's principal
trading partners. Nubia's leaders even
stopped their border raids and attacks
on Egyptian garrisons. The most prized
trading partner, however, was the fa-
bled land of Punt. Following the exam-
ple set by several of his predecessors,
Ramesses sent a trading expedition to
Punt—the last such expedition com-
missioned by an Egyptian king.
As the Two Lands regained some of
their former strength, Ramesses looked
to thank the gods for their help. He or-
dered his engineers to build several
shrines and structures at Karnak and
other sites. But he did not follow the
example of his namesake Ramesses II
and commission massive construction
projects. Instead, Ramesses III preferred
to focus most of his efforts on his mor-
tuary temple. As the site, he chose land
that lay approximately one half mile
south of Ramesses II's mortuary temple,
the Ramesseum, on the west bank of
the Nile, and encouraged his architects
to use the Ramesseum as a model.
Today, the area is known as Medinet
Habu ("town of Habu"), a name that
refers to a community of Christians
who, centuries later, lived in the same
area. In Ramesses's time, the temple was
called the "Mansion of Millions of Years
of King Ramesses III" and "United with
Eternity in the Estate of Amun."
Ramesses saw his temple as a means
of recording both his achievements and
1 6 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 168 ---
his close association with the gods.
Among the traditional elements were a
series of shrines dedicated to the gods
Amun, Mut, Khons, Ptah, Montu, and
Re, and another series honoring
Ramesses II and Ramesses III and his
family. New to mortuary temple design
was the 240-foot-high entrance gate-
way constructed of sandstone and mud
brick. It resembled a migdol, the forti-
fied gateway that served as an entrance
to Syrian towns. To link the temple
with the Nile River, workers built a
canal and landing dock. Materials, sup-
plies, and offerings could be brought di-
rectly to the site.
On the inside walls of the temple
and on the thick outer wall, artisans
carved and painted reliefs and inscrip-
tions detailing Ramesses's exploits.
Prayers and offerings of thanksgiving to
the gods were also inscribed. A great
calendar marked the festival days and
offerings, and another relief recorded
the religious holy days and rituals cele-
brated at the temple.
Egyptologists, however, question
whether Ramesses III actually partici-
pated in all the campaigns or received
all the honors credited to him in the
reliefs. The artisans may have exagger-
ated details and fabricated a few facts,
most likely to emphasize the greatness
of their king's achievements and to as-
sociate him more closely with the gods.
To reinforce the link between past, pre-
sent, and future, Ramesses followed the
example of Ramesses II and had arti-
sans list the names of his sons on the
walls of the west portico.
Ramesses saw his mortuary temple
complex as a building for religious ser-
vices and as a structure that could serve
political needs as well. The great outer
wall seems to have been a defensive
wall. Should an emergency arise, such
as a Libyan raid, those living in the area
could take refuge behind the wall. The
complex also became the administrative
center for Thebes and the surrounding
area. Here, too, was a brick palace and
the traditional Window of Appearance
from which Ramesses distributed re-
wards to those who had achieved some
notable accomplishment. On the south
side of the complex stood another
palace. This, however, was a model
palace, designed to serve the dead king's
ka (life force) in the afterlife.
Under Ramesses, Egypt experi-
enced a mini-Golden Age. Tribute and
taxes from the lands subject to or allied
with the Two Lands continually in-
creased Egypt's wealth. An account
commissioned by Ramesses's son and
successor listed the gifts Ramesses had
presented to the gods during his reign
of 31 years and 41 days. These records
name specific parcels of land, slaves,
various types of animals, grains, vegeta-
bles, fruits, ships and boats, and the
number of linen cloth bolts and gar-
ments, weights of gold and silver, and
individual pieces of jewelry presented.
From the length and detail of the
list, Egyptologists think that Ramesses
had the artisans include not only the
gifts and offerings he gave the temples,
but also those that previous rulers had
given. Because the earlier gifts were
now considered the property of the
priests and temples, their accumulation
of wealth clearly rivaled that of the
king. According to the document, the
priests of Amun owned 433 temples in
Egypt, 83 ships, 46 temple workshops,
approximately 500,000 heads of cattle,
and 1,300 square miles of land. By
some accounts, this meant that the
temples and priests owned approxi-
mately 30 percent of all cultivable land
and employed about 20 percent of
Egypt's inhabitants. Because, as records
suggest, both temples and priests were
exempt from taxes, their wealth multi-
plied even more quickly. Such a policy
did not have a positive effect on Egypt.
Rather, it contributed significantly to
the decline of royal power and to the
destabilization of the government.
This account, which also includes
a brief historical summary of Ramesses's
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
Ramesses III
POSITION
King of Egypt
REIGN
About 1182-51 B.C.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Defeated the Libyans in Year 5 of
his reign and again in Year 11; de-
feated migrant peoples—the Sea
Peoples preparing to invade Egypt;
won battle against the Sea Peo-
ples—history's first recorded naval
battle; built a massive mortuary
temple at Medinet Habu; first
recorded labor union strike occurred
during his reign; Harem Conspiracy
may have resulted in his death
RAMESSES III 1 6 7


--- PAGE 169 ---
Ramesses III is kind-hearted toward Egypt, bearing the pro-
tection of the land on the height of his back without trouble;
a wall, casting a shadow for the people.
—Inscription on Ramesses Ill's mortuary temple at
Medinet Habu
reign, was written on papyrus and dated
the day Ramesses died. It measures 133
feet in length and consists of 117
columns, each 12 to 13 lines in length.
It was discovered in 1855 in a small
private tomb in Deir el Bahri. After an
Englishman named A. C. Harris
bought the piece, it came to be called
the Great Harris Papyrus. To date, it re-
mains the longest papyrus ever uncov-
ered in ancient Egypt and one of the
most valuable.
Another uncovered document tells
of Ramesses dismissing his vizier of
Lower Egypt. Ramesses assigned himself
the responsibility of regulating the gifts
to be sent to the temples. Still another
document details the world's first
known labor strike.
Over the years, the tradition had
developed of housing the skilled arti-
sans, the scribes, and the foremen in
charge of the royal tomb workers in vil-
lages close to the construction site.
Those who worked at the royal tombs
in the Valley of the Kings and the Val-
ley of the Queens and the mortuary
temples in western Thebes lived in Set
Maat ("the Place of Truth"), better
known today as Deir el Medina. Ac-
cording to surviving records, Thutmose
I had established this village for the
skilled artisans, the scribes, and the
foremen of the workers on his mortuary
complex.
Under Ramesses III, Deir el Medi-
na housed about 50 artisans, although
the numbers dwindled as his tomb and
temple neared completion. The artisans
actually spent little time there, except
for holy days and festival days, because
they worked nine days and were off on
the tenth day. The nine nights they
spent in a makeshift camp closer to the
construction sites.
Living full-time at Deir el Medina
were the families of the artisans and
the scribes; gardeners who tended the
small area granted the village to grow
produce; fishermen; water-carriers; and
others who cared for the business of the
village. All, however, depended on the
steady income of the workers to sur-
vive. This income was not money, but
rather food and other necessities.
Since Ramesses wanted his tomb
workers to be happy and content, Deir
el Medina was well supplied. The enor-
mous grain storerooms at the nearby
temples were also kept full. However,
in Year 25, a junior scribe named Ne-
ferhotep sent an official complaint to
the office of the vizier stating that "all
the supplies for us [at Deir el Medina]
that come from the treasury, the gra-
nary, and the storehouse have been ex-
hausted." The letter told how a large
part of the monthly grain ration allot-
ted to the village had been taken away
and "we are dying."
Four years later, in Year 29, matters
seem to have become considerably
worse. This time, a senior scribe named
Amennakht filed a complaint stating
that the community had not received
its wheat ration. He brought his griev-
ance directly to officials whose offices
were in the royal temple at Medinet
Habu. Two days later, a shipment of
wheat arrived at Deir el Medina.
The villagers' joy quickly turned to
anger when their wages were again de-
layed. Their frustrations increased
when only a fraction of what they were
due did arrive. Having lost all confi-
dence in the traditional methods of
solving grievances, the workers took
stronger action—they stopped all work
on the burial complex, left the Valley
of the Kings for the temple of Thut-
mose III, and there sat on the ground
beside the granaries. After waiting 18
days for their wages to be delivered, the
workers walked back to the village, but
not to work.
Determined to have their griev-
ances addressed, they again marched
out of the village and headed for the
Ramesseum. They stopped only when
they reached the courtyards next to the
enormous granaries. When no official
approached to ask about their griev-
ances, the men decided not to return
home that evening but to continue
their "sit-in" by the temple gate. The
following day, temple officials met
with the workers and listened to their
grievances, "[we have] no clothing, no
fat, no fish, no vegetables." Finally, the
officials gave the workmen their over-
due rations.
The matter seemed settled, but the
strikes continued—an indication that
the problem involved more than late
wages. The workers were also upset be-
cause of the corruption among officials
and temple personnel. Using the same
tactics as they had before, the workers
1 6 8 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 170 ---
threatened to approach the High Priest
of Amun, the vizier, and even Ramess-
es III himself if their concerns were not
addressed. Again, the workers won.
This time, new positions were created,
and the new officials were charged with
overseeing the arrival of all wages. Fi-
nally, after months of complaints and
strikes, all was quiet.
Because Amun's priests had played
a significant role in settling the strike,
the workers looked to the priests, and
not the government or state officials, as
their champions. Ramesses recognized
the increasing power of Amun's priests
and of the priests associated with other
religious buildings at Thebes. Because
the priests also held considerable
wealth, he named a non-Theban to the
office of high priest of the Two Lands.
Nevertheless, despite his precautions,
the power of the priesthood continued
to grow and so, too, did the relation-
ship between the workers of Deir el
Medina and the priests of Amun.
Religious power, however, was not
Ramesses's most pressing problem.
Trouble was brewing in the royal harem
where, according to custom, Ramesses's
wives lived. Because only the eldest liv-
ing son of the Great Royal Wife inher-
ited the right to succeed the king, all
other royal offspring could only hope
that their royal blood would win them
a good position in the government. Tiy,
one of Ramesses's minor wives, refused
to accept this long-standing custom
and found others within the palace
who pledged to support her son as the
rightful heir.
In the mid-1800s, Egyptologists un-
covered several papyrus rolls that dis-
closed important details about a
"Harem Conspiracy." According to the
record, Ramesses was to be killed, and
Tiy's son Pentewere was to ascend the
throne. The plot, however, was discov-
ered; the traitors were arrested, and
court proceedings were initiated. The
defendants numbered around 40, many
of whom Ramesses had considered loyal
supporters. The document makes no
mention of Tiy, not even if she was ever
brought to trials. It does state that 24 of
those tried were condemned to death.
The others received lighter sentences.
Whether the conspirators actually
killed Ramesses is unclear. The records
do show that he was dead before the
trial ended. The sentencing, however,
continued without interruption, as did
the preparations he had made for his
son to succeed him. Ramesses's tomb in
the Valley of the Kings was ready. His
father, Sethnakhte, had originally or-
dered it, but had abandoned the site for
a new tomb. Ramesses liked his father's
first choice and had his workers com-
plete the complex for himself. They en-
countered a few problems, the worst of
which occurred when workers cutting
the corridors of Ramesses Ill's tomb
collided with the tomb of King Amen-
messe (Ramesses IFs grandson). After
strengthening the walls of both tombs,
the engineers reworked their design.
Because surviving accounts include lit-
tle about such "mistakes," Egyptologists
believe they were rare and that archi-
tects and workers kept maps and plans
of tombs in the valley. Still, the valley
was becoming crowded, especially
considering that rulers, Ramesses in-
cluded, often opted for tombs larger
than those of their predecessors.
Ramesses had his tomb workers follow
the traditional tomb design. However,
he did have his artisans include scenes
that were not usually found in a king's
tomb—scenes that focused on everyday
life in this world.
In 1881, Egyptologists found
Ramesses's mummy along with many
others that had been reburied by
ancient Egyptian priests in Deir el
Bahri. Detailed analysis of his mummy
I sat upon the throne with
joy in my heart.
—Harris Papyrus
indicates that Ramesses was about 65
when he died. His mummy also bears
witness to a new custom—the use of ar-
tificial eyes. The eyes looked gruesome,
and makers of many horror films used
Ramesses's mummy as their model.
Ramesses's personality, however, seems
the exact opposite, especially if we read
the record of his reign as commissioned
by his son and heir Ramesses IV:
I planted the whole land with trees
and verdure, and I made the people
dwell in their shade. ... I sustained
the whole land, whether foreigners,
common folk, citizens, or people,
male or female. . . . The land was well
satisfied with my reign. I did good to
the gods, as well as to the people, and
I had nothing at all belonging to any
people.... Behold, I have gone to
rest in the afterworld, like my father
Re, I have mingled with the great
gods in heaven, earth, and the after-
world. Amun-Re has established my
son on my throne.
FURTHER READING
Newby, Percy Howard. Warrior Pharaohs:
The Rise and Fall of the Egyptian Empire, pp.
194-96. London and Boston: Faber and
Faber, 1980.
Siliotti, Alberto. Guide to the Valley of the
Kings, pp. 62, 124-29. London: Wiedenfeld
& Nicolson, 1996.
RAMESSES III 1 6 9


--- PAGE 171 ---
More Ancient
Egyptians to
Remember
a-wer-a'a (active about 1210 B.C.) served as
the mayor of western Thebes and was re-
sponsible for overseeing the royal tombs in
the Valley of the Kings. Tomb theft had long
been a problem, and in the years following
the reign of Ramesses III, the number of tomb robberies in-
creased significantly. In Year 16 of Ramesses IX's reign, there
broke a great scandal that involved high-ranking officials in
Thebes and royal tomb workers. Among those accused of
being an accessory was Pa-wer-a'a. According to uncovered
documents, Paser, the mayor of the east bank, gave all the
information he gathered about the case to his superior, the
vizier Khaemwaset. Pa-wer-a'a, meanwhile, presented the
vizier with a list that named eight robbers but did not in-
clude his own name. The court found Pa-wer-a'a not guilty
of neglecting his duty to guard the tombs because the rob-
bers confessed to the crime.
Sometime later Paser filed another complaint with the
vizier, stating that more tomb robberies had occurred. For
the second time, he implied that Pa-wer-a'a was involved.
Once again, Pa-wer-a'a was found innocent. Months later,
the officials reversed their decision and found Pa-wer-a'a
guilty. The section that told the outcome of this trial is
missing, but inspectors now knew how robbers had foiled
them in the past. Aware that priests and those in charge of
tomb sites only checked the seals at the entrance, robbers
were entering these structures by burrowing their way in
from behind.
Herihor (active about 1080-72 B.C.) welcomed his new
role as High Priest of Amun. His climb to this position, the
highest in the Egyptian priesthood, had been steady and de-
termined. So, too, was his climb up the military and politi-
cal ladder. Ramesses XI named him the general in charge of
Upper Egypt, and records suggest Herihor married his sister
Nodjmet. Even after Ramesses appointed Herihor governor
of Kush, then vizier of the Upper Egypt, and high priest of
Amun, Ramesses chose not to curb Herihor's influence in
Upper Egypt. Instead, he seemed to welcome the opportuni-
ty to focus his attention on Lower Egypt and to spend more
time in his palace at Pi-Ramesses in the Delta.
Herihor soon came to consider himself Ramesses's
equal. For centuries, kings had allotted land, tribute, and
taxes to the temples. Because those of Amun received the
majority of grants, Amun's priests were by far the richest
and the most powerful. It soon followed that Ramesses rec-
ognized what seemed inevitable and approved reliefs repre-
senting Herihor as king of Egypt. Two kings now ruled the
Two Lands—Ramesses in Lower Egypt and Herihor in
1 7 0 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS
p


--- PAGE 172 ---
Upper Egypt. And, according to the
inscription on the temple walls at Kar-
nak, both were sons of Amun.
Psamtik I (active about 664-10
B.C.) was determined to free Egypt from
foreign rule. Freedom would be a new
experience for his contemporaries be-
cause the Egyptian line of succession
had ended some 300 years earlier, when
first the Libyans and then the Nubians
laid claim to the throne of Egypt. In
665 B.C., the Assyrian king Ashurbani-
pal recognized Psamtik's father, an
Egyptian official named Necho, as king
of Sais (present-day Sa el Hagan) in
the Delta and named Psamtik king of
Athribis, another city in the Delta.
After the Nubians killed Necho in bat-
tle, Ashurbanipal recognized Psamtik as
the king of all Egypt—with the provi-
sion that Psamtik regard Assyria as an
overlord and incite no trouble against
the Assyrians. Psamtik agreed, but he
had no intention of serving Ashurbani-
pal and moved quickly to eliminate the
opposition. Helping him were great
numbers of mercenaries—foreign sol-
diers who hired themselves out to gen-
erals for pay. These included Nubians,
Libyans, Phoenicians, Syrians, and Jews.
The Egyptians rejoiced in their
new freedom, and Psamtik and his suc-
cessors, who are known as the Saite
kings because of their close association
with the city of Sais, accepted reliance
on foreigners as a fact. Some Egyptians,
however, disapproved of the increasing
numbers of "outsiders" settling in their
lands. Therefore, to avoid any con-
frontation, Psamtik ordered his advisers
and officials to establish special living
areas for foreigners. One such area, the
city of Naukratis (also spelled Nau-
cratis) in the Delta region, was set up
to accommodate Greeks. And in the
years to come, Psamtik would come to
be known more by the Greek form of
his name—Psammetichus—than by his
Egyptian name. Psamtik kept Sais as
his official residence, but he moved the
political capital of the Two Lands back
to Memphis. Thebes continued as the
center of religious celebrations. Trade
prospects increased, and there was a re-
turn to prosperity. In fact, it was under
Psamtik that Egypt began exporting
large amounts of grain. In the decades
to come, Egypt would become one of
the chief producers of grain in the
Mediterranean world. Psamtik ruled
for 54 years and was succeeded by his
son, Necho II, and then his grandson,
Psamtik II, both of whom followed
his policies and kept Egypt free and
prosperous.
Amasis (also known as Ahmose
II) (active 570-26 B.C.) was a general
under Psamtik II's son, Apries. Amasis
did not agree with his king's decision
to send an army of mercenaries to fight
the Libyans. After Apries suffered a
terrible defeat on the battlefield, the
Egyptians withdrew their support of
him and his mercenaries and rallied
around Amasis and his Egyptian troops.
In 570 B.C., the two men—ruler and
contender—met on the battlefield.
Amasis's win brought him to the throne
of Egypt.
Most Egyptians opposed extending
the privileges granted to foreigners, and
Amasis needed the mercenaries if
Egypt was to remain an international
power, so he stationed them at the bor-
der garrisons. To control the Greek
merchant colony at Naukratis, he made
the city a free trade zone and ruled that
Greek merchants were to confine their
business activities to Naukratis. Then,
to win the support of the Greeks, he
granted them special economic privi-
leges. He did not, however, neglect
Egyptian traditions and customs. He
maintained close ties with Thebes, the
chief religious center in Upper Egypt,
and centered political and economic
activity in the Delta region of Lower
Egypt, especially in Sais. Persia re-
mained an area of major concern for
Amasis, and just one year after Ama-
sis's death, the Persian king Cambyses
II defeated Amasis's son and successor
Egyptians often represented the goddess
Hathor as a cow and considered her the
pharaoh Psamtik's nourisher and protec-
tor; especially in the afterlife. Carved from
green schist (a type of rock), this sculpture
of Hathor protecting Psamtik is three feet
five inches long.
MORE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS TO REMEMBER 1 7 1


--- PAGE 173 ---
Isis (left) wears a headdress with the
figure of a vulture. Nectanebo II is wearing
the white crown of Upper Egypt with
the cobra-shaped uraeus. His fourth and
fifth royal names are carved in the two
oval cartouches.
Psamtik III on the battlefield and took
control of Egypt.
Udjahorresne (active about 525
B.C.) prepared to welcome the Persian
conquerors of the Two Lands. A cul-
tured and learned Egyptian, he believed
that peace and prosperity could be
maintained if the Egyptians worked
with the Persians and explained their
native ways to the conquering foreign'
ers. Before the Persian takeover in
525 B.C., Udjahorresne had served
King Amasis well, both as a naval
officer and as his chief physician. Udja-
horresne had also been attentive to his
duties as priest of Neith, who was the
wife of Khnum and one of Egypt's old-
est goddesses.
When Psamtik III succeeded his
father Amasis to the throne, Udjahor-
resne continued to hold the same offi-
cial positions. Not a year had passed,
however, before the Persian king Cam-
byses defeated Psamtik and took control
of Egypt. Because the Persians were not
showing proper respect to Neith's tem-
ple at Sais, Udjahorresne approached
Cambyses and persuaded him to expel
the foreigners living in the building.
Udjahorresne even convinced Camby-
ses to honor Neith and to reinstate the
priests previously assigned to the tem-
ple. Cambyses's son and successor, Dar-
ius I, also valued Udjahorresne's advice,
especially his medical expertise. On
Darius's orders, Udjahorresne began re-
organizing the medical school associat-
ed with the temple at Sais. Darius even
ordered Udjahorresne to accompany
him back to Susa, the capital of Persia,
and then provided Udjahorresne with a
personal escort for the return trip home.
Nekhtnebef (better known as
Nectanebo II) (active 360-42 B.C.)
followed his father's orders and named
himself king of Egypt. His grandfather
Djedhor (also known as Teos) held the
position officially but had left Egypt to
defeat the Persians on the battlefield
and then reconquer lands that his pre-
decessors had taken centuries earlier.
Few Egyptians approved the mission,
especially the hike in taxes to pay its ex-
penses. As king, Nectanebo promoted
security, unity, and a feeling of national-
ism. He commissioned several new con-
struction projects and ordered temples
restored. He also encouraged trade be-
tween Egypt and other foreign nations,
1 7 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 174 ---
An antelope plays a board game with a lion, whose expression suggests he is winning.This scene from an uncovered painted papyrus
dates to the late New Kingdom.
kept his Greek mercenaries paid and
prepared for action, and sought to devel-
op good relations with Persia's enemies.
When reports reached Nectanebo
that Persia's new king, Artaxerxes III,
was preparing to attack Egypt, he read-
ied his army and marched to Pelusium,
a strongly fortified garrison that stood
at the eastern end of the Delta. But the
Persian onslaught by land and by sea
was too much for the Egyptians, and
Pelusium fell. Artaxerxes then used
captured Egyptian farmers to guide his
troops through the Delta region. After
learning that the major cities in the
area had fallen to the advancing Per-
sians, Nectanebo accepted defeat and
fled south into Nubia. Once again,
Egypt had fallen to foreigners. In the
historical records, Nectanebo II would
be listed as the last native ruler of
Egypt in ancient times. Not until the
revolution of 1952—more than 2,200
years later—would an Egyptian again
rule the Two Lands.
Manetho (active about 280 B.C.)
was an Egyptian priest from Sebennytos
(present-day Samanud, in the central
Delta region) who compiled a chrono-
logical list of Egypt's kings and accom-
panied each with a brief biography.
Manetho could read the ancient Egypt-
ian hieroglyphs and knew Greek as
well. His work, the Aegyptiaca ("Histo-
ry of Egypt"), was written in Greek and
presented a chronicle of ancient Egypt-
ian history. In his research, Manetho
used religious records, temple inscrip-
tions, and royal records, as well as de-
tails from popular traditions and tales.
The first of Manetho's eight books
listed Egypt's mythical rulers and the
gods and demigods (half-human, half-
god) of the Two Lands. Manetho then
named Menes as the first historical
king and dated his reign to around
3050 B.C. He listed Nectanebo II,
whose rule ended in 342 B.C., as the
last Egyptian to rule the Two Lands in
ancient times. To make his list easier to
read and understand, Manetho subdi-
vided the kings into family groupings,
now called dynasties. Thus a dynasty
consists of a founder and the descen-
dants who follow him on the throne.
Manetho grouped the ancient rulers
into 30 dynasties. Later historians
added two more dynasties—the 31st,
which includes the Persian monarchs
who claimed the right to the Egyptian
throne, and the 32nd, which includes
the Macedonian monarchs (Alexander
the Great and the Ptolemies). Later
historians grouped the dynasties into
time periods—the Old Kingdom
(around 2686-2181 B.C.); the Middle
Kingdom (around 2040-1782 B.C.);
and the New Kingdom (around
1570-1070 B.C.), with the years be-
tween these main subdivisions known
as the First Intermediate Period (about
2181-2040 B.C.); the Second Interme-
diate Period (about 1782-1570 B.C.);
and the Third Intermediate Period
(about 1069-525 B.C.).
MORE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS TO REMEMBER 1 7 3


--- PAGE 175 ---
Appendix 1
An Egyptian Ruler's Five Names
An Egyptian ruler received official royal names at his or her
coronation ceremony. This custom began during the Old
Kingdom, and by the 12th Dynasty it reached the classic
form of five royal names. The five-names tradition contin-
ued for about 2,000 years.
The first name, or the "Horus," meant that the ruler
was the earthly representative of Horus, the sky god of
Upper Egypt, whose symbol was the falcon. The Horus was
written in a serekh panel, that is, within a picture of the
front of the royal palace. The figure of Horus was perched
at the top of the panel. The second name, or the "Nebti"
("Two Ladies" or "Favorite of the Two Goddesses"), repre-
sented a ruler's power over Upper and Lower Egypt. It also
indicated that Nekhbet, the vulture goddess and goddess of
Upper Egypt, and Wadjet, the cobra goddess and the god-
dess of Lower Egypt, watched over the ruler. The third
name, or the "Golden Horus," symbolized the ruler's divini-
ty. The fourth name was the "Prenomen," an official name
a ruler assumed at the coronation ceremony. Preceded by
the "Nisut-Bit," it represented the king's rule over the Two
Lands. The fifth name was the "Nomen." It was the ruler's
personal name—the one he had received at birth. By
tradition the title "Son of Re" preceded this name and
symbolized the fact that the ruler was also the son of the
Egyptian sun god.
All five names were rarely used together. The first,
fourth, and fifth were commonly used. During the reign of
the 4th-Dynasty ruler Snefru, kings and queens began to
wear rings inscribed with their fourth and fifth names. The
hieroglyphic forms of the Prenomen and Nomen were out-
lined with a rope design, the ends of which were looped over
each other. This elliptical figure is called a "cartouche."
Tutankhamun's Prenomen, or fourth royal name, engraved in
the cartouche of a gold signet ring (left) and imprinted in a
terracotta amulet mold.
Tutankhamun's Five Royal Names
Horus Nebti Golden Horus Prenomen Nomen
Ka-nakht
tut-mesut
Strong bull,
fitting from
created forms
Nefer-hepu
segeretawy
sehetenetjer
u nebu
Dynamic of laws,
who calms the
Two Lands, who
propitiates all the gods
Wetjes-khau
sehetep-netjeru
Who displays
the regalia,
who propitiates
the gods
Nisut-Bit:
Nebkheperure
King of Upper
and Lower Egypt;
the Lordly
Manifestation of Re
Sa-Re:
Tutankhamun
heqa- iunu-shema
Son of Re: Living
Image of Amun,
Ruler of Upper
Egyptian Heliopolis
1 7 4 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 176 ---
Appendix 2
Foreign Rulers of Ancient Egypt
The decline of the Egyptian Empire that began during Ramess-
es Ill's reign (about 1182-51 B.C.) accelerated under
his successors. When Ramesses XI, the last of Ramesses's line,
came to the throne, the very unity of Egypt was at stake. At
Thebes, the high priest of Amun, Herihor, had proclaimed
himself king of Upper Egypt and made his post hereditary. This
division of the Two Lands weakened Egypt's international posi-
tion, and its neighbors began to extend their power into Egypt-
ian territory. In this section, we present brief biographies of
several foreign rulers who claimed the Egyptian throne.
Shoshenq I (ruled 945-24 B.C.)
Since the reign of Ramesses III, Egyptian kings and generals
had become increasingly dependent on mercenaries. Many of
these soldiers were Libyans who had settled in the Delta
region. Through the years, several of their communities had
prospered, including Pi-Bast (House of Bast, or Bubastis as the
Greeks called it), the center for worship of the great cat god-
dess Bast. In 945 B.C., Bubastis's leading citizen was Shoshenq,
a Libyan by birth, commander-in-chief of Egypt's armed
forces, and adviser to Psusennes II, king of Lower Egypt.
Shoshenq was also married to Psusennes's daughter, Maatkare.
When Psusennes died with no son to inherit the throne,
Shoshenq claimed the title.
Over the years, Lower Egypt had gradually surpassed
Upper Egypt as the political and economic center of the Two
Lands. Thebes had continued as the country's religious center,
and Tanis, a northern city in the Delta, replaced Pi-Ramesses
(city founded by Ramesses II) as the capital. Shoshenq kept
the capital at Tanis; he made no plans to build a new capital
closer to Upper Egypt. In the Syria-Palestine area, he reestab-
lished trading ties with Byblos and marched against Judah,
Jerusalem, and Israel. His northward drive ended at Megiddo,
where he ordered a stele set up to honor his victories—just as
Thutmose III had done 500 years earlier. Shoshenq was the
first Libyan to rule Egypt, and his descendants would continue
to rule the country for nearly 200 years. According to
Manetho's king list, they were the kings of the 22nd, the
23rd, and the 24th Dynasties.
Piye (ruled 747-16 B.C.)
In the mid-700s B.C., Piye, also known as Piankhy, married the
daughter of Alara, the ruling king of Napata, a city near the
Fourth Cataract. When Alara died, Piye ascended to the throne
of Kush and continued the northward advance his predecessors
had begun. Piye battled the Egyptians for 10 years. A coalition
of four kings ruled the Two Lands, making his struggle more dif-
ficult. These kings were descendants of Libyan rulers, and each
claimed control of part of Lower Egypt. According to an inscrip-
tion uncovered at Wadi Gasus, Piye had himself crowned king
of the Two Lands at Thebes in Year 12 of his reign. Piye saw
himself and the Nubians as the rightful preservers of Egypt's cus-
toms and religious practices, and assumed the coronation names
used by the rulers of the New Kingdom. He adapted many
Egyptian customs, including building a tomb pyramid. His was
smaller and narrower than the traditional Egyptian pyramid, and
its sides sloped to a peak that rose at a steeper angle. Eight of
Piye's favorite horses were buried near his tomb.
Taharqa (ruled 690-64 B.C.)
According to the Egyptian historian Manetho, Piye's brother
Shabaka succeeded him as the second ruler of the 25th
Dynasty, also known as the Nubian or Kushite Dynasty. Piye's
sons Shebitku and Taharqa succeeded their uncle. Taharqa
came to the throne in 690 B.C. The first years of Taharqa's
26-year rule were relatively peaceful, and he devoted much
of this time to grand building projects in Nubia and Egypt.
Meanwhile, the Assyrian king Esarhaddon was pushing the
frontier of his own empire farther south. Around 674 B.C. he
faced Taharqa on the battlefield at Ashkelon, a city on the
border of Egypt and Palestine. Esarhaddon lost, but in 671
B.C. he attacked again. This time, the Egyptians were unable
to stop him, and he boldly advanced into Egypt. There his
troops took control, seized the city of Memphis, and took the
heir to the throne and members of the royal family as prison-
ers. Taharqa escaped to Thebes, reclaiming Memphis only
after Esarhaddon returned to Assyria. When Esarhaddon died,
his son, Ashurbanipal, advanced against Egypt and retook
APPENDIX 2 1 7 5


--- PAGE 177 ---
Memphis. He allowed Necho to continue ruling as king of
Sais and named Necho's son, Psamtik, to the throne of
Athribis, another city in the Delta. Taharqa, meanwhile,
retreated to Napata. He had lost control of the Two Lands,
but he still ruled Nubia.
Cambyses II (ruled 525-22 B.C.)
Psamtik I's descendant and the last king of the 26th Dynasty,
Psamtik III came to the Egyptian throne in 526 B.C. The fol-
lowing year, King Cambyses of Persia gave the order to attack
Egypt. Cambyses's father, Cyrus, had begun the campaign four
years earlier, but it was suspended when he unexpectedly died.
Cambyses first took control of Phoenicia, a land that bordered
the eastern Mediterranean and was known for its sailors. With
the Phoenician fleet to supplement his land troops, Cambyses
planned to attack Egypt by land and by sea. Psamtik III, mean-
while, led his troops east to Pelusium, a gateway city to Egypt.
When the Persian army easily overwhelmed the Egyptians,
Psamtik retreated to Memphis. Cambyses followed and took
Memphis. Cambyses ordered Psamtik bound in chains and
sent to Susa, the Persian capital. Surviving texts indicate that
Cambyses liked Egypt and ordered temples and other structures
built or restored. He adopted many Egyptian customs, encour-
aged the interchange of ideas between Egypt and Persia, and
sent many Egyptian artisans and officials to work in Persia.
His attempts to extend Persian control into Nubia met with
defeat. When reports of unrest in Persia and Syria reached
Cambyses, he named Aryandes governor of Egypt and
returned home.
Darius I (ruled 522-486 B.C.)
Cambyses's son Darius commissioned several construction pro-
jects during his 3 5-year rule. Egypt was the richest of Persia's
provinces. Darius reopened the great stone quarries at Wadi
Hammamat in Upper Egypt and ordered the completion of a
canal joining the Nile River with the Red Sea. This new sea
route shortened travel time between Egypt and Persia and
allowed messengers to keep Darius better informed about
political developments in the province. When reports of
Aryandes's cruel treatment of the Egyptians proved true, Dar-
ius quickly withdrew his support of this satrap (governor).
Darius requested a list of the wisest Egyptian soldiers and
priests, and assigned these people to compile and codify the
laws of Egypt. Later generations of Egyptians would consider
Darius one of their great lawgivers.
A renewed prosperity spread across the Two Lands while
Darius sat on the Persian throne. After the Greeks defeated
the Persians in 490 B.C., Darius focused all his efforts on his
war with Greece. Four years later, the Egyptians revolted
against their Persian overlords, but Darius's death that same
year prevented any immediate action from being taken.
Darius's son, Xerxes I, quelled the revolt.
Alexander the Great (ruled 332-23 B.C.)
In 332 B.C., Alexander set off to conquer Egypt. The Persian
satrap surrendered the country without a fight. In recent years,
Persian domination had become increasingly harsh, with the
satraps showing little respect for Egyptian traditions and cus-
toms. For this reason, the Egyptians hailed Alexander as their
liberator. Alexander named Kleomenes from the Greek colony
of Naukratis to the post of satrap and appointed six governors.
Two were Macedonians and were put in charge of military
affairs. The other four—two Greeks and two Egyptians—were
to rule in civil matters. Alexander also initiated a building
program that included a new capital city to be named Alexan-
dria. Alexander did not live to see it, but within decades of his
death, Alexandria became one of the principal scientific and
cultural centers in the ancient world.
Alexander visited Amun's temple in the Siwa Oasis to
present his divine father with a petition. No records tell of
Amun's reply, but tradition maintains that Alexander told his
companions he had heard what he wanted to hear.
His hold on power threatened by Darius III, Alexander
left Egypt just six months after taking control of the country.
He was the first Macedonian to rule Egypt, and Macedonians
would rule the Two Lands for nearly 300 years.
Ptolemy I (ruled 323-282 B.C.)
Alexander died unexpectedly in 323 B.C. without an heir.
Two kings were named—Alexander's feeble-minded half-
brother and Alexander's newborn son—but as neither one was
capable of ruling the empire, Alexander's generals divided the
regions among themselves. Ptolemy chose Egypt, Libya, and
Arabia (the Sinai Peninsula). To strengthen his claim to the
region, Ptolemy kidnapped the coffin carrying Alexander's
body from Babylon back to Macedonia and brought it to
Egypt. He claimed that Alexander had intended to be buried
in Alexandria. In 305 B.C., Ptolemy proclaimed himself
King Ptolemy I Soter (Savior) of Egypt. The founder of the
Ptolemaic Dynasty, Ptolemy would be the first of 13 rulers
with the same name to rule Egypt.
Ptolemy initiated a great building program, returned
traditional responsibilities to temple priests and nobles, passed
laws to protect Egypt's maritime rights, established the first
coinage system, and had workers construct a gigantic light-
house on the island of Pharos at the entrance to the port of
Alexandria. This lighthouse, known as the Pharos of Alexan-
dria, became known as one of the seven wonders of the
ancient world.
1 7 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 178 ---
Ptolemy never adopted Egyptian customs or dress. Nor did
he learn the language. He welcomed Greek settlers in Egypt,
and encouraged the exchange of ideas between Greeks and
Egyptians. He commissioned the building of a gigantic library
at Alexandria, as well as a museum with rooms and lecture
halls where scholars from around the Mediterranean world
could discuss their findings and consider new ideas. In 285
B.C., Ptolemy named his son as co-regent. Three years later,
Ptolemy II Philadelphos succeeded his father.
Ptolemy II Philadelphos (ruled 285-47/46 B.C.)
During Ptolemy IPs reign, Egypt's Greek population continued
to increase. Ptolemy II weakened the influence of Egyptian
nobles and the upper class by naming Greeks to high adminis-
trative positions. Ptolemy extended his rule into Syria, Asia
Minor, and parts of the Aegean, and used political marriages to
align himself with neighboring rulers. He followed a custom
long practiced by Egyptian kings and married his sister, Arsi-
noe; each assumed the Greek name Philadelphos, meaning
"brother-loving." Ptolemy's marriage shocked the Greeks living
in Egypt. So did his fostering of religious practices that hon-
ored himself, Arsinoe, and his parents as "brother gods."
Ptolemy commissioned new irrigation projects to increase
the amount of arable land, especially in the Faiyum district. To
encourage trade, Ptolemy ordered his engineers to reopen the
canal connecting the Nile River with the Red Sea. He estab-
lished Greek farming communities in the Faiyum and exported
much of their harvest to peoples around the Mediterranean
world. Ptolemy also oversaw the completion in Alexandria of
his father's unfinished commissions: the gigantic lighthouse at
the harbor's entrance and the great library and museum.
Arsinoe II (ruled 275 B.C.)
Ptolemy I's daughter Arsinoe was first married to Lysimachos,
bodyguard to Alexander the Great. After Alexander's death,
Lysimachos was given control of Thrace and the lands border-
ing the northern Aegean Sea. Next, he extended his control
into Asia Minor, Macedonia, and Thessaly. When Lysimachos
died in 281 B.C., Arsinoe took control of the lands and riches
he had amassed. She married her half-brother Ptolemy Cer-
aunus, but they soon divorced. Arsinoe convinced her brother
Ptolemy II that his chief wife was conspiring to kill him. Ptole-
my ordered this wife arrested and exiled from Egypt. Soon
afterward, Ptolemy married Arsinoe. When she added her
lands to Ptolemy's, Egypt once again became one of the richest
and most powerful kingdoms in the world.
Arsinoe II was the first Egyptian to officially invite
envoys from Rome to visit Alexandria and the royal court.
Military veterans so appreciated her practice of granting
retiring soldiers lands in the Faiyum district that they named
the fertile lands there Arsinoite nome, or "Arsinoe's district."
After Arsinoe's death, a cult was established in her honor at
Alexandria, and a magnificent shrine, the Arsinoeion, was
dedicated to her.
Cleopatra VII (ruled 51-30 B.C.)
Ptolemy XII's death in 51 B.C. brought 17-year-old Cleopatra,
his daughter and heir, to the throne as Cleopatra VII. Egyptian
control of its territories had begun to deteriorate with the
reign of Ptolemy IV. Egypt had lost all of its former territories
except Cyrene, on the coast of North Africa, and the island of
Cyprus. In the meantime another Mediterranean power was
gaining strength—Rome.
Following the wishes of her deceased father, Cleopatra
married her brother, 15-year-old Ptolemy XIII. When Cleopa-
tra learned that Ptolemy XIII's sympathizers were plotting to
kill her, she fled to Syria. Rome's leader, Julius Caesar, support-
ed Cleopatra, and in the battle that followed, Ptolemy XIII
drowned while trying to escape. Cleopatra married her younger
brother, Ptolemy XIV, and the two became king and queen of
Egypt. She took her leadership role seriously. She learned the
Egyptian language, the first Ptolemy to do so; and she joined
with the Egyptians in worshiping their gods. She also aligned
herself with Julius Caesar. Caesar's assassination in Rome in 44
B.C. was followed by a power struggle between Caesar's nephew
Octavius (later Augustus) and Caesar's friend Antony. Cleopa-
tra won Antony's affections and the support of his trained
legions. Furthermore, Antony was willing to consider Egypt,
not Rome, the center of the empire. On September 2, 31 B.C.,
Antony and Cleopatra lost a sea battle to Octavius at Actium,
just off the western coast of Greece. He followed Cleopatra
and Antony to Egypt. Determined to remain queen of Egypt,
but unable to win Octavius to her side, Cleopatra took her
own life (in 30 B.C.), and with it Egypt's independence.
Octavius
On August 31, 30 B.C., Octavius officially took control of
Egypt and named himself king of the Two Lands. He had no
plans for a royal court or capital city there. For Octavius,
Egypt was only one area in a vast empire. However, because
it produced a tremendous amount of grain, Egypt was essen-
tial to Rome. It would become known as the breadbasket of
the Roman Empire. In order to keep Egypt free from political
disturbances, Octavius treated the Two Lands as his personal
property. By decree, he forbade Roman senators and mem-
bers of his family from visiting the country without his for-
mal permission.
APPENDIX 2 1 7 7


--- PAGE 179 ---
Appendix 3
Timeline of
Events in the
Egyptian World
The number in parentheses after a
kings name indicates his order as dynastic
ruler (for example, Pepi 1 was the second
ruler of the 6th Dynasty). All dates are
B.C. and are approximate.
3050
Menes (1) unites Two Lands
2686-2181
Old Kingdom
2686-13
3rd Dynasty
2668-49
Djoser (2) rules Egypt
2660
Imhotep designs Step Pyramid
2613-2500
4th Dynasty
2613-2589
Snefru (1) rules Egypt
2600
Hetep-heres is queen of Egypt
2589-66
Khufu (2) rules Egypt
2570
Hemiumu designs Khufu's pyramid tomb
2558-32
Khafre (4) rules Egypt
2532-04
Menkaure (5) rules Egypt
2500-2345
5th Dynasty
2400
Ptahhotep writes his Maxims
2345-2181
6th Dynasty
2332-2283
Pepi I (2) rules Egypt
2300
Weni oversees digging of canals to bypass
First Cataract on Nile
2278-2184
Pepi II (4) rules Egypt
2275
Harkhuf leads caravan expeditions into
Nubia
2220
Pepinakht leads several military campaigns
2181-2040
1st Intermediate Period
2060-1991
llth Dynasty
2060-10
Nebhepetre Mentuhotep 1(1) rules Egypt
2040-1782
Middle Kingdom
2030
Meketre oversees making of ushebti for his
tomb
2030
Heqanakht is farmer and landowner
1991-1782
12th Dynasty
1991-62
Amenemhet 1(1) rules Egypt
1 7 8 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 180 ---
1971-28
Senwosret I (2) rules Egypt
1878-41
Senwosret III (5) rules Egypt
1842-1797
Amenemhet.III (6) rules Egypt
1782-1570
2nd Intermediate Period
1663-1570
Seqenenre Tao II (2) rules Egypt
1570-1070
New Kingdom
1570-1293
18th Dynasty
1570-46
Ahmose 1(1) rules Egypt
1560
Ahmose Nefertari is queen of Egypt
1535
Ahmose, son of Ebana, captains vessel
against Hyksos
1524-18
Thutmose I (3) rules Egypt
1504-1450
Thutmose III (5) rules Egypt
1498-83
Hatshepsut (6) rules Egypt as king
1490
Senenmut designs Hatshepsut's mortuary
temple at Deir el Bahri
1460
Rekhmire records vizier's duties on his
tomb walls
1386-49
Amenhotep III (9) rules Egypt
1370
Tiye (2) is queen of Egypt
Amenhotep, son of Hapu, designs Amen-
hotep Ill's mortuary temple and "Colossi of
Memnon"
1350-34
Akhenaten (Amenhotep IV) (10) rules
Egypt
1345
Nefertiti is queen of Egypt
1334-25
Tutankhamun (12) rules Egypt
1321-1293
Horemheb (14) rules Egypt
1293-1185
19th Dynasty
1291-78
Seti I (2) rules Egypt
1279-12
Ramesses II (3) rules Egypt
1270
Nefertari is queen of Egypt
1210
Pa-wer-a'a becomes involved in tomb rob-
bery scandal
1185-1070
20th Dynasty
i182-51
Ramesses III (2) rules Egypt
1080-72
Herihor (8) rules Egypt
1069-525
3rd Intermediate Period
664-525
26th Dynasty
664-10
Psamtik 1(1) rules Egypt
570-26
Amasis (Ahmose II) (5) rules Egypt
525-332
Late Period
525-404
27th Dynasty (1st Persian Period)
525
Udjahorresne persuades Cambyses to honor
Egyptian customs and traditions
380-342
30th Dynasty
360-92
Nectanebo II (3) is last Egyptian to rule
ancient Egypt
332-30
Ptolemaic Period
280
Manetho divides king list into dynasties
APPEND I     1 7
17th Dynasty
1574


--- PAGE 181 ---
Glossary
adze—a cutting tool whose blade is at
a right angle to its handle. Used in the
"Opening of the Mouth" ceremony.
afterlife books—passages from reli-
gious texts that the ancient Egyptians
inscribed on tomb walls and coffins to
help ensure the deceased person's safe
and easy passage from this world to
the next. The books included the
Amdwt (also called "That Which Is in
the Underworld" and "The Book of
the Secret Chamber"), Litany of Re,
Book of Gates, Book of the Dead (also
called "The Book of Coming Forth by
Day"), Book of Caverns, Book of the
Heavens, and Book of the Earth.
ankh—an Egyptian cross with looped
top; symbol of life. T
ba—often described as the "essence,"
or "soul," of a person. The ba was rep-
resented as a bird with a human head.
It left the body at death and returned
after the deceased had been mummi-
fied. The ba could visit the world of
the living.
barque—a boat. In religious cere-
monies, barques of all sizes carried cult
statues of the gods. The boat symbol-
ized the importance of the Nile River
to Egyptian life. According to religious
beliefs, sacred barques transported the
dead from this world to the next.
canopic jar—one of four jars, usually
buried with the mummy, in which a
deceased person's liver, lungs,
intestines, or stomach was preserved.
Up to the 18th Dynasty, the stopper
was in the shape of a human head.
Afterward, the stopper represented
one of Horus's four sons, a different
one for each organ.
cartonnage—linen and plaster molded
to form masks and coffins for mummies.
These funerary items were formed by
applying gesso (powdered chalk and
glue) to sheets of linen cloth. The car-
tonnage was then painted and gilded.
cartouche—an oblong frame enclosing
a ruler's birth name and throne name.
The oblong is formed by a looped rope.
cataract—steep rapids in a river. There
are six cataracts along the Nile
between present-day Aswan, Egypt and
Khartoum, Sudan. The First Cataract
marked the original southern boundary
of ancient Egypt, simply because its
treacherous waters and rocks made
boat travel beyond that point impossi-
ble. By building canals to bypass the
cataracts, as well as taking control of
the surrounding land, Egypt's kings
were able to extend the country's
southern boundary.
Coffin Texts—inscriptions on coffins
meant to help deceased nonroyals pass
from this life to the next.
cuneiform—wedge-shaped writing
used by the Akkadians, Babylonians,
Assyrians, and Persians.
demotic script—a form of writing dat-
ing from the end of the seventh centu-
ry B.C. Easier to read and write than
hieroglyphs, demotic script was used
for everyday legal and administrative
documents and for correspondence.
festival of Opet—annual Theban festi-
val celebrated during the season of the
Nile's overflowing its banks. At the
high point of this festival, the king
entered the temple, accompanied by
priests, then proceeded alone into the
chambers at the rear of the temple to
reaffirm his divine link to the great
god Amun, his "father."
Great Royal Wife—the principal wife
of an Egyptian ruler. Although a ruler
could have many wives, he had only
one Great Royal Wife, or Chief Wife,
at a time. A king's heir was usually his
eldest son by his Great Royal Wife. In
the Old Kingdom and Middle King-
dom, a king also married his sister. If a
king had no sons by his Great Royal
Wife, a son by a minor wife sometimes
became king. This son then married a
daughter of the Great Royal Wife—his
half-sister—to provide legitimacy to
the succession.
Heb-Sed festival—a celebration that
sometimes lasted for two or more
months to mark a king's "rebirth," or
"recrowning." Also known as "Sed"
and "jubilee." The practice began early
in Egypt's royal history and continued
for thousands of years. A king tradi-
tionally celebrated his first Heb-Sed in
the 30th year of this reign, and others
at shorter intervals thereafter. (Not all
kings observed the waiting period of 30
years; several celebrated their first
jubilee earlier in their reigns.) Because
the celebrations were believed to con-
tinue in the next life, royal tomb com-
plexes included Heb-Sed courts.
hieratic script—a form of writing
derived from hieroglyphs, but simpler.
Hieratic was used until the end of the
New Kingdom, chiefly by priests and
scribes for legal and business docu-
ments, but also for correspondence.
hieroglyphs—a pictorial script used
principally for religious and literary
texts, from the Greek word meaning
"sacred writings." Hieroglyphs consist
of sound values as well as picture signs
that have no sound value.
jubilee—see Heb-Sed festival
1 80 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 182 ---
ka—the everlasting life force of a per-
son, or "another self." After the body
died, a person's tomb was the ka's
home. The ka subsisted on offerings
brought to the tomb. The ka returned
periodically to its other self (the
mummy) or to a statue of the deceased
body in the tomb. The hieroglyphic
sign for ka is a human body with two
upraised arms.
king lists—chronological lists of
Egyptian rulers inscribed on temple
walls, used in rituals honoring royal
ancestors. A king did not always list
every ruler who had preceded him; he
often omitted those he considered ille-
gitimate.
mastaba—a rectangular, mud-brick
tomb resembling a bench (from the
Arabic word for "bench"). The size
and decoration of the below-ground
burial chamber depended on the
owner's circumstances and status in
the community. A false door painted
on one wall allowed the deceased's
ka to pass between the tomb and
the afterlife.
mummy—the preserved body of a
dead person. To make a mummy,
embalmers removed the deceased's
internal organs. The rest of the body
was dried until no moisture remained,
then wrapped in layers of bandages
between which religious symbols and
amulets were placed.
obelisk—tall, four-sided stone pillar
that tapers to a pyramid-shaped top.
Kings often commissioned pairs of
obelisks for religious centers through-
out the Two Lands.
Opening of the Mouth ceremony—a
ritual to bring the senses of a mummi-
fied body to life for eternity by touch-
ing its mouth, eyes, ears, and nose with
an adze. When a king died, his son and
heir performed the ceremony.
papyrus—a plant commonly found in
the Nile Valley, and from which paper
was made. To make paper, Egyptians
first cut the stems of papyrus plants
into thin strips. They layered strips,
resin, and a second layer of strips per-
pendicular to the first, then pressed the
layers together to form a fine paper.
The Egyptians also used papyrus to
make rope, sandals, skiffs, and baskets.
The English word "paper" comes from
"papyrus."
pharaoh—title of a king or ruler. The
Egyptian phrase Per wer, referred origi-
nally to the royal palace, or "great
house." Around the start of the New
Kingdom (18th Dynasty), it also came
to mean the "great person" who lived
there.
pylon—a monumental stone entrance
made by two trapezoidal towers flank-
ing a temple's doorway. Artisans carved
reliefs and flagpole holders into pylons.
pyramid—a stone structure having
four triangular-shaped sides that slope
upward until they meet at a point.
Egyptian kings of the Old and Middle
Kingdoms constructed huge pyramids
as their tombs.
Pyramid Texts—a collection of sacred
writings meant to help a deceased king
pass easily from this life to the next.
The Pyramid Texts are the earliest
known religious texts in Egypt. They
are carved into pyramid walls of the
Old Kingdom, a time when only the
king was believed to be immortal.
ruler of the Nine Bows—the ruler of
the nations (represented by nine bows)
subdued by Egypt.
scarab—dung beetle considered sacred
by ancient Egyptians. The scarab push-
es a ball of dung into a hole and enters
it to lay eggs in the dung, which will
feed the larvae; in time, new beetles
emerge from the hole. Thus the beetle
was a symbol of life to the Egyptians.
They imagined a great beetle rolling
the sun across the sky. Scarabs were
carved onto the flat side of stones,
gems, gold, and faience. Cartouches
were often inscribed on them. The
"heart scarab" had a passage from the
Book of the Dead inscribed on it and
was placed between the mummified
body and the bandaging to ensure life
in the next world.
Sed—see Heb-Sed festival
serdab—a small, sealed chamber in an
ancient tomb containing a statue of
the deceased; Arabic for "cellar." One
wall had a small opening in front of
the statue's eyes so that it could see the
offerings left and rituals performed in
the adjoining offering hall.
stele (plural stelae)—a rectangular
stone slab used for commemorative
purposes. The upper part was usually a
semicircle, and stelae were often
inscribed with accounts of such accom-
plishments as treaties and victories on
the battlefield. Nonroyal stelae are
often found in private funerary
chapels. These, too, were inscribed
with praiseworthy information about
the deceased, in order to ease his pas-
sage from this world to the next.
Two Lands—the lands that flank the
Nile River north of the cataracts. In
ancient times, this area was divided
into two political entities—Upper
Egypt and Lower Egypt.
ushebti—mummiform figures found in
Middle Kingdom tombs of wealthy
Egyptians; supposed to work on behalf
of deceased in fields of Osiris. Original-
ly made of wood, later of stone or
ceramic.
vizier—an executive officer of the
nation, ranked second to the king in
power and prestige in the Two Lands.
His duties were administrative as well
as legislative and economic.
GLOSSARY 1 8 1


--- PAGE 183 ---
Further Reading and Websites
The books in this list vary in level of difficulty, but none is
too technical for the interested reader. Titles preceded by
an asterisk (*) are recommended for younger readers.
BOOKS
Archaeology
Arnold, Dorothea. When the Pyramids Were Built: Egyptian
Art of the Old Kingdom. New York: Rizzoli International,
1999.
* Avi-Yonah, Michael. Dig This! How Archaeologists Uncover
Our Past. Minneapolis: Runestone, 1993.
*Caselli, Giovanni. In Search of Tutankhamun: The Discovery
of a King's Tomb. New York: Peter Bedrick, 1999.
David, Rosalie. Discovering Ancient Egypt. New York: Facts
on File, 1993.
*Donoughue, Carol. The Mystery of the Hieroglyphs. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Ford, Barbara. Howard Carter: Searching for King Tut. New
York: Freeman, 1995.
*Giblin, James Cross. The Riddle of the Rosetta Stone: Key to
Ancient Egypt. New York: HarperCollins, 1990.
Hobson, Christine. Exploring the World of the Pharaohs. Lon-
don: Thames & Hudson, 1987.
* Ikram, Salima. Egyptology. Washington, D.C.: Amideast,
1997.
Lehner, Mark. The Complete Pyramids. New York: Thames
& Hudson, 1997.
* Moloney, Norah. The Young Oxford Book of Archaeology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Murnane, William J. The Penguin Guide to Ancient Egypt.
New York: Penguin, 1996.
* Reeves, C. N. Into the Mummy's Tomb. New York: Scholas-
tic/Madison Press, 1992.
Reeves, C.N., and Richard H. Wilkinson. The Complete Val-
ley of the Kings. London: Thames & Hudson, 1996.
Siliotti, Alberto. Guide to the Valley of the Kings. London:
Wiedenfeld & Nicolson, 1996,
Vercoutter, Jean. The Search for Ancient Egypt. New York:
Abrams, 1992.
Weeks, Kent R. "Valley of the Kings." National Geographic
Magazine (Sept. 1998): 2-33.
Arts and Sciences
*Howarth, Sarah. The Pyramid Builders. Philadelphia: Run-
ning Press, 1993.
Jean, Georges. Writing: The Story of Alphabets and Scripts.
New York: Abrams, 1992.
*Macaulay, David. Pyramid. New York: Houghton Mifflin,
1975.
*Millard, Anne. Pyramids. New York: Kingfisher, 1996.
Morley, Jacqueline, Mark Bergin, and John James. An Egypt-
ian Pyramid. New York: Peter Bedrick, 1991.
* O'Neal, Michael. Pyramids. San Diego, Calif.: Greenhaven,
1995.
*Perl, Lila. Mummies, Tombs, and Treasure: Secrets of Ancient
Egypt. New York: Clarion, 1987.
Taylor, John H. Unwrapping a Mummy. Austin: University
of Texas Press, 1995.
* Woods, Geraldine. Science in Ancient Eg^pt. New York:
Franklin Watts, 1988.
Daily Life
*Caselli, Giovanni. An Egyptian Craftsman. New York: Peter
Bedrick, 1991.
* David, Rosalie. Growing Up in Ancient Eg^pt. New York:
Troll, 1994.
.Handbook to Life in Ancient Egypt. New York: Facts
on File, 1998.
David, Rosalie, and Rich Archbold. Conversations with
Mummies. New York: William Morrow, 2000.
* Grant, Neil. The Egyptians. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1993.
* Ikram, Salima. Land and People. Washington, D.C.:
Amideast, 1997.
1 8 2 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 184 ---
* Kondeatis, Christos, and Sara Maitland. The Ancient Egypt
Pack. Boston: Bulfinch, 1996.
Lesko, Leonard H., ed. Pharaoh's Workers: The Villagers of
Deir el Medina. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1994-
*Morley, Jacqueline. First Facts About the Ancient Egyptians.
New York: Peter Bedrick, 1996.
Romer, John. Ancient Lives: Daily Life in Egypt of the
Pharaohs. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1984.
. People of the Nile: Everyday Life in Ancient Egypt.
New York: Crown, 1982.
Steedman, Scott, and David Antram. Egyptian Town. New
York: Franklin Watts, 1998.
* Watson, Philip J. Costume of Ancient Egypt. New York:
Chelsea House, 1987.
White, Jon Manchip. Everyday Life in Ancient Egypt. New
York: Peter Bedrick, 1963.
History
Aldred, Cyril. Egypt to the End of the Old Kingdom. New
York: Thames and Husdon, 1982.
Baines, John, and Jaromir Malek. Atlas of Ancient Egypt.
New York: Facts on File, 1980.
Bunson, Margaret. The Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. New
York: Facts on File, 1991.
Corteggiani, Jean-Pierre. The Egypt of the Pharaohs at the
Cairo Museum. London: Scala, 1986.
* David, A. Rosalie. The Egyptian Kingdoms. New York: Peter
Bedrick, 1988.
* Freeman, Charles. The Legacy of Ancient Egypt. New York:
Facts on File, 1997.
* Harris, Geraldine. Cultural Atlas for Young People: Ancient
Egypt. New York: Facts on File, 1990.
Harris, Nathaniel. The Earliest Explorers. Volume I of The
Grolier Student Library of Explorers and Exploration. Danbury,
Conn.: Grolier Educational, 1998.
* James, T. G. H. A Short History of Ancient Egypt. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1995.
Kitchen, K. A. Pharaoh Triumphant: The Life and Times of
Ramesses II. England: Aris & Phillips, 1982.
* Koenig, Viviane, and Veronique Ageorges. The Ancient
Egyptians: Life in the Nile Valley. Brookfield, Conn.: Mill-
brook Press, 1992.
Newby, P. H. Warrior Pharaohs. Boston: Faber and Faber,
1980.
*Odijk, Pamela. The Egyptians. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Silver
Burdett, 1989.
Shaw, Ian, ed. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Silverman, David P., ed. Ancient Egypt. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1997.
* Smith, Brenda. Egypt of the Pharaohs. San Diego, Calif.:
Lucent, 1996.
* Stedman, Scott. Ancient Egypt. New York: Dorling Kinders-
ley, 1995.
Literature
Breasted, James Henry. Ancient Records of Egypt. 4 volumes.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1906.
Lichtheim, Miriam. Ancient Egyptian Literature: A Book of
Readings, vols. 1-3. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1973-80.
Mythology
* Brier, Bob. The Encyclopedia of Mummies. New York: Facts
on File, 1998.
*Cashford, Jules. The Myth oflsis and Osiris. Boston: Barefoot
Books, 1993.
Dunand, Francoise. Mummies: A Voyage Through Eternity.
New York: Abrams, 1994.
* Harris, Geraldine. Gods & Pharaohs from Egyptian Mytholo-
gy. New York: Peter Bedrick, 1981.
Ions, Veronica. Egyptian Mythology. New York: Peter
Bedrick, 1982.
Lesko, Barbara S. The Great Goddesses of Egypt. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 1999.
*Trumble, Kelly. Cat Mummies. New York: Clarion, 1996.
* Wilcox, Charlotte. Mummies and Their Mysteries. Min-
neapolis: Carolrhoda Books, 1992.
Rulers
Clayton, Peter A. Chronicle of the Pharaohs: The Reign-by -
Reign Record of the Rulers and Dynasties of Ancient Egypt.
London: Thames & Hudson, 1994.
FURTHER READING AND WEBSITES 1 8 .3


--- PAGE 185 ---
Dodson, Aidan. Monarc/is of the Nile. London: Rubicon,
1995.
Hornung, Erick. History of Ancient Egypt. Trans. David Lor-
ton. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1999.
*Ikram, Salima. The Pharaohs. Washington, D.C.: Amideast,
1997.
Women
Hawass, Zahi. Silent Images: Women in Pharaonic Egypt. New
York: Abrams, 2000.
Lesko, Barbara S. The Remarkable. Women of Ancient Egypt.
Providence, R.I.: Scribe, 1996.
McDonald, Fiona. Women in Ancient Egypt. New York: Peter
Bedrick, 1999.
Watterson, Barbara. Women in Ancient Egypt. New York: St.
Martin's, 1991.
M AGAZI N ES
KMT, a Modem Journal of Ancient Egypt. Published quarterly
by KMT Communications, Dept. G, P.O. Box 1475,
Sebastopol, CA 95973-1475. Online at http://www.egypt.ol-
ogy.com/kmt/
* "Ancient Nubia." CALLIOPE (Nov./Dec. 1996):
entire issue.
* "Pharaohs of Egypt." CALLIOPE (Sept./Oct. 1994):
entire issue.
* "Queens of Egypt." CALLIOPE (Nov./Dec. 1991):
entire issue.
* "Science and Medicine in Ancient Egypt." CALLIOPE
(Sept./Oct. 1997): entire issue.
* "Tomb Builders." CALLIOPE (Sept. 2000): entire issue.
WEBSITES
Ancient Egypt
http://personalwebs.myriad.net/steveb/egypt.html
Links to dozens of websites, including The British Muse-
um-Department of Egyptian Antiquities; The Egyptian
Museum, Cairo; Australian Centre for Egyptology; "Egypt:
Gift of the Nile"—Seattle Art Museum; Egyptology
Resources from Cambridge University; and the Egyptian
Gallery at the University of Pennsylvania Museum of
Archaeology and Anthropology
Ancient Egypt
http://www.sis.gov.eg/ancient/front.htm
Ancient Egypt section of Egypt State Information Service's
website
Explores ancient Egypt through the daily activities of its
people. Themes include life of ancient Egyptians, pyramids
and the Sphinx, and Egyptian Treasures
The Ancient Egyptian Culture Exhibit
http://emuseum.mankato.msus.edu/prehistory/egypt
Electronic Museum run by Minnesota State
University-Mankato. Themes include daily life, art, the
military, architecture, hieroglyphs, religion, maps, history,
archaeology, and bibliography
Explore Ancient Egypt
http://www.mfa.org/egyp t/explore_ancient_egypt/index.html
Online gallery of the Egyptian Collection at the Museum of
Fine Arts, Boston
Life in Ancient Egypt
www.clpgh.org/cmnh/exhibits/egypt/index.html
An introduction to the Walton Hall of Ancient Egypt at
the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. Themes include the natural world, daily life,
gods and religion, and funerary customs
Pyramids: The Inside Story
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/pyramid/
Maps, diagrams, and virtual tours of several pyramids
Tour Egypt
www.touregypt.net/index.htm
Official website of Egypt's Ministry of Tourism and the
Egyptian Tourist Authority
1 84 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 186 ---
Index of Ancient
Egyptians by
Position
Architect
Amenhotep, son of Hapu
Imhotep
Senenmut
Expedition leader and governor
Harkhuf
Weni
Landholder
Heqanakht
Military officer
Ahmose, son of Ebana
Udjahorresne
Physician
Amenhotep, son of Hapu
Imhotep
Udjahorresne
Priest
Manetho
Ruler
Ahmose I
Akhenaten (Amenhotep IV)
Amasis (Ahmose II)
Amenemhet I
Amenemhet III
Amenhotep III
Djoser
Hatshepsut
Herihor
Horemheb
Khafre
Khufu
Menes
Menkaure
Nebhepetre Mentuhotep I
Nekhtnebef (Nectanebo II)
Pepil
Pepi II
Psamtik I
Ramesses II
Harnesses III
Senwosret I
Senwosret III
Seqenenre Tao II
Seti I
Snefru
Thutmose I
Thutmose III
Tutankhamun
Ruler's wife
Ahmose-Nefertari
Hetep-heres
Nefertari
Nefertiti
Tiye
Statesman
Hemiunu
Meketre
Pa-wer-a'a
Pepinakht
Ptahhotep
Rekhmire
Writer
Manetho
Ptahhotep
INDEX OF ANCIENT EGYPTIANS BY POSITION 1 8 5


--- PAGE 187 ---
Index
References to illustrations and their captions
are indicated by page numbers in bold.
Aata, 87
Abu Simbel, 146, 157, 158, 160-61
Abydos, 17, 30, 38, 64, 73, 150-52, 157
Aegean, 112, 177
Aegyptiaca (History of Egypt), 173
Afterlife, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 27, 30, 31, 38,
43, 44, 45_46, 51, 55, 59, 60, 73, 82, 97,
98, 104, 107, 108, 118, 128, 138, 139, 144,
152, 153, 162
Afterlife books, 82, 104, 118, 144, 152, 162
Ahhotep, 109
Ahmose, son of Ebana, 85-88, 110
Ahmose I, 86, 87, 89, 109-10
Ahmose II (Amasis), 171, 172
Ahmose Nefertari, 89, 110-11
Akhenaten (Amenhotep IV), 113, 118, 120,
121, 123-29, 130-33, 135, 136, 138, 140,
143, 152
Akhetaten, 113, 121, 126-29, 131, 132-33,
136, 138, 139
Albert Nile, 13
Alexander the Great, 173, 176
Alexandria, 157, 176-77
elAmarna, 127, 128
Amarnaart, 123, 128-29, 131, 132-33
Amarna Letters, 118, 121, 127
Amasis (Ahmose II), 171
Amduat (Book of the Secret Chamber), 82,
104, 118
Amenemhet I, 61, 62-65, 67
Amenemhet II, 69
Amenemhet III, 54, 75-79
Amenemhet IV, 79
Amenhotep, son of Hapu, 145
Amenhotep I, 87-88, 95, 110-11
Amenhotep II, 104, 112
Amenhotep III, 114-22, 123, 124, 131, 135,
136, 137, 140, 143, 145
Amenhotep IV. See Akhenaten
Amenmesse, 169
Amenmose, 90
Amennakht, 168
Amulets, 114, 136, 139, 174
Amun-Re, 63, 64, 69, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 96,
97, 100, 102, 103, 104, 111, 112-13, 116,
124-26, 131-33, 136, 139, 141, 143, 145,
150, 152, 153, 158, 161, 167
Amurru, 155
Animal images, 25, 34, 44, 52, 104, 108,
109, 116, 126, 137, 156, 171, 173
Ankh, 76, 111, 125
Ankhesenamun, 132, 136, 137
Ankhesenmerire, 41, 42, 53
Ankhesenpaaten. See Ankhesenamun
Antony, Mark, 177
Anubis (guide to afterlife), 97
Apepi I, 109
Apiru, 158
Apries, 171
Archers, 165, 166
Architects, 18-24, 30-31, 52, 95-98, 104,
111, 116-18, 161
Arsinoe I, 177
Arsinoe II, 177
Artaxerxes III, 173
Aryandes, 176
Ashurbanipal, 171, 175-76
Asia Minor, 177
Asiatics, 66, 67, 84, 86, 140, 143, 148
Assyria, 171, 175
Astronomy, 151, 153
Aswan, 40, 67, 72, 92, 96
Aten, 113, 116, 124-25, 126-29, 131-33,
136, 138, 143, 152
Athribis, 145, 171, 176
Augustus, 177
Avaris, 83, 86-87, 109, 149
Ay, 131, 136, 137, 138, 140, 141, 143, 152
Bab el Hosan, 59
Baboons, 104, 116
Bast (cat goddess), 175
Bauefre, 32
Bedouins, 15-16, 39, 53, 57, 65, 79, 83, 149
Belzoni, Giovanni Battista, 153
"Bent Pyramid," 28
"Black Pyramid," 76
Blue Nile, 13
Boats, 12, 32, 40, 45, 74, 94, 97, 102-3, 138.
See also Wooden boat burials
Boo/co/ Gates, 144, 152, 153, 162
Boole of the Secret Chamber (Amduat), 82,
104, 118
Bronze, 84, 102
Bubastis (Pi-Bast), 175
Buhen, 67
Burial complexes: of Akhenaten, 129, 132,
133; of Amenemhet I, 62, 64; of
Amenemhet III, 75-77; of Amenhotep III,
117-18; of Djoser, 16-18, 21-24; of
Harkhuf, 45-47; of Hatshepsut, 91-94,
96-98; of Hemiunu, 52; of Khafre, 52; of
Khufu, 29-33, 52; of Menkaure, 52-53; of
Mernere, 40; of Nebhepetre Mentuhotep I,
58-60, 73, 96, 97; of Nefertari, 146,
161-63; of Nefertiti, 132, 133; of Pepi I, 40,
53; of Pepi II, 43-44; of Pepinakht, 53; of
Ramesses II, 157, 158-59, 166; Ramesses
III, 164, 165, 166-69; of Senwosret I,
69-70; of Senwosret III, 74; of Seti I,
150-53; of Snefru, 27-28, 30; of Thutmose
I, 93, 111; of Thutmose III, 104; of
Tutankhamun, 134-39; of Weni, 38
Burial rites, 22, 33, 44, 46, 52, 108, 137, 141
Byblos, 27, 53, 65, 103
Caesar, Julius, 177
Cambyses II, 171-72, 176
Canals, 39, 40, 72, 78, 103, 107, 112, 176,
177
Canopic jars, 77, 138
Caravans, 42, 47, 48, 57, 63, 72, 103
Carnarvon, Lord, 134-35
Carpentry, 108
Carter, Howard, 56, 59, 127, 134-35, 137,
138-39
Cartouches, 152, 172, 174
Cataracts, 14, 39-40, 42, 47, 72
Cedarwood, 12, 27, 28, 32, 65, 149
Cenotaphs, 75, 152
Champollion, Jean Francois, 30
Chariots, 84, 85, 86, 102, 104, 108, 120, 126,
133, 138, 156, 166
Cheops. See Khufu
Cleopatra VII, 177
Coffin Texts, 60
Colossi of Memnon, 117, 118, 145
Copper, 28, 39, 41, 51, 63, 68, 104, 166
Co-regents, 64, 66, 69, 73, 79, 104. See also
Regents
Coronation ceremony, 124, 143, 174
Dagi, 57, 60
Dahshur, 27, 28, 54, 74, 75-76
Dakhla Oasis, 57
Darius I, 172, 176
Deir el Bahri (Set Maar), 58-59, 73, 80, 81,
91-92, 93, 96, 97, 98, 104, 109, 110, 111,
145, 153, 159, 168, 169
Deir el Medina, 111, 163, 168-69
Deities. See Gods and Goddesses
De Morgan, Jacques, 74
Dendera, 64
Djadja-emankh, 25-26
Djau, 42
Djedefre, 52
Djedhor (Teos), 172
Djedi, 32-33
Djedkare-Izezi, 49
Djoser (Netjerykhet), 15-24
Dynasties, 173: 1st, 27; 2nd, 15; 3rd, 15, 26,
51; 4th, 25, 26, 52, 62, 106, 174; 5th, 26,
33, 34, 49; 6th, 26, 37; 7th, 55; 8th, 55; 9th,
55; 10th, 55; llth, 60; 12th, 26, 63-64;
13th, 83; 14th, 83; 15th, 84; 16th, 84; 18th,
59, 61, 62, 77, 89, 110, 112; 19th, 147;
20th, 164; 22nd, 175; 23rd, 175; 24th, 175;
25th, 175; 26th, 176; 31st, 173; 32nd, 173
Edict of Horemheb, 143
Edjo (cobra goddess), 14
Elephantine, 19, 40, 53, 65, 67, 72, 96
Embalming. See Mummification
Esarhaddon, 175
Euphrates River, 100, 103, 111
1 8 6 ANCIENT EGYPTIANS


--- PAGE 188 ---
Everyday life, scenes of, 25, 34, 38, 58, 60,
80, 94, 128, 169
Faiyum, 77-78, 83, 177
False doors, 21,38, 107, 152
Famine, 16, 19
Farming, 25, 28, 34, 38, 77-78, 81, 125
Festival Hall, 104
Festivals, 18-19, 24, 69, 104, 108, 116, 117,
121, 126, 136-37, 141, 143-44, 154, 159,
166, 167
Field of Reeds, 60, 73
First Intermediate Period, 55, 83, 173
Floods, 13, 19, 38, 77-78, 107, 112, 143,
158,161
Foreigners, 39-40, 57, 63, 66, 83-87, 109-10,
147, 154, 165, 171, 172, 175-77
Gauthier, J. E., 70
Gebel el Silsila, 124, 144
German Oriental Society, 131
Gilukhepa, 115, 120
Giza, 29-33, 46, 52
Goddesses: Bast, 175; Edjo, 14; Hathor, 64,
93, 97, 119, 158, 161, 171; Ishtar, 118;
Isis, 59, 119, 152, 161, 172; Mut, 116, 144,
167; Neith, 172; Nekhbet, 14, 61, 76, 136,
174; Sekhmet, 116; Taweret, 151; Wadjet,
61, 136, 174
Gods: Amun-Re, 63, 64, 69, 90, 91, 92, 93,
94,96,97, 100, 102, 103, 104, 111,
112-13, 116, 124-26, 131-33, 136, 139,
141, 143, 145, 150, 152, 153, 158, 161,
167; Anubis, 97; Horus, 16, 17, 38, 50, 61,
70, 90, 92, 136, 138, 152, 161, 174; Khepri,
162; Khnum, 16, 19, 20, 33, 91, 172;
Ma'at, 148; Min, 120; Montu, 58, 64, 114,
167; Osiris, 30, 59, 60, 64, 73, 138, 150-52,
158, 163; Ptah, 64, 152, 158, 161, 163, 167;
Re, 14, 17, 33, 41, 52, 64, 69, 104, 148,
167; Re-Harakhte, 152, 161; Seth, 59, 61,
70; Sobek, 78; Thoth, 24, 32, 33, 91, 163.
See also Aten
Gold, 26, 27, 47, 57, 63, 68, 78, 108
Golden Age of Egypt, 28, 35, 62
Grain, 19, 25, 77, 164, 168, 171
Great Harris Papyrus, 166, 168, 169
Great Pyramid, 29-33, 52
Great Royal Wife, 26, 41-42, 70, 89, 110,
114, 120, 130, 131, 141, 160, 161, 169
Greek mythology, 118
Greeks, 27, 117-18, 171, 173, 175, 176-77
Hapuseneb, 90
Harem Conspiracy, 169
Harkhuf, 42, 45-49, 53
Harris, A. C, 168
Hathor (sky goddess), 64, 93, 97, 119, 158,
161, 171
Hatshepsut, 59, 89-98, 104, 111, 152
Hattusas, 137
Hattusilis, 157
Hawara, 76, 77, 78
Hebrews, 158
Heb-Sed ritual, 18-19, 24, 59, 69, 104, 117,
121,159
Heliopolis, 33, 69, 112
Hemiunu, 30-31, 52
Heqanakht, 81
Heracleopolis, 57
Herihor, 147, 170-71, 175
Hermopolis-Magna, 116
Herodotus, 13, 30, 50, 52-53, 77
Hetep-heres, 26, 51-52
Hierakonpolis (Nekhen), 51
Hippopotamuses, 109, 151
Hittites, 127, 137, 150, 155-58
Hor, 116
Hordedef, 32
Horemheb, 136, 137-38, 140-44, 149
Horses, 84, 85, 86, 102, 156, 175
Horus (sky god), 16, 17, 38, 50, 61, 70, 90,
92, 136, 138, 152, 161, 174
Hotpe-her-nebti, 23
Huni, 26, 27, 51, 52
Hunting, 48, 115, 116, 137, 138
Hyksos, 83, 84, 85-87, 109-10
"Hymn of Victory," 103, 104, 128
"Hymn to the Aten," 128
Hypostyle halls, 143, 153, 157
Ibises, 24
Iken, 72
Ikhernofret, 73
Imhotep, 18, 19, 20, 21-24, 70
Imported goods, 26, 27, 32, 40, 43, 46, 47,
48, 57, 63, 65, 68, 91, 94, 103, 143, 158
Ineni, 90, 104, 111
Instructions (Ptahhotep), 35-36
Instruction of Amenemhet, 64, 65, 67, 98
Intef, 56, 57
Intkawes, 23
Ipet-isut, 64
Ipi, 57
Ishtar, 118
Isis, 59, 119, 152, 161, 172
Istnofret, 157
Itj-tawy, 63, 65
Izezi, 34, 35
Jequier, Gustave, 44, 70
Jewelry, 74, 76, 78, 87, 108, 114, 136, 139,
156, 174
Kadesh, 100, 102, 103, 149-50, 155-57, 158
Kagera River, 13
Kamose, 85, 86, 109
Karnak, 61, 62, 64, 68, 92, 94, 96, 100,
103-4, 109, 111, 112, 116, 126, 143-44,
145, 149, 153, 157, 166, 171
Khaemwaset, 157, 170
Khafre, 32, 33, 52
Kharga Oasis, 67
Khasekhemwy, 15
Khepri, 162
Khnum (god of creation and childbirth), 16,
19,20,33,91,172
Khnumhotep, 63
Khufu, 12, 29-33, 52
King list, 15, 26, 89, 94, 103, 123, 143, 152,
173,175
Kiya, 135-36
Kleomenes, 176
Kush, 114, 117, 142, 144, 150
Kushite Dynasty, 175
Labor strike, 168-69
Lakes, 25-26, 61, 72, 78, 116, 120, 131, 158,
161
Lauer, Jean-Philippe, 17
Lebanon, 27, 32,65,149,155
Lepsius, Karl, 72
Libya, 26-27, 32, 57, 59, 65, 66, 67, 147,
150, 157,164-65, 171, 175,176
Lions, 115, 116, 137, 173
el Lisht, 62, 63, 69
"Litany of Re," 104
Literature, 35-36, 43, 44, 53, 64, 65, 67, 82,
98, 103-4, 118, 128
Loret, Victor, 122
Luxor, 116
Lysimachos, 177
Ma'at, 148
Macedonia, 173, 177
Madir, 19
Magic, 25-26, 32-33, 44, 60
Malkata, 116-17, 126, 131, 136, 145
el-Mallakh, Kamal, 31-32
Manetho, 26, 53, 71, 83, 89, 173, 175
Marriage, 26, 41-42, 90, 157, 177
Maruaten, 127
Mastabas, 18, 21, 22-24, 28, 31, 52, 64
Medicine, 20, 24, 172
Medinet el Faiyum, 78
Medinet Habu, 165, 166, 167, 168
Megiddo, 100-103, 175
Meidum, 27
Meketaten, 132
Meketre, 60, 80
Memphis, 16, 22, 35, 51, 64, 109, 126, 136,
139, 143, 149, 158, 171
Menes, 50, 152, 173
Menkaure, 33, 52, 53
Men-nefer-Pepi, 53
Mentuhotep I. See Nebhepetre Mentuhotep I
Mentuhotep II, 55, 62
INDEX 1 8 7


--- PAGE 189 ---
Mentuhotep III, 62
Mercenaries, 171, 173, 175
Mereret, 74
Meresankh, 26
Meritaten, 132, 133
Merneptah, 117, 158, 159, 164
Mernere, 37, 40, 42, 47-48, 53
Meryetamun, 160
Mesehti, General, 37
Metjen, 26
Middle Kingdom, 35, 55-81, 173
Military campaigns: of Ahmose I, 86-87,
109-10; of Amenemhet I, 63-65; of
Amenhotep I, 87-88; of Hatshepsut, 91; of
Horemheb, 140, 142, 143; of Kamose, 109;
of Khufu, 32; of Nebhepetre Mentuhotep I,
57-59; of Pepi I, 39^0, 53; of Pepinakht,
53; of Ramesses II, 154-57; Ramesses III,
164-66; of Senwosret I, 66-68; of
Senwosret III, 72-73; of Seti I, 149-50,
153; of Snefru, 26-27; of Thutmose I, 88,
90; of Thutmose III, 100-103, 149; of
Tutankhamun, 137
Min (fertility god), 120
Mitanni, 100, 102, 103, 115, 118, 120, 121
Montu (god of war), 58, 64, 114, 167
Mortuary temple. See Burial complexes
Moses, 158
Mountain Nile, 13
Mummies, 104; Ahmose I, 110; Ahmose
Nefertari, 111; Amenemhet III, 75, 76;
Amenhotep II, 122; Amenhotep III, 118;
Djoser, 17; Pepi II, 44; Ramesses II, 159;
Ramesses III, 169; Seqenenre Tao II, 109;
Seti I, 152, 153; Thutmose I, 92; Thutmose
III, 104; Tiye, 121-22, 124; Tutankhamun,
136, 138-39
Mummification, 17, 46, 51-52, 77, 120, 134,
137, 138, 139, 159
Mursilis, 150
Musical instruments, 84, 105, 108
Mut, 116,144,167
Mutemwia, 114
Mutnodjmet, 141
Muwatallis, 156, 157
Napoleon, 30, 118
Narmer Palette, 50-51
Natron, 77, 102, 139
Naukratis (Naucratis), 171, 176
Nauri Decree, 150-51
Navy, 63, 85-88, 102-3, 165
Nebhepetre Mentuhotep I, 55, 56-60, 62,
72, 73, 80, 81, 96, 97
Nebka, 15
Nebkheprure, 134. See also Tutankhamun
Nebti, 174
Nechol, 171
NechoII, 171
Necropolis, 44, 45
Nectanebo II (Nekhtnebef), 172-73
Neferhotep, 168
Nefermaet, 52
Nefernefruaten, 132
Nefernefrura, 132
Nefertari, 146, 157, 158, 160-63
Neferti, 61-62
Nefertiti, 124, 125, 130-33, 136, 137, 141
Neferu, 66, 70
Neferuptah, 76
Neferure, 90, 95, 98
Neith, 172
Nekhbet (vulture goddess), 14, 61, 76, 136,
174
Nekheb (el Kab), 85
Nekhen (Hierakonpolis), 51, 53
Nekhtnebef. See Nectanebo II
New Kingdom, 83-173
Nile River, 13-14, 45, 50, 176, 177;
cataracts, 14, 39-40, 42, 47, 72; flooding,
13, 19, 20, 38, 77-78, 107, 112, 116, 143,
158, 161
Nilometers, 78
Nimaathap, 15
Nobles, 43, 57
Nodjmet, 170
Nomarchs (district governors), 43, 55, 56, 57,
62-63, 72-74, 80, 83
Nomen (birth name), 41, 174
Names (districts), 20, 43, 45, 55, 56, 57, 63,
68
Nubia, 26, 27, 31, 32, 39, 40, 47, 53, 57, 59,
63, 65, 67, 69, 70-73, 78, 83, 87-88, 91,
103, 109, 111, 114, 116, 117, 121, 137,
140, 143, 144, 148, 150, 160-61, 166, 171,
175,176
Nubian Dynasty, 175
Oases, 57, 67, 77
Obelisks, 69, 92, 94, 96-97, 104
Octavius, 177
Offerings, 16, 17-18, 19, 20, 24, 28, 38, 40,
43, 46, 52, 60, 99, 108, 126, 163, 167-68
Old Kingdom, 13-53, 55, 173
Opening of the Mouth ritual, 33, 44, 108,
137
Opet festival, 116, 137, 143-44, 154
Osireion, 152
Osiris (god of the dead and of fertility), 30,
59, 60, 64, 73, 138, 150-52, 158, 163
Ostracon, 95
Palermo Stone, 26, 28
Palestine, 53, 68, 87, 100-103, 110, 140,
142, 149-50, 154-58, 165, 175
Palimpsests, 81
Papyrus rolls, 21, 24, 26, 32, 35, 81, 100,
157, 166, 168, 169, 173
Paser, 170
Pa-wer-a'a, 170
Pelusium, 173
Pentewere, 169
Pepi I, 28, 37-40, 42, 53
Pepi II (Neferkare), 41-44, 47, 48-49, 53,
55, 56, 70
Pepinakht, 53
Perehu, 94
Persia, 171-73, 176
Petrie, Flinders, 30, 76, 78, 127
Pharaoh, 84, 110
Pharos of Alexandria, 176-77
Philistines, 165
Philo of Byzantium, 30
Phoenicia, 27, 171, 176
Piankhy (Piye), 175
Pi-Bast (Bubastis), 175
Pi-Ramesses, 158, 170, 175
Piye (Piankhy), 175
Pramesse, 144, 147
Prenomen (official name), 174
Priests, 20, 28, 43, 55, 61, 69, 90, 97, 104,
125, 126, 132, 141, 142, 147, 167, 169,
170-71, 175, 176
Prisoners of war, 102, 112, 140, 142, 148,
149, 150, 154
Prisse Papyrus, 35
Prophecy ofNeferty, 67
Psamtik I (Psammetichus), 171, 176
Psamtikll, 171
Psamtik III, 172, 176
Psusennes II, 175
Ptah (god of creation), 64, 152, 158, 161,
163, 167
Ptahhotep, 34-36
Ptolemaic period, 16, 173, 176-77
Ptolemy I, 176-77
Ptolemy II Philadelphos, 177
Ptolemy IV, 177
Ptolemy XII, 177
Ptolemy XIII, 177
Ptolemy XIV, 177
Punt, 42, 47, 91, 94, 97, 143, 166
Purification ceremony, 102
Pygmies, 42, 48-49
Pylons, 69, 116, 143, 144
Pyramidion, 79, 92
Pyramids, 17, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28, 29-33,
40, 43-44, 52, 53, 54, 64, 68-70, 74,
75-77, 79, 175. See oho Burial complexes
Pyramid Texts, 43, 44, 53, 60
"Pyramid towns," 31, 38, 43, 111, 127, 163,
168
Qubbet el-Hawa, 46, 53
Rakotis, 157
Ramesses I, 144, 148, 149, 153
Ramesses II (Ramesses the Great), 146, 147,
152, 153, 154, 155-59, 160-61, 164
Ramesses III, 164-69, 175
Ramesses IV, 169
Ramesses VI, 134, 135
Ramesses XI, 175
ANCIENT EGYPTIANS1 8 8


--- PAGE 190 ---
Ramesseum, 157, 158-59, 166
Re (sun god), 14, 17, 33, 41, 52, 64, 69, 104,
162,167
Realism, 73, 129
Reddedet, 33
"Red Pyramid," 28
Refugees, 147, 165
Regents, 42, 86, 90, 109, 111, 114. See also
Co-regents
Re-Harakhte, 152, 158, 161
Reisner, George, 51, 52
Rekhmire, 105-8
Restoration Stele, 143
Robbers, tomb, 17, 18, 31, 44, 74, 75, 76, 80,
104,118,120,122,134-35,170
Roman Empire, 102, 118, 177
Royal beard, 17, 89, 139
Royal names, 16, 29, 52, 92, 132, 134, 148,
149,152, 154, 172,174
Sacred barque, 97
Sais, 171, 172, 176
Sanakht, 15
Sand dwellers, 39, 63, 66. See also Bedouins
Saqqara, 16-17, 22-24, 26, 44, 53, 140, 141,
142,144
Scarabs, 114-15, 116,120, 139, 162
Scribes, 20, 24, 32, 36, 94, 100, 102, 107,
108, 117, 118, 135, 145, 157, 166, 168,
169
Sea Peoples, 147, 154, 165
Seasons, 31,38, 116, 143
Second Intermediate Period, 83, 173
Sedeinga, 121
Segerseni, 63
Sehel, 16, 19
Sehetepibre, 77, 78, 79
Sekhmet, 116
Semna, 65, 72
Senenmut, 90, 93, 95-98
Senwosret 1, 62, 64-65, 66-70, 71
Senwosret III, 71-74, 103
Seqenenre Tao II, 85, 86, 109, 110
Serdab, 15, 17-18
Sesostris. See Senwosret III
Setepenra, 132
Seth, 59, 61, 70
Sethnakhte, 164, 169
Seti I, 147, 148-53, 154, 155
Set Maar. See Deir el Medina
Shabaka, 175
Sharuhen, 87, 110
Shebitku, 175
Sheikh Abd el Qurna, 98, 105
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 154, 159
Sherden, 154
Shoshenq, 175
Shuttarnall, 115
Sinai Peninsula, 26, 27, 28, 31, 32, 39, 41,
51, 53, 63, 65, 68, 77, 78-79, 91, 100,
149-50, 166, 176
Sinuhe, 66-67, 98
Sitamun, 117, 118
Sit-Hathor, 74
Slaves, 87, 112, 117, 138
Smenkhkare, 143, 152
Snefru, 23-28, 51,62, 174
Sobek (crocodile god), 78
Sobeknefru, 79
Soldiers, 37, 58, 62-64, 100-101, 113, 171,
173,175,177
Soleb, 116, 124, 137
Sphinxes, 52, 92, 93, 116, 117, 121, 144
Statues, 15, 17, 21, 24, 26, 29, 31, 37, 41,
42, 52, 53, 56, 59, 60, 67, 70, 71, 73, 75,
78, 89, 92-93, 98, 99, 111, 115, 116, 117,
119, 123, 126, 130-31, 132, 145, 146,
158, 160, 161, 171
Stelae, 16, 23, 72, 73, 93, 103, 114, 126-27,
129, 143,175
Step Pyramid, 17, 22, 23, 24
Sun disk. See Aten
Sun god. See Re
Suppiluliumas, 137
Suti, 116
Syria, 68, 100-103, 137, 140, 142, 149-50,
154-58,165, 175, 176,177
Taharqa, 175-76
Tak of Sinuhe, 98
Tanis, 175
Taweret (goddess of childbirth), 151
Taxation, 28, 43, 107-8, 125, 142-43, 167,
170
Temples, 58, 112, 126, 160-61, 167, 170; to
Amenhotep, son of Hapu, 145; to Amun-
Re, 63, 64, 92, 96, 100, 102, 103, 111, 116,
125, 136, 141, 143-44, 145, 153; to Aten,
126, 143; to Hathor, 93, 161; to Imhotep,
24; to Khnum, 19, 20; to Min, 120; to
Montu, 58; to Mut, 116, 144; to Neith,
172; to Osiris, 30, 64, 150-52; to Ptah, 64;
to Re, 69; to Tiye, 121. See also Burial com-
plexes
Teti, 37
Thebes, 56-57, 64, 83, 93, 102, 109, 117-18,
126, 131, 136, 139, 143, 144, 145, 149,
158, 163, 167-69, 170, 171, 175
Third Intermediate Period, 173
Thoth (god of learning and wisdom), 24, 32,
33,91,163
Throwing sticks, 48, 138, 164-65
Thutmose (sculptor), 130-32
Thutmose I, 88, 89, 92, 93, 97, 99, 100, 110,
111, 168
Thutmose II, 90, 95
Thutmose III, 90-91, 92, 93, 94, 98, 99-104,
105-6,112,149
Thutmose IV, 114, 124
Tiy, 169
Tiye, 114, 115-16, 117, 118, 119-22, 129,
131
Tjuya, 120
Tombs, 15, 16, 17, 18, 42, 51, 58, 60, 74, 75,
80, 82, 85, 86, 88, 98, 105, 106, 111, 120,
121-22, 134, 137, 140, 141, 144. See also
Burial complexes
Trade, 26, 27, 32, 39, 40, 42-43, 47-48, 53,
57, 59, 63, 65, 66, 67, 68, 71-73, 83, 91,
94, 97,103,112,117,139,143, 150,158,
166, 171, 177
Tribute, 100, 101, 102, 103, 107-8, 112, 125,
137, 149, 167,170
Trojan War, 118
Tura limestone, 23, 24, 38, 52, 64, 74
Turquoise mines, 15, 27, 39, 41, 63, 68, 78,
150
Tushratta, 118, 121
Tutankhamun, 121, 122, 134-39, 140-41,
143, 152, 174
Tuya, 152
Udjahorresne, 172
Uraeus,99, 119,144,172
Uronarti, 72
Ushebti, 60
Valley of the Kings, 52, 91, 93, 96, 104, 111,
117, 120,121-22,134,137,144,153,157,
162, 163, 169, 170
Valley of the Queens, 161-63
Victoria Nile, 13
Viziers, 20, 34-36, 42, 43, 57, 72-73, 83,
105-8,136, 142,149,168,170
Wadi Hammamat, 62, 68, 176
Wadi Maghara, 28, 41
Wadi Tumilar, 63
Wadi Tushka, 66
Wadjet (cobra goddess), 61, 136, 174
Wadjmose, 90
Walls of the Prince, 63
Weni, 37-40, 53
Wenis, 44
Westcar Papyrus, 26, 32
White Nile, 13
White Wall (Memphis), 16, 22, 51
Wilkinson, John Gardner, 121
Window of Appearance, 141, 167
Women rulers, 89-94, 114-16, 119-22, 124,
130-33
Wooden boat burials, 12, 32, 74
Wooden models, 37, 58, 60, 80, 138
Workers, 30, 31, 43, 58, 60, 68, 80, 106,
108, 111, 128, 150-51, 163, 168-69, 170
Woser, 106
Wrestling, 74, 164-65
Xerxes I, 176
Yam, 47-48
Yebu, 72
Yuya, 120
INDEX 1 8 9


--- PAGE 191 ---
Acknowledgments
Special thanks are owed to the staff of the John D. Rockefeller, Jr., Library at
Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island, for their invaluable assistance
in helping us search and locate so many of the books used in preparing
Ancient Egyptians.
We would also like to thank the reference librarians at the main branch
of the New Public Library in New Bedford, Massachusetts, and at the
Southworth Library in South Dartmouth, Massachusetts, for their quick
responses to our requests for information about resources and other data nec-
essary to our research on Ancient Egyptians.
We are also indebted to James Henry Breasted, the author of Ancient
Records of Egypt: Historical Documents from the Earliest Times to the Persian
Conquest, for his translations and insights into the life and writings of the
early Egyptians.


--- PAGE 192 ---
Picture Credits
Borromeo/Art Resource, NY: 37; Foto Marburg/Art Resource, NY: 53; Giraudon/Art Resource, NY: lower left cover inset,
67, 71, 82, 162, 172; Erich Lessing/Art Resource, NY: 2, 16, 21, 25, 26, 29, 38, 54, 61, 68, 74, 96, 101, 105, 106, 110, 111,
113, 125, 132, 142, 146, 148, 155, 156, 174 left; The Newark Museum/Art Resource, NY (detail): 174 right;
Nimatallah/Art Resource, NY: 119; Scala/Art Resource, NY: 15, 36, 50, 76, 80, 85, 93, 99, 109, 120, 135, 141, 145, 159,
160, 171; Vanni/Art Resource, NY: 130; Werner Forman/Art Resource, NY: 12, 79, 115, 123, 136; Ashmolean Museum,
Oxford: 116; Copyright British Museum: 58, 75, 166, 173; Brooklyn Museum of Art, Charles Edwin Wilbour Fund: 41;
Egypt Museum Cairo: 45, 86; Giraudon/Art Resource, NY: 56; Courtesy, Graham Harrison: 34; All rights reserved, The
Metropolitan Museum of Art: right cover inset, 62, 81, 89, 95; Courtesy, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Reproduced with
permission. © 2000 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. All Rights Reserved.: upper left cover inset, 33, 46, 52; From Travels in
Egypt and Nubia, by F. L. Norden: 30; Ira Toff: cover background, 22; Gary Tong: 8, 9, 10, 11; Courtesy of the Oriental
Institute of the University of Chicago: 164, 165.


--- PAGE 193 ---
Rosalie F. and Charles F. Baker III are the editors of the CALLIOPE: The
World History Magazine for Young Peopk, winner of the EdPress 1998 Golden
Lamp Award and the EdPress 1998 Distinguished Achievement Award for One-
Theme Issue. They are the authors of Ancient Greeks: Creating the Classical
Tradition and Ancient Romans: Expanding the Classical Tradition, both part of the
Oxford Profiles series; The Classical Companion, Myths and Legends of Mount
Olympos; and Classical Ingenuity. Both are former teachers and administrators in
public and private schools. Charles Baker is the editor of FOOTSTEPS, a maga-
zine on African American history, which won the EdPress 1999 Distinguished
Achievement Award for One-Theme Issue. He is also the author of Struggle for
Freedom, 13 plays about the American Revolution for classroom performance.
The Bakers live in New Bedford, Massachusetts, with their son, Chip.

