=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Anti-Colonial-Media-The-Continuing-Impact-of-Robert-L-Allen-s-Black-Awakening-in-Capitalist-America-Ball-Jared-A-2010-June-22.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 19
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:52:48.932677
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Page 1 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of 
Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in 
Capitalist America. 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22). Anti -colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black 
Awakening in Capitalist America The Free Library . (2010). Retrieved July 29, 2011 from 
http://www.thefreelibrary.com/Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black... -
a0233963289 
 
 
IT IS TO BE HOPED that April 10, 2009 will come to represent another radical turning point in 
the acade mic study of, and political organizing around, the conditions of African and Latin 
communities in the Americas. On that date scholars from around the globe gathered in Berkeley, 
California to pay tribute to the fortieth anniversary of Robert L. Allen's Bla ck Awakening in 
Capitalist America. The conference demonstrated the varied and continuing relevancy of that 
work's central thesis: that African America exists more as an internal colony than a free and 
equal citizenry and that approaching it as such is lik ely to yield more appropriate analyses and 
responses than more conventional and popular methods of study. From perspectives as wide -
ranging as the presenters' points of origin, Internal Colonialism Theory (Pinderhughes, 2008) 
was demonstrated anew to be a theoretical approach deserving of wide -ranging discussion. 
Central to the discussion was Allen's seminal Black Awakening, which remains an often 
neglected, yet unfortunately all -too timely, work in addressing twenty -first century concerns.  
 
Presenters were asked to discuss the ways in which Allen's work prompted, sustained, justified 
or even gave support to their own. For me all that came in the form of supporting an attempt at 
reapplying a theory of colonialism to Black America, so as to explain a small l ocalized 
journalism project. That project or concept of "mixtape radio" where the tradition of the rap 
music mixtape is fashioned to the continued need for what Hemant Shah has called 
"Emancipatory Journalism" (1996) required explaining why an anti -colonial form of media was 
indeed relevant for a twenty -first century black American population. Emancipatory Journalism, 
as a concept mostly applied to more "traditionally -held" colonies, is rarely considered in 
journalism (academically or in terms of practice) primarily because of powerful popular myths of 
"democracy," "progress," "post -colonial," "post-Civil Rights," "post -racial," and "pluralism" all 
which accept baseline notions of general equality. However, by definition, those held as colonies 
(internal, domestic, semi or neo) cannot be defined as experiencing such societal notions.  
 
AS ALLEN SAID, notions such as an "argument for democratization of the American social 
system assume that there is still room in the political economy for black peo ple" (Allen, 1970, p. 
3, emphasis added). Even as this colonialism has shifted and made significant adjustments in 
form and image, it is difficult to argue that such room in the political economy of the nation has 
since been made. Or, perhaps it is better said that the room made within the US political 
economy is for Black America to serve as the internally -held colony whose "over -all


--- PAGE 2 ---
Page 2 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
subordination" is maintained by the "state power in the hands of the dominating power" (Allen, 
p. 8). This allows for their service to the "mother country" to include a permanent and locally -
held reservoir of cheap labor within which can also be maintained a class stratification wherein a 
neocolonial petty bourgeoisie can be developed to assure compliance from among the broader  
colonized population (p. 11).  
 
In the end, what remains is that the work of Allen continues to give strong historical evidence, 
academic precedence and, unfortunately, proper interpretation of contemporary reality from 
which can be extended the necessary  pushing of conceptual boundaries to allow for such "odd" 
results as mixtape radio and Emancipatory Journalism. Rap music mixtapes began to emerge in 
the few years that followed the initial publication of Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist 
America (1970). At the time DJs began to develop hip -hop's original mass medium, the mixtape, 
it is not likely there was a conscious recognition of this practice as being part of a tradition of 
international anti-colonial media work. It cannot legitimately be said that  among these DJs there 
was an explicit desire to engage in the kinds of media practice which have been described as 
"revolutionary," nor was there likely any overt understanding that the making of mixtapes was 
somehow threatening to state structures which are, of course, engaged in processes of 
colonization. However, returning to the work of Allen, the tradition in which he remains seminal, 
and its continuing impact on similarly theoretical scholarship helps quite naturally to position 
Emancipatory Journali sm, even expressed via the particular medium of a mixtape, as a vital 
component of anti-colonial struggle.  
 
The Continuity of Colonialism  
 
WHY PERSIST in asserting colonial nature of African America? Because Allen, among others, 
made it clear when he wro te Black Awakening in Capitalist America. Aside from the observable 
conditions of much of Black America today, the fact that forty years later it can be said with 
confidence that Allen unfortunately remains correct is because too little of what he and othe rs 
prescribed as remedy has occurred. Of course, Fanon's frightening clarity on the need for violent 
overthrow even in the face of concessions made by the colonizing power remains unmet in any 
organized or sustained manner. In fact, there have been no sust ained and organized extra -legal 
activities undertaken to shake black people free from colonial bonds. In Black Awakening, Allen 
cautioned against relying on "exclusively legal campaigns" in political struggle. So prescient a 
warning was this that, for example, The Revolution Will Not Be Funded: Beyond the Non -Profit 
Industrial Complex (2007) included a re -prints of excerpts from Black Awakening which 
detailed how a capitalist elite sought to "calm" black communities threatening open rebellion 
(Allen, p. 146).  
 
REGARDING ALLEN'S own suggested "transitional plan," (pp. 274 -284) there has been no 
implementation of a Du Boisian unification and control of a black economy, no development of 
an independent political party. In fact, quite the opposite. Despite this failure to develop the plans 
suggested by Allen to overthrow colonialism, the election of brilliant, skillful and charismatic 
Pres. Barack Obama is furthering myths of progress, inclusiveness, and a "post -racial" world. 
Instead of being interpreted as the  political equivalent of the colonized being brought back into 
the US economy in order to prevent rebellion (Allen, p. 244) it is viewed as a culmination of a 
non-existent freedom struggle. (1)


--- PAGE 3 ---
Page 3 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
 
Today's leading black scholars and activists are among those  championing these ideas. Rather 
than being described as an imposed response to growing, and international threats of rebellion 
among colonized youth from Paris to Cincinnati (Spady, et al., 2006), excitement around 
Obama's appointment, for instance, of Va n Jones as Special Advisor for Green Jobs, Enterprise 
& Innovation at the White House Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) suggests that black 
poverty is simply the result of this nation's historical preference for fossil fuels. Jones's own 
defense of th is idea, and his suggestion that this can be overturned because "ecocapitalists" 
(Jones, 2007) desiring an image makeover will invest in a green economy, thus closing gaps in 
income and reducing, even ending, poverty while improving the overall poor health  of African 
America, again presupposes a fundamental change in the relationship of Black America to the 
national political economy. Peniel Joseph's political equivalent is his irritating insistence that 
Obama's election is an extension of the Black Power m ovement (2008) and that the man is 
indeed "Black Power" (personal communication, March 31, 2009).  
 
THESE MYTHS which cloud the judgments of those like Jones and Joseph, and which even 
force some disagreement with Allen himself (Allen 2008, Ball 2008), for ce them to ignore 
several key colonially -inspired factors. Among these is that despite Obama being said to have 
been elected from among the black community, almost none could claim to have heard of him 
prior to 2007 (and far less so prior to 2004). His vet ting, by Bernays' "invisible government" 
(1928/2005) and their "hidden primaries" conducted during the 1990s by a business elite who 
found him to be corporate-friendly and removed from any Civil Rights tradition (Street, 2008) is 
far more akin to an impose d neocolonial "indirect rule" as opposed to some grassroots 
democratic revolution. Rather than supporting some mythological shift in the global social order, 
these often ignored aspects of his campaign prove as fallacy the notions of Obama having 
ascended from below (Ball, 2008). Obama's further selection by the public relations world 
marketed him as "Brand of the Year" for 2008 (Creamer, 2008), suggests, again, that he 
represents more an fiber form of neocolonial "token representation" (Allen, 1970/1990, p . 8) 
with an imperial reach.  
 
This re-positioning of the US as a singular global empire, even if acknowledged to be in decline 
(Ford, 2009), furthers the relevance of theories of internal colonialism. Empires are not 
comprised of sovereign states and peop le living in open and free democracies. Empires are 
comprised of subservient client states and colonies, with people living in varying degrees of 
colonialism, hence Albert Memmi's still relevant construction of a "colonial pyramid of petty 
tyrants" (1965, p. 17) or Allen's "pyramid class structure" (p. 232). (2) Updating this point, even 
linking it to Huey P. Newton's "reactionary intercommunalism," (Hilliard and Weise, 2002) we 
may observe that all the world's nations and people experience degrees of "free dom" relative to 
others positioned up or down the hierarchical pyramid.  
 
 
However, confusion over this is similar to that described by Du Bois in his attempt to unearth 
colonialism anywhere. He wrote:  
 
Leaving analogies, in this case none too good, we loo k to facts, and find them also elusive. It is 
difficult to define a colony precisely. There are the dry bones of statistics; but the essential facts


--- PAGE 4 ---
Page 4 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
are neither well measured nor logically articulated. After all, an imperial power is not interested 
primarily in censuses, health surveys, or historical research. Consequently we know only 
approximately, and with wide margins of error, the colonial population, the number of the sick 
and the dead, and just what happened before the colony was conquered. (Lewis, p . 677)  
 
So when (if!) the "dry bones of statistics" that demonstrate the reality of African America as an 
internal colony, the reactionary response is to offer the highly propagandized explanation of this 
as being the result of self-fulfilling prophecies of "victimization" (Cosby and Poussaint, 2009) or 
"self-defeatism" (Peck, 2008). According to this view, it cannot be the ravages of colonialism, 
but must be the "pathology" of black Americans (Carr, 2008) that is to blame.  
 
WHAT can then be dismissed are  the evolving or pathetically stagnant conditions of black 
Americans in terms of health care, housing, and income (Muhammad, et al., 2004). Easily 
ignored are the widening of overall gaps in wealth (Rivera, et al., 2008), or that Black America 
remains fixed in a "permanent recession" which sees little change regardless of larger economic 
trends (Austin, 2008). Forgotten is that African America has suffered the largest loss of potential 
wealth in the nation's history during the recent sub -prime housing scandals (Rivera, et al. 2008). 
We can then also dismiss that the state's response to the levees breaking in New Orleans broke 
no historical precedent and was, in fact, part of a process of "predation," which much like the 
description above of the role of insti tutions within a colonial setting is "the systematic abuse of 
public institutions for private profit or, equivalently, the systematic undermining of public 
protection for the benefit of private clients," p. xii -xiii (Galbraith, 2008, pp. xii -xiii. Emphasis 
added.). The "race problem" described by Allen as "misunderstood" materializes today where 
performance in schools is widely ascribed to black or Latin pathology.  
 
Rarely is the continuing segregation in schools, at levels parallel to those in the 1950s ( Bell, 
2004), considered as the result of an indirect "psychological occupation of Black America by 
White America" or as a "mechanism of cultural repression which permeates the institution of 
education in the American system of internal colonialism, whereby  Black America exists as a 
domestic colony of White America" (Atkinson, 1993, p. 3). Will ideologues such as Cosby, 
Poussaint, Peck, and Carr similarly dismiss as pathologically self -fulfilling African American 
defeatism the killings of Scan Bell, Deonte R awlings or Oscar Grant? Or will they not 
acknowledge they are part of a continuing tradition of police brutality (Nelson, 2001), or that 
overall mass incarceration is about the extension of a continuing legal (3) system of slavery? 
(Davis, 2003). 
  
INSTEAD, the "fortress America" Allen predicted has indeed resulted in "a bloody and 
protracted international conflict" where the US has not taken "part in building a rational world 
order in which all men participate ..." The US has not seen fit to play a leading  role in the 
"intelligently organized" distribution of the "planet's resources," (Allen, p. 283). In fact, quite the 
opposite: it has supported the establishment of an "international trade regime" which all but 
guarantees unequal distribution of goods, spe cifically food (Patel, 2008). That "bloody and 
protracted international conflict" has been played out in the years since Black Awakening's 
publication via US military interventions in (to name only a few) Nicaragua, Panama, Grenada, 
Haiti, Afghanistan, and  Iraq and also through the work of "Economic Hit Men" who destroy


--- PAGE 5 ---
Page 5 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
national economies when the protracted bloody killings, or imprisonment and exile of individual 
leaders and innocent civilians are insufficient in gaining compliance (Perkins, 2004).  
 
 
And, of course, this "fortress America" can be seen in force domestically, with the constant and 
continuing occupation through the gentrifying ethnic cleansing of black and Latin American 
communities or the penetration of occupying police forces engaged in the project of mass 
incarceration of members of those colonies. Even more targeted are the continued political 
imprisonment of women and men engaged in anti-colonial struggle within the US, even up to the 
re-arrest of some on old "crimes." (4) In fact, the for tressing also includes the increase in private 
home security, gated communities, as well as the deployment of the highest levels of 
community-wide surveillance technology directed at the colonized, levels which were never 
acceptable to the American public before the War on Terror propaganda after 9/11. The level of 
legal and policing assaults on black and brown people has ossified their relationship to this 
nation's political economy, that of a neo -colonized, neo-enslaved populace that forms the base 
(along with American Indians) of the colonial pyramid. As such, those at the base are, in fact, via 
the prison -industrial complex, the foundation of the national economy (Davis, 2003).  
 
RECOGNITION that these are conditions of colonialism and that this process is part of a larger 
imperial project, one of Internal Colonialism Theory's most fundamental and enduring aspects, 
allays many of the concerns confronted by those seeking to make sense of, and struggle against, 
the causes of those "dry bones of statistics."  Noting this importance, that of returning African 
America back into a global context, works, as Allen says, "At the psychological level ... shatters 
the sense of isolation felt by many black militants." This kind of re -centering of colonialism 
allows for an end to the isolation of Black America and offers a larger set of "theoretic tools" 
(Tabb, 1970), which in turn establishes a more solid foundation upon which an interpretation of 
the current material conditions faced can be developed.  
 
Extending Allen's own analysis, in terms of internal colonialism, of unemployment rates which 
he said in Black Awakening resulted in an "enforced impoverishment," (p. 4) we can better 
interpret today's black unemployment rates which continue to be more than double that of  White 
America nationally (Muhammad, et al., 2004). In fact, the reconnection of Black America to 
other colonized people, so integral to a model of colonialism, is furthered today in 2010 where, 
for instance, the black unemployment rates in Washington, DC at 49 percent (Moreno, 2007) 
surpass those in Gaza, which at 45 percent were said in 2008 to be the highest in the world ("UN 
Report ...").  
 
By the 1970 publishing of Black Awakening the concept of Black America being a "nation 
within a nation" (Delaney, 1852/2004) had already long -been considered. Allen notes the work 
of Harold Cruse, Kwame Ture (Stokely Carmichael) and Charles Hamilton, Malcolm X, and the 
Black Panther Party as others who had by 1969 updated or modified some variant of the theme 
that, "f rom the beginning, the American Negro has existed as a colonial being {whose} 
enslavement coincided with the colonial expansion of European powers and was nothing more or 
less than a condition of domestic colonialism" (Cruse in Allen, p. 6). The general re lationship of 
colonialism, that is, remains intact. It is this basic relationship which Allen so powerfully 
described that even offered some preemptive defense against an important critique of this theory


--- PAGE 6 ---
Page 6 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
offered by Huey Newton's theory of inter-communalism (Hilliard and Weise, 2002). For Newton 
a theory of colonialism applied to African America was flawed because there was no "nation" to 
which black Americans could decolonize. Yet this seems to have been previously answered by 
Allen's inclusion of Jack O'D ell's summary of internal colonialism. For O'Dell, "defining the 
colonial problem it is the role of the institutional mechanisms of colonial domination which are 
decisive. Territory is merely the stage upon which these historically developed mechanisms of 
super-exploitation are organized into a system of oppression" (Allen, p. 8. Original emphasis.).  
 
Indeed, Black America has no pre -existing nation to which to decolonize making that 
community's description as an internal colony imperfect. However, were we  to understand that 
all the world's nation -states are the result of European imperialism and are comprised of various 
groups lumped together and renamed into inauthentic nation -state groupings, none of which 
previously existed and all of which exist to enr ich the West, then we could argue that no group 
can be considered as a colony. It is Allen's summary, which includes O'Dell's, and the focus of 
both on the basics of groups being defined as distinct, where institutions are established to 
maintain one group  in power over another that make sound the analogy of colonialism. To this 
day, Black America finds itself held distinctly apart, racially and spatially, with all its own 
political, economic and social factors controlled by a society and an elite residing outside those 
boundaries, boundaries which are both real and imagined. It remains, as said by Allen, that "The 
Third World, the underdeveloped world, exists just as surely within America as it does across the 
seas" (p. 284). 
  
Mass Media and Culture as Mass Colonization 
  
HAVING CONCLUDED that this colonial relationship exists and is fundamental it then follows 
logically that media and mass communication be analyzed in that context. Media and mass 
communication can no longer be dismissed as benign. They are  essential as weapons in an 
arsenal of colonial rule. They function as mechanisms of the "psychic violence" waged against 
the colonized often proceeding from, or acting in league with, the more physical forms (Fanon, 
1964). They establish the necessary cog nitive boundaries required for the development and 
maintenance of the "portrait of the colonized and colonizer" (Memmi, 1965) where readily 
identifiable definitions of members of society can be generated and re -promoted again and again 
via stereotyping and  popular imagery. US mass communications research was largely an 
extension of government national security defense and, in fact, was considered "a full fourth arm 
of the US military" whose goal, here and abroad, is to "prolong the agony of colonized people s 
and they continue to be used for that purpose today" (Simpson, 1993, p. 315).  
 
Similar to Allen's description of corporate dominance and media manipulation, the final product 
of mass communication is not some accidental ancillary to the pursuit of profi t. It is a 
mechanism of colonial dominance or maintenance of a social order. A focus on corporate 
consolidation of media ownership cannot be limited to some capitalist fantasy of the super -
wealthy doing what business people do. The period from 1983 to 2003  where the media run by 
fifty corporations shifted to the control of "five men" can only be understood in terms of there 
having been "no imperial ruler in past history" who controlled "multiple media channels that 
included television and satellite channels that can permeate entire societies with controlled sights 
and sounds" (Bagdikian, 2004, p. 27).


--- PAGE 7 ---
Page 7 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
  
ALLEN SAW as analogous the internal colonialism suffered by African America in the US and 
the British preference for indirect neocolonial rule over their mor e traditionally -held colonies. 
Mass communication is also seen in precisely this manner. Zbigniew Brzezinski, praising that 
same British indirect rule, has extolled the virtue of "cultural domination" which "had the effect 
of reducing the need of relying o n large military force to maintain the power of the imperial 
center." Updating his view for the US, Brzezinski continued:  
   The American global system emphasizes the technique 
   of co-optation ... to a much greater extent 
   than the earlier imperial systems did. It likewise 
   relies heavily on the indirect exercise of influence 
   on dependent foreign elites, while drawing 
   much benefit from the appeal of its democratic 
   principles and institutions. All of the foregoing 
   are reinforced by the massive but intangible impact 
   of the American domination of global communications, 
   popular entertainment, and mass culture and by 
   the potentially very tangible clout of America's 
   technological edge and military reach. Cultural 
   domination has been an underappreciated facet of 
   American global power ... America's mass culture 
   exercises a magnetic appeal, especially on the 
   world's youth ... American television programs 
   and films account for about three-fourths of the 
   global market. American popular music is equally 
   dominant, while American fads, eating habits, 
   and even clothing are exceedingly imitated 
   worldwide. The language of the internet is English, 
   and an overwhelming proportion of the 
   global computer chatter also originates from 
   America, influencing the content of global conversation. 
   (1997, pp. 24-25. Emphasis added.) 
 
 
THE CONTINUITY of colonialism, when viewed through the institution of mass media, can 
also be seen operating in a manner that can be described in terms of its management of ideology, 
or as Allen found in the expression of those participating in that process, "the art of managing 
change" (p. 216). Shifts in form, if not foundation, can be made "real" via an imaged 
management of "change." Allen's work here, too, remains influential. In my own Colonial 
Ideology of Mass Media model (5) media are described as functioning: A) to protect what Marx 
described as capitalism's "original sin" of "commodity formation" (Kamenka, 1983, pp. 462-463) 
where the goal is, for purposes of capitalist control, to assure that media are owned and managed 
as any other commodity; B) through image to re -inscribe notions of black people as this nation's 
"original commodity -fetish" (Tate, 2003, p. 4) where African bodies and cultural expression 
become fundamental to a national political economy which is in no way beneficial to them; C) to 
similarly re-inscribe racism as the nation's "conceptual original sin" where racialized groups are 
forced into " distinct categories defined by bi -polar extremes" forming a "mental economy" 
which is set to mass media (Downing and Husband, 2005); and D) to assure that, as Marimba 
Ani (1992) and Amos Wilson (1999) have described, this all works to keep a colonized blac k 
population "out of our minds" as a "political necessity."


--- PAGE 8 ---
Page 8 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
 
 
For instance, Allen described "a government monopoly of force" protective of "The American 
social mythology of private property rights" which would assure that the "black revolt" would be 
"accompanied by violence because those who propagate the mythology of property rights will 
not allow peaceful change." In fact, he continued, "this social fiction of property rights and the 
system of force and exploitation which it justifies... stand as the prim e enemies of black people" 
(p. 58). My work narrows (de -revolutionizes) this concept of property rights to the intellectual 
property rights structure of the mass media, which, as one of the US's largest industries, allows a 
"musical OPEC" (Palast, 2002) ol igopoly control over the cultural expression of colonized 
people. Hip -hop, like jazz and other forms of colonized cultural expression are, through 
copyright ownership (a subset of the intellectual property industry), forcibly subsumed by the 
same structure described by Frank Kofsky:  
   In its relation with an underdeveloped country 
   (colony), a more advanced industrial economy 
   (metropolis, "mother country") will use its superior 
   technology to ensure that commodity 
   exchange between the two redounds to the benefit 
   of the latter at the expense (in the form of 
   increasing impoverishment) of the former. The 
   metropolis employs its ownership of capital to 
   generate more capital--i.e., profits. The colony, 
   possessing nothing to exchange save the labor 
   power of its citizens and its natural resources, will 
   have its capital slowly drained away to the 
   metropolis... Black musicians ...labor not primarily 
   for themselves, but to enrich those who own 
   the "means of production" enumerated above. 
   (1970/1988, p. 12) 
 
 
In the case of a mixtape radio concept (or similarly conceived media work), the violence 
predicted by Allen results in unlicensed, unsanctioned exchange of culture by means equally 
unsanctioned or, in terms of mass media, "violent." That is, this is not a situation, despite the 
claims of liberal media reformists (Ball, 2009), that can be corrected simply by appeals to the 
Federal Communications Commission, which was itself was created specifica lly to protect the 
"right" of the elite to enrich themselves through ownership of nominally public airwaves 
(McChesney, 2004). Mixtapes represent a tepid form of Allen's suggested balance of legal and 
extra-legal means to an anti -colonial end. Mixtapes con taining culture, news, and ideas 
unsanctioned, "un-owned," and distributed freely outside a corporate imperial structure designed 
to manage popular discourse is part of that "violent" reclamation of media space made necessary 
by the violent imposition of c orporate ownership ostensibly justified through mythologies of 
private property rights.  
 
Other elements of my model are previously described and summarized in Allen's discussion of 
the ability of a dominant press to establish popular, and damaging yet politically necessary myths 
or concepts of society, particularly the colonized within it. Whereas in more traditional colonial 
settings media were intentionally developed to define uncooperative elements as "terrorists" 
(Simpson, 1993, p. 313), Alien shows this to have occurred in the US where such people became


--- PAGE 9 ---
Page 9 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
"looters" (Allen, p. 196). Of course, from this definition follows specific state -sanctioned 
treatment. When Allen wrote Black Awakening he described the press's ability to define black 
people as "rioters" and "looters" deserving of being "shot" (pp. 196 -197). In 2005 the colonized 
black population in New Orleans could be defined, in the press, as "looters" also to be shot 
justifiably both by agents of the federal government (Joyner, 2005) and by civili ans who likened 
their still as yet unpunished acts of killing unarmed black men to "pheasant season" (Kouddous, 
2008).  
 
MASS MEDIA continue to operate along the lines defined by a continuing colonialism. Just as 
Pinderhughes argues that anti-colonial movements must be developed from among the colonized 
and include support for a "positive abolition" through reparations and state structural reform 
(2009) so too, do these movements require a form of supportive journalism. Herein lies, again, 
the value of Alle n's work in helping to define Black America as a colony. His analysis in Black 
Awakening clarifies the kinds of work needed and the "theoretic tools" (Tabb, 1970) to be 
applied as explanation and justification.  
 
 
Emancipatory Journalism & Mixtape Radio as Twenty-first Century Anti-Colonial Media  
 
HAVING ESTABLISHED the fundamentally colonial nature of the black condition in the US, a 
range of theoretical tools becomes available that can then be applied anti -colonial methods of 
media work. The mixtape is hi p-hop's original mass medium (Ards, 2004). Its emergence 
initially challenged, still challenges and must increasingly challenge conventional means of mass 
communication. Emancipatory Journalism, coined by Hemant Shah (1996), is an anti -colonial 
philosophy of journalism the conception of which, Shah argues, is the result of more 
conventional forms of journalism practice and philosophy being insufficient in reporting and 
disseminating the politics of those most oppressed or marginalized. Emancipatory Journali sm is, 
of course, part of a wider tradition of revolutionary media (6) work that has challenged and must 
continue to challenge conventional notions of journalistic practice. In so doing Emancipatory 
Journalism challenges contemporary and intentionally myop ic views of the relationship of the 
press and society. Emancipatory Journalism is, as Shah explains, a "bottom up" form where 
journalists, encouraged to be part of social justice movements, apply standards of honesty, 
"comprehensiveness," and a willingness  to dismiss openly notions of objectivity (personal 
communication, July 14, 2008). (7)  
 
 
This "comprehensiveness" includes recentering the experience of communities in struggle so as 
to call attention to representatives of those communities as the experts,  pundits and leaders 
whose views would be included if not made the basis of reporting. It is a long -played scheme in 
mainstream media to have hosts or programs purport to be some kind of critical challenge to 
power, all the while having representatives of power as regular commentators or sources for that 
outlet's work. No matter how "radical" or challenging a journalist or media outlet claims to be, 
the trick of consistently returning to elite sources, (8) even if an attempt is made to criticize 
them, allow s for those sources to determine the agenda and acceptable range of ideas. This 
assures that even "debates" held in the mainstream are kept safely away from anything that might 
upset existing power.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Page 10 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
 
 
Both the mixtape and Emancipatory Journalism have origi ns in the irreverence of anti -colonial 
struggle. That is, the mixtape, initially created by DJs searching for a way to disseminate their art 
without the sanction of a mainstream corporate industry, allows for the kinds of communication 
ultimately threatening to power. When Brucie B, Jazzy Joyce, DJ Hollywood, then later Ron G 
and Kid Capri took their artfulness to their communities by recording sessions/parties, special 
custom mixes, all without institutions of state power backing them, the act itself spoke  to the 
very tradition of unsanctioned communication so often seen as dangerous. It was, is, an anti -
authoritarian act similar to that of newly "free" nations developing their own presses and 
traditions of journalism suited to their national development wh ich would, in turn, inspire or 
prefigure Emancipatory Journalism per se.  
 
 
THE ORIGINS of each, the mixtape and Emancipatory Journalism, are in what is initially 
recognized as a state of unfreedom. The act of, again, without sanction or permission creating  a 
mixture of music and sounds, not necessarily intended by the initial artist, or --as is the case with 
Ron G,--creating an entirely new genre of music is ultimately (and potentially) no different from 
consciously determining that new forms of media and jo urnalism are needed to popularize the 
need, justification and movements seeking immediate material uplift and change. Hence, the 
tenet of Emancipatory Journalism which challenges the very notion of Western journalism's core 
values of objectivity and balanc e. The very idea that anyone or any institution is or can be 
objective is seen as worse than foolish but an intentional construct meant to legitimize Western 
values, dominance and ability to define. As mentioned, this is a political necessity in maintainin g 
a colony. 
  
 
In fact, as Shah explains, discussions of "professional journalism" or "objectivity" are themselves 
political in nature. He says that "press freedom per se is not the issue that deserves close scrutiny. 
Rather, it is the politicization of the notion of press freedom that needs to be examined carefully" 
(Shah, p. 144). When mixtape DJs noted the lack of objective balance in their colonized media 
environment they re -established the rules of technology and art --turning turntables into that 
which would allow ancient expression to be reformulated --the turntables mimicked the African -
based tradition of looping repetition, trance -inducing sounds, etc. (Rose, 1994) and as a result 
threw up immediate challenges to and dents in the constructed colonized media environment.  
 
RETURNING to our earlier comparison of the function of property rights, state repression of 
mixtapes continues on that same premise. The lobbying arm of the music industry, the Recording 
Industry Association of America (RIAA), and thei r spokespeople currently attempt to defend 
myths around their dominance through the "social fiction" of copyright. This is done by 
parroting popular (and false) notions which argue that protection of copyright ultimately serves 
society by offering enough fiduciary reward to artists who are then encouraged to reward the rest 
of us with their art. If they do not get paid they won't create and we all suffer. This is done 
primarily to: A) disguise the fact that few artists own their own copyright and fewer enga ge in 
the production of art for money which has never been a primary impetus for creative individuals; 
B) disguise that ownership of copyrights are mostly held by those the RIAA was formed to


--- PAGE 11 ---
Page 11 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
protect; namely the major labels and not the artists themselves;  C) disguise the fact that 
copyright laws or the larger body of intellectual property laws remain essential to managing who 
becomes popular and to whom the bulk of the financial benefits go, and to; D) disguise that this 
is essential to the maintenance of power, that limiting the ability of oppressed communities to 
engage in unsanctioned communication is a paramount concern of those in power. Mixtapes 
represent one of the various mechanisms which might be well suited to unsanctioned 
communication. Those punished for being engaged in such processes, for example, street corner 
vendors or internet file sharers, are made example of less for their "crimes" than the kind of 
ungoverned exchange which can threaten empires. 
  
 
CONSIDER just a few comments made by artists, activists and journalists regarding the use, role 
and importance of mixtapes. To Head-Roc they represent "a means for artists who don't have the 
financial backing of a [major] label to display his or her skills ..." For Badia Albanna, speaking 
to the emancipatory journalistic potential, mixtapes "can be incorporated into our community 
activism and used as a medium for getting messages out, having speakers over music, try to 
connect people more with the message through music ..." Ralph Cooper understand s that 
mixtapes are important because "you could mix hot music with current events and news and shit 
so that kids aren't as stupid as they are." Unlike National Public Radio which, according to 
Cooper, "is boring as fuck and I can't convince anybody to lis ten to it, so you do [mixtapes] in a 
way that people would listen to it and that would be hot ... so listen to political events with [DJ] 
Premier beats ... but since news is a business and its sold to the forty -year-old white man 
everybody else who ain't f orty years old, white and educated they miss a lot of shit. And that's a 
lot of people" (Ball, 2009).  
 
 
Mixtapes represent that which was described by George Jackson when he said that "the job of 
the revolutionary in reactionary times is to make space for revolution to occur." In a media sense 
that means, as summarized by Toni Blackman in her response to a question about what mixtapes 
mean to her, "... Next shit. Newness. Authentic freestyles ... sharing of love. Biggin' up the 
people who don't get bigged u p in the mainstream ... it's an opportunity for them to get some 
shine." And it's Rosa Clemente, whose response to a question about the viability of a mixtape 
radio concept, truly encapsulates the immediate concern. "Our mentor," Clemente said, "Dr. 
[James] Turner really honed in ... he felt that the problem of the twenty -first century would be 
mass communication and how our people would be portrayed..." It also led her to discuss police 
raids in New York City of mixtape vendors led by the RIAA. "So they're  raiding now 'Mom and 
Pop' stores ... and it can't be because 50 [Cent] and them ain't making money. There's something 
else going on here" (Ball, 2009). Though Clemente correctly noted that further use of the 
mixtape, regardless of politics, would likely l ead to further repression this must be used or 
interpreted as further justification of the concept of mixtape radio and all politically organized 
subversive media.  
 
 
EMANCIPATORY JOURNALISM, in its assumption of a need for journalism to serve those 
developing social movements, works to reject the politically -inspired myth of objectivity which 
leads to "false balance," (9) or the assumption that opposing views deserve equal time. In a form


--- PAGE 12 ---
Page 12 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
of Amiri Baraka's critique of Jesse Jackson's 1988 democratic primary  campaign, "both the slave 
and slave master are right? Both slavery and freedom are right?" (Harris, 1991, p. 463). The 
functional need of mainstream journalism to construct fictional opposites allows for discussion to 
always remain safely kept away from t hat which might genuinely lead audiences to new 
conclusions and, therefore, new (unsanctioned) behavior. Therefore, if as has been shown, most 
mainstream sources come from the true minority, military and government officials, and so on, 
(10) even when there is debate among them it rarely would extend beyond acceptable notions of 
difference.  
 
Emancipatory Journalism requires a "much broader pattern of sourcing" which would be 
inclusive of, even centering, "...the people on the ground. The people who are exp eriencing 
issues and problems in neighborhoods and communities." These he says, "are often the poor, 
people of color, people with disabilities, etc. and those are the people who aren't getting their 
voices heard" (personal communication, July 14, 2008).  
 
 
Shah has simplified Emancipatory Journalism and provided a base model from which journalists 
seeking to employ such a form could model their work (Shah, 2007):  
Hemant Shah's 
"Emancipatory Journalism" 
Base Model 
 
                  PREVAILING MODEL   EMANCIPATORY MODEL 
 
Focus of story    Events             Process 
Primary Sources   Officials          Ordinary People 
Writing Style     Factual            Interpretative 
Legitimacy        Science            Grounded Knowledge 
Purpose           Description        Explanation/Orientation 
 
 
In this case, producing mixtapes by the colonized populations already engaged in hip -hop (study, 
production, performance, journalism, etc.) which allow for their realities to be more widely 
disseminated within their own communiti es, from their own perspectives and in their own 
manner or style would be the perfect implementation of Emancipatory Journalism. (11) That is, 
mixtapes could be fashioned so as to include views not just of particular events but the 
underlying realities whi ch cause those events. Interviewing people from the community who 
would serve as "official sources," while being fact -checked by intellectuals grounded in those 
very same communities, mixtapes could provide the space required for the kinds of interpretive 
change necessary to political activity. Similarly, when music mixes include the music 
intentionally excluded as part of a colonizing media's need to enact a "veritable ban on black 
militants" (Allen, p. 181) they become important anti -colonial tools. They help redefine what 
acceptable communication is and perhaps inspire further anti -colonial political activity.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Page 13 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
IT IS ULTIMATELY the issue of political activity which inspires the application of 
Emancipatory Journalism to the mixtape. FreeMix Radio: The Original Mixtape Radio Show, my 
specific project, was conceived originally to be an extension of a now defunct community -based 
political organization. To the extent that it has continued largely as the work of one person 
speaks loudly to this author's failure  in helping the development of that organization or in 
convincing others of this project's viability for their own. However, such criticism, far from some 
attempt at humility or pessimism, is meant to be instructive. Whether as the single form of 
organizational outreach or a component within a larger media plan mixtape radio remains a 
viable, cost-effective and mostly legal method of producing the kinds of media more necessary 
than ever.  
 
Allen's conclusions remain instructive. Colonialism cannot be overth rown using conventional 
methods most of which are designed specifically to prevent change which would threaten 
existing power. George Jackson (1971/1990), following a similar thesis of domestic colonialism 
and reaching similar conclusions to Allen, once sa id that a plan to overthrow such a system was 
threefold: a secret army, an independent political party and an underground press with "mass 
appeal." It is the latter which mixtape radio, as progressive or revolutionary art, media, or 
journalism seeks to add ress. But, as Jackson made clear, it must be connected to existing 
organizations. Allen's influence continues to inspire my attempts at developing this and sharing 
the concept of mixtape radio and its philosophy with existing organizations or those seeking  
them out.  
 
Alien's inspiration by Black Power -era activists is my own. So it remains as Angela Davis has 
said:  
 
Progressive and revolutionary art is inconceivable outside the context of political movements for 
radical change.... Cultural workers must th us be concerned not only with the creation of 
progressive art, but must be actively involved in the organization of people's political 
movements. (Osayande, 2004)  
 
Legendary revolutionary artist Emory Douglas made a similar point when saying, "Without the  
party, the [Black Panther] paper wouldn't have had the same impact" (Gaiter, 2005). What the 
mixtape radio concept, grounded in a variant of Internal Colonialism Theory is meant to convey 
is just that: its existence is defined by a continuing colonialism.  Its method of freely distributing 
a people's -based journalism, inspired and funded by the people, with supporting music from 
political, underground, excluded artists is designed to expose its own relevance, while seeking to 
make colonialism and its brand of journalism irrelevant. Likewise, Allen's work continues to 
inspire where each edition of FreeMix Radio is meant to encourage further Black Awakening in 
Capitalist America.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Page 14 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
 
 
Works Cited  
 
Allen, Robert, L. (1990). Black Awakening in Capitalist America. (New York: Doubleday, 1970) 
Trenton: Africa World Press.  
 
Allen, Robert, L. (2008). "Barack Obama and the Children of Globalizafion." The Black 
Schohzr, Vol. 38, No. 4 (Winter).  
 
Ani, Marimba. (1994). Yurugu: An African-Centered Critique of European Cultural Thought and 
Behavior. Trenton: Africa World Press.  
 
Ards, Angela. (2004). Organizing the Hip-Hop Generation. In Murray Forman & Mark Anthony 
Neal (Eds.). That's the Joint! The Hip-Hop Studies Reader (pp. 311-323). New York: Routledge.  
 
Atkinson, Pansye. (1993). Brown vs. Topeka: Desegregation and Miseducation: An African 
American's View. New York: African American Images.  
 
Austin, Algernon. (January 18, 2008). "What Recession Means for Black America." Economic 
Policy Institute. Retrieved from http://www.epi.org/publications/entry/ib241/.  
 
Ball, Jared, A. (2008). "Barack Obama, 'Connected Distance': Race and Twenty-first Century 
Neo-colonialism." The Black Scholar, Vol. 38, No. 4 (Winter).  
 
Ball, Jared, A. (2009). "FreeMix Radio: The Original Mixtape Radio Show: A Case Study in 
Mixtape "Radio" and Emancipatory Journalism." Journal of Black Studies, Vol. 39, No. 4, 
March.  
 
Bell, Derrick. (2004). Silent Covenants: Brown v. Board of Education and the Unfulfilled Hopes 
for Racial Reform. Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
 
Bernays, Edward. (1928/2005). Propaganda. Brooklyn: IG Publishing.  
 
Brzezinski, Zbigniew. (1997). The Grand Chessboard: American Primacy and Its Geostrategic 
Imperatives. New York: Basic Books.  
 
Carr, Greg. (2008). A Conversation About Race. MSNBC (Television). Retrieved July 19, 2009 
from http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/21134540/vp/24076911#24076911.


--- PAGE 15 ---
Page 15 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
Cosby, Bill and Poussaint, Alvin. (2009) (Television). Meet The Press. Transcript retrieved July 
19, 2009 from http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/28605356/.  
 
Creamer, Matthew. (Oct. 17, 2008). "Obama Wins! ... Ad Age's Marketer of the Year." 
Advertising Age. Retrieved July 19, 2009. http://adage.com/moy2008/article?article_id=131810.  
 
Davis, Angela. (2003). Are Prisons Obsolete? Boston: Seven Stories Press.  
 
Delaney, Martin. (1852/2004). The Condition, Elevation, Emigration, and Destiny of the Colored 
People of the United States and Official Report of the Niger Valley Exploring Party. New York: 
Humanity Books.  
 
Downing, John and Husband, Charles. (2005). Representing 'Race'." Racisms, Ethnicities and 
Media. London: Sage Publications.  
 
Fanon, Frantz. (1963). The Wretched of the Earth. New York: Grove Press.  
 
Fanon, Frantz. (1964). Toward the African Revolution. New York: Grove Press.  
 
Ford, Glen. (2009). "The Shrinking American Empire." Black Agenda Report. Retrieved July 17, 
2009 from http://www.blackagendareport.com/?q=content/shrinking-american-empire.  
 
Gaiter, Colette. (June 8, 2005). "Visualizing a Revolution: Emory Douglas and The Black 
Panther Newspaper." ALGA. Retrieved from http://www.aiga.org/content.cfm/visualizing-a-
revolution-emory-douglasand- the-black-panther-new.  
 
Galbraith, John. (2008). The Predator State: How Conservatives Abandoned the Free Market and 
Why Liberals Should Too. New York: Free Press.  
 
Harris, William, J. (Ed.) (1991). The Leroi Jones/Amiri Baraka Reader (1991). New York: 
Thunder's Mouth Press. Hilliard, David and Weise, Donald. (2002). The Huey P. Newton 
Reader. New York: Seven Stories Press.  
 
INCITE! Women of Color Against Violence. (2007). The Revolution Will Not Be Funded: 
Beyond the Non-Profit Industrial Complex. Boston: South End Press.  
 
Jackson, George. (1971/1990). Blood In My Eye. Baltimore: Black Classic Press.  
 
Jones, Van. (Interview). (March 20, 2007). "A Van With a Plan: An Interview with Van Jones, 
Advocate for Social Justice and Shared Green Prosperity." Grist.org. Retrieved from


--- PAGE 16 ---
Page 16 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
http://www.grist.org/article/vanjones/#comments.  
 
Joseph, Peniel, E. (Feb. 2008). "From Black Power to Barack Obama." The Brooklyn Rail.  
 
Joyner, James. (September 2, 2005). Katrina: Governor Orders Troops to Shoot and Kill Looters. 
Outside the Beltway. Retrieved from http://www.outsidethebeltway.com/archives/ 
la_governor_warns_troops_will_/.  
 
Kamenka, Eugene. (1983). The Portable Karl Marx. New York: Penguin Books.  
 
Kofsky, Frank. (1970, 1988). Black Nationalism and the Revolution in Music. New York: 
Pathfinder Press. Kouddous, Sharif A. (December 19, 2008). Katrina's Hidden Race War. 
Democracy Now! Podcast transcript retrieved from http://www.democracynow.org/2008/12/19/ 
katrinas_hidden_race_war_in_aftermath.  
 
Lewis, David, L. (1995). W.E.B. Du Bois: A Render. New York: Henry Holt and Company, Inc.  
 
McChesney, Robert. (2004). The Problem of the Media: US Communication Politics in the 21st 
Century. New York: Monthly Review Press.  
 
Memmi, Albert. (1965). The Colonizer and the Colonized. Boston: Beacon Press.  
 
Moreno, Sylvia. (October 24, 2007). "Poverty Rate Grows Amid an Economic Boom DC's 
Poorest Left Behind By Renewal, Report Finds." Washington Post.  
 
Muhammad, Dedrick, Davis Attieno, Meizhu Lui, Betsy Leondar-Wright (2004). The State of 
the Dream 2004: Enduring Disparities in Black and White. Boston: United for a Fair Economy.  
 
Nelson, Jill. (2001). Police Brutality: An Anthology. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.  
 
Osayande, Ewuare. (2004). "Art at War: Revolutionary Art Against Cultural Imperialism. Black 
Commentator." Retrieved from 
http://www.blackcommentator.com/108/108_guest_osayande_pf.html  
 
Palast, Greg. (2002). The Best Democracy Money Can Buy. London: Pluto Press.  
 
Patel, Raj. (2008). Raj Patel on the Collapse of the World Trade Organization Talks. Democracy 
Now! (Interview) (July 31) retrieved July 17, 2009 from http: 
//www.democracynow.org/2008/7/31/raj_patel_on_the_collapse_of


--- PAGE 17 ---
Page 17 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
Peck, Janice. (2008). The Age of Oprah: Cultural Icon for the Neoliberal Era. New York: 
Paradigm Publishers.  
 
Perkins, John. (2004). Confessions of an Economic Hit Man. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler 
Publishers, Inc.  
 
Pinderhughes, Charles. (2008, July, 31). "African Americans and Internal Colonial Theory." 
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Sociological Association Annual 
Meeting, Sheraton Boston and the Boston Marriott Copley Place, Boston, MA. Retrieved from 
http://www.allacademic.com/meta/p243088_index.html.  
 
Pinderhughes, Charles. (April 10, 2009). "Robert L. Allen Celebrated: A Fortieth Anniversary 
Tribute to Black Awakening in Capitalist America." Berkeley, CA. See this issue of The Black 
Scholar. Podcast retrieved from http://www.voxunion.com/?p=1089.  
 
Rivera, Amaad, Cotto-Escalera, Brenda, Anisha Desai, Jeannette Huezo, Dedrick Muhammad. 
(2008). Foreclosed: State of the Dream 2008. Boston: United for a Fair Economy.  
 
Rose, Tricia. (1994). Black Noise. Middletown: Wesleyan University Press.  
 
Shah, Hemant. (1996, May). "Modernization, Marginalization, and Emancipation: Toward a 
Normative Model of Journalism and National Development." Communication Theory, 6(2), 143-
166.  
 
Shah, Hemant. (2007). "Journalism in an Age of Mass Media Globalization." June 2007. 
Retrieved from http://www.idsnet.org/Papers/Communications/HEMANT_SHAH.HTM.  
 
Simpson, Chris. (1993). "US Mass Communication Research, Counterinsurgency, and Scientific 
'Reality.'" In Ruthless Criticism: New Perspectives in US Communication History, (Eds. 
Solomon, William and McChesney, Robert). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.  
 
Simpson, Chris. (1994). Science of Coercion: Communication Research & Psychological 
Warfare 1945-1960. New York:Oxford University Press.  
 
Simpson, Chris. (Ed.) (1998). Universities and Empire: Money and Politics in the Social 
Sciences during the Cold War. New York: New Press.  
 
Spady, James G., Alim, H. Samy, Samir Meghelli (2006). The Global Cipha: Hip-Hop Culture 
and Consciousness. Philadelphia: Black History Museum Press.


--- PAGE 18 ---
Page 18 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
Street, Paul. (2008). Barack Obama and the Future of American Politics. New York: Paradigm 
Publishers.  
 
Tabb, William, K. (1970). The Political Economy of the Black Ghetto. New York: Norton.  
 
Tate, Greg (Ed.) (2003). Everything But the Burden. New York: Broadway Books.  
 
"UN report: At 45%, Gaza unemployment is highest in the world." July 28, 2008. Haaretz 
Service. Retrieved July 19, 2009 from http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/spages/1006282.html.  
 
Wilson, Amos. (February 5, 1999). "The Impact of the Media on the African Psyche." 
Democracy Now! Retrieved from http://www.democracynow.org/1999/2/5/ 
amos_wilson_the_impact_of_the_media_on_the_african_american_psyche.  
 
Endnotes  
 
(1.) Allen writes, "The black rebellions injected a new sense of urgency into the urban crisis and 
prompted the corporate elite to reassess its role in handling the problems of the cities. The 
strategy evolved by the corporatists calls for the establishment of a black elite which can 
administer the ghettos. Where possible, black workers will be reintegrated into the economy..."  
 
(2.) Economist Michael Perelman describes "a consolidated national wealth that rests within the 
tiniest 1 percent of the population in terms of national economic pyramid whose top 10 percent 
can be 'sliced off' to reveal an even tinier elite atop which rests the most wealthy 10 percent or 
13,600 households." Interview with Robert McChesney for Media Matters, July 20, 2008. 
Retrieved from http://will.illinois.edu/mediamatters/show/july-20-2008/.  
 
(3.) Passed by Congress on January 31, 1865, and ratified on December 6, 1865, the 13th 
amendment abolished slavery in the United States and provides that "Neither slavery nor 
involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly 
convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction" 
(Emphasis added.).  
 
(4.) The "San Francisco 8." http://www.freethesf8.org/.  
 
(5.) The model can be viewed/downloaded at http://www.voxunion.com/?p=753.  
 
(6.) Juanita Darling, "Re-Imagining the Nation: Revolutionary Media and Historiography in 
Mesoamerica" in Journalism History, 32:4 (Winter 2007), quotes Harva Hatchen as defining 
revolutionary media as, "illegal and subversive mass communication utilizing the press and


--- PAGE 19 ---
Page 19 of 19 
 
"Anti-colonial media: the continuing impact of Robert L. Allen's Black Awakening in Capitalist America" 
Ball, Jared A. (2010, June 22) 
broadcasting to over-throw a government or wrest control from alien rulers.'"  
 
(7.) The interview can be heard online at http://www.voxunion.com/?p=81.  
 
(8.) The work of Fairness and Accuracy In Reporting (FAIR) is of value here. As they reported 
in their May/June 2002 edition of Extra!, titled, "Power Sources: On party, gender, race and 
class, TV news looks to the most powerful groups": "Instead of a liberal bias, the study found, 
source selection favored the elite interests that the corporate owners of these shows depend on 
for advertising revenue, regulatory support and access to information. Network news 
demonstrated a clear tendency to showcase the opinions of the most powerful political and 
economic actors, while giving limited access to those voices that would be most likely to 
challenge them."  
 
(9.) Fairness and Accuracy In Reporting (FAIR) Action Alert! 09/30/04, "Finding Fault on Both 
Sides Can Be False Balance." "While fact-checking is an essential media function, particularly 
during an election year, it's a hollow exercise if journalists start with the assumption that both 
sides must be found equally guilty of falsehoods. It is, in fact, not always the case that both 
campaigns are responsible for deceptive claims to the same degree; coverage that insists on a 
false even-handedness, while pretending to expose political mendacity, actually gives cover for it 
by neutralizing criticism with the "they all do it" defense. Such coverage may protect news 
outlets from charges of bias, but it does a disservice to voters."  
 
(10.) "A new FAIR study of NPR's guest list shows the radio service relies on the same elite and 
influential sources that dominate mainstream commercial news, and falls short of reflecting the 
diversity of the American public." "How Public is Public Radio? A study of NPR's [National 
Public Radio] guest list." Fairness and Accuracy In Reporting, www.fair.org, June 2004. See also 
Achbar, Mark. (Director). (1992). Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and the Media. 
[Film.] Canada: Necessary Illusions Productions.  
 
(11.) A point with which Shah himself agrees, stating that while it had not occurred to him that 
mixtapes could be put to such use, the idea is a good one. Locally produced, consumed and 
focused is precisely what Emancipatory Journalism calls for. Personal communication, July 14, 
2008.

