=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Are-You-Ready-Emergency-Prep-Guide.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 200
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:57:15.115391
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
An In-depth Guide to Citizen Preparedness 
Are You Ready? 
Are You Ready? An In-depth Guide to Citizen Preparedness IS-22 August 2004 
FEMA


--- PAGE 2 ---
Preface
 
This guide has been prepared for direct dissemination to the general public and is 
based on the most reliable hazard awareness and emergency education information 
available at the time of publication, including advances in scientiﬁ c knowledge, 
more accurate technical language, and the latest physical research on what happens 
in disasters. 
This publication is, however, too brief to cover every factor, situation, or difference 
in buildings, infrastructure, or other environmental features that might be of inter­
est. To help you explore your interest further, additional sources of information 
have been included. 
The guide has been designed to help the citizens of this nation learn how to 
protect themselves and their families against all types of hazards.  It can be used 
as a reference source or as a step-by-step manual. The focus of the content is on 
how to develop, practice, and maintain emergency plans that reﬂect what must be 
done before, during, and after a disaster to protect people and their property . Also 
included is information on how to assemble a disaster supplies kit that contains 
the food, water, and other supplies in sufﬁcient quantity for individuals and their 
families to survive following a disaster in the event they must rely on their own 
resources. 
Are You Ready? is just one of many resources the Department of Homeland Security 
provides the citizens of this nation to help them be prepared against all types of 
hazards. The Department of Homeland Security’s Ready Campaign seeks to help 
America be better prepared for even unlikely emergency scenarios.  Information 
on how the public can be ready in case of a national emergency – including a 
possible terrorism attack involving biological, chemical, or radiological weapons 
– can be found by logging on to the Department of Homeland Security’s web site, 
www.ready .gov, or by calling 1-800-BE-READY for printed information. 
1


--- PAGE 3 ---
CERT 
Following a disaster, community members may be on their own for a period of 
time because of the size of the area affected, lost communications, and impassable 
roads. 
The Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) program supports local re­
sponse capability by training volunteers to organize themselves and spontaneous 
volunteers at the disaster site, to provide immediate assistance to victims, and to 
collect disaster intelligence to support responders’ efforts when they arrive. 
In the classroom, participants learn about the hazards they face and ways to prepare 
for them.  CERT members are taught basic organizational skills that they can use to 
help themselves, their loved ones, and their neighbors until help arrives. 
Local government, or one of its representatives, sponsor CERT training in the com­
munity . Training consists of 20 hours of instruction on topics that include disaster 
preparedness, ﬁre safety , disaster medical operations, light search and rescue, team 
organization, and disaster psychology .  Upon completion of the training, partici­
pants are encouraged to continue their involvement by participating in training 
activities and volunteering for projects that support their community’s disaster 
preparedness efforts. 
For additional information on CERT, visit training.fema.gov/EMIWeb/CERT or 
contact your local Citizen Corps Council. 
2


--- PAGE 4 ---
Citizen Corps 
Citizen Corps provides opportunities for people across the country to participate 
in a range of measures to make their families, their homes, and their communities 
safer from the threats of crime, terrorism, public health issues, and disasters of all 
kinds. Through public education, training opportunities, and volunteer programs, 
every American can do their part to be better prepared and better protected and to 
help their communities do the same. 
Citizen Corps is managed at the local level by Citizen Corps Councils, which bring 
together leaders from law enforcement, ﬁre, emergency medical and other emer­
gency management, volunteer organizations, local elected ofﬁcials, the private sector, 
and other community stakeholders. These Citizen Corps Councils will organize 
public education on disaster mitigation and preparedness, citizen training, and 
volunteer programs to give people of all ages and backgrounds the opportunity to 
support their community’s emergency services and to safeguard themselves and 
their property . 
By participating in Citizen Corps programs, you can make your home, your neigh­
borhood and your community a safer place to live. To ﬁnd out more, please visit 
the Citizen Corps Web site, www.citizencorps.gov or visit www.fema.gov. 
Activities under Citizen Corps include existing and new federally sponsored pro­
grams administered by the Department of Justice (Neighborhood Watch and Vol­
unteers in Police Service), FEMA (Community Emergency Response Teams - CERT), 
and Department of Health and Human Services (Medical Reserve Corps), as well 
as other activities through Citizen Corps afﬁliate programs that share the common 
goal of community and family safety . 
3


--- PAGE 5 ---
Certiﬁ cate of Completion
 
As an option, credit can be provided to those who successfully complete the entire 
guide and score at least 75 percent on a ﬁ nal examination. To take the ﬁ nal exami­
nation, log on to training.fema.gov/emiweb/ishome.htm and follow the links for 
Are You Ready? An In-depth Guide to Citizen Preparedness IS-22. Those who pass the examina­
tion can expect to receive a certiﬁcate of completion within two weeks from the 
date the examination is received at FEMA.  Questions about this option should be 
directed to the FEMA Independent Study Program by calling 1-800-238-2258 and 
asking for the Independent Study Ofﬁce or writing to: 
FEMA Independent Study Program 
Emergency Management Institute 
16825 South Seton Avenue 
Emmitsburg, MD 21727 
Facilitator Guide 
Teaching others about disaster preparedness is a rewarding experience that results 
from knowing you have helped your fellow citizens be ready in the event a disas­
ter should strike. As a tool to aid those who want to deliver such training, FEMA 
developed a Facilitator Guide with an accompanying CD-ROM for use with this Are 
You Ready? guide. The materials are appropriate for use in training groups such as 
school children, community organizations, scouts, social groups, and many others. 
The Facilitator Guide includes guidelines on how to deliver training to various 
audiences, generic lesson plans for teaching disaster preparedness, and information 
on how to obtain other resources that can be used to augment the material in the 
Are You Ready? guide. The CD-ROM contains teaching aids such as electronic visu­
als that reﬂect key information and handouts that can be printed and distributed 
to reinforce what is being presented. To obtain a copy of the Facilitator Guide and 
CD-ROM, call the FEMA Distribution Center at (800) 480-2520 or request it by 
writing to: 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
P .O. Box 2012 
Jessup, MD 20794-2012 
4


--- PAGE 6 ---
Table of Contents 
Preface.................................................................................................................... 1
 
Why Prepare .......................................................................................................... 7
 
Part 1 Basic Preparedness ..................................................................................... 13
 
Section 1.1 Getting Informed............................................................................ 15
 
Section 1.2 Emergency Planning and Checklists...............................................23
 
Section 1.3 Assemble a Disaster Supplies Kit ...................................................31
 
Section 1.4 Shelter ........................................................................................... 37
 
Section 1.5 Hazard-Specific Preparedness ........................................................43
 
Section 1.6 Practicing and Maintaining Your Plan............................................45
 
Part 2 Natural Hazards .......................................................................................... 47
 
Section 2.1 Floods ........................................................................................... 49
 
Section 2.2 Tornadoes ..................................................................................... 57
 
Section 2.3 Hurricanes .................................................................................... 65
 
Section 2.4 Thunderstorms and Lightning ........................................................73
 
Section 2.5 Winter Storms and Extreme Cold ..................................................79
 
Section 2.6 Extreme Heat ................................................................................ 85
 
Section 2.7 Earthquakes ................................................................................... 93
 
Section 2.8 Volcanoes ................................................................................... 101
 
Section 2.9 Landslides and Debris Flow (Mudslide) .......................................105
 
Section 2.10 Tsunamis .................................................................................. 111
 
Section 2.11 Fires .......................................................................................... 115
 
Section 2.12 Wildfires ................................................................................... 123
 
Part 3 Technological Hazards .............................................................................. 127
 
Section 3.1 Hazardous Materials Incidents...................................................... 129
 
Section 3.2 Household Chemical Emergencies ...............................................133
 
Section 3.3 Nuclear Power Plants................................................................... 139
 
Part 4 Terrorism .................................................................................................. 145
 
Section 4.1 General Information about Terrorism ...........................................147
 
Section 4.2 Explosions ................................................................................... 151
 
Section 4.3 Biological Threats........................................................................ 155
 
Section 4.4 Chemical Threats......................................................................... 159
 
Section 4.5 Nuclear Blast ............................................................................... 163
 
Section 4.6 Radiological Dispersion Device (RDD)........................................169
 
Section 4.7 Homeland Security Advisory System...........................................173
 
Part 5 Recovering from Disaster.......................................................................... 179
 
Appendix A: Water Conservation Tips ................................................................ 191
 
Appendix B: Disaster Supplies Checklist............................................................. 195
 
Appendix C: Family Communications Plan......................................................... 201
 
5


--- PAGE 7 ---
6


--- PAGE 8 ---
Are You Ready? Why Prepare 
Why Prepare
 
There are real beneﬁts to being prepared. 
•	 Being prepared can reduce fear, anxiety , and losses that accompany disasters. 
Communities, families, and individuals should know what to do in the event 
of a ﬁre and where to seek shelter during a tornado. They should be ready to 
evacuate their homes and take refuge in public shelters and know how to care 
for their basic medical needs. 
•	 People also can reduce the impact of disasters ( ﬂ ood prooﬁ ng, elevating a 
home or moving a home out of harm ’s way , and securing items that could 
shake loose in an earthquake) and sometimes avoid the danger completely . 
The need to prepare is real. 
•	 Disasters disrupt hundreds of thousands of lives every year. Each disaster has 
lasting effects, both to people and property . 
•	 If a disaster occurs in your community , local government and disaster-relief 
organizations will try to help you, but you need to be ready as well.  Local 
responders may not be able to reach you immediately , or they may need to focus 
their efforts elsewhere. 
•	 You should know how to respond to severe weather or any disaster that could 
occur in your area—hurricanes, earthquakes, extreme cold, ﬂ ooding, or 
terrorism. 
•	 You should also be ready to be self-sufﬁcient for at least three days. This may 
mean providing for your own shelter, ﬁrst aid, food, water, and sanitation. 
Using this guide makes preparation practical. 
•	 This guide was developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA), which is the agency responsible for responding to national disas­
ters and for helping state and local governments and individuals prepare for 
emergencies.  It contains step-by-step advice on how to prepare for, respond 
to, and recover from disasters. 
•	 Used in conjunction with information and instructions from local emergency 
management ofﬁces and the American Red Cross, Are You Ready? will give you 
what you need to be prepared. 
7


--- PAGE 9 ---
Why Prepare Are You Ready? 
Using Are You Ready? to Prepare 
The main reason to use this guide is to help protect yourself and your family in the 
event of an emergency . Through applying what you have learned in this guide, you 
are taking the necessary steps to be ready when an event occurs. 
Every citizen in this country is part of a national emergency management system 
that is all about protection–protecting people and property from all types of haz­
ards. Think of the national emergency management system as a pyramid with you, 
the citizen, forming the base of the structure. At this level, you have a responsibil­
ity to protect yourself and your family by knowing what to do before, during, and 
after an event.  Some examples of what you can do follow: 
Before • Know the risks and danger signs. 
•	 Purchase insurance, including ﬂood insurance, which is not 
part of your homeowner’s policy . 
•	 Develop plans for what to do. 
•	 Assemble a disaster supplies kit. 
•	 Volunteer to help others. 
During • Put your plan into action. 
•	 Help others. 
•	 Follow the advice and guidance of ofﬁ cials in charge of the 
 event. 
After • Repair damaged property . 
•	 Take steps to prevent or reduce future loss. 
You will learn more about these and other actions you should take as you progress 
through this guide. 
It is sometimes necessary to turn to others within the local community for help. 
The local level is the second tier of the pyramid, and is made up of paid employees 
and volunteers from the private and public sectors. These individuals are engaged 
in preventing emergencies from happening and in being prepared to respond if 
something does occur.   Most emergencies are handled at the local level, which 
puts a tremendous responsibility on the community for taking care of its citizens. 
Among the responsibilities faced by local ofﬁ cials are: 
•	 Identifying hazards and assessing potential risk to the community . 
•	 Enforcing building codes, zoning ordinances, and land-use management pro­
grams. 
•	 Coordinating emergency plans to ensure a quick and effective response. 
•	 Fighting ﬁres and responding to hazardous materials incidents. 
•	 Establishing warning systems. 
•	 Stocking emergency supplies and equipment. 
•	 Assessing damage and identifying needs. 
8


--- PAGE 10 ---
Are You Ready? Why Prepare 
•	 Evacua
ting the community to safer locations. 
•	 Taking care of the injured. 
•	 Sheltering those who cannot remain in their homes. 
•	 Aiding recovery efforts. 
If support and resources are needed beyond what the local level can provide, the 
community can request assistance from the state. The state may be able to provide 
supplemental resources such as money , equipment, and personnel to close the 
gap between what is needed and what is available at the local level. The state also 
coordinates the plans of the various jurisdictions so that activities do not interfere 
or conﬂict with each other. To ensure personnel know what to do and efforts are 
in agreement, the state may offer a program that provides jurisdictions the oppor­
tunity to train and exercise together. 
At the top of the pyramid is the federal government, which can provide resources 
to augment state and local efforts. These resources can be in the form of: 
•	 Public educational materials, such as this guide, that can be used to prepare 
the public for protecting itself from hazards. 
•	 Financial grants for equipment, training, exercises, personnel, and programs. 
•	 Grants and loans to help communities respond to and recover from disasters 
so severe that the President of the United States has deemed them beyond 
state and local capabilities. 
•	 Research ﬁndings that can help reduce losses from disaster. 
•	 Technical assistance to help build stronger programs. 
The national emergency management system is built on shared responsibilities and 
active participation at all levels of the pyramid. The whole system begins with you, 
the citizen, and your ability to follow good emergency management practices— 
whether at home, work, or other locations. 
Are You Ready? An In-depth Guide to Citizen Preparedness is organized to help you through 
the process.  Begin by reading Part 1 which is the core of the guide. This part 
provides basic information that is common to all hazards on how to create and 
maintain an emergency plan and disaster supplies kit. 
Part 1:  Basic Preparedness 
•	 A series of worksheets to help you obtain information from the community 
that will form the foundation of your plan. You will need to ﬁnd out about 
hazards that threaten the community , how the population will be warned, 
evacuation routes to be used in times of disaster, and the emergency plans of 
the community and others that will impact your plan. 
•	 Guidance on speciﬁc content that you and your family will need to develop 
and include in your plan on how to escape from your residence, communi­
cate with one another during times of disaster, shut-off household utilities, 
insure against ﬁnancial loss, acquire basic safety skills, address special needs 
such as disabilities, take care of animals, and seek shelter. 
9


--- PAGE 11 ---
Why Prepare Are You Ready? 
•	 Checklists of items to consider including in your disaster supplies kit that will 
meet your family’s needs following a disaster whether you are at home or at 
other locations. 
Part 1 is also the gateway to the speciﬁc hazards and recovery information con­
tained in Parts 2, 3, 4, and 5.  Information from these sections should be read care­
fully and integrated in your emergency plan and disaster supplies kit based on the 
hazards that pose a threat to you and your family . 
Part 2: Natural Hazards 
•	 Floods 
•	 Hurricanes 
•	 Thunderstorms and lightning 
•	 Tornadoes 
•	 Winter storms and extreme cold 
•	 Extreme heat 
•	 Earthquakes 
•	 Volcanoes 
•	 Landslides and debris ﬂow 
•	 Tsunamis 
•	 Fires 
•	 Wild ﬁ res 
Part 3:Technological Hazards 
•	 Hazardous materials incidents 
• Household chemical emergencies 
• Nuclear power plant emergencies 
Part 4:Terrorism 
•	 Explosions 
•	 Biological threats 
•	 Chemical threats 
•	 Nuclear blasts 
•	 Radiological dispersion device events 
Part 5: Recovering from Disaster 
•	 Health and safety guidelines 
•	 Returning home 
•	 Seeking disaster assistance 
•	 Coping with disaster 
•	 Helping others 
10


--- PAGE 12 ---
Are You Ready? Why Prepare 
References 
As you work through individual sections, you will see reference points. These are 
reminders to refer to previous sections for related information on the topic being 
discussed. 
FEMA PublicationsThroughout the guide are lists of publications available from FEMA that can help 
you learn more about the topics covered. To obtain these publications, call the 
FEMA Distribution Center at 1-800-480-2520 or request them by mail from: 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
P .O. Box 2012 
Jessup, MD 20794-2012 
Other PublicationsOther publications cited throughout this guide can be obtained by contacting the 
organizations below: 
American Red Cross National Headquarters 
2025 E Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20006 
Phone: (202) 303-4498 
www.redcross.org/pubs/dspubs/cde.html 
National Weather Service 
1325 East West Highway
 Silver Spring, MD 20910 
www.nws.noaa.gov/education.html 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
1600 Clifton Rd, Atlanta, GA 30333, U.S.A 
Public Inquiries: (404) 639-3534 / (800) 311-3435 
www.cdc.gov 
U.S. Geological Survey 
Information Services 
P .O. Box 25286 
Denver, CO 80225 
1 (888) 275-8747 
www.usgs.gov 
11


--- PAGE 13 ---
Why Prepare Are You Ready? 
Disaster Public Education 
Web sites 
You can broaden your knowledge of disaster preparedness topics presented in this 
guide by reviewing information provided at various government and non-govern­
ment Web sites.  Provided below is a list of recommended sites. The Web address 
for each site reﬂects its home address.  Searches conducted from each home site’s 
page result in the most current and extensive list of available material for the site. 
Government Sites 
Be Ready Campaign www.ready .gov 
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry www.atsdr.cdc.gov 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention www.cdc.gov 
Citizen Corps www.citizencorps.gov 
Department of Commerce www.doc.gov 
Department of Education www.ed.gov 
Department of Energy www.energy .gov 
Department of Health and Human Services www.hhs.gov/disasters 
Department of Homeland Security www.dhs.gov 
Department of Interior www.doi.gov 
Department of Justice www.justice.gov 
Environmental Protection Agency www.epa.gov 
Federal Emergency Management Agency www.fema.gov 
Food and Drug Administration www.fda.gov 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration www.noaa.gov 
National Weather Service www.nws.noaa.gov 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission www.nrc.gov 
The Critical Infrastructure Assurance Ofﬁce www.ciao.gov 
The White House www.whitehouse.gov/response 
U.S. Department of Agriculture www.usda.gov 
U.S. Fire Administration www.usfa.fema.gov 
U.S. Fire Administration Kids Page www.usfa.fema.gov/kids 
U.S. Geological Survey www.usgs.gov 
U.S. Ofﬁce of Personnel Management www.opm.gov/emergency 
U.S. Postal Service www.usps.gov 
USDA Forest Service Southern Research Station www.wildﬁ reprograms.com 
Non-government Sites 
American Red Cross www.redcross.org 
Institute for Business and Home Safety www.ibhs.org 
National Fire Protection Association www.nfpa.org 
National Mass Fatalities Institute www.nmﬁ .org 
National Safety Compliance www.osha-safety-training.net 
The Middle East Seismological Forum www.meieisforum.net 
The Pan American Health Organization www.disaster-info.net/SUMA 
12


--- PAGE 14 ---
1 
Basic 
Preparedness 
In this part of the guide, you will learn preparedness strategies that are common to all disasters. You plan only once, 
and are able to apply your plan to all types of hazards. 
When you complete Part 1, you will be able to: 
• 	 Get informed about hazards and emergencies that may affect you and your 
family.
 
• 	 Develop an emergency plan. 
• 	 Collect and assemble disaster supplies kit. 
• 	 Learn where to seek shelter from all types of hazards. 
• 	 Identify the community warning systems and evacuation routes. 
• 	 Include in your plan required information from community and school plans. 
• 	 Learn what to do for speciﬁ c hazards. 
• 	 Practice and maintain your plan. 
13


--- PAGE 15 ---
1.1 
Getting Informed


--- PAGE 16 ---
1.1 Are You Ready? Getting Informed 
Learn a
bout the hazards that may strike your community , the risks you face from 
these hazards, and your community’s plans for warning and evacuation. You can 
obtain this information from your local emergency management ofﬁ ce or your 
local chapter of the American Red Cross.  Space has been provided here to record 
your answers. 
Hazards 
Ask local authorities about each possible hazard or emergency and use the work­
sheet that follows to record your ﬁndings and suggestions for reducing your 
family’s risk. 
Possible Hazards and 
Emergencies 
Risk Level 
(None, Low, 
Moderate, or 
High) 
How can I reduce my risk? 
Natural Hazards 
1. Floods 
2. Hurricanes 
3. Thunderstorms and 
Lightning 
4. Tornadoes 
5. Winter Storms and 
Extreme Cold 
6. Extreme Heat 
7. Earthquakes 
8. Volcanoes 
9. Landslides and Debris 
Flow 
10. Tsunamis 
11. Fires 
12. Wildﬁ res 
16


--- PAGE 17 ---
Are You Ready? Getting Informed 1.1 
Technological Hazards 
1. Hazardous Materials 
Incidents 
2. Nuclear Power Plants 
Terrorism 
1. Explosions 
2. Biological Threats 
3. Chemical Threats 
4. Nuclear Blasts 
5. Radiological Dispersion 
Device (RDD) 
You also can consult FEMA for hazard maps for your area.  Go to 
www.fema.gov, select maps, and follow the directions. National haz­
ard maps have been included with each natural hazard in Part 2 of this 
guide. 
Basic
Preparedness 
17


--- PAGE 18 ---
1.1 Are You Ready? Getting Informed 
Warning Systems and Signals
 
The Emergency Alert System (EAS) can address the entire nation on very short no­
tice in case of a grave threat or national emergency . Ask if your local radio and TV 
stations participate in the EAS. 
National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Weather Radio (NWR) is 
a nationwide network of radio stations broadcasting continuous weather informa­
tion directly from a nearby National Weather Service ofﬁ ce to specially conﬁ gured 
NOAA weather radio receivers.  Determine if NOAA Weather Radio is available 
where you live.  If so, consider purchasing a NOAA weather radio receiver. 
Ask local authorities about methods used to warn your community . 
Warning System What should we do? 
EAS 
NOAA Weather Radio 
18


--- PAGE 19 ---
Are You Ready? Getting Informed 1.1 
Evacuating Yourself and 
Your Family 
When community evacuations become necessary , local ofﬁ cials provide informa­
tion to the public through the media.  In some circumstances, other warning 
methods, such as sirens or telephone calls, also are used. Additionally , there may 
be circumstances under which you and your family feel threatened or endangered 
and you need to leave your home, school, or workplace to avoid these situations. 
The amount of time you have to leave will depend on the hazard.  If the event is 
a weather condition, such as a hurricane that can be monitored, you might have 
a day or two to get ready .  However, many disasters allow no time for people to 
gather even the most basic necessities, which is why planning ahead is essential. 
Evacuation: More Common than You Realize 
Evacuations are more common than many people realize.  Hundreds of 
times each year, transportation and industrial accidents release harmful 
substances, forcing thousands of people to leave their homes.  Fires and 
ﬂoods cause evacuations even more frequently . Almost every year, people 
along the Gulf and Atlantic coasts evacuate in the face of approaching 
hurricanes. 
Ask local authorities about emergency evacuation routes.
 
Record your speciﬁc evacuation route directions in the space provided.
 
Basic
Preparedness 
Is there a map available with evacuation routes marked? Yes No 
19


--- PAGE 20 ---
1.1 Are You Ready?Getting Informed 
Evacuation GuidelinesEv
acuation Guidelines AlwaAlways: ys: If time permits:If time permits:
K Keep a full tank of gas in yeep a full tank of gas in your car if an our car if an 
e ev vacua acuation seems liktion seems likel ely y . .  Gas sta Gas stations ma tions may y 
be closed durbe closed during emer ing emergencies and unagencies and unab ble le 
to pump gas durto pump gas during po ing pow wer outa er outages ges. .  Plan to Plan to 
tak take one car per fe one car per famil amily to r y to reduce congestioneduce congestion 
and dela and delay y . .
Ga Gather y ther your disaster supplies kit.our disaster supplies kit.
Mak Make transpor e transporta tation ar tion arrangements withrangements with 
fr friends or y iends or your local go our local gov ve er rnment if y nment if you do ou do 
not o not own a car wn a car. .
W Wear sturd ear sturdy shoes and clothingy shoes and clothing 
tha that pr t pro ovides some prvides some protection, otection,
suc such as long pants,h as long pants, long-slee long-sleev ved ed 
shir shirts, ts, and a ca and a cap p. .
Listen to a baListen to a batter ttery-po y-pow we er red radio and fed radio and follo ollow w 
local e local ev vacua acuation instr tion instructions uctions. .
Secur Secure y e your home: our home:
• • Close and locClose and lock doors and k doors and 
windo windows ws. .
• • Unplug electrUnplug electrical equipment,ical equipment,
suc such as radios and teleh as radios and televi­ vi-
sions, sions, and small a and small appliances, ppliances,
suc such as toasters and micrh as toasters and micro­ o-
w wa av ve es s. .  Lea Leav ve e fr freezers and r eezers and re e­ -
fr frigera igerators plugged in unlesstors plugged in unless 
ther there is a r e is a risk of ﬂ isk of ﬂooding ooding. .
Ga Gather y ther your f our famil amily and go if y y and go if you ar ou are in­ e in-
str structed to e ucted to ev vacua acuate immedia te immediatel tely y . .
Let others knoLet others know wher w where y e you ar ou are e 
going going. .
Lea Leav ve e earl early enough to ay enough to av void being traoid being trapped b pped by y
se sev ve er re e w we ea ather ther. .
F Follo ollow r w recommended eecommended ev vacua acuation r tion routes outes. .  Do Do 
not tak not take shor e shortcuts; tcuts; the they ma y may be b y be bloc lock ked. ed.
Be aler Be alert f t for w or washed-out r ashed-out roads and br oads and bridges idges. .
Do not dr Do not driv ive into ﬂ e into ﬂooded ar ooded areas eas. .
Sta Stay a y aw wa ay y fr from do om downed po wned pow wer lines er lines. .
20


--- PAGE 21 ---
Are You Ready? Getting Informed 1.1 
Community and Other PlansCommunity and Other Plans
Ask local ofﬁAsk local ofﬁcials the f cials the follo ollowing questions awing questions about y bout your comm our community’ unity’s disaster/ s disaster/
emer emergency plans ge .
Does m Does my y comm community ha unity hav ve e a plan? a plan? Y Yes es No No
Can I obtain a copCan I obtain a copy? y? Y Yes es No No
Wha What does the plan contain?t does the plan contain?
Ho How often is it updaw often is it updated?
 ted?
Wha What should I knot should I know a w about the plan?bout the plan?
Wha What hazards does it cot hazards does it cov ver? er?

In addition to ﬁIn addition to ﬁnding out a nding out about y bout your comm our community’ unity’s plan, s plan, it is impor  it is important tha tant that y t you ou 
kno know wha w what plans ar t plans are in place f e in place for y or your w our workplace and yorkplace and your c our childr hildren’ en’s sc s school or da hool or day y 
car care center e center. .
1. 1. Ask y Ask your emplo our employ yer a er about w bout workplace policies rorkplace policies regarding disasters and emeregarding disasters and emer­ -
gencies, gencies, including understanding ho including understanding how y w you will be prou will be pro ovided emer vided emergency and gency and 
w war arning inf ning infor orma mation. tion.
2. 2. Contact y Contact your c our childr hildren’ en’s sc s school or da hool or day car y care center to discuss their disaster pre center to discuss their disaster pro­ o-
cedur cedures es. .
School Emergency PlansSchool Emergency Plans 
Kno Know y w your c our childr hildren’ en’s sc s school emer hool emergency plan: gency plan:
• •	 Ask ho Ask how the sc w the school will commhool will communica unicate with f te with families dur amilies during a cr ing a crisis isis. .
• •	 Ask if the sc Ask if the school stor hool stores adequa es adequate f te food, ood, w  wa ater ter, , and other basic supplies and other basic supplies. .
• •	 Find out if the scFind out if the school is pr hool is prepar epared to shelter ed to shelter-in-place if need be-in-place if need be, , and wher  and where
 e 
the they plan to go if they plan to go if they m y must get a ust get aw wa ay y .
 .
In cases wherIn cases where sc e schools institute prhools institute procedur ocedures to shelter es to shelter-in-place -in-place, , y  you ma ou may not be y not be 
per permitted to dr mitted to driv ive to the sc e to the school to pic hool to pick up y k up your c our childr hildren. en.  Ev  Even if y en if you go to the ou go to the 
sc school, hool, the doors will lik the doors will likel ely be loc y be lock ked to k ed to keep y eep your c our childr hildren saf en safe e. .  Monitor local Monitor local 
media outlets fmedia outlets for announcements aor announcements about c bout changes in sc hanges in school openings and closings,hool openings and closings,
and f and follo ollow the dir w the directions of local emerections of local emergency ofﬁ gency ofﬁcials cials. .
F For mor or more inf e infor orma mation on de tion on dev veloping emereloping emergency pr gency prepar eparedness plans fedness plans for sc or schools, hools,
please log on to the Uplease log on to the U.S. .S. Depar  Department of Educatment of Education a tion at www t www.ed.go .ed.gov/emer v/emergencyplan. gencyplan.
Basic
Preparedness 
21


--- PAGE 22 ---
1.1 Are You Ready? Getting Informed 
Workplace Plans
 
If you are an employer, make sure your workplace has a building evacuation plan 
that is regularly practiced. 
•	 Take a critical look at your heating, ventilation and air conditioning system 
to determine if it is secure or if it could feasibly be upgraded to better ﬁ lter 
potential contaminants, and be sure you know how to turn it off if you need 
to. 
•	 Think about what to do if your employees can’t go home. 
•	 Make sure you have appropriate supplies on hand. 
22


--- PAGE 23 ---
1.2 
Emergency Planning 
and Checklists


--- PAGE 24 ---
1.2 Are You Ready? Emergency Planning and Checklists 
Now that you’ve learned about what can happen and how your community is pre­
pared to respond to emergencies, prepare your family by creating a family disaster 
plan. You can begin this process by gathering family members and reviewing the 
information you obtained in Section 1.1 (hazards, warning systems, evacuation 
routes and community and other plans).  Discuss with them what you would do if 
family members are not home when a warning is issued. Additionally , your family 
plan should address the following: 
• Escape routes. 
• Family communications. 
• Utility shut-off and safety . 
• Insurance and vital records. 
• Special needs. 
• Caring for animals. 
• Saftey Skills 
Information on these family planning considerations are covered in the following 
sections. 
Escape Routes 
Draw a ﬂ oor plan of your home.  Use a blank sheet of paper for each ﬂ oor.  Mark 
two escape routes from each room.  Make sure children understand the drawings. 
Post a copy of the drawings at eye level in each child’s room. 
Where to Meet Establish a place to meet in the event of an emergency , such as a ﬁre. Record the 
locations below: 
Where to meet… 
Near the 
home 
For exam
ple, the next door neighbor’s telephone pole 
Outside the 
immediate 
area 
For example, the neighborhood grocery store parking lot 
24


--- PAGE 25 ---
Are You Ready? Emergency Planning and Checklists 1.2 
Family Communications 
Your family may not be together when disaster strikes, so plan how you will con­
tact one another. Think about how you will communicate in different situations. 
Complete a contact card for each family member.  Have family members keep these 
cards handy in a wallet, purse, backpack, etc. You may want to send one to school 
with each child to keep on ﬁ le.  Pick a friend or relative who lives out-of-state for 
household members to notify they are safe. 
Below is a sample contact card.  Copies to ﬁll out can be found in Appendix C. 
Also in Appendix C is a more detailed Family Communications Plan which should 
be completed and posted so the contact information is readily accessible to all fam­
ily members. A copy should also be included in your family disaster supplies kit. 
Utility Shut-off and Safety 
In the event of a disaster, you may be instructed to shut off the utility service at 
your home. 
Below is some general guidance for shutting off utility service: 
Modify the information provided to reﬂect your shut off requirements as di­
rected by your utility company(ies). 
Basic
Preparedness 
25


--- PAGE 26 ---
1.2 Are You Ready? Emergency Planning and Checklists 
Natural Gas Natural gas leaks and explosions ar
e responsible for a signiﬁcant number of ﬁ res 
following disasters.  It is vital that all household members know how to shut off 
natural gas. 
Because there are different gas shut-off procedures for different gas meter conﬁ gu­
rations, it is important to contact your local gas company for guidance on prepara­
tion and response regarding gas appliances and gas service to your home. 
When you learn the proper shut-off procedure for your meter, share the informa­
tion with everyone in your household.  Be sure not to actually turn off the gas 
when practicing the proper gas shut-off procedure. 
If you smell gas or hear a blowing or hissing noise, open a window and get every­
one out quickly . Turn off the gas, using the outside main valve if you can, and call 
the gas company from a neighbor’s home. 
CAUTION – If you turn off the gas for any reason, a qualiﬁ ed 
professional must turn it back on.  NEVER attempt to turn the 
gas back on yourself. 
Water Water quickly becomes a precious resource following many disasters.  It is vital that 
all household members learn how to shut off the water at the main house valve. 
• 	 Cracked lines may pollute the water supply to your house.  It is wise to shut 
off your water until you hear from authorities that it is safe for drinking. 
• 	 The effects of gravity may drain the water in your hot water heater and toilet 
tanks unless you trap it in your house by shutting off the main house valve 
(not the street valve in the cement box at the curb—this valve is extremely 
difﬁ cult to turn and requires a special tool). 
Preparing to Shut Off  Water 
• 	 Locate the shut-off valve for the water line that enters your house.  It may 
look like this: 
• 	 Make sure this valve can be completely shut off. Your valve may be rusted 
open, or it may only partially close.  Replace it if necessary . 
26


--- PAGE 27 ---
Are You Ready? Emergency Planning and Checklists 1.2 
• 	 Label this valve with a tag for easy identiﬁcation, and make sure all household 
members know where it is located. 
ElectricityElectrical sparks have the potential of igniting natural gas if it is leaking.  It is wise 
to teach all responsible household members where and how to shut off the elec­
tricity . 
Preparing to Shut Off Electricity 
• 	 Locate your electricity circuit box. 
• 	 Teach all responsible household members how to shut off the electricity to 
the entire house.
 
FOR YOUR SAFETY: Always shut off all the individual 
circuits before shutting off the main circuit breaker. 
Insurance and Vital Records
 
Obtain property , health, and life insurance if you do not have them.  Review exist­
ing policies for the amount and extent of coverage to ensure that what you have in 
place is what is required for you and your family for all possible hazards. 
Flood Insurance 
If you live in a ﬂ ood-prone area, consider purchasing ﬂ ood insur­
ance to reduce your risk of ﬂ ood loss. Buying ﬂ ood insurance to 
cover the value of a building and its contents will not only provide 
greater peace of mind, but will speed the recovery if a ﬂ ood occurs. 
You can call 1(888)FLOOD29 to learn more about ﬂ ood insurance. 
Preparedness 
Basic
27


--- PAGE 28 ---
1.2 Are You Ready? Emergency Planning and Checklists 
Inv
entory Home Possessions Make a record of your personal property , for insurance purposes. Take photos or a 
video of the interior and exterior of your home.  Include personal belongings in 
your inventory . 
You may also want to download the free Household and Personal Property Inven­
tory Book from the University of Illinois at www.ag.uiuc.edu/~vista/abstracts/ 
ahouseinv.html to help you record your possessions. 
Important Documents Store important documents such as insurance policies, deeds, property records, 
and other important papers in a safe place, such as a safety deposit box away from 
your home.  Make copies of important documents for your disaster supplies kit. 
(Information about the disaster supplies kit is covered later.)  
Money Consider saving money in an emergency savings account that could be used in any 
crisis.  It is advisable to keep a small amount of cash or traveler’s checks at home in 
a safe place where you can quickly access them in case of evacuation. 
Special Needs 
If you or someone close to you has a disability or a special need, you may have to 
take additional steps to protect yourself and your family in an emergency . 
Disability/Special Additional Steps 
Need 
Hearing impaired May need to make special arrangements to receive 
warnings. 
Mobility impaired May need special assistance to get to a shelter. 
Single working May need help to plan for disasters and emergencies. 
parent 
Non-English May need assistance planning for and responding to 
speaking persons emergencies.  Community and cultural groups may be 
able to help keep people informed. 
People without May need to make arrangements for transportation. 
vehicles 
People with special Should take special precautions to have an adequate 
dietary needs emergency food supply . 
Planning for Special Needs If y
ou have special needs: 
• 	 Find out about special assistance that may be available in your community . 
Register with the ofﬁce of emergency services or the local ﬁre department for 
assistance so needed help can be provided. 
28


--- PAGE 29 ---
Are You Ready? Emergency Planning and Checklists 1.2 
• 	 Create a network of neighbors, relatives, friends, and coworkers to aid you 
in an emergency . Discuss your needs and make sure everyone knows how to 
operate necessary equipment. 
• 	 Discuss your needs with your employer. 
• 	 If you are mobility impaired and live or work in a high-rise building, have an 
escape chair. 
• 	 If you live in an apartment building, ask the management to mark accessible 
exits clearly and to make arrangements to help you leave the building. 
• 	 Keep specialized items ready , including extra wheelchair batteries, oxygen,
 
catheters, medication, food for service animals, and any other items you 
might need.
 
• 	 Be sure to make provisions for medications that require refrigeration. 
• 	 Keep a list of the type and model numbers of the medical devices you require. 
Caring for Animals 
Animals also are affected by disasters.  Use the guidelines below to prepare a plan 
for caring for pets and large animals. 
Guidelines for Pets Plan for pet disaster needs by: 
• 	 Identifying shelter. 
• 	 Gathering pet supplies. 
• 	 Ensuring your pet has proper ID and up-to-date veterinarian records. 
• 	 Providing a pet carrier and leash. 
Take the following steps to prepare to shelter your pet: 
• 	 Call your local emergency management ofﬁ ce, animal shelter, or animal con­
trol ofﬁce to get advice and information.
 
• 	 Keep veterinary records to prove vaccinations are current. 
• 	 Find out which local hotels and motels allow pets and where pet boarding 
facilities are located.  Be sure to research some outside your local area in case 
local facilities close.
 
• 	 Know that, with the exception of service animals, pets are not typically per­
mitted in emergency shelters as they may affect the health and safety of other 
occupants.
 
Basic
Preparedness 
29


--- PAGE 30 ---
1.2 Are You Ready? Emergency Planning and Checklists 
Guidelines for Large Animals If y
ou have large animals such as horses, cattle, sheep, goats, or pigs on your prop­
erty , be sure to prepare before a disaster. 
Use the following guidelines: 
1. Ensure all animals have some form of identiﬁ cation. 
2. Evacuate animals whenever possible.	   Map out primary and secondary routes 
in advance. 
3. Make available vehicles and trailers needed for transporting and supporting 
each type of animal. Also make available experienced handlers and drivers. 
Note: It is best to allow animals a chance to become accustomed to vehicular 
travel so they are less frightened and easier to move. 
4. Ensure destinations have food, water, veterinary care, and handling equip­
ment. 
5. If evacuation is not possible, animal owners must decide whether to move 
large animals to shelter or turn them outside. 
Safety Skills 
It is important that family members know how to administer ﬁ rst aid and CPR and 
how to use a ﬁ re extinguisher. 
Learn First Aid and CPR Take a ﬁrst aid and CPR class.  Local American Red Cross chapters can provide 
information about this type of training.  Ofﬁ cial certiﬁcation by the American Red 
Cross provides, under the “good Samaritan” law, protection for those giving ﬁ rst 
aid. 
Learn How to Use a Fire 
Extinguisher Be sure everyone knows how to use your ﬁre extinguisher(s) and where it is kept. 
You should have, at a minimum, an ABC type. 
30


--- PAGE 31 ---
1.3 
Assemble a Disaster 
Supplies Kit


--- PAGE 32 ---
1.3 Are You Ready? Assemble a Disaster Supplies Kit 
You ma
y need to survive on your own after a disaster. This means having your 
own food, water, and other supplies in sufﬁ cient quantity to last for at least three 
days. Local ofﬁ cials and relief workers will be on the scene after a disaster, but they 
cannot reach everyone immediately . You could get help in hours, or it might take 
days. 
Basic services such as electricity , gas, water, sewage treatment, and telephones may 
be cut off for days, or even a week or longer.  Or, you may have to evacuate at a 
moment’s notice and take essentials with you. You probably will not have the op­
portunity to shop or search for the supplies you need. 
A disaster supplies kit is a collection of basic items that members of a household 
may need in the event of a disaster. 
Kit Locations 
Since you do not know where you will be when an emergency occurs, prepare 
supplies for home, work, and vehicles. 
Home Work Car 
Your disaster supplies 
kit should contain 
essential food, water, 
and supplies for at least 
three days. 
Keep this kit in a desig­
nated place and have it 
ready in case you have 
to leave your home 
quickly . Make sure all 
family members know 
where the kit is kept. 
Additionally , you may 
want to consider having 
supplies for sheltering 
for up to two weeks. 
This kit should be in 
one container, and 
ready to “grab and go” 
in case you are evacu­
ated from your work­
place. 
Make sure you have 
food and water in the 
kit. Also, be sure to 
have comfortable walk­
ing shoes at your work­
place in case an evacu­
ation requires walking 
long distances. 
In case you are strand­
ed, keep a kit of emer­
gency supplies in your 
car. 
This kit should contain 
food, water, ﬁ rst aid 
supplies, ﬂ ares, jumper 
cables, and seasonal 
supplies. 
32


--- PAGE 33 ---
Are You Ready? Assemble a Disaster Supplies Kit 1.3 
Water 
How Much Water do I Need? You should store at least one gallon of water per person per day . A normally active 
person needs at least one-half gallon of water daily just for drinking. 
Additionally , in determining adequate quantities, take the following into account: 
• 	 Individual needs vary , depending on age, physical condition, activity , diet, and 
climate.
 
• 	 Children, nursing mothers, and ill people need more water. 
• 	 Very hot temperatures can double the amount of water needed. 
• 	 A medical emergency might require additional water. 
How Should I Store Water? To prepare safest and most reliable emergency supply of water, it is recommended 
you purchase commercially bottled water. Keep bottled water in its original con­
tainer and do not open it until you need to use it. 
Observe the expiration or “use by” date. 
If you are preparing your own 
containers of water It is recommended you purchase food-grade water storage containers from sur-
plus or camping supplies stor
es to use for water storage. Before ﬁ lling with water, 
thoroughly clean the containers with dishwashing soap and water, and rinse com­
pletely so there is no residual soap. Follow directions below on ﬁ lling the container 
with water. 
If you choose to use your own storage containers, choose two-liter plastic soft 
drink bottles  – not plastic jugs or cardboard containers that have had milk or fruit 
juice in them. Milk protein and fruit sugars cannot be adequately removed from 
these containers and provide an environment for bacterial growth when water 
is stored in them. Cardboard containers also leak easily and are not designed for 
long-term storage of liquids. Also, do not use glass containers, because they can 
break and are heavy . 
If storing w
ater in plastic soda 
bottles, follow these steps Thoroughly clean the bottles with dishwashing soap and water, and rinse com­
pletely so there is no residual soap. 
Sanitize the bottles by adding a solution of 1 teaspoon of non-scented liquid 
household chlorine bleach to a quart of water. Swish the sanitizing solution in the 
bottle so that it touches all surfaces. After sanitizing the bottle, thoroughly rinse out 
the sanitizing solution with clean water. 
Basic
Preparedness 
Filling water containers 
33


--- PAGE 34 ---
1.3 Are You Ready? Assemble a Disaster Supplies Kit 
Fill the bottle to the top with regular tap w
ater. If the tap water has been commer­
cially treated from a water utility with chlorine, you do not need to add anything 
else to the water to keep it clean. If the water you are using comes from a well or 
water source that is not treated with chlorine, add two drops of non-scented liquid 
household chlorine bleach to the water. 
Tightly close the container using the original cap. Be careful not to contaminate the 
cap by touching the inside of it with your ﬁ nger. Place a date on the outside of the 
container so that you know when you ﬁlled it. Store in a cool, dark place. 
Replace the water every six months if not using commercially bottled water. 
Food 
The following are things to consider when putting together your food supplies: 
• 	 Avoid foods that will make you thirsty .  Choose salt-free crackers, whole grain 
cereals, and canned foods with high liquid content. 
• 	 Stock canned foods, dry mixes, and other staples that do not require refrigera­
tion, cooking, water, or special preparation. You may already have many of 
these on hand. Note: Be sure to include a manual can opener. 
• 	 Include special dietary needs. 
34


--- PAGE 35 ---
Are You Ready? Assemble a Disaster Supplies Kit 1.3 
Basic Disaster Supplies Kit
 
The following items are recommended for inclusion in your basic disaster supplies 
kit: 
• 	 Three-day supply of non-perishable food. 
• 	 Three-day supply of water – one gallon of water per person, per day . 
• 	 Portable, battery-powered radio or television and extra batteries. 
• 	 Flashlight and extra batteries. 
• 	 First aid kit and manual. 
• 	 Sanitation and hygiene items (moist towelettes and toilet paper). 
• 	 Matches and waterproof container. 
• 	 Whistle. 
• 	 Extra clothing. 
• 	 Kitchen accessories and cooking utensils, including a can opener. 
• 	 Photocopies of credit and identiﬁ cation cards. 
• 	 Cash and coins. 
• 	 Special needs items, such as prescription medications, eye glasses, contact lens 
solutions, and hearing aid batteries. 
• 	 Items for infants, such as formula, diapers, bottles, and paciﬁ ers. 
• 	 Other items to meet your unique family needs. 
If you live in a cold climate, you must think about warmth.  It is possible that you 
will not have heat. Think about your clothing and bedding supplies.  Be sure to 
include one complete change of clothing and shoes per person, including: 
• 	 Jacket or coat. 
• 	 Long pants. 
• 	 Long sleeve shirt. 
• 	 Sturdy shoes. 
• 	 Hat, mittens, and scarf. 
• 	 Sleeping bag or warm blanket (per person). 
Be sure to account for growing children and other family changes.  See Appendix B 
for a detailed checklist of disaster supplies. You may want to add some of the items 
listed to your basic disaster supplies kit depending on the speciﬁc needs of your 
family. 
Basic
Preparedness 
35


--- PAGE 36 ---
1.3 Are You Ready? Assemble a Disaster Supplies Kit 
Maintaining Your Disaster 
Supplies Kit 
Just as important as putting your supplies together is maintaining them so they are 
safe to use when needed.  Here are some tips to keep your supplies ready and in 
good condition: 
• 	 Keep canned foods in a dry place where the temperature is cool. 
• 	 Store boxed food in tightly closed plastic or metal containers to protect from 
pests and to extend its shelf life.
 
•	 Throw out any canned good that becomes swollen, dented, or corroded. 
• 	 Use foods before they go bad, and replace them with fresh supplies. 
• 	 Place new items at the back of the storage area and older ones in the front. 
• 	 Change stored food and water supplies every six months. Be sure to write the 
date you store it on all containers. 
• 	 Re-think your needs every year and update your kit as your family needs 
change.
 
• 	 Keep items in airtight plastic bags and put your entire disaster supplies kit in 
one or two easy-to-carry containers, such as an unused trashcan, camping 
backpack, or duffel bag. 
36


--- PAGE 37 ---
1.4 
Shelter


--- PAGE 38 ---
1.4 Are You Ready? Shelter 
Taking shelter is cr
itical in times of disaster.  Sheltering is appropriate when condi­
tions require that you seek protection in your home, place of employment, or 
other location where you are when disaster strikes.  Sheltering outside the hazard 
area would include staying with friends and relatives, seeking commercial lodging, 
or staying in a mass care facility operated by disaster relief groups in conjunction 
with local authorities. 
To effectively shelter, you must ﬁ rst consider the hazard and then choose a place 
in your home or other building that is safe for that hazard.  For example, for a 
tornado, a room should be selected that is in a basement or an interior room on 
the lowest level away from corners, windows, doors and outside walls.  Because the 
safest locations to seek shelter vary by hazard, sheltering is discussed in the various 
hazard sections.These discussions include recommendations for sealing the shelter 
if the hazards warrants this type of protection. 
Even though mass care shelters often provide water, food, medicine, and basic sani­
tary facilities, you should plan to take your disaster supplies kit with you so you 
will have the supplies you require.  Mass care sheltering can involve living with 
many people in a conﬁ ned space, which can be difﬁ cult and unpleasant. To avoid 
conﬂ icts in this stressful situation, it is important to cooperate with shelter manag­
ers and others assisting them.  Keep in mind that alcoholic beverages and weapons 
are forbidden in emergency shelters and smoking is restricted. 
The length of time you are required to shelter may be short, such as during a 
tornado warning, or long, such as during a winter storm.  It is important that you 
stay in shelter until local authorities say it is safe to leave. Additionally , you should 
take turns listening to radio broadcasts and maintain a 24-hour safety watch. 
During extended periods of sheltering, you will need to manage water and food 
supplies to ensure you and your family have the required supplies and quantities. 
Guidance on how to accomplish this follows. 
Managing Water
 
Essentials 1. Allow people to drink according to their needs.  Many people need even 
more than the average of one-half gallon, per day . The individual amount 
needed depends on age, physical activity , physical condition, and time of year. 
38


--- PAGE 39 ---
Are You Ready? Shelter 1.4 
2. Never ration water unless ordered to do so by authorities . Drink the 
amount you need today and try to ﬁnd more for tomorrow. Under no circum­
stances should a person drink less than one quart (four cups) of water each 
day . You can minimize the amount of water your body needs by reducing 
activity and staying cool. 
3. Drink water that you know is not contaminated ﬁ rst.  If necessary , suspi­
cious water, such as cloudy water from regular faucets or water from streams 
or ponds, can be used after it has been treated.  If water treatment is not 
possible, put off drinking suspicious water as long as possible, but do not 
become dehydrated. 
4. Do not drink carbonated beverages instead of drinking water. Carbonated 
beverages do not meet drinking-water requirements.  Caffeinated drinks and 
alcohol dehydrate the body , which increases the need for drinking water. 
5. Turn off the main water valves. You will need to protect the water sources 
already in your home from contamination if you hear reports of broken 
water or sewage lines, or if local ofﬁ cials advise you of a problem.To close the 
incoming water source, locate the incoming valve and turn it to the closed 
position. Be sure you and other family members know how to perform this 
important procedure. 
• 	 To use the water in your pipes, let air into the plumbing by turning on 
the faucet in your home at the highest level. A small amount of water will 
trickle out.Then obtain water from the lowest faucet in the home. 
• 	 To use the water in your hot-water tank, be sure the electricity or gas is 
off, and open the drain at the bottom of the tank. Start the water ﬂ owing 
by turning off the water intake valve at the tank and turning on the hot-
water faucet. Reﬁ ll the tank before turning the gas or electricity back on. If 
the gas is turned off, a professional will be needed to turn it back on. 
Review 
Section 1.2: 
Emergency 
Planning and 
Checklists 
Water Sources Safe Sources Unsafe Sources 
Melted ice cubes Radiators 
Water drained from the water 
heater (if the water heater has 
not been damaged) 
Hot water boilers (home heating system) 
Liquids from canned goods 
such as fruit or vegetable 
juices 
Water beds (fungicides added to the water or 
chemicals in the vinyl may make water unsafe to 
use) 
Water drained from pipes Water from the toilet bowl or ﬂ ush tank 
Swimming pools and spas (chemicals used to 
kill germs are too concentrated for safe drinking 
but can be used for personal hygiene, cleaning, 
and related uses) 
Basic
Preparedness 
39


--- PAGE 40 ---
1.4 Are You Ready? Shelter 
Wat
er Treatment 
Review 
How I Should Store 
Water, Section 1.3 
Treat all water of uncertain quality before using it for drinking, food washing or 
preparation, washing dishes, brushing teeth, or making ice.  In addition to having 
a bad odor and taste, contaminated water can contain microorganisms (germs) that 
cause diseases such as dysentery , cholera, typhoid, and hepatitis. 
There are many ways to treat water.  None is perfect.  Often the best solution is a 
combination of methods.  Before treating, let any suspended particles settle to the 
bottom or strain them through coffee ﬁlters or layers of clean cloth. 
Make sure you have the necessary materials in your disaster supplies kit for the cho­
sen water treatment method. 
There are three water treatment methods.They are as follows: 
• Boiling 
• Chlorination 
• Distillation 
These instructions are for treating water of uncertain quality in an emergency situ­
ation, when no other reliable clean water source is available, or you have used all of 
your stored water. 
Boiling 
Boiling is the safest method of treating water. In a large pot or kettle, bring water 
to a rolling boil for 1 full minute, keeping in mind that some water will evapo­
rate. Let the water cool before drinking. 
Boiled water will taste better if you put oxygen back into it by pouring the water 
back and forth between two clean containers. This also will improve the taste of 
stored water. 
Chlorination 
You can use household liquid bleach to kill microorganisms. Use only regular 
household liquid bleach that contains 5.25 to 6.0 percent sodium hypochlorite. 
Do not use scented bleaches, color safe bleaches, or bleaches with added cleaners. 
Because the potency of bleach diminishes with time, use bleach from a newly 
opened or unopened bottle. 
Add 16 drops (1/8 teaspoon) of bleach per gallon of water, stir, and let stand for 
30 minutes.The water should have a slight bleach odor. If it doesn’t, then repeat 
the dosage and let stand another 15 minutes. If it still does not smell of chlorine, 
discard it and ﬁ nd another source of water. 
Other chemicals, such as iodine or water treatment products sold in camping or 
surplus stores that do not contain 5.25 to 6.0 percent sodium hypochlorite as the 
only active ingredient, are not recommended and should not be used. 
Distillation 
While the two methods described above will kill most microbes in water, distil­
lation will remove microbes (germs) that resist these methods, as well as heavy 
metals, salts, and most other chemicals. 
40


--- PAGE 41 ---
Are You Ready? Shelter 1.4 
Distillation involves boiling water and 
then collecting only the vapor that con­
denses. The condensed vapor will not 
include salt or most other impurities.To 
distill, ﬁll a pot halfway with water. Tie a 
cup to the handle on the pot’s lid so that 
the cup will hang right-side-up when the 
lid is upside-down (make sure the cup is 
not dangling into the water) and boil the 
water for 20 minutes.The water that drips 
from the lid into the cup is distilled. 
Basic
Preparedness 
Effectiveness of Water 
Treatment Methods 
Methods Kills 
Microbes 
Removes other contaminants (heavy met­
als, salts, and most other chemicals) 
Boiling √ 
Chlorination √ 
Distillation √ √ 
Managing Food Supplies
 
Safety and Sanitation Do: Don’t: 
• 
• 
Keep food in covered containers 
Keep cooking and eating utensils 
clean 
• Eat foods from cans that are swol­
len, dented, or corroded, even 
though the product may look safe 
• Keep garbage in closed contain­
ers and dispose outside, burying 
garbage if necessary  
• 
to eat 
Eat any food that looks or smells 
abnormal, even if the can looks 
• Keep your hands clean by wash­
ing them frequently with soap 
and water that has been boiled or 
• 
normal 
Use powdered formulas with 
treated water 
• 
disinfected 
Use only pre-prepared canned 
baby formula for infants 
• Let garbage accumulate inside, 
both for ﬁre and sanitation rea­
sons 
• Discard any food that has come 
into contact with contaminated 
ﬂ oodwater 
• Discard any food that has been at 
room temperature for two hours 
or more 
• Discard any food that has an un­
usual odor, color, or texture 
Note: Thawed food usually can be eaten if it is still “refrigerator cold.” It can be 
re-frozen if it still contains ice crystals. To be safe, remember, “When in doubt, 
throw it out.” 
41


--- PAGE 42 ---
1.4 Are You Ready? Shelter 
Cooking • 	 Alterna
tive cooking sources in times of emergency include candle warmers, 
chaﬁng dishes, fondue pots, or a ﬁ replace. 
• 	 Charcoal grills and camp stoves are for outdoor use only . 
• 	 Commercially canned food may be eaten out of the can without warming. 
• 	 To heat food in a can: 
1. Remove the label. 
2. Thoroughly wash and disinfect the can. (Use a diluted solution of one part 
bleach to ten parts water.) 
3. Open the can before heating. 
Managing without Power Here are two options for keeping food safe if you are without power for a long 
period: 
• 	 Look for alternate storage space for your perishable food. 
• 	 Use dry ice. Twenty-ﬁ ve pounds of dry ice will keep a 10-cubic-foot freezer 
below freezing for 3-4 days.  Use care when handling dry ice, and wear dry , 
heavy gloves to avoid injury . 
42


--- PAGE 43 ---
1.5 
Hazard-Speciﬁ c 
Preparedness


--- PAGE 44 ---
1.5 Are You Ready? Hazard-Speciﬁ c Preparedness 
There ar
e actions that should be taken before, during, and after an event that are 
unique to each hazard.  For example: 
• Seeking a safe shelter during a tornado. 
• Reducing property loss from a hurricane. 
Information about the speciﬁ c hazards and what to do for each is provided in Parts 
2, 3, and 4.  Study the material for those hazards that you identiﬁed in Section 1.1 
as the ones that have happened or could happen.  Share the hazard-speciﬁ c infor­
mation with family members and include pertinent material from these parts in 
your family disaster plan. 
44


--- PAGE 45 ---
1.6 
Practicing and 
Maintaining Your Plan


--- PAGE 46 ---
1.6 Are You Ready? Practicing and Maintaining Your Plan 
Once you ha
ve developed your plan, you need to practice and maintain it.  For ex­
ample, ask questions to make sure your family remembers meeting places, phone 
numbers, and safety rules.  Conduct drills such as drop, cover, and hold on for 
earthquakes. Test ﬁ re alarms.  Replace and update disaster supplies. 
For More Information 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following are 
resources that may be helpful. 
FEMA Publications Disaster Preparedness Coloring Book. FEMA-243. Coloring book for ages 3-10. Also avail­
able in Spanish. 
Before Disaster Strikes. FEMA A-291. Contains information about how to make sure you 
are ﬁnancially prepared to deal with a natural disaster. Also available in Spanish. 
The Adventures of Julia and Robbie: Disaster T wins. FEMA-344. A collection of disaster related 
stories.  Includes information on preparedness and how to mitigate against disasters. 
FEMA for Kids. L-229.  Provides information about what FEMA (speciﬁ cally fema.gov) 
has to offer children. 
Community Shelter. FEMA 361. Contains guidelines for constructing mass shelters for 
public refuge in schools, hospitals, and other places. 
Food and Water in an Emergency. L-210 If an earthquake, hurricane, winter storm, or 
other disaster strikes your community , you might not have access to food, water, 
and electricity for days, or even weeks.  By taking some time now to store emer­
gency food and water supplies, you can provide for your entire family . Also avail­
able online at 
www.fema.gov/pdf/library/f&web.pdf. 
Helping Children Cope with Disaster.  FEMA L-196.  Helps families understand how to 
help children cope with disaster and its aftermath. 
Assisting People with Disabilities in a Disaster. Information about helping people with 
disabilities in a disaster and resources for individuals with disabilities. Available 
online at www.fema.gov/rrr/assistf.shtm. 
American Red Cross
 Publications Facing Fear: Helping Young People Deal with T errorism and Tragic Events. A school curriculum 
designed to help alleviate worries and clear up confusion about perceived and 
actual threats to safety . Available online at www.redcross.org/disaster/masters/ 
facingfear, or contact your local Red Cross chapter. 
46


--- PAGE 47 ---
2 
Natural 
Hazards 
Part 2 includes information about many types of natural hazards.  Natural hazards are natural events that threaten 
lives, property , and other assets.  Often, natural hazards can be predicted. They tend to occur repeatedly in the same 
geographical locations because they are related to weather patterns or physical characteristics of an area. 
Natural hazards such as ﬂ ood, ﬁre, earthquake, tornado, and windstorms affect thousands of people every year. We 
need to know what our risks are from natrual hazards and take sensible precautions to protect ourselves, our fami­
lies, and our communities. 
Use Part 2 to learn about the hazards that pose a risk to you.  Include the pertinent information in your family di­
saster plan.  Speciﬁc content on each hazard consists of the characteristics of that hazard, terms associated with the 
hazard, measures that can be taken beforehand to avoid or lessen the impact of these events, and what individuals 
need to do during and after the event to protect themselves. 
When you complete Part 2, you will be able to: 
• Know important terms. 
• Take protective measures for natural hazards. 
• Identify resources for more information about natural hazards. 
47


--- PAGE 48 ---
48


--- PAGE 49 ---
2.1 
Floods


--- PAGE 50 ---
2.1 Are You Ready? Floods 
Floods are one of the most common hazar
ds in the United States.  Flood effects can 
be local, impacting a neighborhood or community , or very large, affecting entire 
river basins and multiple states. 
However, all ﬂ oods are not alike.  Some ﬂ oods develop slowly , sometimes over 
a period of days.  But ﬂ ash ﬂ oods can develop quickly , sometimes in just a few 
minutes and without any visible signs of rain.  Flash ﬂoods often have a danger­
ous wall of roaring water that carries rocks, mud, and other debris and can sweep 
away most things in its path.  Overland ﬂooding occurs outside a deﬁ ned river or 
stream, such as when a levee is breached, but still can be destructive. Flooding can 
also occur when a dam breaks, producing effects similar to ﬂ ash ﬂ oods. 
Be aware of ﬂood hazards no matter where you live, but especially if you live in a 
low-lying area, near water or downstream from a dam.  Even very small streams, 
gullies, creeks, culverts, dry streambeds, or low-lying ground that appear harmless 
in dry weather can ﬂ ood.  Every state is at risk from this hazard. 
50


--- PAGE 51 ---
Are You Ready? Floods 2.1 
What Would You Do? 
You and your family moved from a city neighborhood in San Francisco, CA, to 
a suburb of Phoenix, AZ.  Since earthquakes were a threat in your area, you al­
ways kept some extra food, water, and other supplies on hand and maintained an 
earthquake insurance policy , just in case something happened. You think this kind 
of preparation is no longer necessary based on what your neighbors have told you. 
According to them, the biggest threat they face is lack of water caused by the very 
dry weather. You continue to see public service announcements from the federal 
government about ﬂ ood insurance and the need to protect yourself from ﬂ ood 
damage.  Surely , there would be no need for ﬂood insurance where you live with 
its bare hills, deep canyons, and dry land. 
• Are you at risk for ﬂooding, or is this more of a risk to people who live else­
where?
 
Yes  
        No 
• 	 Is there a need to have a disaster plan and a disaster supplies kit?
 
Yes  
        No 
• 	 Should you consider purchasing ﬂ ood insurance?
 
Yes  
        No 
Answer key 
1.Yes  2.Yes  3.Yes 
Know the Terms 
Familiarize yourself with these terms to help identify a ﬂ ood hazard: 
Flood Watch 
Flooding is possible.Tune in to NOAA Weather Radio, commercial radio, 
or television for information. 
Flash Flood Watch 
Flash ﬂooding is possible. Be prepared to move to higher ground; listen to 
NOAA Weather Radio, commercial radio, or television for information. 
Flood Warning 
Flooding is occurring or will occur soon; if advised to evacuate, do so 
immediately . 
Flash Flood Warning 
Aﬂ ash ﬂ ood is occurring; seek higher ground on foot immediately . 
Natural
Hazards 
51


--- PAGE 52 ---
2.1 Are You Ready? Floods 
Take Protective Measures 
Before a Flood To prepare for a ﬂ ood, you should: 
• 	 Avoid building in a ﬂoodplain unless you elevate and reinforce your home. 
• 	 Elevate the furnace, water heater, and electric panel if susceptible to ﬂ ooding. 
• 	 Install “check valves” in sewer traps to prevent ﬂ ood water from backing up 
into the drains of your home. 
• 	 Construct barriers (levees, beams, ﬂoodwalls) to stop ﬂ oodwater from enter­
ing the building. 
• 	 Seal walls in basements with waterprooﬁ ng compounds to avoid seepage. 
During a Flood If a ﬂ ood is likely in your area, you should: 
• 	 Listen to the radio or television for information. 
• 	 Be aware that ﬂ ash ﬂ ooding can occur.  If there is any possibility of a ﬂ ash 
ﬂood, move immediately to higher ground.  Do not wait for instructions to 
move. 
• 	 Be aware of streams, drainage channels, canyons, and other areas known to 
ﬂood suddenly .  Flash ﬂ oods can occur in these areas with or without such 
typical warnings as rain clouds or heavy rain. 
If you must prepare to evacuate, you should do the following: 
• Secure your home.  If you have time, bring in outdoor furniture.  Move es­
sential items to an upper ﬂ oor. 
• Turn off utilities at the main switches or valves if instructed to do so.  Discon­
nect electrical appliances.  Do not touch electrical equipment if you are wet or 
standing in water. 
Review 
See Section 1.1: 
Getting Informed 
52


--- PAGE 53 ---
Are You Ready? Floods 2.1 
If you have to leave your home, remember these evacuation tips: 
•	 Do not walk through moving water.  Six inches of moving water can make 
you fall.  If you have to walk in water, walk where the water is not moving. 
Use a stick to check the ﬁrmness of the ground in front of you. 
•	 Do not drive into ﬂ ooded areas.  If ﬂoodwaters rise around your car, aban­
don the car and move to higher ground if you can do so safely . You and the 
vehicle can be quickly swept away . 
Driving: Flood Facts 
The following are important points to remember when driving in ﬂ ood 
conditions: 
• Six inches of water will reach the bottom of most passenger cars 
causing loss of control and possible stalling. 
• A foot of water will ﬂ oat many vehicles. 
• Two feet of rushing water can carry away most vehicles including 
sport utility vehicles (SUV’s) and pick-ups. 
After a Flood The following are guidelines for the period following a ﬂ ood: 
• 	 Listen for news reports to learn whether the community’s water supply is safe 
to drink.
 
• 	 Avoid ﬂoodwaters; water may be contaminated by oil, gasoline, or raw sew­
age. Water may also be electrically charged from underground or downed 
power lines.
 
• 	 Avoid moving water. 
• 	 Be aware of areas where ﬂoodwaters have receded.  Roads may have weakened 
and could collapse under the weight of a car.
 
• 	 Stay away from downed power lines, and report them to the power company . 
• 	 Return home only when authorities indicate it is safe. 
• 	 Stay out of any building if it is surrounded by ﬂ oodwaters. 
• 	 Use extreme caution when entering buildings; there may be hidden damage,
 
particularly in foundations.
 
• 	 Service damaged septic tanks, cesspools, pits, and leaching systems as soon as 
possible.  Damaged sewage systems are serious health hazards.
 
• 	 Clean and disinfect everything that got wet.  Mud left from ﬂ oodwater can 
contain sewage and chemicals.
 
Natural
Hazards 
53


--- PAGE 54 ---
2.1 Are You Ready? Floods 
Additional Information 
Flood Insurance Consider the following facts: 
• 	 Flood losses are not covered under homeowners’ insurance policies. 
• 	 FEMA manages the National Flood Insurance Program, which makes feder­
ally-backed ﬂood insurance available in communities that agree to adopt and 
enforce ﬂoodplain management ordinances to reduce future ﬂ ood damage. 
• 	 Flood insurance is available in most communities through insurance agents. 
• 	 There is a 30-day waiting period before ﬂood insurance goes into effect, so 
don’t delay . 
• 	 Flood insurance is available whether the building is in or out of the identiﬁ ed 
ﬂ ood-prone area. 
Knowledge Check 
Decide whether the following statements are true or false.  Check the appropriate column.  When you have ﬁnished, check your 
answers using the answer key below.
 T F Statement 
❏❏ 1. Flood emergencies occur in only 12 states.
 
❏❏  2. A “ﬂood watch” announcement on the radio indicates that ﬂooding is possible.
 
❏❏  3. Flash ﬂoods may occur with little warning.
 
❏❏ 4. Flood risk varies from one region to another.
 
❏❏  5. National ﬂood insurance is available only for buildings within an identiﬁ  ed ﬂ ood-prone area.
 
❏❏ 6. It is safe to walk through ﬂoodwater if you can see the ground under it.
 
❏❏ 7. It takes at least 3 feet of ﬂ oodwater to make a motorized vehicle ﬂ oat.
 
❏❏  8. After ﬂood waters recede from a roadway , the road could still be dangerous.
 
❏❏ 9. To prepare for a ﬂood emergency , you should have a NOAA Weather Radio as well as a
 
commercial radio. 
Answer key 
False  1. 2.True  3.True  4.True  5. False  6. False  7. False  8.True  9.True 
54


--- PAGE 55 ---
Are You Ready? Floods 2.1 
For More Information 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following are 
resources that may be helpful. 
FEMA Publications•	 After a Flood:The First Steps. L-198.  Information for homeowners on prepared­
ness, safety , and recovery from a ﬂ ood. 
•	 Homeowner’s Guide to Retroﬁtting: Six Ways to Protect Your House from Flooding. L-235. A 
brochure about obtaining information about how to protect your home from 
ﬂ ooding. 
•	 Homeowner’s Guide to Retroﬁtting: Six Ways to Protect Your House from Flooding. FEMA-312. 
A detailed manual on how to protect your home from ﬂ ooding. 
•	 About the Flood: Elevating Your Floodprone House. FEMA-347. This publication is in­
tended for builders, code ofﬁcials and homeowners. 
•	 Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damage. FEMA-348. This publication is 
intended for developers, architects, engineers, builders, code ofﬁ cials and 
homeowners. 
Other Publications
American Red Cross 
•	 Repairing Your Flooded Home.  sixty-page booklet about how to perform simple 
home repairs after ﬂooding, including cleaning, sanitation, and determining 
which professionals to involve for various needed services. Local Red Cross 
chapters can order in packages of 10 as stock number A4477 for a nominal 
fee. Also available online at www.redcross.org/services/disaster/0,1082,0_ 
570_,00.html 
National W eather Service 
•	 Hurricane Flooding: A Deadly Inland Danger.  20052.  Brochure describing the 
impact of hurricane ﬂooding and precautions to take. Available online at 
www.nws.noaa.gov/om/brochures/InlandFlooding.pdf 
•	 The Hidden Danger:  Low Water Crossing.  96074E.  Brochure describing the 
hazards of driving your vehicle in ﬂood conditions. Available online at 
www.nws.noaa.gov/om/brochures/TheHiddenDangerEnglish.pdf 
Natural
Hazards 
55


--- PAGE 56 ---
56


--- PAGE 57 ---
2.2 
Tornadoes


--- PAGE 58 ---
2.2 Are You Ready? Tornadoes 
Tor
nadoes are nature’s most violent storms.  Spawned from powerful thunder­
storms, tornadoes can cause fatalities and devastate a neighborhood in seconds. 
A tornado appears as a rotating, funnel-shaped cloud that extends from a thun­
derstorm to the ground with whirling winds that can reach 300 miles per hour. 
Damage paths can be in excess of one mile wide and 50 miles long.  Every state is 
at some risk from this hazard. 
Some tornadoes are clearly visible, while rain or nearby low-hanging clouds ob­
scure others.  Occasionally , tornadoes develop so rapidly that little, if any , advance 
warning is possible. 
Before a tornado hits, the wind may die down and the air may become very still. 
A cloud of debris can mark the location of a tornado even if a funnel is not vis­
ible. Tornadoes generally occur near the trailing edge of a thunderstorm.  It is not 
uncommon to see clear, sunlit skies behind a tornado. 
58


--- PAGE 59 ---
Are You Ready? Tornadoes 2.2 
The following are facts about tornadoes: 
• 	 They may strike quickly , with little or no warning. 
• 	 They may appear nearly transparent until dust and debris are picked up or a 
cloud forms in the funnel. 
• 	 The average tornado moves Southwest to Northeast, but tornadoes have been 
known to move in any direction. 
• 	 The average forward speed of a tornado is 30 MPH, but may vary from sta­
tionary to 70 MPH. 
• 	 Tornadoes can accompany tropical storms and hurricanes as they move onto 
land. 
• 	 Waterspouts are tornadoes that form over water. 
• 	 Tornadoes are most frequently reported east of the Rocky Mountains during 
spring and summer months. 
• 	 Peak tornado season in the southern states is March through May; in the 
northern states, it is late spring through early summer.
 
• 	 Tornadoes are most likely to occur between 3 p.m. and 9 p.m., but can occur 
at any time. 
Know the Terms 
Familiarize yourself with these terms to help identify a tornado hazard: 
Tornado Watch 
Tornadoes are possible.  Remain alert for approaching storms. Watch the 
sky and stay tuned to NOAA Weather Radio, commercial radio, or televi­
sion for information. 
Tornado Warning 
A tornado has been sighted or indicated by weather radar. Take shelter 
immediately . 
Take Protective Measures
 
Before a Tornado Be alert to changing weather conditions. 
• 	 Listen to NOAA Weather Radio or to commercial radio or television newscasts 
for the latest information.
 
• 	 Look for approaching storms. 
Natural
Hazards 
59


--- PAGE 60 ---
2.2 Are You Ready? Tornadoes 
• Look for the f
ollowing danger signs: 
- Dark, often greenish sky 
- Large hail 
- A large, dark, low-lying cloud (particularly if rotating) 
- Loud roar, similar to a freight train. 
If you see approaching storms or any of the danger signs, be prepared to take shel­
ter immediately . 
During a Tornado If you are under a tornado WARNING, seek shelter immediately! 
If you are in: Then: 
A structure (e.g. residence, small 
building, school, nursing home, 
hospital, factory , shopping center, 
high-rise building) 
Go to a pre-designated shelter area such as 
a safe room, basement, storm cellar, or the 
lowest building level. 
If there is no basement, go to the center 
of an interior room on the lowest level 
(closet, interior hallway) away from 
corners, windows, doors, and outside 
walls.  Put as many walls as possible 
between you and the outside. Get under a 
sturdy table and use your arms to protect 
your head and neck. 
Do not open windows. 
A vehicle, trailer, or mobile home Get out immediately and go to the lowest 
ﬂoor of a sturdy , nearby building or a 
storm shelter.  Mobile homes, even if 
tied down, offer little protection from 
tornadoes. 
The outside with no shelter • Lie ﬂat in a nearby ditch or depression 
and cover your head with your hands. 
Be aware of the potential for ﬂ ooding. 
• Do not get under an overpass or 
bridge. You are safer in a low, ﬂ at 
location. 
• Never try to outrun a tornado in 
urban or congested areas in a car 
or truck.  Instead, leave the vehicle 
immediately for safe shelter. 
• Watch out for ﬂ ying debris.  Flying 
debris from tornadoes causes most 
fatalities and injuries. 
60


--- PAGE 61 ---
Are You Ready? Tornadoes 2.2 
Preparing a Safe Room 
Extreme windstorms in many parts of the country pose a serious threat to build­
ings and their occupants. Your residence may be built “to code,” but that does not 
mean it can withstand winds from extreme events such as tornadoes and major 
hurricanes. The purpose of a safe room or a wind shelter is to provide a space 
where you and your family can seek refuge that provides a high level of protection. 
You can build a safe room in one of several places in your home: 
• Your basement. 
• Atop a concrete slab-on-grade foundation or garage ﬂ  oor. 
• An interior room on the ﬁ  rst ﬂ oor. 
Safe rooms built below ground level provide the greatest protection, but a safe 
room built in a ﬁ rst-ﬂ oor interior room also can provide the necessary protection. 
Below-ground safe rooms must be designed to avoid accumulating water during 
the heavy rains that often accompany severe windstorms. 
To protect its occupants, a safe room must be built to withstand high winds and 
ﬂying debris, even if the rest of the residence is severely damaged or destroyed. 
Consider the following when building a safe room: 
• The safe room must be adequately anchored to resist overturning and uplift. 
• The walls, ceiling, and door of the shelter must withstand wind pressure and 
resist penetration by windborne objects and falling debris. 
• The connections between all parts of the safe room must be strong enough to 
resist the wind. 
• Sections of either interior or exterior residence walls that are used as walls of 
the safe room, must be separated from the structure of the residence so that 
damage to the residence will not cause damage to the safe room. 
Additional information about Safe Rooms avaliable from FEMA 
T aking Shelter from the Storm: Building a Safe Room Inside Your House. L-233.  Brochure provid­
ing details about obtaining information about how to build a wind-safe room to 
withstand tornado, hurricane, and other high winds 
T aking Shelter from the Storm: Building a Safe Room Inside Your House. FEMA-320.  Manual with 
detailed information about how to build a wind-safe room to withstand tornado, 
hurricane, and other high winds 
Natural
Hazards 
61


--- PAGE 62 ---
2.2 Are You Ready? Tornadoes 
Locate the Safest Place 
On the following home layout diagrams, locate the safest place to seek shelter should you not be able to evacuate. 
Apartment 
Dining 
Room 
Kitchen 
Bath 
Bedroom 
Bedroom 
Living 
Room 
One-Story Home 
DW 
W D 
Dining 
Room Kitchen 
Bath 
Bath 
Master 
Bedroom 
Bedroom 
Living 
Room 
Veranda 
W.I.C. 
62


--- PAGE 63 ---
Are You Ready? Tornadoes 2.2 
Two-Story Home First Floor 
DW 
Dining 
Room 
Living 
Room 
Kitchen 
Bath 
Garage 
Veranda 
Second Floor
 
Bath 
Bath 
Master 
Bedroom 
Bedroom Bedroom 
Natural
Hazards 
Answer key 
Apartment: Bathroom,  One-Story Home:WIC (walk in Closet), Two-Story Home: First ﬂ oor bathroom 
63


--- PAGE 64 ---
2.2 Are You Ready? Tornadoes 
Aft
er a Tornado Follow the instructions for recovering from a disaster in Part 5. 
For More Information
 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following are 
resources that may be helpful. 
FEMA Publications T ornado Fact Sheet. L-148.  Provides safety tips for before, during, and after a tornado 
T ornado Protection—Selecting Refuge Areas in Buildings. FEMA 431.  Intended primarily to 
help building administrators, architects, and engineers select the best available 
refuge areas in existing schools 
64


--- PAGE 65 ---
2.3 
Hurricanes


--- PAGE 66 ---
2.3 Are You Ready? Hurricanes 
A hurr
icane is a type of tropical cyclone, the generic term for a low pressure 
system that generally forms in the tropics. A typical cyclone is accompanied by 
thunderstorms, and in the Northern Hemisphere, a counterclockwise circulation of 
winds near the earth’s surface. 
All Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico coastal areas are subject to hurricanes or tropical 
storms.  Parts of the Southwest United States and the Paciﬁc Coast experience heavy 
rains and ﬂ oods each year from hurricanes spawned off Mexico.The Atlantic hur­
ricane season lasts from June to November, with the peak season from mid-August 
to late October. 
Hurricanes can cause catastrophic damage to coastlines and several hundred miles 
inland. Winds can exceed 155 miles per hour.  Hurricanes and tropical storms can 
also spawn tornadoes and microbursts, create storm surges along the coast, and 
cause extensive damage from heavy rainfall. 
Hurricanes are classiﬁ ed into ﬁ ve categories based on their wind speed, central 
pressure, and damage potential (see chart).  Category  Three and higher hurricanes 
are considered major hurricanes, though Categories One and Two are still extreme­
ly dangerous and warrant your full attention. 
Safﬁr-Simpson Hurricane Scale 
Scale Number 
 (Category) 
Sustained Winds 
(MPH) 
Damage Storm
Surge
 1 74-95 Minimal:  Unanchored mobile homes, 
vegetation, and signs 4-5 feet
 2 96-110 Moderate: All mobile homes, roofs, 
small craft; ﬂ ooding 6-8 feet
 3 111-130 Extensive:  Small buildings; low-lying 
roads cut off 9-12 feet
 4 131-155 Extreme:  Roofs destroyed, trees 
down, roads cut off, mobile homes 
destroyed, beach homes ﬂ ooded 13-18 feet 
5 More than 155 Catastrophic:  Most buildings 
destroyed, vegetation destroyed, 
major roads cut off, homes ﬂ ooded Greater than 
18 feet 
Hurricanes can produce widespread torrential rains.  Floods are the deadly and de­
structive result. Slow moving storms and tropical storms moving into mountainous 
regions tend to produce especially heavy rain.  Excessive rain can trigger landslides 
or mud slides, especially in mountainous regions.  Flash ﬂooding can occur due to 
intense rainfall.  Flooding on rivers and streams may persist for several days or more 
after the storm. 
66


--- PAGE 67 ---
Are You Ready? Hurricanes 2.3 
Between 1970 and 1999, more people lost their lives from freshwater inland 
ﬂooding associated with land falling tropical cyclones than from any other weather 
hazard related to tropical cyclones. 
Naming the Hurricane 
Since 1953, Atlantic tropical storms have been named from lists originated by the National Hurricane 
Center and now maintained and updated by an international committee of the World Meteorological 
Organization. The lists featured only women’s names until 1979. After that, men’s and women’s names 
were alternated.  Six lists are used in rotation. Thus, the 2001 lists will be used again in 2007. 
The only time there is a change in the list is if a storm is so deadly or costly that the continued use of 
the name would be inappropriate for reasons of sensitivity . When this occurs, the name is stricken 
from the list and another name is selected to replace it. 
Sometimes names are changed.  Lorenzo replaced Luis and Michelle replaced Marilyn. The complete 
lists can be found at 
www.nhc.noaa.gov under “Storm Names.” 
Natural
Hazards 
67


--- PAGE 68 ---
2.3 Are You Ready? Hurricanes 
Know the Terms 
Familiarize yourself with these terms to help identify a hurricane hazard: 
Tropical Depression 
An organized system of clouds and thunderstorms with a deﬁ ned surface 
circulation and maximum sustained winds of 38 MPH (33 knots) or less. 
Sustained winds are deﬁned as one-minute average wind measured at 
about 33 ft (10  meters) above the surface. 
Tropical Storm 
An organized system of strong thunderstorms with a deﬁ ned surface cir­
culation and maximum sustained winds of 39-73 MPH (34-63 knots). 
Hurricane 
An intense tropical weather system of strong thunderstorms with a well-
deﬁned surface circulation and maximum sustained winds of 74 MPH 
(64 knots) or higher. 
Storm Surge 
A dome of water pushed onshore by hurricane and tropical storm winds. 
Storm surges can reach 25 feet high and be 50-100 miles wide. 
Storm Tide 
A combination of storm surge and the normal tide (i.e., a 15-foot storm 
surge combined with a 2-foot normal high tide over the mean sea level 
creates a 17-foot storm tide). 
Hurricane/Tropical Storm Watch 
Hurricane/tropical storm conditions are possible in the speciﬁ ed area, 
usually within 36 hours. Tune in to NOAA Weather Radio, commercial 
radio, or television for information. 
Hurricane/Tropical Storm Warning 
Hurricane/tropical storm conditions are expected in the speciﬁ ed area, 
usually within 24 hours. 
Short  Term Watches and Warnings 
These warnings provide detailed information about speciﬁ c hurricane 
threats, such as ﬂ ash ﬂoods and tornadoes. 
68


--- PAGE 69 ---
Are You Ready? Hurricanes 2.3 
Take Protective Measures 
Before a Hurricane To prepare for a hurricane, you should take the following measures: 
• 	 Make plans to secure your property .  Permanent storm shutters offer the best 
protection for windows. A second option is to board up windows with 5/8”
 
marine plywood, cut to ﬁ t and ready to install. Tape does not prevent win­
dows from breaking.
 
• 	 Install straps or additional clips to securely fasten your roof to the frame struc­
ture. This will reduce roof damage.
 
• 	 Be sure trees and shrubs around your home are well trimmed. 
• 	 Clear loose and clogged rain gutters and downspouts. 
Review 
For more informa-
tion on safe rooms 
See Section 2.2: 
Tornadoes 
• 	 Determine how and where to secure your boat. 
• 	 Consider building a safe room. 
During a HurricaneIf a hurricane is likely in your area, you should: 
• 	 Listen to the radio or TV for information. 
• 	 Secure your home, close storm shutters, and secure outdoor objects or bring 
them indoors.
 
• 	 Turn off utilities if instructed to do so.  Otherwise, turn the refrigerator ther­
mostat to its coldest setting and keep its doors closed.
 
• 	 Turn off propane tanks. 
• 	 Avoid using the phone, except for serious emergencies. 
• 	 Moor your boat if time permits. 
• 	 Ensure a supply of water for sanitary purposes such as cleaning and ﬂ ushing 
toilets.  Fill the bathtub and other large containers with water.
 
Natural
Hazards 
69


--- PAGE 70 ---
2.3 Are You Ready? Hurricanes 
Review 
Guidelines for 
sheltering 
See Section 1.4: 
Shelter 
You should evacuate under the following conditions: 
• 	 If you are directed by local authorities to do so.  Be sure to follow their in­
structions.
 
• 	 If you live in a mobile home or temporary structure—such shelters are 
particularly hazardous during hurricanes no matter how well fastened to the 
ground. 
• 	 If you live in a high-rise building—hurricane winds are stronger at higher 
elevations. 
• 	 If you live on the coast, on a ﬂ oodplain, near a river, or on an inland water­
way . 
• 	 If you feel you are in danger. 
If you are unable to evacuate, go to your wind-safe room.  If you do not have one, 
follow these guidelines: 
• 	 Stay indoors during the hurricane and away from windows and glass doors. 
• 	 Close all interior doors—secure and brace external doors. 
• 	 Keep curtains and blinds closed.  Do not be fooled if there is a lull; it could be 
the eye of the storm—winds will pick up again. 
• 	 Take refuge in a small interior room, closet, or hallway on the lowest level. 
• 	 Lie on the ﬂ oor under a table or another sturdy object. 
After a Hurricane Follow the instructions for recovering from a disaster in Part 5. 
70


--- PAGE 71 ---
Are You Ready? Hurricanes 2.3 
Knowledge Check 
You Make the Call 
Read the following and respond to the question below.  See the answer key below to check your answer. 
Your neighbor said that in the event a hurricane threatens, the household would get ready by closing the win­
dows and doors on the storm side of the house and opening the ones on the side away from the wind. They 
also will tape the windows to prevent damage to the glass. 
Is this a good idea? 
Answer Key
 
No! All of the doors and windows should be closed (and shuttered) throughout the duration of the hurricane.
 
The winds in a hurricane are highly turbulent and any open window or door can be an open target for ﬂ ying 
debris.
 
As for the tape, it is a waste of effort, time, and tape.  It offers no strength to the glass and no protection against 
ﬂ ying debris.
 
Natural
Hazards 
71


--- PAGE 72 ---
2.3 Are You Ready? Hurricanes 
For More Information 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following are 
resources that may be helpful. 
FEMA Publications Against the Wind: Protecting Your Home from Hurricane and Wind Damage. FEMA-247. A guide 
to hurricane preparedness. Available online at www.fema.gov/txt/hazards/ 
hurricanes/survivingthestormhurricane.txt 
Community Hurricane Preparedness. IS-324. CD-ROM or Web-based training course for 
federal, state, and local emergency managers. Web-based version available online at 
http://meted.ucar.edu/hurrican/chp/index.htm 
Safety Tips for Hurricanes. L 105. Publication for teachers and parents for presentation to 
children. To order, call 1(800)480-2520. 
Other Publications Protect Your Home against Hurricane Damage, Institute for Business and Home Safety. 110 William 
Street, New York, NY  20038 
72


--- PAGE 73 ---
2.4 
Thunderstorms 
and Lightning


--- PAGE 74 ---
2.4 Are You Ready? Thunderstorms and Lightning 
All thunderstorms ar
e dangerous.  Every thunderstorm produces lightning.  In the 
United States, an average of 300 people are injured and 80 people are killed each 
year by lightning. Although most lightning victims survive, people struck by light­
ning often report a variety of long-term, debilitating symptoms. 
Other associated dangers of thunderstorms include tornadoes, strong winds, hail, 
and ﬂ ash ﬂ ooding.  Flash ﬂ ooding is responsible for more fatalities—more than 
140 annually—than any other thunderstorm-associated hazard. 
Dry thunderstorms that do not produce rain that reaches the ground are most 
prevalent in the western United States.  Falling raindrops evaporate, but lightning 
can still reach the ground and can start wildﬁ res. 
74


--- PAGE 75 ---
Are You Ready? Thunderstorms and Lightning 2.4 
The following are facts about thunderstorms: 
• 	 They may occur singly , in clusters, or in lines. 
• 	 Some of the most severe occur when a single thunderstorm affects one loca­
tion for an extended time. 
• 	 Thunderstorms typically produce heavy rain for a brief period, anywhere 
from 30 minutes to an hour.
 
• 	 Warm, humid conditions are highly favorable for thunderstorm development. 
• 	 About 10 percent of thunderstorms are classiﬁed as severe—one that pro­
duces hail at least three-quarters of an inch in diameter, has winds of 58 miles 
per hour or higher, or produces a tornado. 
The following are facts about lightning: 
• 	 Lightning’s unpredictability increases the risk to individuals and property . 
• 	 Lightning often strikes outside of heavy rain and may occur as far as 10 miles 
away from any rainfall. 
•	 “Heat lightning” is actually lightning from a thunderstorm too far away for 
thunder to be heard.  However, the storm may be moving in your direction! 
• 	 Most lightning deaths and injuries occur when people are caught outdoors in 
the summer months during the afternoon and evening. 
• 	 Your chances of being struck by lightning are estimated to be 1 in 600,000, 
but could be reduced even further by following safety precautions. 
• 	 Lightning strike victims carry no electrical charge and should be attended to 
immediately . 
Know the Terms 
Familiarize yourself with these terms to help identify a thunderstorm 
hazard: 
Severe Thunderstorm Watch 
Tells you when and where severe thunderstorms are likely to occur. 
Watch the sky and stay tuned to NOAA Weather Radio, commercial radio, 
or television for information. 
Severe Thunderstorm Warning 
Issued when severe weather has been reported by spotters or indicated by 
radar. Warnings indicate imminent danger to life and property to those in 
the path of the storm. 
Natural
Hazards 
75


--- PAGE 76 ---
2.4	 Are You Ready? Thunderstorms and Lightning 
Take Protective Measures 
Before Thunderstorms and 
Lightning To prepare for a thunderstorm, you should do the following: 
• 	 Remove dead or rotting trees and branches that could fall and cause injury or 
damage during a severe thunderstorm. 
• 	 Remember the 30/30 lightning safety rule: Go indoors if, after seeing light­
ning, you cannot count to 30 before hearing thunder.  Stay indoors for 30 
minutes after hearing the last clap of thunder. 
Thunderstorms 
The following are guidelines for what you should do if a thunderstorm is likely 
in your area: 
• 	 Postpone outdoor activities. 
• 	 Get inside a home, building, or hard top automobile (not a convertible). 
Although you may be injured if lightning strikes your car, you are much safer 
inside a vehicle than outside. 
• 	 Remember, rubber-soled shoes and rubber tires provide NO protection from 
lightning.  However, the steel frame of a hard-topped vehicle provides in­
creased protection if you are not touching me tal. 
• 	 Secure outdoor objects that could blow away or cause damage. 
• 	 Shutter windows and secure outside doors. If shutters are not available, close 
window blinds, shades, or curtains. 
• 	 Avoid showering or bathing.  Plumbing and bathroom ﬁxtures can conduct 
electricity . 
• 	 Use a corded telephone only for emergencies. Cordless and cellular telephones 
are safe to use. 
• 	 Unplug appliances and other electrical items such as computers and turn off 
air conditioners. Power surges from lightning can cause serious damage. 
• 	 Use your battery-operated NOAA Weather Radio for updates from local of­
ﬁ cials. 
Avoid the following: 
• Natural lightning rods such as a tall, isolated tree in an 
open area 
• Hilltops, open ﬁelds, the beach, or a boat on the water 
• Isolated sheds or other small structures in open areas 
• Anything metal—tractors, farm equipment, motorcy­
cles, golf carts, golf clubs, and bicycles 
76


--- PAGE 77 ---
Are You Ready? Thunderstorms and Lightning 2.4 
During a Thunderstorm If you are: Then: 
In a forest Seek shelter in a low area under a thick growth 
of small trees. 
In an open area Go to a low place such as a ravine or valley .  Be 
alert for ﬂ ash ﬂ oods. 
On open water Get to land and ﬁ nd shelter immediately . 
Anywhere you feel your hair 
stand on end (which indi­
cates that lightning is about 
to strike) 
Squat low to the ground on the balls of your 
feet.  Place your hands over your ears and your 
head between your knees.  Make yourself the 
smallest target possible and minimize your 
contact with the ground.  DO NOT lie ﬂ at on 
the ground. 
After a Thunderstorm Call 9-1-1 for medical assistance as soon as possible. 
The following are things you should check when you attempt to give aid to a vic­
tim of lightning: 
•	 Breathing - if breathing has stopped, begin mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. 
•	 Heartbeat - if the heart has stopped, administer CPR. 
•	 Pulse - if the victim has a pulse and is breathing, look for other possible 
injuries. Check for burns where the lightning entered and left the body . Also 
be alert for nervous system damage, broken bones, and loss of hearing and 
eyesight.
 
Natural
Hazards 
77


--- PAGE 78 ---
2.4 Are You Ready? Thunderstorms and Lightning 
Knowledge Check 
Decide whether the following statements are true or false.  Check the appropriate column.  When you have ﬁnished, verify your 
answers using the answer key below.
 T F Statement 
❏❏ 1. Every thunderstorm produces lightning.
 
❏❏ 2. Never touch a person struck by lightning.
 
❏❏ 3. Dry , cold conditions favor development of a thunderstorm.
 
❏❏ 4. If you can count to 25 after seeing lightning and before hearing thunder, it is safe to stay 
outdoors. 
❏❏ 5. It is safe to use a cordless telephone during a thunderstorm. 
❏❏ 6. Rubber-soled shoes and rubber tires provide protection from lightning. 
For More Information
 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following 
resource may be helpful. 
Publications National W eather Service 
Facts about Lightning.  200252. Two-page factsheet for boaters. Available online at 
www.nws.noaa.gov/om/wcm/lightning/resources/LightningFactsSheet.pdf 
Answer key: 
 2. False 3. False 4. False 5.True 6. False 1.True
78


--- PAGE 79 ---
2.5 
Winter Storms and 
Extreme Cold


--- PAGE 80 ---
2.5 Are You Ready? Winter Storms and Extreme Cold 
Heavy snowfall and extreme cold can immobilize an entire region.  Even areas that 
normally experience mild winters can be hit with a major snowstorm or extreme 
cold. Winter storms can result in ﬂooding, storm surge, closed highways, blocked 
roads, downed power lines and hypothermia. 
Know the Terms 
Familiarize yourself with these terms to help identify a winter storm 
hazard: 
Freezing Rain 
Rain that freezes when it hits the ground, creating a coating of ice on 
roads, walkways, trees, and power lines. 
Sleet 
Rain that turns to ice pellets before reaching the ground. Sleet also causes 
moisture on roads to freeze and become slippery . 
Winter Storm Watch 
A winter storm is possible in your area.Tune in to NOAA Weather Radio, 
commercial radio, or television for more information. 
Winter Storm Warning 
A winter storm is occurring or will soon occur in your area. 
Blizzard Warning 
Sustained winds or frequent gusts to 35 miles per hour or greater and 
considerable amounts of falling or blowing snow (reducing visibility 
to less than a quarter mile) are expected to prevail for a period of three 
hours or longer. 
Frost/Freeze Warning 
Below freezing temperatures are expected. 
Take Protective Measures
 
Before Winter Storms and 
Extreme Cold Include the following in your disaster supplies kit: 
• Rock salt to melt ice on walkways 
Review 
See Section 1.3: 
Assemble a Disaster 
Supplies Kit 
• Sand to improve traction 
• Snow shovels and other snow removal equipment. 
Prepare for possible isolation in your home by having sufﬁcient heating fuel; regu­
lar fuel sources may be cut off.  For example, store a good supply of dry , seasoned 
wood for your ﬁreplace or wood-burning stove. 
80


--- PAGE 81 ---
Are You Ready? Winter Storms and Extreme Cold 2.5 
Winterize your home to extend the life of your fuel supply by insulating walls and 
attics, caulking and weather-stripping doors and windows, and installing storm 
windows or covering windows with plastic. 
To winterize your car, attend to the following: 
• 	 Battery and ignition system should be in top condition and battery terminals 
clean. 
• 	 Ensure antifreeze levels are sufﬁcient to avoid freezing. 
• 	 Ensure the heater and defroster work properly . 
• 	 Check and repair windshield wiper equipment; ensure proper washer ﬂ uid 
level.
 
• 	 Ensure the thermostat works properly . 
• 	 Check lights and ﬂashing hazard lights for serviceability . 
• 	 Check for leaks and crimped pipes in the exhaust system; repair or replace as 
necessary .  Carbon monoxide is deadly and usually gives no warning. 
Natural
Hazards 
81


--- PAGE 82 ---
2.5 Are You Ready? Winter Storms and Extreme Cold 
• 	 Check br
eaks for wear and ﬂ uid levels. 
• 	 Check oil for level and weight.  Heavier oils congeal more at low temperatures 
and do not lubricate as well. 
• 	 Consider snow tires, snow tires with studs, or chains. 
• 	 Replace fuel and air ﬁ  lters.  Keep water out of the system by using additives 
and maintaining a full tank of gas. 
Dress for the Weather 
• Wear several layers of loose ﬁ  tting, lightweight, warm clothing rather 
than one layer of heavy clothing. The outer garments should be 
tightly woven and water repellent. 
• Wear mittens, which are warmer than gloves. 
• Wear a hat. 
• Cover your mouth with a scarf to protect your lungs. 
During a Winter Storm The following are guidelines for what you should do during a winter storm or 
under conditions of extreme cold: 
• 	 Listen to your radio, television, or NOAA Weather Radio for weather reports 
and emergency information. 
• 	 Eat regularly and drink ample ﬂuids, but avoid caffeine and alcohol. 
• 	 Avoid overexertion when shoveling snow.  Overexertion can bring on a heart 
attack —a major cause of death in the winter.  If you must shovel snow, stretch 
before going outside. 
• 	 Watch for signs of frostbite. These include loss of feeling and white or pale 
appearance in extremities such as ﬁngers, toes, ear lobes, and the tip of the 
nose.  If symptoms are detected, get medical help immediately . 
• 	 Watch for signs of hypothermia. These include uncontrollable shivering, 
memory loss, disorientation, incoherence, slurred speech, drowsiness, and ap­
parent exhaustion.  If symptoms of hypothermia are detected, get the victim 
to a warm location, remove wet clothing, warm the center of the body ﬁ rst, 
and give warm, non-alcoholic beverages if the victim is conscious. Get medi­
cal help as soon as possible. 
• 	 Conserve fuel, if necessary , by keeping your residence cooler than normal. 
Temporarily close off heat to some rooms. 
• 	 Maintain ventilation when using kerosene heaters to avoid build-up of toxic 
fumes.  Refuel kerosene heaters outside and keep them at least three feet from 
ﬂ ammable objects. 
82


--- PAGE 83 ---
Are You Ready? Winter Storms and Extreme Cold 2.5 
• 	 Drive only if it is absolutely necessary . If you must drive, consider the 
following:
 
-	 Travel in the day , don’t travel alone, and keep others informed of your      
schedule 
-	  Stay on main roads; avoid back road shortcuts 
If a blizzard traps you in the car, keep these guidelines in mind: 
• 	 Pull off the highway . Turn on hazard lights and hang a distress ﬂag from the 
radio antenna or window. 
• 	 Remain in your vehicle where rescuers are most likely to ﬁnd you.  Do not set 
out on foot unless you can see a building close by where you know you can 
take shelter.  Be careful; distances are distorted by blowing snow. A building 
may seem close, but be too far to walk to in deep snow. 
• 	 Run the engine and heater about 10 minutes each hour to keep warm. When 
the engine is running, open an upwind window slightly for ventilation. This 
will protect you from possible carbon monoxide poisoning.  Periodically clear 
snow from the exhaust pipe. 
• 	 Exercise to maintain body heat, but avoid overexertion.  In extreme cold, use 
road maps, seat covers, and ﬂoor mats for insulation.  Huddle with passengers 
and use your coat for a blanket. 
• 	 Take turns sleeping.  One person should be awake at all times to look for res­
cue crews. 
• 	 Drink ﬂ uids to avoid dehydration. 
• 	 Be careful not to waste battery power.  Balance electrical energy needs—the 
use of lights, heat, and radio—with supply . 
• 	 Turn on the inside light at night so work crews or rescuers can see you. 
• 	 If stranded in a remote area, stomp large block letters in an open area spelling 
out HELP or SOS and line with rocks or tree limbs to attract the attention of 
rescue personnel who may be surveying the area by airplane. 
• 	 Leave the car and proceed on foot—if necessary—once the blizzard passes. 
Natural
Hazards 
83


--- PAGE 84 ---
2.5 Are You Ready? Winter Storms and Extreme Cold 
Aft
er a Winter Storm Follow the instructions for recovering from a disaster in Part 5. 
For More Information 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following are 
resources that may be helpful. 
Publications National W eather Service 
Winter Storms…The Deceptive Killers.  Brochure packed with useful information includ­
ing winter storm facts, how to detect frostbite and hypothermia, what to do in a 
winter storm, and how to be prepared. Available online at: www.nws.noaa.gov/ 
om/brochures/wntrstm.htm 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Extreme Cold: A Prevention Guide to Promote Your Personal Health and Safety . An extensive docu­
ment providing information about planning ahead for cold weather, safety both 
indoors and outdoors in cold weather, and cold weather health conditions. Avail­
able online at: www.phppo.cdc.gov 
84


--- PAGE 85 ---
2.6 
Extreme Heat


--- PAGE 86 ---
2.6 Are You Ready? Extreme Heat 
Heat kills b
y pushing the human body beyond its limits.  In extreme heat and high 
humidity , evaporation is slowed and the body must work extra hard to maintain a 
normal temperature. 
Most heat disorders occur because the victim has been overexposed to heat or has 
over-exercised for his or her age and physical condition.  Older adults, young chil­
dren, and those who are sick or overweight are more likely to succumb to extreme 
heat. 
Conditions that can induce heat-related illnesses include stagnant atmospheric 
conditions and poor air quality .  Consequently , people living in urban areas may 
be at greater risk from the effects of a prolonged heat wave than those living in 
rural areas. Also, asphalt and concrete store heat longer and gradually release heat 
at night, which can produce higher nighttime temperatures known as the “urban 
heat island effect.” 
86


--- PAGE 87 ---
Are You Ready? Extreme Heat 2.6 
Natural
Hazards
Take Protective Measures 
Know the Terms 
Familiarize yourself with these terms to help identify an extreme heat 
hazard: 
Heat Wave 
Prolonged period of excessive heat, often combined with excessive hu­
midity. 
Heat Index 
A number in degrees Fahrenheit (F) that tells how hot it feels when rela­
tive humidity is added to the air temperature.  Exposure to full sunshine 
can increase the heat index by 15 degrees. 
Heat Cramps 
Muscular pains and spasms due to heavy exertion. Although heat cramps 
are the least severe, they are often the ﬁrst signal that the body is having 
trouble with the heat. 
Heat Exhaustion 
Typically occurs when people exercise heavily or work in a hot, humid 
place where body ﬂuids are lost through heavy sweating.  Blood ﬂ ow to 
the skin increases, causing blood ﬂow to decrease to the vital organs. This 
results in a form of mild shock.  If not treated, the victim’s condition will 
worsen.  Body temperature will keep rising and the victim may suffer 
heat stroke. 
Heat Stroke 
A life-threatening condition. The victim’s temperature control system, 
which produces sweating to cool the body , stops working. The body tem­
perature can rise so high that brain damage and death may result if the 
body is not cooled quickly . 
Sun Stroke 
Another term for heat stroke. 
Before Extreme Heat To prepare for extreme heat, you should: 
•	 Install window air conditioners snugly; insulate if necessary . 
•	 Check air-conditioning ducts for proper insulation. 
•	 Install temporary window reﬂectors (for use between windows and drapes),
 
such as aluminum foil-covered cardboard, to reﬂect heat back outside.
 
• 	 Weather-strip doors and sills to keep cool air in. 
87


--- PAGE 88 ---
2.6	 Are You Ready? Extreme Heat 
•	 Cover windows that receive morning or afternoon sun with drapes, shades, 
awnings, or louvers. (Outdoor awnings or louvers can reduce the heat that 
enters a home by up to 80 percent.) 
•	 Keep storm windows up all year. 
During a Heat Emergency The following are guidelines for what you should do if the weather is extremely 
hot: 
•	 Stay indoors as much as possible and limit exposure to the sun. 
•	 Stay on the lowest ﬂoor out of the sunshine if air conditioning is not available. 
•	 Consider spending the warmest part of the day in public buildings such as 
libraries, schools, movie theaters, shopping malls, and other community 
facilities.   Circulating air can cool the body by increasing the perspiration rate 
of evaporation. 
•	 Eat well-balanced, light, and regular meals. Avoid using salt tablets unless 
directed to do so by a physician. 
•	 Drink plenty of water.  Persons who have epilepsy or heart, kidney , or liver 
disease; are on ﬂuid-restricted diets; or have a problem with ﬂ uid retention 
should consult a doctor before increasing liquid intake. 
•	 Limit intake of alcoholic beverages. 
•	 Dress in loose-ﬁtting, lightweight, and light-colored clothes that cover as 
much skin as possible. 
•	 Protect face and head by wearing a wide-brimmed hat. 
•	 Check on family , friends, and neighbors who do not have air conditioning 
and who spend much of their time alone. 
•	 Never leave children or pets alone in closed vehicles. 
•	 Avoid strenuous work during the warmest part of the day .  Use a buddy sys­
tem when working in extreme heat, and take frequent breaks. 
88


--- PAGE 89 ---
Are You Ready? Extreme Heat 2.6 
Natural
Hazards
First Aid for Heat-Induced Illnesses 
Extreme heat brings with it the possibility of heat-induced illnesses. The follow­
ing table lists these illnesses, their symptoms, and the ﬁrst aid treatment. 
Condition Symptoms First Aid 
Sunburn Skin redness and pain, 
possible swelling, blis­
ters, fever, headaches 
• Take a shower using soap to remove 
oils that may block pores, preventing 
the body from cooling naturally . 
• Apply dry , sterile dressings to any 
blisters, and get medical attention. 
Heat Cramps Painful spasms, usu­
ally in leg and abdom­
inal muscles; heavy 
sweating 
• Get the victim to a cooler location. 
• Lightly stretch and gently massage af­
fected muscles to relieve spasms. 
• Give sips of up to a half glass of cool 
water every 15 minutes. (Do not give 
liquids with caffeine or alcohol.) 
• Discontinue liquids, if victim is nau­
seated. 
Heat Heavy sweating but • Get victim to lie down in a cool place. 
Exhaustion skin may be cool, 
pale, or ﬂ ushed. Weak 
pulse. Normal body 
temperature is pos­
sible, but temperature 
will likely rise.  Faint­
ing or dizziness, nau­
sea, vomiting, exhaus­
tion, and headaches 
are possible. 
• Loosen or remove clothing. 
• Apply cool, wet cloths. 
• Fan or move victim to air-conditioned 
place. 
• Give sips of water if victim is con­
scious. 
• Be sure water is consumed slowly . 
• Give half glass of cool water every 15 
minutes. 
• Discontinue water if victim is nause­
ated. 
• Seek immediate medical attention if 
vomiting occurs. 
Heat Stroke (a High body tempera­ • Call 9-1-1 or emergency medical ser­
severe medical ture (105+); hot, red, vices, or get the victim to a hospital 
emergency) dry skin; rapid, weak 
pulse; and rapid, shal­
low breathing. Victim 
will probably not 
sweat unless victim 
was sweating from re­
cent strenuous activity . 
Possible unconscious­
ness. 
immediately . Delay can be fatal. 
• Move victim to a cooler environment. 
• Remove clothing. 
• Try a cool bath, sponging, or wet 
sheet to reduce body temperature. 
• Watch for breathing problems. 
• Use extreme caution. 
• Use fans and air conditioners. 
89


--- PAGE 90 ---
2.6 Are You Ready? Extreme Heat 
Additional Information 
An emergency water shortage can be caused by prolonged drought, poor water 
supply management, or contamination of a surface water supply source or aquifer. 
Drought can affect vast territorial regions and large population numbers.  Drought 
also creates environmental conditions that increase the risk of other hazards such as 
ﬁ re, ﬂash ﬂood, and possible landslides and debris ﬂ ow. 
Conserving water means more water available for critical needs for everyone. Ap­
pendix A contains detailed suggestions for conserving water both indoors and out­
doors.  Make these practices a part of your daily life and help preserve this essential 
resource. 
After Extreme Heat Follow the instructions for recovering from a disaster in Part 5. 
Knowledge Check 
You and a friend have been outdoors in the sun for some time.  Shortly after coming inside, your friend complains of nausea 
and headache but tells you not to worry as it is probably a food allergy. 
What would you advise him or her to do? 
Answer:  Seek immediate medical attention and discontinue intake of water. 
90


--- PAGE 91 ---
Are You Ready? Extreme Heat 2.6 
For More Information 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following 
resource may be helpful. 
National W eather Service 
Heat Wave: A Major Summer Killer. An online brochure describing the heat index, heat 
disorders, and heat wave safety tips. Available online at: www.nws.noaa.gov/om/ 
/brochures/heat_wave.htm 
Publications 
Natural
Hazards
91


--- PAGE 92 ---
92


--- PAGE 93 ---
2.7 
Earthquakes


--- PAGE 94 ---
2.7 Are You Ready? Earthquakes 
One of the most frightening and destr
uctive phenomena of nature is a severe 
earthquake and its terrible aftereffects. An earthquake is a sudden movement of the 
earth, caused by the abrupt release of strain that has accumulated over a long time. 
For hundreds of millions of years, the forces of plate tectonics have shaped the 
earth, as the huge plates that form the earth’s surface slowly move over, under, and 
past each other.  Sometimes, the movement is gradual. At other times, the plates 
are locked together, unable to release the accumulating energy . When the accumu­
lated energy grows strong enough, the plates break free.  If the earthquake occurs 
in a populated area, it may cause many deaths and injuries and extensive property 
damage. 
94


--- PAGE 95 ---
Are You Ready? Earthquakes 2.7 
Natural
Hazards
Take Protective Measures 
Know the Terms 
Familiarize yourself with these terms to help identify an earthquake 
hazard: 
Earthquake 
A sudden slipping or movement of a portion of the earth’s crust, accom­
panied and followed by a series of vibrations. 
Aftershock 
An earthquake of similar or lesser intensity that follows the main earth­
quake. 
Fault 
The fracture across which displacement has occurred during an earth­
quake. The slippage may range from less than an inch to more than 10 
yards in a severe earthquake. 
Epicenter 
The place on the earth’s surface directly above the point on the fault 
where the earthquake rupture began.  Once fault slippage begins, it ex­
pands along the fault during the earthquake and can extend hundreds of 
miles before stopping. 
Seismic Waves 
Vibrations that travel outward from the earthquake fault at speeds of 
several miles per second. Although fault slippage directly under a struc­
ture can cause considerable damage, the vibrations of seismic waves cause 
most of the destruction during earthquakes. 
Magnitude 
The amount of energy released during an earthquake, which is com­
puted from the amplitude of the seismic waves. A magnitude of 7.0 on 
the Richter Scale indicates an extremely strong earthquake.  Each whole 
number on the scale represents an increase of about 30 times more 
energy released than the previous whole number 
represents. Therefore, 
an earthquake measuring 6.0 is about 30 times more powerful than one 
measuring 5.0. 
Before an Earthquake The following are things you can do to protect yourself, your family , and your 
property in the event of an earthquake: 
•	 Repair defective electrical wiring, leaky gas lines, and inﬂexible utility con­
nections.  Get appropriate professional help.  Do not work with gas or electri­
cal lines yourself.
 
95


--- PAGE 96 ---
2.7 Are You Ready? Earthquakes 
•	 Bolt down and secur
e to the wall studs your water heater, refrigerator, fur­
nace, and gas appliances.  If recommended by your gas company , have an 
automatic gas shut-off valve installed that is triggered by strong vibrations. 
•	 Place large or heavy objects on lower shelves.  Fasten shelves, mirrors, and 
large picture frames to walls.  Brace high and top-heavy objects. 
•	 Store bottled foods, glass, china, and other breakables on low shelves or in 
cabinets that fasten shut. 
•	 Anchor overhead lighting ﬁ xtures. 
•	 Be sure the residence is ﬁrmly anchored to its foundation. 
•	 Install ﬂ exible pipe ﬁttings to avoid gas or water leaks.  Flexible ﬁ ttings are 
more resistant to breakage. 
•	 Locate safe spots in each room under a sturdy table or against an inside wall. 
Reinforce this information by moving to these places during each drill. 
•	 Hold earthquake drills with your family members: Drop, cover, and hold on! 
During an Earthquake Minimize your movements during an earthquake to a few steps to a nearby safe 
place. Stay indoors until the shaking has stopped and you are sure exiting is safe. 
If you are: Then: 
Indoors • Take cover under a sturdy desk, table, or bench or against 
an inside wall, and hold on. If there isn’t a table or desk 
near you, cover your face and head with your arms and 
crouch in an inside corner of the building. 
• Stay away from glass, windows, outside doors and walls, 
and anything that could fall, such as lighting ﬁ xtures or 
furniture. 
• Stay in bed—if you are there when the earthquake 
strikes—hold on and protect your head with a pillow, 
unless you are under a heavy light ﬁxture that could fall. 
In that case, move to the nearest safe place. 
• Use a doorway for shelter only if it is in close proximity 
to you and if you know it is a strongly supported, load-
bearing doorway . 
• Stay inside until the shaking stops and it is safe to go 
outside.  Most injuries during earthquakes occur when 
people are hit by falling objects when entering into or 
exiting from buildings. 
• Be aware that the electricity may go out or the sprinkler 
systems or ﬁre alarms may turn on. 
• DO NOT use the elevators. 
Outdoors • Stay there. 
• Move away from buildings, streetlights, and utility wires. 
96


--- PAGE 97 ---
Are You Ready? Earthquakes 2.7 
Natural
Hazards
After an Earthquake •	 Be prepared for aftershocks. These secondary shockwaves are usually less vio­
lent than the main quake but can be strong enough to do additional damage 
to weakened structures. 
•	 Open cabinets cautiously .  Beware of objects that can fall off shelves. 
•	 Stay away from damaged areas unless your assistance has been speciﬁ cally 
requested by police, ﬁre, or relief organizations. 
•	 Be aware of possible tsunamis if you live in coastal areas.These are also known 
as seismic sea waves (mistakenly called “tidal waves”). When local authorities 
issue a tsunami warning, assume that a series of dangerous waves is on the 
way .  Stay away from the beach. 
If you are: Then: 
In a moving 
v
ehicle 
• Stop as quickly as safety permits and stay in the 
vehicle. Avoid stopping near or under buildings, trees, 
overpasses, and utility wires. 
• Proceed cautiously once the earthquake has stopped, 
watching for road and bridge damage. 
Trapped under 
debris 
• Do not light a match. 
• Do not move about or kick up dust. 
• Cover your mouth with a handkerchief or clothing. 
• Tap on a pipe or wall so rescuers can locate you.  Use a 
whistle if one is available.  Shout only as a last resort— 
shouting can cause you to inhale dangerous amounts of 
dust. 
97


--- PAGE 98 ---
2.7 Are You Ready? Earthquakes 
Knowledge Check 
Check your knowledge about what to do during an earthquake.  For each question, choose answer A or B and circle the correct 
response. When you have ﬁnished, check your responses using the answer key below. 
What action should you take during an earthquake?  The answer varies by where you are when an earthquake 
strikes.  For each situation, pick the best course of action from the choices given. 
1. At home A.  Stay inside 
B.  Go out to the street 
2.  In bed A.  Stand by a window to see what is happening 
B.  Stay in bed and protect your head with a pillow 
3.  In any building A.  Stand in a doorway 
B.  Crouch in an inside corner away from the exterior wall 
4.  On the upper ﬂoor of an
     apartment building 
A. Take the elevator to the ground ﬂoor as quickly as possible 
B.  Stay in an interior room under a desk or table 
5.  Outdoors A.  Run into the nearest building 
B.  Stay outside away from buildings 
6.  Driving a car A.  Stop the car in an open area 
B.  Stop the car under an overpass 
Answer key 
1. A  2. B  3. B  4. B  5. B  6. A 
98


--- PAGE 99 ---
Are You Ready? Earthquakes 2.7 
Natural
Hazards
For More Information 
FEMA PublicationsAvoiding Earthquake Damage:A Checklist for Homeowners.  Safety tips for before, during, and 
after an earthquake 
Preparedness in High-Rise Buildings. FEMA-76.  Earthquake safety tips for high-rise dwell­
ers 
Learning to Live in Earthquake Country: Preparedness in Apartments and Mobile Homes. L-143.  Safe­
ty tips on earthquake preparation for residents of apartments and mobile homes 
Family Earthquake Safety Home Hazard Hunt and Drill. FEMA-113.  How to identify home 
hazards; how to conduct earthquake drills 
Earthquake Preparedness: What Every Childcare Provider Should Know. FEMA 240. Publication 
for teachers and for presentation to children. Available online at www.fema.gov/ 
kids/tch_eq.htm 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the follo
 wing are 
resources that may be helpful. 
99


--- PAGE 100 ---
100


--- PAGE 101 ---
2.8 
Volcanoes


--- PAGE 102 ---
2.8 Are You Ready? Volcanoes 
A volcano is a v
ent through which molten rock escapes to the earth’s surface. 
When pressure from gases within the molten rock becomes too great, an eruption 
occurs.  Eruptions can be quiet or explosive. There may be lava ﬂ ows, ﬂ attened 
landscapes, poisonous gases, and ﬂying rock and ash. 
Because of their intense heat, lava ﬂows are great ﬁre hazards.  Lava ﬂ ows destroy 
everything in their path, but most move slowly enough that people can move out 
of the way . 
Fresh volcanic ash, made of pulverized rock, can be abrasive, acidic, gritty , gassy , 
and odorous. While not immediately dangerous to most adults, the acidic gas and 
ash can cause lung damage to small infants, to older adults, and to those suffer­
ing from severe respiratory illnesses. Volcanic ash also can damage machinery , 
including engines and electrical equipment. Ash accumulations mixed with water 
become heavy and can collapse roofs. 
Volcanic eruptions can be accompanied by other natural hazards, including earth­
quakes, mudﬂ ows and ﬂash ﬂoods, rock falls and landslides, acid rain, ﬁ re, and 
(under special conditions) tsunamis. Active volcanoes in the U.S. are found mainly 
in Hawaii, Alaska, and the Paciﬁ c Northwest. 
102


--- PAGE 103 ---
Are You Ready? Volcanoes 2.8 
Natural
Hazards
Take Protective Measures 
Before a Volcanic Eruption •	 Add a pair of goggles and a disposable breathing mask for each member of 
the family to your disaster supplies kit. 
•	 Stay away from active volcano sites. 
During a Volcanic Eruption The follo wing are guidelines for what to do if a volcano erupts in your area: 
•	 Evacuate immediately from the volcano area to avoid ﬂying debris, hot gases,
 
lateral blast, and lava ﬂ ow.
 
•	 Be aware of mudﬂows. The danger from a mudﬂow increases near stream 
channels and with prolonged heavy rains. Mudﬂows can move faster than you 
can walk or run.  Look upstream before crossing a bridge, and do not cross 
the bridge if mudﬂow is approaching.
 
•	 Avoid river valleys and low-lying areas. 
Protection from Falling Ash 
•	 Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants. 
•	 Use goggles and wear eyeglasses instead of contact lenses. 
•	 Use a dust mask or hold a damp cloth over your face to help with 
breathing.
 
•	 Stay away from areas downwind from the volcano to avoid volcanic ash. 
•	 Stay indoors until the ash has settled unless there is danger of the 
roof collapsing.
 
•	 Close doors, windows, and all ventilation in the house (chimney vents,
 
furnaces, air conditioners, fans, and other vents).
 
•	 Clear heavy ash from ﬂat or low-pitched roofs and rain gutters. 
•	 Avoid running car or truck engines. Driving can stir up volcanic ash 
that can clog engines, damage moving parts, and stall vehicles.
 
•	 Avoid driving in heavy ash fall unless absolutely required.  If you have 
to drive, keep speed down to 35 MPH or slower.
 
103


--- PAGE 104 ---
2.8 Are You Ready? Volcanoes 
Aft
er a Volcanic Erruption Follow the instructions for recovering from a disaster in Part 5. 
Knowledge Check 
Read the scenario and answer the question.  Check your responses with the answer key below. 
Scenario 
About an hour after the eruption of Mount St. Helens, ash began to fall in Yakima, a city in eastern Washington. 
The ash fall was so extensive and it became so dark that lights were turned on all day .  It took 10 weeks to haul 
away the ash from Yakima’s streets, sidewalks, and roofs. 
Assume you were a resident of  Yakima during this time. What would you need to protect yourself when going 
outside? 
For More Information
 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following are 
resources that may be helpful. 
Publications National W eather Service 
Heat Wave: A Major Summer Killer. An online brochure describing the heat index, heat 
disorders, and heat wave safety tips. Available online at: www.nws.noaa.gov/om/ 
/brochures/heat_wave.htm 
U.S. Geological Survey 
Volcano Hazards Program. Website with volcano activity updates, feature stories, 
information about volcano hazards, and resources. Available online at: http: 
//volcanoes.usgs.gov 
Answer key 
Face masks  1. 2. Goggles  3. Eyeglasses instead of contact lenses  4. Clothing to cover as much of the body as 
possible 
104


--- PAGE 105 ---
2.9 
Landslides and 
Debris Flow (Mudslide)


--- PAGE 106 ---
2.9 Are You Ready? Landslides and Debris Flow (Mudslide) 
Landslides occur in all U.S.
 states and territories.  In a landslide, masses of rock, 
earth, or debris move down a slope.  Landslides may be small or large, slow or 
rapid. They are activated by storms, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, ﬁres, and hu­
man modiﬁcation of land. 
Debris and mud ﬂows are rivers of rock, earth, and other debris saturated with 
water. They develop when water rapidly accumulates in the ground, during heavy 
rainfall or rapid snowmelt, changing the earth into a ﬂowing river of mud or 
“slurry .” They ﬂow can rapidly , striking with little or no warning at avalanche 
speeds. They also can travel several miles from their source, growing in size as they 
pick up trees, boulders, cars, and other materials. 
Landslide problems can be caused by land mismanagement, particularly in moun­
tain, canyon, and coastal regions.  Land-use zoning, professional inspections, and 
proper design can minimize many landslide, mudﬂow, and debris ﬂ ow problems. 
106


--- PAGE 107 ---
Are You Ready? Landslides and Debris Flow (Mudslide) 2.9 
Natural
Hazards
Take Protective Measures 
Before a Landslide or 
Debris Flow The following are steps you can take to protect yourself from the effects of a land­
slide or debris ﬂ ow: 
•	 Do not build near steep slopes, close to mountain edges, near drainage ways,
 
or natural erosion valleys.
 
•	 Get a ground assessment of your property . 
•	 Consult an appropriate professional expert for advice on corrective measures. 
•	 Minimize home hazards by having ﬂ exible pipe ﬁttings installed to avoid gas 
or water leaks, as ﬂ exible ﬁttings are more resistant to breakage (only the gas 
company or professionals should install gas ﬁttings).
 
Recognize Landslide Warning Signs 
•	 Changes occur in your landscape such as patterns of storm-water drainage on 
slopes (especially the places where runoff water converges) land movement, 
small slides, ﬂows, or progressively leaning trees. 
•	 Doors or windows stick or jam for the ﬁ rst time. 
•	 New cracks appear in plaster, tile, brick, or foundations. 
•	 Outside walls, walks, or stairs begin pulling away from the building. 
•	 Slowly developing, widening cracks appear on the ground or on paved areas 
such as streets or driveways. 
•	 Underground utility lines break. 
•	 Bulging ground appears at the base of a slope. 
•	 Water breaks through the ground surface in new locations. 
•	 Fences, retaining walls, utility poles, or trees tilt or move. 
•	 A faint rumbling sound that increases in volume is noticeable as the landslide 
nears. 
•	 The ground slopes downward in one direction and may begin shifting in that 
direction under your feet. 
•	 Unusual sounds, such as trees cracking or boulders knocking together, might 
indicate moving debris. 
•	 Collapsed pavement, mud, fallen rocks, and other indications of possible debris 
ﬂ ow can be seen when driving (embankments along roadsides are particularly 
susceptible to landslides). 
107


--- PAGE 108 ---
2.9 Are You Ready? Landslides and Debris Flow (Mudslide) 
During a Landslide or 
Debris Flow The f
ollowing are guidelines for what you should do if a landslide or debris ﬂow 
occurs: 
•	 Move away from the path of a landslide or debris ﬂow as quickly as possible. 
•	 Curl into a tight ball and protect your head if escape is not possible. 
After a Landslide or 
Debris Flow The following are guidelines for the period following a landslide: 
•	 Stay away from the slide area. There may be danger of additional slides. 
•	 Check for injured and trapped persons near the slide, without entering the 
direct slide area.  Direct rescuers to their locations. 
•	 Watch for associated dangers such as broken electrical, water, gas, and sewage 
lines and damaged roadways and railways. 
•	 Replant damaged ground as soon as possible since erosion caused by loss of 
ground cover can lead to ﬂash ﬂooding and additional landslides in the near 
future. 
•	 Seek advice from a geotechnical expert for evaluating landslide hazards or 
designing corrective techniques to reduce landslide risk. 
•	 Follow the instructions for returning home in Part 5. 
108


--- PAGE 109 ---
Are You Ready? Landslides and Debris Flow (Mudslide) 2.9 
Natural
Hazards
Knowledge Check 
Review the following information and answer the questions.  Check your responses with the answer key below. 
Landslides occur in all 50 states—it is estimated that they cause between 25 and 50 deaths each year in the U.S. 
and thousands more in vulnerable areas around the globe. The number of landslides in the United States is ex­
pected to increase. 
1. What might account for the projected increase in landslides? 
2. What can you do to help reverse the upward trend? 
Answer Key 
Mounting pressure for approving the development of lands subject to landslides and earth failures has in­1. 
creased development in these unsafe areas. 
Work with others in the community to enact and enforce regulations that prohibit building near areas sub­2. 
ject to landslides and mudslides.  In areas where the hazard exists and development has already occurred, 
work to promote protective measures such as encouraging homeowners to get a professional ground assess­
ment of their property and educating residents about the warning signs. 
109


--- PAGE 110 ---
110


--- PAGE 111 ---
Tsunamis 
2.10


--- PAGE 112 ---
2.10 Are You Ready? Tsunamis 
Tsunamis (pronounced soo-n
á-mees), also known as seismic sea waves (mistak­
enly called “tidal waves”), are a series of enormous waves created by an underwa­
ter disturbance such as an earthquake, landslide, volcanic eruption, or meteorite. A 
tsunami can move hundreds of miles per hour in the open ocean and smash into 
land with waves as high as 100 feet or more. 
From the area where the tsunami originates, waves travel outward in all direc­
tions. Once the wave approaches the shore, it builds in height.The topography of 
the coastline and the ocean ﬂoor will inﬂuence the size of the wave. There may be 
more than one wave and the succeeding one may be larger than the one before. 
That is why a small tsunami at one beach can be a giant wave a few miles away . 
All tsunamis are potentially dangerous, even though they may not damage every 
coastline they strike. A tsunami can strike anywhere along most of the U.S. coast­
line. The most destructive tsunamis have occurred along the coasts of California, 
Oregon,Washington, Alaska, and Hawaii. 
Earthquake-induced movement of the ocean ﬂ oor most often generates tsunamis. 
If a major earthquake or landslide occurs close to shore, the ﬁrst wave in a series 
could reach the beach in a few minutes, even before a warning is issued. Areas are 
at greater risk if they are less than 25 feet above sea level and within a mile of the 
shoreline. Drowning is the most common cause of death associated with a tsu­
nami. Tsunami waves and the receding water are very destructive to structures in 
the run-up zone. Other hazards include ﬂooding, contamination of drinking water, 
and ﬁres from gas lines or ruptured tanks. 
Know the Terms 
Familiarize yourself with these terms to help identify a tsunami hazard: 
Advisory 
An earthquake has occurred in the Paciﬁc basin, which might generate 
a tsunami. 
Watch 
A tsunami was or may have been generated, but is at least two hours 
travel time to the area in Watch status. 
Warning 
A tsunami was, or may have been generated, which could cause 
damage; therefore, people in the warned area are strongly advis ed 
to evacuate. 
112


--- PAGE 113 ---
Are You Ready? Tsunamis 2.10 
Natural
Hazards
Take Protective Measures
 
During a Tsunami The following are guidelines for what you should do if a tsunami is likely in your 
area: 
•	 Turn on your radio to learn if there is a tsunami warning if an earthquake oc­
curs and you are in a coastal area.
 
•	 Move inland to higher ground immediately and stay there. 
If there is noticeable recession in water away from the 
shoreline this is nature’s tsunami warning and it should 
be heeded.Y ou should move away immediately. 
113


--- PAGE 114 ---
2.10 Are You Ready? Tsunamis 
Aft
er a Tsunami   The following are guidelines for the period following a tsunami: 
•	 Stay away from ﬂooded and damaged areas until ofﬁcials say it is safe to re­
turn. 
•	 Stay away from debris in the water; it may pose a safety hazard to boats and 
people. 
Save Yourself—Not Your Possesions 
Like everyone else in Maullin, Chile, Ramon Atala survived the 1960 Chile 
earthquake.  However, he lost his life trying to save something from the 
tsunami that followed. 
Mr. Atala was Maullin’s most prosperous merchant.  Outside of town, he 
owned a barn and a plantation of Monterey pine.  In town, he owned a 
pier and at least one large building and also had private quarters in a wa­
terfront warehouse. 
Mr. Atala entered this warehouse between the ﬁrst and second wave of the 
tsunami that struck Maullin. The warehouse was washed away and his 
body was never found. 
It is unclear what he was trying to save. What is clear is that no possession 
is worth your life and that it is important to get to higher ground away 
from the coast and stay there until it is safe to return. 
114


--- PAGE 115 ---
2.11 
Fires


--- PAGE 116 ---
2.11 Are You Ready? Fires 
Each y
ear, more than 4,000 Americans die and more than 25,000 are injured in 
ﬁres, many of which could be prevented. Direct property loss due to ﬁres is esti­
mated at $8.6 billion annually . 
To protect yourself, it is important to understand the basic characteristics of ﬁ re. 
Fire spreads quickly; there is no time to gather valuables or make a phone call. In 
just two minutes, a ﬁre can become life-threatening.  In ﬁve minutes, a residence 
can be engulfed in ﬂ ames. 
Heat and smoke from ﬁre can be more dangerous than the ﬂames.  Inhaling the 
super-hot air can sear your lungs.  Fire produces poisonous gases that make you 
disoriented and drowsy .  Instead of being awakened by a ﬁre, you may fall into a 
deeper sleep. Asphyxiation is the leading cause of ﬁ re deaths, exceeding burns by a 
three-to-one ratio. 
Take Protective Measures
 
Before a Fire Smoke Alarms 
•	 Install smoke alarms.  Properly working smoke alarms decrease your chances 
of dying in a ﬁre by half. 
•	 Place smoke alarms on every level of your residence. Place them outside bed­
rooms on the ceiling or high on the wall (4 to 12 inches from ceiling), at the 
top of open stairways, or at the bottom of enclosed stairs and near (but not 
in) the kitchen. 
•	 Test and clean smoke alarms once a month and replace batteries at least once a 
year.  Replace smoke alarms once every 10 years. 
Escaping the Fire 
•	 Review escape routes with your family .  Practice escaping from each room. 
•	 Make sure windows are not nailed or painted shut.  Make sure security grat­
ings on windows have a ﬁre safety opening feature so they can be easily 
opened from the inside. 
116


--- PAGE 117 ---
Are You Ready? Fires 2.11 
Natural
Hazards
Flammable Items 
•	 Consider escape ladders if your residence has more than one level, and ensure 
that burglar bars and other antitheft mechanisms that block outside window 
entry are easily opened from the inside. 
•	 Teach family members to stay low to the ﬂoor (where the air is safer in a ﬁ re) 
when escaping from a ﬁ re. 
•	 Clean out storage areas. Do not let trash, such as old newspapers and maga­
zines, accumulate. 
•	 Never use gasoline, benzine, naptha, or similar ﬂammable liquids indoors. 
•	 Store ﬂammable liquids in approved containers in well-ventilated storage 
areas. 
•	 Never smoke near ﬂ ammable liquids. 
•	 Discard all rags or materials that have been soaked in ﬂammable liquids after 
you have used them. Safely discard them outdoors in a metal container. 
•	 Insulate chimneys and place spark arresters on top. The chimney should be 
at least three feet higher than the roof. Remove branches hanging above and 
around the chimney . 
Heating Sources 
•	 Be careful when using alternative heating sources. 
•	 Check with your local ﬁre department on the legality of using kerosene heat­
ers in your community .  Be sure to ﬁll kerosene heaters outside, and be sure 
they have cooled. 
•	 Place heaters at least three feet away from ﬂammable materials.  Make sure the 
ﬂoor and nearby walls are properly insulated. 
•	 Use only the type of fuel designated for your unit and follow manufacturer’s 
instructions. 
•	 Store ashes in a metal container outside and away from your residence. 
•	 Keep open ﬂames away from walls, furniture, drapery , and ﬂammable items. 
•	 Keep a screen in front of the ﬁ replace. 
•	 Have heating units inspected and cleaned annually by a certiﬁ ed specialist. 
Matches and Smoking 
•	 Keep matches and lighters up high, away from children, and, if possible, in a 
locked cabinet. 
•	 Never smoke in bed or when drowsy or medicated.  Provide smokers with 
deep, sturdy ashtrays.  Douse cigarette and cigar butts with water before dis­
posal. 
117


--- PAGE 118 ---
2.11 Are You Ready? Fires 
Electrical Wiring 
•	 Have the electrical wiring in your residence checked by an electrician. 
•	 Inspect extension cords for frayed or exposed wires or loose plugs. 
•	 Make sure outlets have cover plates and no exposed wiring. 
•	 Make sure wiring does not run under rugs, over nails, or across high-trafﬁc 
areas. 
•	 Do not overload extension cords or outlets.  If you need to plug in two or 
three appliances, get a UL-approved unit with built-in circuit breakers to pre­
vent sparks and short circuits. 
•	 Make sure insulation does not touch bare electrical wiring. 
Other 
•	 Sleep with your door closed. 
•	 Install A-B-C-type ﬁre extinguishers in your residence and teach family mem­
bers how to use them. 
•	 Consider installing an automatic ﬁre sprinkler system in your residence. 
•	 Ask your local ﬁre department to inspect your residence for ﬁre safety and 
prevention. 
During a Fire If your clothes catch on ﬁre, you should: 
•	 Stop, drop, and roll—until the ﬁre is extinguished.  Running only makes the 
ﬁ re burn faster. 
To escape a ﬁre, you should: 
•	 Check closed doors for heat before you open them. If you are escaping 
through a closed door, use the back of your hand to feel the top of the door, 
the doorknob, and the crack between the door and door frame before you 
open it.  Never use the palm of your hand or ﬁngers to test for heat—burning 
those areas could impair your ability to escape a ﬁre (i.e., ladders and crawl­
ing). 
Hot Door Cool Door 
Do not open. Escape through a win­
dow.  If you cannot escape, hang a 
white or light-colored sheet outside 
the window, alerting ﬁre ﬁ ghters to 
your presence. 
Open slowly and ensure ﬁ re and/or 
smoke is not blocking your escape route. 
If your escape route is blocked, shut the 
door immediately and use an alternate 
escape route, such as a window.  If clear, 
leave immediately through the door 
and close it behind you.  Be prepared to 
crawl.  Smoke and heat rise. The air is 
clearer and cooler near the ﬂ oor. 
118


--- PAGE 119 ---
Are You Ready? Fires 2.11 
Natural
Hazards
After a Fire The following are guidelines for different circumstances in the period following a 
ﬁ re: 
•	 If you are with burn victims, or are a burn victim yourself, call 9-1-1; cool 
and cover burns to reduce chance of further injury or infection. 
•	 If you detect heat or smoke when entering a damaged building, evacuate im­
mediately .
 
•	 If you are a tenant, contact the landlord. 
•	 If you have a safe or strong box, do not try to open it.  It can hold intense 
heat for several hours.  If the door is opened before the box has cooled, the 
contents could burst into ﬂ ames.
 
•	 If you must leave your home because a building inspector says the building is 
unsafe, ask someone you trust to watch the property during your absence.
 
•	 Follow the instructions for recovering from a disaster in Part 5. 
•	 Crawl low under any smoke to your exit—hea
 vy smoke and poisonous gases col­
lect ﬁrst along the ceiling. 
•	 Close doors behind you as you escape to delay the spread of the ﬁ re. 
•	 Stay out once you are safely out. Do not reenter. Call 9-1-1. 
119


--- PAGE 120 ---
2.11 Are You Ready? Fires 
Knowledge Check
Answer each question and check your responses using the answer key below.  
1. You need to escape a ﬁre through a closed door. What, if anything, should you do before opening the door? 
2. What should you do if your clothes are on ﬁ re? 
3. What actions should be taken for burn victims? 
4. To reduce heating costs, you installed a wood-burning stove. What can you do to reduce the risk of ﬁ re from 
this heating source? 
5. To escape in thick smoke, what should you do? 
Answer key 
1. Check the door for heat with the back of your hand 
2. Stop, drop, and roll 
3. Call 9-1-1 and cool and cover burns 
4. Have the stove cleaned and inspected by a certiﬁ ed specialist 
5. Crawl close to the ﬂ oor 
120


--- PAGE 121 ---
Are You Ready? Fires 2.11 
Natural
Hazards
For More Information 
FEMA PublicationsAfter the Fire: Returning to Normal. FA 046. This 16-page booklet provides informa­
tion about recovering from a ﬁre, including what to do during the ﬁrst 24 hours, 
insurance considerations, valuing your property , replacement of valuable docu­
ments, salvage hints, 
ﬁre department operations, and more. Available online at 
www.usfa.fema.gov/public/hfs/pubs/atf/after.shtm 
Protecting Your Family From Fire. FA 130. This pamphlet was written to provide the 
information you need to decide what you must do to protect your family from ﬁ re. 
Topics include children, sleepwear, older adults, smoke detectors, escape plans, and 
residential sprinklers. Available online at www.usfa.fema.gov/public/hfs/pubs/ 
hfs_pubs2.shtm 
Fire Risks for the Hard of Hearing. FA 202; Fire Risks for the Older Adult. FA 203; Fire Risks for 
the Mobility Impaired. FA 204; Fire Risks for the Blind or Visually Impaired.  FA 205 
These reports address preparation for ﬁre risks for populations with special chal­
lenges. All  are available online at www.usfa.fema.gov/ﬁ re-service/education/ 
education-pubs.shtm 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the follo
 wing are 
resources that may be helpful. 
121


--- PAGE 122 ---
122


--- PAGE 123 ---
Wildﬁres 
2.12


--- PAGE 124 ---
2.12 Are You Ready? Wildﬁres 
If you liv
e on a remote hillside or in a valley , prairie, or forest where ﬂ ammable 
vegetation is abundant, your residence could be vulnerable to wildﬁ res. These ﬁ res 
are usually triggered by lightning or accidents. Wildﬁres spread quickly , igniting 
brush, trees, and homes. 
Take Protective Measures
 
Before a Wildﬁre To prepare for wildﬁres, you should: 
•	 Mark the entrance to your property with address signs that are clearly visible 
from the road. 
•	 Keep lawns trimmed, leaves raked, and the roof and rain gutters free from 
debris such as dead limbs and leaves. 
•	 Stack ﬁrewood at least 30 feet away from your residence. 
124


--- PAGE 125 ---
Are You Ready? Wildﬁres 2.12 
Natural
Hazards
•	 Store ﬂammable materials, liquids, and solvents in metal containers outside 
your residence at least 30 feet away from structures and wooden fences. 
•	 Create defensible space by thinning trees and brush within 30 feet around 
your residence.  Beyond 30 feet, remove dead wood, debris, and low tree 
branches. 
•	 Landscape your property with ﬁre resistant plants and vegetation to prevent 
ﬁre from spreading quickly .  For example, hardwood trees are more ﬁ re-resis­
tant than pine, evergreen, eucalyptus, or ﬁ r trees. 
•	 Make sure water sources, such as hydrants, ponds, swimming pools, and 
wells, are accessible to the ﬁ re department. 
•	 Use ﬁre resistant, protective rooﬁng and materials like stone, brick, and metal 
to protect your residence. Avoid using wood materials. They offer the least 
ﬁ re protection. 
•	 Cover all exterior vents, attics, and eaves with metal mesh screens no larger 
than 6 millimeters or 1/4 inch to prevent debris from collecting and to help 
keep sparks out. 
•	 Install multi-pane windows, tempered safety glass, or ﬁreproof shutters to 
protect large windows from radiant heat. 
•	 Use ﬁre-resistant draperies for added window protection. 
•	 Have chimneys, wood stoves, and all home heating systems inspected and 
cleaned annually by a certiﬁ ed specialist. 
•	 Insulate chimneys and place spark arresters on top. The chimney should be at 
least 3 feet above the roof. 
•	 Remove branches hanging above and around the chimney . 
Follow Local Burning Laws 
Before burning debris in a wooded area, make sure you notify local authorities, 
obtain a burning permit, and follow these guidelines: 
•	 Use an approved incinerator with a safety lid or covering with holes no larger 
than 3/4 inch. 
•	 Create at least a 10-foot clearing around the incinerator before burning debris. 
•	 Have a ﬁre extinguisher or garden hose on hand when burning debris. 
125


--- PAGE 126 ---
2.12 Are You Ready? Wildﬁres 
During a Wildﬁre If a wild
ﬁre threatens your home and time permits, take the following precautions: 
•	 Shut off gas at the meter.  Only a qualiﬁed professional can safely turn the gas 
back on. 
•	 Seal attic and ground vents with pre-cut plywood or commercial seals. 
•	 Turn off propane tanks. 
•	 Place combustible patio furniture inside. 
•	 Connect garden hose to outside taps.  Place lawn sprinklers on the roof and 
near above-ground fuel tanks. Wet the roof. 
•	 Wet or remove shrubs within 15 feet of your residence. 
•	 Gather ﬁre tools such as a rake, axe, handsaw or chainsaw, bucket, and shovel. 
•	 Back your car into the garage or park it in an open space facing the direction 
of escape.  Shut doors and roll up windows.  Leave the key in the ignition and 
the car doors unlocked.  Close garage windows and doors, but leave them 
unlocked.  Disconnect automatic garage door openers. 
•	 Open ﬁreplace damper.  Close ﬁ replace screens. 
•	 Close windows, vents, doors, blinds or noncombustible window coverings, 
and heavy drapes.  Remove ﬂammable drapes and curtains. 
•	 Move ﬂammable furniture into the center of the residence away from win­
dows and sliding-glass doors. 
•	 Close all interior doors and windows to prevent drafts. 
•	 Place valuables that will not be damaged by water in a pool or pond. 
If advised to evacuate, do so immediately .  Choose a route away from the ﬁ re haz­
ard. Watch for changes in the speed and direction of the ﬁ re and smoke. 
After a Wildﬁre Follow the instructions for recovering from a disaster in Part 5. 
For More Information 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following 
resource may be helpful. 
FEMA Publications Wildﬁ  re:Are You Prepared? L-203. Wildﬁre safety tips, preparedness, and mitigation 
techniques. 
126


--- PAGE 127 ---
3 
Technological 
Hazards 
Technological hazards include hazardous materials incidents and nuclear power plant failures.  Usually , little or no 
warning precedes incidents involving technological hazards.  In many cases, victims may not know they have been 
affected until many years later.  For example, health problems caused by hidden toxic waste sites—like that at Love 
Canal, near Niagara Falls, New York—surfaced years after initial exposure. 
The number of technological incidents is escalating, mainly as a result of the increased number of new substances 
and the opportunities for human error inherent in the use of these materials. 
Use Part 3 to learn what actions to include in your family disaster plan to prepare for and respond to events in­
volving technological hazards.  Learn how to use, store, and dispose of household chemicals in a manner that will 
reduce the potential for injury to people and the environment. 
When you complete Part 3, you will be able to: 
• Recognize important terms. 
• Take protective measures for technological disasters. 
• Know what actions to take if an event occurs. 
• Identify resources for more information about technological hazards. 
127


--- PAGE 128 ---
128


--- PAGE 129 ---
3.1 
Hazardous Materials 
Incidents


--- PAGE 130 ---
3.1 Are You Ready? Hazardous Materials Incidents 
Chemicals are f
ound everywhere. They purify drinking water, increase crop pro­
duction, and simplify household chores.  But chemicals also can be hazardous to 
humans or the environment if used or released improperly .  Hazards can occur 
during production, storage, transportation, use, or disposal. You and your commu­
nity are at risk if a chemical is used unsafely or released in harmful amounts into 
the environment where you live, work, or play . 
Chemical manufacturers are one source of hazardous materials, but there are many 
others, including service stations, hospitals, and hazardous materials waste sites. 
Take Protective Measures
 
Before a Hazardous 
Materials Incident Many communities have Local Emergency Planning Committees (LEPCs) whose 
responsibilities include collecting information about hazardous materials in the 
community and making this information available to the public upon request. The 
LEPCs also are tasked with developing an emergency plan to prepare for and re­
spond to chemical emergencies in the community . Ways the public will be notiﬁ ed 
and actions the public must take in the event of a release are part of the plan.  Con­
tact the LEPCs to ﬁ nd out more about chemical hazards and what needs to be done 
to minimize the risk to individuals and the community from these materials. The 
local emergency management ofﬁ ce can provide contact information on the LEPCs. 
Review 
See Section 1.3: 
Assemble a Disaster 
Supplies Kit 
You should add the following supplies to your disaster supplies kit: 
• Plastic sheeting. 
• Duct tape. 
• Scissors. 
During a Hazardous 
Materials Incident Listen to local radio or television stations for detailed information and instructions. 
Follow the instructions carefully . You should stay away from the area to minimize 
the risk of contamination.  Remember that some toxic chemicals are odorless. 
130


--- PAGE 131 ---
Are You Ready? Hazardous Materials Incidents 3.1 
If you are: Then: 
Asked to evacuate Do so immediately . 
Caught Outside Stay upstream, uphill, and upwind!  In general, try to go 
at least one-half mile (usually 8-10 city blocks) from the 
danger area. Do not walk into or touch any spilled liquids, 
airborne mists, or condensed solid chemical deposits. 
In a motor vehicle Stop and seek shelter in a permanent building. If you must 
remain in your car, keep car windows and vents closed 
and shut off the air conditioner and heater. 
Requested to stay 
indoors 
• Close and lock all exterior doors and windows. Close 
vents, ﬁreplace dampers, and as many interior doors as 
possible. 
• Turn off air conditioners and ventilation systems. In 
large buildings, set ventilation systems to 100 percent 
recirculation so that no outside air is drawn into the 
building. If this is not possible, ventilation systems 
should be turned off. 
• Go into the pre-selected shelter room. This room 
should be above ground and have the fewest openings 
to the outside. 
• Seal the room by covering each window, door, and 
vent using plastic sheeting and duct tape. 
• Use material to ﬁ  ll cracks and holes in the room, such 
as those around pipes. 
Shelter Safety for Sealed Rooms 
Ten square feet of ﬂ oor space per person will provide sufﬁ cient air to 
prevent carbon dioxide build-up for up to ﬁ ve hours, assuming a normal 
breathing rate while resting. 
However, local ofﬁ cials are unlikely to recommend the public shelter in 
a sealed room for more than 2-3 hours because the effectiveness of such 
sheltering diminishes with time as the contaminated outside air gradually 
seeps into the shelter. At this point, evacuation from the area is the better 
protective action to take. 
Also you should ventilate the shelter when the emergency has passed to 
avoid breathing contaminated air still inside the shelter. 
Technological
Hazards 
131


--- PAGE 132 ---
3.1 Are You Ready? Hazardous Materials Incidents 
Aft
er a Hazardous 
Materials Incident   
The following are guidelines for the period following a hazardous materials inci­
dent: 
• 	 Return home only when authorities say it is safe. Open windows and vents 
and turn on fans to provide ventilation. 
• 	 Act quickly if you have come in to contact with or have been exposed to haz­
ardous chemicals. Do the following: 
-	 Follow decontamination instructions from local authorities.You may be 
advised to take a thorough shower, or you may be advised to stay away 
from water and follow another procedure. 
-	 Seek medical treatment for unusual symptoms as soon as possible. 
-	 Place exposed clothing and shoes in tightly sealed containers.  Do not 
allow them to contact other materials.  Call local authorities to ﬁ nd out 
about proper disposal. 
-	 Advise everyone who comes in to contact with you that you may have 
been exposed to a toxic substance. 
• 	 Find out from local authorities how to clean up your land and property . 
• 	 Report any lingering vapors or other hazards to your local emergency services 
ofﬁ ce. 
• 	 Follow the instructions for recovering from a disaster in Part 5. 
132


--- PAGE 133 ---
3.2 
Household Chemical 
Emergencies


--- PAGE 134 ---
3.2 Are You Ready? Household Chemical Emergencies 
Nearly e
very household uses products containing hazardous materials or chemi­
cals. 
Cleaning Products 
• Oven cleaners 
• Drain cleaners 
• 	 Wood and metal
 
cleaners and polishes
 
• Toilet cleaners 
• 	 Tub, tile, shower cleaners 
• Bleach (laundry) 
• Pool chemicals 
Automotive Products 
• Motor oil 
• Fuel additives 
• Carburetor and fuel
 
injection cleaners
 
• 	 Air conditioning refrigerants 
• Starter ﬂ  uids 
• Automotive batteries 
• Transmission and brake ﬂ  uid 
• Antifreeze 
Lawn and Garden Products 
• Herbicides 
• Insecticides 
• Fungicides/wood preservatives 
Indoor Pesticides 
• 	 Ant sprays and baits 
• 	 Cockroach sprays and baits 
• 	 Flea repellents and shampoos 
• Bug sprays 
• Houseplant insecticides 
• Moth repellents 
• 	 Mouse and rat poisons 
and baits 
W orkshop/Painting Supplies 
• 	 Adhesives and glues 
• Furniture strippers 
• 	 Oil- or enamel-based paint 
• Stains and ﬁ  nishes 
• 	 Paint thinners and turpentine 
• 	 Paint strippers and removers 
• Photographic chemicals 
• 	 Fixatives and other solvents 
Miscellaneous 
• Batteries 
• 	 Mercury thermostats or
 
thermometers
 
• Fluorescent light bulbs 
• Driveway sealer 
134


--- PAGE 135 ---
Are You Ready? Household Chemical Emergencies 3.2 
      Other Flammable Products 
• Propane tanks and other compressed gas cylinders 
• Kerosene 
• Home heating oil 
• Diesel fuel 
• Gas/oil mix 
• Lighter ﬂ  uid 
Although the risk of a chemical accident is slight, knowing how to handle these 
products and how to react during an emergency can reduce the risk of injury . 
Take Protective Measures 
Before a Household 
Chemical EmergencyThe following are guidelines for buying and storing hazardous household chemi­
cals safely: 
• 	 Buy only as much of a chemical as you think you will use.  Leftover material 
can be shared with neighbors or donated to a business, charity , or govern­
ment agency .  For example, excess pesticide could be offered to a greenhouse 
or garden center, and theater groups often need surplus paint. Some commu­
nities have organized waste exchanges where household hazardous chemicals 
and waste can be swapped or given away .
 
• 	 Keep products containing hazardous materials in their original containers and 
never remove the labels unless the container is corroding. Corroding contain­
ers should be repackaged and clearly labeled.
 
• 	 Never store hazardous products in food containers. 
• 	 Never mix household hazardous chemicals or waste with other products.
 
Incompatibles, such as chlorine bleach and ammonia, may react, ignite, or 
explode.
 
Take the following precautions to prevent and respond to accidents: 
• 	 Follow the manufacturer’s instructors for the proper use of the household 
chemical.
 
• 	 Never smoke while using household chemicals. 
• 	 Never use hair spray , cleaning solutions, paint products, or pesticides near an 
open ﬂame (e.g., pilot light, lighted candle, ﬁreplace, wood burning stove,
 
etc.)  Although you may not be able to see or smell them, vapor particles in 
the air could catch ﬁre or explode.
 
Technological
Hazards
135


--- PAGE 136 ---
3.2	 Are You Ready? Household Chemical Emergencies 
• 	 Clean up any chemical spill immediately .  Use rags to clean up the spill.Wear 
gloves and eye protection. Allow the fumes in the rags to evaporate outdoors, 
then dispose of the rags by wrapping them in a newspaper and placing them 
in a sealed plastic bag in your trash can. 
• 	 Dispose of hazardous materials correctly . Take household hazardous waste to 
a local collection program.  Check with your county or state environmental or 
solid waste agency to learn if there is a household hazardous waste collection 
program in your area. 
Learn to recognize the symptoms of toxic poisoning, which are as follows: 
• 	 Difﬁ culty breathing. 
• 	 Irritation of the eyes, skin, throat, or respiratory tract. 
• 	 Changes in skin color. 
• 	 Headache or blurred vision. 
• 	 Dizziness. 
• 	 Clumsiness or lack of coordination. 
• 	 Cramps or diarrhea. 
Be prepared to seek medical assistance: 
• 	 Post the number of the emergency medical services and the poison control 
center by all telephones.  In an emergency situation, you may not have time 
to look up critical phone numbers. The national poison control number is 
(800)222-1222. 
During a Household 
Chemical Emergency If there is a danger of ﬁre or explosion: 
• 	 Get out of the residence immediately .  Do not waste time collecting items or 
calling the ﬁre department when you are in danger.  Call the ﬁ re department 
from outside (a cellular phone or a neighbor’s phone) once you are safely 
away from danger. 
• 	 Stay upwind and away from the residence to avoid breathing toxic fumes. 
If someone has been exposed to a household chemical: 
• 	 Find any containers of the substance that are readily available in order to pro­
vide requested information.  Call emergency medical services. 
• 	 Follow the emergency operator or dispatcher’s ﬁrst aid instructions carefully . 
The ﬁrst aid advice found on containers may be out of date or inappropriate. 
Do not give anything by mouth unless advised to do so by a medical profes­
sional. 
Discard clothing that may have been contaminated.  Some chemicals may not wash 
out completely . 
136


--- PAGE 137 ---
Are You Ready? Household Chemical Emergencies 3.2 
Checking Your Home
 
There are probably many hazardous materials throughout your home. Take a tour 
of your home to see where these materials are located.  Use the list of common 
hazardous household items presented earlier to guide you in your hunt.  Once you 
have located a product, check the label and take the necessary steps to ensure that 
you are using, storing, and disposing of the material according to the manufactur­
er’s directions. It is critical to store household chemicals in places where children 
cannot access them. Remember that products such as aerosol cans of hair spray and 
deodorant, nail polish and nail polish remover, toilet bowl cleaners, and furniture 
polishes all fall into the category of hazardous materials. 
Technological
Hazards 
137


--- PAGE 138 ---
3.2 Are You Ready? Household Chemical Emergencies 
For More Information 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following are 
resources that may be helpful. 
FEMA Publications Household Hazardous Materials: A Guide for Citizens.  IS 55. An independent study resource 
for parents and teachers. Web-based safety program focused on reducing the num­
ber of deaths and injuries in the home. Available online at 
http://training.fema.gov/ 
emiweb/is/is55.asp 
Chemical Emergencies. A pamphlet promoting awareness of chemical hazards in 
the home, how to prevent them, and what to do if exposed. Available online at 
www.fema.gov/pdf/rrr/talkdiz/chemical.pdf 
Backgrounder:  Hazardous Materials.  0.511. Information sheet available online at 
www.fema.gov/hazards/hazardousmaterials/hazmat.shtm 
USFA:  Factsheet:  Baby-sitters Make the Right Call to EMS.  0510. Available online at 
www.usfa.fema.gov/public/factsheets/mtrc.shtm 
Other Publications 
American Red Cross 
Chemical Emergencies.  Extensive document describing the hazards of house­
hold chemicals and what to do in an emergency . Available online at 
www.redcross.org/services/disaster/0,1082,0_581_,00.html 
138


--- PAGE 139 ---
3.3 
Nuclear Power Plants


--- PAGE 140 ---
3.3 Are You Ready? Nulear Power Plants 
Nuclear pow
er plants use the heat generated from nuclear ﬁssion in a contained 
environment to convert water to steam, which powers generators to produce 
electricity .  Nuclear power plants operate in most states in the country and produce 
about 20 percent of the nation’s power.  Nearly 3 million Americans live within 10 
miles of an operating nuclear power plant. 
Although the construction and operation of these facilities are closely monitored 
and regulated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), accidents are pos­
sible. An accident could result in dangerous levels of radiation that could affect the 
health and safety of the public living near the nuclear power plant. 
Local and state governments, federal agencies, and the electric utilities have emer­
gency response plans in the event of a nuclear power plant incident. The plans 
deﬁ ne two “emergency planning zones.”  One zone covers an area within a 10­
mile radius of the plant, where it is possible that people could be harmed by direct 
radiation exposure. The second zone covers a broader area, usually up to a 50-mile 
radius from the plant, where radioactive materials could contaminate water sup­
plies, food crops, and livestock. 
The potential danger from an accident at a nuclear power plant is exposure to 
radiation. This exposure could come from the release of radioactive material 
from the plant into the environment, usually characterized by a plume (cloud-like 
formation) of radioactive gases and particles. The major hazards to people in the 
vicinity of the plume are radiation exposure to the body from the cloud and par­
ticles deposited on the ground, inhalation of radioactive materials, and ingestion of 
radioactive materials. 
Radioactive materials are composed of atoms that are unstable. An unstable atom 
gives off its excess energy until it becomes stable. The energy emitted is radiation. 
Each of us is exposed to radiation daily from natural sources, including the Sun 
and the Earth.  Small traces of radiation are present in food and water.  Radiation 
also is released from man-made sources such as X-ray machines, television sets, 
and microwave ovens.  Radiation has a cumulative effect. The longer a person is 
exposed to radiation, the greater the effect. A high exposure to radiation can cause 
serious illness or death. 
Minimizing Exposure to Radiation 
• Distance - The more distance between you and the source of the ra-
diation, the better. This could be evacuation or remaining indoors to 
minimize exposure. 
• Shielding - The more heavy , dense material between you and the source 
of the radiation, the better. 
• Time - Most radioactivity loses its strength fairly quickly . 
140


--- PAGE 141 ---
Are You Ready? Nuclear Power Plants 3.3 
If an accident at a nuclear power plant were to release radiation in your area, local 
authorities would activate warning sirens or another approved alert method. They 
also would instruct you through the Emergency Alert System (EAS) on local televi­
sion and radio stations on how to protect yourself. 
Know the Terms 
Familiarize yourself with these terms to help identify a nuclear power 
plant emergency: 
Notiﬁcation of Unusual Event 
A small problem has occurred at the plant.  No radiation leak is expected. 
No action on your part will be necessary . 
Alert 
A small problem has occurred, and small amounts of radiation could leak 
inside the plant. This will not affect you and no action is required. 
Site Area Emergency 
Area sirens may be sounded.  Listen to your radio or television for safety 
information. 
General Emergency 
Radiation could leak outside the plant and off the plant site. The sirens 
will sound. Tune to your local radio or television station for reports.  Be 
prepared to follow instructions promptly . 
Take Protective Measures
 
Before a Nuclear Power Plant 
EmergencyObtain public emergency information materials from the power company that 
operates your local nuclear power plant or your local emergency services ofﬁ ce. 
If you live within 10 miles of the power plant, you should receive these materials 
yearly from the power company or your state or local government. 
Technological
Hazards 
141


--- PAGE 142 ---
3.3 Are You Ready? Nulear Power Plants 
During a Nuclear Power Plant 
Emergency The follo
wing are guidelines for what you should do if a nuclear power plant 
emergency occurs. Keep a battery-powered radio with you at all times and listen to 
the radio for speciﬁc instructions.  Close and lock doors and windows. 
If you are told to evacuate… If you are advised to remain indoors… 
• Keep car windows and 
vents closed; use 
re-circulating air. 
• Turn off the air conditioner, ventilation 
fans, furnace, and other air intakes. 
• Go to a basement or other underground 
area, if possible. 
• Do not use the telephone unless 
absolutely necessary . 
If you expect you have been exposed to nuclear radiation: 
• Change clothes and shoes. 
• Put exposed clothing in a plastic bag. 
• Seal the bag and place it out of the way . 
• Take a thorough shower. 
Keep food in covered containers or in the refrigerator.  Food not previously covered 
should be washed before being put in to containers. 
After a Nuclear Power Plant 
Emergency Seek medical treatment for any unusual symptoms, such as nausea, that may be 
related to radiation exposure. 
Follow the instructions for recovering from a disaster in Part 5. 
142


--- PAGE 143 ---
Are You Ready? Nuclear Power Plants 3.3 
Technological Hazards Knowledge Check
Answer the following questions. Check your responses with the answer key below. 
1. What are some things you can do to reduce the threat from hazardous materials in your home?  
2. What should you do if you are caught at the scene of a hazardous materials incident? 
3. What is the telephone number for the National Poison Control Center? 
4. What are three ways to minimize radiation exposure? 
5. Are there special warning requirements for nuclear power plants?  If so, what are they? 
6.	 What does it mean when a nuclear power plant has issued a general emergency?  What actions should you 
take? 
7. If you are at home and instructed to shelter-in-place because of a chemical release, where will you go? 
8. If you are in a car and unable to seek shelter in a building and a chemical release occurs, you should? 
9. Who can you contact to ﬁnd out about hazardous materials stored in your community? 
10. What are some common placess hazardous materials may be present in the community? 
Technological
Hazards 
143


--- PAGE 144 ---
Answers: 
1.	 a. Learn to identify hazardous materials. 
b.	 Follow manufacture’s instructions for storage, use, and disposal. 
c.	 Never store hazardous products in food containers. 
d.	 Keep products in original containers unless the container is corroding. 
e.	 Never mix household hazardous chemicals or waste with other products. 
f.	 Take household hazardous waste to a local collection program. 
g.	 Never smoke while using household chemicals. 
h.	 Clean up spills immediately with rags. 
i.	 Buy only as much of a chemical as you think you will use. 
2.	 a. Do not walk into or touch any spilled liquids, airborne mists, or condensed solid chemical deposits. 
b.	 Stay upstream, uphill, and upwind!  In general, try to go at least one-half mile (usually 8-10 city blocks) 
from the danger area. 
(800)222-12223. 
Distance, shielding, and time. 4. 
Yes.5.   Nuclear power plants are required to install sirens or other approved warning systems. 
Radiation could leak outside the plant and off the plant site. The sirens will sound. Tune to local radio or tele­6. 
vision station for reports.  Be prepared to follow instructions promptly . 
An above ground room with the fewest exterior doors and windows. 7. 
Keep car windows and vents closed and shut off the air conditioner or heater. 8. 
Local Emergency Planning Committee (LEPC). The local emergency management ofﬁ ce can provide contact 9. 
information for the LEPCs. 
Agricultural operations and farms, auto service stations and junkyards, chemical manufacturing and storage 10. 
facilities, construction sites, dry cleaners, electronics manufactures, paint shops, hospitals, hazardous materials 
waste sites, and transportation routes. 
Are you Ready? 
144


--- PAGE 145 ---
4 
Terrorism 
Throughout human history , there have been many threats to the security of nations. These threats have brought about 
large-scale losses of life, the destruction of property , widespread illness and injury , the displacement of large numbers of 
people, and devastating economic loss. 
Recent technological advances and ongoing international political unrest are components of the increased risk to national 
security . 
Use Part 4 to learn what actions to include in your family disaster plan to prepare for and respond to terrorist threats. 
When you complete Part 4, you will be able to: 
• Recognize important terms. 
• Take protective measures for terrorist threats. 
• Know what actions to take if an event occurs. 
• Identify resources for more information about terrorist threats. 
145


--- PAGE 146 ---
146


--- PAGE 147 ---
4.1 
General Information 
about Terrorism


--- PAGE 148 ---
4.1 Are You Ready? General Info about Terrorism 
Te
rrorism is the use of force or violence against persons or property in violation of 
the criminal laws of the United States for purposes of intimidation, coercion, or 
ransom. Terrorists often use threats to: 
• 	 Create fear among the public. 
• 	 Try to convince citizens that their government is powerless to prevent 
terrorism.
 
• 	 Get immediate publicity for their causes. 
Acts of terrorism include threats of terrorism; assassinations; kidnappings; hijack­
ings; bomb scares and bombings; cyber attacks (computer-based); and the use of 
chemical, biological, nuclear and radiological weapons. 
High-risk targets for acts of terrorism include military and civilian government 
facilities, international airports, large cities, and high-proﬁ le landmarks. Terror­
ists might also target large public gatherings, water and food supplies, utilities, 
and corporate centers.  Further, terrorists are capable of spreading fear by sending 
explosives or chemical and biological agents through the mail. 
Within the immediate area of a terrorist event, you would need to rely on police, 
ﬁre, and other ofﬁ cials for instructions.  However, you can prepare in much the 
same way you would prepare for other crisis events. 
The following are general guidelines: 
• 	 Be aware of your surroundings. 
• 	 Move or leave if you feel uncomfortable or if something does not seem right. 
• 	 Take precautions when traveling.  Be aware of conspicuous or unusual behav­
ior.  Do not accept packages from strangers.  Do not leave luggage unattended. 
You should promptly report unusual behavior, suspicious or unattended pack­
ages, and strange devices to the police or security personnel. 
• 	 Learn where emergency exits are located in buildings you frequent.  Plan how 
to get out in the event of an emergency . 
• 	 Be prepared to do without services you normally depend on—electricity ,
 
telephone, natural gas, gasoline pumps, cash registers, ATMs, and Internet 
transactions.
 
148


--- PAGE 149 ---
Are You Ready? General Info about Terrorism 4.1 
• 	 Work with building owners to ensure the following items are located on each 
ﬂoor of the building: 
-	 Portable, battery-operated radio and extra batteries. 
-	 Several ﬂ ashlights and extra batteries. 
-	 First aid kit and manual. 
-	 Hard hats and dust masks. 
-	 Fluorescent tape to rope off dangerous areas. 
Terrorism 
149


--- PAGE 150 ---
150


--- PAGE 151 ---
4.2 
Explosions


--- PAGE 152 ---
4.2 Are You Ready? Explosions 
Ter
rorists have frequently used explosive devices as one of their most common 
weapons.Terrorists do not have to look far to ﬁnd out how to make explosive de­
vices; the information is readily available in books and other information sources. 
The materials needed for an explosive device can be found in many places includ­
ing variety , hardware, and auto supply stores. Explosive devices are highly portable 
using vehicles and humans as a means of transport. They are easily detonated from 
remote locations or by suicide bombers. 
Conventional bombs have been used to damage and destroy ﬁ nancial, political, 
social, and religious institutions. Attacks have occurred in public places and on city 
streets with thousands of people around the world injured and killed. 
Parcels that should make you suspicious: 
• Are unexpected or from someone unfamiliar to you. 
• Have no return address, or have one that can’t be veriﬁed as legiti­
mate. 
• Are marked with restrictive endorsements such as “Personal,” “Conﬁ  ­
dential,” or “Do not X-ray .” 
• Have protruding wires or aluminum foil, strange odors, or stains. 
• Show a city or state in the postmark that doesn’t match the return ad­
dress. 
• Are of unusual weight given their size, or are lopsided or oddly 
shaped. 
• Are marked with threatening language. 
• Have inappropriate or unusual labeling. 
• Have excessive postage or packaging material, such as masking tape 
and string. 
• Have misspellings of common words. 
• Are addressed to someone no longer with your organization or are 
otherwise outdated. 
• Have incorrect titles or titles without a name. 
• Are not addressed to a speciﬁ  c person. 
• Have hand-written or poorly typed addressess. 
152


--- PAGE 153 ---
Are You Ready? Explosions 4.2 
Take Protective Measures 
If you receive a telephoned bomb threat, you should do the following: 
•	 Get as much information from the caller as possible. 
• 	 Keep the caller on the line and record everything that is said. 
• 	 Notify the police and the building management. 
During an ExplosionIf there is an explosion, you should: 
• 	 Get under a sturdy table or desk if things are falling around you.When they 
stop falling, leave quickly , watching for obviously weakened ﬂoors and stair­
ways. As you exit from the building, be especially watchful of falling debris.
 
• 	 Leave the building as quickly as possible. Do not stop to retrieve personal pos­
sessions or make phone calls.
 
• 	 Do not use elevators. 
Review 
Safety guidelines 
for escaping ﬁ res 
in Section 2.11 
Once you are out: 
• 	 Do not stand in front of windows, glass doors, or other potentially hazardous 
areas.
 
• 	 Move away from sidewalks or streets to be used by emergency ofﬁcials or oth­
ers still exiting the building.
 
If you are trapped in debris: 
• 	 If possible, use a ﬂ ashlight to signal your location to rescuers. 
• 	 Avoid unnecessary movement so you don’t kick up dust. 
• 	 Cover your nose and mouth with anything you have on hand. (Dense-weave 
cotton material can act as a good ﬁ lter. Try to breathe through the material.) 
• 	 Tap on a pipe or wall so rescuers can hear where you are. 
• 	 If possible, use a whistle to signal rescuers. 
• 	 Shout only as a last resort.  Shouting can cause a person to inhale dangerous 
amounts of dust. 
Terrorism 
153


--- PAGE 154 ---
4.2 Are You Ready? Explosions 
Aft
er an Explosion Follow the instructions for recovering from a disaster in Part 5. 
For More Information
 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following 
resource may be helpful. 
Publications American Red Cross: 
T errorism, Preparing for the Unexpected.  Document providing preparation guidelines for 
a terrorist attack or similar emergency . Available online at www.redcross.org/ 
services/disaster/0,1082,0_589_,00.html 
154


--- PAGE 155 ---
4.3 
Biological 
Threats


--- PAGE 156 ---
4.3	 Are You Ready? Biological Threats 
Biological agents are organisms or toxins that can kill or incapacitate people, live­
stock, and crops. The three basic groups of biological agents that would likely be 
used as weapons are bacteria, viruses, and toxins.  Most biological agents are dif­
ﬁcult to grow and maintain.  Many break down quickly when exposed to sunlight 
and other environmental factors, while others, such as anthrax spores, are very 
long lived.  Biological agents can be dispersed by spraying them into the air, by 
infecting animals that carry the disease to humans, and by contaminating food and 
water.  Delivery methods include: 
•	 Aerosols—biological agents are dispersed into the air, forming a ﬁ ne mist 
that may drift for miles.  Inhaling the agent may cause disease in people or 
animals.
 
•	 Animals—some diseases are spread by insects and animals, such as ﬂ eas,
 
mice, ﬂies, mosquitoes, and livestock.
 
•	 Food and water contamination—some pathogenic organisms and toxins 
may persist in food and water supplies.  Most microbes can be killed, and tox­
ins deactivated, by cooking food and boiling water.  Most microbes are killed 
by boiling water for one minute, but some require longer.  Follow ofﬁ cial 
instructions. 
•	 Person-to-person —spread of a few infectious agents is also possible. Hu­
mans have been the source of infection for smallpox, plague, and the Lassa 
viruses. 
Speciﬁ c information on biological agents is available at the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention’s Web site, 
www.bt.cdc.gov. 
Take Protective Measures
 
Before a Biological Attack The following are guidelines for what you should do to prepare for a biological 
threat: 
• 	 Check with your doctor to ensure all required or suggested immunizations are 
up to date.  Children and older adults are particularly vulnerable to biological 
agents. 
156


--- PAGE 157 ---
Are You Ready? Biological Threats 4.3 
• Consider installing a High Efﬁ  ciency Particulate Air (HEPA) ﬁlter in your fur­
nace return duct.These ﬁ lters remove particles in the 0.3 to 10 micron range 
and will ﬁ lter out most biological agents that may enter your house. If you 
do not have a central heating or cooling system, a stand-alone portable HEPA 
ﬁlter can be used. 
Filtration in Buildings 
Building owners and managers should determine the type and level of 
ﬁltration in their structures and the level of protection it provides against 
biological agents. The National Institute of Occupational Safety and 
Health (NIOSH) provides technical guidance on this topic in their publi­
cation Guidance for Filtration and Air-Cleaning Systems to Protect Building Environments 
from Airborne Chemical, Biological, or Radiological Attacks.To obtain a copy , call 
1(800)35NIOSH or visit www.cdc.gov/NIOSH/publist.html and request 
or download NIOSH Publication 2003-136. 
Review 
Shelter 
in Section 1.4 
During a Biological Attack In the event of a biological attack, public health ofﬁcials may not immediately be 
able to provide information on what you should do.  It will take time to deter­
mine what the illness is, how it should be treated, and who is in danger. Watch 
television, listen to radio, or check the Internet for ofﬁcial news and information 
including signs and symptoms of the disease, areas in danger, if medications or 
vaccinations are being distributed, and where you should seek medical attention if 
you become ill. 
The ﬁ rst evidence of an attack may be when you notice symptoms of the disease 
caused by exposure to an agent.  Be suspicious of any symptoms you notice, but 
do not assume that any illness is a result of the attack.  Use common sense and 
practice good hygiene. 
If you become aware of an unusual and suspicious substance nearby: 
• 	 Move away quickly . 
• 	 Wash with soap and water. 
• 	 Contact authorities. 
• 	 Listen to the media for ofﬁ cial instructions. 
• 	 Seek medical attention if you become sick. 
If you are exposed to a biological agent: 
• 	 Remove and bag your clothes and personal items.  Follow ofﬁ cial instructions 
for disposal of contaminated items.
 
• 	 Wash yourself with soap and water and put on clean clothes. 
• 	 Seek medical assistance. You may be advised to stay away from others or even 
quarantined.
 
157 
Terrorism


--- PAGE 158 ---
4.3 Are You Ready? Biological Threats 
Using HEPA Filters 
HEPA ﬁlters are useful in biological attacks.  If you have a central heat­
ing and cooling system in your home with a HEPA ﬁlter, leave it on if it 
is running or turn the fan on if it is not running.  Moving the air in the 
house through the ﬁlter will help remove the agents from the air.  If you 
have a portable HEPA ﬁlter, take it with you to the internal room where 
you are seeking shelter and turn it on. 
If you are in an apartment or ofﬁ ce building that has a modern, central 
heating and cooling system, the system’s ﬁ ltration should provide a rela­
tively safe level of protection from outside biological contaminants. 
HEPA ﬁlters will not ﬁ lter chemical agents. 
After a Biological Attack In some situations, such as the case of the anthrax letters sent in 2001, people may 
be alerted to potential exposure. If this is the case, pay close attention to all ofﬁ cial 
warnings and instructions on how to proceed. The delivery of medical services 
for a biological event may be handled differently to respond to increased demand. 
The basic public health procedures and medical protocols for handling exposure to 
biological agents are the same as for any infectious disease.  It is important for you 
to pay attention to ofﬁ cial instructions via radio, television, and emergency alert 
systems. 
Review 
Getting 
Informed 
in Section 1.1 
158


--- PAGE 159 ---
4.4 
Chemical 
Threats


--- PAGE 160 ---
4.4 Are You Ready? Chemical Threats 
Chemical agents ar
e poisonous vapors, aerosols, liquids, and solids that have toxic 
effects on people, animals, or plants. They can be released by bombs or sprayed 
from aircraft, boats, and vehicles. They can be used as a liquid to create a hazard to 
people and the environment.  Some chemical agents may be odorless and tasteless. 
They can have an immediate effect (a few seconds to a few minutes) or a delayed 
effect (2 to 48 hours). While potentially lethal, chemical agents are difﬁcult to de­
liver in lethal concentrations.  Outdoors, the agents often dissipate rapidly .  Chemi­
cal agents also are difﬁcult to produce. 
A chemical attack could come without warning.  Signs of a chemical release include 
people having difﬁculty breathing; experiencing eye irritation; losing coordination; 
becoming nauseated; or having a burning sensation in the nose, throat, and lungs. 
Also, the presence of many dead insects or birds may indicate a chemical agent 
release. 
Take Protective Measures 
Before a Chemical Attack The following are guidelines for what you should do to prepare for a chemical 
threat: 
• 	 Check your disaster supplies kit to make sure it includes: 
- A roll of duct tape and scissors. 
- Plastic for doors, windows, and vents for the room in which you will shelter 
in place.To save critical time during an emergency , pre-measure and cut the 
plastic sheeting for each opening. 
• 	 Choose an internal room to shelter, preferably one without windows and on 
the highest level. 
During a Chemical Attack The following are guidelines for what you should do in a chemical attack. 
If you are instructed to remain in your home or ofﬁce building, you should: 
Review 
Shelter safety for 
sealed rooms in 
Section 3.1 
• Close doors and windows and turn off all ventilation, including furnaces, air 
conditioners, vents, and fans. 
• 	 Seek shelter in an internal room and take your disaster supplies kit. 
• 	 Seal the room with duct tape and plastic sheeting. 
• 	 Listen to your radio for instructions from authorities. 
160


--- PAGE 161 ---
Are You Ready? Chemical Threats 4.4 
If you are caught in or near a contaminated area, you should: 
• 	 Move away immediately in a direction upwind of the source. 
• 	 Find shelter as quickly as possible. 
After a Chemical Attack Decontamination is needed within minutes of exposure to minimize health con­
sequences.  Do not leave the safety of a shelter to go outdoors to help others until 
authorities announce it is safe to do so. 
A person affected by a chemical agent requires immediate medical attention from a 
professional.  If medical help is not immediately available, decontaminate yourself 
and assist in decontaminating others. 
Decontamination guidelines are as follows: 
• 	 Use extreme caution when helping others who have been exposed to chemi­
cal agents.
 
• 	 Remove all clothing and other items in contact with the body . Contaminated 
clothing normally removed over the head should be cut off to avoid contact 
with the eyes, nose, and mouth. Put contaminated clothing and items into a 
plastic bag and seal it.  Decontaminate hands using soap and water. Remove
 
eyeglasses or contact lenses. Put glasses in a pan of household bleach to de­
contaminate them, and then rinse and dry .
 
• 	 Flush eyes with water. 
• 	 Gently wash face and hair with soap and water before thoroughly rinsing 
with water.
 
• 	 Decontaminate other body areas likely to have been contaminated. Blot (do 
not swab or scrape) with a cloth soaked in soapy water and rinse with clear 
water.
 
• 	 Change into uncontaminated clothes. Clothing stored in drawers or closets is 
likely to be uncontaminated.
 
• 	 Proceed to a medical facility for screening and professional treatment. 
Terrorism 
161


--- PAGE 162 ---
162


--- PAGE 163 ---
4.5 
Nuclear 
Blast


--- PAGE 164 ---
4.5 Are You Ready? Nuclear Blast 
A nuclear b
last is an explosion with intense light and heat, a damaging pressure 
wave, and widespread radioactive material that can contaminate the air, water, and 
ground surfaces for miles around. A nuclear device can range from a weapon car­
ried by an intercontinental missile launched by a hostile nation or terrorist organi­
zation, to a small portable nuclear devise transported by an individual. All nuclear 
devices cause deadly effects when exploded, including blinding light, intense heat 
(thermal radiation), initial nuclear radiation, blast, ﬁres started by the heat pulse, 
and secondary ﬁres caused by the destruction. 
Hazards of Nuclear Devices 
The extent, nature, and arrival time of these hazards are difﬁ cult to predict.The 
geographical dispersion of hazard effects will be deﬁ ned by the following: 
• 	 Size of the device. A more powerful bomb will produce more distant effects. 
• 	 Height above the ground the device was detonated. This will determine the 
extent of blast effects. 
• 	 Nature of the surface beneath the explosion.  Some materials are more likely 
to become radioactive and airborne than others. Flat areas are more suscep­
tible to blast effects. 
• 	 Existing meteorological conditions. Wind speed and direction will affect ar­
rival time of fallout; precipitation may wash fallout from the atmosphere. 
Radioactive Fallout 
Even if individuals are not close enough to the nuclear blast to be affected by 
the direct impacts, they may be affected by radioactive fallout. Any nuclear blast 
results in some fallout.  Blasts that occur near the earth’s surface create much 
greater amounts of fallout than blasts that occur at higher altitudes. This is be­
cause the tremendous heat produced from a nuclear blast causes an up-draft of 
air that forms the familiar mushroom cloud. When a blast occurs near the earth’s 
surface, millions of vaporized dirt particles also are drawn into the cloud. As 
the heat diminishes, radioactive materials that have vaporized condense on the 
particles and fall back to Earth. The phenomenon is called radioactive fallout. 
This fallout material decays over a long period of time, and is the main source of 
residual nuclear radiation. 
Fallout from a nuclear explosion may be carried by wind currents for hundreds 
of miles if the right conditions exist.  Effects from even a small portable device 
exploded at ground level can be potentially deadly . 
Nuclear radiation cannot be seen, smelled, or otherwise detected by normal 
senses.  Radiation can only be detected by radiation monitoring devices. This 
makes radiological emergencies different from other types of emergencies, such 
as ﬂ oods or hurricanes.  Monitoring can project the fallout arrival times, which 
will be announced through ofﬁcial warning channels.  However, any increase in 
surface build-up of gritty dust and dirt should be a warning for taking protective 
measures. 
164


--- PAGE 165 ---
Are You Ready? Nuclear Blast 4.5 
Electromagnetic Pulse 
In addition to other effects, a nuclear weapon detonated in or above the earth’s 
atmosphere can create an electromagnetic pulse (EMP), a high-density electrical 
ﬁeld. An EMP acts like a stroke of lightning but is stronger, faster, and shorter. 
An EMP can seriously damage electronic devices connected to power sources or 
antennas. This includes communication systems, computers, electrical appli­
ances, and automobile or aircraft ignition systems. The damage could range 
from a minor interruption to actual burnout of components.  Most electronic 
equipment within 1,000 miles of a high-altitude nuclear detonation could be 
affected.  Battery-powered radios with short antennas generally would not be 
affected. Although an EMP is unlikely to harm most people, it could harm those 
with pacemakers or other implanted electronic devices. 
Protection from a Nuclear Blast 
The danger of a massive strategic nuclear attack on the United States is predicted 
by experts to be less likely today .  However, terrorism, by nature, is unpredictable. 
If there were threat of an attack, people living near potential targets could be 
advised to evacuate or they could decide on their own to evacuate to an area not 
considered a likely target.  Protection from radioactive fallout would require tak­
ing shelter in an underground area or in the middle of a large building. 
In general, potential targets include: 
• Strategic missile sites and military bases. 
• Centers of government such as Washington, DC, and state capitals. 
• Important transportation and communication centers. 
• Manufacturing, industrial, technology , and ﬁ nancial centers. 
• Petroleum reﬁ neries, electrical power plants, and chemical plants. 
• Major ports and airﬁ elds. 
Terrorism 
165


--- PAGE 166 ---
4.5 Are You Ready? Nuclear Blast 
The three f
actors for protecting oneself from radiation and fallout are distance, 
shielding, and time. 
•	 Distance — the more distance between you and the fallout particles, the bet­
ter. An underground area such as a home or ofﬁce building basement offers 
more protection than the ﬁ rst ﬂoor of a building. A ﬂoor near the middle of 
a high-rise may be better, depending on what is nearby at that level on which 
signiﬁcant fallout particles would collect.  Flat roofs collect fallout particles so 
the top ﬂoor is not a good choice, nor is a ﬂoor adjacent to a neighboring ﬂ at 
roof. 
•	 Shielding — the heavier and denser the materials—thick walls, concrete,
 
bricks, books and earth—between you and the fallout particles, the better.
 
•	 Time — fallout radiation loses its intensity fairly rapidly .  In time, you will be 
able to leave the fallout shelter.  Radioactive fallout poses the greatest threat to 
people during the ﬁrst two weeks, by which time it has declined to about 1 
percent of its initial radiation level. 
Remember that any protection, however temporary , is better than none at all, and 
the more shielding, distance, and time you can take advantage of, the better. 
Take Protective Measures
 
Before a Nuclear Blast 
Review 
Update your 
supplies; 
see Section 1.2 
To prepare for a nuclear blast, you should do the following: 
• 	 Find out from ofﬁcials if any public buildings in your community have been 
designated as fallout shelters.  If none have been designated, make your own 
list of potential shelters near your home, workplace, and school. These places 
would include basements or the windowless center area of middle ﬂ oors in 
high-rise buildings, as well as subways and tunnels. 
• 	 If you live in an apartment building or high-rise, talk to the manager about 
the safest place in the building for sheltering and about providing for building 
occupants until it is safe to go out. 
• 	 During periods of increased threat increase your disaster supplies to be ad­
equate for up to two weeks.
 
166


--- PAGE 167 ---
Are You Ready? Nuclear Blast 4.5 
Taking shelter during a nuclear blast is absolutely necessary . There 
are two kinds of shelters—blast and fallout. The following describes 
the two kinds of shelters: 
• Blast shelters are speciﬁcally constructed to offer some protec­
tion against blast pressure, initial radiation, heat, and ﬁ re. But 
even a blast shelter cannot withstand a direct hit from a nuclear 
explosion. 
• Fallout shelters do not need to be specially constructed for 
protecting against fallout. They can be any protected space, 
provided that the walls and roof are thick and dense enough to 
absorb the radiation given off by fallout particles. 
Review 
Shelter 
requirements in 
Section 1.4 
During a Nuclear BlastThe following are guidelines for what to do in the event of a nuclear explosion. 
If an attack warning is issued: 
• 	 Take cover as quickly as you can, below ground if possible, and stay there 
until instructed to do otherwise.
 
• 	 Listen for ofﬁ cial information and follow instructions. 
If you are caught outside and unable to get inside immediately: 
• 	 Do not look at the ﬂ ash or ﬁ reball—it can blind you. 
• 	 Take cover behind anything that might offer protection. 
• 	 Lie ﬂat on the ground and cover your head. If the explosion is some distance 
away , it could take 30 seconds or more for the blast wave to hit.
 
• 	 Take shelter as soon as you can, even if you are many miles from ground zero 
where the attack occurred—radioactive fallout can be carried by the winds for 
hundreds of miles.  Remember the three protective factors:  Distance, shield­
ing, and time.
 
After a Nuclear Blast Decay rates of the radioactive fallout are the same for any size nuclear device. 
However, the amount of fallout will vary based on the size of the device and its 
proximity to the ground. Therefore, it might be necessary for those in the areas 
with highest radiation levels to shelter for up to a month. 
The heaviest fallout would be limited to the area at or downwind from the explo­
sion, and 80 percent of the fallout would occur during the ﬁ rst 24 hours. 
People in most of the areas that would be affected could be allowed to come out of 
Review 
Shelter 
requirements in 
Section 1.4 
Terrorism 
shelter within a few days and, if necessary , evacuate to unaffected areas. 
167


--- PAGE 168 ---
4.5 Are You Ready? Nuclear Blast 
Returning to Y our Home 
Remember the following: 
• 	 Keep listening to the radio and television for news about what to do, where to 
go, and places to avoid. 
• 	 Stay away from damaged areas. Stay away from areas marked “radiation 
hazard” or “HAZMAT.” Remember that radiation cannot be seen, smelled, or 
otherwise detected by human senses. 
Follow the instructions for returning home in Part 5. 
168


--- PAGE 169 ---
4.6 
Radiological Dispersion 
Device (RDD)


--- PAGE 170 ---
4.6 Are You Ready? Radiological Dispersion Devices (RDD) 
Ter
rorist use of an RDD—often called “dirty nuke” or “dirty bomb”—is consid­
ered far more likely than use of a nuclear explosive device. An RDD combines a 
conventional explosive device—such as a bomb—with radioactive material. It is 
designed to scatter dangerous and sub-lethal amounts of radioactive material over a 
general area.  Such RDDs appeal to terrorists because they require limited technical 
knowledge to build and deploy compared to a nuclear device. Also, the radioactive 
materials in RDDs are widely used in medicine, agriculture, industry , and research, 
and are easier to obtain than weapons grade uranium or plutonium. 
The primary purpose of terrorist use of an RDD is to cause psychological fear and 
economic disruption.  Some devices could cause fatalities from exposure to radio­
active materials.  Depending on the speed at which the area of the RDD detonation 
was evacuated or how successful people were at sheltering-in-place, the number 
of deaths and injuries from an RDD might not be substantially greater than from a 
conventional bomb explosion. 
The size of the affected area and the level of destruction caused by an RDD would 
depend on the sophistication and size of the conventional bomb, the type of ra­
dioactive material used, the quality and quantity of the radioactive material, and 
the local meteorological conditions—primarily wind and precipitation.The area 
affected could be placed off-limits to the public for several months during clean­
up efforts. 
Take Protective Measures 
Before an RDD Event There is no way of knowing how much warning time there will be before an at­
tack by terrorists using an RDD, so being prepared in advance and knowing what 
to do and when is important. Take the same protective measures you would for 
fallout resulting from a nuclear blast. 
Review 
Nuclear Blast 
Section 4.5 
During an RDD Event While the explosive blast will be immediately obvious, the presence of radiation 
will not be known until trained personnel with specialized equipment are on the 
scene.Whether you are indoors or outdoors, home or at work, be extra cautious. 
It would be safer to assume radiological contamination has occurred—particularly 
in an urban setting or near other likely terrorist targets—and take the proper pre­
cautions. As with any radiation, you want to avoid or 
limit exposure.This is particu­
larly true of inhaling radioactive dust that results from the explosion. As you seek 
shelter from any location (indoors or outdoors) and there is visual dust or other 
contaminants in the air, breathe though the cloth of your shirt or coat to limit your 
exposure.  If you manage to avoid breathing radioactive dust, your proximity to the 
radioactive particles may still result in some radiation exposure. 
170


--- PAGE 171 ---
Are You Ready? Radiological Dispersion Devices (RDD) 4.6 
If the explosion or radiological release occurs inside, get out immediately and seek 
safe shelter. Otherwise, if you are: 
Outdoors Indoors 
• Seek shelter indoors 
immediately in the nearest 
undamaged building. 
• If appropriate shelter is not 
available, move as rapidly as 
is safe upwind and away from 
the location of the explosive 
blast. Then, seek appropriate 
shelter as soon as possible. 
• Listen for ofﬁ  cial instructions 
and follow directions. 
• If you have time, turn off ventilation 
and heating systems, close windows, 
vents, ﬁreplace dampers, exhaust fans, 
and clothes dryer vents.  Retrieve your 
disaster supplies kit and a battery-
powered radio and take them to your 
shelter room. 
• Seek shelter immediately , preferably 
underground or in an interior room of 
a building, placing as much distance 
and dense shielding as possible 
between you and the outdoors where 
the radioactive material may be. 
• Seal windows and external doors 
that do not ﬁt snugly with duct tape 
to reduce inﬁltration of radioactive 
particles.  Plastic sheeting will not 
provide shielding from radioactivity 
nor from blast effects of a nearby 
explosion. 
• Listen for ofﬁ  cial instructions and 
follow directions. 
After an RDD Event After ﬁ nding safe shelter, those who may have been exposed to radioactive material 
should decontaminate themselves. To do this, remove and bag your clothing (and 
isolate the bag away from you and others), and shower thoroughly with soap and 
water.  Seek medical attention after ofﬁ cials indicate it is safe to leave shelter. 
Contamination from an RDD event could affect a wide area, depending on the 
amount of conventional explosives used, the quantity and type of radioactive mate­
rial released, and meteorological conditions. Thus, radiation dissipation rates vary , 
but radiation from an RDD will likely take longer to dissipate due to a potentially 
larger localized concentration of radioactive material. 
Follow these additional guidelines after an RDD event: 
• 	 Continue listening to your radio or watch the television for instructions from 
local ofﬁ cials, whether you have evacuated or sheltered-in-place.
 
• 	 Do not return to or visit an RDD incident location for any reason. 
• 	 Follow the instructions for recovering from a disaster in Part 5. 
Terrorism 
171


--- PAGE 172 ---
Terrorism Knowledge Check 
Answer the following questions.  Check your responses with the answer key below. 
1 What would you do, if you were at work and… 
a.  there was an explosion in the building? 
b.  you received a package in the mail that you considered suspicious? 
c.  you received a telephone call that was a bomb threat? 
2 	  If caught outside during a nuclear blast, what should you do? 
3 	 What are the three key factors for protection from nuclear blast and fallout? 
4 	 If you take shelter in your own home, what kind of room would be safest during a chemical or 
biological attack? 
5 	 In case of a chemical attack, what extra items should you have in your disaster supplies kit? 
Answer Key 
1.	 a.  Shelter from falling debris under a desk and then follow evacuation procedures 
b.  Clear the area and notify the police immediately  
c.  Keep the caller on the line and record everything that was said 
2.	 • Don’t look at the ﬂ ash 
• Take cover behind anything that offers protection 
• Lay ﬂ at on the ground 
• Cover your head 
3.	 Distance, shielding, time 
4.	 An interior room on the uppermost level, preferably without windows 
5.	 Plastic sheeting, duct tape, and scissors. 
Are You Ready? 
172


--- PAGE 173 ---
4.7 
Homeland Security 
Advisory System


--- PAGE 174 ---
4.7 Are You Ready? Homeland Security Advisory System 
The Homeland Security 
Advisory System was designed to provide a national frame­
work and comprehensive means to disseminate information regarding the risk of 
terrorist acts to the following: 
• Federal, state, and local authorities 
• The private sector 
• The American people 
This system provides warnings in the form of a set of graduated “threat condi­
tions” that increase as the risk of the threat increases. Risk includes both the prob­
ability of an attack occurring and its potential gravity . Threat conditions may be 
assigned for the entire nation, or they may be set for a particular geographic area 
or industrial sector. At each threat condition, government entities and the private 
sector, including businesses and schools, would implement a corresponding set of 
“protective measures” to further reduce vulnerability or increase response capabil­
ity during a period of heightened alert. 
There are ﬁve threat conditions, each identiﬁ ed by a description and corresponding 
color. Assigned threat conditions will be reviewed at regular intervals to determine 
whether adjustments are warranted. 
Threat Conditions and Associated 
Protective Measures 
There is always a risk of a terrorist threat. Each threat condition assigns a level 
of alert appropriate to the increasing risk of terrorist attacks. Beneath each threat 
condition are some suggested protective measures that the government, the private 
sector, and the public can take. 
In each case, as threat conditions escalate, protective measures are added to those 
already taken in lower threat conditions. The measures are cumulative. 
174


--- PAGE 175 ---
Are You Ready? Homeland Security Advisory System 4.7 
Citizen Guidance on the Homeland 
Security Advisory System 
Low Risk 
• Develop a family emergency plan. Share it with family and friends, and practice the plan. 
Visit www.Ready .gov for help creating a plan. 
• Create an “Emergency Supply Kit” for your household. 
• 	 Be informed.Visit www.Ready .gov or obtain a copy of “Preparing Makes Sense, Get Ready 
Now” by calling 1-800-BE-READY. 
• 	 Know where to shelter and how to turn off utilities (power, gas, and water) to your home. 
• 	 Examine volunteer opportunities in your community , such as Citizen Corps,Volunteers in 
Police Service, Neighborhood Watch or others, and donate your time. Consider complet­
ing an American Red Cross ﬁ rst aid or CPR course , or Community Emergency Response 
Team (CERT) course . 
Guarded Risk 
• 	 Complete recommended steps at le
vel green. 
• 	 Review stored disaster supplies and replace items that are outdated. 
• 	 Be alert to suspicious activity and report it to proper authorities. 
Elevated Risk 
• 	 Complete recommended steps at levels green and blue. 
• 	 Ensure disaster supplies are stocked and ready . 
• 	 Check telephone numbers in family emergency plan and update as necessary . 
• 	 Develop alternate routes to/from work or school and practice them. 
• 	 Continue to be alert for suspicious activity and report it to authorities. 
High Risk 
• 	 Complete recommended steps at lower levels. 
• 	 Exercise caution when traveling, pay attention to travel advisories. 
• 	 Review your family emergency plan and make sure all family members know what to do. 
• 	 Be Patient. Expect some delays, baggage searches and restrictions at public buildings. 
• 	 Check on neighbors or others that might need assistance in an emergency . 
Severe Risk  
• 	 Complete all recommended actions at lower levels. 
• 	 Listen to local emergency management ofﬁ cials. 
• 	 Stay tuned to TV or radio for current information/instructions. 
• 	 Be prepared to shelter or evacuate, as instructed. 
• 	 Expect trafﬁ c delays and restrictions. 
• 	 Provide volunteer services only as requested. 
• 	 Contact your school/business to determine status of work day . 
*Developed with input from the American Red Cross. 
Terrorism 
175


--- PAGE 176 ---
4.7 Are You Ready? Homeland Security Advisory System 
Knowledge Check 
1. By following the instructions in this guide, you should now have the following: 
• 	 A family disaster plan that sets forth what you and your family need to do to prepare for and respond 
to all types of hazards. 
• 	 A disaster supplies kit ﬁ lled with items you would need to sustain you and your family for at least 
three days, maybe more. 
• 	 Knowledge of your community warning systems and what you should do when these are activated. 
• 	 An understanding of why evacuations are necessary and what you would need to do in the case of an 
evacuation. 
• 	 Identiﬁcation of where the safest shelters are for the various hazards. 
Compare the above actions with the personal action guidelines for each of the threat levels.  Determine how well you are pre­
pared for each of the ﬁ ve levels. 
2. What is the current threat level?  ___________________________ 
Hint: To determine the current threat level, check your cable news networks or visit www.dhs.gov.  Keep 
your family informed when changes in the threat level occur, and go over the personal 
actions you need to take. 
176


--- PAGE 177 ---
Are You Ready? Homeland Security Advisory System 4.7 
For More Information 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following 
resource may be helpful. 
Publications American Red Cross 
American Red Cross:  Homeland Security Advisory System Recommendations for Individuals, Families, 
Neighborhoods, Schools, and Businesses.  Explanation of preparedness activities for each 
population. Available online at www.redcross.org/services/disaster/beprepared/ 
hsas.html 
Terrorism 
177


--- PAGE 178 ---
178


--- PAGE 179 ---
5 
Recovering 
from Disaster


--- PAGE 180 ---
5.0	 Are You Ready? Recovering from Disaster 
Health and Safety 
Guidelines 
Recovering from a disaster is usually a gradual process.  Safety is a primary issue, as 
are mental and physical well-being.  If assistance is available, knowing how to ac­
cess it makes the process faster and less stressful. This section offers some general 
advice on steps to take after disaster strikes in order to begin getting your home, 
your community , and your life back to normal. 
Your ﬁrst concern after a disaster is your family’s health and safety . You need to 
consider possible safety issues and monitor family health and well-being. 
Aiding the Injured Check for injuries.  Do not attempt to move seriously injured persons unless they 
are in immediate danger of death or further injury .  If you must move an uncon­
scious person, ﬁrst stabilize the neck and back, then call for help immediately. 
• 	 If the victim is not breathing, carefully position the victim for artiﬁ cial respi­
ration, clear the airway , and commence mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. 
• 	 Maintain body temperature with blankets.  Be sure the victim does not be­
come overheated. 
• 	 Never try to feed liquids to an unconscious person. 
Health • 	 Be aware of exhaustion.  Don’t try to do too much at once.  Set priorities and 
pace yourself.  Get enough rest. 
• 	 Drink plenty of clean water. 
• 	 Eat well. 
• 	 Wear sturdy work boots and gloves. 
• 	 Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and clean water often when working 
in debris. 
Safety Issues  • 	 Be aware of new safety issues created by the disaster. Watch for washed out 
roads, contaminated buildings, contaminated water, gas leaks, broken glass, 
damaged electrical wiring, and slippery ﬂ oors. 
• 	 Inform local authorities about health and safety issues, including chemical 
spills, downed power lines, washed out roads, smoldering insulation, and 
dead animals. 
180


--- PAGE 181 ---
Recov ering
fr om Disaster
Are You Ready? Recovering from Disaster 5.0 
Returning Home
 
Returning home can be both physically and mentally challenging. Above all, use 
caution. 
General tips: 
•	 Keep a battery-powered radio with you so you can listen for emergency up­
dates and news reports. 
•	 Use a battery-powered ﬂash light to inspect a damaged home. 
Note:  The ﬂashlight should be turned on outside before entering—the bat­
tery may produce a spark that could ignite leaking gas, if present. 
•	 Watch out for animals, especially poisonous snakes.  Use a stick to poke 
through debris.
 
•	 Use the phone only to report life-threatening emergencies. 
•	 Stay off the streets.  If you must go out, watch for fallen objects; downed elec­
trical wires; and weakened walls, bridges, roads, and sidewalks. 
Before You Enter Your Yome Walk carefully around the outside and check for loose power lines, gas leaks, and 
structural damage.  If you have any doubts about safety , have your residence in­
spected by a qualiﬁed building inspector or structural engineer before entering. 
Do not enter if: 
•	 You smell gas. 
•	 Floodwaters remain around the building. 
•	 Your home was damaged by ﬁre and the authorities have not declared it safe. 
Going Inside Your Home When you go inside y
our home, there are certain things you should and should 
not do. Enter the home carefully and check for damage.  Be aware of loose boards 
and slippery ﬂoors. The following items are other things to check inside your 
home: 
181


--- PAGE 182 ---
5.0 Are You Ready? Recovering from Disaster 
•	 Natural gas.  If y
ou smell gas or hear a hissing or blowing sound, open a 
window and leave immediately . Turn off the main gas valve from the outside, 
if you can.  Call the gas company from a neighbor’s residence.  If you shut off 
the gas supply at the main valve, you will need a professional to turn it back 
on.  Do not smoke or use oil, gas lanterns, candles, or torches for lighting 
inside a damaged home until you are sure there is no leaking gas or other 
ﬂ ammable materials present. 
•	 Sparks, broken or frayed wires. Check the electrical system unless you are 
wet, standing in water, or unsure of your safety .  If possible, turn off the elec­
tricity at the main fuse box or circuit breaker.  If the situation is unsafe, leave 
the building and call for help.  Do not turn on the lights until you are sure 
they’re safe to use. You may want to have an electrician inspect your wiring. 
•	 Roof, foundation, and chimney cracks. If it looks like the building may col­
lapse, leave immediately . 
•	 Appliances. If appliances are wet, turn off the electricity at the main fuse 
box or circuit breaker. Then, unplug appliances and let them dry out.  Have 
appliances checked by a professional before using them again. Also, have the 
electrical system checked by an electrician before turning the power back on. 
•	 Water and sewage systems. If pipes are damaged, turn off the main water 
valve.  Check with local authorities before using any water; the water could be 
contaminated.  Pump out wells and have the water tested by authorities before 
drinking.  Do not ﬂush toilets until you know that sewage lines are intact. 
•	 Food and other supplies. Throw out all food and other supplies that you sus­
pect may have become contaminated or come in to contact with ﬂ oodwater. 
•	 Y our basement. If your basement has ﬂooded, pump it out gradually (about 
one third of the water per day) to avoid damage. The walls may collapse and 
the ﬂoor may buckle if the basement is pumped out while the surrounding 
ground is still waterlogged. 
•	 Open cabinets. Be alert for objects that may fall. 
•	 Clean up household chemical spills. Disinfect items that may have been con­
taminated by raw sewage, bacteria, or chemicals. Also clean salvageable items. 
•	 Call your insurance agent. Take pictures of damages.  Keep good records of 
repair and cleaning costs. 
182


--- PAGE 183 ---
Recov ering
fr om Disaster
Are You Ready? Recovering from Disaster 5.0 
Being Wary of Wildlife and 
Other AnimalsDisaster and life threatening situations will exacerbate the unpredictable nature of 
wild animals. To protect yourself and your family , learn how to deal with wildlife. 
Guidelines 
•	 Do not approach or attempt to help an injured or stranded animal. Call your 
local animal control ofﬁce or wildlife resource ofﬁ ce. 
•	 Do not corner wild animals or try to rescue them. Wild animals will likely 
feel threatened and may endanger themselves by dashing off into ﬂ oodwaters, 
ﬁre, and so forth. 
•	 Do not approach wild animals that have taken refuge in your home. Wild 
animals such as snakes, opossums, and raccoons often seek refuge from 
ﬂoodwaters on upper levels of homes and have been known to remain after 
water recedes.  If you encounter animals in this situation, open a window or 
provide another escape route and the animal will likely leave on its own.  Do 
not attempt to capture or handle the animal.  Should the animal stay , call your 
local animal control ofﬁce or wildlife resource ofﬁ ce. 
•	 Do not attempt to move a dead animal. Animal carcasses can present serious 
health risks.  Contact your local emergency management ofﬁce or health de­
partment for help and instructions. 
•	 If bitten by an animal, seek immediate medical attention. 
Seeking Disaster Assistance 
Throughout the recovery period, it is important to monitor local radio or televi­
sion reports and other media sources for information about where to get emergen­
cy housing, food, ﬁrst aid, clothing, and ﬁnancial assistance. The following section 
provides general information about the kinds of assistance that may be available. 
183


--- PAGE 184 ---
5.0 Are You Ready? Recovering from Disaster 
Direct Assistance Direct assistance to individuals and f
amilies may come from any number of organi­
zations, including: 
•	 American Red Cross. 
•	 Salvation Army . 
• Other volunteer organization.
 
These organizations provide food, shelter, supplies and assist in clean-up efforts.
 
The Federal Role In the most severe disasters, the federal government is also called in to help indi­
viduals and families with temporary housing, counseling (for post-disaster trau­
ma), low-interest loans and grants, and other assistance. The federal government 
also has programs that help small businesses and farmers. 
Most federal assistance becomes available when the President of the United States 
declares a “Major Disaster” for the affected area at the request of a state governor. 
FEMA will provide information through the media and community outreach about 
federal assistance and how to apply . 
Coping with Disaster
 
The emotional toll that disaster brings can sometimes be even more devastating 
than the ﬁnancial strains of damage and loss of home, business, or personal prop­
erty . 
Understand Disaster Events •	 Everyone who sees or experiences a disaster is affected by it in some way . 
•	 It is normal to feel anxious about your own safety and that of your family and 
close friends. 
•	 Profound sadness, grief, and anger are normal reactions to an abnormal event. 
•	 Acknowledging your feelings helps you recover. 
•	 Focusing on your strengths and abilities helps you heal. 
•	 Accepting help from community programs and resources is healthy. 
•	 Everyone has different needs and different ways of coping. 
•	 It is common to want to strike back at people who have caused great pain. 
Children and older adults are of special concern in the aftermath of disasters.  Even 
individuals who experience a disaster “second hand” through exposure to extensive 
media coverage can be affected. 
Contact local faith-based organizations, voluntary agencies, or professional coun­
selors for counseling. Additionally , FEMA and state and local governments of the 
affected area may provide crisis counseling assistance. 
184


--- PAGE 185 ---
Recov ering
fr om Disaster
Are You Ready? Recovering from Disaster 5.0 
Recognize Signs of Disaster 
Related Stress When adults have the following signs, they might need crisis counseling or stress 
management assistance: 
•	 Difﬁculty communicating thoughts. 
•	 Difﬁ culty sleeping. 
•	 Difﬁculty maintaining balance in their lives. 
•	 Low threshold of frustration. 
•	 Increased use of drugs/alcohol. 
•	 Limited attention span. 
•	 Poor work performance. 
•	 Headaches/stomach problems. 
•	 Tunnel vision/mufﬂ ed hearing. 
•	 Colds or ﬂ u-like symptoms. 
•	 Disorientation or confusion. 
•	 Difﬁ culty concentrating. 
•	 Reluctance to leave home. 
•	 Depression, sadness. 
•	 Feelings of hopelessness. 
•	 Mood-swings and easy bouts of crying. 
•	 Overwhelming guilt and self-doubt. 
•	 Fear of crowds, strangers, or being alone. 
Easing Disaster-Related 
Stress The following are ways to ease disaster-related stress: 
•	 Talk with someone about your feelings—anger, sorrow, and other emotions—
 
even though it may be difﬁcult.
 
•	 Seek help from professional counselors who deal with post-disaster stress. 
•	 Do not hold yourself responsible for the disastrous event or be frustrated be­
cause you feel you cannot help directly in the rescue work.
 
•	 Take steps to promote your own physical and emotional healing by healthy 
eating, rest, exercise, relaxation, and meditation.
 
•	 Maintain a normal family and daily routine, limiting demanding responsibili­
ties on yourself and your family .
 
•	 Spend time with family and friends. 
•	 Participate in memorials. 
185


--- PAGE 186 ---
5.0 Are You Ready? Recovering from Disaster 
•	 Use existing support groups of f
amily , friends, and religious institutions. 
•	 Ensure you are ready for future events by restocking your disaster supplies kits 
and updating your family disaster plan.  Doing these positive actions can be 
comforting. 
Helping Children Cope 
with Disaster Disasters can leave children feeling frightened, confused, and insecure. Whether a 
child has personall
y experienced trauma, has merely seen the event on television, 
or has heard it discussed by adults, it is important for parents and teachers to be 
informed and ready to help if reactions to stress begin to occur. 
Children may respond to disaster by demonstrating fears, sadness, or behavioral 
problems. Younger children may return to earlier behavior patterns, such as bed-
wetting, sleep problems, and separation anxiety .  Older children may also display 
anger, aggression, school problems, or withdrawal.  Some children who have only 
indirect contact with the disaster but witness it on television may develop distress. 
Who is at Risk? 
For many children, reactions to disasters are brief and represent normal reac­
tions to “abnormal events.” A smaller number of children can be at risk for more 
enduring psychological distress as a function of three major risk factors: 
•	 Direct exposure to the disaster, such as being evacuated, observing injuries 
or death of others, or experiencing injury along with fearing one’s life is in 
danger 
•	 Loss/grief:This relates to the death or serious injury of family or friends 
•	 On-going stress from the secondary effects of disaster, such as temporarily 
living elsewhere, loss of friends and social networks, loss of personal property , 
parental unemployment, and costs incurred during recovery to return the 
family to pre-disaster life and living conditions. 
What Creates Vulnerabilities in Children? 
In most cases, depending on the risk factors above, distressing responses are 
temporary .  In the absence of severe threat to life, injury , loss of loved ones, or 
secondary problems such as loss of home, moves, etc., symptoms usually dimin­
ish over time.  For those that were directly exposed to the disaster, reminders of 
the disaster such as high winds, smoke, cloudy skies, sirens, or other reminders 
of the disaster may cause upsetting feelings to return.  Having a prior history of 
some type of traumatic event or severe stress may contribute to these feelings. 
186


--- PAGE 187 ---
Recov ering
fr om Disaster
Are You Ready? Recovering from Disaster 5.0 
Children’s coping with disaster or emergencies is often tied to the way parents 
cope.They can detect adults’ fears and sadness.  Parents and adults can make 
disasters less traumatic for children by taking steps to manage their own feelings 
and plans for coping.  Parents are almost always the best source of support for 
children in disasters.  One way to establish a sense of control and to build conﬁ­
dence in children before a disaster is to engage and involve them in preparing a 
family disaster plan. After a disaster, children can contribute to a family recovery 
plan. 
A Child’s Reaction to Disaster by Age 
Review 
See Section 1: 
Basic preparedness 
Below are common reactions in children after a disaster or traumatic event. 
Birth through 2 years. When children are pre-verbal and experience a trauma, 
they do not have the words to describe the event or their feelings.  However, they 
can retain memories of particular sights, sounds, or smells.  Infants may react 
to trauma by being irritable, crying more than usual, or wanting to be held and 
cuddled. The biggest inﬂuence on children of this age is how their parents cope. 
As children get older, their play may involve acting out elements of the traumatic 
event that occurred several years in the past and was seemingly forgotten. 
Preschool—3 through 6 years. Preschool children often feel helpless and pow­
erless in the face of an overwhelming event.  Because of their age and small size, 
they lack the ability to protect themselves or others. As a result, they feel intense 
fear and insecurity about being separated from caregivers.  Preschoolers cannot 
grasp the concept of permanent loss. They can see consequences as being revers­
ible or permanent.  In the weeks following a traumatic event, preschoolers’ play 
activities may reenact the incident or the disaster over and over again. 
School age—7 through 10 years. The school-age child has the ability to un­
derstand the permanence of loss.  Some children become intensely preoccupied 
with the details of a traumatic event and want to talk about it continually . This 
preoccupation can interfere with the child’s concentration at school and academ­
ic performance may decline. At school, children may hear inaccurate informa­
tion from peers. They may display a wide range of reactions—sadness, general­
ized fear, or speciﬁc fears of the disaster happening again, guilt over action or 
inaction during the disaster, anger that the event was not prevented, or fantasies 
of playing rescuer. 
Pre-adolescence to adolescence—11 through 18 years. As children grow 
older, they develop a more sophisticated understanding of the disaster event. 
Their responses are more similar to adults. Teenagers may become involved in 
dangerous, risk-taking behaviors, such as reckless driving, or alcohol or drug 
use.  Others can become fearful of leaving home and avoid previous levels of 
activities.  Much of adolescence is focused on moving out into the world. After a 
trauma, the view of the world can seem more dangerous and unsafe. A teenager 
may feel overwhelmed by intense emotions and yet feel unable to discuss them 
with others. 
187


--- PAGE 188 ---
5.0 Are You Ready? Recovering from Disaster 
Meeting the Child’s Emotional Needs 
Children’s reactions are inﬂuenced by the behavior, thoughts, and feelings of 
adults. Adults should encourage children and adolescents to share their thoughts 
and feelings about the incident.  Clarify misunderstandings about risk and 
danger by listening to children’s concerns and answering questions.  Maintain a 
sense of calm by validating children’s concerns and perceptions and with discus­
sion of concrete plans for safety . 
Listen to what the child is saying.  If a young child is asking questions about the 
event, answer them simply without the elaboration needed for an older child or 
adult.  Some children are comforted by knowing more or less information than 
others; decide what level of information your particular child needs.  If a child 
has difﬁculty expressing feelings, allow the child to draw a picture or tell a story 
of what happened. 
Try to understand what is causing anxieties and fears.  Be aware that following a 
disaster, children are most afraid that: 
•	 The event will happen again. 
•	 Someone close to them will be killed or injured. 
•	 They will be left alone or separated from the family . 
Reassuring Children After a Disaster 
Suggestions to help reassure children include the following: 
•	 Personal contact is reassuring.  Hug and touch your children. 
•	 Calmly provide factual information about the recent disaster and current plans 
for insuring their safety along with recovery plans. 
•	 Encourage your children to talk about their feelings. 
•	 Spend extra time with your children such as at bedtime. 
•	 Re-establish your daily routine for work, school, play , meals, and rest. 
•	 Involve your children by giving them speciﬁc chores to help them feel they 
are helping to restore family and community life. 
•	 Praise and recognize responsible behavior. 
•	 Understand that your children will have a range of reactions to disasters. 
•	 Encourage your children to help update your a family disaster plan. 
If you have tried to create a reassuring environment by following the steps above, 
but your child continues to exhibit stress, if the reactions worsen over time, or 
if they cause interference with daily behavior at school, at home, or with other 
relationships, it may be appropriate to talk to a professional. You can get profes­
sional help from the child’s primary care physician, a mental health provider 
specializing in children’s needs, or a member of the clergy . 
188


--- PAGE 189 ---
Recov ering
fr om Disaster
Are You Ready? Recovering from Disaster 5.0 
Monitor and Limit Y our Family’s Exposure to the Media 
News coverage related to a disaster may elicit fear and confusion and arouse 
anxiety in children. This is particularly true for large-scale disasters or a terror­
ist event where signiﬁcant property damage and loss of life has occurred.  Par­
ticularly for younger children, repeated images of an event may cause them to 
believe the event is recurring over and over. 
If parents allow children to watch television or use the Internet where images 
or news about the disaster are shown, parents should be with them to encour­
age communication and provide explanations.This may also include parent’s 
monitoring and appropriately limiting their own exposure to anxiety-provoking 
information. 
Use Support Networks 
Parents help their children when they take steps to understand and manage 
their own feelings and ways of coping. They can do this by building and using 
social support systems of family , friends, community organizations and agencies, 
faith-based institutions, or other resources that work for that family .  Parents can 
build their own unique social support systems so that in an emergency situation 
or when a disaster strikes, they can be supported and helped to manage their 
reactions. As a result, parents will be more available to their children and better 
able to support them.  Parents are almost always the best source of support for 
children in difﬁcult times. But to support their children, parents need to attend 
to their own needs and have a plan for their own support. 
Preparing for disaster helps everyone in the family accept the fact that disasters 
do happen, and provides an opportunity to identify and collect the resources 
needed to meet basic needs after disaster.  Preparation helps; when people feel 
prepared, they cope better and so do children. 
Helping Others 
The compassion and generosity of the American people is never more evident than 
after a disaster.  People want to help.  Here are some general guidelines on helping 
others after a disaster: 
•	 Volunteer! Check with local organizations or listen to local news reports for 
information about where volunteers are needed. Note: Until volunteers are 
speciﬁcally requested, stay away from disaster areas. 
•	 Bring your own food, water, and emergency supplies to a disaster area if you 
are needed there. This is especially important in cases where a large area has 
been affected and emergency items are in short supply . 
•	 Give a check or money order to a recognized disaster relief organization. 
These groups are organized to process checks, purchase what is needed, and 
get it to the people who need it most. 
189


--- PAGE 190 ---
5.0 Are You Ready? Recovering from Disaster 
•	 Do not drop off food,
 clothing, or any other item to a government agency 
or disaster relief organization unless a particular item has been requested. 
Normally , these organizations do not have the resources to sort through the 
donated items. 
•	 Donate a quantity of a given item or class of items (such as nonperishable 
food) rather than a mix of different items.  Determine where your donation 
is going, how it’s going to get there, who is going to unload it, and how it is 
going to be distributed. Without sufﬁcient planning, much needed supplies 
will be left unused. 
For More Information
 
If you require more information about any of these topics, the following are 
resources that may be helpful. 
FEMA Publications Helping Children Cope with Disasters.  L-196.  Provides information about how to prepare 
children for disaster and how to lessen the emotional effects of disaster. 
When Disaster Strikes.  L-217. Provides information about donations and volunteer 
organizations. 
Repairing Your Flooded Home.  FEMA 234. This 362-page publication provides a step­
by-step guide to repairing your home and how to get help after a ﬂood disaster. 
Available online at www.fema.gov/hazards/ﬂoods/lib234.shtm 
After a Flood: The First Steps.  L 198. Tips for staying healthy , cleaning up and repairing, 
and getting help after a ﬂood. Available online at www.fema.gov/hazards/ﬂoods/ 
aftrﬂd.shtm 
190


--- PAGE 191 ---
Are You Ready? Appendix A 
Appendix A: 
Water Conservation Tips 
Indoor Water 
Conservation Tips General 
• 	 Never pour water down the drain when there may be another use for it.  Use 
it to water your indoor plants or garden. 
• 	 Repair dripping faucets by replacing washers.  One drop per second wastes 
2,700 gallons of water per year!  
• 	 Check all plumbing for leaks.  Have leaks repaired by a plumber. 
• 	 Retroﬁt all household faucets by installing aerators with ﬂ ow restrictors. 
• 	 Install an instant hot water heater on your sink. 
• 	 Insulate your water pipes to reduce heat loss and prevent them from breaking. 
• 	 Install a water-softening system only when the minerals in the water would 
damage your pipes. Turn the softener off while on vacation. 
• 	 Choose appliances that are more energy and water efﬁ cient. 
Bathroom 
• 	 Consider purchasing a low-volume toilet that uses less than half the water of 
older models. Note: In many areas, low-volume units are required by law. 
• 	 Install a toilet displacement device to cut down on the amount of water need­
ed to ﬂush.  Place a one-gallon plastic jug of water into the tank to displace 
toilet ﬂow (do not use a brick, it may dissolve and loose pieces may cause 
damage to the internal parts).  Be sure installation does not interfere with the 
operating parts. 
• 	 Replace your showerhead with an ultra-low-ﬂ ow version. 
• 	 Place a bucket in the shower to catch excess water for watering plants. 
• 	 Avoid ﬂushing the toilet unnecessarily .  Dispose of tissues, insects, and other 
similar waste in the trash rather than the toilet. 
• 	 Avoid taking baths—take short showers—turn on water only to get wet and 
lather and then again to rinse off. 
• 	 Avoid letting the water run while br ushing your teeth, washing your face, or 
shaving. 
Kitchen 
• 	 Operate automatic dishwashers only when they are fully loaded.  Use the 
“light wash” feature, if available, to use less water. 
• 	 Hand wash dishes by ﬁlling two containers—one with soapy water and the 
other with rinse water containing a small amount of chlorine bleach. 
• 	 Clean vegetables in a pan ﬁlled with water rather than running water from the 
tap. 
• 	 Start a compost pile as an alternate method of disposing of food waste or 
simply dispose of food in the garbage. (Kitchen sink disposals require a lot of 
water to operate properly). 
• 	 Store drinking water in the refrigerator.  Do not let the tap run while you are 
waiting for water to cool. 
191


--- PAGE 192 ---
Are You Ready? Appendix A 
•	 Avoid wasting water waiting for it to get hot.  Capture it for other uses such as 
plant watering or heat it on the stove or in a microwave. 
•	 Avoid rinsing dishes before placing them in the dishwasher; just remove large 
particles of food. (Most dishwashers can clean soiled dishes very well, so 
dishes do not have to be rinsed before washing) 
•	 Avoid using running water to thaw meat or other frozen foods. Defrost food 
overnight in the refrigerator or use the defrost setting on your microwave 
oven. 
Laundry 
• Operate automatic clothes washers only when they are fully loaded or set the 
water level for the size of your load. 
Outdoor Water 
Conservation Tips 
General 
•	 Check your well pump periodically .  If the automatic pump turns on and off 
while water is not being used, you have a leak. 
•	 Plant native and/or drought-tolerant grasses, ground covers, shrubs, and trees. 
Once established, they do not need water as frequently and usually will sur­
vive a dry period without watering.  Small plants require less water to become 
established.  Group plants together based on similar water needs. 
•	 Install irrigation devices that are the most water efﬁcient for each use.  Micro 
and drip irrigation and soaker hoses are examples of efﬁ cient devices. 
•	 Use mulch to retain moisture in the soil.  Mulch also helps control weeds that 
compete with landscape plants for water. 
•	 Avoid purchasing recreational water toys that require a constant stream of 
water. 
•	 Avoid installing ornamental water features (such as fountains) unless they use 
recycled water. 
Car Washing 
•	 Use a shut-off nozzle that can be adjusted down to a ﬁne spray on your hose. 
•	 Use a commercial car wash that recycles water.  If you wash your own car, 
park on the grass so that you will be watering it at the same time. 
Lawn Care 
•	 Avoid over watering your lawn. A heavy rain eliminates the need for watering 
for up to two weeks.  Most of the year, lawns only need one inch of water per 
week. 
•	 Water in several short sessions rather than one long one, in order for your 
lawn to better absorb moisture. 
•	 Position sprinklers so water lands on the lawn and shrubs and not on paved 
areas. 
192


--- PAGE 193 ---
Are You Ready? Appendix A 
•	 Av
oid sprinklers that spray a ﬁne mist.  Mist can evaporate before it reaches 
the lawn.  Check sprinkler systems and timing devices regularly to be sure 
they operate properly . 
•	 Raise the lawn mower blade to at least three inches or to its highest level. A 
higher cut encourages grass roots to grow deeper, shades the root system, and 
holds soil moisture. 
•	 Plant drought-resistant lawn seed. 
•	 Avoid over-fertilizing your lawn. Applying fertilizer increases the need for 
water. Apply fertilizers that contain slow-release, water-insoluble forms of 
nitrogen. 
•	 Use a broom or blower instead of a hose to clean leaves and other debris from 
your driveway or sidewalk. 
•	 Avoid leaving sprinklers or hoses unattended. A garden hose can pour out 
600 gallons or more in only a few hours. 
Pool 
•	 Install a new water-saving pool ﬁlter. A single back ﬂushing with a traditional 
ﬁlter uses 180 to 250 gallons of water. 
•	 Cover pools and spas to reduce evaporation of water. 
193


--- PAGE 194 ---
Are You Ready? Appendix B 
Appendix B: 
Disaster Supplies Checklists 
The following list is to help you determine what to include in your disaster sup­
plies kit that will meet your family’s needs. 
First Aid Supplies 
Supplies Home (√) Vehicle (√) Work (√) 
Adhesive bandages, various sizes 
5” x 9” sterile dressing 
Conforming roller gauze bandage 
Triangular bandages 
3” x 3” sterile gauze pads 
4” x 4” sterile gauze pads 
Roll 3” cohesive bandage 
Germicidal hand wipes or waterless, alco­
hol-based hand sanitizer 
Antiseptic wipes 
Pairs large, medical grade, 
non-latex gloves 
Tongue depressor blades 
Adhesive tape, 2” width 
Antibacterial ointment 
Cold pack 
Scissors (small, personal) 
Tweezers 
Assorted sizes of safety pins 
Cotton balls 
Thermometer 
Tube of petroleum jelly or other 
lubricant 
Sunscreen 
CPR breathing barrier, such as a face shield 
First aid manual 
195 195


--- PAGE 195 ---
Are You Ready?Appendix B 
Non-Prescription and Prescription Medicine Kit Supplies 
Supplies Home (√) Vehicle (√) Work (√) 
Aspirin and non-aspirin pain reliever 
Anti-diarrhea medication 
Antacid (for stomach upset) 
Laxative 
Vitamins 
Prescriptions 
Extra eyeglasses/contact lenses 
Sanitation and Hygiene Supplies 
Item (√) Item (√) 
Washcloth and towel Heavy-duty plastic garbage bags and ties 
for personal sanitation uses and toilet 
paper 
Towelettes, soap, hand sanitizer Medium-sized plastic bucket with tight 
lid 
Tooth paste, toothbrushes Disinfectant and household chlorine 
bleach 
Shampoo, comb, and brush A small shovel for digging a latrine 
Deodorants, sunscreen Toilet paper 
Razor, shaving cream 
Lip balm, insect repellent 
Contact lens solutions 
Mirror 
Feminine supplies 
196 196


--- PAGE 196 ---
Are You Ready? Appendix B 
Equipment and Tools 
Tools (√) Kitchen Items (√) 
Portable, battery-powered radio or 
television and extra batteries 
Manual can opener 
NOAA Weather Radio, if 
appropriate for your area 
Mess kits or paper cups, plates, and 
plastic utensils 
Flashlight and extra 
batteries 
All-purpose knife 
Signal ﬂare Household liquid bleach to treat 
drinking water 
Matches in a waterproof container 
(or waterproof matches) 
Sugar, salt, pepper 
Shut-off wrench, pliers, shovel, 
and other tools 
Aluminum foil and plastic wrap 
Duct tape and scissors Resealable plastic bags 
Plastic sheeting Small cooking stove and a can 
of cooking fuel (if food must be 
cooked) 
Whistle 
Small canister, ABC-type ﬁre extin­
guisher 
Comfort Items 
Tube tent Games 
Compass Cards 
Work gloves Books 
Paper, pens, and pencils Toys for kids 
Needles and thread Foods 
Battery-operated travel alarm clock 
19 197 7


--- PAGE 197 ---
Are You Ready?Appendix B 
Food andWater 
Supplies Home (√) Vehicle (√) Work (√) 
Water 
Ready-to-eat meats, fruits, and vegetables 
Canned or boxed juices, milk, and soup 
High-energy foods such as peanut butter, 
jelly , low-sodium crackers, granola bars, and 
trail mix. 
Vitamins 
Special foods for infants or persons on special 
diets 
Cookies, hard candy 
Instant coffee 
Cereals 
Powdered milk 
Clothes and Bedding Supplies 
Item (√) (√) (√) (√) 
Complete change of clothes 
Sturdy shoes or boots 
Rain gear 
Hat and gloves 
Extra socks 
Extra underwear 
Thermal underwear 
Sunglasses 
Blankets/sleeping bags and pillows 
198 198


--- PAGE 198 ---
Are You Ready? Appendix B 
Documents and Keys 
Make sure you keep these items in a watertight container 
Item Stored (√) 
Personal identiﬁcation 
Cash and coins 
Credit cards 
Extra set of house keys and car keys 
Copies of the following: 
• Birth certiﬁ cate 
• Marriage certi ﬁcate 
• Driver’ s license 
• Social Security cards 
• Passports 
• Wills 
• Deeds 
• Inventory of household goods 
• Insurance papers 
• Immunization records 
• Bank and credit card account numbers 
• Stocks and bonds 
Emergency contact list and phone numbers 
Map of the area and phone numbers of places you could go 
199 199


--- PAGE 199 ---
Are You Ready? Appendix C 
Appendix C: 
201


--- PAGE 200 ---
Are You Ready? Appendix C 
203

