=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Barbara Ransby~ Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 497
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:49:35.708078
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Ella Baker
and the black freedom movement


--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---
gender & american culture
coeditors
Thadious M. Davis
Linda K. Kerber
editorial advisory board
Nancy Cott
Cathy N. Davidson
Jane Sherron De Hart
Sara Evans
Mary Kelley
Annette Kolodny
Wendy Martin
Nell Irvin Painter
Janice Radway
Barbara Sicherman


--- PAGE 5 ---
Ella


--- PAGE 6 ---
Baker
and the Black Freedom Movement
a radical democratic vision
Barbara Ransby
The
University
of North
Carolina
Press
Chapel Hill &
London


--- PAGE 7 ---
∫ 2003
The University of North Carolina Press
All rights reserved
Set in Charter and Meta types
by Keystone Typesetting, Inc.
Manufactured in the United States of America
Excerpt from Mississippi Goddam by Nina Simone
∫ 1964 (renewed) WB Music Corp. All rights reserved.
Used by permission of Warner Bros. Publications U.S., Inc.,
Miami, FL 33014.
The paper in this book meets the guidelines for
permanence and durability of the Committee on
Production Guidelines for Book Longevity
of the Council on Library Resources.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ransby, Barbara.
Ella Baker and the Black freedom movement: a radical democratic
vision / Barbara Ransby.
p. cm.—(Gender and American culture)
Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.
isbn 0-8078-2778-9 (alk. paper)
1. Baker, Ella, 1903–1986. 2. African American women civil rights
workers—Biography. 3. Civil rights workers—United States—Biography.
4. Civil rights movements—United States—History—20th century.
5. African Americans—Civil rights—History—20th century. 6. National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People—Biography.
7. Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party—Biography. 8. Southern
States—Race relations. 9. United States—Race relations. I. Title.
II. Series: Gender & American culture
e185.97.b214 r36 2003
323%.092—dc21 2002153275
c l o t h0 70 60 50 40 3 54321


--- PAGE 8 ---
contents
Acknowledgments xi
Abbreviations xix
Introduction 1
1. Now, Who Are Your People?:
Norfolk, Virginia, and Littleton, North Carolina, 1903–1918 13
2. A Reluctant Rebel and an Exceptional Student:
Shaw Academy and Shaw University, 1918–1927 46
3. Harlem during the 1930s:
The Making of a Black Radical Activist and Intellectual 64
4. Fighting Her Own Wars:
The naacp National Ofﬁce, 1940–1946 105
5. Cops, Schools, and Communism:
Local Politics and Global Ideologies—New York City in the 1950s 148
6. The Preacher and the Organizer:
The Politics of Leadership in the Early Civil Rights Movement 170
7. New Battleﬁelds and New Allies:
Shreveport, Birmingham, and the Southern
Conference Education Fund 209
8. Mentoring a New Generation of Activists:
The Birth of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee, 1960–1961 239
9. The Empowerment of an Indigenous Southern
Black Leadership, 1961–1964 273
10. Mississippi Goddamn:
Fighting for Freedom in the Belly of the Beast of Southern Racism 299


--- PAGE 9 ---
11. The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
and the Radical Campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 330
12. A Freirian Teacher, a Gramscian Intellectual,
and a Radical Humanist: Ella Baker’s Legacy 357
Appendix. Ella Baker’s Organizational Afﬁliations, 1927–1986 375
Notes 377
Bibliography 425
Index 451


--- PAGE 10 ---
illustrations
Ella Baker in The Crisis magazine, 1932 197
Ella Baker, ca. 1942 198
Ella Baker with naacp colleagues, September 1945 199
Ella Baker at naacp fair, 1950s 199
Ella Baker in Shreveport, Louisiana, 1959 200
Ella Baker and Myles Horton, ca. 1960 200
Ella Baker smiling, 1962 201
Ella Baker, Fannie Lou Hamer, Eleanor Holmes Norton, Stokely
Carmichael, and others, 1964 202
Ella Baker in Atlantic City, New Jersey, 1964 202
Ella Baker in Jackson, Mississippi, 1964 203
Ella Baker singing at scef luncheon, 1970s 204
Ella Baker at Angela Davis rally, 1972 205
Ella Baker with David Dellinger and Marilyn Clement, 1980 206
Ella Baker with William Kunstler and Marilyn Clement, 1980 206
Ella Baker in her Harlem apartment, 1984 207
Ella Baker, Jackie Brockington, and Carolyn Brockington, 1985 208


--- PAGE 11 ---



--- PAGE 12 ---
acknowledgments
This book has taken me on a long and circuitous path, which began in 1989
when I chose to research the life of Ella Baker as a dissertation topic. Since
that time I have encountered many wonderful fellow travelers, and experi-
enced difﬁcult detours along the way. One of my children grew up, another
was born, and both my parents passed away. Political struggles and per-
sonal commitments repeatedly pulled me away from the task of research
and writing.
If it takes a community to raise a child, it certainly takes a community to
produce a book. Many people have contributed to this book directly and
indirectly, and it would be disrespectful to Ella Baker’s memory if I did not
take time and space to recognize them. I must ﬁrst express my appreciation
to Ella Baker’s family, especially her niece Jackie Brockington, who died
months before the book was published, who, along with Joanne Grant,
gave me early and extensive access to Ella Baker’s papers when they were
still housed at her old apartment in Harlem. Jackie never said, ‘‘No,’’ to
anything I asked for—photographs, copies of documents, or a few hours of
her time. I was touched that she always asked about my family and trusted
me with the precious memories of hers. She exempliﬁed those ﬁne quali-
ties for which others praised her beloved aunt Ella. I regret terribly that she
did not live to see the completion of the book. I am also deeply indebted to
Joanne Grant, whose documentary Fundi brought Ella Baker to life for my
generation and whose own biography of Baker made a vital contribution.
Joanne was a friend and colleague throughout the writing of my disserta-
tion. In the spirit of Ella Baker, we chose to cooperate and coexist rather
than compete in our efforts to tell her story in our own words. We agreed
early on that there was certainly room for two Ella Baker biographies.
I have had the beneﬁt of quite a number of amazing readers and re-
searchers who have made invaluable contributions to this project. Cathy
Cohen, my dear friend and adopted sister, has been a glowing inspiration
and an unwavering source of support. During our morning phone conver-
sations, at our respective computers, she often began with the question,
‘‘How’s Ella?’’—as if checking in on an ailing family member. She read large


--- PAGE 13 ---
xii acknowledgments
portions of the manuscript and opened her home and her heart at critical
junctures. Tracye Matthews, friend, colleague, reader, research associate,
fellow activist, and birthing coach, read, edited, and dug up details to
help move this book along. The photo of Ella Baker that she gave me
has hung above my computer for six years now. My dear friend Premilla
Nadasen schlepped down to the Municipal Archives in New York and ma-
neuvered her way around bureaucratic hurdles to get access to Ella Baker’s
divorce records. She and her family then welcomed me into their Mount
Vernon, New York, home for a weeklong writing retreat in the summer of
2001 to ﬁnish one round of revisions on the book. Thanks to Billy Gladstone
for keeping the coffee brewed and Tyler Kirin for being a delightful distrac-
tion during my stay.
Gerald Horne is a generous colleague who, when I asked him to read
500 pages in a week, responded that he would be honored. Timothy Ty-
son and John Dittmer were also extremely knowledgeable and thoughtful
readers and continue to be treasured colleagues, who remind me with their
own sterling examples that we can love our subjects and still write damn
good history books. And I will be ever grateful to the amazing Charles
Payne, whose own work helped to bring Ella Baker to a wider audience and
who nudged me along for years with hugs, gentle criticism, profound in-
sights, and words of reassurance.
Martha Biondi took time away from her own book-writing to read and
comment on my manuscript. Her comments have strengthened the ﬁnal
product, and her professional and political example continues to
strengthen my resolve. I would also like to thank scholar-activist Leith
Mullings for her generous reading of several chapters. Colleagues of mine
at the University of Illinois at Chicago—Sue Levine, Bill Ayers, Amanda
Lewis, John D’Emilio, and Eric Arnesen—read the manuscript carefully and
provided enormously helpful suggestions and comments. John and I have
had many wonderful Ella and Bayard lunches to talk about our tandem
biographies. We all anxiously await what promises to be the deﬁnitive
biography on Bayard Rustin.
Aldon Morris introduced me to Ella Baker in his civil rights seminar ﬁf-
teen years ago, and I am ever grateful. He continues to be a friend, mentor,
and colleague. Clayborne Carson, Susan Carson, Stewart Burns, and the
staff at the King Papers Project were enormously helpful to me at the early
stages of this project during the week I spent at Stanford. They provided
advice, information about historical documents and obscure archives, and
a friendly and intellectually stimulating environment. Daniel Holliman


--- PAGE 14 ---
acknowledgments xiii
aided me in digging up information in George Schuyler’s papers at Syra-
cuse University at a moment when timing was everything. Herbert Hill
welcomed me into his home, fed me a ﬁne meal, and shared important
insights and recollections. On a separate occasion in another city, Lenora
Taitt-Magubane did the same thing. Other researchers have sent me little
treasures—letters, news clippings, and interviews—to fatten my already
engorged Ella Baker ﬁles. For these contributions, I thank John Bracey,
Jerry Markowitz, Andrea Vasquez, John Thornbery, Julius Scott, Pam
Sporn, Archie Allen, Wendy Plotkin, and Kathleen Cleaver. Penny Von Es-
chen and Kevin Gaines have also been wonderful colleagues and support-
ive friends. Vincent Harding’s support is also much appreciated.
I owe still another enormous debt to historians Nell Painter, Linda Ker-
ber, and Linda Gordon, all notoriously busy women who took time out to
read my manuscript and offer suggestions and kind words of encourage-
ment. Nell went the extra mile to help me grapple with the vexing issue of
Baker’s private life by providing me with a rich reading list of psychological
studies on the social meanings of privacy and identity, which I have tried to
weave into the text.
Through their own pioneering work, the following scholars have created
an academic and a popular audience for black women’s history, and each of
them in different ways has supported and inspired my work: Darlene Clark
Hine, Elsa Barkley Brown, Tera Hunter, Deborah Gray White, Stephanie
Shaw, Tiffany Patterson, Rosiland Terborg-Penn, Ula Taylor, Chana Kai Lee,
Stanlie James, Angela Davis, Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, Joy James,
Sharon Harley, Paula Giddings, and Beverly Guy-Sheftal.
And Robin D. G. Kelley is in a category all his own. He has always been
there for me. My brother-friend-comrade-mentor. His encouragement, ad-
vice, solidarity, and remarkable example of a brilliant scholar and a funda-
mentally humane person have sustained my optimism about unraveling
the past and shaping the future. When I began reading his recent book,
Freedom Dreams, during the ﬁnal stages of my own writing process, I sim-
ply could not put it down, despite a looming deadline. It has informed the
ﬁnal chapter of this book in powerful and unexpected ways.
The time Ella Baker spent with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee in the 1960s was some of her most rewarding work. Meeting
and getting to know the remarkable collection of people associated with
sncc was for me one of the most rewarding aspects of researching this
book. sncc activists Judy Richardson, Connie Curry, and Ivanhoe Don-
aldson read the entire manuscript and put up with numerous follow-up


--- PAGE 15 ---
xiv acknowledgments
queries as acts of solidarity and generosity. Judy went out of her way to
provide me with a copy of an excerpt from Judith Rollins’s All Is Never Said
that mentions Ella Baker. I thank them from the bottom of my heart, as well
as all of the other sncc people who allowed me to interview them (their
names are listed in the bibliography); they have warmly welcomed me into
the sncc family and included me in reunions, reminiscences, and some-
times a little bit of movement gossip. I am humbled by their friendship
and kindness, especially that of my ﬁrst sncc friend, Martha Prescod Nor-
man. Each one of them, as well as the admirable and indefatigable Anne
Braden, gave me the dual gifts of time and trust. Even those I did not
formally interview—Bill Strickland, Charles McDew, Michael Thelwell,
Cleveland Sellers, Zohara Simmons, Gloria House, Julian Bond, Larry Fox,
and others—informed my reading of Ella Baker’s life through their public
remarks and in private conversations. I hope this book is some small mea-
sure of repayment. The contribution of Kwame Ture (Stokely Carmichael)
to this project was heroic even though we only spent a few hours together.
Despite terminal cancer, he persevered in the freedom struggle until the
end. I interviewed him at his bedside during his last visit to the States.
Despite the frailness of his body, his mind was sharp and his words clear.
He spoke to me like a man with a stake in both the past and the future.
Other individuals whom I interviewed have passed on, including Conrad
Lynn, John Henrik Clarke, Jackie Brockington, Prathia Hall (Wynn), Mar-
vel Jackson Cooke, and Gloster Current. Their memories and contributions
live on in these pages and beyond.
And what would I have done without excellent editors, researchers, and
librarians? Grey Osterud, a ﬁne wordsmith with a keen eye, helped me
through the last phase of writing, chapter by chapter. From her desk in
rural Massachusetts to my desk in Chicago, she offered ideas, questions,
and suggestions. Interspersed between revisions, we digressed to learn
about one another’s backgrounds, politics, religious views, and children. I
jokingly called her my book therapist because she cheered me on as much
as anything else and reminded me that what often felt large and unwieldy
could be harnessed and completed.
Kate Torrey, the director of the University of North Carolina Press, has
given new meaning to the words ‘‘patience’’ and ‘‘grace.’’ Although my early
manuscript was in a very unpolished state, she saw potential in this project
and nurtured and nudged it and me along every step of the way. A skilled
editor, and an all-around ﬁne human being, she has most importantly given
me the space, time, and encouragement needed to bring this book to fru-


--- PAGE 16 ---
acknowledgments xv
ition. Two other capable editors, Paul Betz and Pamela Upton, have seen
me through the ﬁnal stages.
A small battalion of graduate and undergraduate students has contrib-
uted bits and pieces to this project over the decade. Some dug up obscure
articles in the library, while others traveled with me to archives to excavate
more pieces of the Ella Baker puzzle. With one exception, most of them
worked for short stints, ranging from a few hours to a couple of months,
but all of their labors are appreciated; they include Jasmine Patel, Emily
Mann, Jeff Helgeson, Greg Simmons, David Brewer, Rachel Caidor, Gareth
Canaan, David Levine, and Rychelle (Kitty) Hooper (who was one of the
stalwarts). John Santiago, Deva Woodly, Brandi Adams, Lisa Jones, Quincy
Mills, and Anne McCarthy also contributed. No words can express the
gratitude I feel for Sarah Wood, my ﬁrst research assistant, who stumbled
with me through the early days of this project, diligently tracked down
information and individuals, and served as a sounding board for ideas; an
impeccable young colleague, she was also a devoted friend. She then came
back to help me in the ﬁnal stages despite her own hectic schedule as
she prepared to move to Pennsylvania. Ella belongs to her as much as to
anyone.
Numerous librarians, archivists, and photographers have provided me
with priceless resources. I am immensely grateful to Howard Dodson,
Diane Lachatanarre, and Andre Elizee at the Schomburg Center for Re-
search in Black Culture in New York City for allowing me to plow through
Baker’s unprocessed papers once they were deposited there. Also deserving
of special thanks are the photographers Harvey Wang and Charmian Read-
ing and the staffs at the State Historical Society of Wisconsin, the North
Carolina Collection at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the
Martin Luther King Jr. Papers Project, the Library of Congress, and the
Moorland-Spingarn Research Center at Howard University.
There are others who have never read a line of this book as of yet but
who live in its pages because for me they represent a continuation of Ella
Baker’s tradition. For much of the time I was conceiving of this book, I was
engaged in various political struggles, attempting to learn from and apply
Ella Baker’s lessons as I went. In the process, I worked alongside some
extraordinary people who embodied Baker’s democratic values and radical
humanist vision. The members of African American Women in Defense of
Ourselves, especially Elsa Barkley Brown and Deborah King, took Baker’s
ideas and put them directly into practice; they continue to be an inspiration
to me. Bill Fletcher, with whom I worked for ﬁve years on the Black Radical


--- PAGE 17 ---
xvi acknowledgments
Congress, stands out as a model of the selﬂess organizer—enormously
wise, profoundly humane, often underappreciated. Manning Marable,
Leith Mullings, Abdul Alkalimat, Fran Beal, Lisa Brock, Cheryl Harris,
Humberto Brown, Jarvis Tyner, Prexy Nesbit, Ajamu and Rukiya Dillahunt,
and Jean Carey Bond are other activists from whom I have learned a great
deal as well. Tanaquil Jones was a dear friend and close ally for years as I
struggled to hear Ella Baker’s political voice and ﬁnd my own. Much of the
reason I decided to write this book in the ﬁrst place has to be attributed to
my political family at the University of Michigan in the 1980s, who sat in
with me at the administration building to demand an honorary degree for
Nelson Mandela, picketed during the dead of winter for the Martin Luther
King Jr. holiday to be recognized by the university, and helped establish the
Ella Baker–Nelson Mandela Center for Anti-Racist Education. Those not
already mentioned include Hector Delgado, Michael Wilson, Roderick
Linzie, Lillien Waller, Rajal Patel, Nikita Buckhoy, Lannis Hall, David Mau-
rasse, David Fletcher, Jocelyn Sargent, Emery Smith, Kimberly Smith, Re-
gina Freer, Anthony Vivasis, Brett Stockdill, and too many more to name. A.
Sivanandan, Jenny Bourne, Hazel Waters, and Liz Fekete at the Institute for
Race Relations in London have provided me with a political home away
from home during my visits there. Back home in Chicago, my friends at the
Crossroads Fund have buoyed my optimism in bleak political times.
There are those whose contributions were professional or political, and
then there are those whose contributions were entirely personal. Arlene
Branscomb, my daughter Asha’s caregiver for ﬁve years, may not even
remember the topic of this book. However, Arlene gave me the most pre-
cious gift a mother can hope for, peace of mind that my child was in
capable and loving arms when I was working. Her kindness and warmth
reminded me daily of the care and interdependency that holds families and
communities together. Jacqui BassiriRad too was a surrogate mom for
Asha many afternoons during the ﬁnal stage of the book’s preparation, and
Hormoz BassiriRad kept us well fed with Persian delicacies. Laura Hender-
son at the Buzz Café in Oak Park kept me fueled with caffeine as I sat and
wrote for hours.
Beth Richie sent me ﬂowers and good wishes during an especially in-
tense period of work. Other friends—Aisha Ray, Linda Hillman, Lynette
Jackson, Lisa Yun Lee, Kim and Mary Byas, and Bernardine Dohrn—have
sustained me in many ways as I juggled my various responsibilities in order
to complete this book. Linda took time out to pull herself away from her


--- PAGE 18 ---
acknowledgments xvii
potter’s wheel to read and give feedback on the text on three occasions.
Her skills as a writer and editor were enormously helpful.
Finally, the members of my immediate family, to whom this book is dedi-
cated, have loved me unconditionally and welcomed Ella Baker into our
home and our lives as if she were one of us. They have endured my inter-
mittent need to shut myself off from the world and write, and they have
pulled me out of my seclusion to remind me that there is a larger world
beyond this book and my computer. Despite his own extremely demanding
career, my husband, Peter Sporn, has been my anchor in the storm for
nearly half of my life, and I could not have written this book without his
love and his unrelenting support. My daughter, Asha, reminds me day in
and day out of the power of a creative imagination to remake things from
what they are into something better. I am in awe of her energy and deter-
mination. Like Ella, she will be her own woman and demand that the world
make a place for her. My son, Jason, the budding activist/philosopher took
off for his ﬁrst year at Brown University just as this book was being sent to
the publisher. In the summer of 2002, he was both my research assistant
and my political comrade. His honest observations and probing questions
pushed me to dig deeper and think harder about the meaning of Ella
Baker’s legacy for his generation. Jason’s wit and wisdom made this book a
better product, and his love and friendship have made me a better person.
My extended family—Jo and Paul Sporn, Pam Sporn, Paul Foster, Le-
lanie Foster, and Papito Foster—have loved and tolerated me through the
writing of this book. Paul Sporn has served as a writing coach and ever-
loving conﬁdant for which I thank him. My parents and grandparents—
Charlie and Ethel Ransby, Rosia and Henry Pittman, and John and Queenie
Fallens, all of whom have passed on—never read this book. Even if they had
been alive, they might not have done so. My mother had the most formal
education in the family, and she never ﬁnished high school. They were
sharecroppers in Newnan, Georgia, and Greenwood, Mississippi, who mi-
grated north to become factory workers and maids in Detroit, Michigan.
They were the kind of strong, hard-working, generous, astutely aware ordi-
nary people that Ella Baker valued so much. Perhaps that is what initially
attracted me to her story and her ideas. It is certainly my memory of them
and their example of the best humanity has to offer that inspires me to
persevere as a historian and an activist.


--- PAGE 19 ---



--- PAGE 20 ---
abbreviations
acmhr: Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights
afl: American Federation of Labor
cio: Congress of Industrial Organizations
cofo: Council of Federated Organizations
core: Congress of Racial Equality
cp: Communist Party
ilgwu: International Ladies Garment Workers Union
mfdp: Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
mia: Montgomery Improvement Association
mpoc: Mass Party Organizing Committee
naacp: National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
prso: Puerto Rican Solidarity Organization
scef: Southern Conference Education Fund
schw: Southern Conference on Human Welfare
sclc: Southern Christian Leadership Conference
sds: Students for a Democratic Society
sncc: Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee
tscc: Temporary Student Coordinating Committee
uaw: United Auto Workers
ucmi: United Christian Movement Inc.
unia: Universal Negro Improvement Association
vep: Voter Education Project
wep: Workers Education Project
wpa: Works Progress Administration
ymca: Young Men’s Christian Association
yncl: Young Negroes Cooperative League
ypf: Young People’s Forum
ywca: Young Women’s Christian Association


--- PAGE 21 ---



--- PAGE 22 ---
Ella Baker
and the black freedom movement


--- PAGE 23 ---



--- PAGE 24 ---
introduction
In order for us as poor and oppressed people to become a part of a
society that is meaningful, the system under which we now exist has to be
radically changed. This means that we are going to have to learn to think in
radical terms. I use the term radical in its original meaning—getting down
to and understanding the root cause. It means facing a system that does not
lend itself to your needs and devising means by which you change that system.
Ella Baker, 1969
Ella Baker spent her entire adult life trying to ‘‘change that system.’’ Some-
where along the way she recognized that her goal was not a single ‘‘end’’
but rather an ongoing ‘‘means,’’ that is, a process. Radical change for Ella
Baker was about a persistent and protracted process of discourse, debate,
consensus, reﬂection, and struggle. If larger and larger numbers of commu-
nities were engaged in such a process, she reasoned, day in and day out,
year after year, the revolution would be well under way. Ella Baker under-
stood that laws, structures, and institutions had to change in order to
correct injustice and oppression, but part of the process had to involve
oppressed people, ordinary people, infusing new meanings into the con-
cept of democracy and ﬁnding their own individual and collective power to
determine their lives and shape the direction of history. These were the
radical terms that Ella Baker thought in and the radical ideas she fought for
with her mind and her body. Just as the ‘‘end’’ for her was not a scripted
utopia but another phase of struggle, the means of getting there was not
scripted either. Baker’s theory of social change and political organizing was
inscribed in her practice. Her ideas were written in her work: a coherent
body of lived text spanning nearly sixty years.
Biography is a profoundly personal genre of historical scholarship, and
the humbling but empowering process of ﬁnding our own meanings in
another person’s life poses unique challenges. As biographers, we ask ques-
tions about lives that the subjects themselves may never have asked out-


--- PAGE 25 ---
2 introduction
right and certainly did not consciously answer. Answers are always elusive.
We search for them by carefully reading and interpreting the fragmented
messages left behind. Feminist biographers and scholar-activists like my-
self face particular challenges. It is imperative that we be ever cautious of
the danger inherent in our work: imposing our contemporary dilemmas
and expectations on a generation of women who spoke a different lan-
guage, moved at a different rhythm, and juggled a different set of issues
and concerns. The task of tailoring a life to ﬁt a neat and cohesive narrative
is a daunting one: an awkward and sometimes uncomfortable process of
wading barefoot into the still and often murky waters of someone else’s
life, interrogating her choices, speculating about her motives, mapping her
movements, and weighing her every word. No single descriptor ever seems
adequate to capture the richly nuanced complexity of a life fully lived.
Every term is inherently inadequate, each one loaded with someone else’s
meanings, someone else’s baggage. How can a biographer frame a unique
life, rendering it full-bodied, textured, even contradictory, yet still accessi-
ble for those who want to step inside and look around?
My journey into Ella Jo Baker’s world has been a personal, political, and
intellectual journey, often joyous and at times painful. It has taken me in
and out of some twenty cities and to numerous libraries, archives, county
courthouses, kitchen tables, front porches, and a few dusty attics. This long
journey has been marked by periods of difﬁcult separation followed by
hopeful reunions. In the process I have revisited the faces, experiences, and
southern roots of my own mother, father, grandparents, aunts, uncles, and
cousins: Mississippi sharecroppers, domestic and factory workers, honest,
generous, hard-working, resilient black people. Most importantly, in the
process I have developed an intense and unique relationship with my sub-
ject. I have chatted, argued, commiserated, and rejoiced with Ella Baker in
an ongoing conversation between sisters, one living and one dead. In this
book, I have tried to tell Ella Baker’s story partly as she would have told it
and partly the way I—a historian and an activist of a different time and
place—felt it had to be told.
There are those who insist that biographical writing is compromised and
tainted by an author’s identiﬁcation and closeness with her subject. This
does not have to be the case. I do not apologize for my admiration for Ella
Baker. She earned it. I admire her for the courageous and remarkable life
she led and for the contributions she made without any promise of immedi-
ate reward. I admire her for the ways in which she redeﬁned the meaning
of radical and engaged intellectual work, of cross-class and interracial or-


--- PAGE 26 ---
introduction 3
ganizing, and of a democratic and humanistic way of being in the world, all
the while trying to mold the world around her into something better.
......
I ﬁrst came upon Ella Baker’s story through my search for political role
models, not research subjects. As an anti-apartheid and antiracist student
activist at Columbia University and the University of Michigan in the 1980s
and as a black feminist organizer thereafter, I was drawn to the example of
Ella Baker as a woman who fought militantly but democratically for a
better world and who fought simultaneously for her own right to play more
than a circumscribed role in that world. As an insurgent intellectual with a
passion for justice and democracy, Ella Baker held an afﬁnity for the most
oppressed sectors of our society. So, my ﬁrst connection to Ella Baker was a
political one. This connection has enhanced rather than lessened my desire
to be thorough, rigorous, and balanced in my treatment of her life and
ideas. For me, there is more at stake in exploring Ella Baker’s story than an
interesting intellectual exercise or even the worthy act of writing a correc-
tive history that adds a previously muted, black, female voice to the chorus
of people from the past. To understand her weaknesses as well as her
strengths, her failures as well as her triumphs, her confusion as well as her
clarity is to pay her the greatest honor I can imagine. To tell her life truths
with all their depth and richness is to afﬁrm her humanity and all that she
was able to accomplish, because of and at times in spite of who she was.
There are vital political and historical lessons to be gleaned by looking back
in time through the lens of Ella Baker’s life.
Ella Josephine Baker’s activist career spanned from 1930 to 1980,
touched thousands of lives, and contributed to over three dozen organiza-
tions. She was an internationalist, but her cultural and political home was
the African American community. So it is within the Black Freedom Move-
ment in the United States—the collective efforts of African Americans to
attain full human rights, from the nadir of segregation at the turn of the
twentieth century through the peak of the civil rights movement in the
1960s and beyond—that I locate her story. For Baker, as for W. E. B. Du
Bois, racism was the litmus test for American democracy and for interna-
tional human rights. Both were convinced that racism had infected every
major social problem of the twentieth century: colonialism and imperial-
ism, war and fascism, the oppression of women, the politics of crime and
punishment, and the exploitation of labor; both recognized that very little
progress could be made without tackling the political cargo of race. Baker
organized for democratic rights for over ﬁfty years, from Harlem to Mis-


--- PAGE 27 ---
4 introduction
sissippi, in interracial coalitions and African American organizations, and
(unlike Du Bois) she lived to see the day when ordinary black folks enjoyed
some of the fruits of freedom. But she died knowing that the process of
struggle and social transformation would continue.
Ella Baker played a pivotal role in the three most prominent black
freedom organizations of her day: the National Association for the Ad-
vancement of Colored People (naacp); the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference (sclc); and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee
(sncc; pronounced ‘‘snick’’). She worked alongside some of the most prom-
inent black male leaders of the twentieth century: W. E. B. Du Bois, Thur-
good Marshall, George Schuyler, Walter White, A. Philip Randolph, Martin
Luther King Jr., and Stokely Carmichael. However, Baker had contentious
relationships with all these men and the organizations they headed, with
the exception of sncc during its ﬁrst six years. For much of her career she
functioned as an ‘‘outsider within.’’ She was close to the centers of power
within the black community, but she was always a critical and conditional
insider, a status informed by her gender, class loyalties, and political ideol-
ogy. Baker criticized unchecked egos, objected to undemocratic structures,
protested unilateral decision making, condemned elitism, and refused to
nod in loyal deference to everything ‘‘the leader’’ had to say. These stances
often put her on the outside of the inner circle.
While her most public political associations were with men, some of Ella
Baker’s most signiﬁcant and sustaining relationships were with a group of
women activists, some of them not very well-known, who were her friends
and co-workers over many years. These women provided the sisterly sup-
port that allowed Baker to ﬁght all of the battles she did, both inside and
outside the Black Freedom Movement. Ella Baker was part of a powerful,
yet invisible network of dynamic and inﬂuential African American women
activists who sustained civil rights causes, and one another, across several
generations. Her life intersected with such notable black women as Anna
Arnold Hedgeman, Dorothy Height, Nannie Helen Burroughs, Pauli Mur-
ray, Mary McLeod Bethune, Septima Clark, and Fannie Lou Hamer. She
was dear friends with naacp legends Ruby Hurley and Lucille Black. As
Diane Nash and Eleanor Holmes Norton suggest, women like Ella Baker
were laying the foundation for contemporary black feminists even before
the term was invented. This earlier generation of women lived the poli-
tics others have since written about, challenging treatment that belittled
the seriousness of their contributions, resisting models of organizing that
placed men and men’s work at the center, and carving out public identities


--- PAGE 28 ---
introduction 5
as leaders, strategists, and public intellectuals—identities that were gener-
ally reserved for men.
A creative and independent thinker and doer, Baker operated in a politi-
cal world that was, in many ways, not fully ready for her. She inserted her-
self into leadership situations where others thought she simply did not
belong. Her unique presence pioneered the way for fuller participation
by other women in political organizations, and it reshaped the positions
within the movement that they would occupy. At each stage she nudged
the movement in a leftward, inclusive, and democratic direction, learning
and modifying her own position as she went.
For Ella Baker, anchoring her activism within the black freedom strug-
gle was not simply a matter of identity but rather a part of a political
analysis that recognized the historical signiﬁcance of racism as the cor-
nerstone of an unjust social and economic order in the United States ex-
tending back to slavery. A movement for black freedom, deﬁned broadly,
she thought, would inevitably be a movement against economic exploita-
tion and the oppressive conditions faced by other groups within American
society as well. At least it had that potential. African Americans and, in a
complex variety of ways, other peoples of color were excluded from basic
access to the political process, marginalized socially, and super-exploited
economically for the better part of the twentieth century. If this contradic-
tion could not be confronted, Baker felt, there was no hope for American
society as a whole. More precisely, she felt that to push and challenge
political and economic leaders on this question would expose some of the
society’s fundamental ﬂaws and serve as an impetus for transformative
social change on multiple fronts.
An aging and irascible Virginia Durr, the legendary white civil rights
activist from Montgomery, once confronted me at a conference to remind
me that ‘‘Ella Baker didn’t just belong to black people.’’ She was right.
Baker’s work, inﬂuence, and political family extended well beyond the
conﬁnes of the African American community and the struggle against rac-
ism. She had strong ties to the more democratic tendencies within the
white left. She worked closely with the multiracial labor and cooperative
movements, while at the same time championing struggles against colo-
nialism and imperialism around the world.
Ella Baker was concerned with the plight of African Americans, but she
was also passionately committed to a broader humanitarian struggle for a
better world. Over the course of her life, she was involved in more than
thirty major political campaigns and organizations, addressing such issues


--- PAGE 29 ---
6 introduction
as the war in Vietnam, Puerto Rican independence, South African apart-
heid, political repression, prison conditions, poverty, unequal education,
and sexism. Still, because of who she was—a daughter of the Jim Crow
South and a granddaughter of slaves—and because of the political analysis
she formulated early in her career, which was centered on antiracist poli-
tics, Baker’s primary frame of reference was the African American experi-
ence and the struggle for black freedom.
Baker identiﬁed with and helped advance a political tradition that is rad-
ical, international, and democratic, with women at its center. She critiqued
black separatism as a narrow, dead-end strategy, yet she did not hesitate to
criticize the chauvinism and racism of white colleagues in multiracial coali-
tions all the while stressing the importance of black leadership. Her own
political ideology and worldview was a result of the cross-fertilization of the
vibrant black Baptist women’s movement of the early twentieth century, the
eclectic and international political culture of depression-era Harlem, and
the American tradition of democratic socialism—a variegated mix of north-
ern and southern, religious and secular, American and global, left and
liberal elements.
Ella Baker’s life gives us a sense of the connections and continuities that
link together a long tradition of African American resistance. Each inter-
generational organization she joined, each story she told, each lesson she
passed on was a part of the connective tissue that formed the body politic
of the Black Freedom Movement in the United States from the 1930s into
the 1980s. Following Baker’s path back through the years, trying to look at
national and world events from her vantage point, takes us to different sites
of struggle, opens up different windows of conversation, and pushes us into
different people’s lives than if we were to have someone else as our guide.
Finally, Ella Baker was a skilled grassroots organizer and an ‘‘organic’’
intellectual—one who learned lessons from the street more than from the
academy and who sought to understand the world in order to change it.
Many other activists looked to her, especially during the last half of her life,
for her strategic and analytical insights and guidance. Her radical, demo-
cratic, humanistic worldview, her conﬁdence in the wisdom of the black
poor, and her emphasis on the importance of group-centered, grassroots
leadership set her apart from most of her political contemporaries. Her
ideas and example inﬂuenced not only sncc in the 1960s, but also the
leaders of Students for a Democratic Society ( sds) and the embryonic
women’s movement of the late 1960s and the 1970s.
∞ Baker was a role
model and mentor for an entire generation of activists who came of age


--- PAGE 30 ---
introduction 7
politically in the 1960s. Within progressive circles, even those who did not
know her knew of her.
Ella Baker was a movement teacher who exempliﬁed a radical peda-
gogy, similar to that of Latin American educator and political organizer
Paulo Freire. She sought to empower those she taught and regarded learn-
ing as reciprocal. Baker’s message was that oppressed people, whatever
their level of formal education, had the ability to understand and interpret
the world around them, to see that world for what it was and to move to
transform it. Her primary public constituency was the dispossessed. She
viewed a democratic learning process and discourse as the cornerstone of a
democratic movement.
Ella Baker’s private life was as unconventional as her public one. For
example, many of her political colleagues never knew that she had, at one
time, been married. She deemphasized her married life, never took her
husband’s name, and traveled extensively over the course of her nearly
twenty-year marriage. Throughout the marriage, her principal passion was
politics; after her divorce, she was singularly devoted to her ﬁrst love.
Some aspects of Ella Baker’s private life remain a mystery, not because I
have not snooped and pried with the voyeuristic appetite of a private detec-
tive, but because she was so consciously and thoroughly discreet about
personal affairs and protective of her family and domestic life. One of my
chief frustrations as a biographer has been the difﬁculty of attempting to
follow the trail of a woman who, in many respects, tried not to leave one.
There is no memoir or diary, nor are there boxes of intimate personal
correspondence. What remains is, for the most part, her public voice and
presence as documented in over thirty archival and manuscript collections
of organizations and individuals across the country. Her own personal
papers, which chronicle only part of the story, are now deposited at the
Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture in Harlem. I have spent
untold hours pouring over the documents there. I have interviewed dozens
of people who knew her and tracked down letters, papers, and photo-
graphs in the most out-of-the-way places. Yet there is much we may never
know.
A part of interpreting and revisiting Ella Baker’s life has involved a series
of oral history interviews with friends, family members, and co-workers
who knew her over the years. These conversations gave me not only the
facts about Baker’s life but the feel of it as well. While these excavated
memories helped me add movement and ﬂuidity to otherwise still-life
snapshots of Baker, I also appreciate the limits of our recollective powers. I


--- PAGE 31 ---
8 introduction
have tried in every instance possible to ﬁnd more than one source to sub-
stantiate particular individual assertions. In other instances I have quali-
ﬁed those assertions as speculative or remembered. I also realize that writ-
ten documents can be misleading, so I do not mean to privilege them
without condition. All of the sources are used as pieces of a larger puzzle,
reinforced by other parts as they ﬁt or don’t ﬁt what is already known. In
addition to the recollections and observations of others, I have tried to tap
Ella Baker’s own words as much as possible. Even when speaking for her-
self, however, in the dozen or so interviews that have been preserved,
Baker is more often than not speaking with the beneﬁt and the blurred
vision of hindsight, years and in some cases decades after the fact. As
honest and straightforward a person as she was, and as lucid as she was
until the early 1980s, I cannot always afford to take her at her word. Memo-
ries fade, ideas change, and thus what we thought we felt or did at the time
is ﬁltered through the lens of our ongoing sense of ourselves. In recon-
structing her political views, however, I gave Ella Baker and myself greater
license than when reconstructing a series of events largely because I am as
concerned about where she ended up politically and philosophically as I
am with how she got there. Her conclusions and self-representation are
critical elements in summing up her life’s work and her ideas.
Psychologists have written about the complex ways in which public
individuals, especially women, demarcate the boundaries between public
and private lives as a form of psychological protection. Ella Baker guarded
her privacy. Her refusal to talk about certain aspects of her past, while
being wholly open about others, resembles ‘‘the culture of dissemblance’’
that historian Darlene Clark Hine talks about. In analyzing the silence
surrounding black women and rape, Hine writes: ‘‘By dissemblance I mean
the behavior and attitudes of black women that created the appearance of
openness and disclosure but actually shielded the truth of their inner lives
and selves from their oppressors.’’
≤ In the case of Ella Baker, the shield-
ing was from public view and scrutiny, not only from her oppressors,
but often from friends and colleagues as well. Shielding their private lives
from public view provided a margin of protection for black women of Ella
Baker’s generation, who were viliﬁed and stereotyped by whites and often
circumscribed to a limited sphere of activity by black men. According to her
friend Lenora Taitt-Magubane, Ella Baker never wanted to be ‘‘pigeon-
holed.’’ The less known about the complex person she was, perhaps the less
likely she was to be sized up and assigned an identity with narrow borders.
Bernice Johnson Reagon once observed that Baker was the ﬁrst woman she


--- PAGE 32 ---
introduction 9
met who would not allow a discussion of her marital status. This was liber-
ating for Reagon and other young women because they then felt personal
and romantic relationships could be left at the door when they went into a
meeting, which better enabled them to participate on their own terms
regardless of who they were or were not dating at the time. Hine concludes
that ‘‘a secret, undisclosed persona allowed the individual black woman to
function, to work effectively as a domestic in (sometimes hostile) white
households.’’
≥ I would add that it may have allowed Ella Baker and many of
her female counterparts to function more effectively—although not with-
out a psychological price—within predominately male civil rights leader-
ship circles. Still, all was not shielded from public view. And from literally
thousands of documents, articles, interviews, ﬂyers, letters, and FBI re-
ports emerges the story of Ella Baker’s amazing and incandescent life.
......
This biography surveys Ella Baker’s long and rich political career in an
effort to explain the unique political and intellectual contributions she
made to the movement for radical democratic change in America. Like
most biographies, it begins by exploring the familial and educational expe-
riences that were the foundation of her public political life. Baker’s child-
hood and schooling through college are covered in chapters 1 and 2. Ba-
ker’s well-read and deeply religious mother was her moral anchor in her
early years, providing her with intellectual training and a sense of social
responsibility that she would carry with her always. Her time in boarding
school and college at Shaw Academy and University in Raleigh, North
Carolina, was a period of intellectual and political growth. Baker had a
stellar academic career and organized her ﬁrst protest against what she
perceived as an unjust exercise of authority by college administrators.
Chapter 3 explores Ella Baker’s eye-opening cultural and political encoun-
ters in Harlem in the late 1920s and 1930s, a time when she secularized her
childhood values and embraced the radical democratic vision of social
change that she would modify and build on for the next half century. In
chapter 4 I survey Ella Baker’s six-year tenure as a part of the national staff
of the naacp from 1940 to 1946, ﬁrst as a ﬁeld secretary and then as the
national director of branches. During the intense period of World War II,
Ella Baker traveled throughout the mineﬁeld of the American South, orga-
nizing local branches, encouraging local leaders to be more active, and
building up a network of contacts that she would rely on for years to come.
In her capacity as the naacp’s director of branches, Baker sought to democ-
ratize the organization by empowering local and regional leaders and by


--- PAGE 33 ---
10 introduction
deemphasizing legal battles and giving more attention to grassroots strug-
gles. Chapter 5 focuses on Baker’s work concerning school reform and
police brutality in New York City in the 1950s; these struggles occurred
against the backdrop of mounting anticommunist and Cold War policies
and rhetoric. Baker herself had a curious and ambivalent relationship to
the communist question, one that evolved and changed over time.
The second half of the book deals with the period of the modern civil
rights and black power movements, the apex of Baker’s political sojourn.
Chapters 6 and 7 chronicle Ella Baker’s work with the sclc in the mid- to
late 1950s and speciﬁcally her concentrated work with the more active sclc
afﬁliates in Shreveport, Louisiana, and Birmingham, Alabama. Chapter 6
offers a perspective on Baker’s complicated and conﬂicted relationship
with Martin Luther King Jr. and the tensions between them, which re-
volved largely around their divergent views on leadership and organiza-
tion. Chapters 8 and 9 detail Baker’s pivotal role in the founding of sncc
and her capacity as mentor and adviser to the young activists of that group
from 1960 to 1966. Chapters 10 and 11 focus on sncc’s work in Mississippi in
the 1960s, her work with the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (mfdp)
and the rise of black power. Chapter 11 ends with a discussion of Ella
Baker’s political involvement in the 1970s and 1980s after the collapse of
sncc. During the ﬁnal years of her life, Ella Baker spoke out passionately
against political repression and in support of anticolonial struggles, most
notably in connection with the Free Angela Davis campaign and the Puerto
Rican Independista Movement. For several years she also lent her name
and her dwindling energies to an effort to create an independent third
political party to the left of the Democrats through the Mass Party Organiz-
ing Committee.
The book concludes, in chapter 12, by outlining Ella Baker’s political
philosophy as it relates to both historical and contemporary contexts, offer-
ing a living legacy to all of us who share her vision of a more just and
democratic society, not as an event in history but as an ongoing process
around which to organize our lives and work.
......
On Saturday, December 13, 1986, precisely eighty-three years to the day
after her birth, Ella Jo Baker died quietly in her sleep in the modest Harlem
apartment she had occupied off and on for nearly forty years. The end of
her life did not come as a surprise to those close to her. She had been sick
for some time, and her health had been spiraling downward rapidly in the
months preceding her death. But as natural and uneventful as her passage


--- PAGE 34 ---
introduction 11
may have seemed, it represented the end of a rich and inﬂuential political
career, and even the end of an era. Those who gathered to mourn her death
the following Friday symbolized in their diversity the breadth and depth of
Ella Baker’s inﬂuence on American politics for the better part of the twen-
tieth century.
It was a cold and rainy day in New York City and a week before Christ-
mas when the overﬂow crowd piled into Harlem’s historic Abyssinian Bap-
tist Church to remember and to celebrate a woman who had touched more
lives than she herself could have realized. Those who came to honor Ella
Baker wore fur coats, African prints, Islamic kuﬁs, and yarmulkes. They
were young with dreadlocks and elderly with graying temples and receding
hairlines. They were black and white and a myriad of shades in between,
men and women, rich and poor, those formally educated and those self
taught. Among those who gathered were politicians, religious leaders, en-
tertainers, and renowned scholars. Crowded in among the celebrities were
those whom Ella Baker sometimes referred to as the little people: people
without credentials or titles, but people she had valued and respected in
her life, and who now honored her in death. They were neighbors, local
merchants, and even those who didn’t know Ella Baker personally but
knew her enough by reputation that they came to pay their respects. This is
what Ella Baker had done for decades. If a child was born or if someone in
her extended family passed away, she found time to acknowledge the im-
portance of that singular life. Harlem activist Yuri Kochiyama, an intern-
ment camp survivor who was on the speaker’s platform with Malcolm X
when he was assassinated, remembered fondly Ella Baker’s kindness to-
ward her family when her son, Billy, died in 1975. Ella Baker did not know
Billy Kochiyama, really. He had gone to Mississippi in 1965 as an act of
solidarity with the growing Black Freedom Movement, and they crossed
paths brieﬂy. When he died tragically ten years later, Baker sent a telegram
and made a phone call to Billy’s parents to express her condolences. Yuri
Kochiyama, who had admired Baker from a distance, and met her only
once, treasured the gesture. Yuri Kochiyama in turn paid her respects that
rainy December day in Harlem.
∂
Throughout much of her life Ella Baker was a radical humanist and a
consummate coalition builder, connecting young and old, black and white,
neophytes and veterans, and staunch leftists and ambivalent moderates.
Gathered together in the Abyssinian church that day was the eclectic and
sometimes fractious group of people Baker had claimed as her political
family. Crowded shoulder to shoulder, they found their political differ-


--- PAGE 35 ---
12 introduction
ences receding in their shared admiration for a fallen comrade, sister,
teacher, and mother. Ardent nationalists, orthodox Marxists, establish-
ment politicians, and free-ﬂoating radicals—people with long-standing an-
tagonisms, some of whom hadn’t spoken to each other in years—mingled
in a slow common procession. Only Ella Baker could convene such a gather-
ing. There were touching moments that suggested her political children
had actually internalized her belief that in the end the politics are only as
important as the real human beings with and for whom we struggle. Stand-
ing at Baker’s graveside in the frigid December air, white activist Bob
Zellner found himself positioned between his two old friends, Jamil Al-
Amin (H. Rap Brown) and Kwame Ture (Stokely Carmichael): two men
who had come to symbolize ‘‘Black Power’’ and had been associated with
militant black nationalist rhetoric. There they stood, the three of them
together. Al-Amin draped his coat around the ill-clad Zellner, and Ture
quietly shared his umbrella. No words were exchanged.
The voice that echoed most powerfully through the cavernous church
where Ella Baker’s funeral was held was that of Bernice Johnson Reagon,
one of Ella Baker’s political daughters and founder of the black women’s a
cappella group Sweet Honey in the Rock. Her commanding voice drew
attention to every line of Ella Baker’s favorite movement song, ‘‘Guide My
Feet.’’ ‘‘Guide my feet, while I run this race, . . . because I don’t want to run
this race alone . . . because I don’t want to run this race in vain.’’ And Ella
Baker did neither. She ran long, she ran hard, and she ran with a diverse
assortment of folks over some ﬁfty years. Ella Baker did not represent any
single tendency of the American left or a particular wing of the Black
Freedom Movement; rather, she forged a hybrid political vision and an
inclusive style of democratic leadership. The long-term goal, for which she
admittedly had no blueprint, was simply a more democratic, egalitarian,
and humane world. Baker’s values and her deeply felt ideals guided her
feet over variegated and difﬁcult terrain. In the race, she was not a sprinter
but a long distance runner.
∑


--- PAGE 36 ---
1
now, who are your people?
norfolk, virginia, and littleton,
north carolina, 1903–1918
......
I was young when I became active in things and I became active in things
largely because my mother was very active in the ﬁeld of religion.
Ella Baker, 1979
Black Baptist women encouraged an aggressive womanhood that felt personal
responsibility to labor, no less than men, for the salvation of the world.
Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, 1993
In the early 1980s Paula Giddings, the writer and historian, went to Ella
Baker’s modest Harlem apartment to interview the legendary activist for a
book Giddings was writing on African American women’s history. At that
meeting Giddings had hoped to learn more about the half century of his-
tory Ella Baker had witnessed and helped shape: her role in the Works
Progress Administration and the cooperative movement in Harlem during
the 1930s; her dangerous organizing work for the naacp in the South dur-
ing the 1940s; her collaboration with and criticisms of Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. in the 1950s; and her pivotal role in the founding of the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee in the 1960s. A few minutes into the
visit, Giddings realized that the exchange she had hoped for was not to be.
Instead of responding to Giddings’s questions about the past, Baker kept
asking her a single question: ‘‘Now, who are your people?’’ Giddings regret-
fully concluded that, after all the battles Ella Baker had fought and won
over the course of her ﬁfty-year political career, she was losing the ﬁght
with Alzheimer’s and was no longer able to provide the information and
insights she sought. To Giddings, it seemed as if Baker were groping for a


--- PAGE 37 ---
14 now, who are your people?
cognitive anchor in the conversation.∞ Yet Baker’s desire to know and place
her visitor was characteristic of what had been important to her through-
out her life. The question ‘‘Now, who are your people?’’ symbolizes Baker’s
approach to life-history as well. Who one’s people were was important to
Ella Baker, not to establish an elite pedigree, but to locate an individual
as a part of a family, a community, a region, a culture, and a historical
period. Baker recognized that none of us are self-made men or women;
rather, we forge our identities within kinship networks, local communities,
and organizations.
Ella Baker’s family, her childhood experiences in Norfolk, Virginia, and
Littleton, North Carolina, and her secondary and college education at
Shaw University in Raleigh and her transformative political encounters in
Harlem during the Great Depression all contributed to her evolving iden-
tity as a woman, an activist, and an intellectual, and set the stage for the
years of political activism that would follow.
So, who were Ella Baker’s people? She was born on December 13, 1903,
in Norfolk, Virginia, and grew up from the age of seven in the small town of
Littleton, North Carolina. Ella Jo was the middle of three surviving chil-
dren; she had an older brother, Blake Curtis, and a younger sister, Maggie.
Her parents, Georgianna (Anna) Ross Baker and Blake Baker, raised their
children to be upstanding members of the rural community where they
themselves had grown up. Her maternal grandparents, Mitchell and Jose-
phine Elizabeth Ross, owned their own farm, and her grandfather was a
noted Baptist clergyman. Her paternal grandparents, Teema and Margaret
Baker, were landless tenant farmers.
≤ Both sets of grandparents had grown
up under slavery, and their differing educational and economic positions
reﬂected both the obstacles that faced freedmen and freedwomen and the
achievements of black families in the rural South after Reconstruction.
Baker’s parents attended secondary school and sought to better their posi-
tion, moving to the city of Norfolk in search of opportunity and then return-
ing to Littleton in search of security. Blake’s job as a waiter on a Norfolk
steamer line required him to travel, while Anna presided at home and
played a prominent role in the Baptist church.
During her childhood in Littleton, Ella Baker was nurtured, educated,
and challenged by a community of strong, hard-working, deeply religious
black people—most of them women—who celebrated their accomplish-
ments and recognized their class advantage, but who also pledged them-
selves to serve and uplift those less fortunate. Anna Ross Baker was the
single most inﬂuential force in Ella’s early life. Ella described her mother as


--- PAGE 38 ---
now, who are your people? 15
a stern and pious woman who believed in discipline almost as much as she
believed in God: ‘‘My mother was a . . . very positive and sort of aggressive
woman.’’
≥ Ella grew up in a female-centered household, surrounded by a
community of Christian women actively engaged in uplifting their families
and communities. These women were as much concerned with enlighten-
ing the mind as they were with saving the soul. At a statewide convention
of Baptist women, the local group to which Anna belonged urged members
to ‘‘do all in our power to foster education.’’
∂ Trained as a teacher herself,
Anna instructed all three of her own children in grammar, writing, and
speech before they entered school.
For Anna Ross Baker’s daughters, it was important to be ladylike as
well as to be learned. Female respectability was coveted and cultivated by
middle-class black women of her generation. Ella and her sister, Maggie,
were tutored in etiquette, proper grooming, and deportment. They were
expected to conform to conventional standards of female respectability as
they pursued their studies and practiced their religion. At the same time
that Baker was encouraged to strive to be exceptional, she was also con-
stantly reminded that humility and service to others were Christian virtues
incumbent upon those who enjoyed academic opportunities and middle-
class status. In the early-twentieth-century South, women like Anna and
Ella were imbued with the conviction that their relative privilege carried
with it a fundamental obligation to work for the improvement of their race
and, especially, to better the condition of the many women and children
who were denied such advantages.
The Ross-Baker family belonged to that stratum of black people who
saw themselves as representatives of the race to the white world and as role
models for those less fortunate within the black community. To borrow
the historian Glenda Gilmore’s term, they were the ‘‘best men’’ and ‘‘best
women.’’
∑ Many black people who occupied positions of some class ad-
vantage received what the historian Stephanie Shaw has called a ‘‘mixed
message—rendering a person part of and apart from the group.’’
∏ Ella Jo
Baker’s life is marked by the working-out of this paradoxical position: she
drew on the strengths of her childhood community, rejected the strictures
of middle-class womanhood and the dominant ideologies of her society,
and afﬁliated herself with the poor black people whom she saw as the most
oppressed and the most able to transform the world through collective
action. Formed by who her people were when she was a child, Ella Baker
ultimately chose her own people. In the years after she left North Carolina,
Ella Baker embraced some aspects of her early socialization and rejected


--- PAGE 39 ---
16 now, who are your people?
others, yet she carried vivid memories of her childhood with her and rein-
terpreted their meaning as she grew and changed. To understand the com-
plex social environment that nurtured Baker’s early social conscience and
her evolving identity as a woman, an intellectual, and a political activist,
this chapter and the next explore central themes in her childhood and
education. These themes include the central role of religion in women’s
sense of self and in their mission in the world; intraregional southern
migration in search of economic opportunity and to escape Jim Crow in its
most virulent, urban form; the importance of language and education; and
the multiple meanings of family and community. The chapter takes up
these themes that Ella Jo Baker encountered and interprets them in rela-
tion to her development, but it does not present them entirely from her
point of view. Rather, the facts of her life are set in historical context, and
the way in which Baker remembered the past is sometimes juxtaposed with
my own historical perspective.
......
spreading the faith and uplifting the race
Religion, speciﬁcally black southern Baptist religion, was a major force in
Anna Ross Baker’s life, and consequently it became a major force in Ella
Baker’s life. ‘‘I was young when I became active in things and I became
active in things largely because my mother was very active in the ﬁeld of
religion,’’ Baker reﬂected at the age of seventy-ﬁve.
π Anna’s strong belief in
God went hand in hand with her conviction that faith must be translated
into deeds. At a statewide convention of her Baptist women’s group, she
admonished others to ‘‘let Christ take the ﬁrst place in your vocation and
life. Inquire of the Lord what he would have us do. Let us stay on the job for
Christ.’’
∫ In a more general sense, the church was one of the social and
ideological bedrocks of the rural southern black community in which Ella
Baker grew up. Religion was important to her family in particular, and it
was a deﬁning feature of the community and culture of which they were a
part. According to Eric Anderson, a historian of North Carolina, in the Sec-
ond Congressional District, which included Littleton, ‘‘Protestant Chris-
tianity . . . permeated the district, touching people’s lives more steadily
than any other institution. . . . The very pervasiveness of religion obscured
its boundaries with politics, society, and work.’’
Ω
The Baker children were deeply immersed in the black Baptist tradition.
Although Ella and her two siblings were never required to attend church
services more than once a week, as many other devout southern Baptist


--- PAGE 40 ---
now, who are your people? 17
families were accustomed to doing, they were drawn into the wider reli-
gious world in which the Ross family played an active leadership role. ∞≠
Anna’s family was so religious that all of her six brothers were named after
Christ’s disciples: Luke, Mark, John, Peter, Paul, and Matthew.
∞∞ Ella’s
uncle Luke was president of the Warren County Sunday School Associa-
tion, and her maternal grandfather, Mitchell Ross, served as a minister.
∞≤
Ella and her siblings frequently accompanied their mother to local and
regional missionary meetings. ‘‘My mother was an ardent church worker . . .
and the women had developed a state conference and [they] had regular
meetings, and I had been to all these kinds of things,’’ Baker recalled.
∞≥
Ella actually participated in the programs on several occasions, reciting
poems and reading from biblical texts. These auxiliary associations had
been formed, Baker explained, in order for ‘‘the women . . . to be able to
have some identity of their own.’’
∞∂ At these meetings she observed not
simply ritualistic expressions of faith but also the business of applying
religious principles, particularly the principle of Christian charity, in the
real world. The missionary association sponsored an orphanage, aided the
sick and elderly, funded scholarships for black college students, and pro-
vided aid to local, church-afﬁliated grammar schools.
∞∑ Ella witnessed this
important work being organized and carried out by conﬁdent, competent,
and committed African American women. These women’s groups operated
with a considerable amount of autonomy. Women conducted their own
meetings, managed their ﬁnances, and made policy decisions. Many mem-
bers drew their daughters into these activities, Baker recalled; ‘‘they also
would carry their young who could articulate.’’
∞∏ These women’s collective
example of strength and activism had a profound effect on Ella Baker.
Anna Ross Baker and her sisters in the church preached and practiced an
activist, woman-centered faith, which was similar to the Social Gospel
doctrine being espoused by white Protestant denominations around the
same time.
∞π Although they were predominately middle class and imbued
with a maternalist, missionary objective to ‘‘Christianize’’ their less fortu-
nate brethren and sistren, these devout black Baptist women were more
than elitist charity workers. Through home visits and reading groups called
‘‘Bible bands,’’ they forged personal, cross-class relationships with the poor
and illiterate members of their communities. They did not conﬁne their
work to prayerful study and community service; they extended their mis-
sion to secular affairs, advocating antilynching legislation, crusading for
temperance, and challenging segregation. Theirs was an activist religion
that urged women to act as positive agents for change in the world.
∞∫


--- PAGE 41 ---
18 now, who are your people?
Ella Baker’s mother was a part of a generation of educated southern
black women who, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
began actively to assert themselves as a group to be reckoned with inside
the black Baptist Church. The National (Black Baptist) Woman’s Conven-
tion, formed in 1900, reﬂected the consolidation of local and regional
efforts by black Baptist women, many of them missionaries, to play a more
active role in the life of their church and community. The North Carolina
Convention, to which Anna Ross Baker belonged, was afﬁliated with the
Woman’s National Convention and sent two delegates to its annual meet-
ings.
∞Ω According to the historian Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, their col-
lective mission and worldview constituted a type of feminist theology, one
that ‘‘challenged the ‘silent helpmate’ image of women’s church work and
set out to convince the men that women were equally obliged to advance
not only their race and denomination, but themselves. . . . Within a female-
centered context, they accentuated the image of woman as saving force,
rather than woman as victim. They rejected a model of womanhood that
was fragile and passive, just as they deplored a type preoccupied with
fashion, gossip, or self-indulgence. They argued that women held the key
to social transformation.’’
≤≠ This description ﬁts Anna Ross Baker perfectly.
Ella Baker’s mother was intimately involved in this movement; she iden-
tiﬁed with its activist, woman-centered philosophy and strove to instill in
her daughters the desire to mold themselves in the images of strong, intel-
ligent, and socially engaged black women. Ella deeply admired her moth-
er’s fortitude and compassion. Years later, in the secular context of the
political and civil rights organizations with which she worked, she emu-
lated her mother’s example of zealous and selﬂess service on behalf of
those victimized by injustice and social inequity, albeit in a different lan-
guage and with expanded political objectives.
The southern black Baptist women’s missionary movement embodied
the ‘‘lift as we climb’’ approach to community service, as did the National
Association of Colored Women’s Clubs founded in 1896.
≤∞ As some mem-
bers of the race excelled and progressed, it was their duty to help others
along and to contribute to the welfare of those less able and fortunate than
themselves. This responsibility to serve the community was derived as
much from a sense of class distinction as from a sense of moral duty. Yet for
African American women the relationship between class status and moral
obligation was a reciprocal one; indeed, staunch religious faith and selﬂess
service to others was one way in which a woman and her family could
attain a respectable, even elevated position within the community. Embed-


--- PAGE 42 ---
now, who are your people? 19
ded in uplift ideology was a certain degree of elitism, along with a sense of
class prerogative on the part of middle-class blacks who felt they should act
as race ambassadors toward white society and as moral police and social
workers inside the black community.
≤≤
Elitism coexisted with a commitment to equality, so black women’s or-
ganizations could support cross-class relationships as well as reinforce
class distinctions. While Anna Ross Baker’s sisters in the church saw them-
selves as distinct from ordinary black folk, they rejected elitism in their
rhetoric.
≤≥ Leaders of the black Baptist women’s movement often railed
against individuals for whom charity work was an avocation rather than a
vocation. Nannie Helen Burroughs, a leader of the black women’s conven-
tion movement, condemned the socialite who ‘‘smoothes her well-gloved
hand while she studies the ‘wonderfully interesting slum problem’ as a
diversion.’’
≤∂ Instead, they embraced the masses of less fortunate black
people and made sacriﬁces, both material and personal, in order to provide
assistance. Missionary women who were advocates of temperance, mod-
esty, and propriety also embraced the principle of providing aid to the
downtrodden, irrespective of their status, their sins, or their inadequacies.
This was a concept that Ella Baker accepted, internalized, and carried with
her for the rest of her life.
The women’s missionary movement stressed the importance of hands-
on service to those in need; their approach was one of active intervention.
This orientation was consistent with the ethos of mutual aid that had
shaped black communities since slavery and Reconstruction. Ella Baker
remembered her mother being called upon late at night to come to the
aid of other members of the community: ‘‘Mama was always responding to
the sick.’’
≤∑ According to the mores of the southern black Baptist women’s
movement, the duty to help others was serious, immediate, and practical.
Anna Ross Baker exempliﬁed that view.
The value that Baker’s mother placed on concrete service to others is
illustrated in two stories that Ella Baker later told about her childhood. The
Powell family rented a farmhouse on land that Baker’s family owned in
Littleton. The mother had died, and the father was too overwhelmed and
impoverished to care for the children properly. So it was Ella’s respon-
sibility to visit the children’s home regularly, bathe them, comb their hair,
and bring their dirty clothes back for her mother to wash.
≤∏ This hands-on
approach to service required an intimate identiﬁcation with those being
served. In the second story, those who suffered were regarded as neighbors
even though they lived on the other side of town. Ella was restless, curious,


--- PAGE 43 ---
20 now, who are your people?
and a bit of a wanderer, so she often drifted far from home despite her
mother’s disapproval. On one such roaming adventure Ella encountered
Mandy Bunk, whose parents were mentally ill and who lived in squalid
conditions on the outskirts of Littleton. As Ella was walking past the Bunks’
house, she noticed that Mandy was standing on her porch bleeding. Ella
went home immediately and retrieved her mother to help: ‘‘She needed
medical attention. So what do you do? I mean, she was a person. You
couldn’t just pass by her and say, ‘oh, that’s just Mandy Bunk, you see, who
also raised her pig in one room and herself in the other room.’ You don’t do
that.’’
≤π The lesson Ella Baker took from these experiences was that the
poor and afﬂicted were not a caste of contaminated or contaminating
‘‘untouchables.’’ They were not some reiﬁed and depraved ‘‘other,’’ but
rather an extension of self, a concept she articulated quite eloquently in
later years.
While black Baptist missionary women at the turn of the century de-
fended their place in the public sphere and in the work of the church, they
accepted and valued women’s primary roles as mothers, homemakers, and
wives.
≤∫ Like other women’s groups, black women’s organizations some-
times described their public, political work as an extension of their role in
the household. One piece of literature declared metaphorically: ‘‘The task
of our Baptist women is like a housewife, a hard piece of work. We are
to continue humming until the Lord says ‘enough done.’ ’’
≤Ω For southern
black women, this perspective was more than a justiﬁcation of their public
role; it was also an expression of the extent to which family, kinship, and
community overlapped in African American society. Ties of extended fam-
ily and ﬁctive kinship helped bond Ella Baker’s childhood community to-
gether and shaped her family’s interdependent relationship with a larger
network of neighbors and friends. Collective parenting was a common-
place practice. Ella’s mother did not hesitate to feed, clothe, and discipline
other people’s children when the need arose. And Ella’s aunt Eliza unof-
ﬁcially adopted and raised several children who were not biologically her
own but were in need of parenting.
≥≠ This practice is an example of what
Patricia Hill Collins, a feminist sociologist, describes as the African Ameri-
can concept of ‘‘other mothers,’’ whereby a child is nurtured by female
relatives or neighbors when the child’s biological parents cannot do so.
≥∞
According to Baker, family was deﬁned broadly rather than narrowly. She
‘‘had a family who placed a very high value on people. We were the kind of
family that was not just my mother and her brood, but if somebody came by
who needed something, you got something.’’
≥≤


--- PAGE 44 ---
now, who are your people? 21
Ella Baker’s most enduring image of her mother was as an unbending
tower of strength. Anna Ross Baker was very conscious of presenting herself
as a ‘‘lady’’—poised, graceful, and precise in her speech—but ladylike be-
havior did not mean feigning weakness or frailty. It meant, instead, assert-
ing and defending her dignity. In a 1974 interview, Baker described her
mother as a ‘‘feminist.’’
≥≥ Five years later, she remarked that her mother
‘‘would have been very much at home leading a feminist movement,’’ and
she described Anna Ross Baker as a ﬁrm, authoritative person who com-
manded respect from those around her.
≥∂ In many references to her mother,
Baker stressed that she was a ‘‘precise-spoken’’ woman with a large ‘‘ego.’’≥∑
In using the term ‘‘ego,’’ Baker did not appear to suggest that her mother
was self-centered or vain. Rather, she was strong, determined, and un-
wavering in her self-conﬁdence. She carried herself with dignity and self-
respect and insisted that others treat her in a similar manner. One story
Baker told epitomizes her mother’s attitude. Once, when a white salesman
came to the Bakers’ door and, in a paternalistic gesture that was common in
those days, referred to Anna Ross Baker as ‘‘aintie,’’ she sharply corrected
him, pointing out that they were certainly not related. ‘‘I didn’t know my
brother had a son like you,’’ she snapped.
≥∏ As far as Ella Baker could
remember, her mother showed no deference to white authority and very
little deference to male authority. Baker’s mother was the strong-willed
disciplinarian of the family who did not mince her words or tolerate dis-
respect from her children. Her father was quiet and nurturing, a reversal of
conventional gender attributes.
≥π
Another inﬂuential female role model for Ella Baker during her child-
hood in North Carolina was her maternal grandmother. Josephine Eliza-
beth Ross, called Bet for short, was a rebellious spirit who, despite a very
arduous life, lived to be nearly ninety-six years old. Ella Josephine Baker,
called Ella Jo for short, was her grandmother’s namesake. Baker recalled
being told that her maternal grandmother, who had been born into slavery,
was named after two queens, Josephine and Elizabeth. Baker remembered
her grandma Bet as a feisty, fun-loving person who always enjoyed the
company of children and was ever ready to engage her grandchildren in a
game of catch ball or a lively discussion. This demeanor was in contrast to
Ella Baker’s mother, who was always very sober and serious.
≥∫
According to Ross family lore, as a slave Bet had actively resisted at-
tempts by her owners to deny her autonomy as a person and speciﬁcally as
a woman. She was herself the product of an illicit sexual encounter be-
tween a master and one of his young female slaves. Indeed, Bet’s mother


--- PAGE 45 ---
22 now, who are your people?
was allegedly poisoned by the master’s wife because she was jealous of the
liaison that had taken place between her husband and his slave, of which
the young Bet was a constant reminder.
≥Ω The sexual violation of enslaved
black women by white men, which was often repeated from one generation
to the next, was a central fact of American slavery. How enslaved women
and their kin responded to and remembered such acts is deeply revealing of
their stance toward personhood and womanhood. As the story was passed
down in the Ross family, Bet was raised by her own grandmother. When
she was old enough to go to work, she was assigned to the master’s house,
where her duties would be less physically grueling than the ﬁeld work
performed by the majority of the slaves. However, Bet’s life was hardly
devoid of the oppressive conditions faced by her darker-skinned counter-
parts in the ﬁeld. One speciﬁc event illustrates her vulnerability and the
fact that, even though she was the master’s biological child, she was ﬁrst
and foremost a slave. According to Ella Baker, ‘‘[W]hen she [Bet] was of
marriageable age, . . . the mistress wanted to have her married to a man
whom we knew as Uncle Carter. . . . And she didn’t like Carter. And so when
she refused to concur with the wishes of the mistress, the mistress ordered
her whipped, but the master, who was still her father, refused to have her
whipped. . . . But he did put her out on the farm and she even had to
plow . . . she would plow all day and dance all night. She was deﬁant.’’
∂≠
After she refused to marry Carter, Bet chose Mitchell Ross instead. Even
under the abject conditions of slavery, Bet pushed against the will of her
slave mistress and master to deﬁne her own humanity. She took great pride
in retelling this story to her grandchildren.
Bet Ross shared many stories with her grandchildren. Baker remem-
bered her grandmother’s powerful tales of the suffering and struggle she
had witnessed over her long life. She was a ‘‘raconteur,’’ Baker recalled,
‘‘recounting what took place during her period of slavery.’’
∂∞ The tales of
slavery and Reconstruction passed down by the Ross and Baker families
instilled in the young Ella the value of personal and political resistance and
impressed on her the fact that chattel slavery was not ancient history but a
mere generation away. What Baker remembered about her grandmother’s
stories was not the brutality and degradation of enslavement but the re-
sistance and the triumphs.
∂≤ Although the Ross and Baker families at-
tempted to shelter their children from the harsh realities of racism that
surrounded them, they did not deny or attempt to conceal the more brutal
aspects of the past. Instead, they passed on stories of deﬁance in the de-
fense of dignity. What was instilled in young Ella Baker by the family’s


--- PAGE 46 ---
now, who are your people? 23
storytelling tradition was not only that she was the descendant of slaves;
but that she came from a long line of militant ﬁghters.
......
the promise and perils of life in norfolk
Blake Baker and Anna Ross were married in 1896,∂≥ the same year that the
Supreme Court’s historic Plessy v. Ferguson  decision upheld the constitu-
tionality of racial segregation and enshrined the ‘‘separate but equal’’ justi-
ﬁcation for Jim Crow. In the wake of this decision, color lines were drawn
in what many thought was indelible ink, inscribed by a battery of local
ordinances and regulations that penetrated virtually every aspect of life. In
1903, the year of Ella Baker’s birth, the scholar-activist W. E. B. Du Bois
wrote, ‘‘[T]he problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the
color-line.’’
∂∂ Ella Baker’s parents began their married life at the nadir of
race relations in the post-Reconstruction South, and they raised their chil-
dren amid the harsh realities of segregation, political disenfranchisement,
and racist violence.
Both of Ella Baker’s parents were natives of eastern North Carolina. The
Rosses lived in Elams, a riverside community just outside Littleton, and
the Bakers lived in the nearby county seat of Warrenton.
∂∑ Blake and Anna
met in secondary school in Warrenton, struck up a friendship, and began
to court. Although both came from large families, were the offspring of
former slaves, and were the eldest son and daughter in their respective
families, their backgrounds were otherwise quite different. Blake’s parents
were illiterate and landless,
∂∏ while Anna’s parents were literate land-
owners.
Blake and Anna were ambitious for themselves and for their children.
They dreamed of a better life than white Americans thought they, or their
children, deserved. They studied, worked hard, relocated, and endured
painful separations in order to realize a small part of that dream. They
were by no means members of the ‘‘black bourgeoisie,’’ a group that the
sociologist E. Franklin Frazier characterized as coveting their privilege and
distancing themselves from the mass of ordinary black folk.
∂π But the Ba-
kers were not poor either. They persisted in their optimism, despite an
often bleak social climate, that they would make some progress in their
own lives and beneﬁt the race in the process. To a certain extent, they
did both.
As the agricultural base of the South shrank in the early 1900s, tens of
thousands of African Americans migrated from farms to cities, leaving


--- PAGE 47 ---
24 now, who are your people?
behind their plows and hoes for jobs as Pullman porters, service workers,
and domestic servants. Ella Baker’s parents were among them. Like many
others from eastern North Carolina, both black and white, the Bakers
migrated to the bustling port city of Norfolk, Virginia, because it was the
nearest ‘‘big’’ city to their home, with a population of over 50,000 in 1900.
∂∫
By the turn of the twentieth century, the city had become the heart of
commercial activity in the region. ‘‘With a deep harbor and a strategic
location at the conﬂuence of the Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Ocean,
the city’s fortunes as a commercial center were on the rise’’ after the Civil
War. Between 1880 and 1900, capital investment increased tenfold, and the
labor force quintupled. Hundreds of trains and boats passed through Nor-
folk’s harbor and along its roadways, transporting cotton, coal, and other
commodities from the South to the markets and manufacturing centers of
the North. Many of those who came to work in the city were African Ameri-
can. The city’s black population had risen to nearly 46 percent by 1870.
∂Ω
Norfolk was a place very much in ﬂux when Blake and Anna Baker
arrived. The racial politics of the city were undergoing a dynamic transfor-
mation as the economy boomed and its population grew. Norfolk was a
mecca for new migrants because of its vital commercial base and many
employment opportunities. However, for black residents, what may have
looked like a promised land from afar looked quite different close up.
Norfolk’s neighborhoods became increasingly segregated, and the black
and white communities became more polarized and insular. Three factors
made the climate in the city more difﬁcult for blacks after the turn of the
twentieth century: the imposition of a strict system of Jim Crow segrega-
tion; the move toward black disenfranchisement in the wake of Recon-
struction; and dramatic incidents of racist vigilante violence.
Between 1890 and 1910, according to historian Earl Lewis, ‘‘Jim Crow
society slowly enveloped daily life.’’ City ordinances mandating the segre-
gation of public accommodations were passed one after another, circum-
scribing and even eliminating black residents’ access to public facilities.
For example, a 1906 ordinance enforced segregated seating on city street-
cars.
∑≠ Imposing the new Jim Crow laws and extracting the subservience
they demanded from black men and women in Norfolk was not an easy
task. A 1910 newspaper headline read, ‘‘Judge Fines Insolent Negro $25’’ for
‘‘insulting’’ a white woman on a public bus. City ordinances required blacks
to defer to whites in all aspects of public life, and humiliating treatment
was routinely meted out to those who resisted.
∑∞ None of these develop-


--- PAGE 48 ---
now, who are your people? 25
ments was unique to Norfolk; the city’s policies paralleled the evolution of
racial politics throughout the South in this period.∑≤
White Norfolkians also took steps to minimize black political participa-
tion. The 1901–02 Virginia state convention passed an ‘‘understanding
clause,’’ which required that voters prove their understanding of the Consti-
tution as a condition of suffrage and that prospective voters pay a poll tax.
Both measures were designed to limit the black electorate, and they did. In
1901, 1,826 African Americans voted in Norfolk. By 1904 the number was
down to 504, and by 1910 only forty-four blacks paid the tax required to
vote. Moreover, between 1904 and 1908 white reformers eliminated the
city’s ward system, which weakened the voting base of black politicians and
effectively eliminated African American candidates from local politics.
∑≥
The physical exclusion and political marginalization of African Ameri-
cans in Norfolk was underwritten by frequent public incidents of antiblack
mob violence. Race riots were quite common in southern cities; Atlanta
and Charleston also experienced major riots during the ﬁrst decade of the
twentieth century. Norfolk experienced its worst race riot in 1910, when
whites randomly attacked black residents as retribution for the victory of
the black prizeﬁghter, Jack Johnson, over a white contender.
During that Fourth of July weekend, while some of Norfolk’s white
citizens celebrated the ideals of freedom and independence, its African
American residents feared for their lives. Incensed by the black heavy-
weight boxer’s triumph, enraged whites took to the streets to vent their
anger and indignation and reafﬁrm by collective violence the sense of
white superiority that had been lost in the ring. Blacks were pulled from
streetcars and beaten mercilessly. Others were chased down alleyways
and pummeled by jeering crowds. Most of the trouble was apparently
initiated by white sailors whose ships were docked in the Norfolk harbor.
Local newspapers reported that ‘‘every boat brought fresh batches of sailor-
men looking for trouble. Negroes were being attacked and mauled every-
where.’’ The riot left forty people injured and over 200 in jail. Similar
outbreaks of antiblack violence occurred in several other cities in the wake
of the Johnson victory.
∑∂
The Baker family moved to Norfolk in search of economic opportunity,
as did many other African Americans from rural areas, and they witnessed
the increasingly violent efforts that white residents made to maintain
white supremacy in the city as its black population swelled. Blake Baker
moved to Norfolk in about 1895, a year before he and Anna were married.


--- PAGE 49 ---
26 now, who are your people?
As was the pattern with many black migrant families, one person went
ahead to secure a job and a place to live before sending for the rest of the
family. Blake initially found a job as a boatman and got a room in a house at
85 St. Paul Street.
∑∑ Two of Anna’s brothers, Peter and Matthew, also mi-
grated to Norfolk around the same time. Matthew and Blake moved in
together, sharing a small house at 102 Scott Street, around the corner from
where Blake had lived the year before.
∑∏ Peter set out on his own and
eventually established a successful dairy farm just outside town.∑π Within a
few years, Blake was able to ﬁnd a better paying job as a waiter on a
steamship run by one of the many steamship companies based in Norfolk.
He earned a decent wage and enjoyed what was, at the time, considered a
relatively comfortable standard of living. The only disadvantage of the job
was that Blake had to be out of town several nights a week as the steamer
shuttled back and forth between Norfolk and Washington, D.C.
Blake and Anna were wed in 1896. She left her teaching job and her
family in North Carolina and moved to Norfolk to settle down with her new
husband in the small house on Scott Street. The neighbors were a diverse
group of black Norfolkians. With the exception of the white grocer down
the block and a few other white-owned small businesses, the entire com-
munity was black. The people who lived in the Baker family’s neighbor-
hood included Mr. Jordan, a barber who lived two doors down; Nelson
Darden, a longshoreman; Joe Stokes, a carpenter; and Mr. Petty, a shoe-
maker. Norfolk was a growing community, and between 1897 and 1900
several new houses were constructed on the Bakers’ block.
∑∫
Starting a family was not easy for the Bakers; the three children who
survived infancy were born over a period of seven years. Anna experienced
at least two unsuccessful pregnancies before the birth of Ella’s older
brother, Blake Curtis, on December 23, 1901. Two Decembers later, Ella
Josephine arrived. A second son, Prince, died in infancy when Ella was
about three. Anna had at least two other unsuccessful pregnancies, ending
in miscarriage or stillbirth, over the years. The Bakers’ youngest child,
Margaret Odessa (Maggie), was born in 1908.
By 1910, the growing family had moved into a bigger house, which they
rented, on the corner of Lee and O’Keefe Streets.
∑Ω This neighborhood,
where Ella lived until the age of seven and which she remembered most
vividly, was a newly developed, ‘‘colored’’ section of town called Hunters-
ville. Most of her neighbors there were educated and owned their own
property. They were skilled workers, professionals, and small entrepre-
neurs.
∏≠ There was also a concentration of maritime workers, like Ella


--- PAGE 50 ---
now, who are your people? 27
Baker’s father, who worked as porters and waiters for various shipping
companies based in the port city. Baker remembered Huntersville as a
more middle-class neighborhood than the older section of town where the
family had previously lived.
∏∞
One neighbor in particular made a strong impression on young Ella
Baker. Known as ‘‘the Black Money King,’’ he was probably Dennis Alston, a
North Carolinian who, like Ella’s parents, had relocated to Norfolk.
∏≤ Baker
remembered him as a digniﬁed man who was very dark-skinned and was
coincidentally one of the most prosperous African Americans in town. ‘‘He
was a very proud and very well-groomed man, [with] sharp features. I
guess he struck me as a Zulu might, a strong, tall type.’’
∏≥ This combination
of qualities had great appeal to Ella Baker.
One day while young Ella was swinging on her front gate, as was her
habit, she saw the impressive Mr. Alston passing by, and they began to chat.
A friendly, assertive, and precocious child, Ella was always looking for a
good conversation. She described herself in retrospect as ‘‘one of these
talking children . . . one who insisted on being able to talk to people.’’
∏∂ And
she liked talking to Dennis Alston. She liked him so much she decided to
ask him to become her godfather, even though her family was devoutly
Baptist and he was not. He reminded her of her beloved grandfather,
Mitchell Ross, who had recently died. Like her grandfather, ‘‘he prided
himself on being black.’’
∏∑ Later Baker likened Alston to the regal African
statesman Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya. ∏∏ Ella Baker’s adoration of Alston’s
dark complexion suggests a type of black pride that seems to have been
typical in her family. This appreciation for African characteristics is signiﬁ-
cant because at that time a disproportionate number of well-to-do blacks
were light-skinned, and in some circles light skin and straight hair were
celebrated as marks of superiority and beauty. Ella’s notion of beauty was
clearly different.
When Alston approached Ella Baker’s mother regarding the possibility
of her becoming his godchild, Anna was not impressed with Alston’s good
looks or regal demeanor. She was outraged that a Presbyterian would ask a
Baptist to change denominations. Becoming Alston’s goddaughter would
have meant that Ella would be baptized, and the practice of baptizing
infants and children violated Anna’s religious convictions. Her response
bespoke her pride and was a reﬂection of what Ella repeatedly referred to
as her mother’s ‘‘ego.’’ Anna told Alston in no uncertain terms that her own
father ‘‘would turn over in righteous indignation in his grave if he thought
that any of his children or his children’s children had gone from the Baptist


--- PAGE 51 ---
28 now, who are your people?
Church to the Presbyterian.’’ Baker described this kind of response as char-
acteristic of her mother: ‘‘You see, her ego was just as great as his, as the
man who wanted me as his god-child but [wanted me] christened in his
church.’’
∏π Anna Ross Baker was a woman of strong opinions who did not
hesitate to express those views. Her eldest daughter displayed this very
same trait as she matured. Throughout her childhood, Ella observed her
mother carry herself with dignity and a strong sense of self-conﬁdence in
her interactions with blacks and whites alike.
Anna Ross Baker’s strength and determination notwithstanding, the
years in Norfolk were not easy ones for the Baker family. Blake was away
from home a lot, and Anna missed North Carolina. The ﬁve tragic losses of
children that Ella’s parents experienced took their toll, both physically and
emotionally. One of the saddest events in Ella’s youth was the death of her
infant brother, Prince. ‘‘This was the ﬁrst death I knew of in the family,’’
Baker later recalled. ‘‘I remembered it in particular because my father was
the only one who went to wherever the internment was taking place. And it
was a carriage, and I was very eager to be in the carriage, but they didn’t
permit me to go.’’
∏∫ Anna Ross Baker suffered from a respiratory ailment,
most likely chronic bronchitis, which grew worse during the family’s years
in Virginia. Ella herself was not always healthy either. When she was about
six years old, she was afﬂicted with typhoid fever and suffered a long and
difﬁcult recovery.
∏Ω
Anna Ross Baker never felt quite at home in the city. Baker recalled: ‘‘My
mother didn’t like Norfolk.’’ π≠ Even with a steady stream of guests visiting
from North Carolina, she was still homesick. Most summers, Anna would
take the children back to North Carolina for an extended vacation lasting
several months, and they would return to Norfolk in the fall.
π∞ This sea-
sonal shuttle between city and country was typical of many recent mi-
grants; it reﬂected their ambivalent feelings about leaving behind the calm
pace, familiarity, and sense of community associated with rural and small-
town life for the hectic impersonalism of the city. The same ties of kinship
and friendship that brought blacks to the city to settle or just to visit also
took them back to the country, where their ‘‘people’’ were an anchor and
support in times of personal tragedy and illness, as well as during economic
difﬁculties and vigilante violence.
Anna did not work outside the house after she moved to Norfolk, which
may have intensiﬁed her sense of isolation. Baker recalled that her mother
did not even consider resuming her teaching career, largely because Blake
did not want her to. Like many men of his generation, black and white, he


--- PAGE 52 ---
now, who are your people? 29
wanted to feel that he could provide for his family without his wife having
to work.π≤ African American men not only accepted the prevailing notion
that breadwinning was central to masculinity but also worried about the
insults their wives might encounter in working for whites. While it was not
socially acceptable for middle-class women to go out to work, most black
families needed the income that married women’s employment could pro-
vide. So it was acceptable for wives to take in boarders as a way to supple-
ment the family income. And this is what Anna did. Boarders were a con-
stant presence in the Baker home. Keeping boarders added signiﬁcantly to
Anna’s burden of household labor at a time when she was often unwell and
occupied with the care of young children.
In 1910 the Baker family—with the signiﬁcant exception of Ella’s father—
packed up and moved back to North Carolina. There were at least three
reasons for the family’s decision, one explicit and two implicit. Anna Ross
Baker was determined that the children receive the best education avail-
able to them, a reason for the move that she communicated clearly to Ella.
The 1910 race riot not only jeopardized the immediate security of black
people but also signaled their increasingly bleak prospects in Norfolk; al-
though Baker never discussed the race riot, it may have ﬁgured in her
parents’ decision. Third, the family was drawn back to North Carolina by
continuing ties of obligation to kinfolk at home, which became more press-
ing after the death of Mitchell Ross. Blake Baker kept his job on the steam-
ship line that sailed out of Norfolk, so he visited his family when he could on
weekends and holidays.
Anna Ross Baker was critical of the schooling available to black children
in Norfolk, and she felt that her own native state could provide her chil-
dren with a better education and a richer cultural experience.
π≥ Educa-
tion was an especially signiﬁcant arena of contest in the Jim Crow South,
as African Americans’ academic opportunities were increasingly limited
by white elites’ determination to conﬁne blacks to menial, manual jobs.
Anna’s father, Mitchell Ross, had taught himself to read and had instilled in
his children the importance of education as a stepping stone to social
advancement. Anna’s training and experience as a teacher meant that she
had high standards for what education should provide. Curtis and Ella
enrolled in public school in Norfolk, and Ella was in ﬁrst grade by the time
the family moved. In 1910 Norfolk had some thirty-eight public schools,
eight of them designated for colored children of all ages.
π∂ There is no
evidence to suggest that Norfolk’s public schools were any better or worse
than schools in North Carolina. Comments Baker made later in life, how-


--- PAGE 53 ---
30 now, who are your people?
ever, suggest that her mother felt more comfortable with the grammar
school in Littleton because she knew the teachers and the principal and
therefore had greater conﬁdence in her ability to oversee her children’s
education.
The second likely reason for the family’s move back to North Carolina
was the racial violence that increasingly plagued Norfolk during the early
twentieth century. In her recollections of the family’s years in the city,
Baker never mentioned the 1910 race riot. It is unclear whether any mem-
bers of Ella’s family were directly affected by the riot, but some of their
friends and neighbors certainly were. Much of the rioting took place in
downtown Norfolk at the streetcar depot, where black shipyard workers
congregated to catch the trolley back to their homes after work. It is fair to
assume that some of Blake’s co-workers witnessed or were victims of the
violence. Everyone was aware of the race riot, even if they were not person-
ally involved and did not live in the affected neighborhoods. The mayhem
and bloodshed were headline news in Norfolk papers for over a week.
π∑
Since Anna and the children customarily spent their summers in North
Carolina, they may not have been in the city when the riot took place, but
the adults in the family were surely well aware of the violence. With Blake
away from home so often, even the conﬁdent and capable Anna Baker may
have felt vulnerable.
The death of Mitchell Ross, Ella Baker’s maternal grandfather, around
1909 was also a likely factor in the family’s move back to Littleton. Anna’s
elderly mother, Bet, was living alone. In the Ross family, as with many
southern farm families, black and white, there was a serious set of inter-
generational obligations. It is likely that, as the eldest daughter, Anna felt a
duty to be closer to her mother.
......
coming home to littleton
Ella Baker’s parents navigated the treacherous terrain of the American
South in the early 1900s in search of the best possible life and fullest range
of opportunities for themselves and their children. The family’s move to
Littleton meant a greater physical and emotional distance between the
children and their father. Blake visited the family on holidays, and Anna
would occasionally pack up the children, mainly Ella and Maggie, and
make the trek back to Norfolk to spend a few days with Blake.
π∏ The
children did not see much of their paternal grandparents, Teema and Mar-


--- PAGE 54 ---
now, who are your people? 31
garet Baker, because they lived over a day’s ride away, and Teema Baker
died when Ella was still quite young.
Ella Baker’s mother and maternal relatives were the main adult inﬂu-
ences in her life after the family came home to Littleton. They moved into a
house owned by one of Anna Ross Baker’s sisters, who had recently moved
to Philadelphia, and were closely connected with other members of the
Ross family. This was a woman-centered world. Ella Baker had vivid child-
hood memories about growing up with her mother, her maternal grand-
mother, and her aunts.
ππ In the small towns of Littleton and Elams, which
was just across the river, Ella Jo Baker’s maternal relatives were pillars of
the black community. The Rosses were not wealthy people, but they were
better off than most. Anna was one of a dozen siblings, and her circle of
extended kin was even larger. Mitchell Ross, the reigning patriarch of the
family until his death, had been a prominent Baptist minister and farmer
in Elams.
On January 24, 1888, Mitchell Ross and several of his male relatives
were able to realize the dream shared by black freedpeople throughout the
South in the wake of emancipation: they purchased their own land. With it
they purchased a greater margin of self-respect, independence, and social
mobility for their children and grandchildren. It was a memorable day in
the Ross family’s history when Mitchell Ross made the ﬁnal installment of
the $250 he had contracted to pay for a ﬁfty-acre plot of land, which was
most likely a portion of the plantation he had once lived on as a slave.
π∫
Two of his relatives, Everett and Plummer Ross, made similar purchases of
smaller, adjacent plots as a part of the disposition of the estate of William
D. Elams, the landowner who may have been the Rosses’ former master.
These transactions occurred nearly twenty years before Ella Baker was
born, but the story remained an integral part of her family’s oral tradition
for many decades. Ella Baker was still recounting a version of it nearly a
hundred years later.
πΩ The land was a great source of family pride. Baker
sent home a portion of her ﬁrst paycheck after she moved to New York to
pay off back taxes and to keep the land from being sold.
∫≠
Over the years, the Rosses became successful independent farmers, es-
caping the trap of sharecropping that ensnared so many others. They grew
cotton, wheat, and corn and raised chickens and cattle. Their farms pro-
vided them with a certain degree of insulation from the ﬂuctuations in the
economy, since they were always assured of having food on the table. In
recollecting her frequent visits to her grandfather’s farm when she was a


--- PAGE 55 ---
32 now, who are your people?
young child, Baker remarked that he ‘‘had developed an orchard, . . . and
he had lots of cattle, . . . [and] a big garden.’’ ∫∞ Land ownership also of-
fered a bulwark against the very real possibility of economic reprisals from
whites, a constant threat faced by black tenant farmers and sharecroppers.
Although Mitchell Ross’s children and grandchildren occasionally worked
on the land, picking cotton and tending to the livestock, his main objective
was that they secure an education. Formal schooling was a luxury the
Rosses, unlike many of their less fortunate counterparts, could afford.
∫≤
The school that Ella Baker and her siblings attended in Littleton was a
two-room grammar school attached to the South Street Baptist Church and
run by Mr. Lonzie (Alonzo) Weaver.
∫≥ Weaver was a stern disciplinarian
who led the children in daily prayers and insisted on strict adherence to
school rules and regulations. Although Weaver was clearly in charge, the
two teachers were women: Bertha Palmer, who moved from Warrenton to
Littleton to teach there, and Susie Grundy, a Littleton native. Church funds
helped to establish the school, which was free to those who attended.
∫∂
One of Baker’s fondest memories of her schooling in Littleton was playing
on the school baseball team. She reminisced: ‘‘I would rather play baseball
than to eat . . . we had a mixed team of boys and girls, some much big-
ger than I, and I played baseball at recess. I’d take my lunch with me and
eat it on the way to school, rather than bother with having to eat during
lunch time.’’
∫∑
Ella, Curtis, and Maggie attended Lonzie Weaver’s modest school for
several years until Ella, apparently the most academically oriented of the
three children, was sent away to Shaw boarding school in Raleigh in 1918.
Curtis enrolled in Greensboro Agricultural and Technical College, and
Maggie went away brieﬂy to another, less prestigious, boarding school.
∫∏
‘‘Maggie was the wild one,’’ the more frivolous and fun-loving of the two
sisters, recalled Maude Solomon, a girlhood friend of Maggie’s.
∫π Ella was
serious and studious. Maggie eventually dropped out of school, while Ella
went on to earn her college degree with honors.
The fact that Ella Baker and her siblings attended school year-round and
went on to secondary school and even college was in stark contrast to the
experiences of many of their peers who were the sons and daughters of
impoverished sharecroppers. Jenny Newell, one of Ella’s childhood class-
mates in Littleton, remembered that ‘‘we went to school when we could, but
papa was on somebody else’s land so we had to work the ﬁelds when he
needed us. . . . Ella Jo [Ella Baker’s nickname] and them went to school


--- PAGE 56 ---
now, who are your people? 33
regular though, and their mama taught them at home too.’’ ∫∫ Plantation
owners discouraged and, in some cases, forbade black farmers and their
children from obtaining an education. The system of debt peonage that
bound so many black peasants depended on their illiteracy, since share-
cropping contracts and accounting were often fraudulent.
∫Ω For tenant
farmers’ children, such as Jenny Newell, economic necessity meant that
work was a higher priority than schooling. Ella Baker was well aware that
‘‘the tenant farmer class . . . were bound more or less by what their owner
needed and if it was cotton picking time, the children picked cotton.’’
Ω≠
Most black youths were not able to go to high school, not to mention col-
lege. The Ross children and grandchildren enjoyed exceptional advantages.
Ella Baker’s family was characterized by a certain ﬂexibility in gender
dynamics, male and female roles, and masculine and feminine attributes.
Although domestic responsibility and childcare fell largely on her mother
and wage-earning fell primarily on her father, her parents did not exhibit
or inculcate the behaviors and attitudes conventionally associated with
males and females. This ﬂuidity may have contributed to Ella Baker’s own
construction of a gender identity that was less than conventional.
As children, Ella and her older brother, Curtis, did not conform to the
expectations that were commonly held for boys and girls. Ella was always
more aggressive and adventuresome. Baker described her brother as ‘‘thin,
tall, and not too combative, whereas I was the opposite as far as being
combative.’’
Ω∞ The way Baker remembered her childhood role and persona,
she was a tomboy who stood up to playground bullies and defended her shy
and timid older brother when she had to. Baker proudly described herself
as a tough little kid who rarely backed down from a ﬁght: ‘‘I wasn’t big
enough to challenge anybody, but I never ran.’’ She added, ‘‘I was neither
girl nor boy in certain ways.’’
Ω≤
Although Blake Baker was the main income-earner and discouraged his
wife from continuing her work as a teacher, Anna was an equal decision-
maker and authority ﬁgure in the family. In fact, some of the key decisions
about the family seem to have been made primarily by Anna, in particular
the decision to return to North Carolina for the sake of the children’s
schooling. Moreover, given Blake’s virtual absence from the household for
most of the year, she was the principal disciplinarian as well.
Ω≥ Baker de-
scribed her mother as having ‘‘a sort of matriarchal approach to young
people or to anybody because she was very positive. She didn’t do much
playing with you.’’ She described her father, in contrast, as mild-mannered


--- PAGE 57 ---
34 now, who are your people?
and tolerant.Ω∂ ‘‘He didn’t insist on too many things, because after all he
wasn’t home except on every other day,’’ she recalled. He must have been
even less of a presence once the family moved back to Littleton.Ω∑
At the same time that Ella Baker admired her mother’s strength and her
father’s gentleness, she had a clear sense of the constraints placed on her
mother because she was a woman. Ella seemed determined not to succumb
to the burdens and limitations women suffered as a result of their sex. In
Baker’s retrospective view, her mother was an able and talented woman
who had suppressed her own personal ambitions because of her domestic
responsibilities and the sexism she encountered in society. In recounting
her mother’s life story, Baker observed: ‘‘She was a very bright woman . . .
and at the time, of course, that she came along, there were only certain
things that women, especially black women, could do . . . and so she
taught . . . she never worked after she married. And then of course children
started coming.’’
Ω∏ Ella Baker was intent on not following the same path.
She refused to teach, declined to have children, and opted for a rather
unconventional marriage. Perhaps Baker’s lack of interest in having chil-
dren had to do, in part, with her mother’s painful experience. Anna was
pregnant eight times, suffered four miscarriages or stillbirths, and lost one
child in infancy.
Ωπ For many women of her generation, pregnancy and
childbirth were painful and dangerous.
It is possible that Ella’s memories of her mother’s painful losses and
unrealized ambitions dimmed any romantic notions of motherhood and
marriage she might otherwise have harbored. When asked why she never
had children of her own, she confessed: ‘‘I wasn’t interested, really, in
having children, per se.’’
Ω∫ Reﬂecting with regret on her mother’s unful-
ﬁlled aspirations, Baker remarked: ‘‘Had she not been female, she probably
would have gone on into something else. But the time was not yet right for
being female and not married . . . and so she married and I came along.’’
ΩΩ
Baker herself never fully conformed to the dominant society’s prescrip-
tion for what a woman, especially a black woman, ought to be. In conver-
sations and interviews, she often downplayed gender issues, yet in her
personal and political life she consciously violated most of the social con-
ventions that dictated proper feminine behavior. Although she married
during the 1930s, she did not center her life around her husband. While she
never sought the limelight in political organizations and criticized many of
her male colleagues who did, she also refused to play the role of the silent
helper to the prominent male leaders with whom she was associated, from
Walter White in the naacp during the 1940s to Martin Luther King in the


--- PAGE 58 ---
now, who are your people? 35
Southern Christian Leadership Conference during the 1950s. Ella Baker
was an assertive, outspoken woman of strong opinions. These traits some-
times made her male colleagues uncomfortable, but they would have made
Anna Ross Baker quite proud.
......
class and community
Ella Baker developed a special relationship with her maternal grandfather,
Mitchell Ross, during her extended summer visits to the family farm in
North Carolina while she was still living in Norfolk. Although he died when
she was about six or seven, just before the family returned home, his
inﬂuence continued, both because of the close bond they had developed
and because of his enduring imprint on the Ross-Baker family’s position in
the church and community. Mitchell Ross became a great source of inspira-
tion in Baker’s life.
A prominent Baptist minister in Warren County, Ross often traveled to
nearby communities to deliver guest sermons, and sometimes he served
several churches at once. His inﬂuence and reputation extended beyond
his immediate congregation. Ella was his favorite grandchild. She would
often travel with Reverend Ross in his horse-drawn buggy, and she was
sometimes allowed to sit in a deacon’s chair behind the pulpit while her
grandfather preached, a practice that the more socially conservative Anna
Ross Baker thought entirely inappropriate for a young child.
∞≠≠ But the
precocious little girl beamed at the elevated status she temporarily en-
joyed. Ella also liked hearing her grandfather preach. Ross’s preaching
style distinguished him from many other southern black Baptist preach-
ers of his era. According to Baker, he discouraged his congregation from
‘‘screaming and shouting’’ during his religious services. ‘‘My grandfather
didn’t care too much for noise in the church . . . [T]he story goes that if they
began to do a lot of shouting and throwing their arms, he’d call them by
name and tell them to sit down and keep quiet. And if they didn’t, then he
had his sons . . . go and take them up and sit them outside the church, let
them cool off.’’
∞≠∞ This practice may have reﬂected Ross’s disdain for the
loud and lively expressions of religious enthusiasm commonly associated
with poor and uneducated blacks, as well as his emphasis on the substan-
tive content of the sermon. Ella Baker viewed her grandfather’s preaching
style as a more genuine mode of conveying moral teachings than the drama
and theatrics that many popular black Baptist ministers employed. Mitch-
ell Ross had a special affection for young Ella. Perhaps he saw a bit of


--- PAGE 59 ---
36 now, who are your people?
himself in this articulate and willful child, who was insatiably curious,
always spoke her mind, and never backed down from a ﬁght. Although she
was no more than seven, he referred to her as the ‘‘grand lady.’’
∞≠≤ For the
rest of her life, she strove to live up to his grand expectations.
An independent, hard-working farmer and devout preacher of the Gos-
pel, Ross was a recognized community leader who was reputed to have
been active in Reconstruction-era politics in North Carolina. He was an
ardent proponent of equal rights and black suffrage and was sometimes
called on to defend those convictions, both verbally and physically. Ella
described her grandfather as a ‘‘man who had the nerve to ﬁght back . . .
and he identiﬁed with the struggles of his people. The thing that was
passed on was not subservience. It was always ﬁghting back. It was said
that when [black people] went up to register to vote . . . if they [white
segregationists] interfered, he and his sons would go up and stand by the
folks if necessary. . . . This is what fed the lifeline of our family.’’
∞≠≥ Baker
took pride in her grandfather’s defense of black citizenship, just as she took
pride in her grandmother’s deﬁance of her owners’ attempts to violate her
autonomy while she was enslaved.
Mitchell Ross rejected many of the cultural practices that reminded him
of the humiliation and degradation of slavery. Baker said that ‘‘he did not
believe in eating certain things that he had eaten during slavery. He could
not eat cornbread as such . . . and he wouldn’t let his wife force the children
to eat cornbread [either].’’
∞≠∂ In this respect, as with his preaching style,
Ross seemed to disassociate himself from many popular black cultural
traditions as an afﬁrmation of pride and a symbol of his own social prog-
ress. Ross clearly had compassion for the mass of poor black people. How-
ever, as is the case with many poor people who achieve a modicum of
success, there is a dialectic of afﬁnity and distance relative to whom and
what they have left behind. These tensions reﬂect Ross’s status as a leader
who was part of the people and at the same time apart from the people;
indeed, he may have viewed himself and been perceived by his kinfolk as
slightly above the people. Ella Baker seems never to have acknowledged
these contradictions in the position of her grandfather, whom she loved
without reservation.
Mitchell and Bet Ross continued to ﬁght the injustices faced by black
freedpeople just as they had resisted, on the very same terrain, the indig-
nities of slavery. The personal and economic choices they made in the post-
Reconstruction years demonstrate their commitment to the community.
For example, the Rosses never regarded the land they purchased in 1888 as


--- PAGE 60 ---
now, who are your people? 37
private property in the strict sense of the term. They viewed it not only as
a resource for the economic well-being of their immediate family but also
as a source of stability for the entire community. Land could serve as a
weapon in the struggle against the white planters’ attempts to dominate
and control the African American population. According to Baker, one of
the ﬁrst schools for Negro children in the Littleton-Elams area after Eman-
cipation was built on land that Mitchell and Bet Ross donated for that
purpose. A small parcel of the land was allocated to the Roanoke Chapel,
which became an important black religious institution in Elams.
∞≠∑ County
records show that in 1888 Bet and Mitchell Ross donated a parcel of land to
the Roanoke Chapel Baptist Church, some of which may have been desig-
nated for the building of a church school for black children from the sur-
rounding area.
∞≠∏ During hard economic times, the Ross family felt called
on to make even greater sacriﬁces. Land not only represented capital but
could also serve as collateral. Baker recalled that the family farm was
mortgaged more than once during the late nineteenth century, and the
money the family borrowed was used to help feed other families in the
community who were less fortunate than the Rosses. There is no evidence
to corroborate Baker’s recollections of the aid her family provided to neigh-
bors; such acts were not written down in public or church records, however
deeply they were inscribed in the memories of both donors and recipients.
But county records do show that the Ross family’s land was mortgaged
twice, in 1889 and 1890.
∞≠π
Cooperation, the sharing of resources, and a strong community spirit
were fundamental values among African Americans. Ella Baker’s extended
family was part of a larger network of black farmers in Warren County,
North Carolina, who emphasized self-help and mutual aid as strategies for
survival and the betterment of the race. The cooperative ethos that perme-
ated Baker’s childhood was deeply implicated in prevailing notions of fam-
ily and community; it connoted groups of individuals banding together
around shared interests and promoting a sense of reciprocal obligation, not
of individualism and competition.
∞≠∫ For example, African American farm-
ers exchanged goods, services, and other resources among themselves.
Expensive farm equipment was purchased collectively or used commu-
nally; Baker remembered a wheat-threshing machine being used cooper-
atively. ‘‘There was a deep sense of community that prevailed in this little
neck of the woods,’’ she once observed. ‘‘It wasn’t a town, it was just people.
And each of them had their twenty-, thirty-, forty-, ﬁfty-acre farms, and if
there were emergencies, the farmer next to you would share in something


--- PAGE 61 ---
38 now, who are your people?
to meet that emergency. For instance, . . . if there was a thresher around,
you didn’t have each person having his own. So you came to my farm and
threshed.’’
∞≠Ω Baker retained positive memories of the cooperative spirit
evident in Littleton and Elams.
As an adult, Baker said that the socialist principle—to each according to
need, from each according to ability—was very much in operation in her
childhood community. She ‘‘grew up out of more or less kind of a Socialistic
bit of thinking . . . [but it was] not called such.’’
∞∞≠ The sociologist Charles
Payne argues that much of Baker’s political work in her later years was an
attempt to rekindle and recapture some of the communal values and feel-
ings of group solidarity that she so fondly remembered from her childhood
in North Carolina.
∞∞∞ But this is more a reﬂection of Baker’s values as she
looked back than a reﬂection of the values that fully characterized her
childhood community. By all indications, members of the Ross family were
fair-minded people with a great deal of compassion for others. Yet Baker’s
recollections do not account for the very real class differences that existed
within the black community itself. The cooperative farming practices she
described so vividly were self-help strategies that could only be employed
by those who shared the advantage of land ownership. This network of
mutual aid did not encompass the majority of blacks, who were bound to
the land as tenant farmers. Although poor black tenants’ struggle for sur-
vival also led them to adopt a cooperative ethos, they faced much greater
obstacles with fewer material resources than landowning families like the
Rosses did.
Ella Baker’s childhood perceptions of her hometown community were
also shaped by its distinct demographic and political history. The towns of
Littleton and Elams were situated in the historic Second Congressional
District of eastern North Carolina. From the 1870s, when the state’s con-
gressional districts were reconﬁgured, until the early 1900s, when most
black citizens were disenfranchised, the Second District was referred to
contemptuously by white southern Democrats as the ‘‘Black Second’’ be-
cause it was one of the few congressional districts in the nation with a
majority-black electorate. Warren County, where the Rosses and Bakers
lived, was considered the ‘‘blackest’’ county in the district; African Ameri-
cans made up nearly 70 percent of the population.
∞∞≤ The formation of the
district in 1872 was the work of racist southern Democrats who gained
control of the state legislature in 1870 and moved to isolate black Republi-
cans by lumping a large number of them in one congressional district,
hoping to insure Democratic victories in the remaining districts of the


--- PAGE 62 ---
now, who are your people? 39
state. As a result, the Second District was a Republican stronghold for most
of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.∞∞≥ The black electorate
of the Second District wielded considerable political power, especially rela-
tive to their counterparts in other parts of the state.
The young Ella Baker beneﬁted from a social climate in which the adults
in her immediate circle, in spite of the racism in the larger society, were
able to function on a daily basis with a certain margin of conﬁdent self-
determination. Her childhood memories, for the most part, are devoid of
images of enforced black subservience: of the humiliating gestures of def-
erence exacted from southern blacks in the form of bowed heads and ‘‘yes
ma’am’’ and ‘‘yes sir’’ in the presence of whites. Instead, Baker recalled a
community of proud black people, a number of whom were educated prop-
erty owners actively engaged in local and state politics. These impressions
shaped Ella’s assumptions about racial equality and boosted her conﬁdence
in herself and black people in general. While Baker’s recollections of life in
Littleton were not representative of the experiences of the majority of black
people, they left powerful impressions in her own mind and therefore
contributed concretely to the formation of her social conscience.
Taken as a whole, the childhood memories that Ella Baker shared with
interviewers later in life characterize Littleton as a rather idyllic southern
town. Her most salient memory of racial conﬂict during her childhood
involved a young white boy who dared to call her ‘‘nigger’’ when she was
walking through downtown Norfolk with her father at Christmastime. She
turned around and began punching the boy before her father could inter-
vene. In Littleton, a white sheriff ’s son who made the mistake of hurling a
racial epithet her way was also made to regret the error. Ella threw rocks at
the boy and chased him off her street. Baker rarely mentioned speciﬁc,
personal encounters with racism during her early childhood, in contrast to
her vivid and accurate recollections of many other childhood events.
∞∞∂
Baker herself concluded that her parents had successfully protected her
from the brunt of southern racism: ‘‘The manner in which we lived shel-
tered us from the bad aspects of race.’’
∞∞∑ This protection created a space
within which Ella Baker’s self-esteem and conﬁdence could ﬂourish. Her
parents had fashioned a life for their children that allowed them to avoid
routine contact with whites. Baker recalled: ‘‘We did not come in contact
with whites too much. . . . I was shielded from having contact with them at
an early age. . . . This was a complete black community to a large extent.
Even the store on the corner, it was Mr. Foreman’s store, he was black. Even
the ice cream store was owned by Mr. Evans. . . . So, this is the kind of


--- PAGE 63 ---
40 now, who are your people?
insulation that was provided by the black people themselves . . . you didn’t
have to run afoul of a lot of insults.’’∞∞∏ The Bakers’ residence in an all-black
neighborhood with black-owned stores insulated the children from racism
in their daily lives.
Although most black families endeavored to protect their children from
the humiliation of racial epithets and second-class treatment by whites,
few could afford the luxury. Most black children in the early twentieth
century had to work for wages as ﬁeld hands or domestics; so contact with
whites could hardly be avoided. Ella Baker’s grandfather had insisted that
his children and grandchildren not work for white people;
∞∞π they worked
with and under the supervision of their parents and other family members.
The Ross-Baker family could afford to keep their young people at home,
providing them another layer of insulation from racism.
When ‘‘whites only’’ signs began to pollute Norfolk’s public space and
increasing racial violence threatened blacks’ physical and psychological
well-being, Anna Ross Baker collected up her children and ﬂed home to her
own people. In the black middle-class section of Littleton, Ella and her
siblings must have been aware of racism, but their daily lives and formative
identities were not strongly shaped by it. Their mother saw to that. The
children read, played music, participated in church programs, and vig-
orously pursued their studies at home and at school. Their contact with
whites was limited, and most of those in their circle of close friends and
extended family were educated and relatively comfortable materially.
The majority of blacks in Littleton were not as protected from the impact
of racial subordination as the Ross-Baker children were. In Littleton, as in
many other small towns throughout the South, black subservience to white
authority was enforced through legislation, intimidation, and force. Anti-
black violence, although not on the same scale as the urban riots of the day,
was a long-standing feature of the racial order and political tradition of
eastern North Carolina. In his study of racial terror in the North Carolina
Piedmont region during Reconstruction, Paul Escott indicates that, while
Warren County was not one of the hardest-hit areas, Alamance and Caswell
Counties, only short distances away, were the scenes of hundreds of acts of
vigilante violence during the mid- to late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries.
∞∞∫ It is likely that on a day-to-day basis race relations in Littleton
were quite civil—as long as African Americans stayed in their place, kept
their distance, and did not violate the established conventions of white
supremacy.


--- PAGE 64 ---
now, who are your people? 41
Whites praised those whom they perceived as the ‘‘good Negroes’’ of
Littleton. In 1892, the local newspaper made this comment about Henry P.
Cheatham, the ‘‘Black Second’s’’ black congressman: ‘‘He is a polite gentle-
man and is thought well of by everybody. Some of our colored citizens
should take pattern after him. We wish we could speak as complimentary
of all of his color who hold federal ofﬁces in this state.’’
∞∞Ω Those colored cit-
izens who were not as ‘‘gentlemanly’’ as Mr. Cheatham met with a very dif-
ferent response. In a lengthy syndicated column reprinted in a local Lit-
tleton paper, one writer defended lynching as a necessary bulwark against
what he perceived as widespread black lawlessness.
∞≤≠
In 1897, the Littleton paper described an incident in which two black
men approached the house of Captain J. W. Dempsey, presumably a cap-
tain in the former Confederate army, and asked his wife for food. She
turned them away, and when Mr. Dempsey heard of this ‘‘outrage,’’ he
chased the two men down and beat them both with the butt of his riﬂe. The
paper recounts the incident as if Dempsey were a hero and his actions
perfectly justiﬁed. The article concludes: ‘‘They [the two Negro men] had
been convinced [by Dempsey’s actions] that it was un-gentlemanly and was
not permissible to visit a lady in her home, insult her and demand food.’’
∞≤∞
This incident and the report published in the newspaper reﬂects the way in
which white racism was inﬂected by sexuality; any interracial encounter,
especially involving a black man and a white woman, was regarded as a
speciﬁcally sexual violation of racial boundaries, and white men’s reactions
were potentially explosive. If black men overstepped the limits of the defer-
ential behavior whites expected, they were targeted for violent retribution.
Race was not the only dividing line in Littleton. Although a strong web
of interdependent relationships bound the African American community
together, it was by no means a homogeneous community free of class ten-
sions. Baker’s recollections on this score deny any internal conﬂict among
blacks arising from class distinctions: ‘‘Where we lived there was no sense
of hierarchy in terms of those who have, having the right to look down
upon . . . those who didn’t have,’’ she once commented.
∞≤≤ By other ac-
counts, however, there were palpable class differences between the haves
and have-nots in her hometown. Families who lived on East End Avenue,
the main residential street, were generally thought to be better off than the
majority of townspeople. East End Avenue is a small, narrow street by
contemporary standards and remains unpaved to this day, but then it was
considered a prestigious address. About 1911, Ella Baker’s family rented a


--- PAGE 65 ---
42 now, who are your people?
big white house on East End Avenue, with a large, inviting front porch and
a pecan tree in the front yard. Their neighbors included the Brown, Davis,
Hill, and Hawkins families.
∞≤≥
Baker recognized that her closest neighbors, as well as her own family,
enjoyed a higher socioeconomic status than most of their black contempo-
raries. She explained:
There was this section where we lived where the blacks, our neighbors,
each had their own place. Next to us was the Reverend Mr. Hawkins,
who in addition to being a minister was a bricklayer. And [other] men
were artisans, like brick plastering and so forth. And somebody else was
a carpenter. So you had at that time an intermixture. All of the heads
of the families and their wives who lived in the section we called East
End were at least literate. They had been to school somewhere, and
many of them had been to what might have been considered college or
an academy.
∞≤∂
Like their neighbors, the Bakers ‘‘lived in a six-room two-story house . . .
[with] a dining room, and dining room furniture, and silver.’’∞≤∑ The sound
of the children playing the piano and the sight of Ella’s mother reading in
the living room were well-understood signs of their middle-class status.
∞≤∏
The view from the other side of town was strikingly different. ‘‘They
were big-shot Negroes,’’ recalled Maude Solomon; ‘‘some of them were so
biggity they didn’t want their wives to go and work for the white folks like
the rest of us.’’ Solomon saw her own situation in stark contrast to that of
the Ross-Baker clan and their East End Avenue neighbors. She was born
out of wedlock and lived with her mother in a small, two-room house on
Ferguson Street, in a run-down section of town.
∞≤π The Baker children
were clearly among the ‘‘haves’’ of Littleton’s black community, and Maude
Solomon was one of the ‘‘have-nots.’’ As a child, Ella must have perceived
this class difference and the social distance it involved, even though her
parents and grandparents did not dwell on the advantages that distin-
guished them from other black people.
Relationships among African Americans of different socioeconomic
classes in early-twentieth-century Littleton were not static mirror images of
class relations in the dominant white society. Despite visible differences in
wealth, status, and consciousness, the black community was not sharply
polarized along class lines. Living on the poor side of town did not prevent
Maude Solomon from becoming friends with Maggie. Baker’s childhood
experiences encompassed the dual class realities that characterized most


--- PAGE 66 ---
now, who are your people? 43
African Americans’ lives during the early twentieth century. On the one
hand, there was a clear distinction between the small, elite group of edu-
cated black artisans and landowners and the majority of blacks, who were
illiterate or semiliterate, landless, and relatively impoverished.
∞≤∫ On the
other hand, the two groups generally lived in close proximity and were
linked together in their day-to-day activities and by their shared condition
of racial oppression.
Ella Baker’s family and friends straddled this class divide. While the
Ross-Baker children and their Ross relatives enjoyed certain class privi-
leges, Ella was constantly reminded that others did not share their good
fortune. Members of her extended family, as well as her schoolmates and
neighbors, suffered the brunt of economic hardship. And those people
were almost as much a part of Ella’s life and consciousness as were her
more afﬂuent friends and relatives. ‘‘I’ve been identiﬁed over a long period
of time with people, a lot of whom had nothing,’’ Baker recalled, ‘‘although
in terms of my immediate family, we have never lived out in the streets.’’
∞≤Ω
Most people on Blake Baker’s side of the family were uneducated and
relatively poor. In a social context in which land and literacy were the two
most signiﬁcant determinants of class status, Ella Baker’s paternal grand-
parents were clearly at the bottom of the socioeconomic hierarchy. Her
father’s name was a tacit symbol of his own proximity to slavery days. He
was named after his father’s former master, Blake Baker, a prominent
North Carolina planter and Confederate war veteran. County estate rec-
ords that list Teema as an item of property in the inventory of the white
Blake Baker’s estate are a chilling reminder of the circumstances of bond-
age from which Ella Baker’s family had emerged.
∞≥≠ Even though Ella did
not spend much time with her father’s family, they were still very much a
part of her consciousness and her sense of family heritage. Baker was well
aware that she was only two generations removed from slavery and only
one generation removed from the poverty and illiteracy that trapped so
many southern blacks. All of these factors helped to mold Ella Baker’s
sense of morality, justice, and social obligation.
......
Ella Baker’s class privilege and the way in which her parents conceptual-
ized the meaning of that privilege were key factors in shaping her class
analysis of society and her model for political leadership within movements
for social change. Baker’s family internalized and inculcated the notion
that from those to whom much is given, much is expected. Moreover, as
good Christians steeped in the African American tradition of mutual aid,


--- PAGE 67 ---
44 now, who are your people?
they felt that because they had been ‘‘blessed’’ with good fortune they were
obliged to reach out to those who were less successful and provide assis-
tance when and where they could. In Baker’s words: ‘‘Your relationship to
human beings was more important than your relationship to the amount of
money you made.’’
∞≥∞ Her family emphasized the importance of sharing
what they had with others. Baker’s recollections move from sharing food to
other forms of solidarity: ‘‘[My family was] never hungry. They could share
their food with people. So, you shared your lives with people.’’
∞≥≤ To Ella
Baker, this became a matter of moral obligation. A certain degree of elitism
remained within her parents’ and maternal grandparents’ ethos of Chris-
tian charity. Implicit in this philosophy is the idea that the disadvantaged
are not fully capable of helping themselves. Ella Baker later rejected this
assumption outright, as she came to see what she described as the hidden
inner strength within people and communities that on the surface ap-
peared to be without resources or recourse.
Baker’s parents’ and maternal grandparents’ sense of community ser-
vice seems to have been based on the contradictory notions of duty to and
distinction from the masses of the black poor. The characteristics of which
the Ross-Baker family were most proud were not those things that linked
them to the majority of their fellow African Americans; they took pride,
instead, in what most set them apart: land ownership, education, and
Mitchell Ross’s ministerial work. They were landowners at a time when
tenant farming trapped most southern blacks in economic conditions that
resembled slavery. They were literate and educated when most were not.
Their style of religious worship, under Ella’s grandfather’s tutelage, con-
sciously distinguished them from the ‘‘screaming and shouting’’ of most
black Christians.
∞≥≥ This is not to suggest that members of the Ross-Baker
family were not genuine in the help they provided to their disadvantaged
neighbors, or that they had different criteria for success than most of their
contemporaries. But their class consciousness nonetheless stands in clear
contrast to the radical egalitarianism that Ella Baker embraced in her work
and life, and that contrast underscores the evolution that occurred in her
own thinking over time.
As she matured personally and politically, Ella Jo Baker departed from
her family’s characteristic posture vis-à-vis the poor and downtrodden. She
eventually adopted the notion that the more privileged, educated, and
articulate members of the African American community were not only
duty-bound to come to the aid of their less fortunate brothers and sisters,
but also had to humble themselves in order to create the social space


--- PAGE 68 ---
now, who are your people? 45
necessary for the more oppressed people in the community to speak and
act on their own behalf. Ella Baker built on, but moved beyond, the re-
ligious teachings of her youth. The values of charitable giving, sacriﬁce,
and communalism that she internalized as a child became a part of her
more secular world view as an adult. She ultimately identiﬁed with the
plight of the poor and the working class, not as a gesture of Christian
charity, but as an act of political solidarity. The choices she made over the
course of her life distanced her from her relatively advantaged class back-
ground and merged her own consciousness and material self-interest with
the concerns of the have-nots. In economic terms, she ‘‘eked out an exis-
tence’’ most of her adult life.
∞≥∂
Although Ella Baker’s childhood experiences did not mold her into the
radical political activist and intellectual she later became, they form an
important foundation and context for our understanding of her grassroots,
group-centered leadership style, her egalitarian vision for a renewed so-
ciety, and, perhaps most important, her unwavering conﬁdence that, as an
African American woman, she had both the capacity and the obligation to
be a powerful force for social change. What that change should be and how
it should be enacted were open questions she grappled with for many
years. Ella Baker’s upbringing, rooted in a tradition of pride, resistance to
oppression, a deep sense of community cooperation, and a strong sense of
her strength as a woman left an indelible mark on her character and helped
to shape her values, priorities, and convictions. Her family background
instilled a bedrock commitment to community service, a sense of the use-
fulness of cooperative—as opposed to competitive and individualistic—
survival strategies, an awareness of the pitfalls of self-aggrandizement,
and the notion that women, as well as men, had both a right and a duty to
be actively engaged in struggles to make the world a better place. Ella
Baker left Littleton at the age of fourteen to attend Shaw Academy, a
private, church-run boarding school in Raleigh, North Carolina. Although
she never went back to live there permanently, she remained tied to her
hometown for the rest of her life. Her family continued to own land there,
and Baker often retreated to the house where her mother had lived to work
or write—and to reconnect herself with ‘‘her people’’ and the place that
provided her with important political and personal groundings.
∞≥∑


--- PAGE 69 ---
2
a reluctant rebel and
an exceptional student
shaw academy and shaw university,
1918–1927
......
I didn’t break the rules, but I challenged the rules.
Ella Baker, 1977
Awake youth of the land and accept this noble challenge of salvaging
the strong ship of civilization by the anchors of right, justice and love.
Ella Baker, valedictorian speech, 1927
From 1918 to 1927, Ella Baker lived, worked, and learned on the campus of
Shaw University, a Baptist boarding school and college in Raleigh, North
Carolina. She matured socially, intellectually, and politically in this en-
vironment. Next to the church, Shaw was the most inﬂuential institution in
Ella Baker’s early life. Anna Ross Baker selected the school because it
met her academic and moral standards. She anticipated that Shaw would
groom her eldest daughter to be both learned and ladylike. Such qualities
would serve her well in the teaching career that Anna Baker had planned
for her upon graduation. The expectation was that Ella’s achievements at
Shaw would serve not only her own best interest but also the interests of her
family and community, promoting the advancement of the race. Ella Baker
eventually fulﬁlled her obligation of service a thousand times over, but not
in the way that her parents anticipated when they sent her off to school.
Shaw nurtured Ella Baker’s intellectual growth at the same time that it
inadvertently fueled her rebellious spirit. Her curiosity about the larger
world deepened as she was exposed to new ideas and broadened her intel-


--- PAGE 70 ---
reluctant rebel and exceptional student 47
lectual horizons. When she was a senior in high school, Baker had her ﬁrst
confrontation with an authority to which she found it impossible to defer.
The student protests in which she was involved during her later years at
Shaw centered on campus concerns, including the dress code and the re-
quired course in religion. The articulate young woman became a spokes-
person for her peers as they challenged the teachers and administrators
whom they had been taught to respect and not to question. These for-
mative years marked the beginning of Ella Baker’s self-identiﬁcation as a
rebel and her lifelong work as an intellectual and a political organizer.
Ella Baker did not need to go to college to learn the value of community
service, humility, and a strong love of knowledge. The Ross-Baker family
had emphasized all of these virtues for as long as Ella could remember.
Language was especially important to Anna Ross Baker, who taught all
three children how to read before they entered public school. She passed
on her talent as a public speaker and her passion for the spoken word to
Ella, coaching her in elocution and tutoring her in spelling and grammar.
Baker recalled that her mother ‘‘had a great appreciation for, and almost a
bias for, how people were able to speak and write.’’
∞ Anna Ross Baker’s
emphasis on the accurate use of standard English represented a public
expression of the family’s class status and educational achievements.
Anna was so concerned that Ella be adequately prepared to enter Shaw
that she had Ella spend an additional year at a local school working closely
with a tutor.
≤ Few teachers could meet Anna Ross Baker’s high standards.
Baker recalled: ‘‘The year before high school was spent largely with an old
time teacher who would ﬁt her [Anna’s] appreciation . . . I went through all
this business with grammar, all the things you learn in grammar that I
couldn’t even articulate now . . . [but] that teacher was just like my mother.
She ﬁt my mother’s needs in terms of how she carried me through all the
declensions. She carried me through all the parts of speech and how they
are used.’’
≥
Although Ella Baker sometimes questioned whether Anna Ross Baker’s
obsession with proper language was ‘‘a good thing or not,’’ since it empha-
sized class distinctions among African Americans, she recognized that her
own proﬁciency in spoken language and her polished use of the written
word, which were largely a result of the tutelage her mother provided, gave
her a certain power and self-conﬁdence that many others did not have. ‘‘. . .
And I had a big voice to start with,’’ Baker reﬂected.
∂ Over the course of her
life others often admired and sometimes were intimidated by Ella Baker’s
use of language. She wielded words, big and small, as political tools: to


--- PAGE 71 ---
48 reluctant rebel and exceptional student
make complex ideas simple, to deliver a cutting-edge criticism, to thwart
an attack from the opposition, or to inspire a comrade to struggle a little
harder. One of her young protégés in the 1960s commented admiringly, ‘‘I
so much wanted to be as articulate and eloquent as she [Ella Baker] was.
Her words were always powerful.’’
∑ Anna Ross Baker’s passion for language
led Ella to become a skilled speaker and an effective communicator. But
Baker saw rhetorical ability as a potentially double-edged sword. The abil-
ity to impress others with words did not necessarily mean that the speaker
had something substantive to say or that he or she was prepared to trans-
late those fancy words into deeds. In describing the exaggerated emphasis
placed on speaking and preaching ability in the black church, Baker ob-
served that orators were unduly ‘‘lionized’’ because of their verbal prow-
ess.
∏ Yet Baker’s ability to articulate ideas and convictions, both for herself
and for others, enabled her to defend the rights and interests of those who
were less educated and to hold her own against whoever was standing in
the way of the changes she sought.
......
Shaw Academy and University, like other black colleges, universities, and
normal schools in the South, was founded during the Reconstruction era
in order to promote the advancement of African Americans.
π These insti-
tutions received most of their initial ﬁnancial support from the Freed-
men’s Bureau, northern religious organizations such as missionary socie-
ties, and individual white philanthropists. Shaw was founded in 1865 by the
American Baptist Home Mission Society.
∫ From the outset, African Ameri-
cans themselves, despite their obvious economic disadvantage as freed
people, managed to contribute economically to black educational insti-
tutions like Shaw. The North Carolina State Baptist Convention and local
black churches and missionary associations routinely raised funds for
Shaw. This type of self-help activity was typical of the postemancipation
era. Historian Herbert Gutman emphasizes that ‘‘the former slaves them-
selves played the central role in building, ﬁnancing and operating these
schools. . . . Postwar educational efforts by blacks built upon a ﬁrm base of
educational activism during slavery.’’
Ω The Ross family exempliﬁed this tra-
dition. In addition to paying tuition while Ella was a student at Shaw, Anna
Ross Baker participated in fund-raising campaigns to support the school
years after her daughter graduated, as part of her work with the Women’s
Auxiliary Progressive Baptist Missionary Association.
∞≠ Most black people
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries saw education as a


--- PAGE 72 ---
reluctant rebel and exceptional student 49
pathway to their goals of freedom and empowerment and were prepared to
make sacriﬁces to support both elementary and higher education.
Like most black colleges, Shaw was a fairly conservative institution con-
trolled by paternalistic northern white benefactors. As Baker put it, ‘‘Shaw
was founded by the New England white Christians.’’
∞∞ Northern mission-
aries and reformers saw education as a vehicle for preparing ex-slaves to
assume their new roles as hard-working, law-abiding American citizens.
From the end of radical Reconstruction through the institutionalization of
Jim Crow, white administrators of black colleges accepted segregation and
promoted accommodationist views. Whites with close ties to northern con-
tributors continued to run these colleges even when a second generation of
well-educated African Americans was prepared to lead them. In fact, Shaw
did not appoint its ﬁrst African American president until 1931, four years
after Ella graduated.
∞≤ According to Wilmoth Carter, who documented
Shaw’s history, the institution enjoyed several notable distinctions. It was
‘‘the oldest [historically black] institution of higher learning founded in the
South, [and] the ﬁrst Negro institution in America to open its doors to
women.’’
∞≥ The tensions between the views and practices of paternalistic
white administrators and the aspirations of students, their families, and
the school’s supporters in the black community were intensiﬁed by the
fundamental contradiction between the ﬁrst-rate education offered to stu-
dents and the second-class positions they would be forced to occupy after
graduation.
∞∂ Institutions like Shaw communicated mixed messages. Al-
though Shaw’s administrators emphasized humility and Christian service,
they reinforced many elitist assumptions about social class. The excep-
tional status of its students was a given.
As Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham points out in her discussion of southern
Baptist missionaries in this period, institutions like Shaw had both a radical
and a conservative impulse.
∞∑ A coeducational classical curriculum, paral-
lel to curricula at white colleges and universities, implied that African
American men and women were as intellectually capable as their white
counterparts. At the same time, the enforcement of a strict, middle-class
code of conduct created visible markers that distinguished those who were
educated from the majority of the race. At Shaw, the rejection of notions of
innate black inferiority merged with elitist assumptions about the moral
and cultural superiority of those with education and class advantage. This
elitism was tempered, however, by a strong sense of moral obligation to aid
and uplift those who were less able and to do so with a humble spirit.


--- PAGE 73 ---
50 reluctant rebel and exceptional student
A commitment to Christian service was integral to Shaw’s mission as an
institution. At Shaw, as at most private colleges, religious instruction was
required by the school’s core curriculum. Bible class and daily attendance
at chapel were mandatory. The catalog read: ‘‘As Shaw University is a
Christian school, the study of the English Bible is a part of the regular
curriculum. The work is so arranged as to give a comprehensive knowledge
of both the Old and New Testaments.’’
∞∏ The ofﬁcial school motto was ‘‘For
Christ and humanity.’’∞π Not surprisingly, all of the school’s presidents up to
the 1920s were either former missionaries or ministers.
Shaw’s philosophy represented a mix of intellectual elitism and social
conservatism, with a heavy emphasis on selﬂess Christian service. This
aspect of Shaw’s philosophy was consistent with the religious values and
teachings of the Ross-Baker family. The school deemphasized individual-
ism and stressed community service and Christian charity instead. ‘‘Where
I went to school . . . you went there to give . . . the best of yourself to other
people, rather than to extract from other people for your own beneﬁt,’’
Baker recalled.
∞∫ The moral training she received at Shaw encouraged
her to be modest and self-effacing. ‘‘My not pushing myself, as I saw it,
came out of the Christian philosophy,’’ she remarked.
∞Ω Selﬁshness and
self-promotion were vices not to be tolerated. Shaw was the kind of school
where students ‘‘sang, ‘Others, Lord, yes, others, and none of self for me.
Help me to live for others that I might live like thee.’ ’’
≤≠
The contradiction between Shaw’s philosophy of Christian service and
its intellectual and class elitism is epitomized in a statement by its presi-
dent, Joseph Leishman Peacock, quoted in the college newspaper in 1925:
‘‘college life . . . includes the opportunity to associate with minds and hearts
of the highest type.’’
≤∞ Although Shaw’s philosophy discouraged crude dis-
plays of snobbery, its administrators and faculty clearly thought of their
students as exceptional, distinct from and, to some extent, better than the
masses of ordinary black people. While most African Americans saw aca-
demic learning as a passport to full citizenship, the northern white mis-
sionaries who directed and supported schools like Shaw viewed black edu-
cation as a source of both racial uplift and social control.
≤≤ They hoped to
produce a group of moderate race leaders who would temper black protest
and help to instill the Protestant work ethic in their less-educated counter-
parts. Members of the educated black elite regarded themselves both as
advocates for and as educators of their people. They lobbied for resources
and rights at the same time that they urged poor and working-class blacks


--- PAGE 74 ---
reluctant rebel and exceptional student 51
to uphold dominant standards of morality in order to demonstrate their
worthiness for citizenship.
The mission of black Baptist colleges like Shaw, according to Evelyn
Brooks Higginbotham, was to produce members of what W. E. B. Du Bois
called the ‘‘Talented Tenth,’’ a highly educated cadre of race leaders who
would tutor, lead, and act as ambassadors for the larger black community.
≤≥
Through the Talented Tenth, northern white Baptists hoped to trans-
form—albeit indirectly—the illiterate and impoverished black masses
into American citizens who valued education, industriousness, piety,
and reﬁned manners. . . . Through the black educated elite, the de-
graded masses would be introduced to the values of white, middle-class
Protestant America. . . . It was the men and women of the Talented
Tenth who assured race management—that is, control of the masses—
and consequently the well-being of the nation. . . . From the north-
ern Baptists’ perspective, a well-educated black vanguard constituted a
buffer between white society and the black masses. . . . In the event of
rebellion, the Talented Tenth would serve as a critical mediating force
between several million oppressed blacks and white America.
≤∂
Du Bois’s conceptualization of the Talented Tenth was distinct from the
visions of white missionaries and other black leaders like Booker T. Wash-
ington, who primarily advocated industrial, manual training for blacks and
accommodation in matters of civil rights. In Du Bois’s view, a classical
liberal arts education for a black leadership class could serve as a means of
achieving civil rights for the entire black community. He rejected segrega-
tion and the assignment of all black people to positions of subordination in
the economic, social, and political life of the country.
≤∑ The missionary
spirit and the concept of the Talented Tenth embodied both a genuine
commitment to community service and the improvement of the race and a
strong dose of elitism and social conservatism. Consistent with the school’s
philosophy, Shaw’s administrators dictated and enforced a very rigid code
of conduct for its students and faculty. Their behavior was to be exemplary
enough to earn them leadership status, a badge of respectability, and mem-
bership in the middle class. Such behavior would supposedly demonstrate
their civility to whites and legitimate their fuller inclusion in the dominant
society. It was also intended to distinguish them from black common folk
who were untutored and unpolished. The school’s philosophy was consis-
tent with the view articulated by Du Bois in the ﬁrst decade of the twen-


--- PAGE 75 ---
52 reluctant rebel and exceptional student
tieth century: ‘‘developing the Best of the race so that they may guide the
Mass away from the contamination and death of the Worst, in their own
and other races.’’
≤∏ Since it was considered a privilege to be accepted at the
school, students were expected to be grateful and to behave accordingly.
In order to be admitted to Shaw during the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries, an applicant had to be of ‘‘unblemished moral charac-
ter.’’
≤π Shaw’s rules were designed to ensure that students remained mor-
ally above reproach, even as they traversed the dangerous years of adoles-
cence. The college strictly regulated behavior and deportment, prohibiting
dancing, card playing, and the use of tobacco, which were common leisure
activities among poor and working-class African Americans. Dress and
appearance were especially important marks of class and sexual respect-
ability for young women. Female students were not allowed to wear ‘‘eve-
ning dresses, French heels, [or] ear rings.’’
≤∫ Dating and socializing were
strictly supervised. ≤Ω Students were reprimanded and disciplined for the
slightest violations of school protocol. Those who left campus without
permission or missed chapel services were routinely disciplined and might
even be expelled.
≥≠ Students had to make formal requests to be late or
absent from classes or school events, and ‘‘no frivolous conversations or
attention to trivial matters or visiting in each others rooms, lounging upon
beds or loitering upon the grounds’’ were allowed.
≥∞ The school bulletin
warned that ‘‘only those students who are willing to comply cheerfully with
reasonable rules and regulations are desired at this institution.’’
≥≤
Shaw offered a comparable list of course offerings to both male and
female students, and classes were mixed rather than segregated by sex.
Still, the school’s philosophy held that women’s responsibilities centered
on their homes and families, and residential life was organized to ensure
that female students practiced domestic skills. A section of the catalog
titled ‘‘Special Requirements for Girls’’ reads: ‘‘A period of work will be
required daily of each girl, under the supervision of a matron, for which no
compensation will be given. . . . Each girl is required to have aprons suitable
for house and laundry work, and those who wait tables must have wait-
resses aprons.’’
≥≥ The middle-class image of black womanhood did not
preclude public or professional activity, but creating and maintaining order
in the home was seen as a core feature of female respectability.≥∂
The etiquette that governed interaction between male and female stu-
dents at Shaw was quite rigid, and its rules were ﬁrmly enforced. School-
sponsored social events were formal and heavily chaperoned. According to
Efﬁe Yergan, a classmate of Ella’s, school parties were ‘‘more like banquets


--- PAGE 76 ---
reluctant rebel and exceptional student 53
than dances.’’≥∑ At religious services, ‘‘the boys marched in one line and the
girls in another,’’ and female students occupied the center aisle while the
male students sat on either side. ≥∏ Sex-segregated seating at chapel was
presumably intended to prevent informal contact that might distract young
people from their prayers. There were some covert romantic interludes
between students, Yergan said, but these were rare. Students who married
secretly were—if caught—penalized by immediate expulsion.
≥π
Shaw students were forbidden from socializing with the black commu-
nity in Raleigh, except in the formal capacity of charity workers under the
supervision of school authorities. Students who were learning to lead and
serve their race had to have some contact with their uneducated counter-
parts, but school ofﬁcials evidently thought that their interaction had to be
closely controlled in order to prevent the masses from inﬂuencing the elite
rather than vice versa. Administrators frowned on casual contact with
Raleigh residents, seeing it as detrimental to the cultivation of respectable,
middle-class alumnae. The 1881–82 catalog states that ‘‘no young man or
woman from the city, without any legitimate business, will be allowed to
visit the students in their rooms or mingle with them upon the grounds.’’
≥∫
The 1927 catalog reads: ‘‘Boarding girls are expected to come directly to
school from the train, and to return directly to their homes at the close of
school . . . [and] are not allowed to visit in the city during the session.’’
≥Ω
Female students were even forbidden from visiting family members in the
city without express permission from the University’s president, and their
monthly shopping trips were chaperoned.
∂≠ These rules drew sharp lines
of demarcation—reﬂected in appearance and deportment as well as for-
mal learning—between Shaw’s middle-class academic community and the
common people of Raleigh. After her years at Shaw, Ella Baker spent much
of her life trying to break down such divisions.
......
coming into her own
Ella Baker moved from the secure and somewhat sheltered environment of
home to begin her journey into adulthood at Shaw Academy against the
backdrop of a rapidly changing and increasingly dangerous world. In the
wake of World War I, the meaning of American democracy, especially as
it applied to African Americans, was hotly contested. Wartime rhetoric
called on all Americans to do their part to ‘‘make the world safer for democ-
racy.’’ And many African Americans did. Two hundred thousand black men
served in the war, a fourth of them in combat, and all of them in segregated


--- PAGE 77 ---
54 reluctant rebel and exceptional student
units.∂∞ Blacks remained disenfranchised at home, and racial violence was
on the rise; attacks on black soldiers in uniform were soon followed by
racist violence against black urban-dwellers. The ‘‘Great Migration’’ of
southern blacks to northern and western cities began during the war and
accelerated through the 1920s. Race leaders debated what strategies ought
to be adopted at such a perilous yet potentially transformative time.
∂≤
In ofﬁce from 1913 to 1921, Woodrow Wilson was the ﬁrst southerner to
be elected to the presidency since Reconstruction, and he saw no contra-
diction between racial inequality and American democracy. Indeed, he was
an unapologetic segregationist; he applauded the racist ﬁlm Birth of a
Nation and imposed segregation in federal ofﬁces in the nation’s capital.
There were advances for some and setbacks for others. In 1920, women
ﬁnally won access to the ballot. Baker was sixteen years old and in her third
year of high school. Still, millions of African American women were ex-
cluded from the political process, as were most African American men. Ella
Baker began to develop her personal ambitions and to deﬁne her own
worldview at a time when the citizenship rights of women and African
Americans were at an important crossroads.
Of all the southern cities where Ella Baker could have ended up, with
perhaps the exception of Atlanta, Raleigh was probably better than most.
Two famous North Carolinians who came of age in Raleigh a decade ahead
of Baker were Sarah and Elizabeth Delany, two black middle-class sisters
who late in life became the subject of an award-winning book, Having Our
Say. The Delany sisters, older siblings of the Harlem-based black jurist
Hubert Delany, with whom Ella Baker was to become acquainted, recalled
Raleigh as ‘‘a center for education,’’ with two premiere black colleges to its
credit, Shaw and St. Augustine. The Delany sisters described Raleigh as ‘‘a
good place for a Negro of the South to be living, compared to most places at
that time.’’
∂≥ Shaw’s environment was fairly insular, but when students
were allowed to venture out, the environment was less hostile than in other
cities in the Jim Crow South.
Shaw University opened new intellectual horizons for Ella Baker, expos-
ing her to a myriad of ideas and experiences she had never previously
encountered. The institution’s litany of rules, elitist social milieu, and fairly
conventional notions about gender expressed the values, views, and aspira-
tions that had shaped Ella’s education at home; yet being away at boarding
school and college gave her the opportunity to deﬁne herself, to develop an
independent identity, and to take a stand on the controversial questions of
the day. Above all, as a ﬁrst-rate, comprehensive institution of higher edu-


--- PAGE 78 ---
reluctant rebel and exceptional student 55
cation, Shaw offered Baker ample opportunity to discover and explore the
world of ideas. She took full advantage of the scholarly expertise and
resources made available to her there, and she excelled academically. Her
curiosity was insatiable. She read the works of Kant, Socrates, Aristotle,
and Carter G. Woodson and studied the lives of Frederick Douglass, Harriet
Tubman, and Sojourner Truth.
∂∂ Baker was already a voracious reader who
was enamored of books and delighted in the exchange of ideas when she
came to Shaw. There, as a member of the debate team, she honed her
oratorical skills and grappled with current social issues. Efﬁe Yergan, her
classmate, recalled that Ella ‘‘had a heavy voice, and helped to win a lot of
trophies and honors for the school.’’
∂∑
Ella Baker’s most important mentor at Shaw was Professor Benjamin
Brawley. Although Baker enjoyed good relationships with several faculty
members, Brawley had the most profound impact on her thinking. In addi-
tion to teaching a course on Shakespeare, he coached the debate team and
advised the campus newspaper, the Shaw University Journal, on which Ella
also worked. Brawley exempliﬁed the highest standards of academic excel-
lence, especially in writing for and speaking to the public.
A meticulous scholar and proliﬁc writer, Brawley wrote some seventeen
books during his life.
∂∏ He demanded perfection from his students and
deplored mediocrity. Perhaps it was his high standards of scholarship that
attracted him to the bright and articulate Ella Baker. She was an excep-
tional student, and he was a serious scholar. But there was another side of
Brawley that may have particularly impressed young Ella Baker. A sensi-
tive man, he was committed to racial equality and community service. He
spoke out against racial discrimination and the second-class status im-
posed on African Americans of his generation. Although he came from an
upper-middle-class black Atlanta family, Brawley chose to spend a semes-
ter after college working as a teacher in a one-room schoolhouse in an
impoverished black community in rural Florida. He often shared memories
from that experience with his students at Shaw.
∂π His stories had a lasting
effect on Ella Baker.
Brawley was a legendary ﬁgure at Shaw, thoroughly bourgeois in his
manner and a bit of an eccentric. Prim and proper himself, he insisted on
strict adherence to school rules and protocol. He would lock his classroom
door and refuse admittance to students who were more than a few minutes
late.
∂∫ One observer remarked that most ‘‘students stood in awe of Brawley.
He was precise and exacting in class, immaculate in dress, frowned on men
who said ‘hello’ to women, [and] refused to attend basketball games be-


--- PAGE 79 ---
56 reluctant rebel and exceptional student
cause the male players were not sufﬁciently clad.’’ ∂Ω He always left his
ofﬁce door open when meeting with female students to circumvent any
possible assumptions of impropriety. Reminiscing about her college educa-
tion at Shaw, Efﬁe Yergan characterized Professor Brawley as ‘‘uptight and
rigid,’’
∑≠ two words that no one who knew Ella Baker later in her life would
ever have associated with her. Yet, despite their contrasting styles and
personalities, Baker developed a fairly close relationship with Brawley.
Perhaps he reminded her of her mother, who had many of the same quali-
ties, especially a sharp wit and a love of ideas. In her reminiscences, Ba-
ker gently mocked Brawley’s elitism and formality, observing that he was
‘‘Hah-vahd’’ educated and ‘‘classic-al-ly inclined.’’ He was so prudish, Baker
recalled critically, that he even forbade students from reading what she
termed ‘‘all the nice salacious things that were in Shakespeare.’’
∑∞ But
Brawley was a rigorous and compassionate intellectual, and this distin-
guishing feature won Ella Baker’s enduring admiration. The two kept in
touch long after Ella left Shaw. In the 1930s, when Baker was living in New
York, she invited her old teacher to speak at an event held by the Young
Negroes’ Cooperative League ( yncl), which she was organizing at the
time, and Brawley agreed.
∑≤
Extracurricular activities were nearly as important to Ella Baker’s intel-
lectual development as her classroom experiences. She began her journal-
ism career at Shaw in her freshman year of college, when she was the
youngest student contributor to the campus newspaper.
∑≥ She then became
associate editor of the Shaw University Journal , a student publication es-
tablished in 1924. In 1925 she took over as editor; her mentor, Professor
Brawley, served as the faculty adviser.
∑∂ Since she was curious about all
kinds of subjects, journalism became a way for Ella to raise questions that
she otherwise might not have had the opportunity to ask. She received As
and Bs in all of her English and composition classes, and she seems to have
been almost as good a writer as she was a public speaker.
∑∑ These com-
munications skills came in handy when Baker began her work as a political
organizer. Over the years, she would contribute to such important African
American periodicals as the Crisis, the Amsterdam News, the Norfolk Jour-
nal and Guide, the National News, and the West Indian News.
∑∏
Ella Baker’s education and experience at Shaw gave her skills and self-
conﬁdence that she drew on throughout her life, especially as a woman
operating in meetings and organizations dominated by men. In reﬂecting
on what experiences helped to prepare her for her later political activism,
Baker recalled: ‘‘My man-woman relationships were on the basis of just


--- PAGE 80 ---
reluctant rebel and exceptional student 57
being a human being, not a sex object. As far as my sense of security, it had
been established. . . . I had been able to compete on levels such as scholar-
ship. . . . And I could stand my own in debate. And things of that nature.
I wasn’t delicate.’’
∑π So, despite the conservative norms regarding gen-
der that Shaw tried to inculcate in students, Ella Baker’s education was a
source of empowerment that enabled her to feel conﬁdent relating to men
as an equal rather than as a sexual subordinate.
There is no indication Baker took a serious romantic interest in anyone
while she was at Shaw, although she reportedly met her future husband,
T. J. Roberts, when she was enrolled there.
∑∫ She was also rumored to have
had a crush on a football player.∑Ω According to her classmate Efﬁe Yergan,
Ella Baker was popular. ‘‘She was friendly to everyone, but I don’t think she
ever had a steady beau . . . you know how men were at that time, and some
of them still today, they wanted you to be beautiful and dumb. [She] was
too intelligent for that. The boys were probably intimidated.’’
∏≠ Yergan’s
reminiscences suggest that during her college years Baker cultivated a
persona that enabled her to associate with men on a collegial basis, keep-
ing them at a certain personal distance and creating a space in which she
could be forthright and assertive.
Shaw provided Ella Baker with a window on the wider world. The social
and intellectual atmosphere of the Shaw campus was enhanced by the
presence of international students and by visiting speakers who discussed
their work as foreign missionaries and world travelers. According to histo-
rian Wilmoth Carter, ‘‘Many foreign students came from Canada, Mexico,
South Africa, Liberia, Sierra Leone, the Congo, Jamaica, Trinidad, British
Guiana, the Canal Zone, the Philippines and Puerto Rico.’’ There were no
white students at the school until after 1954.
∏∞ Meeting a diverse mix of
students from around the world must have been quite an experience for
students from small towns in the South, many of whom had never traveled
outside the state, much less outside the country.
Ella savored the taste of the world that Shaw offered her. Two people
in particular encouraged her to think of the world in global terms: Max
Yergan, a 1914 Shaw graduate who spent seventeen years in Africa working
for the Young Men’s Christian Association (ymca), and his wife, who was a
teacher at Shaw. Max Yergan later became a close ally of Paul and Essie
Robeson and lobbied for the decolonization of Africa through the Council
on African Affairs, which he and the Robesons founded.
∏≤ A radical oppo-
nent of imperialism, Yergan was also a socialist during the 1930s.∏≥ In 1922,
when Baker was still in high school, he visited the campus and talked about


--- PAGE 81 ---
58 reluctant rebel and exceptional student
his travels in Africa. ∏∂ A wide-eyed Ella Baker was in the audience. As she
was to recall in about 1980: ‘‘Max Yergan was the ﬁrst person that I met
who had been to South Africa. . . . I was in school and his wife was a teacher
there. . . . And they went to South Africa under the aegis of the ymca as
missionaries. And when they got back they told stories of South Africa that
some people are just getting for the ﬁrst time now.’’ Baker added that her
own interest in the situation in South Africa was ‘‘long since imbedded in
me from that input which was their experience.’’
∏∑ Her curiosity about the
world was piqued by her relationship with the Yergans.
In the 1920s Ella Baker herself contemplated a career as a medical mis-
sionary, an ambition inﬂuenced both by role models like Max Yergan and
by her mother.
∏∏ During her college years, Ella engaged in projects that
closely resembled Anna Ross Baker’s missionary activities back home. In
her junior year, for example, Ella worked with the Student Friendship
Fund, which raised money for ‘‘students in other lands who are struggling
bravely amid difﬁcult and adverse circumstances to prepare themselves for
future service.’’
∏π This group supported Shaw’s missionary work to estab-
lish schools and churches in Africa and elsewhere. In the winter of 1925,
Baker raised $25.50 for the fund, an impressive sum at the time.
∏∫ She also
belonged to Shaw’s ywca; although her Y afﬁliation never took her as far as
Max Yergan’s had, she was selected as a delegate to attend a ywca meeting
held at the Commodore Hotel in Manhattan.∏Ω That was Baker’s ﬁrst visit to
New York City, and it may have inﬂuenced her decision to move there after
graduation.
π≠
When she was still in high school at Shaw Academy, Ella Baker wrote an
eloquent essay praising the role of the church in African American history.
Titled ‘‘The Negro Church, the Nucleus of the Negroes’ Cultural Develop-
ment,’’ the paper concluded that the church had ‘‘cradled the aesthetic
tendencies of the race.’’
π∞ Ella paid homage to the preacher’s leadership
role within the church, describing him as ‘‘the spiritual leader, the teacher,
the lawyer, and general adviser of his congregation.’’
π≤ She observed that
many ministers were political as well as spiritual leaders; like her beloved
grandfather, Mitchell Ross, they used the pulpit to advocate for the race. At
the same time, the essay apologized for the gradualist approach to reform
that many church leaders embraced, explaining that a more radical ap-
proach was not realistic: ‘‘The group’s economic resources would not be
adequate to carry out a radical program.’’
π≥ Therefore, one could not justi-
ﬁably blame those moderate leaders who called for patience and slow


--- PAGE 82 ---
reluctant rebel and exceptional student 59
progress. This is certainly a far cry from the expectations and criticisms Ella
Baker would direct at apolitical church leaders a generation later.
......
a polite dissident and a reluctant rebel
During her years at Shaw, Ella Baker always asked questions. As a senior in
high school and as a college student, she challenged the school’s conserva-
tive dress code, criticized the paternalistic racism of its president, and
protested its methods of teaching religion and the Bible. Ella was ambiva-
lent about exactly how confrontational she was willing to be, especially
given the high price she might be required to pay for dissent. Students who
broke the rules and persisted in their deﬁance of authority were expelled
from school, dimming their prospects and disappointing their parents. The
three known protest activities in which Ella Baker was involved over the
course of her years at Shaw offer a portrait of her as a tentative young
activist, a polite dissident, and a reluctant rebel.
π∂ As she reﬂected years
later, ‘‘I did not break the rules [at Shaw], but I challenged the rules.’’π∑
Interestingly, the ﬁrst issue on which Ella Baker took a strong stand was
one in which she personally had very little at stake. When she was a high
school senior, she was asked by a group of older female students to be their
spokesperson in requesting permission to wear silk stockings on campus.
The 1923 bulletin declared that ‘‘fancy, colored or silk hose . . . will not be
allowed. If brought or sent they will be returned.’’
π∏ The speciﬁcity of this
rule and the explicit statement of the consequences for breaking it suggest
that violations had, in fact, occurred. A group of female students, most of
whom were in college, sought to change this policy. Although Ella was not
very fashion-conscious and did not even own a pair of silk stockings, she
was asked to be the leader and spokesperson for the group because of her
reputation for being assertive and articulate. According to Baker, the other
girls ‘‘didn’t have guts enough, or maybe a combination of guts and articu-
lation, to deal with [their grievance] . . . and they came to me.’’
ππ
Ella Baker wrote a letter on behalf of the students petitioning the school
to relax the dress code, and the group presented its request to the dean of
women students.
π∫ After all, it was the twenties. Magazines were ﬁlled with
sketches and photographs of well-dressed ladies wearing silk stockings,
and the young women of Shaw felt they had every right to dress as stylishly
as the next person. The dean was not persuaded. Not only did the dean
reject their petition, but ‘‘after this the girls had to go to chapel every night’’


--- PAGE 83 ---
60 reluctant rebel and exceptional student
as punishment.πΩ Indeed, the dean became so upset by this bold and willful
affront to the authority of the school administration that she called Ella
Baker into her ofﬁce to pray that she would see the error of her ways.
Strong-willed Ella, of course, had no regrets, even though she was threat-
ened with expulsion.
∫≠ Baker recalled that the dean became so distraught
over this unapologetic deﬁance that she fainted to the ﬂoor of her ofﬁce
during one of their conversations. ‘‘I didn’t seem particularly penitent, and
she [the dean] was very disturbed about it. But it didn’t bother me because
I felt I was correct.’’
∫∞
On one level, it appears as though the protesters simply wanted to be
able to conform to changing standards of fashion by wearing silk hose. On
another level, however, especially for someone like Ella, for whom the
issue was purely a matter of principle rather than a personal objective,
there were larger things at stake. Fashion was an important cultural arena
of struggle for competing gender constructs in the 1920s: the so-called
ﬂappers challenged conventional femininity. Young, single, urban women,
through their dress, dance, and demeanor, contested prevailing standards
of womanhood and morality, projecting an assertive, self-conﬁdent, and
consciously sexual public image. Conﬂicts about how respectable women
of this generation ought to comport themselves were expressed in the
popular media and from the pulpit. While Shaw women did not aspire to
become ﬂappers, they were asserting their right to be expressive and cre-
ative through their dress. And, since wearing silk stockings likely meant
wearing shorter skirts, they were also rejecting the commonly held as-
sumption that proper ladies had to keep their legs covered as a sign of
respectability. As Baker put it, ‘‘I felt it was their right to wear stockings if
they wanted to.’’
∫≤ Although the dean of women did not back down in the
face of this challenge, the rule against silk hose was removed from the
dress code by the time Ella graduated four years later.
∫≥ In this incident, the
nineteen-year-old Ella stood her ground against authority, but she did not
pursue the issue when the group she represented accepted its defeat.
The next time Ella Baker challenged the school administration, she did
so alone. When the president of the university entertained northern white
guests on campus, it was his custom to invite some students to perform.
‘‘They’d want you to sing spirituals,’’ Baker remembered. ‘‘Many students
resented’’ this, but went along with it out of either fear or respect for the
school’s chief administrator.
∫∂ Ella found such practices demeaning and
would not go along. She ‘‘had a strong voice,’’ but she adamantly refused to
participate in what she perceived as an undigniﬁed performance. Such an


--- PAGE 84 ---
reluctant rebel and exceptional student 61
act of deﬁance by an undergraduate student, Baker concluded, must have
‘‘irked’’ the president. ∫∑ For the rest of her life, as a matter of principle,
Baker resisted any inclination to ingratiate herself with people in power.
During her junior year in college, Ella Baker once again confronted
university ofﬁcials. This time she was part of a large group of protesters
who took a ﬁrm stance with a mild tone. On February 1, 1926, Ella Baker
joined with ﬁfty-seven other juniors and seniors in refusing to take the
required Bible examination as it was administered by a particular faculty
member, claiming that the test was being administered unfairly.
∫∏ Students
objected speciﬁcally to the fact that the professor had demanded they
memorize their readings and lectures and had forbade the use of note-
books during the exam, which was apparently a customary practice. Stu-
dents submitted a formal letter of protest to the faculty council of the
university indicating their refusal to sit for the exam and voicing their
complaints about the way the course had been taught. The tone of the
letter was mild, almost obsequious. The students stressed that they were
not trying to be antagonistic, but they claimed disingenuously that they
simply were unable to grasp the subject as it had been presented.
∫π
After receiving a negative response from the administration, the major-
ity of the students backed down, acquiesced to the admonitions of the
administration, and took the exam at the designated time under threat of
expulsion. A few stood fast. Ella Baker was not among them. It is unclear
exactly why she made this decision. The fact that she was likely to be
expelled if she persisted in her opposition was probably a formidable con-
sideration. She may have contacted her parents and been advised to com-
ply with the school’s directive. She may have reconsidered the situation on
her own and decided that, if she were going to take a stand on principle,
this was not the right time or the right issue.
Signiﬁcantly, Ella Baker had encountered serious difﬁculties in Bible
class the year before. Her sophomore transcript shows a C– in religion, the
lowest grade of her entire nine years at Shaw and a striking aberration in
her otherwise stellar record.
∫∫ Baker’s problems with religion courses at
Shaw may have involved simple incompatibility with particular instructors,
but they may well have represented something more substantive. As the
daughter of a devoutly religious woman and the granddaughter of a minis-
ter, Ella had been immersed in biblical teachings as a child. Neither her
near-failing grade in her sophomore Bible class nor her near-refusal to take
the exam in her junior Bible class reﬂected ignorance or an inability to
comprehend the material. Perhaps she was beginning to ask questions


--- PAGE 85 ---
62 reluctant rebel and exceptional student
about religion in a way that was not encouraged at Shaw. As Efﬁe Yergan
recalled, ‘‘There wasn’t much room for discussion or debate in Bible class.
They taught it like a history course, that’s all.’’
∫Ω Memorizing names, dates,
and sequences of events was a far cry from contemplating complex theo-
logical issues or considering the contemporary implications of Christianity.
Ella had been inquisitive even as a child, and in college she was an avid de-
bater; she was not comfortable accepting things at face value. The method
of religious instruction at Shaw apparently did not suit her intellectual or
personal sensibilities.
......
By the time Ella Baker completed her college education at Shaw, she had
begun to carve out her own path. Most important, she chose not to pursue
education as a professional career. In doing so, she rejected what was ex-
pected of well-educated, middle-class black women and what her mother
had wanted for her. Baker later explained that she resented the fact that,
in her mother’s generation and her own, teaching was regarded as ‘‘inevi-
table’’; she had a ‘‘rebellious streak,’’ which led her to resist conformity.
Ω≠
Through her years at Shaw, Baker had developed a political critique of
black educational institutions. Since schools were still largely under white
control, teachers had to be conservative and subdued in order to get and
keep their jobs. Women ‘‘couldn’t teach unless somebody in the white
hierarchy okayed your teaching,’’ Baker complained. It was ‘‘a demeaning
sort of thing, and I resented this, and I refused to teach.’’
Ω∞ ‘‘I had seen
generations of graduates also go out and teach. And sometimes there had
been people who had shown spirit ﬁghting back in school but after they
taught they came back and they were nothing. They had no spirit.’’
Ω≤ So,
although Ella had several ‘‘good offers’’ of teaching jobs, she adamantly
refused to accept any of them.
Ω≥ She was intent on preserving her own
ﬁghting spirit; she saw the socialization that women went through to be-
come teachers and the resulting subordinate position they came to occupy
as a threat to that spirit.
During her years at Shaw, Ella Baker was a rebel but not yet a radical,
tactically prepared to question but not to defy the rules, and philosophi-
cally ready to argue against the limitations of the dominant authority but
not to challenge its fundamental validity. Ella Baker retained a basic faith
in the major institutions of American society, even as she recognized the
existence of injustice and discrimination. She clung to the belief that,
through her own individual effort, education, hard work, and faith, she
could help to uplift the race and, by extension, all of humanity. Baker


--- PAGE 86 ---
reluctant rebel and exceptional student 63
recalled that, at the tender age of twenty-three, she felt that ‘‘the world was
out there waiting for you to provide a certain kind of leadership and give
you an opportunity.’’
Ω∂
Graduation day in April 1927 was a shining moment in Ella Baker’s life.
As the culmination of her sterling academic career, she was chosen valedic-
torian, one of two student speakers at commencement. Her proud parents
sat in the audience, no doubt beaming at what she and they had accom-
plished. Ella’s graduation address reﬂected her oratorical skill, her commit-
ment to social justice, her youthful idealism, and her religiosity. In her
words there is clear evidence that she was the progeny of deeply religious
people and that she shared their faith. There is also a hint of the deter-
mined activist she soon became: ‘‘Awake youth of the land and accept this
noble challenge of salvaging the strong ship of civilization, by the anchors
of right, justice and love. . . . let us resolve that for the welfare of the whole,
for the good of all, for the uplift of the fallen humanity, for the extension of
Christ’s kingdom on earth . . . there shall be no turning back . . . we will
strike against evil, strife and war until the echo shall resound in the re-
cesses of the earth and . . . the waters of the deep.’’
Ω∑ These words were
indeed prophetic, although perhaps not precisely in the way Ella intended
at the time. The optimism she expressed in 1927 was soon challenged by
the onset of the Great Depression. The harsh realities of poverty and dis-
crimination, coupled with her exposure to a whole array of left-wing po-
litical groups, radicalized her views and reoriented her thinking. As she
moved from a religious to a more secular stance, the critical questioning
and rebelliousness that marked her youth deepened and broadened. Ella
Baker became a radical intellectual and activist with a vision of a new
social order.


--- PAGE 87 ---
3
harlem during the 1930s
the making of a black radical activist
and intellectual
......
[Harlem] is the fountainhead of mass movements. From it ﬂows the progressive vitality
of Negro life. Harlem is, as well, a cross-section of life in Black America—a little from here,
there and everywhere. It is at once the capital of clowns, cults and cabarets, and the
cultural and intellectual hub of the Negro world.
Roi Ottley, 1943
. . . a hotbed of radical thinking.
Ella Baker, 1977
When Ella Baker arrived in New York City in 1927, she walked up and down
the streets of Harlem in sheer amazement. The intoxicating sounds of jazz
ﬂoated in the air, competing with police sirens, domestic arguments, and
soapbox speakers. The congestion, intensity, and excitement of urban life
were all around her. At every turn Baker realized that she was further from
home than she had ever been before: away from the South, from the
sheltered conﬁnes of the Shaw campus, from her protective hometown
community, and from the restrictive authority of her mother.
∞
Unlike others who had consciously chosen to move to Harlem because of
its reputation as a center of modern African American cultural life, Ella
Baker arrived there somewhat by chance. Her original plan when she ﬁn-
ished college was to attend the University of Chicago, one of Professor
Brawley’s alma maters, to pursue graduate studies in sociology or medicine
in preparation for a career as a medical missionary. She was all ‘‘gung ho’’


--- PAGE 88 ---
harlem during the 1930s 65
for the idea, but her family’s ﬁnances were limited, and the Ross-Bakers
had no relatives in Chicago to cushion the transition, either ﬁnancially or
socially. Anna Ross Baker was also reluctant to let her elder daughter get
too far away from her supervision or at least from the watchful eye of
someone she trusted. In New York there was cousin Martha Grinage, a
woman slightly older than Ella, whom Anna had helped raise in North
Carolina. This familial connection provided assurance that even if Ella did
not ﬁnd a job right away, she would at least have a roof over her head and
food in her stomach, not to mention a respectable home to shelter her from
the vices of the big city.
Ella got a taste of the real world the summer after she left Shaw and be-
fore she landed in New York. That summer she worked at a New Jersey
resort hotel, what she termed a ‘‘roadhouse,’’ that served food and pro-
vided entertainment for guests. She especially enjoyed the camaraderie of
her fellow workers. For her, the job was temporary, but for some of her co-
workers it was the only kind of job they could look forward to. This intro-
duction to the world of work broadened Ella Baker’s perspective. She re-
called that she did not hesitate to stand up for herself: ‘‘If something came
up that I didn’t like, I’d react to it. I retained what I called my essential in-
tegrity . . . I neither kowtowed nor felt the need to lord over anyone else.’’
≤
The hotel employees were from diverse backgrounds. ‘‘We were all
mixed up in nationality,’’ Baker was to recall.≥ The mix also included show
business types, aspiring actors, black and white students, and some Euro-
peans. ‘‘That particular summer I met a very interesting group of young
people,’’ she commented years later.
∂ This wild and irreverent crew in no
way resembled the model of respectability that her parents and teachers
had tried to cultivate. The owner was a wealthy eccentric who enjoyed
mingling with the guests, whom Baker mockingly called the local ‘‘royalty.’’
She took a liking to Ella because she was talkative and friendly. ‘‘I had to
wait on the table of the owner of the place. . . . She wanted me to wait on
her table because she had these royalties at the table and I talked. I’m not
the court jester but one of the court’s better spoken servers.’’
∑ This summer
job may have represented only a moment of youthful adventure, but it took
Ella Baker far from home and brought her into contact with a colorful and
eclectic group of people. Although the political culture was very different,
it resembled the bohemian communities she would soon encounter in
Greenwich Village and Harlem.
There was another development in Ella Baker’s life at this juncture that
likely did not please her mother. During her last year of college at Shaw,


--- PAGE 89 ---
66 harlem during the 1930s
after an impressive academic career with few distractions other than an
occasional protest, Ella had fallen in love with a smart, gentle-spirited,
handsome young man named T. J. Roberts (also known as T. J. Robinson).
∏
The relationship progressed rapidly, and by the time Baker was due to
leave North Carolina for New York, it was quite serious.
π But her romantic
interest in one man was not enough to lessen the seductive lure of the big
city. By all indications, Roberts himself was looking for a way to move
north, and the two lovers would soon be reunited.
When Ella Baker did ﬁnally arrive in New York, she was seduced, not by
Harlem’s ﬁery nightlife, but rather by its vibrant political life. During the
late 1920s and the 1930s, Baker came of age politically and began to formu-
late the worldview and theoretical framework that inﬂuenced her organiz-
ing work for the next ﬁfty years. In this historic decade, she evolved from
an idealistic and tentative young rebel into a savvy and determined orga-
nizer committed to achieving justice through radical social change. In Har-
lem, Baker debated passionately with left-wing men and embraced a com-
munity of dynamic young women whom her friend Pauli Murray later
described as black feminist foremothers.
∫
Ella Baker was among the tens of thousands of African Americans who
migrated to the North during the 1920s. Hopeful migrants followed their
dreams of a better life to such urban hubs as New York and Chicago,
contributing to one of the most dramatic interregional migrations in this
nation’s history. Although few of those who participated in the Great Mi-
gration found the promised land they were looking for, they dramatically
transformed the social landscape they encountered, forging a new sense of
community, creating a dynamic culture, and developing new strategies for
resistance to racial oppression and economic exploitation.
Ω
What emerged in the African American capital of Harlem during the
decades following World War I was a discourse and practice based on the
politics and vision of fundamental social transformation, that is, a semi-
autonomous black left. The development of this heterogeneous political
community was fueled by several factors: the rise of a black intelligentsia
consciously critical of conservative accommodationism, liberal uplift ideol-
ogy, and narrow black nationalism; the inﬂux of blacks from the diaspora
who helped to internationalize and radicalize the ideas and politics of
U.S.-born blacks; and ﬁnally, the increasingly independent voice of black
women activists, artists, and writers.
Ella Baker’s new-found community was now a distinctly international
one. Harlem’s new residents came not only from the farms and ﬁelds of the


--- PAGE 90 ---
harlem during the 1930s 67
U.S. South, but also from Jamaica, Barbados, Antigua, Guyana, Trinidad,
and, in smaller numbers, various parts of Africa. By 1930, 55 percent of
all foreign-born blacks in the United States lived in Harlem. Among them
were W. A. Domingo, Claudia Jones, Cyril V. Briggs, Otto Huiswood, Grace
Campbell, and Richard Moore, all of whom became key forces in shaping
Harlem’s black left community from the 1910s through the 1930s.
∞≠
Baker recalled fondly that Harlem during the years of the Great De-
pression was ‘‘a hotbed of radical thinking.’’ ∞∞ The political and cultural
rumblings of the late 1910s and early 1920s had infused a new spirit of
resistance and intellectual energy into the community. The cultural revolu-
tion known as the Harlem Renaissance, the black pride movement led by
the Jamaican-born Marcus Garvey, and the agitation and education car-
ried on by a small group of black socialists known as the Harlem radicals
had effectively re-colored and revitalized Harlem’s political and cultural
landscape a decade before Ella Baker’s arrival. These developments, cou-
pled with the economic suffering caused by the onset of the depression in
1929 and socialist rumblings increasingly heard around the world, laid the
foundation for the ‘‘unprecedented explosion of protest activity’’ that oc-
curred during the 1930s.
∞≤ For Ella Baker and many others, Harlem was a
politically and intellectually invigorating place to be. Intense political de-
bates raged everywhere, spawning militant protests in the streets. There
were rent strikes, picket lines, marches, street corner rallies, and the fa-
mous Harlem riot of 1935, which was triggered by an incident of alleged
police brutality. Looking back during the late 1970s on the vibrant and
volatile political climate that she had encountered in Harlem almost ﬁfty
years before, Baker remarked that ‘‘I was ﬁlling my cup’’; ‘‘I drank of the
‘nectar divine’.’’
∞≥
......
the education of a radical intellectual
Ella Baker’s ﬁrst task in New York City, after her summer stopover in New
Jersey, was ﬁnding a job. Searching for work that paid enough to enable
her to support herself provided her with a radically new kind of education,
even before the depression was in full swing. Baker quickly realized that, as
a black woman, her career options were sorely limited. Even her coveted
college diploma was not much help. On her arrival in the city, Ella moved in
with her cousin Martha and worked at whatever odd jobs she could ﬁnd.
∞∂
She knocked on the doors of employment agencies all over town and was
unable to ﬁnd work. She was even turned down for a job addressing enve-


--- PAGE 91 ---
68 harlem during the 1930s
lopes because there were so many others competing for the low-paying
job.∞∑ Baker’s situation was not unusual. African American women in gen-
eral were concentrated at the bottom of the economic hierarchy. ∞∏ This
discovery came as a shock to the wide-eyed young woman. Baker had left
North Carolina with great ambitions and high hopes, believing that great
opportunities awaited her.
∞π The reality she encountered shattered her
naive optimism. She had only seen glimpses of the world beyond her shel-
tered childhood community and the gated campus of Shaw, but in New
York City, largely on her own, she confronted the harshness of the larger
society head-on.
One of the ﬁrst full-time jobs Ella Baker found in the city was waitressing
at New York University’s Judson House restaurant in Greenwich Village.
The work was hard and the pay low, but the job offered other rewards.
Since she worked only the busy lunch and dinner hours, Ella could spend
her free time exploring the neighborhood. Like Harlem, the Village was a
vital center of political and cultural activity during the late 1920s. Left-wing
meeting places, coffeehouses, and bookstores in Greenwich Village pro-
vided almost as much stimulation for Baker as did the black intellectual
and arts community uptown. During her afternoon breaks, she would visit
the public library or stroll through Washington Square Park. She especially
enjoyed the spring, when the park was being groomed for the summer
season; the smell of freshly plowed soil reminded her of the farm commu-
nity of her youth.
∞∫ It was in Greenwich Village that she ﬁrst heard about
the ideas of socialism and communism.
Still as eager as she had been as a child to engage strangers in conversa-
tion, Ella would meet people on the streets of New York and begin a discus-
sion. Quite by accident one day, she struck up a conversation with a young
man who, she quickly learned, was a Russian Jew eager to exchange ideas
about the Bolshevik revolution and socialist movements in general. As she
recalled the encounter, ‘‘I was just standing there looking at pigeons or
whatever else and this chap starts talking and he began to try to recruit me
into one party or the other.’’
∞Ω They talked for what seemed like hours.
Baker was fascinated. She didn’t join his party because she ‘‘didn’t have the
burning need to just jump into an organization,’’ but she became curious
about socialism, Marxist theory, and subjects she ‘‘had not heard of be-
fore.’’
≤≠ But the chance meeting in the park had sparked her interest, and
she began to read more about radical ideas on her own. According to one
friend and co-worker during the 1930s, ‘‘Ella Baker was a student of Marx
and we used to debate that often.’’
≤∞


--- PAGE 92 ---
harlem during the 1930s 69
Baker had an insatiable urge to learn as much as she could about politics
and world affairs, so she took advantage of every opportunity to attend
lectures and engage in discussions about these subjects. Two vital Harlem
institutions became important intellectual training grounds for Baker and
her friends. One was the 135th Street library, later renamed the Schomburg
Center for Research in Black Culture, and the other was the Harlem Branch
ywca (close in proximity and function to the ymca). Both institutions were
teeming with political activity, hosting regular forums on issues ranging
from socialism to segregation. They became key gathering places for many
young Harlem artists, intellectuals, and activists. On his arrival in New York
in 1921, the poet Langston Hughes recounted: ‘‘I came up out of the subway
at 135th and Lenox into the beginnings of the Negro Renaissance. I headed
for the Harlem ymca down the block, where so many new, young dark . . .
arrivals in Harlem have spent their early days. The next place I headed to
that afternoon was the Harlem Branch Library just up the street.’’
≤≤ These
two institutions were the dual pillars of Harlem’s intellectual and political
life for over two decades.
Her intellectual curiosity and growing passion for politics led Baker to
spend more and more time at the Harlem library, where she met and be-
friended white librarian Ernestine Rose, twenty years her senior. Beginning
in 1925, Rose oversaw the founding and expansion of the Negro Division
within the library and mentored a young interracial staff to maintain the
collection.
≤≥ At the library, Baker helped establish the ﬁrst Negro History
Club, which met regularly to discuss historical and contemporary events
relevant to blacks. The group routinely sponsored forums and other educa-
tional events for the Harlem community. Sometimes heated discussions
would spill over into the street; interested discussants would gather around
an able orator perched atop a crate, or standing on a stepladder, as she or
he preached about colonialism, the class struggle, or American racism. The
library occasionally even paid some soapbox speakers for their oratory, a
political tradition that was imported to Harlem by Caribbean immigrants.
≤∂
Baker recalled, ‘‘If you hadn’t stood on the corner of 135th and & 7th
Avenue [protesting and debating] . . . you weren’t with it.’’
≤∑ There is no
evidence that Baker herself ever climbed on one of these makeshift stages
to display her oratorical abilities, but in May 1936 she helped organize a
street-corner discussion on lynching sponsored by the library.
≤∏
Baker joined the library’s Adult Education Committee around 1933. The
Harlem Adult Education Experiment, as it was called, sponsored forums,
lectures, and debates on a wide range of topics.
≤π According to Elinor Des


--- PAGE 93 ---
70 harlem during the 1930s
Verney Sinette, who wrote a history of the Harlem library, it was ‘‘espe-
cially innovative in the character and breadth of its activities. In addition to
the traditional library services, the Harlem Experiment used the library
and its resources to offer courses in the graphic and performing arts, to
sponsor lectures and book discussions for local residents and to make its
facilities available for community forums.’’
≤∫ Baker’s involvement in the
Adult Education Experiment was evidence of her profound interest in Afri-
can American social and political history and of her commitment to spread-
ing that knowledge to as wide an audience as possible. Up to this point in
her life, knowledge had been a source of personal empowerment; now, as
she became more political, she came to see education and knowledge as
tools in the struggle against oppression. From her perspective, reading,
discussions, forums, and lectures were as important to a movement for
social change as mass protests, boycotts, and strikes.
Baker became an employee of the Harlem branch library in January
1934, when she was hired to coordinate an educational and consciousness-
raising program for Harlem youth and young adults, aged sixteen to
twenty-six. She ‘‘organized and developed the Young People’s Forum (ypf)
in 1936 and later worked with the adult Education Committee on its sum-
mer programs for mothers in Colonial and St. Nicholas Avenue Parks.’’
≤Ω
According to Baker’s supervisor, she ‘‘successfully formed an active organi-
zation, which she brought in touch with other youth groups in the neigh-
borhood and city.’’
≥≠ As early as the 1930s, Baker served as a catalyst linking
together different sectors of the black community, breaking down genera-
tional barriers and facilitating exchanges of skills and resources. In the ypf,
she introduced Harlem teenagers to an impressive roster of prominent
speakers, emphasizing the need for active participation by the youth them-
selves. As Baker exposed many young people to the world of books and
ideas, she sought to instill in them a sense of their own power to think
critically, analyze events, and articulate their opinions and beliefs. The ypf
included discussions about ‘‘social, economic, and cultural topics,’’ as well
as library-sponsored debates on various controversial issues of the day.
≥∞ In
her work with the ypf and in many other contexts, Ella Baker was a teacher
without a traditional classroom. The belief that education and the ex-
change and dissemination of ideas could make a difference in people’s lives
was to remain central to her life’s work.
The 137th Street ywca was another important gathering place, attract-
ing many strong-minded, young, single women who were seeking the ex-
citement, intellectual freedom, and the cultural stimulation that only Har-


--- PAGE 94 ---
harlem during the 1930s 71
lem could provide. Pauli Murray, who later became a prominent civil rights
lawyer, religious leader, and feminist poet, rented a room at the Y in 1929.
Murray described the Harlem ywca as a focus of political and social ac-
tivity, and a ‘‘heady’’ place to be at that time. On its staff were such bright
and determined black women as Dorothy Height, later the head of the
National Council of Negro Women, Anna Arnold Hedgeman, the ywca’s
membership secretary, Viola Lewis Waiters, and Margaret Douglass; all
went on to illustrious careers as professionals, public ﬁgures, and political
activists.
≥≤ According to Murray, ‘‘None of these women would have called
themselves feminists in the 1930’s, but they were strong independent per-
sonalities who, because of their concerted efforts to rise above the limita-
tions of race and sex, and to help younger women do the same, shared a
sisterhood that foreshadowed the revival of the feminist movement in the
1960s.’’
≥≥ Baker spent many hours in the Y cafeteria and meeting rooms. In
this thriving community of black women, she found the inspiration and
intellectual challenges that aided her in deﬁning her own personal and
political identity.
Pauli Murray, Ella Baker, and the friends who congregated at the ywca
represented a new model of black womanhood in this era. Untrammeled by
attachments to either birth families or husbands, these women were ad-
venturesome, educated, and ambitious. The social climate of the times and
the abysmal conditions of suffering created by the depression helped to
channel much of their energy and ambition into radical political activity.
Some of them worked with the Communist and Socialist Parties but many
more of them were ‘‘fellow travelers’’ in a loosely connected circle of op-
positional forces. If there was a rally about the Scottsboro case to defend
young black men against trumped-up charges of raping two white women
on a train, they called up one another and went as a group. If there was a
picket line organized by the ‘‘Don’t Buy Where You Can’t Work’’ campaign,
which used consumer boycotts to persuade stores with black customers to
hire black employees, leaﬂets would be dropped off at the Y for distribu-
tion. This was a loose, informal network of women activists, many of whom
did not join or pledge allegiance to any of the organized left factions but
were actively engaged with a wide range of issues.
≥∂
Women were integral to Harlem’s political life, both as individuals and
in organized groups. Some organizations, such as the Harlem Housewives
League and the Domestic Workers Union, represented collective action
around the common interests of women. In her study of African American
women’s political activism, the historian Deborah Gray White argues con-


--- PAGE 95 ---
72 harlem during the 1930s
vincingly that ‘‘seldom did African American women organize across class
lines.’’≥∑ In the unique political environment of depression-era Harlem,
however, such cross-class unity was indeed attempted and occasionally
achieved. Maids, cooks, and unemployed workers bonded with leftist,
middle-class teachers in adult education classes. Ordinary Harlem resi-
dents worked with journalists and other professionals in the cooperative
movement. And the library, the ymca and ywca, and the street corners
were democratic public spaces where community members, either for-
mally educated or self-taught, gathered, debated, and collaborated. In all
these venues, women were central participants.
Pauli Murray stood out among this group of smart and spirited young
women. She was articulate, well read, witty, and ﬁercely interested in
politics and social justice. She and Ella Baker became fast friends. Their
lives had interesting parallels. Both women grew up in North Carolina;
both migrated to Harlem around the same time; and both obtained jobs in
the Workers Education Project of the Works Progress Administration. Both
were involved in the Jay Lovestone political faction during the 1930s and
afﬁliated with the (Lovestone-inﬂuenced) Liberal Party during the 1940s
and 1950s. Years later, when Baker was working for the naacp and the
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, Murray lent support and
sang the praises of her old friend.
≥∏ After she left Harlem, Murray attended
Howard University Law School, taught law at Yale and Brandeis, eventually
entered the ministry, and wrote four books. The two women remained in
touch off and on for over forty years.
Baker’s political awakening was stimulated by the lively social and intel-
lectual community she encountered in Harlem, and her close comradeship
with other women activists such as Murray nurtured her political matura-
tion. Her development as a radical intellectual took place through a sys-
tematic educational process that went on both inside and outside cultural
institutions. Baker later described herself as one of the ‘‘ignorant ones’’
when she ﬁrst arrived in Harlem with her college degree in hand.
≥π In
retrospect, she felt that she had gained a clearer understanding of the
world around her and of how to go about changing it through her political
education by activists, many of whom had less formal education than she.
In lauding Baker’s credentials in a 1932 article in the naacp’s magazine, the
Crisis, her mentor, George Schuyler, underscored the learning process that
occurred through Baker’s participation in the low-wage work force. ‘‘By
force of circumstances,’’ he observed, ‘‘her ‘post graduate’ work has in-
cluded domestic service, factory work and other freelance labors, to which


--- PAGE 96 ---
harlem during the 1930s 73
‘courses’ she credits her education.’’≥∫ Baker learned many valuable lessons
about history, politics, and people through her experiences as a political
organizer, journalist, worker, and teacher, as well as through her discus-
sions and interactions with other activists in a wide array of settings.
......
The streets of Harlem provided a cultural and political immersion like no
other. At no other time in twentieth-century African American history was
there a more vibrant black public sphere than in Harlem in the 1920s and
’30s, infused as it was with the exciting intellectual rhythms of the black
diaspora. The serious exchange of ideas, cultural performances, and politi-
cal debates ﬂowed out of classrooms, private homes, meeting halls and
bars onto the neighborhood thoroughfare of Lenox Avenue.
As historian Irma Watkins-Owens writes: ‘‘From World War I through
the 1930’s, the unclaimed terrain of the Harlem streetcorner became the
testing ground for a range of political ideologies and a forum for intellec-
tual inquiry and debate.’’ These self-styled orators are sometimes described
as ‘‘soapboxers,’’ but because of their choice of political platform Watkins-
Owens calls them ‘‘stepladder speakers.’’
≥Ω Among them were well-known
Harlem radicals like Baker’s friend Frank Crosswaith of the Harlem Labor
Center and Hubert Harrison, a socialist and onetime Marcus Garvey sup-
porter. Women participating on the stepladder circuit included Audley
‘‘Queen Mother’’ Moore, Grace Campbell, Williana J. Burrroughs, and Eliz-
abeth Frederickson. The struggle to determine Harlem’s public culture was
as much a class and ethnic struggle as a struggle over which speakers and
ideas would predominate. Respectable Harlemites saw the sometimes rau-
cous crowds that gathered as a source of embarrassment; preachers looked
down on the crude language that was sometimes expressed; and police ac-
tually arrested several speakers for disturbing the peace. Still, the tradition
continued.
∂≠ Streetcorner discussions were an informal site of Ella Baker’s
political education in the 1930s, but there were more formal courses of
study as well.
In 1931, Baker spent a semester at the Brookwood Labor College in
Katonah, New York. There she had an opportunity to learn about theories
and models of social change, as well as the history of working people.
Brookwood, where Pauli Murray had also spent time, was established in
1921 by a group of socialists and paciﬁsts in order to offer union organizers
and other progressives a socially relevant curriculum.
∂∞ It was one of a
number of worker education schools set up around that time to train labor
organizers. The teachers at Brookwood went far beyond their stated mis-


--- PAGE 97 ---
74 harlem during the 1930s
sion. They were radical, not only in what they taught but also in how they
taught, experimenting with new teaching methods and encouraging stu-
dents to think and speak for themselves. In her book on the Brookwood
educators and their cohorts, the historian Susan Kates describes how these
teachers sought ‘‘to enact forms of writing and speaking instruction incor-
porating social and political concerns in the very essence of their peda-
gogies.’’
∂≤ This was Baker’s ﬁrst encounter with an open, democratic ap-
proach to formal education. She saw enormous transformative potential
in democratic and nontraditional learning environments like Brookwood.
She took ideas, theoretical paradigms, and philosophies seriously, and she
spent much of her adult life mastering ways of how to pass that knowledge
on to others and empower them in the process.
Ella Baker’s political work from the late 1930s onward was consistent
with a worldview that she constructed from the wide range of ideologies
and traditions she had engaged with over the years. She combined the
black Baptist missionary values of charity, humility, and service with the
economic theories of Marxists and socialists of various stripes who advo-
cated a redistribution of society’s wealth and a transfer of power from
capitalist elites to the poor and working classes. Added to the mix was
Baker’s popular democratic pedagogy, which emphasized the importance
of tapping oppressed communities for knowledge, strength, and leadership
in constructing models for social change.
In many respects, Baker herself was what Gramscian theorists refer to as
an ‘‘organic intellectual.’’ Her primary base of knowledge came from grass-
roots communities and from lived experience, not from formal study. She
was a partisan intellectual, never feigning a bloodless objectivity, but al-
ways insisting that ideas should be employed in the service of oppressed
people and toward the goal of social justice. In the 1930s, New York was her
classroom, and Baker was both student and teacher.
In his biographical study of Ivory Perry, a St. Louis activist, George
Lipsitz offers a useful deﬁnition of an organic intellectual in practice:
Traditional intellectuals can distinguish themselves purely through
the originality of their ideas or the eloquence of their expression, but
organic intellectuals must initiate a process that involves people in social
contestation. . . . Organic intellectuals try to understand and change
society at the same time. . . . Organic intellectuals generate and circulate
oppositional ideas through social action. They create symbols and slo-
gans that expose the commonalities among seemingly atomized experi-


--- PAGE 98 ---
harlem during the 1930s 75
ences, and they establish principles that unite disparate groups into
effective coalitions. Most signiﬁcantly, they challenge dominant inter-
ests through education and agitation that expose the gap between the
surface harmonies that seem to unite society and the real conﬂicts and
antagonisms that divide it.
∂≥
This description characterizes much of the public intellectual work that
Ella Baker did, beginning with the Harlem Adult Education Experiment
and the Young People’s Forum and continuing with the Young Negroes’
Cooperative League and with the Workers Education Project later in the
decade. By the time she was thirty, she had become a radical intellectual
committed to teaching and learning from the people in movements for
social change, an approach that would continue to distinguish her political
work.
......
the young negroes’ cooperative league
and the dream of a new social order
In the early 1930s, grim economic realities, the looming threat of a second
world war, and the rise of European fascism had a strong, sobering effect
on the young activists and intellectuals Ella Baker associated with. Their
debates about politics, economics, and social change took on timely rele-
vance and had concrete implications for the lives of the masses of black
Harlemites. The historic backdrop of the depression era imbued their ex-
changes with a new sense of urgency.
The Great Depression hit Harlem hard. Forced evictions of entire fam-
ilies in the dead of winter were common sights, as were the hungry faces of
poverty-stricken children and long lines of desperate job-seekers. Anna
Arnold Hedgeman, who was on the staff of the Harlem ywca that Baker
frequented, recalled:
With the ﬁnancial collapse in 1929, a large mass of Negroes was faced
with the reality of starvation and they turned sadly to public relief. A
few chanted optimistically, ‘‘Jesus will lead me, and Welfare will feed
me,’’ but . . . meanwhile men, women and children searched in garbage
cans for food, foraging with dogs and cats. Many families had been
reduced to living below street level . . . in cellars and basements that had
been converted into makeshift ﬂats. Packed in damp, rat-ridden dun-
geons, they existed in squalor not too different from that of the Arkansas
sharecroppers.
∂∂


--- PAGE 99 ---
76 harlem during the 1930s
Seeing black people living in southern-style poverty in the North’s most
modern city shook many Harlemites’ assumptions about which pathways
would lead to progress for the race. These scenes of suffering had a tremen-
dous impact on Baker’s evolving political consciousness.
Baker’s political journalism reveals her responses to the depression. An
article she coauthored in 1935 with African American communist Marvel
Cooke, vividly describes the abysmal plight of black New Yorkers. Titled
‘‘The Bronx Slave Market,’’ the article highlights the connections among
wage labor, slavery, race, and sex. Baker documented the humiliating ex-
periences of black domestic workers who huddled together on designated
street corners in the early morning hours, waiting for white middle-class
women to look them over and choose a lucky one to hire for the day. Baker,
who, according to a friend, had worked brieﬂy as a maid herself, posed as a
job seeker in order to get an insider’s view of what these women were go-
ing through. The humiliation that such self-exposure entailed was com-
pounded, so Baker found, by the desperate act that some women were
driven to: that of selling their bodies to the highest bidder:
The Simpson Avenue block exudes the stench of the slave market at
its worst. Not only is human labor bartered and sold for slave wage, but
human love also is a marketable commodity. . . . Rain or shine, cold or
hot, you will ﬁnd them there—Negro women, old and young, sometimes
bedraggled, sometimes neatly dressed—but with the invariable paper
bundle, waiting expectantly for Bronx housewives to buy their strength
and energy for an hour, two hours, or even for a day. . . . If not the wives
themselves, maybe their husbands, their sons, their brothers, under the
subterfuge of work, offer worldly-wise girls higher bids for their time.
∂∑
Baker and Cooke’s vivid account of these scenes illustrates how deeply both
women were affected by the depression and its dehumanizing impact on
poor black women.
∂∏
‘‘The Bronx Slave Market’’ reﬂects Ella Baker’s lucid assessment of the
complex realities of race, gender, and class in the lives of African American
women. The women Baker observed on Simpson Avenue were victimized
by their position as blacks, as workers, and as women. Baker’s description
meshes these analytical abstractions together in the intricate web of lived
human experience. Although poor black women were sexually exploited as
women, there was no magical, raceless and classless sisterhood between
them and the white female employers, who were just as eager to use them
for their muscle as their husbands were to use them for their sexual ser-


--- PAGE 100 ---
harlem during the 1930s 77
vices. The economic rigors of the depression had intensiﬁed all forms of
oppression, pushing many black women from the lower rungs of the wage
labor force back to day work and even into occasional prostitution. When
Baker and Cooke wrote their article, the modern concept of feminism was
still a foreign notion to most Americans, black and white. Yet the black
feminist notion of intersecting systems of oppression as a cornerstone of
black women’s collective experience was an observable reality, and in their
article Cooke and Baker came close to articulating it as a theory.
∂π
Ella Baker and Marvel Jackson Cooke traveled in overlapping political
and social circles. They knew one another by reputation and through mu-
tual friends but had not formally met until they were asked by an editor at
the Crisis to coauthor an article on the plight of poor black women in the
Bronx. Over the course of several weeks, as the two women researched,
discussed, and wrote their story, they got to know one another and gradu-
ally became friends. After the publication of ‘‘The Bronx Slave Market,’’
Baker and Cooke were on a few panels together and saw one another from
time to time at social and political events in Harlem.
∂∫ They developed a
mutual respect and admiration for one another that, according to Cooke’s
recollections decades later, continued despite their political differences.
Ella Baker spoke quite fondly of Marvel in an interview as late as the 1970s.
∂Ω
Marvel Jackson Cooke, the daughter of black Debsian socialists from
Minnesota, came to New York in 1927, the same year that Baker did, and
quickly landed a job as W. E. B. Du Bois’s secretary and assistant. Her
mother had known Du Bois previously and thus helped her to secure the
job. Du Bois introduced Marvel Jackson (later Marvel Cooke) to a whole
array of political ideas, and according to his biographer, David Lewis,
also may have made unwanted sexual advances toward the naive young
woman.
∑≠ She made other political and personal connections on her own,
and she eventually chose to join the underground section of the Com-
munist Party ( cp). She became a ‘‘mainstay’’ of the ‘‘popular front’’ pub-
lication the People’s Voice  and grew to be very close to Paul and Essie
Robeson and other well-known cp members and sympathizers who con-
gregated in Harlem. Cooke lived in the popular 321 Edgecomb Avenue
apartment building that was at one time or another the home of George
and Josephine Schuyler, the journalist Ted Poston, and naacp executives
Walter White and Roy Wilkins.
∑∞ Her sister’s marriage to Wilkins could
have connected Cooke to a wider network of people, but she and her
brother-in-law were at odds politically; so the relationship was never close.
Cooke’s clandestine party membership circumscribed her involvement in


--- PAGE 101 ---
78 harlem during the 1930s
other political activities, a fact that she regretted many decades later.∑≤ Her
closest friends were, for the most part, her party comrades.
The differences as well as the connections between Baker and Cooke
are revealing. The two women were close in age, lived nearby, and shared
a left-leaning political orientation and passion for ideas. Yet their social
and political lives were not analogous. While Cooke associated primarily
with other members of the Communist Party, Ella Baker’s circle was much
broader and more eclectic. She maintained close relationships with some
cp members, and she worked with many others on particular campaigns.
Baker did not conﬁne her associations to people of a single ideological
stripe or political party. In the early 1930s, she admittedly had more ques-
tions than answers. She sought out people with whom she could study
social conditions and political strategy and places where wide-ranging dis-
cussion and debate ﬂourished. This curiosity inescapably brought Baker
into contact with not only communists and socialists but also the followers
of Marcus Mosiah Garvey, who were a visible and vocal force on the Har-
lem political scene, despite Garvey’s deportation the year Ella Baker ar-
rived there. A Jamaican immigrant and admirer of Booker T. Washington,
Garvey arrived in Harlem in 1916 and began recruiting members to his
Universal Negro Improvement Association ( unia). His message of African
pride and economic self-sufﬁciency for blacks, coupled with his ﬂamboy-
ant pageantry, won him thousands of followers and the ire of both the
federal government and black political leaders like W. E. B. Du Bois, who
saw his politics as escapist and self-promoting. Ella Baker’s close friend
William Pickens, an naacp ofﬁcial, was one of Garvey’s most ardent critics.
But unia’s popularity piqued Ella Baker’s interest: she regularly read the
organization’s paper, the Negro World , and, according to Conrad Lynn,
even attended public forums organized by the group.
∑≥ Baker spent much
of her early years in Harlem in public venues soaking up the culture, the
politics, and the intellectual fervor. She even enjoyed dining at the restau-
rant run by Father Divine’s organization on occasion, because it was an-
other lively site for political and intellectual engagement with ordinary
Harlem residents.
∑∂
For most of the 1930s, however, Ella Baker’s closest political ally was the
iconoclastic writer and activist George Schuyler, a socialist, philosophical
anarchist, and critic of Soviet-style communism. He became a mentor to
Baker, and through him and his wife, Josephine, a young, white artist from
Texas, Baker was absorbed into a lively community of writers, artists, and
radical intellectuals from across the nation and around the world who were


--- PAGE 102 ---
harlem during the 1930s 79
living in Harlem at the time. Baker and Schuyler were introduced to each
other by a mutual friend, L. M. Cole, a reporter for the Baltimore Afro-
American, and the two hit it off right away. Schuyler was a smart, creative,
provocative, and critical thinker who, according to Baker, impressed her
because he ‘‘would raise questions that weren’t being raised.’’
∑∑
Baker soon became a regular member of the circle that gathered at the
Schuylers’ home, which was large, lively, and exceptionally open, as Mar-
vel Cooke recalled. People would bring friends or acquaintances without a
speciﬁc invitation from the hosts.
∑∏ In this setting, Baker found others who
were grappling with the same moral, philosophical, and political dilemmas
that she was wrestling with at the time. She enjoyed their company, but,
she later recalled, she ‘‘didn’t care as much about the socializing as the ex-
change of ideas, or at least being exposed to the debate.’’
∑π The Schuylers’
apartment, like the ywca cafeteria, the forums at the library, and the public
parks and street corners of Harlem, was a site for an animated discourse
that helped deﬁne African American public life. In these venues, politics
and culture were debated and areas of consensus were formed and re-
formed.
∑∫ The activists, writers and artists who convened regularly at the
Schuylers’ apartment had a certain romantic appeal about them. They
were young, creative, bold, witty, and cosmopolitan. Some were known to
be pretty ‘‘snappy dressers,’’ too.
∑Ω Their spirited conversations often lasted
until dawn, and participants left intellectually energized and physically
exhausted. Ella Baker took part in many of these late-night parlays, enjoy-
ing the stimulating company, provocative conversations, and elegant hos-
pitality. The Schuylers resided at one of Harlem’s more prestigious ad-
dresses, in the ‘‘Park Lincoln Apartments on Edgecomb Avenue on what
Harlemites called the upscale area of ‘Sugar Hill.’ ’’ A reporter described the
building as one ‘‘where a rich canopy runs out to the sidewalk, and where a
liveried footman in gold braid must announce a visitor before he is permit-
ted to go up in the automatic elevator.’’
∏≠ In other words, the group’s criti-
cisms of capitalist decadence were made in very comfortable surroundings.
Despite this obvious material contradiction, most members of Schuyl-
er’s circle were not simply armchair radicals; they were organizers as well.
Schuyler was as much of a doer as he was a talker and a writer. By all indi-
cations, he was genuinely committed to improving the conditions of the
poor, even though he had managed to secure a fairly cushy lifestyle for
himself.
A belligerent and colorful character in Harlem politics during the 1920s
and 1930s, Schuyler became even more controversial thereafter.
∏∞ Born in


--- PAGE 103 ---
80 harlem during the 1930s
Providence, Rhode Island, in 1895, he served in the army during World War
I and then settled in New York City. In 1923 he joined the staff of the
Harlem-based socialist magazine the Messenger, working alongside Chan-
dler Owen and A. Philip Randolph; the latter became one of the country’s
best-known labor leaders as head of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Por-
ters and then as a founder of the Congress of Industrial Organizations.
∏≤
Schuyler became contributing editor of the magazine after Owen’s depar-
ture in the winter of 1923. As a protégé of Randolph, Schuyler was pulled
into a circle of black radical intellectuals that included Frank Crosswaith, a
black labor leader; Robert Bagnall, an naacp ofﬁcial; and J. A. Rogers, a
journalist and self-taught historian. These Harlem leftists were united by
their opposition to the separatist nationalism of Marcus Garvey. Under the
banner of the short-lived organization the Friends of Negro Freedom, the
group met weekly at Randolph’s apartment to discuss contemporary poli-
tics, history, and philosophy. Those Sunday gatherings made quite a strong
impression on Schuyler, who recalled that nothing ‘‘escaped the group’s
probing minds and witty shafts.’’
∏≥ By the late 1920s, the Messenger had
ceased to exist, the group had disintegrated, and Schuyler had begun writ-
ing a popular column, ‘‘Views and Reviews,’’ for the nationally circulated
African American newsweekly the Pittsburgh Courier . The column sur-
veyed domestic politics and race issues and occasionally commented on
foreign affairs.
Ella Baker and George Schuyler became very close friends despite their
very distinct personalities. Schuyler was an arrogant, irreverent, and some-
times ostentatious young writer, who took particular pleasure in intellec-
tual sparring matches with worthy opponents. He was a close friend and
admirer of the iconoclastic, white editor of the American Mercury , H. L.
Mencken; in fact, he was sometimes referred to as the black Mencken.
∏∂
Schuyler took great delight in ridiculing groups and individuals that he
deemed corrupt, backward, or inept. His targets covered the gamut from
black ministers and petit bourgeois black entrepreneurs to Communist
organizers. According to his longtime colleague A. Philip Randolph, Schuy-
ler took few things seriously.
∏∑ In contrast, Baker was pensive and unas-
suming. Despite her wit and good-natured humor, she took everything
seriously, and, as one friend recalls, she always ‘‘seemed mature beyond
her years.’’
∏∏
By the early 1930s, Ella Baker was no longer a devoutly religious person,
but she still appreciated the cohesive role of the church as a spiritual
and material resource for black people.
∏π In contrast, Schuyler was an


--- PAGE 104 ---
harlem during the 1930s 81
avowed and outspoken atheist who saw Christianity and religion as stum-
bling blocks to black progress. At times, his criticisms of the black church
were so ruthless and relentless that anyone who was uncritical of orga-
nized religion on some level would have been unable to work closely with
him. Presumably, Baker had developed her own doubts and criticisms of
the church as an institution by this time.
∏∫ Her doubts later evolved into a
more developed critique of the mainstream black church in general and of
the black clergy in particular. Yet, despite or perhaps because of their
contrasting characteristics, Schuyler and Baker were the best of friends
and the closest of comrades for several years. They complemented each
other in their joint political endeavors, with Baker guaranteeing that busi-
ness matters were taken care of and Schuyler serving as a ﬁgurehead and
spokesperson for the cause. In her relationship with Schuyler, Baker took
on a role she continued to play for much of her political life, that of a
behind-the-scenes organizer who paid attention to the mechanics of move-
ment building in a way that few high-proﬁle charismatic leaders did, or
even knew how to do.
Ella Baker was frequently a resource for the Schuylers in personal as
well as political matters. When the Schuylers’ daughter, Phillipa, was born
in 1932, George was, as usual, away on business, and he asked Ella to assist
his wife. Ella stayed with Josephine for a few days after the baby was born,
keeping her company and helping her with chores around the apartment.
∏Ω
Ella and Josephine became very good friends. Baker recalled that the wives
of many of Schuyler’s black colleagues disapproved of his interracial mar-
riage, which was quite uncommon in those days, and did not welcome
Josephine into their social circle.
π≠ For Baker, that was simply not an issue.
But there were other issues in the Schuylers’ marriage that caused her
some difﬁculty.π∞ Much later, Baker hinted that George may have had ex-
tramarital affairs and further intimated that she had kept George’s philan-
dering a secret from his wife. Her disapproval and silence reﬂected Ella
Baker’s complicated and often conﬂicted relationship with black men in
leadership positions. She was close enough to their day-to-day lives to
witness the backstage drama, the character ﬂaws, the sexism, and the
contradictions between their high ideals and their imperfect, even du-
plicitous actions. Although she was often critical, her criticism may have
been muted by the political goals she shared with her colleagues. Baker
acquiesced to the permeable and artiﬁcial divide between the personal and
the political only with regard to sexual matters.
π≤ She was aware that
Schuyler, and later some of her colleagues in the Southern Christian Lead-


--- PAGE 105 ---
82 harlem during the 1930s
ership Conference, were cheating on their wives and professing moral
rectitude according to conventional standards, but she did not expose their
behavior or frame it in political terms, even though she clearly viewed it as
an expression of male sexual privilege, an option not socially acceptable for
their wives or, for that matter, for Baker herself. Despite George Schuyler’s
male chauvinism and adulterous behavior behind closed doors, Ella Baker
was still willing to work with him politically.
π≥ Many years later, she re-
vealed his secrets, but even then she was not explicit: ‘‘Of course George
was male and had opportunities to exercise his maleness by traveling. I
wouldn’t claim that George was a saint and all.’’
π∂ Still, she accepted him as
a ﬂawed person, yet a reliable colleague.
The idea of forming black consumer cooperatives as a strategy to com-
bat the economic devastation being wreaked by the depression and to
educate black people about socialism galvanized the group of intellectuals
and activists that gathered around Schuyler. He proposed the idea in his
column in the Pittsburgh Courier  and received a positive response from
readers. In the spring of 1930, Schuyler issued a call to young blacks inter-
ested in the ‘‘economic salvation’’ of the race through cooperative eco-
nomics to come forth and establish a new organization for the purpose of
studying the idea and ‘‘carrying the message to all corners of Negro Amer-
ica.’’
π∑ He emphasized that the young recruits had to be ‘‘militants, pio-
neers, unswerved by the defeatist propaganda of the oldsters, and the
religious hokum of our generally . . . parasitic clergy.’’
π∏ By November, he
had only received a handful of responses. Undeterred, Schuyler joined
forces with Ella Baker and called a meeting of those who were interested in
the idea. The Young Negroes’ Cooperative League ( yncl) was formed in
1930. In October 1931, the group held its ﬁrst annual conference at the
ymca in Pittsburgh, with Robert Vann, publisher of the Pittsburgh Courier,
delivering the introductory remarks. The event was attended by thirty
delegates ‘‘who paid their own carfare to come’’ from as far away as Wash-
ington D.C. and South Carolina.
ππ Despite the small number of ofﬁcial
delegates, the conference’s opening session drew a capacity crowd of over
600 people. Baker shared the speaker’s platform with Schuyler and Vann,
addressing the important role of black women in the emerging cooperative
movement. Schuyler became the ﬁrst president of the yncl, and Baker was
unanimously elected to serve as its national director.
π∫
The yncl was a coalition of local cooperatives and buying clubs loosely
afﬁliated in a network of nearly two dozen afﬁliate councils scattered
throughout the United States. Each council functioned independently but


--- PAGE 106 ---
harlem during the 1930s 83
contributed funds for the national ofﬁce, which was based in New York
City. The yncl circulated a newsletter, served as a clearinghouse for infor-
mation, attempted to bolster the cooperative concept through national
publicity efforts, and offered workshops and training sessions for co-op
leaders. In her capacity as executive director of the organization, Baker
staffed the national ofﬁce and traveled around the country consulting with
local council leaders and promoting the value of cooperative ventures, for
which she received a salary of $10 a week.
πΩ As the masthead of the group’s
stationery proclaimed, its principal purpose was to ‘‘gain economic power
through consumer cooperation.’’
∫≠ Baker emphasized her own commit-
ment to that mission in 1932, when she stated: ‘‘We accept with zest the
opportunity which is now ours to prove to ourselves and others that the
Negro can and will save himself from economic death.’’
∫∞
The founding statement of the yncl reﬂected many of the principles of
grassroots democracy and group-centered leadership that Ella Baker advo-
cated for the rest of her political life. The coalition pledged itself to the full
inclusion and equal participation of women. An explicit emphasis on gen-
der equality was unusual for any political organization, black or white,
during this period; this commitment suggests that Baker’s remarks about
the vital role women could play in the cooperative movement were well
received, and it certainly underscores the group’s inclusive and egalitarian
orientation. The yncl took steps to ensure the full participation of its rank
and ﬁle in decision making and leadership. Since membership in individual
co-ops had to be purchased through the buying of shares, larger share-
holders could conceivably have wielded greater inﬂuence in determining
the priorities of the co-ops than smaller shareholders. To avoid such in-
equalities, the yncl adopted the position that each member was allotted
only one vote, regardless of the number of cooperative shares he or she
owned. In a pamphlet titled ‘‘An Appeal to Young Negroes,’’ George Schuy-
ler declared the organization’s commitment to grassroots democracy: ‘‘We
are ultra democratic and all power rests in the hands of the rank and ﬁle.
All ofﬁcers serve only during the pleasure of the electorate.’’
∫≤ This em-
phasis on participatory democracy is all the more signiﬁcant in a political
climate where the major organizations trying to organize among blacks—
the naacp, the cp, and the unia—were under ﬁre for elitist, authoritarian,
or messianic leadership styles.
Another founding principle of the yncl was that young people should be
in the forefront of the struggle for social change. If the energy, optimism,
and rebelliousness of youth could be harnessed and directed into con-


--- PAGE 107 ---
84 harlem during the 1930s
structive political channels, the black movement would be revitalized. The
yncl restricted its membership to young adults thirty-ﬁve years old and
younger. Older adults could be admitted only after a two-thirds vote of
approval by the local membership. The group’s founder, George Schuyler,
was already thirty-ﬁve years old when the organization was established;
Ella Baker was twenty-seven. Schuyler commented at the time, ‘‘This mea-
sure is designed to keep the control of the organization in the hands of
young people. We consider most of the oldsters hopelessly bourgeois and
intent on emulating Rockefeller and Ford on a shoestring budget.’’
∫≥ To
ensure that its autonomy would remain uncompromised, the yncl refused
to accept ﬁnancial support from churches or charitable foundations.∫∂
While Ella Baker and the other leaders of the yncl held no great rev-
erence for older, established leaders, they did not assume that the mantle
of leadership should pass to them automatically because of their youth.
In the tradition of the young intellectuals known as the Harlem radicals
in the 1920s, a group to which Schuyler had belonged, the yncl placed
great emphasis on internal discussion and education among its members.
The founding statement declared that ‘‘each council should follow a well-
planned educational program, emphasizing at all times the inclusiveness
and far-reaching effects of Consumers Co-Operation on the Negro’s social
and economic status.’’
∫∑ Rank-and-ﬁle members were offered an analysis of
the cooperative movement as it related to larger national and international
issues as part of their orientation to the cooperative movement. The orga-
nization’s founders insisted ‘‘we must be trained before trying to lead peo-
ple’’ and that therefore in the ﬁrst year ‘‘each council [will be] engaged in
extensive educational work.’’
∫∏ The key role of mass education in grassroots
organizing was another principle Baker pushed for time and again in the
decades that followed.
In 1930, the yncl envisioned an ambitious ﬁve-year plan, which, accord-
ing to Schuyler, was inspired by the Bolsheviks’ ﬁve-year economic plan. It
included the goals of training 5,000 co-op leaders by 1932, establishing a
cooperative wholesale outlet by 1933, and ﬁnancing an independent col-
lege by 1937. Although most of these heady plans were never realized, the
yncl’s membership did grow steadily in its ﬁrst few years. Starting with a
core group of thirty in December 1930, the organization boasted a member-
ship of 400 two years later, with local councils in some twenty-two cities
from California to New York.
∫π Two of the more successful ventures were a
grocery store employing four full-time workers and ‘‘doing a business of


--- PAGE 108 ---
harlem during the 1930s 85
$850 a week’’ in Buffalo, New York, and ‘‘a co-operative newsstand and
stationery store’’ in Philadelphia.∫∫
The organization faced ﬁnancial difﬁculties from the outset. In January
1932, Ella Baker, as executive director of the organization, oversaw the
kick-off of a three-month ‘‘Penny a Day’’ campaign urging yncl supporters
to set aside a penny each day to invest in cooperative projects in the hope of
revitalizing the cooperative movement and saving the ﬂedgling national
ofﬁce of the yncl. The campaign was timed to coincide with three dates of
historic signiﬁcance: Abraham Lincoln’s birthday, Negro History Week,
and the signing of the Emancipation Proclamation. The second annual
conference was held in Washington, D.C., in April 1932. By September of
that year, however, the national ofﬁce was forced to close because of the
lack of ﬁnancial support from local councils. Without any guarantee of
steady income, Baker continued to serve as unpaid executive director of the
yncl, answering correspondence, accepting speaking engagements, and
coordinating weekly meetings of the New York council, which were held at
the ofﬁces of the Urban League.
∫Ω At the height of the organization’s ﬁnan-
cial crisis, Baker urged her comrades to remain optimistic: ‘‘remember,
every movement has started as our movement has started.’’
Ω≠
Ella Baker’s determination in the face of such formidable obstacles was
due, in large part, to her having begun to develop a long-range view of
political struggle. The founders of the yncl had a vision of social change
and racial uplift that extended well beyond the immediate beneﬁts result-
ing from the establishment of buying clubs and cooperative enterprises.
They viewed the cooperative movement as much more than a survival
strategy to ameliorate the suffering of a handful of black participants; it
was a vital, practical proving ground for the socialist principles of commu-
nalism and mutual aid. To them, the concepts of cooperation and collective
action were the ideological pillars on which this larger movement was to be
built. The cooperative movement was thus a microcosm of a new social
order and embodied the idealistic vision held by many of its proponents.
Cooperatives offered an alternative to the cut-throat, unbridled compe-
tition that many felt had led to the 1929 stock market crash and the ensuing
depression. In describing the mission of the cooperative movement, Baker
declared: ‘‘Ours is an unprecedented battle front. We are called upon to . . .
be in the vanguard of the great world movement toward a new order.’’
Ω∞ An
article distributed by the yncl explains the mission of the more radical
wing of the 1930s cooperative movement as follows: ‘‘The consumer coop is


--- PAGE 109 ---
86 harlem during the 1930s
an evolutionary movement, whereby the people . . . hope to obtain full
control of the supply and distribution of the necessities of life, thereby
eliminating the proﬁt motive from trade. . . . Consumer cooperation is
revolutionary, for its ultimate aim is to create a better social structure by
making unnecessary the present form of government which is operated by
and for the privileged class.’’
Ω≤
Baker and her idealistic young comrades saw the building of cooperative
economic institutions as the ﬁrst step toward a peaceful transformation of
society from capitalism to a more egalitarian, socialist alternative. Buying
cooperatives would, they hoped, demonstrate on a small scale the efﬁ-
ciency of collective economic planning and simultaneously promote the
values of interdependency, group decision making, and the sharing of re-
sources. As sociologist Charles Payne points out, this vision echoes the
memories Baker treasured from her childhood in North Carolina during
the early 1900s. She often spoke fondly of a time when mutual obligation
and shared resources were the ties that bound small southern black com-
munities together and brought out the best in the individual members of
those communities.
Ω≥ The plan of the organization was that all proﬁts
earned by shareholders would be ‘‘used for the common good’’; proﬁts
were to be reinvested in ‘‘clinics, libraries, and cooperative housing to
combat slums.’’
Ω∂ In a 1935 article for the Amsterdam News, Baker articu-
lated her hope that the new cooperative ventures would be harbingers of
‘‘the day when the soil and all of its resources will be reclaimed by its
rightful owners—the working masses of the world.’’
Ω∑ In her 1935 view of
the world, a redistribution of wealth had to be a part of any radical reorga-
nization of society.
The yncl was not formally linked to any socialist or communist party,
and its founders were harshly critical of the weaknesses of much of the
organized left. Yet the yncl’s leaders had their own vision, however elu-
sive, of how their efforts could transform society and eradicate capitalism.
George Schuyler was ﬁrm and outspoken in his condemnation of the evils
of modern capitalism, and Ella Baker shared that critique. This conviction
was central in Schuyler’s call for the formation of consumer cooperatives.
In a 1930 column, Schuyler identiﬁed capitalism as the cause of much
of the suffering experienced by African American people. He responded
sharply to an anticommunist critic:
[W]hen the best minds of the age are questioning how long an eco-
nomic system can last that exploits its slaves and does not even protect


--- PAGE 110 ---
harlem during the 1930s 87
them from hunger and the elements; when we see capitalistic govern-
ments advocating many policies that were suggested by Socialists 50
years ago, and ﬁnally, when capitalism has been the greatest factor in
the ravishing of Africa and the degradation of her transplanted sons and
daughters, it sounds strange to hear a smug little Negro editor criticize
other Negroes because they have the intellectual courage, ability and
vision to study socialism and bolshevism.
Ω∏
Linking economic exploitation, enslavement, and colonialism, Schuyler
proclaimed that only a left-wing analysis could adequately address the
problems facing the race. The progress of the race depended on a clear-
sighted critique of the class dynamics of American capitalism. Schuyler
outlined the yncl’s long-term objectives in terms that stressed the group’s
unique combination of revolutionary goals with an evolutionary process of
social transformation:
Co-operative democracy means a social order in which the mills,
mines, railroads, farms, markets, houses, shops and all the other neces-
sary means of production, distribution and exchange are owned cooper-
atively by those who produce, operate and use them.
Whereas the Socialists hope to usher in such a Utopia society by the
ballot and the Communists hope to turn the trick with the bullet, the co-
operator (who is really an Anarchist since the triumph of his society will
do away with the state in its present form—and I am an Anarchist) is
slowly and methodically doing so through legal, intelligent economic
cooperation or mutual aid.
Ωπ
Schuyler claimed to be an anarchist in part to be provocative. He identiﬁed
with a freer form of radicalism that rejected the strictures of a Soviet-style
state or the centralized hierarchy of a Bolshevik-type vanguard party. He
seems to have embraced socialist ideals, not socialist or communist parties.
Baker did not share all of Schuyler’s views, but she did share his opti-
mism about the cooperative movement, proclaiming that ‘‘from economic
planning must spring our second emancipation.’’
Ω∫ For the rest of her life
she challenged the inequities inherent in a capitalist society. In an article
published in 1970, for example, Baker argued that ‘‘only basic changes in
the social structure of the country will be adequate to the needs of the poor,
both black and white,’’ given that ‘‘in the midst of such great wealth, mil-
lions are impoverished.’’
ΩΩ
The yncl and the concept of economic cooperation enjoyed a very broad


--- PAGE 111 ---
88 harlem during the 1930s
base of support that spanned the spectrum of African American political
thought during the early 1930s. Such moderate black leaders as newspaper
publisher Robert Vann, Howard University president Mordecai Johnson,
and Benjamin Brawley of Shaw, expressed support for the organization,
although none of them were socialists, much less philosophical anarchists.
These unlikely associations suggest two things. First, cooperative econom-
ics was rooted in the long-standing tradition of black self-help, mutual aid,
and uplift, so it had wide appeal to both small entrepreneurs and socialists.
Cooperatives could be viewed as a way of navigating the racist stumbling
blocks within American capitalism; alternatively, they could be seen as a
direct challenge to its legitimacy. Second, in a time of systemic economic
crisis, many small business people were eager to try any methods they
could, however unorthodox, to keep their businesses aﬂoat. For blacks in
particular, the repertoire of survival strategies included the pooling of
resources and a willingness to at least temporarily substitute cooperation
for competition.
Baker and Schuyler were heirs to a long tradition of mutual aid in
the African American community, and many black organizers had seen
cooperatives as an avenue for economic improvement. During the 1920s
and 1930s, several organizations and leaders, including, most notably,
W. E. B. Du Bois, advocated similar strategies. According to historian Man-
ning Marable, Du Bois’s commitment to all-black cooperative ventures was
consistent with his deepening socialist vision and simply took into account
the reality of American racial politics in the Jim Crow era. Du Bois, in
Marable’s words, ‘‘ﬁrmly believed that the Negro middle class could lead
black workers to a moderate socialist program. In a series of articles in the
Pittsburgh Courier , Du Bois explained that the entire working class could
‘make one assault upon poverty and race hate.’ But to begin this process,
black Americans had to build their own separate organizations along coop-
erative lines.’’
∞≠≠ Du Bois held the view, Marable concludes, that ‘‘the rise of
black cooperativism would ultimately establish a unity between workers of
both races.’’
∞≠∞ In other words, African Americans had to initiate a transi-
tional strategy toward socialism that made political sense within the con-
ﬁnes of Jim Crow. Toward this end, Du Bois ‘‘supported the development of
black cooperatives.’’
∞≠≤
Varied political tendencies can be identiﬁed under the rubric of the
cooperative movement. Du Bois represented one strain, while Father Divine
represented quite another. A ﬂamboyant and controversial messianic re-
ligious leader who professed no socialist aspirations whatsoever, Divine


--- PAGE 112 ---
harlem during the 1930s 89
adopted cooperative methods and rhetoric in building his religious empire.
He organized soup kitchens, stores, and nurseries by calling on his fol-
lowers to pool their meager resources and labor together under the banner
of self-help. Divine’s cooperative enterprises did help many poor black
people to survive during hard times. Contrary to the yncl’s policy of chan-
neling proﬁts into community projects, however, Divine siphoned off a
good chunk of the excess to support his own lavish lifestyle.
∞≠≥ Some sup-
porters of cooperatives had more straightforward, pragmatic goals. Many
small business people entered into partnerships and joint, bulk-buying ar-
rangements to minimize their costs and maximize their proﬁts. Although
advocates of ‘‘black capitalism’’ supported cooperatives, most of them
strongly disapproved of the yncl. For example, in 1933 the yncl was
sharply criticized by the conservative Colored Merchants Association and
the National Negro Business League. Schuyler predictably reacted with
biting criticisms of his own.
∞≠∂
The yncl was a short-lived experiment in collective black self-
determination. Like many economic cooperatives, it was unable to survive
the concrete pressures of a dominant social and economic system antitheti-
cal to its aims or to sustain a mass base of committed supporters. It proved
especially difﬁcult to hammer out a daily practice to implement the group’s
long-term goals. The organization was plagued by monetary woes from its
inception and eventually collapsed under the weight of ﬁnancial obliga-
tions that could not be met. Schuyler’s biographer, Michael Peplow, at-
tributes the failure of the yncl not only to the lack of capital and ﬁnancial
support but also to the fact that Schuyler’s inﬂammatory remarks about
the black church and the black middle class had made him too many
enemies.
∞≠∑
Rooted in the idealism of the utopian socialist communities of the nine-
teenth century, cooperatives held out the illusory hope of creating an oasis
of economic democracy in the midst of a capitalist society, an objective rife
with pitfalls and contradictions from the outset. Schuyler traveled to En-
gland and met with organizers of the famous British cooperative move-
ment to garner lessons to ensure the longevity and stability of the yncl, but
the odds were against the venture.
∞≠∏ Cooperatives needed capital, which
few black people had even during the best of times. In the depths of the
Great Depression, the minimum funds required to sustain stable buying co-
ops were simply unavailable. Cooperatives were not a short-term solution
to economic woes; they needed considerable time to demonstrate prog-
ress. In such urgent and uncertain times, most people were not conﬁdent or


--- PAGE 113 ---
90 harlem during the 1930s
patient enough to allow them to work. The co-ops that did succeed were
absorbed into the dominant economy.
Still, the cooperative movement held a special appeal for Ella Baker.
Given the range of political organizations based in New York City during
the early 1930s, why did she choose to dedicate her efforts to the yncl?
One reason is that the cooperative philosophy resonated with many of the
ideals that were instilled in her as a child. She brought her memories and
ideals of community solidarity in the rural South to bear on the predica-
ment in which she found oppressed black people in the urban North.
Judging from the political views that the mature Ella Baker articulated
during the 1960s, there are other ways in which the yncl must have ap-
pealed to and inﬂuenced her as well. Baker’s political philosophy called for
challenging the laws and institutions of society in order to eliminate dis-
crimination and inequity, but at the same time she felt strongly that any
movement for social change must transform the individuals involved—
their values, priorities, and modes of personal interaction. Baker expressed
this viewpoint as early as the 1940s, and it remained a constant theme in
her politics thereafter. The cooperative movement offered organizers a way
of working with people on a protracted, day-to-day basis. The process of
setting up co-ops, establishing common priorities for those involved, solidi-
fying democratic methods of decision making, and building communica-
tions networks encouraged people at the grassroots to engage in social
change and transformation, changing themselves, each other, and the
world around them simultaneously. Unlike such singular events as voting
on election day or attending a political rally, involvement in cooperatives
and buying clubs enabled people to redeﬁne the ways in which they related
to neighbors, friends, and co-workers. For Baker, political struggle was,
above all, a process, and she insisted that the structure of political organi-
zations had to allow for the process of personal and political transforma-
tion to occur.
In many respects, the yncl experiment foreshadowed a very similar or-
ganization with which Baker would be closely afﬁliated some thirty years
later, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ( sncc). Both orga-
nizations were decidedly independent of more moderate black leadership.
Both embraced the concept of leadership at the grassroots as opposed to a
top-down model. And both focused on youth as a cutting-edge force for
social change. The two groups certainly had different goals and emerged
from distinctly different historical contexts. But parallels are clear: both
the yncl and sncc were distinguished from other contemporary organiza-


--- PAGE 114 ---
harlem during the 1930s 91
tions by their focus on grassroots education, democratic decision-making,
and a step-by-step, transformative process of working toward long-term
goals. The connection between the yncl and sncc in Baker’s own life
history illuminates the carryover of strategies for resistance and change,
which were passed on through conduits like Ella Baker from generation to
generation. Since the yncl was so crucial in shaping Baker’s own political
thinking, she presumably drew on many of the lessons and mistakes of that
experience in the efforts to launch and sustain sncc during the early 1960s.
Her years in the yncl left Baker with a wealth of political experience,
but her lack of any real material wealth took its toll. Throughout the de-
pression, she suffered bouts of unemployment and was in a perpetual state
of ﬁnancial instability. Her predicament was shared by many other edu-
cated people, both black and white, but her commitment to voluntary
political organizing kept her poorer than some. To make ends meet, Baker
took short-term jobs whenever they were available, often ﬁnding them
through friends. In the summer of 1934, she worked with the World’s Fair
Boosters and Friends of Africa, in their ofﬁces on 135th Street, to promote
black attendance at the fair and coordinate the Negro exhibits. She worked
brieﬂy, along with John Henrik Clarke, on the Youth Committee of 100
against Lynching; with Lester Granger at the New York Urban League; with
Harlem’s Own Cooperative; and with the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car
Porters.
∞≠π Some of this was volunteer work, and some provided her with a
nominal salary. She also did freelance writing for a wide variety of periodi-
cals and worked as ofﬁce manager for the National News , a short-lived
publication edited by Schuyler that was geared toward a black readership.
Finally, Les Granger told her about job openings at the Works Progress
Administration (wpa). Baker immediately ‘‘went down and signed up.’’
∞≠∫
......
the workers education project
In October 1936, Baker began working as a consumer education teacher for
the Workers Education Project ( wep) of the wpa, based initially in ofﬁces
on Broadway across from City Hall and later on 14th Street in lower Man-
hattan.
∞≠Ω Her experience in coordinating and conducting education pro-
grams in the cooperative movement qualiﬁed her for this assignment. The
wpa was one of numerous New Deal agencies set up during the depres-
sion by President Franklin D. Roosevelt to combat massive unemployment
through the creation of government-funded jobs. Employment programs
designed speciﬁcally for educated workers aimed to use their talents for the


--- PAGE 115 ---
92 harlem during the 1930s
public good: artists created murals and sculptures for public buildings; the
Federal Theatre hired actors and directors to stage plays for popular au-
diences; the Federal Writers Project compiled guides to states and collected
historical documents. Black leaders close to the Roosevelt administration
made sure that black artists, writers, and teachers were not denied access
to employment programs for educated workers, and some projects docu-
mented and supported African American culture.
∞∞≠
The wep consisted of 1,000 teachers nationwide who were sympathetic
with the militant forces within the burgeoning trade union movement,
speciﬁcally the Congress of Industrial Organizations ( cio). The project’s
ofﬁcial purpose was to ‘‘cooperate with union ofﬁcials and community
leaders in organizing and conducting classes in workers’ and consumers’
problems.’’
∞∞∞ wep teachers held classes in settlement houses, union halls,
churches, and workplaces, and discussions ranged from practical questions
about the social security program to the growth of fascism abroad.
∞∞≤ The
New York City ofﬁce had a staff of about eighty and was supervised by
Isabel Taylor, ‘‘a mild-mannered woman whose background included set-
tlement house work in the tradition of Jane Addams, and working with
coal mining families in Pennsylvania.’’
∞∞≥ Initially, according to Baker’s
friend and wep co-worker Conrad Lynn, ‘‘the government felt we [in the
wep] should be neutral in the struggle between capital and labor . . . but we
won the right to study the history of the labor movement,’’ which soon
became a primary focus of the group’s work.
∞∞∂ Lynn recalled how prolabor
wep teachers tried to infuse radical politics into their classes. ‘‘We ferreted
out instances of exploitation of workers, educating them about instances
such as the famous Triangle Shirtwaist ﬁre in which dozens of workers
were killed due to the unsafe conditions they were forced to work under.’’
Such lessons, Lynn admitted, were intended to motivate workers to join the
growing trade union movement.
∞∞∑ Baker’s long-time friend Pauli Murray,
who also worked with the wep, made the case for partisanship even more
strongly in a 1938 report on how to improve the project’s efforts. In her
view, teachers needed to bolster workers’ conﬁdence so that they would
not be ‘‘satisﬁed with things as they are.’’ She felt that the wep should
encourage black workers, in particular, to overcome feelings of ‘‘inferiority
and timidity’’ and to ‘‘see the world as theirs and from which they have a
right to take what rightfully belongs to them.’’
∞∞∏
Ella Baker was recognized as a successful educator within the wep. Soon
after joining the wpa, she was promoted to assistant project supervisor in
the Manhattan ofﬁce of the wep. There, Baker coordinated and conducted


--- PAGE 116 ---
harlem during the 1930s 93
workshops on consumer issues for church, labor, and community groups.
She was also the author of several publications, including a study guide
on consumer issues that was distributed nationwide.
∞∞π Like Lynn and Mur-
ray, Baker strove to politicize the content of her work and radicalize her
students by linking the problems of consumers with larger issues of in-
equality and the need for social change. A ﬂyer announcing one of Baker’s
consumer education workshops read: ‘‘Some consumers organize to save
money, others to save the world—what does consumer education mean to
you?’’
∞∞∫ Her syllabi posed such questions as ‘‘Why so much poverty in so
rich a country as America?’’ and ‘‘What role can organized and dynamic
consumer action play in issuing in a new social order?’’
∞∞Ω
Baker undertook concerted efforts to make consumer education avail-
able and accessible to black Americans, who might otherwise not have seen
wep programs as relevant to them. She conducted workshops in Harlem,
holding classes in old storefronts and at workplaces, and created an educa-
tional exhibit on consumer issues in Harlem Hospital to accommodate
hospital employees, especially nurses who might not have otherwise at-
tended.
∞≤≠ Pauli Murray shared Baker’s goal of making the wep more acces-
sible to black workers and supported her efforts, praising Baker’s work in
Harlem and urging the ofﬁce to lend more publicity to the work.
∞≤∞
The wep provided a serious political education for the teachers it em-
ployed. ‘‘We had few guidelines and we learned as we taught, pooling our
experiences,’’ recalled Murray. ‘‘We also had to familiarize ourselves with
the immediate problems of clothing workers, Pullman car porters, domes-
tic workers, transport workers, sales clerks, the unemployed, or whatever
groups we were assigned to. We had to be well informed on contemporary
social, economic and political issues to satisfy the demand among workers
for discussions of political events.’’
∞≤≤ The wep teachers learned from their
dialogues with adult students and from their debates with one another.
They studied, argued, and grappled on a day-to-day basis with the most
pressing economic and political problems of the time. Looking back de-
cades later, Conrad Lynn was convinced that he had encountered ‘‘some of
the best political minds collected under one roof ’’ while working there.
∞≤≥
In the wep, young radical intellectuals hammered out together new ap-
proaches to social change.
The wep was host to virtually every sector of the American left, from
proponents of labor union organizing and independent socialists to mem-
bers of the Communist Party. Baker recalled their passionate debates with
pleasure: ‘‘You had every spectrum of radical thinking on the wpa. We had


--- PAGE 117 ---
94 harlem during the 1930s
a lovely time. . . . Boy it was good, stimulating.’’ ∞≤∂ In this intellectually
dynamic environment, where theories were tested against the experiences
of working adults as well as against alternative points of view, many of the
amorphous ideals that had attracted Baker to the yncl were challenged
and reﬁned. The yncl had introduced Baker to progressive politics; in the
wep, her ideas were forged into a coherent political analysis.
Baker also studied and taught in the workers’ education program at the
Rand School for Social Science, located on East 15th Street in Lower Man-
hattan. In 1936, while she was working for the wep, Baker attended classes
at the Rand School, and by 1937 she was teaching consumer issues at the
school’s weekly afternoon classes for women.
∞≤∑ Founded in 1906 by mem-
bers of the American Socialist Society and funded by Carrie Sherfey Rand,
a wealthy Iowa radical and former abolitionist, the school offered courses
on socialist theory, economics, and labor history and hosted such notable
intellectuals as John Dewey, Bertrand Russell, and Charles Beard. By the
1930s the school’s cafeteria, classrooms, and bookstore were hangouts for
an interracial crowd of young radical thinkers and activists.
∞≤∏ Her experi-
ence as a student and teacher at the Rand School was another part of
Baker’s deepening involvement in and exposure to leftist politics in New
York City.
In the wep ofﬁce where Baker worked, there were constant debates and
discussions about such topics as the future of socialism, the relationship
of the communist movement to the struggle for Negro rights, how to struc-
ture organizations democratically, the rise of fascism in Europe, and the
future of colonialism in Africa. Her coworkers included Conrad Lynn, a
lawyer for the Young Communist League; Agnes Martuoucci, a member of
the Socialist Party; and Pauli Murray, who supported the independent
socialist faction led by Jay Lovestone. ‘‘You had every splinter of the cp,’’
Baker recalled, as well as a variety of socialists and independent radicals. In
describing the backgrounds of her co-workers at the wep, Baker remem-
bered that many of her white colleagues were so-called red diaper babies
who had been brought up in leftist families, but who ‘‘had become disillu-
sioned with the bringing in of the socialist order through the cp, and yet
who couldn’t leave the idea.’’
∞≤π They were actively looking for socialist
alternatives. Lynn echoed Baker’s assessment: the wep staff ‘‘were men and
women committed to the cause of labor, and they represented every party
and tendency of the left. For the ﬁrst time Trotskyists, Lovestoneites, Stam-
mites, Socialists, Anarchists, and Henry Georgeites mingled with orthodox
Communists.’’
∞≤∫


--- PAGE 118 ---
harlem during the 1930s 95
In this new environment, Baker clariﬁed her thinking about class, and
began to put her ideas about education and social change into practice. The
philosophy of education that she expressed during her work for the wep
reﬂects some key features of her larger political vision. One of the main
goals of workers’ education, according to Baker, was to provide the worker
with ‘‘a more intelligent understanding of the social and political economy
of which he is a part.’’
∞≤Ω For Baker, consumer issues were not apolitical
matters that affected everyone regardless of their economic position. She
pointed out that although ‘‘everyone is a consumer . . . here, we are pri-
marily concerned with the wage earner whose income fails to satisfy the
needs and desires of himself and his family . . . and who can ﬁnd small
comfort and little hope in our present economy.’’
∞≥≠ In describing her ap-
proach to consumer education, Baker insisted that ‘‘the aim is not educa-
tion for its own sake, but education that leads to self-directed action.’’
∞≥∞
Consumer politics were one aspect of a larger class struggle between the
haves and have-nots. Baker saw consumers as workers at the other end of
the production process and struggle over consumer power as analogous to
the struggle for workers’ power on the factory ﬂoor. As she put it in her
syllabus: ‘‘All work is but a means to the end of meeting consumer de-
mands. The ‘real wage’ is what the pay envelope will actually buy. The
wage-earner’s well-being is determined as much at the points of distribu-
tion and consumption as at the point of production. . . . Since recurrent
‘business slumps’ and the increased mechanization of industry tend to
decrease the primal importance of the worker as producer, he must be
oriented to the increasingly more important role of consumer.’’
∞≥≤
In other words, organization at the point of consumption was poten-
tially as important as the Marxist strategy of organization at the point
of production. By acting collectively as consumers and as workers, ordi-
nary people could inﬂuence the economy and improve the condition of
their lives. In her wep course syllabus, Baker raised fundamental questions
about the economic injustice of American capitalism and suggested that an
independent, aggressive consumer movement had an important role to
play in changing that system.
∞≥≥ She clearly saw her work as a part of a
bigger process of social and economic change along socialist lines.
The wep exposed Baker to the entire spectrum of leftist political ide-
ologies and factions. She was a careful observer and critic of the left and
had many close friends in opposing organizations and parties. In her opin-
ion, the Communist Party ‘‘was the most articulate group for social action.
[It] may not have been well organized all the time, but it was articulate.’’
∞≥∂


--- PAGE 119 ---
96 harlem during the 1930s
Charles Payne points out that Baker also admired the localized ‘‘cell struc-
ture’’ of the cp, which could be interpreted any number of ways, but, given
the trajectory of Baker’s politics after the 1930s, it is likely that she simply
valued the localized process of intensive small-group discussion and plan-
ning that a ‘‘cell’’ structure composed of small units that worked closely
together would allow for.
∞≥∑ Baker respected the cp’s leadership in organiz-
ing white and black industrial workers during the 1930s, and its white
members were some of the staunchest antiracists around. However, her
criticisms of the party, which she did not write down, seem to have out-
weighed her praise.
∞≥∏ Baker’s relationships with cp members were not
governed by the politically expedient notion of ‘‘live and let live.’’ Rather,
she constantly struggled with her friends and comrades around points of
disagreement. Conrad Lynn, one of her closest cp friends, recalled that
Baker often ‘‘shoved reading material under my nose critical of the Com-
munist Party.’’ Yet the two remained lifelong friends.
∞≥π Even though Baker
was more closely associated with the socialists, rather than the commu-
nists, in Harlem, she never endorsed the ‘‘militant anticommunism’’ of
some of her friends, such as A. Philip Randolph, who, according to histo-
rian Mark Naison, took the position that ‘‘communism represented a ‘Fifth
Column’ in American life that had to be destroyed at all costs.’’
∞≥∫
Among all the various and competing leftist organizations active in New
York during the 1930s, Baker was particularly sympathetic to the Love-
stonites, an independent socialist faction named after its leader, Jay Love-
stone, who had split from the Community Party during the late 1920s.
∞≥Ω In
interviews, John Henrik Clarke and Conrad Lynn agreed about Baker’s
Lovestonite afﬁliation.
∞∂≠ The fact that one of Baker’s closest friends, Pauli
Murray, supported Lovestone adds weight to Lynn’s and Clarke’s recollec-
tions.
∞∂∞ Lovestone and his followers were critical of the Communist Party’s
view of the Bolshevik revolution as a virtual blueprint for socialist revolu-
tions worldwide. As proponents of a brand of American exceptionalism,
they believed that the United States had to follow its own path toward
socialism. Lovestone had been general secretary of the Workers (Commu-
nist) Party during the late 1920s, when the so-called Negro question was
being hotly debated within party circles. Before he was ousted in 1929,
Lovestone and his black and white allies within the party opposed the
notion of black self-determination founded on the idea of a southern-based
Negro ‘‘nation within a nation,’’ which was introduced at the Sixth Con-
gress of the Communist International in Moscow in 1930. Lovestone had
little conﬁdence in organizing in the agrarian South and thought that the


--- PAGE 120 ---
harlem during the 1930s 97
party should urge blacks to migrate to the industrial North instead. ∞∂≤
Lovestone advocated interracial organizing on the basis of common class
interests. One of his strongest black supporters within the party was Lovett
Fort-Whiteman, who coauthored an internal party document that called
for the abolition of the party-run American Negro Labor Congress on the
grounds that it unfairly segregated black workers coming into the party.
Those on the other side of the debate countered that critics of the American
Negro Labor Congress and the self-determination position were minimiz-
ing race and suggesting that it was marginal to the class struggle.
∞∂≥ Love-
stone recognized that racism was a problem within the party as well as in
the nation as a whole, and he maintained that the party should ﬁght ‘‘white
chauvinism’’ and upgrade ‘‘Negro work.’’
∞∂∂
According to historian Paul Buhle, the Lovestonite faction, after its ex-
pulsion from the Workers (Communist) Party, encouraged ‘‘a rethinking of
communist policies in a more open fashion’’ while promoting an aggres-
sive agenda, including the development of a Worker’s School headed by
Bertram Wolfe.
∞∂∑ The group, in Buhle’s assessment, maintained a ‘‘small
but vital intellectual following’’ in the early thirties.∞∂∏ Baker may have been
drawn to the Lovestonites’ lively intellectual debates and emphasis on radi-
cal education. The group’s interracial composition and its commitment to
understanding the connections between racial injustice and class inequality
would also have appealed to her. Whatever the attraction to the controver-
sial group, Baker’s afﬁliation with Lovestone was a loose one at best.
Baker was well informed about left political theory and questioned all
the viewpoints. She read and debated Marxist ideas regularly with her co-
workers in the wep, but she was never known to toe a ‘‘party line’’ of
any type. Indeed, she was a vigorous opponent of sectarianism, regard-
ing organizational splits over abstractions as destructive to organizing for
change. Baker’s interest in Marxism was an extension of her open-minded
exploration of a wide spectrum of political views. According to some of her
friends, she was fairly promiscuous in her political associations during and
after the 1930s. It did not matter whether she dealt with communists,
Lovestonites, socialists, or ardent Garveyites; she was eager to engage them
all. This openness to diverse political views and ideologies characterized
much of her political life. Anyone concerned with social and economic
justice, civil rights, and human progress was a potential ally—or at least
worthy of a hearty debate. Even at this early stage of her political career,
Baker was a catalyst for bringing people together. She was a common
denominator among the varied and often contentious segments of Harlem’s


--- PAGE 121 ---
98 harlem during the 1930s
progressive political community. ‘‘Characters of all the various political
stripes would drop by Ella’s apartment, just for the political challenge of it.
She would argue her point one day,’’ John Henrik Clarke recalled, ‘‘and see
you on the street and hug you the next. Principled disagreements were not a
basis to shut anybody out.’’
∞∂π
......
internationalism and the black diaspora
Moving from the provincial South to metropolitan Harlem opened Baker’s
eyes to the variety of black diasporic cultures and politics. One of the things
Baker loved about New York was its global character, a multinationalism
that permeated the political and cultural life of the city. Baker marveled
that ‘‘if ever there was any ferment across the ocean in terms of social action
and development of political parties like communist, socialist, etc., New
York became the place where it birthed and blossomed most.’’
∞∂∫ During the
1930s, Baker, like many African Americans, took a greater interest in world
affairs and U.S. foreign policy. As John Henrik Clarke put it, ‘‘black took on
a bigger meaning and freedom took on a global character.’’
∞∂Ω
In 1932, Baker worked as a reporter for the West Indian News and famil-
iarized herself with Caribbean politics and culture; she also became ac-
quainted with the Caribbean socialist Richard Moore.
∞∑≠ In January 1937,
when England sent troops to suppress a strike by oil workers in the British
colony of Trinidad and Tobago, Baker took a stand in support of the strik-
ing workers. She had lengthy conversations with her friend Conrad Lynn
about the incident, ﬁring him up so much that he disrupted a meeting of
the New York City Committee of the Communist Party by demanding that
they funnel aid to the embattled black strikers.
∞∑∞ The cp committee re-
fused, and Lynn walked out of the meeting threatening to resign his mem-
bership in protest. Lynn recounted this dramatic incident in his autobiog-
raphy, There Is a Fountain , but only years later did he mention that his
conversations with Ella Baker were the impetus for his actions.
∞∑≤
During 1934–35, when the Italian dictator, Mussolini, moved to annex
the African nation of Ethiopia, thousands of Harlemites mobilized to pro-
test the violation of Ethiopia’s autonomy and to support the Ethiopian
resistance. Ella Baker lent her voice in support of this international cam-
paign, marching in demonstrations, attending meetings, and circulating
petitions under the organizational banner of the American League against
War and Fascism.
∞∑≥ The league held a major march through Harlem on


--- PAGE 122 ---
harlem during the 1930s 99
August 3, 1935, which brought out nearly 25,000 people. ∞∑∂ Baker’s close
relationship with one of the key leaders of the Ethiopian aid campaign,
Rev. William Lloyd Imes, suggests that she may have played more of a role
in this effort than extant documents indicate.
∞∑∑ In ‘‘Light on a Dark Conti-
nent,’’ an unpublished article on the richness of African history written by
Baker in the late 1930s, she directly challenged the bias of Eurocentric
histories, pointing out that, in fact, the so-called Dark Continent of Africa
was the birthplace of the human species.
∞∑∏ These words and activities
indicate that Baker’s politics were framed by a much larger internationalist
perspective and included a particular concern with the issues of African
colonialism and independence.
Pan-Africanism linked the liberation of people of African descent
throughout the diaspora to the struggle for self-determination on the conti-
nent of Africa. W. E. B. Du Bois was one of its major proponents within the
United States, advocating solidarity among black people around the world
but rejecting any type of narrow, racial separatism at home. Baker’s inter-
nationalist stance and her critique of black nationalism went hand in hand
as well. She was indubitably a ‘‘race woman,’’ unapologetic about her love
and afﬁnity for black people, and she situated herself politically and per-
sonally within a diverse and sometimes fractious black community. She
lived her entire adult life in the historically and culturally rich black en-
clave of Harlem out of choice rather than necessity. But her afﬁnity and
sense of community did not stop there. Baker’s class analysis and political
perspective suggested the need for cooperation and coalition building with
other oppressed people, regardless of race. The Young Negroes’ Coopera-
tive League was the only all-black organization with which Baker was
afﬁliated, and the yncl maintained amicable relations with nonblack orga-
nizations, especially cooperatives, that had similar economic and political
goals. Baker never worked with organizations that espoused narrow na-
tionalist ideas or advocated Garvey-style separatism. Her views on these
questions closely resembled those of Du Bois. They both recognized that, in
a historical period deﬁned by Jim Crow segregation, all-black organiza-
tions were necessary modes of self-help and group empowerment, yet they
did not preclude working with predominantly white or multiracial organi-
zations simultaneously or in the future.
∞∑π In the economic crisis of the
depression, African Americans had to take immediate steps to resist op-
pression and ensure their survival. They could work toward establishing
principled, enduring coalitions with whites and with other people of color,


--- PAGE 123 ---
100 harlem during the 1930s
especially on issues of economic justice, but coalition-building was a pro-
tracted process and was most effectively conducted from a strong, autono-
mous base.
Baker saw the necessity of forming alliances across racial lines and
national boundaries on pragmatic political grounds. In response to re-
marks made by a Philadelphia minister urging blacks to pull themselves up
by their bootstraps, that is, without allies, she argued in an unpublished
essay written around 1940:
I could but think ‘‘how true and yet how false.’’ True that a new
economic order must be built, but false to hope that it can be built by the
Negro alone on any policy of racial isolation. True that the Negro’s
future will be determined by his own efforts, but false to expect . . . that
it can be achieved by . . . racial isolation. While we are tugging at our
own bootstraps, we must realize that our interests are more often than
not identical to that of others. We must recognize the identity of inter-
ests, work with other groups . . . [and yet not sacriﬁce our interests to
that of the larger cause]. A difﬁcult but unavoidable task.
∞∑∫
Baker, like Du Bois, combined a commitment to self-determination with a
vision of social and political transformation in which African Americans
would work alongside other oppressed groups to establish a new social and
economic order. The international perspective that enabled Du Bois and
Baker to link black Americans’ struggles with those of Africans and others
against colonialism was key to their ability to untie the knot that, within
the United States, too often made self-determination and multiracial orga-
nizing look like antitheses rather than compatible, even mutually neces-
sary goals.
Baker’s internationalism and her commitment to coalition-building re-
mained steadfast throughout her long political life. She connected racial
and economic injustice and looked to other oppressed groups as poten-
tial allies. In 1968, for example, Baker observed: ‘‘The logical groups for
the black masses to coalesce with would be the impoverished whites, the
mis-represented and impoverished Indians, and the alienated Mexican-
Americans. These are the natural allies in my book.’’
∞∑Ω Baker later ex-
pressed her internationalist views by her involvement in the Puerto Rican
solidarity movement, the struggle against colonialism in Africa, and the
anti–Vietnam War movement. She also made deliberate efforts to expose
civil rights activists to struggles in other parts of the world. Although Baker
never traveled outside the United States, her universal vision of politics


--- PAGE 124 ---
harlem during the 1930s 101
and human rights encompassed the globe and linked her with individuals
from the Caribbean to the African continent. The foundations of this inter-
nationalist perspective were laid in Harlem during the 1930s.
......
a most unconventional marriage
Some time in the early 1930s, there are conﬂicting accounts on exactly
when, Ella Baker moved out of her cousin’s apartment and into a place of
her own, located across from a small park on St. Nicholas and West 133d
Streets.
∞∏≠ This was a bold and unconventional act. Baker was aware that
‘‘for black women from nice homes’’—‘‘[n]ice religious homes’’—to be liv-
ing alone in a big city like New York was frowned on.
∞∏∞ But she was not
overly concerned about what other people thought of her choices. The new
apartment afforded her privacy, space enough to gather with groups of
friends, and the ability to come and go as she pleased. When asked years
later if her mother, Anna, had approved of the move and her New York
lifestyle, Baker responded that it really didn’t matter, since she was too far
away to do anything about it.
∞∏≤
Baker’s early years in New York City were dominated by professional and
political activities, though she did have a few personal friends, including
the Schuylers. She occasionally got together with Emma Lance, who
worked on the wpa-sponsored Federal Theatre Project, to ‘‘drink a few
beers and talk over matters of ‘Affairs of State,’ as well as romance.’’
∞∏≥ In a
very frank and detailed letter to Ella after the two women had not seen one
another in some time, Emma conﬁded irreverently that she was dating two
men at the same time but was still working too hard to devote proper
attention to either one. Her level of candor and disclosure suggests that the
two women were quite close. A male friend, Freeman Hubbard, also con-
ﬁded in Baker about his love life and other personal matters, at one point
chastising ‘‘busy little Ella’’ for not keeping in closer touch.
∞∏∂
Soon after Ella arrived in New York, her boyfriend from back home, T. J.
Roberts, or Bob as she called him, began sending telegrams declaring his af-
fection and longing to be with her. Addressing her as ‘‘darling’’ and ‘‘sweet-
heart,’’ Bob promised Ella that he was ‘‘still loving you’’ despite their dis-
tance.
∞∏∑ The two kept up an active correspondence, augmented by phone
calls between 1927 and 1930. At times, Bob complained that Ella had not
responded quickly enough to his previous telegram or call; it appears that
on other occasions Bob had let the communication between them lag. They
professed their love for one another, and both expressed a desire to be


--- PAGE 125 ---
102 harlem during the 1930s
together. Eventually, after years of separation punctuated by her visits
home and his visits to New York, they decided to get married. ∞∏∏ Roberts
and Baker shared the apartment on St. Nicholas Avenue in Harlem for
nearly twenty years.
The marriage was anything but traditional. Baker never assumed her
husband’s surname, an unusual act of independence during the 1930s.
When Baker was visiting her family in Littleton, one of her cousins asked
what had possessed her to keep her own last name after she married. ‘‘I had
it all this time, I just ﬁgured I would keep it,’’ she explained matter-of-
factly.
∞∏π Nor did she stay home in Harlem to perform whatever wifely
duties might have been expected of women of her generation. From her
ﬁrst years as an organizer and educator for the yncl, she had traveled
wherever her work took her. Baker did not change this pattern when she
married; in 1941, she accepted a job as a ﬁeld organizer for the naacp that
required her to be away for weeks at a time. Roberts was a quiet and gentle
man who did not interfere with Ella’s principal passion, which was politics.
Indeed, he kept such a low proﬁle that when the fbi was spying on Baker
during the 1940s they assumed he was a female relative living with her and
apparently had no idea she was married.
∞∏∫ Many close friends were also
unaware of what Baker later referred to as her ‘‘domestic arrangement.’’∞∏Ω
Although Baker was married to Roberts for many years, she seems never
to have treated him as an integral part of her life or as an inﬂuencing force
in her thinking. In interviews conducted over many years, she repeatedly
minimized the importance of her married life, denied that it had any rele-
vance to her political work, and declined to answer probing questions that
attempted to unravel her marital mystery. Student activists with whom
Baker worked during the 1960s remember her being open and frank about
almost everything except her marriage. ‘‘It was one of the few things she
just wouldn’t talk about,’’ recalled Bernice Johnson Reagon.
∞π≠ ‘‘When I
asked her about her husband she would say, ‘oh no, it’s not important,’ ’’
remembers Joyce Ladner.
∞π∞ Baker bluntly told an interviewer not to ‘‘get
too personal’’ when she broached the subject of marriage.∞π≤ ‘‘Many people
didn’t even know Miss Baker had ever been married; she was explicitly Miss
Baker’’ to most of her political associates.∞π≥
Ella Baker’s deliberate silence about her married life makes it difﬁcult
for a biographer to do more than document the fact of her marriage and
acknowledge this gap in the story she told about her life. Yet her papers and
her friends’ observations of her and her husband during these years do
offer some clues about the relationship. Although Roberts was never as


--- PAGE 126 ---
harlem during the 1930s 103
politically active as Baker, he was a ﬁghter in his own way, refusing to
accept indignities meted out routinely to blacks and demanding fair treat-
ment when and where he could. When Roberts was treated rudely by a
clerk in a Miami, Florida, railway station while he was traveling, he wrote a
strong letter of complaint to the railway company insisting on an apol-
ogy.
∞π∂ During the 1940s, Roberts was active in the tenants’ rights group in
their Harlem apartment building at 452 St. Nicholas Avenue, ∞π∑ one of the
few contexts in which the twosome had an open, public identity as a mar-
ried couple.
∞π∏ Roberts was willing to ﬁght when issues had an immedi-
ate impact on him and his loved ones. He left the larger political battles
to Baker.
John Henrik Clarke, who met Ella Baker through the Committee of 100
against Lynching, knew the couple well during the 1930s and frequently
visited their apartment. According to Clarke, the marriage was not a union
of equals. Roberts ‘‘was out of his league with Ella,’’ Clarke observed. ‘‘She
took him in like a little puppy out of the rain. I think she sort of felt sorry for
him.’’
∞ππ ‘‘He had his interests and she had hers,’’ recalled another close
friend.∞π∫ Despite their differences, the couple stayed together and weath-
ered some difﬁcult years. They were often separated by the demands of
their jobs: Baker’s work for the naacp required extensive travel, and Rob-
erts’s work in the refrigeration business also took him on the road quite a
bit. Undoubtedly, being apart so much put a strain on their relationship.
After a period of separation and an attempted reconciliation, which in-
cluded marital counseling from a Harlem pastor, the marriage was not
salvageable and ﬁnally ended in divorce in 1958.
∞πΩ Years later, Baker and
her niece, Jackie Brockington, who had lived with the couple for several
years, attended Bob Roberts’s funeral to pay their respects.
∞∫≠ Even after
the marriage ended, connections and obligations remained. Just as she
didn’t write off political friends, she was not prepared to write Bob off
either, even if they were no longer a couple.
The late 1930s were especially difﬁcult years for Baker personally and ﬁ-
nancially. On December 11, 1938, two days before Ella’s thirty-ﬁfth birthday,
her father died, leaving her mother alone and economically vulnerable. Ella
had developed an independent identity during her years in Harlem, but
now she was recast as an adult daughter with signiﬁcant responsibility for
her aging mother. Ella had always been the responsible one, not Maggie, so
the burden fell on her shoulders. It was difﬁcult for Ella to contribute to
the support of her kin when it was so hard to ﬁnd paid work herself. Her
marriage did not improve her ﬁnancial situation, since both she and Rob-


--- PAGE 127 ---
104 harlem during the 1930s
erts had difﬁculty keeping jobs. This problem was so common during the
depression that many couples postponed marriage for years because of
ﬁnancial uncertainty. By 1939, Baker and her new husband were nearly
destitute. Bob Roberts answered a New York Times classiﬁed ad for a couple
to work as janitors, an indication of just how desperate they were.
∞∫∞
Ella Baker wrote letters to the New York Housing Authority, the American
League for Peace and Democracy, and other organizations inquiring about
possible employment, all to no avail. In 1940, she applied unsuccessfully for
an emergency loan from a New York charity, pointing out that she did so
only as ‘‘a last resort’’ after an extended period of unemployment.
∞∫≤ John
Henrik Clarke recalled that ‘‘Ella was always broke and always borrowing
money from one friend or another.’’
∞∫≥
Money was never important to Baker. She focused on her political work
and thought about money only when there was none. In 1938 she applied
for a job as youth coordinator for the naacp. Two years later, they hired her
as an assistant ﬁeld secretary, which launched another phase of her politi-
cal career as a grassroots organizer and guaranteed a steady income at
least for a while.
Baker was always a ﬁercely independent soul who routinely shunned
convention and refused to be corralled into the prescribed roles that others
wanted her to play. In college, she was a rebel, albeit a reluctant one, who
deﬁed the rigid rules and bureaucratic hierarchy of Shaw’s administration.
During her early years in Harlem, she quickly evolved from a curious and
naive young rebel to a serious and committed left-wing radical. Reﬂecting
on her arrival in Harlem, Baker recalled: ‘‘I, perhaps at that stage, had the
kind of ambition that others may have . . . the world was out there waiting
for you to provide a certain kind of leadership and give you the oppor-
tunity. But with the Depression, I began to see that there were certain
social forces over which the individual had very little control. It wasn’t an
easy lesson. It was out of that context that I began to explore more in the
areas of ideology and theory regarding social change.’’
∞∫∂
This realization was a turning point in Baker’s life. After nearly a decade
in Harlem, working in various political organizations and studying a wide
range of ideas about social change, she rejected much of the middle-class
‘‘grooming’’ she had received at home and at Shaw and instead became a
radical activist and grassroots organizer. Baker forfeited many of the class
privileges that her education and talents might have afforded her. She
chose instead to struggle on behalf of the oppressed. Her rewards were not
material ones.


--- PAGE 128 ---
4
fighting her own wars
the naacp national office, 1940–1946
......
We must have the ‘‘nerve’’ to take the Association to people wherever they are.
Ella Baker, 1941
Give people light and they will ﬁnd a way.
Ella Baker, 1944
In December 1940, as fascism swept across Europe and North Africa and
the United States vacillated about entering the conﬂict, Ella Baker enlisted
in another war—the war against American racism—by joining the staff of
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( naacp),
one of the fastest-growing black freedom organizations.
After two years of trying to get her foot in the door at the naacp, Baker
had landed a job as assistant ﬁeld secretary, earning $29 a week.
∞ She
was ecstatic. What could be better than getting paid to ﬁght the sys-
tem? Throughout the remainder of the decade, as the predominantly male
spokespersons for black America made pronouncements about the war,
federal legislation, and world affairs, organizers like Ella Baker were ﬁght-
ing in the trenches of southern battleﬁelds for social and economic justice
for African Americans. Through their actions, they were making real the
national black freedom slogan of ‘‘double victory,’’ victory against fascism
abroad and racism at home. Their courageous efforts laid the basis for the
postwar struggle over the very meaning of American democracy, a mean-
ing that inescapably hinged on the issue of race. For Baker and many of her
closest allies, the struggle had another layer as well. By the 1940s, Baker


--- PAGE 129 ---
106 fighting her own wars
was convinced that how one fought was as important as what one was
ﬁghting for; the key to change lay in the process of movement building.
Therefore she lobbied to make the structure and practices of the naacp
more inclusive and egalitarian and to infuse a greater spirit of activism and
militancy into its local campaigns as a strategy for grassroots empower-
ment. During her years with the naacp, Baker honed her skills as a rank-
and-ﬁle organizer and began to explore ways of implementing her evolving
ideas about democratic mass action.
Throughout her nearly six-year tenure with the naacp’s national staff,
ﬁrst as a ﬁeld secretary and then as the national director of branches, Baker
traveled into the bowels of the American South, suffering the insults of
Jim Crow segregation and often putting her own life in danger in order
to support local antidiscrimination campaigns and recruit new members
to the association. Although antiracist whites still served on the naacp’s
board of directors and belonged to branches in some northern cities, the
strict segregation that pervaded every aspect of life in the South meant
that local branches were composed almost entirely of African Americans.
In many southern cities and small towns, the naacp was the only black
freedom organization on the scene, and joining it was a militant gesture. In
doing ﬁeld work for the naacp, then, Baker was organizing black people to
confront white supremacy. This was a physically grueling and emotionally
stressful job, and Baker was only able to do it because of the support she
received from a network of close friends and colleagues, most of whom
were women.
In the naacp, as in other political organizations, women were indispens-
able but underappreciated. The association had never elected a woman as
its executive secretary, and women were often excluded from the informal
inner circle of decision makers.
≤ On the other hand, women formed the
backbone of many of the most active local branches, as well as of the
national ofﬁce staff itself. Women’s contributions had to be acknowledged,
even if they did not translate into formal positions of power. Both ﬁeld
secretaries and local branch leaders had a certain amount of autonomy,
and—despite the national leadership’s preoccupation with control—the
day-to-day organizing work they did in the ﬁeld was crucial to the associa-
tion’s success. In the ﬁnal analysis, the naacp provided an opportunity for
women like Ella Baker to wield considerable inﬂuence at the local level and
to a lesser extent nationally. At times, Baker had to defend her authority
and her autonomy, but the respect she earned from her co-workers and
from local activists and the skills she brought to her assigned tasks meant


--- PAGE 130 ---
fighting her own wars 107
that even those who disliked her outspoken and assertive style had to put
up with it, at least for a while.
......
field work for the naacp
Founded in 1909–10 by the prominent scholar-activist W. E. B. Du Bois
as an interracial organization committed to achieving racial equality, the
naacp experienced considerable growth and success over its ﬁrst thirty
years. Fighting its battles largely in the legal arena, the naacp won a num-
ber of key victories, recruited a cadre of bright and talented young black
activists and lawyers to its staff, and earned a reputation as the preeminent
black rights organization of the day.
Emerging out of the all-black Niagara Movement, the naacp was as
much a challenge to the conservative political tendencies among African
American leaders as it was a response to the unabashed racism and vigi-
lante violence of white society. In 1909, Booker T. Washington was the
reigning patriarch of black American politics. Although a radical black
tradition had existed through slavery, Reconstruction, and beyond, Wash-
ington’s accommodationist stance, which advocated self-help instead of
protest, set the tone for the era. The naacp’s demand for racial equality
seemed radical in comparison to Washington’s politics, especially in the
hostile climate of the early twentieth century. In the beginning the associa-
tion’s leadership, embodied in its board of directors, was predominately
white and middle class, and its rank-and-ﬁle membership was relatively
small. After a series of legal victories regarding voting rights in the 1910s
and 1920s, including a 1915 Supreme Court decision that struck down the
discriminatory grandfather clause and another in 1927 that outlawed the
all-white primary, the organization grew considerably in prominence and
visibility. In 1920, the Harlem Renaissance writer James Weldon Johnson,
who was an associate of Ella Baker’s during the 1930s, became the ﬁrst
black to head the organization. He was succeeded by the controversial and
ﬂamboyant Walter White, who took over as the second black executive
secretary in 1930.
≥
The naacp came of age during the Great Depression and World War II.
Its aggressive attack on lynching and other forms of racial violence, its ﬁght
against discrimination in the armed forces and war industries, and ﬁnally
its campaign against inequality in public education put the organization on
the national map. There were internal changes as well. By the onset of the
depression, the naacp’s leadership had an increasing black presence, and


--- PAGE 131 ---
108 fighting her own wars
the organization enjoyed tremendous growth. Over the course of Baker’s
years with the association’s national ofﬁce, from 1940 to 1946, its member-
ship mushroomed from 50,000 in 1940 to almost 450,000 by 1945.
∂ The
naacp became a nationwide organization with a signiﬁcant presence in
southern small towns as well as in northern cities. Baker worked for the as-
sociation at a pivotal moment in its development as a leading force within
the black freedom movement.
The naacp’s growth was promoted by its active national staff. By the
1940s, this cadre of educated young, predominately black professionals
were increasingly inﬂuencing the association’s programs and policies. As
the group expanded, internal debates and struggles over its politics and
policies became more frequent. One of the palpable tensions Baker ob-
served was generational as well as political, foreshadowing some of the
political differences that later manifested themselves in the Civil Rights
Movement of the 1960s. At the time Baker was hired, she later recalled, the
naacp had entered ‘‘a period when there were young people who were
joining the staff and who were demanding certain kinds of opening up,
which meant primarily going down and working with people, not just
having a great big mass meeting and collecting the membership.’’
∑ They
were challenging what they perceived to be the more moderate and elitist
practices of their elders.
∏
The push to widen the organization’s base was linked to an ongoing
effort to expand its agenda. During the depression, economic issues came
to the fore in the naacp, as was true in other African American organi-
zations. The clamor for change peaked in 1933 at a conference held in
Amenia, New York, at the estate of Joel Spingarn, a longtime white backer
of the naacp. The gathering included young radical black intellectuals,
such as E. Franklin Frazier, Ralph Bunche, and Abram Harris, who de-
manded that the group become more oriented toward mass action and
more focused on labor and economic issues. While their speciﬁc proposals
for change were rejected by the national leadership, many staff mem-
bers still hoped to push the organization in that general direction. Some of
these young activists became Ella Baker’s allies and role models during the
1940s, as the association continued to grapple with questions about what
kind of organization it should be and what work should be given priority.
Black politics at that time, perhaps even more so than today, were domi-
nated by personalities, a fact that Ella Baker spent a great deal of her life
trying to change. The two personalities who dominated the naacp during
the 1930s and 1940s were W. E. B. Du Bois, founder and editor of the


--- PAGE 132 ---
fighting her own wars 109
association’s monthly magazine, the Crisis, and Walter White, its executive
secretary. Du Bois was a Harvard-trained scholar who had studied in Berlin
and published works of history, sociology, political analysis, and autobiog-
raphy. By the 1940s he had an international reputation as an outspoken
opponent of American racism and of colonialism worldwide, and he was a
leading advocate of Pan-Africanism, a philosophy that called for the de-
colonization and uniﬁcation of Africa.
π Walter White also was an author
and longtime civil rights crusader, but he was never as erudite or politically
sophisticated as Du Bois. Their relationship was permeated by competition
and conﬂict. White had a great sense of his own importance, which he liked
to ﬂaunt. His egotism offended many black people, especially those who
believed that his arrogance stemmed from misplaced pride in his striking
physical features: he was blonde, blue-eyed, and very light complected. But
White’s commitment to the struggle for racial justice was as clear as his
own racial appearance was ambiguous.
Personal tensions and political differences put Du Bois and White on a
collision course. According to his supporters, Du Bois, who had no pint-
sized ego himself, was engaged in a push to democratize the association
during the 1930s and 1940s, seeking to open up decision making and con-
duct more mass campaigns. White, on the other hand, felt that Du Bois was
using the Crisis to put forth his own political views, some of which were at
variance with the ofﬁcial policies of the naacp. Most notably, Du Bois
clashed with White and others on the board over his support for all-black
economic initiatives during the 1930s, a position they felt undermined the
association’s commitment to full integration. To some, however, the con-
ﬂict between the two men was largely a clash of egos and personalities.
Neither man won a decisive victory. Du Bois initially resigned from the
naacp in 1935, but he continued to enjoy strong support and returned to
the national ofﬁce in 1944. White ﬁnally ﬁred him in 1948. Ironically, it was
the ousted Du Bois who left the more enduring legacy, as others carried on
the principles he had articulated.
Ella Baker respected Du Bois, shared many of his left-wing sentiments,
and felt that the naacp could ‘‘use his many and varied talents.’’ Yet she was
not comfortable with either White’s or Du Bois’s leadership style. She de-
scribed Du Bois as aloof and both men as having a great sense of ego and
self-importance.
∫ Neither of them was the kind of organizer Baker modeled
herself after; such high-proﬁle, public ﬁgures did not draw her to the asso-
ciation and keep her there. It was the brave and unheralded local people
scattered in naacp branches throughout the country, along with her few


--- PAGE 133 ---
110 fighting her own wars
close friends in the New York ofﬁce, who earned Baker’s respect, loyalty,
and perseverance.
An interesting and eclectic supporting cast of characters staffed the
naacp ofﬁces in New York during the 1940s, ranging from sophisticated
and articulate young lawyers to quiet but tireless secretaries and ofﬁce
workers. Although the most visible naacp leaders during the 1940s were
male, a number of tough, creative, and hard-working women were indis-
pensable to the daily operations of the New York ofﬁce and the grassroots
ﬁeld organizing that sustained it. W. E. B. Du Bois’s future wife, Shirley
Graham, was one of them. Graham, a novelist, playwright and left-leaning
activist who worked brieﬂy for the naacp as a ﬁeld organizer in 1943,
expressed enormous respect for Baker as a democratizing force within the
organization. Five years after her own departure from the staff, Graham,
by then married to Du Bois, wrote a scathing letter protesting her hus-
band’s ouster and linking his criticisms about the lack of democratic ac-
countability with the grievances that Baker had expressed at the time
of her own resignation in 1946.
Ω Other women that Baker respected and
worked closely with included Lucille Black, Charlotte Crump, Ruby Hurley,
and Daisy Lampkin, all of whom she relied on for sisterly support.
Baker was one of four ﬁeld secretaries when she joined the staff in 1940.
Daisy Lampkin, the eldest and most experienced of the group, immediately
took Ella under her wing. The job of ﬁeld secretary required long hours,
hard work, and extensive travel. The ﬁeld secretaries were the direct links
between the naacp national leadership and the association’s rank-and-ﬁle
members. Field workers traveled several months out of the year assisting
branch leaders in setting up and conducting membership and fundraising
drives. Those who were so inclined also helped branches to pursue local
campaigns on issues they regarded as important. Field secretaries were the
front-line troops whom Madison Jones, a national staff member, once jok-
ingly called the ‘‘ﬁeld hands’’ of the organization, underscoring the distinc-
tion between those who did tough, direct organizing and those who
worked from their desks in the New York ofﬁce.
As a part of her orientation as a new ﬁeld secretary, Baker was asked
to accompany Lampkin on a visit to the Washington, D.C., branch, which
was holding its annual membership drive. Walter White hoped that Baker
would ‘‘be able to observe Daisy’s techniques in putting over a campaign.’’
∞≠
Baker admired Lampkin’s savvy as an organizer, although in many respects
the two women were quite different. Lampkin was nearly twenty years
Baker’s senior, with a decade of service at the naacp and long experience


--- PAGE 134 ---
fighting her own wars 111
in African American women’s politics. Lampkin had been an advocate of
woman suffrage, had lobbied for the passage of the Nineteenth Amend-
ment, and was active in both the National Association of Colored Women
and the National Council of Negro Women, two prominent black women’s
organizations. She was also vice president of the African American news-
paper the Pittsburgh Courier  and a close associate of Robert Vann, the
paper’s publisher, who had supported Ella Baker’s efforts in the coopera-
tive movement during the 1930s. Lampkin was a legendary organizer of
naacp branches and served as something of a role model for Baker when
she was ﬁrst hired.
∞∞
Baker was grateful to get the job with the naacp and eager to prove
herself. Branch ofﬁcials in Washington, D.C., were quite impressed by her
performance. Herbert Marshall, the branch president, wrote to Walter
White commending Baker’s skills and insights as an organizer: ‘‘I predict
for her a very brilliant future as a member of our naacp family.’’
∞≤ In
September 1941, her colleague E. Frederic Morrow, who later served in the
Eisenhower White House, concluded that Baker’s ‘‘success in the past few
months with the Association has been phenomenal.’’
∞≥
In March 1941, Ella Baker began traveling on her own. Her ﬁrst stop was
Birmingham, Alabama, where she launched a major membership drive. ∞∂
Many new organizers would have been intimidated by the prospect of
venturing, all alone, into so notorious a place. By the 1940s, Birming-
ham already had a formidable reputation for racism and repression. Anne
Braden, who spent part of her childhood in Alabama, commented that
‘‘Birmingham was so bad that race and union organizers were snatched off
the streets and beaten nearly half to death in the 1930’s, and racist police
chief Bull Connor was doing his dirty work in the 40’s as well,’’ meaning
that he was openly encouraging antiblack violence.
∞∑ Martin Luther King
Jr. once described Birmingham as the ‘‘most thoroughly segregated city in
the United States.’’
∞∏ After a systematic campaign by Alabama’s white elites
to suppress civil rights organizing, the naacp was banned from the state in
1956.∞π Birmingham remained a pivotal site of civil rights struggles for the
next two decades.
In this dismal climate of repression and racial violence, Baker met some
tough and courageous people. She viewed the branch president, Rev. J. W.
Goodgame Jr., as a ‘‘doer,’’ and she described local activists, particularly
Mr. and Mrs. J. J. Green, as ‘‘people who endeared themselves to me to an
unusual degree.’’
∞∫ The friendships forged through her work in Birming-
ham made it, ironically, one of Baker’s favorite cities. Despite its virulent


--- PAGE 135 ---
112 fighting her own wars
racism and vigilante violence, she once described it as ‘‘one of the places in
the South where I felt at ease.’’ Whenever she took time out for a few days
of leisure during her extended travels, she stopped in Birmingham. Baker
liked ‘‘shopping in the big department stores there’’—probably buying hats,
which was one of her few and favorite indulgences.
∞Ω She loved hats. Per-
haps it was a quick way for someone as busy as she was to add a little
pizzazz to her outﬁt without much fuss. She had a sense of style but never
much time or patience for makeup, fancy hairdos, and the like. Her hats
were her fashion statement, and she was very upset when on at least two
occasions during her travels in the 1940s her hatboxes were left behind on
trains. She dispatched letters to just about everyone concerned to locate
the prized possessions, which eventually she did.
≤≠
In the spring of 1941, during the Birmingham campaign, Baker went to
great lengths to drum up support for the naacp. Working with Rev. Good-
game, she frequented neighborhood gathering places to try to reach the
common folk. On one particular day, they ‘‘spent the morning visiting
barber shops, ﬁlling stations, grocery stores and housewives, getting peo-
ple to work.’’
≤∞ Baker was not above resorting to material incentives to
motivate people to recruit new members for the naacp. She was pleased to
report that ‘‘with the announcement of cash prizes, we have been able to
get the pastors of most of the leading churches to agree to act as captains
and accept 100 members as their quota.’’
≤≤ The membership drive was a
resounding success. During a stay of nearly two weeks, Baker helped enlist
dozens of new members and raised thousands of dollars for the naacp.
Baker wanted to build as large a base for the naacp as she could. She
conveyed to Assistant Secretary Roy Wilkins her ideas for ‘‘increasing the
Crisis circulation and bolstering my campaign efforts [by visiting] some of
the pool-rooms, boot black parlors, bars and grilles,’’ with the aim of ‘‘hav-
ing a Crisis made available to regular patrons of the business.’’
≤≥ These
forays into traditionally male domains—obvious gender transgressions—
exemplify Baker’s habit of pushing the boundaries of acceptable behavior
for a respectable, middle-class, married woman during the 1940s. In her
letter to Wilkins, she described this activity as the result of her strong
‘‘desire to place the naacp and its program on the lips of all the people . . .
the uncouth masses included.’’
≤∂ Baker used this expression sarcastically:
in her thinking, the masses were not ‘‘uncouth’’; rather, they were central
to her political vision for change. Her style of organizing always focused on
how she could make a campaign, an issue, or an organization have greater
appeal to the mass of ordinary people.


--- PAGE 136 ---
fighting her own wars 113
Baker had a way of appealing to ordinary people by making herself
accessible, speaking in a familiar language that people could readily under-
stand, and interacting with them in a way that made them feel they were
important to her. She nurtured and cultivated this unassuming manner.
Baker recognized that aspects of her background—her class privilege,
higher education, residence in New York City, and close contact with prom-
inent national leaders—made her different from many of the uneducated
folk she worked with in the South. Nevertheless, she did not want those
differences to overshadow their commonalities. Baker was fond of telling a
story about a woman who said to her after a meeting in some small south-
ern town that the two of them were wearing the same dress. Such an
encounter would be a society woman’s nightmare, but Ella Baker delighted
in it: ‘‘I’ve had women come up to me and say, ‘Your dress is just like mine.’
And that’s an identiﬁcation. See, they don’t know how to deal with the
verbal part, but they are identifying with you. And instead of you turning
up your nose to turn them off, you can say something that shows that that’s
good. We’ve both got good dresses.’’
≤∑ Baker interacted with the woman in
a way she thought would make the woman feel most comfortable. She did
not view the comment as petty; rather, she tried to read between the lines
to understand why the woman had approached her. The woman’s com-
ment about the piece of clothing they had in common suggested that the
woman had also identiﬁed with what Baker had said in her speech, al-
though the woman was uncertain about how to express it. Other naacp
leaders had come to town in the past wearing expensive clothing. Baker
approached people in a different manner. ‘‘They didn’t have to worry about
me wearing any minks,’’ Baker joked later; ‘‘I didn’t own any—didn’t want
any.’’
≤∏ Her remarks underscore the point that she was straightforward and
unpretentious. This down-to-earth quality enabled her to rapidly develop a
rapport with people, especially poor and working-class people.
This story gives us insight into Baker’s personal organizing style. In
an interview many years later, Baker described how she approached her
naacp work in the South. Over the years, she had arrived at the conclusion
that political participation was not mainly about high-powered leaders like
White or Du Bois but rather about the ways in which ordinary people could
transform themselves and their communities. This process was both pro-
foundly political and deeply human. She explained it this way:
There’re some people in my experience, especially ‘‘the little people’’ as
some might call them, who never could explain the naacp as such. But


--- PAGE 137 ---
114 fighting her own wars
they had the knack of getting money from John Jones or somebody.
They might walk up to him: ‘‘Gimme a dollar for the naacp.’’ And maybe
because of what they had done in relationship to John Jones, he’d give
the dollar. They could never tell anybody what the program of the Asso-
ciation was. So, what do you do about that. You don’t be [ sic] demean-
ing to them. You say, well here is Mrs. Jones, Mrs. Susie Jones, and
remember last year Sister Susie Jones came in with so much. . . . Now,
somewhere in the process she may learn some other methods, and she
may learn to articulate some of the program of the Association. But
whether she does or not, she feels it. And she transmits it to those she
can talk to.
≤π
In Baker’s political philosophy, personal relationships were the building
blocks that led to solidarity and collective action. Sociologist Belinda Rob-
nett suggests that emotions are also critical variables in mobilizing and
organizing people for action. It is important that people feel as well as think
about what they are involved in.
The process of individual politicization described by Baker resembles
the theories developed by feminist social scientists and historians such as
Karen Brodkin Sacks, Chana Kai Lee, Bernice Johnson Reagon, and Temma
Kaplan, who, like Robnett, argue that women’s social relationships are
critical resources in community-based political mobilization. For example,
Sacks’s study of a hospital workers’ unionization drive focuses on the web
of personal and political relationships sustained largely by women workers,
whom she terms ‘‘centerwomen.’’ She concludes that ‘‘political activism is
embedded in, and ﬂowers from, everyday inter-personal and social experi-
ences.’’
≤∫ Ella Baker armed herself with this understanding as she marched
across the South doing battle with Jim Crow racism in the fall of 1941, and
as she battled to change the organizational culture of the New York ofﬁce.
Baker’s next campaign, in Virginia, was almost derailed even before it
began. Here she had to prove herself not only as a new organizer but also as
a woman capable of doing what others perceived as a man’s job. She
agreed at the last minute to conduct Virginia’s annual membership cam-
paign because her colleague Fred Morrow was unable to go as scheduled.
≤Ω
A few days before her arrival, John M. Tinsley, the Richmond branch presi-
dent and state chairman, dispatched a letter to Walter White containing
the following message:
Our branches in Virginia need guidance, organization, information, and
inspiration. But we feel it will be too much of a hardship upon any


--- PAGE 138 ---
fighting her own wars 115
woman to undertake to do this. In many communities the only time at
which a meeting can be held when a large number of people will be free
to attend is late at night or on certain Sundays. In some parts of the
state personal accommodations will be comfortable, but we cannot say
that for every locality. For all of these reasons we recommend a young
man who can easily adjust himself to all of these conditions to cover
Virginia.
≥≠
By the time Tinsley’s letter reached Walter White’s desk, it was too late to
intercept Baker and send a man instead. But it is unlikely that White would
have tried to make this kind of substitution, and it is even more unlikely
that Baker would have accepted such a change without a ﬁght. She showed
up on Tinsley’s doorstep a few days later, unaware that he preferred a man.
Tinsley was a dentist, and he and his wife Ruth had long been active in
the Richmond branch. He was one of those black professionals who, as
Baker put it, ‘‘had an income separate and apart from the establishment.’’
≥∞
Many of his patients were his fellow naacp members, so he had a bit more
economic insulation than those whose employers were white segregation-
ists. Some southern naacp leaders, like other civil rights activists, relied
on their relative economic independence to protect them from reprisals. A
small, thin man whom Baker described as ‘‘tiny’’—not much bigger than
herself—Tinsley was a ﬁghter and a good organizer.
≥≤ Over the course
of her eleven-day stay, the two worked side by side. By the time she left
Richmond, Tinsley was an enthusiastic Ella Baker fan. His sexist assump-
tions about a woman’s limited capabilities had been shattered. In his
follow-up letter to White, Tinsley described Baker in glowing terms: ‘‘One
of the most important and wonderful things that has happened to Rich-
mond was the presence of the national ﬁeld worker, Miss Ella J. Baker. . . .
Never during her stay in Richmond did she slacken the pace. She was going
from the time of her arrival until the time she left. . . . She has demon-
strated to the people of Richmond and over the State of Virginia one char-
acteristic very few people have and that is the wonderful and outstanding
quality of mixing with any group of people and trying to help solve their
problem[s].’’
≥≥ One of the lessons Baker took away from these early expe-
riences was the importance of patience and process. People without con-
ﬁdence to express themselves could grow into that conﬁdence if given the
time and space to do so, and people skeptical of women’s leadership could
be won over, occasionally even without major confrontations.
Richmond was one of the naacp’s largest branches. During the member-


--- PAGE 139 ---
116 fighting her own wars
ship drive, Baker met with virtually all of the major black organizations in
town, including the city’s Baptist Ministers Conference, the Independent
Order of St. Luke, the North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, and
students and faculty at Virginia Union University. Through Baker’s efforts,
the chapter raised over $1,000 and recruited more than 1,500 new mem-
bers in less than two weeks.
≥∂ But Baker was not satisﬁed. She observed
that ‘‘as successful as the Richmond campaign was . . . there were many
more people who could have joined the naacp had there been sufﬁcient
campaign workers to contact them.’’
≥∑ Perhaps she was thinking of the
‘‘uncouth masses’’—the poor, illiterate, or semiliterate people who were
sometimes given low priority in membership drives. She was equally con-
cerned about the lack of involvement in branch activities. Richmond had
an impressive membership roster, but most members were not in the habit
of actually participating in the work of the organization. Baker found this
problem in a number of the naacp’s larger branches. Her goal was to get
more people actively engaged in local campaigns, confronting local elites,
talking to one another in meetings, and feeling a greater sense of owner-
ship of the organization. Popular participation was the ﬁrst step in mak-
ing the association a more democratic and mass-based organization. The
naacp had to belong to the masses, and they had to claim it as their own,
she insisted.
≥∏
After leaving Richmond, Baker ventured into the more rural parts of the
state where Tinsley feared conditions would be too difﬁcult for her, visiting
such places as Danville, Nottaway County, Farmville, and Martinsville. Al-
though the smaller towns had many fewer members than the Richmond
branch, she gave serious thought and attention to the particular circum-
stances in each locale, and she welcomed the opportunity ‘‘to work in areas
and with branches that are in need of intensive organizational efforts.’’
≥π
Baker found her efforts in these communities both challenging and re-
warding. Tinsley accompanied her on some of the trips that did not require
an overnight stay. ‘‘He had a big car. And he was a bad driver,’’ Baker, who
herself never learned to drive, recalled, ‘‘but I rode with anybody.’’
≥∫ This
tour cemented the friendship between the dentist and the activist. One
Christmas, the Tinsleys sent Baker a Virginia ham as a gesture of their af-
fection, one that she deeply appreciated.
≥Ω The kind of relationships Baker
created during her tenure with the naacp were not just business or profes-
sional relationships; they were profoundly personal ones.
In her work with naacp branches, Baker went well beyond the national
leadership’s preoccupation with collecting membership dues to fund the


--- PAGE 140 ---
fighting her own wars 117
legal department’s litigation against discrimination. Like the other mem-
bers of the younger cohort on the national staff, she wanted to see mem-
bers engage actively in local struggles. In Baker’s view, the ﬁeld organizer
had to forge friendships, earn the trust and conﬁdence of members at the
branch level, and mobilize people on the basis of the relationships that
held communities together. Baker recognized that familial and personal
relationships were the foundation of any sustained local organizing cam-
paign and that it was the job of any outside organizer to identify and build
on that foundation. In order to further this aim, Baker stayed in the South
for longer periods of time. Although she complained that her visits to most
branches were not nearly long enough, she stayed longer than her pre-
decessors had. Previously, according to Baker, ‘‘the pattern’’ was for ‘‘a
well-known person [to] come in and speak at a meeting and leave the next
day.’’
∂≠ Baker would stay in one place for up to two weeks and make ex-
tended tours through the region. She generally left New York in September
and did not return until November, and she went out ‘‘into the ﬁeld’’ again
for a month or two in the spring. These extended visits allowed her to get to
know local activists, to build greater rapport with them, and to become
familiar with the issues and problems that concerned them most. The
lengthy absences from home did little for her marriage, but the local naacp
branch work beneﬁted from her sacriﬁce.
Baker contended that ﬁeld secretaries had to know the issues and cul-
ture of each locale in order to organize a campaign. It was only through this
type of attention to detail that serious programs of action could be devel-
oped, and Baker understood this better than anyone. In Danville, she noted
that the principal issues were ‘‘police brutality and getting Negroes to qual-
ify and vote.’’ In Farmville, ‘‘qualifying voters, teachers’ salaries and school
busses [were] the immediate concerns of the branch.’’ And in Nottaway,
‘‘voting seem[ed] to strike the most responsive chord.’’
∂∞ Baker’s hard work
and enthusiasm in both the Alabama and Virginia campaigns were ap-
plauded by the people she met and commended by her superiors in the
naacp hierarchy. During her ﬁrst few months as an naacp ﬁeld secretary,
she made an impressive debut.
In the fall of 1941 Baker undertook another series of membership drives
for the association, reporting that ‘‘with the exception of two days in Octo-
ber and two days in November, the period from September 6th to Novem-
ber 25th was spent in the ﬁeld.’’ She delivered some sixty-three speeches in
seven cities.
∂≤ It was an exhausting itinerary. Baker was anxious to do more
outreach and to explore ways of more actively engaging members in practi-


--- PAGE 141 ---
118 fighting her own wars
cal work. She was optimistic that ‘‘the masses of Negroes [were] ready for
the program of the Association,’’ and she was determined to bring it to
them.
∂≥ Ella chided her colleagues to be more creative and aggressive in
their outreach efforts: ‘‘We must have the ‘nerve’ to take the Association to
people wherever they are. As a case in point, the mass-supported beer
gardens, night clubs etc., in Baltimore were invaded on a small scale during
the membership campaign there. And with considerable success. . . . We
went in, addressed the crowds and secured memberships and campaign
workers. With the results that are well summed up in a comment overheard
in one club, ‘you certainly have some nerve coming in here, talking , but I’m
going to join that doggone organization.’ ’’
∂∂
Despite her enthusiasm about her work, Baker’s job was not an easy one.
While on the road she worked every day almost to the point of collapse. In
October 1941, she complained she was in the naacp ofﬁce in Baltimore as
late as 9:30 at night ‘‘after weeks of nothing but work.’’
∂∑ She often doubted
whether the time and energy she invested was actually paying off in re-
sults. In another letter to Walter White, Baker lamented: ‘‘I must leave now
for one of those small church meetings which are usually more exhausting
than the immediate returns seem to warrant but it’s a part of the spade
work, so let it be.’’
∂∏ Travel was difﬁcult, ofﬁce space and supplies were
limited, and the frenzied pace was often taxing on her health and spirits.
But Baker was on a mission and therefore comfortable accommodations
were a secondary consideration. She admitted that she would sleep almost
anywhere and eat almost anything. Traveling mostly by train, she would
typically leave one town on Sunday morning after a weeklong visit, only to
have another series of meetings with local ofﬁcials on her arrival in the
next town, followed by speeches at up to ﬁve churches on a given Sunday
afternoon.
∂π The seemingly boundless enthusiasm Baker had brought with
her to the job was ﬁnally being tested by the grueling work regimen that
was demanded of her.
......
friendship and friction in the naacp family
Although Ella Baker occasionally vented to Walter White about the frustra-
tions of organizing in the ﬁeld, she never got much sympathy. White was
more obsessed with his own image and ego to bother with such matters.
‘‘He was very much in love with himself,’’ Baker once snipped.
∂∫ A travel
itinerary as hectic as Baker’s did not leave much time for family life. But
Ella rarely mentioned Bob in her correspondence with friends and co-


--- PAGE 142 ---
fighting her own wars 119
workers. Roberts was also on the road much of the time during this period,
trying to make a go of his refrigeration business. He suffered several ill-
nesses, and during the late 1940s he spent time receiving medical care in
North Carolina.
∂Ω Baker interrupted her travel itinerary at least two times
to check on him.
One of the most nurturing and supportive relationships Baker formed
while working at the naacp was with Lucille Black, the national member-
ship secretary. Black began working for the association in the early 1940s
and continued her afﬁliation more than thirty years. A superﬁcial look at
Lucille Black’s career might give the impression that she was a loyal, hard-
working staff member, but otherwise not terribly interesting. Such a char-
acterization would not do her justice. Lucille was an intellectual, a vora-
cious reader, and a bit of an eccentric. She was lively, colorful, and a savvy
political organizer. Apparently, she was also quite attractive. One former
lover described her as ‘‘a tall voluptuous brown-skinned woman,’’ with a
sharp wit and a deep commitment to social justice. Lucille loved jazz and
bourbon, hated cooking, read Kafka, and chose never to marry, despite
having been asked repeatedly.
∑≠ She was Ella Baker’s dear friend and conﬁ-
dante for many years. The two women enjoyed long phone conversations,
meals together, and occasionally evenings out. Their relationship was an-
chored in politics, a sisterhood steeped in struggle. ‘‘Lucille was probably
Ella’s closest friend in the ofﬁce,’’ an naacp staffer observed.
∑∞
Baker let her guard down with Black, complaining about her problems
and confessing her doubts and insecurities. While traveling alone, Baker
would routinely sit down at the end of a busy day and write Lucille a
rambling, cathartic, and often witty rendition of the day’s events. In one
letter Ella complained to Lucille: ‘‘Today, I am worn to a frazzle. Train con-
nections are not so good . . . [and the situation] leaves me quite frayed.’’
∑≤
In another letter to Black, she confessed: ‘‘The outlook for this trip does not
appear rosy. I am constantly challenged to ‘pass a miracle’ which will dem-
onstrate how small, isolated, and rural communities can initiate active
branches in the absence of some major tragedy. . . . The best I can do is try
to jolt or scare them into action, and make an effort to maintain it through
correspondence long enough to bring the branch membership up to at least
ﬁfty members. But such are the trials of those who must act as Mother
Confessor to the Little Folk. So let it be.’’
∑≥ These letters were an important
outlet for Baker to express her frustrations and disappointments as she
undertook the difﬁcult work of grassroots organizing in the South.
Baker’s letters to Black eloquently express her analysis of the class poli-


--- PAGE 143 ---
120 fighting her own wars
tics within the organization and the black community and clearly articu-
late her own egalitarian sensibilities. Ella had great distaste for the petit-
bourgeois lifestyles and snobbery displayed by some of the local branch
leaders. She felt that their elitism and pompous attention to social, rather
than political, events were obstacles to more militant mass action. Even in
the stiﬂing atmosphere of the Jim Crow South, especially in the cities,
black professionals and entrepreneurs had carved out a niche within the
conﬁning walls of the racial order. Within those conﬁnes, there was an
ever-present struggle over issues of resistance and accommodation.
The letters to Black complained about the middle-class socialites who
had a stranglehold on some local branches. She did not hide her contempt
for the pettiness she encountered in these circles. She wrote to Lucille
about a visit she was compelled to make in Georgia: ‘‘I am stopping at
the home of three women of leisure whose major past time[ sic] is idle
chatter . . . [and] who were too busy to attend the meeting last night.’’
∑∂
From Florida, Ella wrote: ‘‘The campaign chairman is experiencing a slight
let down in that I am not a social elite, and cannot join her in a game of
bridge or golf at the ‘Country Club.’ ’’
∑∑
Baker felt that the class hierarchy within the black community was a
major obstacle to creating more active and effective branches that would
be able to reach out to every sector of the African American community. In
Baker’s opinion, some of the middle-class black professionals who ran local
branches ‘‘had attitudes that were not particularly helpful in terms of
change. For instance, . . . they would be against the idea of going to battle
for the town drunk who happened to have been brutalized when being
arrested, because who was he?’’
∑∏ Baker referred to this hypothetical sce-
nario of police brutality toward the town drunk repeatedly, and it reveals
her fundamental criticism of the vision of change embodied by the black
elite. In essence, some middle-class black leaders felt that only those blacks
who conformed to the dominant culture’s notion of social respectability
should be held up as deserving of civil rights and full citizenship. This was
not always the position they articulated publicly, but it was implicit in their
actions. Baker felt that this viewpoint had to be rooted out and challenged,
ﬁrst, as a matter of principle and, second, in order to mobilize the support
and participation of poor and working-class members of the black commu-
nity who were, after all, the overwhelming majority.
∑π
Another source of personal support in her dealings with others was
Baker’s friendship with Charlotte Crump, a young woman who worked as
the naacp’s coordinator of publicity and promotions in the early 1940s.


--- PAGE 144 ---
fighting her own wars 121
Crump was friendly, easygoing, and perhaps a little lonely, since her hus-
band was stationed elsewhere with the military. She and Baker often went
out to lunch or dinner together at a nearby restaurant called the Starlight,
where they would relax and, as Crump described it, ‘‘gripe about this or
that.’’
∑∫ One of Crump’s main gripes concerned her run-ins with her male
supervisors, White and Wilkins. Despite the fact that she worked week-
ends, holidays, and some evenings, both White and Wilkins complained
that she did not work hard enough and threatened to have her punch a
time clock to ensure that she was in the ofﬁce by 9:30 every morning.
∑Ω In
1945, when Baker was no longer in White’s good graces, very similar com-
plaints would be lodged against her as well. At this point, however, Baker
served as a sounding board for her friend Charlotte.
Much of the correspondence between Baker and Crump was business-
related, since Crump coordinated the publicity for Baker’s visits to various
branches. However, their exchanges always had a personal tone. Crump
signed her letters ‘‘affectionately’’ or ‘‘faithfully’’ and jokingly chastised Ella
to ‘‘get a little rest because we don’t want to have to carry you into Fifth on
a stretcher when you return.’’
∏≠ Crump’s concern and affection for Baker
are apparent in these details. Baker was known for overworking and push-
ing herself to the limit. Friends and colleagues like Crump constantly re-
minded her to take it easy and take better care of herself, although she
rarely took their advice.
∏∞
The naacp women seemed to look out for one another. They knew the
difﬁculties of navigating the internal dynamics of the organization as well
as the dangers and inconveniences associated with being on the road.
Many of their letters back and forth are punctuated with admonitions to
‘‘take care of yourself ’’ and ‘‘don’t let [it] get you down.’’
∏≤ Baker took a
special interest in the hardships that her friend Ruby Hurley experienced
while traveling on naacp business in Norfolk in 1943, soon after Baker had
assumed the post of director of branches. She made suggestions about how
Hurley might arrange more comfortable accommodations during her stay
and then assured her that she would try to attend a meeting on youth in
Harlem in the wake of the 1943 ‘‘riot’’ in order to convey some of Ruby’s
concerns, which are not speciﬁed in the letter. Given the demands on
Baker’s schedule this was a generous gesture, and she concluded the letter
jokingly, ‘‘now ain’t I a friend.’’
∏≥ Both Hurley and Baker also stayed in
touch with their mutual friend, Pauli Murray, who also remained very
much involved in naacp activities. Pauli wrote to Ruby when she was
considering law school. When Ruby wrote back to encourage her, she up-


--- PAGE 145 ---
122 fighting her own wars
dated her on how hard Ella was working and concluded, ‘‘in the meantime,
good luck from both of us.’’∏∂
Not all of Baker’s relationships in the naacp were so amicable, and not
all of her female colleagues were sisterly. She made friends and enemies
alike. Her ﬁrst major conﬂict within the naacp ‘‘family’’ was with the formi-
dable Lillie Jackson, an unapologetic socialite who headed the Baltimore
branch.
∏∑ Baker made no secret of her disdain for the pretenses and self-
aggrandizing behavior of those who were overly concerned with status and
appearance. These sensibilities immediately put her on a collision course
with Jackson.
The two women are a study in opposites. Jackson basked in the spotlight
and insisted on deference from those around her. Although she came from
humble origins, she went to great lengths to demonstrate the wealth she
and her family had acquired and their rank as one of Baltimore’s most
prominent black families. Baker, on the other hand, was self-assured but
modest. She dressed plainly and spoke with a simple elegance that en-
deared her to educated and uneducated audiences alike. Jackson’s identity
was very much that of a respectable, married woman. Baker was an ambig-
uously married woman, if in fact her marital status was known, and she
ﬂirted with the limits of respectability with her aggressive organizing style.
No one would accuse Lillie Jackson of being an appendage of her husband
or anyone else, but she did harbor some very conventional notions about
marriage and the proper role of married women. Her status as Mrs. Jack-
son was important to her, a value she passed on to her daughter, Juanita,
who, in her own words, ‘‘resigned [her post with the naacp] to marry my
prince.’’
∏∏ Baker saw herself as a ﬁercely independent woman and deﬁed
the conventions that restricted the activities of married women simply by
ignoring them.
Personalities, class biases, and divergent gender identities all contrib-
uted to the problems between Baker and Jackson, which developed in
September 1941, when Baker went to Baltimore to help conduct the annual
membership drive. There had already been conﬂict between the national
ofﬁce and the branch leadership before she arrived. Baltimore had re-
quested a paid secretary to help handle branch business; the national of-
ﬁcers apparently felt no such position was needed; and the branch leaders
had threatened to withhold dues and hire someone themselves.
∏π Other
national staff members had complaints about Lillie Jackson as well. When
ﬁeld secretaries visited Baltimore, Jackson treated them as a part of her
personal staff. She was accustomed to planning their schedules and medi-


--- PAGE 146 ---
fighting her own wars 123
ating their contacts with other branch members. One staff member re-
called that Jackson would have ‘‘scheduled our trips to the bathroom, if she
could have.’’
∏∫
Even though Baker was still new to the association, she had no intention
of catering to the whims of the branch president. Baker went around Jack-
son to meet directly with rank-and-ﬁle members, including those with
grievances about how the branch was being run. Jackson viewed this as a
direct affront to her leadership. The very day that Ella Baker left Baltimore
for another campaign in Norfolk, Lillie Jackson dispatched a letter to Wal-
ter White harshly criticizing Baker and alleging incompetence and a ‘‘bad
attitude’’ on her part. Baker’s ‘‘attitude has been discourteous and con-
temptible, and is not conducive to the best interests of all concerned.’’
Jackson accused Baker of trying to disrupt the Baltimore branch by fo-
menting dissension and of being ‘‘antagonistic’’ and uncooperative.
∏Ω Jack-
son took the view that ‘‘there are always a few disgruntled people in every
organization. Certainly campaign directors should not encourage dissen-
sion and confusion in a branch. That, however, is precisely what Miss Baker
has done.’’
π≠ Baker disapproved of Jackson, and she said so in her reports
to her supervisors in the national ofﬁce. In her view, Jackson dominated
the Baltimore group in such a way as to stiﬂe its growth and to engender
bad feelings among potential new members.
π∞ What Jackson described
as Baker’s ‘‘bad attitude’’ was probably reﬂective of her negative view of
the way in which the branch was being directed. In Baker’s opinion, the
branch was being run by a group of short-sighted, self-serving bureaucrats
who were roadblocks to progress. Although the Baltimore branch boasted
nearly 3,000 members, they were members in name only; they had signed
up and paid their dues, but they were asked to do little else. In one of her
monthly ﬁeld reports, Baker observed: ‘‘The need for greater membership
participation in the larger branches was emphasized when in Baltimore a
functioning publicity committee and speaker’s bureau were not obtain-
able.’’
π≤ Baker conﬁded to Roy Wilkins that she thought the Baltimore
branch leaders were petty and arrogant, and they used ‘‘almost blackmail’’
techniques in persuading others to support the branch ﬁnancially. Even
more seriously, she accused the Jackson family of nepotism and favoritism
in the exercise of their political power. She noted speciﬁcally that one
or another of Lillie Jackson’s relatives had repeatedly ‘‘won’’ trips to the
national naacp conferences, to the exclusion of other members.
π≥ Even
though Jackson’s persistent and vindictive attacks undoubtedly bothered
Baker, she was more deeply troubled by the heavy-handed and undemocra-


--- PAGE 147 ---
124 fighting her own wars
tic style of leadership that Jackson personiﬁed. The Baltimore branch had
only the appearance of a strong local organization. The branch leadership
had not cultivated a group of local leaders or developed a serious program
for action; instead, the chapter was run like an exclusive social club.
Fortunately for Baker, both Walter White and Roy Wilkins defended her
against Jackson’s criticisms and deﬂected blame for the conﬂict away from
Baker and back on the branch leaders themselves. According to Wilkins,
‘‘The Jackson family will ﬁnd fault with every national ofﬁcer who does not
conform to their personal ideas. They do not like Mrs. Lampkin; they spend
a lot of time trying to smear me; Morrow has never been there; and now
they are trying to smear Ella. I think a good rule from now on would be to
let them conduct their own campaigns and probably hoist themselves by
their own petard.’’
π∂ White expressed astonishment at the allegations from
Baltimore, pointing out to Lillie Jackson that her complaints about Ella
Baker were ‘‘at such variance with the reports from every other branch
with which she has worked that I am convinced that there must be some
basic misunderstanding.’’
π∑ Although tensions between Baker and Jackson
persisted for some years, this controversy blew over without any apparent
damage to Baker’s political career or her reputation within the naacp. She
was promoted to director of branches less than two years later. But the road
Baker traveled was indeed a difﬁcult and, at times, a dangerous one. In
order to do the work to which she had committed herself, she had to face
challenges more serious than those presented by the likes of Lillie Jackson.
......
dangers all around
Although Baker was never arrested or beaten during her naacp days, it was
certainly not because she traveled in a safe environment. There were dan-
gers all around her, and she escaped harm only through a combination of
blind luck and constant awareness. When threats were apparent, Baker ma-
neuvered carefully. Her refusal to always conform to the conventions of Jim
Crow meant she had many close calls. One day in December, 1942, while she
was riding a bus in Georgia, she braced herself for a confrontation.
I got on a bus [and] . . . it was crowded and it had a lot of whites on it,
service people, and there was only one other black person and I could
tell that she was one of the ladies who paid payroll. But I could see that
she was not going to be pushed around either. So I said, ‘‘well, we’ll see
here today’’ because they [bus drivers] had the habit of demanding that


--- PAGE 148 ---
fighting her own wars 125
you get up and let them [white passengers] sit down. But they didn’t do
it that day. Because I was prepared to not get up and I could tell she was
not going to be moved.
π∏
When Baker and her quietly deﬁant ally did not relinquish their seats, they
were subjected to a litany of verbal abuse. She recalled that she sat and
‘‘listened to two white sailors [standing above her] talking about how they
had killed a black woman.’’ Baker, understanding the volatility of the situa-
tion, regretted that she ‘‘couldn’t confront them,’’ but she wisely decided
not to in this instance.
ππ
Another time, a bus driver refused to let Baker and other blacks board a
bus in Florida because a white sailor was sprawled out on a seat in the back
of the bus designated for ‘‘colored’’ passengers. Baker just stood there and
watched the bus pass by.
π∫ She endured a number of similar humiliating
experiences. Baker was known for being tough and confrontational if she
had to be, but she was also practical. She chose her battles carefully and
assessed what was at stake and the likely outcome of a ﬁght before she
entered into it. Her own survival strategy dictated that she had to tolerate
certain insults and abuses, garner her anger and her strength, and bring
them to bear under more favorable conditions. However, there were times
when she simply could not avoid confrontation.
For Ella Baker, the ﬁght for social justice waged through the naacp
became a personal as well as political crusade. She had been told since she
was a young child that she was inferior to no one, and she believed it. But
her conﬁdence routinely rubbed against the reality of Jim Crow segrega-
tion. Baker’s struggle against racism was as much about standing up for
herself as it was about lending her strength to struggles initiated on behalf
of others. There were numerous instances over the course of her life when
she personally tested the limits of America’s racial policies, vented her
anger, and afﬁrmed her own humanity in the process. One such instance
occurred in the spring of 1943, when she was traveling by train from Mo-
bile, Alabama, to Jacksonville, Florida.
On May 4, 1943, hungry and tired, Baker entered the dining car of the
train at about 5:45 p.m. to have her supper. Initially, she had no intention of
challenging the company’s Jim Crow policy. She entered the diner and
proceeded to take a seat in the section designated for ‘‘colored’’ passengers.
However, four white soldiers were already seated there. When Ella Baker
took a seat near the white soldiers’ table, the white steward nervously ran
over to her and insisted that she could not sit there because it violated state


--- PAGE 149 ---
126 fighting her own wars
law, which required separate eating facilities for white and ‘‘colored’’ din-
ers. Baker pointed out to him that she had complied with state law and sat
in the designated section. If he were so concerned about enforcing segre-
gated eating facilities, he should ‘‘request that the four white soldiers move
forward, since there was ample space in the section reserved for whites.’’
When the steward declined to act on Baker’s suggestion, she took it upon
herself to ask the soldiers to move, which, much to her surprise, they did.
In the waiter’s version of the incident, Baker was ‘‘insulting and abusive.’’
He contended that white passengers were so outraged at Baker’s behavior
that they offered to use physical force to remove her from the diner, but the
steward nobly intervened to avert a confrontation. Baker was eventually
served her dinner at the table she had originally occupied.
πΩ
Three weeks later, on the last leg of the same trip, Baker confronted a
very similar situation. This time, perhaps feeling emboldened by her earlier
victory, she stood her ground with even greater resolve, but her deﬁance
was met with violence. On May 29, while she was heading home to New
York from Jacksonville, she entered the dining car of the train for a meal at
about 1:45 p.m. No curtain was in place to divide the white and ‘‘colored’’
sections of the diner, as was the custom. She sat down at a booth near the
kitchen, which was usually reserved for ‘‘colored’’ people, and waited for
service. A white steward then confronted Baker, insisting that she leave the
car and come back later when the white passengers were ﬁnished eating. It
had been a long and tiring trip. Her blunt response was that ‘‘I was hungry
and I preferred eating then.’’
∫≠ Baker reminded the steward that, while
segregation was the law in Florida, there were also laws that provided for
ﬁrst-class passengers to be served at their convenience. The steward was
so ﬂustered and offended by the willful self-conﬁdence of this digniﬁed,
middle-aged Negro woman that he immediately summoned two military
policemen who were also traveling on the train to assist him in removing
her from the diner. Baker had no intention of going peacefully. She de-
scribed the rest of the incident as follows:
Two white military police immediately rushed to where I was sitting,
one snatched me up by my arm, bruising my leg in two places, and told
me to ‘‘get out of there.’’ I reminded the M.P. that he was overstepping
his bounds. He disregarded this remark. I then spoke louder and ap-
pealed to the house and said ‘‘this man is overstepping his authority.’’
This seemed to shock him into realizing that he was manhandling me
without any right to do so. He freed my arms and he, the other M.P. and


--- PAGE 150 ---
fighting her own wars 127
the steward rushed out of the car in search, I presume, of the train
conductor. When they returned, I was leaving the dining room and the
M.P. who had manhandled me was remarking, ‘‘but I have no jurisdic-
tion over her.’’
∫∞
Baker was so insulted by the treatment she had received that she ate dinner
in her seat that evening instead of going back to the dining car, and she
skipped breakfast altogether on Sunday morning.
∫≤ When she arrived back
in New York she immediately ﬁled a complaint with the railway company.
Her friend and colleague Thurgood Marshall, the future Supreme Court
justice, who was then on the naacp’s legal staff, submitted the complaint
on her behalf.
∫≥ Baker did not make it easy for railway workers—or anyone
else for that matter—to treat her as a second-class citizen.
The historic struggle for fair treatment on public transportation was a
particularly powerful and symbolic issue for African American women, and
Baker’s actions in 1943 had implications for both race and gender politics.
Ida B. Wells, the famed advocate of black and women’s rights, had thrown
down the gauntlet nearly twenty years before Ella Baker’s birth when she
sued the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway company for ejecting her from the
‘‘ladies coach’’ of a passenger train in 1884 in Tennessee. While Wells was
very much a lady, she was black and therefore not eligible for the cour-
tesies afforded white womanhood. Instead of the more comfortable ‘‘ladies
coach,’’ she was required to ride with the rough-and-tumble, predomi-
nantly male crowd in the smoking car.
∫∂ Wells was not alone in her pro-
test. Many African American women took similar, though less publicized,
stances against demeaning treatment on public transportation. Over a half
century later, Rosa Parks, Joanne Gibson Robinson, and thousands of Afri-
can American women in Montgomery, Alabama, became the decisive force
in winning the famed Montgomery bus boycott, an event cited as the spark
that ignited the postwar Black Freedom Movement. In all of these con-
frontations, as black women demanded respectful treatment on public
trains and busses, they struggled to deﬁne the parameters of race relations,
class distinctions, and gender identity that manifested themselves in the
ebb and ﬂow of daily life. Ella Baker and other black women who engaged
in similar protests were laying claim to the privileges afforded to their
white counterparts. They were rebelling against social custom by insisting
on being treated as ‘‘ladies’’ in a culture that much more readily cast them
as ‘‘mammies’’ or ‘‘aunties.’’
In this instance, Baker relied on her knowledge of the law to defend


--- PAGE 151 ---
128 fighting her own wars
herself from being ‘‘manhandled,’’ as she put it. Such an assertion crossed
other boundaries as well. Here she was, a black woman speaking with
great clarity and conﬁdence, asserting her rights as a citizen, invoking the
law, and publicly reprimanding white men—soldiers, no less. In this ex-
change, Baker not only insisted on courtesies usually reserved for white
women but also spoke in an authoritative language more associated with
white men than with black or white women. Baker deﬁed society’s expecta-
tions of who and what a Negro woman ought to be. Her deﬁance of the
conventions deﬁning black womanhood permeated her life, extending be-
yond white racist views to the expectations that prevailed within her own
family and community. Her wrestling with the white military police on the
train who attempted unsuccessfully to ‘‘put her in her place’’ was paralleled
by her wrestling with the circumscribed role prescribed for her by her
family and with the supportive, sometimes deferential role most of her
male colleagues in the naacp expected her to play. She was determined to
stand up for herself at the same time that she stood up for her sex, her race,
and those at the bottom of the social and economic hierarchy. This type of
willful self-assertion was an act of both personal empowerment and politi-
cal intervention.
Assertive actions characterize Baker’s years of work with the naacp. In
standing up for herself, she confronted the contradictions embedded in
dominant assumptions about the proper role of black women of her gener-
ation. On the one hand, they were expected to be engaged in improving the
condition of the race, and many, out of necessity, were employed outside
their homes. These activities located black women, including respectable
middle-class women, in the public arena as social reformers and as work-
ers. Yet the culture was permeated with the idea that a woman’s primary
role was to be a mother and a homemaker. There was indeed a tension
between the celebrated contributions of women like Ida B. Wells-Barnett,
Nannie Helen Burroughs, and Mary McCleod Bethune—Baker’s activist
foremothers—and criticisms of them as encroaching on leadership roles
reserved for black men. Although black women’s activism was encouraged,
it was circumscribed by what Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham terms the ‘‘poli-
tics of respectability,’’ an attempt to represent the prevailing model of fe-
male propriety and ladylike behavior while still participating in strategies
for racial progress and social reform.
The dangers facing a militant black woman in the Jim Crow South were
undeniable, perhaps incalculable. Baker traveled long stretches alone,
making her a vulnerable target. And she traveled with the label of naacp


--- PAGE 152 ---
fighting her own wars 129
organizer hanging over her head, which was a red ﬂag to white vigilantes
throughout the South. Ku Klux Klan members were known to attack people
who distributed African American newspapers simply because the publica-
tions advocated black suffrage and desegregation. When Baker visited a
given locale, her presence was announced through ﬂyers, handbills, and
the black press. Headlines blazoned: ‘‘Hear This Dynamic Speaker’’; ‘‘Look
Who is Here—Ella Baker’’; ‘‘Join Now, This Is Your Fight Too—Hear Ella
Baker.’’
∫∑ The intervention of militant ‘‘outside agitators’’ must have en-
raged the likes of Bull Conner, the racist sheriff of Birmingham, and other
avowed white supremacists. But, remarkably, Baker was able to ease in and
out of southern communities for six years relatively unscathed.
Not all of her colleagues were so lucky. During the 1940s, Ella Baker
worked closely with Harry T. Moore, a teacher and high school principal
in Mims, Florida. Moore was a steadfast organizer who coordinated the
naacp branches statewide. He spearheaded a campaign to equalize the
salaries of white and black teachers, and helped organize other black edu-
cators in Florida. Baker and Moore were in regular correspondence during
the mid-forties, and she spent time with him and his family during her
frequent Florida visits on behalf of the department of branches. On Christ-
mas night in 1951, Moore and his wife Harriet were murdered when dyna-
mite was thrown under their home.
∫∏ Murder was the ultimate fear of
naacp leaders throughout the South in the postwar period, as public lynch-
ing had been for earlier generations. Lethal violence lurked just below the
surface of southern race politics. Baker understood this mineﬁeld and navi-
gated it with caution.
At the same time that Baker worried about the threat of white vigilante
violence, the federal government worried about the alleged ‘‘danger’’ that
she represented. Throughout the World War II period and the Cold War
years that followed, Baker was under constant surveillance by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation and by Military Intelligence. They monitored her
moves, speculated about her motives, and compiled reams of reconnais-
sance data on her public activity and her private life. fbi informants called
Baker on the phone to obtain information about her whereabouts, feigned
interest in her politics to get a closer view of her day-to-day activities, and
pumped her friends and associates to amass a proﬁle of a woman they
deemed potentially subversive.
∫π
Most of the fbi agents who spied on Baker from the 1940s through the
1970s did not know what to make of this middle-aged hell-raiser who deﬁed
categorization. She led an unconventional life, made enormous sacriﬁces


--- PAGE 153 ---
130 fighting her own wars
for the causes and campaigns to which she devoted herself, and asked for
very little material reward or recognition in return. She maintained an
eclectic circle of friends of various ages, races, and political afﬁliations, yet
she herself never belonged to any one organization for very long. Reading
between the lines of the fbi’s individual reports on Baker’s activities, one
can almost hear the agents’ queries, pregnant with all the biased stereo-
types the agency held about dissidents: What is she up to? Who does she
work for? What is her hidden agenda? The agents’ own inability to answer
such basic questions led one of them to conclude that Baker was ‘‘un-
stable.’’
∫∫ It was the very way that she looked at the world that made her
difﬁcult to label. Since she saw revolution as a process, as a living experi-
ment in creative vision and collaboration, very little, in her opinion, could
be predetermined. No blueprint could be rigidly adhered to. There was an
organic interaction between the people involved in social change and those
opposed; among different sectors, generations, and regions of the move-
ment; between what we know and what we dare to dream. Although Baker
had a deﬁnite worldview, which she articulated, enacted, and defended,
there was ﬂuidity and ﬂexibility in the positions she took and the alliances
she formed. Even the fbi could not pin her down.
Despite the hectic pace, long hours, and dangers inherent in her job,
Baker loved her work as a ﬁeld organizer for the naacp. Perhaps she even
enjoyed certain aspects of the solitary, nomadic lifestyle that the job af-
forded her. During long train rides between cities she was alone with her
thoughts, and at those times she must have struggled to make meaning out
of the work she was doing ten to twelve hours a day. How far had she
traveled from her own origins in the South? In some ways she was a world
apart, and in other ways she had come full circle. Over twenty years after
leaving Littleton and abandoning her mother’s missionary zeal, and over a
decade after renouncing her own missionary ambitions in order to pursue a
more secular path, here she was with her little, dusty, tattered suitcase
living a missionary’s existence: traveling from one town to another preach-
ing the ‘‘Gospel’’ of racial justice, and at times attempting, as she herself put
it, to ‘‘pass a miracle.’’
∫Ω Baker admitted, ‘‘I was the missionary type—I was
on a crusade to save something.’’ Ω≠ But what was that ‘‘something’’? And
how would she ever succeed against such enormous odds?
The South could seem comfortable and familiar at times, but at other
times Baker must have felt like a foreign visitor. In the decade and a half
since she left Shaw University in Raleigh, she had become a New Yorker.
She made friends from places most small-town southerners had never


--- PAGE 154 ---
fighting her own wars 131
heard of; she related to whites in the bohemian arts and leftist political
communities in ways that would make most black southerners fear for
their lives; and she adopted a secular political language for discussing right
and wrong, which would have made her mother cringe. One friend from
North Carolina told Baker admiringly, ‘‘You are a lady of the world [now],’’
underscoring the divergent paths the two women’s lives had taken since
Ella Baker had left her hometown, while the friend had remained in North
Carolina.
Ω∞
As worldly and cosmopolitan as Baker had become during her years in
New York, she still maintained close ties to her family in the South. One of
her cousins, Helen Gilchrist, recalled: ‘‘Ella would swing through here with
her little typewriter and spend a few days. She loved my cooking and she’d
come over to my house and get a good home-cooked meal, and then she’d
be off again.’’
Ω≤ Baker remained especially close to her mother. Even though
she had rejected the two things her mother wanted most for her in life, a
teaching career and a life in the church, she still found a way to make
Georgianna Ross Baker proud. When Ella conducted membership drives in
North Carolina or Virginia, not only would she always ﬁnd time to visit and
spend time in Littleton, but she also would frequently arrange to have her
mother attend one of the public meetings at which she was scheduled to
deliver the keynote address. Even though later in life Ella would question
the value of eloquent oratory as a tool for political mobilization, during her
naacp campaigns she was known as a powerful public speaker. Having
served as Ella’s childhood ‘‘speech coach,’’ Anna Baker must have taken
great satisfaction in the fact that her daughter’s oratorical skills were being
put to good use. On at least one occasion, Ella indicated she would ‘‘dele-
gate my mother to represent me’’ at an naacp event in Warrenton, North
Carolina.
Ω≥ Ella had been trained in pronunciation and diction by her per-
fectionist and proper mother, but she developed her own speaking style
that was itself quite effective. One of her friends and naacp co-workers,
Odetta Harper Hines, described her speaking style this way: Baker was ‘‘a
powerful speaker who talked without notes from her heart to the hearts of
her audience. Very forceful, with a strong voice that projected even with-
out a microphone. Her speeches weren’t full of statistics, nor were they
anecdotal. They were to the point [but still] . . . very human and warm.’’
Ω∂


--- PAGE 155 ---
132 fighting her own wars
......
class, gender, and personal politics
World War II unsettled the class, gender, and racial order of the United
States, creating a new sense of possibility for women, working people, and
African Americans. Women went into the factories in large numbers, and
civil rights activists forced the government and businesses to open up de-
fense industry jobs to black men and women. New forms of mass mobiliza-
tion developed along with new modes of political action. Ella Baker fol-
lowed her own path amid these exciting possibilities, linking the naacp’s
civil rights agenda to the labor movement, pushing for greater gender
equity within the association, and emphasizing the need for rank-and-ﬁle
organizing built on preexisting community networks as a model for the
naacp.
In Baker’s view, the struggle against racism was deeply embedded in an
overarching class struggle between the haves and the have-nots. Inﬂu-
enced by the egalitarian ethos of her childhood community, the socialist
milieu of Harlem in the 1930s, and her close association with labor union
organizers in the Workers Education Project, Baker was strongly sympa-
thetic to the growing trade union movement, regarding it as a natural ally
for the naacp. In a 1943 memo, she pointed out that ‘‘branches should be
made more and more aware that the ﬁght for Negro rights is but one aspect
of the larger ﬁght for social and democratic gains . . . for instance, the ﬁght
for up-grading of Negro workers might well gain support if a given local
branch would also take the leadership in support of the labor movement’s
ﬁght against anti-labor legislation.’’
Ω∑ Baker saw the complementary goals
of interracial labor organizing and civil rights activism as the basis for
potential coalitions among groups or even for a uniﬁed economic and
political initiative within the African American community.
During 1942 and 1943, Ella Baker became increasingly involved in the
labor movement, which was spearheaded by left-wing unions of the Con-
gress of Industrial Organizations (cio). Founded in 1936 to organize work-
ers in entire mass-production industries rather than on the basis of their
particular skills, the cio emphasized the mobilization of unskilled and
semiskilled workers. Considerable numbers of African Americans worked
in such positions, especially after wartime labor shortages opened up em-
ployment opportunities in mines, steel plants, auto factories, shipyards,
and other essential industries.
In contrast to the cio, the more established American Federation of


--- PAGE 156 ---
fighting her own wars 133
Labor (afl) had a long history of exclusionary and segregationist practices.
Earlier in 1942 the United Auto Workers ( uaw), the cio’s largest member
union, had taken an unequivocal stand in support of civil rights for African
Americans in Detroit in a conﬂict that erupted over black families’ access to
the Sojourner Truth public housing project, a struggle that erupted into a
full-scale riot in 1943. The uaw’s position in the controversy won it the
respect and support of local black leaders and prospective union members
and the attention of antiracist activists in the naacp. On the national level,
cio leadership had taken a ﬁrm stand against antiblack hate strikes initi-
ated by white segregationists within the union. The cio represented a
stronger commitment to interracial union organizing than any other major
labor organization of its day.
Ω∏
In November 1942, Baker became involved in the cio’s efforts to orga-
nize shipyard workers in Newport News, Virginia. She believed strongly in
linking economic and social justice issues and, for her, civil rights and labor
were a perfect ﬁt. The afl, which had unionized skilled workers in particu-
lar trades, competed with the cio for the allegiance of less-skilled workers
and laborers, many of whom were black. As Baker described that struggle:
The cio is here to organize the southeastern shipyard and the local
branch is playing ball with the organizers and both cio and naacp are
expecting to win through the contact. Yesterday several hours were
spent in conference with reps of the International Longshoremen’s Asso-
ciation, which is the one bona ﬁde Negro group in the AF of L here; and
the AF of L is attempting to use them as a buffer between the Negro and
the damaging cio policies of non-discrimination. Hence I am trying to
aid the branch in avoiding an appearance of partisanism in this growing
labor dispute; and yet at the same time make membership gains in both
ﬁelds. This is not easy because the President [of the local naacp branch]
and many of the ofﬁcials have already gone on record as being more cio
than afl.
Ωπ
Despite her public profession of neutrality, Baker revealed her partisan
support for the cio in a letter to Lucille Black: ‘‘The cio is moving in,
organizing everything. . . . I wish I could stay here several months. It is just
the time to do a real piece of organizing for the naacp, but as usual, I can
only linger long enough to stir up sufﬁcient interest to increase the mem-
bership by a few hundred and collect a few dollars. . . . I am rushing to a cio
meeting.’’
Ω∫ Baker appreciated the mass appeal of the labor movement, es-
pecially that of the cio during its initial organizing campaigns. In her view,


--- PAGE 157 ---
134 fighting her own wars
the mobilization of African Americans in the workplace and in the commu-
nity were inextricably related, and the naacp as well as the cio would gain
from the upsurge in activism. She had, after all, worked with the Brother-
hood of Sleeping Car Porters in New York, as an extension of her commu-
nity organizing work on racial and economic justice in the 1930s.
The cio was also trying to organize in the sugar, laundry, and paper box
industries.
ΩΩ Allegations of racism in the afl and charges of communist
involvement in the cio escalated the level of antagonism between the rival
organizations, which peaked when a black cio organizer was beaten up,
presumably by afl supporters, and ‘‘a free for all ﬁght ensued.’’∞≠≠
The allegations concerning the cio’s ostensible ties to communism
prompted Baker to defend the union. It is unclear whether she believed that
the political afﬁliation of union organizers should not matter or whether
she thought that the allegations were unfounded. Based on her later waver-
ing on the issue, it is most likely that she leaned toward the latter position.
She reported to Walter White that she chastised afl leaders for using the
‘‘red scare’’ to try to deter black workers from joining the cio. In 1943, the
so-called red scare had a different historical meaning than it would just a
few years later when Cold War anticommunism permeated the culture.
This issue would polarize the naacp in the postwar years, with the national
leadership taking a ﬁrmly anticommunist position and purging members
who had communist afﬁliations. In 1943, Baker was condemning a practice
that would later take hold in her own organization and to which she would
brieﬂy consent. In any case, she was pleased to report that ‘‘the best-
thinking Negroes have not been brought into the picture on the side of the
status quo. To the contrary, the most articulate community leaders are
deﬁnitely pro-cio. This includes the president of our branch, and most of
the members of the executive board.’’
∞≠∞ In her ofﬁcial statements, however,
Baker ‘‘neither lauded the cio or damned the afl; but stressed the greater
need for Negroes to be on guard to protect their special interests within and
outside of the organized labor movement.’’
∞≠≤ As an ofﬁcial naacp represen-
tative, she felt compelled to express a neutral position publicly, so as to not
‘‘expose the naacp to the criticism of being partisan.’’
∞≠≥
Ella Baker’s support for the cio was tempered by an awareness of some
of its internal weaknesses. Above all, she worried that the cio’s animus
against the afl might cause conﬂicts among black workers themselves. For
example, she deplored the fact that a young black man named Elijah Jack-
son ‘‘was so deﬁnitely anti-afl that he could barely be civil in company with
Negro afl members.’’
∞≠∂ A number of black workers in the shipyard indus-


--- PAGE 158 ---
fighting her own wars 135
try, especially in the building trades, were in afl-afﬁliated unions.∞≠∑ Baker
wanted to be able to bring the entire black community and its allies to-
gether around the shared concern for racial and social justice, and she
saw sectarianism of any kind, including within the labor movement, as an
obstacle to that objective. This inclusive, democratic sensibility persisted
throughout her career as an organizer, as did her commitment to militant
trade union activism. In a 1947 speech in Atlanta, she admonished black
civil rights workers to ‘‘identify themselves with the labor ﬁght, as well as
other ﬁghts of oppressed people everywhere.’’
∞≠∏
Ella Baker’s work alongside southern labor activists was yet another
example of her willingness to venture into a predominantly male terrain.
Nearly all of the union members mentioned in her correspondence were
men. Since the shipbuilding and steel industries with which she had the
most contact employed a predominantly male work force, it is likely she
was the only woman in many of the meetings she attended. But this did not
deter her; she seemed to not even notice the gender aberration her pres-
ence represented.
Baker was not naive about sexism, but her approach was to simply plow
ahead as if she expected no one to stop her—and, more often than not, no
one did. But she did not try to ignore sexism in the hope that it would just
go away. She pushed for broader inclusion and fairer treatment of other
women and took opportunities to make women feel valued within the
organization, including women whose main roles in life were those of wife
and mother. In one instance, she publicly commended an Alabama woman
for her intention to take out naacp memberships for each of her ﬁve chil-
dren. Citing her as an example of ‘‘progressive motherhood,’’ Baker invited
the woman to have a picture taken for an naacp publication in order to
inspire other mothers to do likewise.
∞≠π This was her way of demonstrating
that there was a place in the organization for everyone, homemakers as
well as wage workers.
Like workers, women were another underutilized group that Baker saw
as integral to the naacp’s efforts. When asked by a new member about the
prospect of starting up a separate women’s auxiliary to one of the existing
branches, Baker scoffed at the idea. It would, she felt, marginalize women
and circumscribe their participation, excluding them from the mainstream
of the organization. In direct response to this suggestion, Baker noted: ‘‘It is
my opinion that any woman who wishes to contribute to the welfare of the
Association can ﬁnd opportunity to do so through the regular branch pro-
gram. . . . From our experience we have found that women who become


--- PAGE 159 ---
136 fighting her own wars
members of the women’s auxiliary tend to isolate themselves from the
main program of the Association and to forget that money-raising, as im-
portant as it is, can never take the place of the purpose for which the naacp
was organized.’’
∞≠∫ Perhaps not surprisingly, the person inquiring about the
establishment of a separate women’s auxiliary was a man, not a woman.
Although Baker had been politically mentored in the all-female environ-
ment of the black Baptist missionary movement, she felt that the naacp’s
relative openness to women’s participation should be exploited and ex-
panded. When she assumed her post as director of branches, she empha-
sized explicitly that women and men should be considered equally for all
jobs.
∞≠Ω Such measures, she believed, would enhance the strength of the
larger struggle by enhancing the personnel base from which the group
could draw to carry out its programs. Moreover, she did not want to see
women who wanted to play a role in the movement have their aspirations
eclipsed because of sexism.
One important aspect of Baker’s efforts to recruit more active members,
men and women, into the ranks of the naacp was her personalized ap-
proach to political work. At the same time that she sought to recruit large
numbers of people to join the naacp, she still tried to recognize and afﬁrm
the value of each individual. This type of personalism or humanism be-
came Ella Baker’s trademark as an organizer. In her travels throughout the
South on behalf of the naacp, she met hundreds of ordinary black people
and established enduring relationships with many of them. She slept in
these people’s homes, ate at their tables, spoke in their churches, and
earned their trust. And she was never too busy, despite her intense sched-
ule, to send off a batch of personal thank-you notes, sending regards to
those she did not contact directly and expressing gratitude for the support
and hospitality she had received. In a follow-up letter to local activists in
Birmingham, she wrote: ‘‘I enjoyed my stay in the Magic City, I enjoyed
working with Mr. Green in his ofﬁcial capacity as President of the branch,
and most especially I remember the pleasant hours spent in your home and
your presence. . . . Please give my regards to Mereva, and Aunt and Uncle
Guice.’’ She also promised to ‘‘write a little note to all of the key workers’’ to
encourage them in their recruitment efforts.
∞∞≠ This was typical of her
warm, personal correspondence with many branch leaders.
Baker encouraged her male colleagues to follow her example of forging
stronger personal ties with individual activists on the branch level. For
example, she advised Walter White that the naacp could be strengthened
by ‘‘paying some attention to the human interest angle of correspondence


--- PAGE 160 ---
fighting her own wars 137
from branches, such as the recognition of the illness and death of branch
ofﬁcers and workers.’’∞∞∞ Baker often intervened in order to maintain good
relationships between the national ofﬁce and the organization’s constitu-
ency. On one occasion, White had neglected to respond to a request for
support from the Newport News branch regarding a dispute in which a
veterans hospital had recruited black nurses from Tuskegee and neglected
to provide housing for them. Baker reminded the executive secretary that
‘‘sometime ago the Newport News branch wrote you for advice on the
Kecoughtan Veterans Facility. . . . They are quite anxious to hear from you
at your earliest convenience.’’ Baker covered for White by telling the branch
leaders that he was ‘‘unusually busy,’’ but she promised that she ‘‘would call
the matter to [his] attention,’’ which she promptly did.
∞∞≤
A keen judge of character, Baker used her insights into human behavior
to work effectively with others. In one instance, while negotiating with an
older naacp member who had decided to deed her estate to the organiza-
tion on her death, Baker was careful not to seem too eager and push for a
more immediate contribution in the form of a life membership, ‘‘les[t] she
thinks . . . I think of her as a gift horse.’’
∞∞≥ Baker was very sensitive about
how she came across to the people in the communities where she did
outreach work. An organizer did not have to have the perfect political
strategy but did have to have the respect and trust of those he or she
struggled alongside. This was Baker’s contention.
......
give people light and they will find the way
In 1943, Ella Baker became the director of branches, supervising the ﬁeld
secretaries and coordinating the national ofﬁce’s work with local groups.
As the highest-ranking female staff member, she had greater inﬂuence over
national policy, although never as much as she would have liked. The post
put her in a better position to pursue her agenda for a more democratic,
inclusive, and action-oriented organization. But the way in which she was
appointed to the post was itself an example of the kind of dictatorial style
that Baker was anxious to undo.
While working on a membership drive in Mobile, Alabama, in the spring
of 1943, she received a rather terse letter from Walter White announcing her
new appointment. She was ﬂoored. Since the post had been left vacant for
nearly two years after William Pickens left the organization in 1941, Baker
wondered why there was such a rush to ﬁll it now. When Baker resigned the
position three years later, she recalled her appointment as an example of


--- PAGE 161 ---
138 fighting her own wars
the organization’s internal problems. In her words: ‘‘[T]he manner in which
I was appointed or rather ‘‘drafted’’ as Director of Branches indicated a
thought pattern that does not lend itself to healthy staff relations. . . . At no
time had we [White and Baker] discussed the directorship either in respect
to myself or to anyone else. . . . [M]y right to an opinion in the matter was
completely discounted.’’
∞∞∂ Although Baker was pretty sure that her friends
Thurgood Marshall and Bill Hastie had inﬂuenced White to chose her for
the post, the timing and awkward process led her to believe that White was
trying to make an impression or cover up some past oversight. Baker never
got over the way in which she had been shuttled into leadership without
consultation or consent.
Baker’s reply to White’s letter of appointment indicated that she was
ﬂattered as well as surprised. She asked to discuss the implications of the
new assignment before she gave him her answer. White had not anticipated
the possibility that Baker would decline the post, and he had issued state-
ments to the press at the same time that he sent her the letter ‘‘offering’’
her the job.
∞∞∑ Such presumptuous arrogance, which was not unusual for
White, demonstrated that he viewed Baker as more of a pawn than a peer.
She accepted the new title with some trepidation, viewing it as an op-
portunity to effect some of the changes she felt were sorely needed in
the naacp.
A top priority for the new director of branches was to lessen the organi-
zation’s bureaucracy and White’s dominating role in it. Baker was dis-
turbed by the fact that ‘‘the program was more or less channeled through
the head [the executive secretary and the national ofﬁce] and not the
people out in the ﬁeld.’’
∞∞∏ While working as a ﬁeld secretary, Baker had
lobbied for a regional or state structure that would reduce the rigid hier-
archy within the association and place more power in the hands of capable
and heroic local leaders like her friend Harry Moore in Florida.
∞∞π In one
letter to Wilkins, Baker reminded him that ‘‘regional secretaries are an
imminent need.’’
∞∞∫ Baker also advocated giving greater responsibility and
autonomy to local branches. In 1942, she urged the development of ‘‘neigh-
borhood units’’ on the model of Birmingham. These would not be ‘‘separate
branches, but in the neighborhood there is a chairman and a co-chairman,
and various committees.’’ The value of such a substructure, she contended,
‘‘is that you have more people participating in branch work and you are
able to contact more persons who perhaps will never get to the general
branch meeting but will attend little neighborhood meetings.’’
∞∞Ω Her goal
was to make the organization more accessible to people at every level of


--- PAGE 162 ---
fighting her own wars 139
involvement. Baker suggested that branch supervision be ‘‘decentralized,’’
allowing ﬁeld workers to work more closely with individual branches.∞≤≠
Ella Baker’s strong commitment to local leadership persisted through-
out her career as an activist. She once commented that ‘‘persons living and
working in a community are in a better position to select leadership for a
community project than one coming into the community.’’
∞≤∞ As far as
Baker was concerned, that observation applied as much to naacp branches
during the 1940s as it did to sncc in the Mississippi Delta during the
mid-1960s. By 1942, Baker had become quite vocal in her criticisms of
bureaucratic leadership. She insisted that the strength of an organization
grew from the bottom up, not the top down. ‘‘The work of the National
Ofﬁce is one thing, but the work of the branches is in the ﬁnal analysis the
life blood of the Association,’’ she argued.
∞≤≤ In many respects, Baker’s
criticisms of the organization closely resembled Du Bois’s. In 1946, the year
Baker resigned from her post as director of branches, Du Bois argued that
‘‘power and authority’’ were too tightly concentrated ‘‘among a small tight
group which issues directives to the mass of members.’’ Like Baker, Du Bois
concluded that the association had to ‘‘hand down and distribute authority
to regions and branches.’’
∞≤≥
A fundamental commitment to democratic practice distinguished Ella
Baker’s progressive politics. She despised elitism and placed her conﬁ-
dence in the many rather than the few, however talented and enlightened
they might be. Moreover, she had come to recognize that the bedrock of
any serious social change organization is not the eloquence or expertise of
its top leaders; it lies, instead, in the commitment and hard work of the
rank-and-ﬁle membership and the willingness and ability of those mem-
bers to engage in a vibrant and reciprocal process of discussion, debate,
and decision making. Baker carried this viewpoint with her into her orga-
nizing efforts with the Southern Christian Leadership Conference during
the 1950s. She felt that the national naacp relied too heavily on its lawyers
and educated spokesmen and neglected its branch structure. Legal initia-
tives were ﬁne; but, without mass campaigns waged in tandem, the victo-
ries were shallow and short-lived.
Baker was well aware that naacp branches were ﬂoundering because of
a lack of direction or a lack of channels through which to contribute to the
larger struggle—or, worse still, they were stiﬂed by the narrow, self-serving
agendas of bureaucratic branch leaders. In Baker’s view, there was no
excuse for local branches simply to serve as cheerleaders and fund-raisers
for the national ofﬁce. Programs of action were key to the vitality and


--- PAGE 163 ---
140 fighting her own wars
relevance of local branches. In a letter to Lucille Black written from Rome,
Georgia, she remarked: ‘‘Rome manifests all the expected symptoms of a
branch that has had the same president for 24 years; and of a community
that thinks nothing can be done in the South that would challenge the
status quo.’’
∞≤∂ Bringing in new leadership and challenging the black com-
munity’s resignation in the face of Jim Crow were, in Baker’s mind, closely
related; only people who refused to become accustomed to things as they
were had the determination to act for change.
One of Ella Baker’s ﬁrst goals as director of branches was ‘‘to increase
the extent to which the present membership participates in national and
local activities.’’
∞≤∑ She also pledged ‘‘to transform the local branches from
being centers of sporadic activity to becoming centers of sustained and
dynamic community leadership.’’
∞≤∏ Toward that end, she organized a se-
ries of regional leadership conferences designed to cultivate leadership at
the grassroots level. Initially, her idea for regional gatherings met with
opposition.
∞≤π But she mobilized the Committee on Branches, which she
had put together, to support the idea, and pressured Walter White to allow
her to proceed.
Interestingly, and probably not wholly by chance, Ella’s old friend Pauli
Murray, the leftist lawyer who was then living in California, added her
voice to those supporting the leadership training initiative. In the summer
of 1944, just as Baker was making her case for the proposal, Murray wrote
to Walter White and Roy Wilkins endorsing a very similar concept. In a
witty and humorous letter to White, she demanded to know ‘‘when you
burn out ﬁfty years from now, who is going to take your place? When I burn
out much sooner, who is going to be the gadﬂy getting into people’s hair
and urging them to get things done? . . . The naacp needs a carefully
worked out naacp leadership training program . . . where young men and
women would sit down for several weeks and discuss with you, Roy, Dean
Hastie, Ella Baker and countless others the problems and techniques of
organization.’’
∞≤∫ In her follow-up letter to Wilkins, Murray stressed the
need for such training on the branch level: ‘‘In trotting over the country in
my vagabond fashion, I am appalled at the lag between the sure-ﬁre ﬁght-
ing techniques developed by the national ofﬁce staff members and the
slow, inefﬁcient methods of local volunteer ofﬁcers. Race-relations has
become a profession and its workers should be technically trained. Who is
more capable to lead off in the training process than the national staff?’’
∞≤Ω
There is no paper trail indicating that Ella Baker had requested Pauli Mur-
ray’s timely intervention, but it is likely that the two women were in touch,


--- PAGE 164 ---
fighting her own wars 141
as they had been on and off for over a decade. Murray singled out Baker
for praise in her letter to White: ‘‘I’ve seen Ella in action and they don’t
come ﬁner.’’
∞≥≠
Ella Baker’s leadership conferences were an enormous success; and
when she left the association in 1946, Roy Wilkins remembered them as
one of her main contributions to the national organization.
∞≥∞ The ﬁrst
regional leadership conference was held in New York City on November 11–
12, 1944. The purpose of the conference was ‘‘to emphasize the basic tech-
niques and procedures for developing and carrying out programs of action
in the branches.’’
∞≥≤ Over 150 delegates from seventy-three branches and
six states attended the two-day conference, which addressed such topics as
individual and mass protest, political pressure, education and propaganda,
legal action, and cooperation and collaboration with other groups.
∞≥≥ Ba-
ker was very concerned with the mechanics of movement building. She
thought that, rather than simply telling people to develop a program, the
association should impart to them the skills and information necessary to
carry out such a task effectively and with conﬁdence.
Between 1944 and 1946, under Baker’s direction, leadership conferences
were held in Shreveport, Tulsa, Atlanta, Jacksonville, Chicago, Easton
(Pennsylvania), and Indianapolis.
∞≥∂ Baker pulled in top ofﬁcials to deliver
lectures, offer welcoming remarks, and conduct workshops. Roy Wilkins,
Thurgood Marshall, and Walter White all participated at one time or an-
other.
∞≥∑ For the conference held in New York, Gloster Current, president of
the Detroit branch, and Leslie Perry of the Washington Bureau, which
focused on lobbying and litigation, were ﬂown in to speak. Baker also drew
on the expertise of people outside the ofﬁcial structure of the association;
for example, she invited Grace Hamilton of the Atlanta Urban League and
Dorothy Homer of the New York Public Library. Ministers in towns where
the conferences were convened were always asked to participate.
∞≥∏ At the
conference held at the Mt. Zion Baptist Church in Indianapolis in January
1945, both the city’s mayor and Indiana’s governor delivered welcoming
addresses; Ella Baker and Thurgood Marshall represented the national
naacp.
∞≥π At the Atlanta conference held in March, Baker and Marshall
were accompanied by the national membership secretary, Lucille Black,
and an assistant ﬁeld secretary, Donald Jones. Building on the lessons of
the two previous conferences, the Atlanta meeting had a much more de-
tailed agenda. An evening session led by Marshall focused on such concrete
issues as ‘‘police brutality; discrimination in public facilities, city parks and
playgrounds; segregation in Inter-State Transportation; job discrimination;


--- PAGE 165 ---
142 fighting her own wars
the G.I. Bill of Rights . . . and the Negro Veteran; and . . . Labor Legisla-
tion.’’∞≥∫ Venues were chosen to maximize attendance: after daytime pro-
ceedings at Atlanta’s Butler Street ymca, evening mass meetings were held
at Bethel Church.
Two residents of Montgomery, Alabama, who attended the Atlanta
meeting later played decisive roles in the Civil Rights Movement. E. D.
Nixon, an organizer for the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, and Rosa
Parks, a local naacp activist, became key ﬁgures in the momentous Mont-
gomery bus boycott of 1955–56. Parks conﬁded in Baker some time later
that this was the ﬁrst time she had traveled outside the Montgomery area,
and the experience made a lasting impression.
∞≥Ω ‘‘I know Ella Baker had
a profound effect on Rosa Parks,’’ observed an activist who knew both
women.
∞∂≠ Years later, Parks agreed.∞∂∞
In preparation for the leadership conferences, Baker sent out question-
naires asking what topics participants wanted to discuss at the gatherings.
She tried to set an agenda that did not assume that the experts and na-
tional leaders were there to enlighten the masses. The title of the leader-
ship conferences Baker coordinated was ‘‘Give People Light and They Will
Find the Way.’’ This title, drawn from one of Baker’s favorite hymns, cap-
tures the essence of what she was trying to accomplish. She believed that
people did not really need to be led; they needed to be given the skills,
information, and opportunity to lead themselves.
......
time to move on
The view that common people were capable of identifying the problems
they faced and learning how to address them was shared by some of Ba-
ker’s naacp colleagues, but not by all. As she began to assert herself in the
leadership of the naacp, Baker made Walter White more and more uneasy.
She was outspoken in executive staff meetings, criticized White when she
thought he was wrong, and insisted on being either consulted about deci-
sions affecting the branches or left alone to follow her own course. The
association’s resistance to engaging in mass mobilizations and grassroots
organizing, coupled with the lack of internal democracy that prevented
internal dialogue about such issues, contributed to Baker’s decision to
resign her post as director of branches in 1946.
Some of her naacp colleagues found Baker’s manner abrasive and her
straightforward style annoying. A common word used to describe her was
‘‘difﬁcult.’’
∞∂≤ The ways in which she often described herself are consistent


--- PAGE 166 ---
fighting her own wars 143
with the notion that she was deliberately ‘‘difﬁcult.’’ That is, she did not
ingratiate herself with those in high positions, and she did not hesitate to
speak her mind even when her ideas were controversial. To men like Walter
White, this made her difﬁcult. Baker was really never much of a team
player, in the affable, conformist sense of the term. One problem was that
she said what others thought but were more discreet about. She gave
concrete meaning to the slogan ‘‘Speak truth to power.’’ For example, there
seems to have been an almost universal consensus among the New York
staff that Walter White was egotistical, vain, and short-sighted. People
whispered about him in the hallway, and many of his staff criticized him in
private.
∞∂≥ Baker recalled White as someone who went out of his way to
remind everyone around him how important he was. For example, he
would keep visitors waiting to give them the impression that he was too
busy with more urgent matters to see them at the agreed-upon time. He
would also walk into the middle of the ofﬁce where the telephone switch-
board was located to confer with the operator in a loud voice about the
calls he was expecting from one important person or another.
∞∂∂ His mo-
tives were transparent to most observers. However, most staff members
discreetly kept their negative opinions of White to themselves. According to
Herbert Hill, an naacp staff member during the years shortly after Baker’s
tenure and later the architect of the naacp’s labor programs, ‘‘Ella made no
secret of her contempt for Walter White.’’
∞∂∑ Neither did Du Bois. As a
result, both Baker and Du Bois were nudged out of the organization.
Baker realized that her days on the national staff were numbered when
she and her friend Ruby Hurley openly deﬁed Walter White’s leadership at
an Administrative Committee meeting in the winter of 1944. Hurley and
Baker abstained from a vote endorsing a letter White wanted to send the
mayor of New York City regarding a controversy that was brewing at Har-
lem’s Sydenham Hospital. White, who was not at the meeting himself, was
offended by his subordinates’ independence and sent off a terse memo
reprimanding Baker and Hurley and asking for an explanation of their
actions. Baker cited this incident two years later in her letter of resignation,
indicating that she ‘‘knew then that independent thinking was not to be
tolerated on the staff.’’
∞∂∏ She also knew that she could not operate com-
fortably for very long in such an environment.
The relationship between Baker and White grew more tense over the
next year. He was not accustomed to anyone questioning his administrative
decisions and viewed it as an affront to his leadership. For example, when
White ﬁnally moved to implement Baker’s suggestion that regional secre-


--- PAGE 167 ---
144 fighting her own wars
taries be hired to coordinate branch work, she applauded the decision but
challenged the procedure as unfair, pointing out that there should be more
detailed discussion throughout the organization before such important
changes were made. She added that, before new staff were hired from the
outside, present staff should be given an opportunity to apply for the new
positions.
∞∂π
The more Baker pushed for accountability regarding administrative de-
cisions, the more White prodded her for alleged infractions of ofﬁce pro-
cedure. White’s charges seem petty or even fabricated. In November 1945,
he dictated a stinging memo complaining that Baker was not working hard
enough. He asserted that ‘‘throughout your time with the Association you
have been out of the ofﬁce on personal matters more than any other execu-
tive to the detriment of your work and ofﬁce morale.’’
∞∂∫ By all other in-
dications, Baker was a tireless worker. On several occasions, she ignored
her own health and came into the ofﬁce against doctor’s orders to per-
form some of the seemingly never-ending tasks associated with her job.
∞∂Ω
Baker’s grueling itinerary for the years she was with the naacp belies
Walter White’s suggestion that she was not pulling her weight in the orga-
nization. Moreover, it was only because White took the time to calculate
Baker’s days off over a ﬁve-year period that he was able to assert that she
had taken more time off than any of her co-workers. Such research had to
have been undertaken with a precise motive in mind. Even if Baker was off
sick more than others, she certainly was not shirking her responsibilities,
as White argued, since her calendar indicated that she worked evenings,
weekends, and holidays throughout her tenure with the association. It was
probably no coincidence that White’s reprimand of Baker came only a week
after Baker’s criticism of White’s unilateral action regarding the regional
secretaries.
White’s criticism of Baker for taking too much personal time was partic-
ularly callous and insensitive given the fact that Baker had just suffered a
bereavement. The main reason she had requested personal time off during
the months leading up to White’s memo was the prolonged, terminal ill-
ness of her cousin Martha Grinage, whom she regarded as a sister. Martha
had grown up with Ella in North Carolina, moving in with Ella’s family
after her own mother’s death, and Ella had stayed with Martha when she
ﬁrst came to New York in 1927. Ella felt closer to Martha than she did to her
own sister, Maggie. Martha was seriously ill and in and out of the hospital
throughout the summer and fall of 1945. On several occasions, Ella re-
arranged her travel and meeting schedules in order to visit and help care


--- PAGE 168 ---
fighting her own wars 145
for Martha.∞∑≠ After Martha died on October 16, Walter White did not even
attend the funeral; he sent an impersonal telegram instead.∞∑∞
Later that winter, Baker’s family responsibilities expanded again as she
adopted her nine-year-old niece, Jackie. In January 1946, Ella’s brother,
Curtis, wrote to her that Jackie ‘‘was asking about her relatives up north.’’∞∑≤
Jackie was the daughter of Ella’s younger sister, Maggie. Since Maggie was
unable to care for the child, the responsibility had fallen to Ella’s mother
and brother. Maggie had always been known as the wild and wayward
child.
∞∑≥ ‘‘My sister wasn’t going to be very responsible [for the child]
anyway,’’ Ella admitted, ‘‘so, mama and papa [before his death] took the
baby.’’
∞∑∂ By the mid-1940s, Anna Ross Baker was aging and less able to care
for Jackie, and Curtis, who was unmarried, may have been reluctant to
become her primary caregiver. So Ella Baker agreed to take responsibility
for the child, and Jackie moved from Littleton, North Carolina, to New York
City to live with her aunt. Baker’s new family commitment was a secondary
factor contributing to her decision to resign from her administrative post
with the naacp. She anticipated that she would need to be closer to home
for a while and feared that the time and travel commitments required by
the job might be incompatible with her new parental responsibilities. At age
forty-two, for all intents and purposes, Baker became a mother, a role she
had not planned for herself, but one she embraced after it was thrust on her.
A conventional mother she was not. Jackie later recalled: ‘‘I had to
move fast to keep up with her. I would sit in the back of meetings and do
my homework many a night.’’
∞∑∑ Ella relied on her husband and a female
neighbor to assist with child-rearing. Baker recollected that ‘‘we could
depend on Miss Lena being there to look out the window at the right time,
and then [Jackie] would go upstairs to her place and be fed . . . she went to
Miss Lena’s regularly because I frequently had night meetings.’’
∞∑∏ Bob
seems to have ﬁlled in as well. One friend observed that ‘‘he did help look
after the child, he helped Ella in that way.’’
∞∑π Although Baker remained
closer to home after Jackie came to live with her, she did not conﬁne her
work to a regular eight-hour day. She relied on others to help care for
Jackie and tried to keep up an active pace of work.
Baker was already looking for another job when she decided to adopt
Jackie. She responded to White’s reprimand immediately by looking for
other employment. In November 1945, she contacted Mary McLeod Be-
thune, the prominent civil rights activist, to inquire about job possibilities.
Baker and Bethune were not friends, but they were acquainted. Bethune,
nearly thirty years Baker’s senior, had gone to a boarding school in North


--- PAGE 169 ---
146 fighting her own wars
Carolina, had contemplated becoming a missionary, was ﬁercely inde-
pendent, and was deeply committed to community service and political
activism—although of a somewhat different sort than Ella Baker’s grass-
roots community organizing. Bethune was an educator and founder of
Bethune-Cookman College, a friend of Eleanor Roosevelt, adviser to Presi-
dent Roosevelt, and leader of the black women’s club movement.
∞∑∫ She
was certainly one of the most high-proﬁle and politically inﬂuential black
women of her generation. She knew of Ella Baker’s work and respected her
reputation as an organizer. Bethune responded cordially to Baker’s inquiry,
acknowledged her skills and talents, but no job offer was ever made.
∞∑Ω
When Ella Baker left the naacp’s national staff in May 1946, it was not
primarily because she was a new parent, although that was a contributing
factor. She left mainly because she had little conﬁdence that the national
organization would make room for dissenting opinions or differing politi-
cal views:
My reasons for resigning are basically three—I feel that the Association
is falling short of its present possibilities; that the full capacities of the
staff have not been used; that there is little chance of mine being utilized
in the immediate future. Neither one nor all of these reasons would
induce me to resign if I felt that objective and honest discussion were
possible and that remedial measures would follow. Unfortunately, I ﬁnd
no basis for expecting this. My reactions are not sudden but accumula-
tive, and are based upon my own experience during the past ﬁve years
and the experience of other staff, both present and former.
∞∏≠
Although Baker was characteristically honest in voicing her strong criti-
cisms of the way the organization operated, she conﬁned her opinions this
time to a letter sent directly to the executive secretary and declined to make
her criticisms a public issue at the naacp’s national convention, a move
that Gloster Current, her colleague, successor, and sometime nemesis, saw
as a ‘‘gracious gesture.’’
∞∏∞ It was probably more practical and strategic on
Baker’s part than anything else. She understood that the naacp was still a
powerful and in many ways effective black freedom organization, although
hampered by its internal weaknesses. She did not want to discredit the
organization publicly, and she had every intention of continuing to work
with the naacp on terms more to her liking.
Baker’s departure from the national staff came as such a blow to many
of her associates at the branch level that she was inundated with letters
expressing gratitude for her assistance and pleading with her to stay on.


--- PAGE 170 ---
fighting her own wars 147
After learning of her resignation, her friend John Leﬂore, a labor organizer
and naacp leader in Mobile, wrote: ‘‘All of us here and people throughout
the country whom we have talked to, and who know you, have nothing but
praise [for your work] . . . we have grown to love you.’’
∞∏≤ Baker appreciated
the words of praise and thanks she received from branch members, and she
assured friends like Leﬂore that, while she was stepping down as director
of branches, she was by no means resigning from the struggle. Baker’s
reputation and personal ties were strong enough that some naacp branch
leaders continued to treat her as if she were an ofﬁcial of the organization.
Long after she had left the national ofﬁce, Baker received a steady ﬂow of
invitations to speak at naacp branch events across the South. For example,
in January 1947, she went to Atlanta to help launch the annual membership
drive at Big Bethel Church. The newspaper account of her visit reported
that she ‘‘electriﬁed’’ the audience, giving them both a history lesson and a
political directive. Slaves were not given their freedom by Abraham Lin-
coln, Baker claimed; black soldiers fought and died for their freedom in the
Civil War. The 1940s were no different, she insisted. Before stepping down
from the podium, Baker called on her listeners to ally themselves with ‘‘the
cause of oppressed people everywhere.’’
∞∏≥ As she had told John Leﬂore,
her commitment to the more activist and militant forces of the naacp did
not depend on her being on the payroll of the national ofﬁce.
Although Ella Baker had developed a national network through her role
as director of branches, she spent the last few years of her tenure culti-
vating ties to progressive individuals and organizations in New York as
well. It was through this network that Baker was able to ﬁnd employment.
In the late 1940s and early 1950s, she managed to piece together an income
through a series of odd jobs with several civil rights and community service
organizations. Her longest employment stint was with the New York Can-
cer Committee, where she coordinated a public health education program.
This was important work, but it was not her life’s calling. It was not long
before she plunged back into politics.
In the early 1950s, Baker would turn her attention from the national
political stage to the local one in Harlem and New York City. The northern-
based black freedom struggle was long overlooked, Baker felt; so, after her
departure from the naacp’s national staff, she would ground herself in the
struggles that burdened the lives of her own neighbors, friends, and family
in New York. She soon realized that a local focus still could not keep at bay
national politics and even global rivalries.


--- PAGE 171 ---
5
cops, schools, and communism
local politics and global ideologies—
new york city in the 1950s
......
I came into the social justice movements at the height of the repression of the Cold War
period. . . . Organizations seeking civil rights, peace and justice had been crushed
everywhere. . . . And although I discovered in those years that there was always a
resistance movement, many people did indeed fall into silence. . . . But the one thing
that could not be crushed was a burning desire of African Americans to be free.
Anne Braden, 1999
In 1952, Ella Baker was elected president of the large New York City naacp
branch, becoming its ﬁrst woman president. She had been active in the
branch for several years working with the youth council and several other
projects, but her new post provided her with the latitude and authority to
orchestrate some of the kinds of political campaigns she had long envi-
sioned. After traveling around the country for two decades aiding grass-
roots groups to develop activist campaigns for change, she now had an
opportunity to shape and direct such a movement in the heart of New York
City. Her base of operations was Harlem, where she had long experience
and manifold ties with diverse groups of black and white political activists
and progressive intellectuals. Actually, she moved branch headquarters
from ofﬁces downtown to the heart of the black community in Harlem
to be more in the thick of things. Baker led the New York City branch
the way she thought all naacp branches should function. She identiﬁed


--- PAGE 172 ---
cops, schools, and communism 149
issues of concern to black people—ordinary working people as well as
professionals—and involved as many members as possible in building di-
rect action campaigns to address those issues. She also worked hard to
build coalitions with other groups in the city. In New York, unlike many
smaller cities where the naacp was the only civil rights organization in
town, the black political scene was eclectic and contentious. But Baker was
able to deal with the personalities and navigate the territorial rivalries of
various organizations with ﬁnesse. Part of the key to her success was that
she relished rather than resented other organizational involvement. Every
action did not have to be carried out in the naacp’s name. In fact, Baker
maintained multiple organizational afﬁliations even as she presided over
the New York branch.
During 1952 and 1953, under Ella Baker’s leadership, the New York naacp
branch built coalitions with other groups in the city and carried out aggres-
sive campaigns focused primarily on school reform and desegregation and
on police brutality.
∞ In the course of these campaigns, Baker employed the
whole range of protest tactics she had taught others to utilize: sending
public letters of protest, leading noisy street demonstrations, confronting
the mayor in front of the news media, and even running for public ofﬁce,
after temporarily taking off her naacp hat. Baker’s photograph and her ﬁery
words appeared regularly in New York City newspapers, as she demanded
quality, public education for all New York students, with active parental
participation, and called for public accountability and fair treatment for
people of color from the police. Often at the head of a crowd of supporters,
acting in concert with other groups and individuals, Baker led the New York
City naacp into action alongside progressive whites and Puerto Ricans, the
city’s second-largest group of people of color.
In her efforts at coalition-building, Baker tried to avoid the divisive Cold
War politics that deﬁned the national scene during the early 1950s and
threatened to infect the debates over local issues. While Baker continued
to have regular contact with Walter White, Roy Wilkins, and Gloster Cur-
rent, her successor as director of branches, with whom she had a civil but
strained relationship, she tried to function as independently as possible.
She contacted the executive ofﬁcers regarding fund-raising efforts, mem-
bership strategies, and incidents that occurred in the city that both the New
York branch and the national ofﬁce might respond to. It took a conscious,
continuous effort for Baker to carve out her own path in the very backyard
of the national ofﬁce. The personality conﬂicts and the tension between the


--- PAGE 173 ---
150 cops, schools, and communism
national organization and local branches that created long-standing prob-
lems in the association were compounded, during the early 1950s, by the
growing inﬂuence of anticommunism.
The national naacp asserted its intention to step up the push for racial
progress in the wake of World War II when it convened the National Emer-
gency Civil Rights Mobilization in Washington, D.C., in January 1950. The
tone and ﬂavor of the event, however, suggested that the organization’s
national leaders intended to carry out that work safely within the bounds
of Cold War rhetoric and ideology. The gathering brought together over
4,000 African American civic, community, and religious leaders in the
nation’s capital to press President Truman to take stronger action on pend-
ing civil rights initiatives. Demands included a permanent Fair Employ-
ment Practices Commission and voting rights protection.
The organization wanted to send another message to the Truman ad-
ministration as well. Roy Wilkins and his colleagues were anxious to de-
fend and reafﬁrm the naacp’s reputation against allegations of ties with
communism. Anticommunist campaigners charged that the naacp mem-
bership included those who presently or formerly belonged to the Commu-
nist Party and that communist ideas therefore dominated the association.
This was hardly the case, but in the volatile political climate of 1950, and in
the wake of the 1947 government decision to require loyalty oaths of fed-
eral employees, charges of communist links seemed tantamount to charges
of treason. The national naacp responded by denying the allegations out-
right, despite the prominent role played by well-known leftists of various
ideological bents, including communists, in joint campaigns for racial jus-
tice over the previous thirty years.
The conveners of the National Emergency Civil Rights Mobilization went
to great lengths formally and publicly to exclude radicals with any hint of
communist afﬁliation. The conference call explicitly declared the mobiliza-
tion to be a ‘‘nonpartisan, non-leftist movement rejecting the persistent
proffers of ‘cooperation’ and ‘assistance’ made by individuals and organiza-
tions long identiﬁed as apologists for communist doctrine and Soviet for-
eign policies.’’ The mobilization in Washington was only the beginning. At
its annual convention in Boston in June, the naacp formally barred commu-
nists from membership and following the lead of the cio—which had re-
cently taken similar steps—proceeded to purge leftists from its ranks.
≤ This
undemocratic stance was partly a defensive capitulation to the virulent red-
baiting that was quickly permeating the political culture. At the same time,
it was a continuation and deepening of longstanding tensions between the


--- PAGE 174 ---
cops, schools, and communism 151
policies of the dominant leadership and the leftist politics of other antiracist
activists, including some who were also naacp members.
Like most black radicals living in New York City in 1950, Ella Baker had
friends and colleagues who were communists. She often disagreed with
them but she had worked with them off and on for over twenty years. Baker
had managed to stay clear of the debate surrounding the Emergency Mobi-
lization in January, and she had not ﬁgured prominently in the arguments
that took place at the naacp’s Boston convention. But as head of the New
York branch, in a city known for its radical political culture, Ella Baker
would not be able to dodge the issues indeﬁnitely.
≥
In the early 1950s in New York and elsewhere, there was a vibrant
and multifaceted campaign for quality, integrated public education. Baker
brought passion as well as long experience to the issue of educational
reform. She was her mother’s daughter, so education had always been near
and dear to her heart. In contrast to Anna Ross Baker’s rather conventional
notions of teaching and learning, Ella was eager to explore more creative
pathways to knowledge. In the 1930s, she had focused her energies on
adult education. In the late 1940s and early 1950s, as the parent of a school-
aged child, she turned her attention to elementary and secondary educa-
tion. Jackie was enrolled in a private Quaker school for most of her time in
New York, a sign of Ella’s commitment to raising her daughter in an inte-
grated, progressive, and nurturing milieu. But Baker knew that private
solutions to public problems were not solutions at all. Her deep interest in
public education led Baker to team up with the well-known psychologist
and civil rights activist Kenneth Clark and his equally accomplished, less
often recognized wife, Mamie Phipps Clark, to push for improved condi-
tions for poor, largely African American and Latino schoolchildren in New
York City. Through her relationship with the Clarks, Baker became a strong
proponent of ‘‘community-based’’ models of learning in which parents
were empowered to help deﬁne priorities and design curricula for their
children. In this struggle, she also worked alongside Stanley Levison’s wife,
Bea, who was a reading tutor at the child development center run by the
Clarks and a strong supportor of their work.
∂
Ella Baker joined a growing community of education reformers who
sought fundamental changes in public education and child welfare policies
that went well beyond the simple demand for integration. Milton Gala-
mison, an African American activist in Brooklyn, and Annie Stein, a Jewish
communist who was also active in Brooklyn, were pushing the national
naacp leaders as well as city ofﬁcials to take more aggressive actions.
∑


--- PAGE 175 ---
152 cops, schools, and communism
Baker led her Harlem-based group, Parents in Action, and the citywide
naacp branch into the campaign, and out of that struggle developed a rela-
tionship with both Galamison and Stein; the latter became one of Baker’s
dear friends and close comrades. These were the years in which the naacp’s
long-term legal campaign to desegregate public education was about to
bear fruit in the landmark Supreme Court decision Brown v. Board of Educa-
tion, and community-based civil rights activists sought to lay the basis for
change once litigation had opened the door to desegregation.
Baker ofﬁcially began working with the Clarks during the early 1950s,
although she may have known them earlier through her activities with
the naacp and other organizations in New York. In August 1952, she co-
convened a meeting at the Clarks’ home in suburban Hastings-on-Hudson,
a frequent gathering place for New York’s black activist intellectuals, to talk
about the issue of segregation in the New York schools. In March 1953, a
follow-up meeting was held at the same location. These outreach meetings,
directed at activists, educators, and policymakers in the New York area,
were an attempt to attract a broad base of support for school desegregation
and curricular reform in the city.
∏
Both Kenneth and Mamie Clark were the children of Caribbean-born
parents, recipients of Ivy League doctorates in psychology, and staunchly
committed social activists. Kenneth was the ﬁrst African American ac-
cepted into Columbia University’s graduate program in psychology; in
1942, he became the ﬁrst black professor on the faculty of the City College
of New York.
π The couple’s famous doll studies (which have since been
questioned) sought to demonstrate how black children’s self-esteem was
damaged by racism, as evidenced by their preference for white over black
dolls. The Clarks’ doll studies were discussed at length in the naacp’s brief
in Brown v. Board of Education , and the Supreme Court speciﬁcally cited
the Clarks’ work in its historic decision striking down segregated schools as
unconstitutional. The Clarks had long careers as scholars and activists
before and after the 1954 Brown decision. In 1946 they established the
Northside Center for Child Development to provide ‘‘social work, psycho-
logical evaluation, and remediation services for youth in Harlem since
there were virtually no mental health services in the community.’’
∫ They
were visible and vocal participants in struggles over housing, health, and
poverty, as well as education.
In 1954, Baker agreed to serve as a member of the Intergroup Commit-
tee, chaired by Kenneth Clark, which was set up by the New York Board of
Education to address some of the problems African American and Latino


--- PAGE 176 ---
cops, schools, and communism 153
children encountered in the public schools. On the eve of the Brown deci-
sion, in April 1954, the committee hosted a conference at the New Lincoln
School in Manhattan, titled ‘‘Children Apart,’’ which indicted the school
system for instilling a sense of inferiority in black children and perpetuat-
ing an enormous disparity in the resources allocated to black versus white
schools. The meeting drew activists, social workers, educators, and parents
from across the city and kicked off several years of intense protests and
lobbying for school reform, school desegregation, and increased youth
services in New York. Baker was a paid staff person for the conference and
devoted several weeks of her time to planning the event, contributing her
well-honed organizing skills to ensure its success.
Ω She drafted literature
and conference documents, lined up speakers, coordinated publicity, met
with various participant groups, and strategized with other activists about
how to make the event effective in reaching their larger objectives. The
conference was perfectly timed: those who attended were primed to act
once the imminent legal victory in the Brown case created an opening
for change.
Ella Baker and the Clarks continued their work with the Intergroup
Committee; but, after several years of lobbying and working with city
ofﬁcials, Baker was ready to move from debate to direct action. She feared
that her former colleagues at the national naacp ofﬁce would either op-
pose such a step or slow it down with red tape. So, instead of operating ex-
clusively under the banner of the New York City naacp branch, Baker
helped launch Parents in Action against Educational Discrimination, a
grassroots coalition composed primarily of African American and Puerto
Rican parents that demanded integrated schools and greater parental par-
ticipation in educational policymaking. Years later, Baker recounted how
the organization got started: ‘‘New York City didn’t act right after the ’54
decision. It didn’t have any reason to act, so you had to help it to realize it. I
was asked to serve on the Mayor’s Commission. They ﬁnally discovered the
city wasn’t integrated! And Bob Wagner the second was then Mayor, and
we ended up by having several sessions with him. In ’57, the entire summer
was spent in weekly parent workshops, helping parents become aware that
they had certain rights.’’
∞≠
In the fall of 1957, the eyes of the nation were focused not on efforts to
desegregate public schools in northern cities but rather on the pitched
battle being waged in the streets of Little Rock, Arkansas, a confrontation
so intense that it led to a standoff between Orval Faubus, the state’s segre-
gationist governor, and President Dwight Eisenhower, culminating in the


--- PAGE 177 ---
154 cops, schools, and communism
deployment of federal troops. Daisy Bates, Ella Baker’s friend and former
naacp colleague, was in the middle of the fray as the leader of the local
naacp branch. Bates negotiated with local school ofﬁcials and police to try
to ensure the protection of the nine brave black teenagers who deﬁed
vicious mobs to enroll in Central High School that fall. Bates’s home was
ﬁrebombed, and the newspaper that she and her husband ran was forced
to close down because of economic pressures and harassment.
∞∞ In the
South in this era, struggles to secure basic legal rights were often met with
violent reprisals.
Building on the attention that Little Rock had garnered, New York activ-
ists were eager to point out that racial disparities were not unique to the
South and that militant challenges to government intransigence would be
necessary in New York City as well. As was often the case, Baker found
herself trying to push her civil rights colleagues—particularly the national
leaders of the naacp—toward a more militant stance at the same time that
she was leading a popular struggle against those in positions of govern-
ment power. The national naacp ofﬁce, afraid of negative publicity and of
alienating its moderate, liberal supporters, sought to discourage confronta-
tion and advised the activists to ‘‘adopt a less provocative endeavor, point-
ing out that after all northern school ofﬁcials, unlike the hostile segrega-
tionists of the south, had agreed to integration; it was just a question of
how and when,’’ according to Galamison.
∞≤ Baker founded the grassroots
parents’ group in order to circumvent the naacp’s paralytic bureaucracy
and ‘‘go slow’’ politics.∞≥
On September 26, 1957, Parents in Action called a rally designed to up
the ante and draw greater attention to the campaign. Baker led a spirited
picket line of over 500 black and Puerto Rican parents in front of City Hall
in Manhattan to protest the beginning of another school year without a
serious response to complaints these parents had been making for years.
The group was particularly angry with School Superintendent William
Jansen, but on this day they took their complaints directly to the mayor.
The parents group had planned this confrontation for months. When the
day of the scheduled demonstration ﬁnally arrived, Baker was one of the
angriest and most vocal of the protesters. Although many civil rights activ-
ists later described Baker as a quiet, behind-the-scenes organizer, she was
by no means hesitant to exert her leadership in this instance. News reports,
which quoted Baker extensively, described her as the leader and princi-
pal rabble-rouser in the group. Their grievances included overcrowded
schools, inappropriate curriculum content, the disproportionate allocation


--- PAGE 178 ---
cops, schools, and communism 155
of more experienced teachers away from black and Latino schools, blatant
racial segregation throughout the system, and the unresponsiveness of
school ofﬁcials to parents’ concerns.
On that Thursday morning, the protesters picketed for nearly two hours
demanding an immediate meeting with Mayor Robert Wagner. Finally,
when it was apparent that the group would not back down, Wagner was
persuaded by one of his colleagues to leave a meeting of the Board of
Estimates and see a delegation of twenty-one protesters, many of them
local ministers and naacp activists, led by Ella Baker. Sara Black, a reporter
for the Harlem-based Amsterdam News, described the meeting as follows:
‘‘From 11:55 to 12:12 Mayor Wagner spent an uneasy 17 minutes facing the
delegation . . . led by Mrs. Ella J. Baker . . . while the parents leveled their
charges. . . . Standing while the Mayor twitched nervously, spokesman
Baker said: ‘We parents want to know ﬁrst hand from you just what is, or is
not, going to be done for our children. . . . New York City, the world’s
leading city, should reﬂect the highest degree of democracy in its public
school system.’ ’’
∞∂
The group demanded a follow-up meeting with the mayor, to which he
agreed. Baker then warned Wagner bluntly that he could not afford to
alienate black and Puerto Rican voters two months before he would be on
the ballot for reelection. After a few more sharp exchanges between Baker
and the mayor, the group left City Hall, exhausted and drained after their
four-hour-long protest, but claiming a tactical victory.
∞∑
The campaign for quality integrated schools in New York during the
1950s is historically signiﬁcant. ∞∏ First, Baker and her allies went beyond
the simple demand for racial integration, calling for greater parent and
community involvement in running the schools. This campaign was the
ﬁrst stage in the longer-term struggle for community control of the schools,
a volatile issue that reemerged during the late 1960s and early 1970s. To
insist that parents be empowered to deﬁne their children’s education was a
more substantive and radical demand than simply saying that black and
white children should sit next to each other in the classroom. Complaining
about distorted media coverage of the New York school struggle in a letter
to her friend Ruth Moore, Baker wrote: ‘‘The headlines especially are de-
signed to give the impression that the only thing with which we are con-
cerned is integration rather than the fact that integration is desirable be-
cause where there is separation, even in New York, the schools are too
often inadequate.’’
∞π Second, Baker helped to forge an important biracial
alliance between the African American and Puerto Rican communities.


--- PAGE 179 ---
156 cops, schools, and communism
Some of Baker’s friends from the school struggles of the 1950s became
allies once again in the 1970s, when Baker joined the Puerto Rican Soli-
darity Committee to push for Puerto Rican independence.
The other major cause that Baker championed during her tenure as New
York naacp branch president was even more volatile: the campaign against
police brutality. Police brutality was a problem in black communities
throughout the nation, in the North as well as the South. Baker had tackled
it in both small towns and big cities during her work as an naacp ﬁeld
secretary. She was well aware that the issue had larger ramiﬁcations. Not
only did police brutality against individual black people violate their civil
rights, but the intimidation that the entire community faced from local law
enforcement was a key way that oppressed communities were discouraged
from political protest. From 1950 to 1953, the New York naacp branch ofﬁce
received nearly 100 complaints about instances of police violence against
blacks in the city.
∞∫ The issue came to a head in the summer of 1952 when
two men, Jacob Jackson and Samuel Crawford, were brutally beaten by
two white ofﬁcers in the West 54th Street station house. One of the men
was so seriously injured that he needed brain surgery.
∞Ω
In February 1953, public anger was fueled by allegations made by the
New York Telegram and Sun  newspaper regarding a secret agreement
between the New York Police Department and the U.S. Justice Depart-
ment that discouraged the fbi from investigating brutality charges leveled
against the department and simply allowed the department to handle such
complaints as internal matters. The agreement rendered the police depart-
ment exempt from federal oversight. In March, Attorney General James P.
McGranery issued a statement that conﬁrmed the existence of the agree-
ment but claimed it had already been terminated.
≤≠ In response to the
initial revelation in the newspaper, Ella Baker issued a sharply worded
open letter to the mayor demanding ‘‘the immediate resignation’’ of the
police commissioner ‘‘to save the City of New York from further disgrace.’’
≤∞
The naacp’s national ofﬁce and the New York City branch co-sponsored
a meeting in early February on the subject of police brutality. Representa-
tives from about a dozen other organizations in the city were present. The
group formulated a list of demands for the mayor, including the dismissal
of all federal and local ofﬁcials implicated in the secret agreement, an
immediate and thorough review of all pending cases, the establishment of
a civilian review board, and immediate public disclosure of all allegations
of abuse.
≤≤ On February 29, 1953, the New York naacp sponsored a mass
meeting at the Friendship Baptist Church to protest police brutality. The


--- PAGE 180 ---
cops, schools, and communism 157
speakers included Baker, police brutality victim Jacob Jackson, Thurgood
Marshall, Rev. Thomas Kilgore, and Earl Brown, a progressive member of
the New York City Council.
≤≥ Not surprisingly, given his appetite for atten-
tion, Adam Clayton Powell, Harlem’s ﬂamboyant black congressman, held
his own rally against police brutality at the exact same time as the naacp
event. Powell’s plan may have been prompted by resentment that he was
not offered top billing at the naacp-sponsored meeting. Such ego rivalries
and organizational turf battles were familiar but nonetheless wearying
to Baker, and her tolerance for such political theatrics lessened as the
years passed.
≤∂
Later, in March 1953, the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association and other
police organizations tried to diffuse mounting criticisms by denouncing the
campaign against police brutality as a ‘‘Communist plot.’’ The naacp was
one of the main groups attacked, along with councilman Earl Brown. Ba-
ker’s blunt reply was, ‘‘No communist plot can explain away the fact that
Jacob Jackson had to undergo two brain operations . . . nor does it explain
how other able-bodied persons have walked into police precincts, but had
to be carried out as hospital cases.’’
≤∑
As a modest concession and half-hearted gesture to the protesters, the
police commissioner announced the inauguration of antibias training for
ofﬁcers in order to ease tensions and reduce the chances that police would
treat black suspects in a way that might be regarded as using excessive
force. The training was to be overseen by a human relations committee
that included citizens who were not members of the police force. Ironi-
cally, School Superintendent William Jansen, with whom Baker had locked
horns over racism in the educational system, headed the police reform
committee.
≤∏ Baker was not satisﬁed with the outcome of the campaign
and was determined to keep up the pressure with a vigilant scrutiny of the
police. The struggle continued to ebb and ﬂow for some years.
......
Ella Baker experimented with electoral politics in the early 1950s by run-
ning unsuccessfully for the New York City Council on the Liberal Party
ticket. She ﬁrst ran for city council in 1951 and lost.
≤π In 1953 the slate
was led by her friend Rev. James Robinson, an independent candidate for
mayor.
≤∫ In the November 1953 poll, Baker was defeated handily by Earl
Brown, the incumbent, her adversary in the election but an ally in the
naacp campaign against police brutality.
≤Ω The defeat was probably not
unexpected and may have been cushioned a bit by the support of friends
like the ever-loyal Pauli Murray, who sent Baker an encouraging note on


--- PAGE 181 ---
158 cops, schools, and communism
the eve of the election, ‘‘just to wish you good luck at the polls tomorrow . . .
affectionately, Pauli.’’≥≠
Ella Baker’s 1953 decision to resign temporarily from the naacp branch
presidency in order to run for the New York City Council seems an aberra-
tion within a career dedicated to grassroots organizing rather than elec-
toral politics. Later in life, Baker was openly skeptical of electoral politics
and career politicians. Within the context of her community-based activism
in New York, however, Baker’s interest in city politics makes more sense.
Not only did the naacp regularly tangle with elected ofﬁcials over issues
such as school segregation and police brutality, but the broad, popular
participation that was characteristic of New York City politics in this period
made an electoral campaign seem a logical extension of issue-oriented
organizing. Baker may well have realized that she could not win at the
polls. The value of the campaign lay not in a vain hope of victory but in the
broad-based educational effort that running for ofﬁce entailed. In the early
1950s, as in later periods, some civil rights activists saw electoral politics as
simply another mode of community organizing—a way to get issues in
the spotlight. While the Liberal Party’s campaign platform focused on the
rather tame issues of cleaning up government corruption and inefﬁciency,
the party did include a statement in support of more educational funding
(through bond sales), opposition to bigotry and hate groups, and race-
relations training for police ofﬁcers. These may have been some of the
issues that attracted Ella Baker to the party. But she was not the only
African American activist to work with the Liberal Party in the 1950s.
A. Philip Randolph, the socialist labor leader with whom Baker was closely
associated in the 1930s, had a brief afﬁliation with the party, and Pauli
Murray had been a Liberal candidate for city council in 1949. Murray’s and
Baker’s willingness to run for ofﬁce on the Liberal Party ticket suggests that
it offered an appealing, although imperfect, alternative to the Democratic
and Republican Parties.
≥∞ So, clearly the party embodied some of what
independent black activists were looking for in this period.
The Liberal Party was founded in 1944 by David Dubinsky, the leader of
the International Ladies Garment Workers Union ( ilgwu), as an offshoot
of the more left-leaning American Labor Party, which Ella Baker was also
brieﬂy aligned with before it split. The Liberal Party drew an odd assort-
ment of characters, a number of whom Baker had worked with before. Jay
Lovestone, with whom Baker and Murray had been associated politically
during the 1930s, was working with the ilgwu during the early 1940s and
was involved in the Liberal Party’s formation.
≥≤ Although there is little


--- PAGE 182 ---
cops, schools, and communism 159
evidence that the Liberal Party had more than a formal commitment to
racial integration, even that was unusual during the 1940s. Running Afri-
can American women and men for public ofﬁce represented a clear and
appealing departure from politics as usual. Why Baker allied herself more
with the Liberal Party than the American Labor Party is unclear. The Amer-
ican Labor Party is better known in progressive circles as a serious third-
party experiment that began in 1936 as a way for leftists to back President
Franklin D. Roosevelt without supporting the less progressive forces in the
Democratic Party. The party, founded by Dubinsky and other socialists
including Frank Crosswaith, began to splinter in 1939 over the Hitler-Stalin
Pact and the American Communist Party’s pragmatic support of that agree-
ment. Crosswaith and others then pushed to expel communists from the
American Labor Party, but the anticommunist faction ultimately went its
own way and formed the Liberal Party.
≥≥
Liberal-left coalition work took on new meanings during the postwar
period, when virulent anticommunism spread through the organized labor
movement, partisan politics, the U.S. government, and even the civil rights
movement. At the same time, the move away from inclusive popular front
politics and toward a more rigid sectarian agenda on the part of the Com-
munist Party only exacerbated the situation. Comfortable alliances among
people on the left who had divergent ideologies and afﬁliations dissolved
under the dual pressures. Some independent socialists stood by current
and former Communist Party members who had organized alongside
them, while others sought to distance themselves from this increasingly
suspect and stigmatized group by denouncing their former co-workers and,
in some cases, ‘‘naming names’’ to government investigators to absolve
themselves.
≥∂ A few Americans refused to be intimidated, defending civil
liberties and deploring McCarthyism. Many progressives, however, were
silenced by fear and confusion, failing to fully appreciate the far-reaching
dangers of the House Un-American Activities Committee’s witch-hunts or,
on the other hand, understanding the dangers quite clearly and wanting to
spare themselves by pointing a ﬁnger at others.
≥∑
David Dubinsky and the Liberal Party openly espoused anticommunism.
According to the historian Paul Buhle, Dubinsky became ‘‘fanatically anti-
Communist,’’
≥∏ and the Liberal Party eventually followed his lead. Some
members collaborated with the House Un-American Activities Committee
to prosecute their communist counterparts within the United States, while
simultaneously working with the cia to undermine communist inﬂuence
abroad. Baker would have certainly been aware of these politics, and the


--- PAGE 183 ---
160 cops, schools, and communism
fact that she worked closely with the Liberal Party in spite of its undemo-
cratic politics is wholly inconsistent with the views and values she articu-
lated a decade later. It may be that her brief association with the Liberal
Party should just be seen as yet another curious example of her eclectic and
sometimes unusual political ties.
Although Baker’s own relationship with the Communist Party was an
ambivalent one, she never collaborated with government agencies to per-
secute alleged communists. Ironically, throughout the 1950s, even as she
positioned herself squarely among the noncommunists, if not the anticom-
munists, Baker was being kept under heavy surveillance by the fbi as a
potential subversive. Informants called her home and ofﬁce under false
pretenses to obtain information. Her apartment was watched, her phone
bill intercepted, and her bank account monitored.
≥π
In the late 1950s, Baker cooperated, however reluctantly, with naacp
ofﬁcials when the national organization began to purge communists from
the organization. The 1950 decision to exclude communists on the national
level was implemented by Baker’s old friend J. M. Tinsley, who headed the
Committee on Political Domination, the goal of which was to end alleged
communist inﬁltration of the organization.
≥∫ In September 1957, while
serving on the executive committee of the New York branch, Baker was
asked to serve on the newly established Internal Security Committee,
headed by her former Liberal Party running mate, Rev. James Robinson.
The committee met on October 14 at Morningside Community Center on
West 122d Street and drafted its mission statement and its report to the
branch. Although the two-page report began with the unconvincing dis-
claimer that it was ‘‘not a ‘witch hunt’ committee but a ‘watch dog’ commit-
tee,’’ it proceeded to lay out a rather rigid set of criteria for membership in
the branch. ‘‘No individual having any afﬁliation with communists within
the past ﬁfteen years should be allowed on the Executive Board,’’ the report
stated. Any nominee for the executive board would be required to provide a
‘‘written and signed statement listing all past and present afﬁliations,’’ and
if ‘‘any ofﬁcer or member is discovered to have any connection with com-
munism within the past 13 years [15 years stated elsewhere], or to be
presently so connected, they shall be expelled from the organization.’’
≥Ω
The most public ouster was that of former Harlem city councilman Ben
Davis Jr., an attorney and a well-known member of the Communist Party
who had served time in jail under the Smith Act; his membership fee
was returned by the branch president along with a terse letter ‘‘condemn-
ing atheistic communism.’’
∂≠ Other New York City branch members were


--- PAGE 184 ---
cops, schools, and communism 161
quietly coerced to resign under threat of a possible committee investiga-
tion. Baker must have felt enormously torn by this decision since it was at
variance with the personal choices she made. Around the time that she
served on the naacp committee to weed out communists, she befriended
Anne Braden and Annie Stein, two reputed communists who were also
militant antiracist whites and very principled people. In the case of Braden,
Baker provided moral and political support, defending Anne and her hus-
band Carl against the kind of persecution that the naacp itself was replicat-
ing on a small scale within the organization. Looking back on her role in
the naacp’s Internal Security Committee years later, after the most re-
actionary implications of McCarthyism had played themselves out, Baker
conﬁded to her friend Joanne Grant: ‘‘I followed a national ofﬁce direc-
tive to the letter, and I should not have.’’
∂∞ After her involvement with
the Internal Security Committee, political independence became even
more critical to Ella Baker.
During the postwar years and after she left the naacp’s national ofﬁce,
Baker was searching for a political home, an organization that embraced a
radical and egalitarian practice and vision similar to her own, but she had
clearly not yet found it. Finding that political community may have taken
on even greater importance to Ella Baker after the death of her beloved
mother, Anna Ross Baker, in December 1954. Littleton, North Carolina, the
family homestead, and Anna Baker’s presence there had been anchoring
forces in Ella’s otherwise fairly nomadic existence. During her travels for
the black cooperative movement in the 1930s and her town-by-town organ-
izing crusades on behalf of the naacp in the 1940s, her mother’s house had
been a place for respite and recouping her energy. The house was still
there, but gone from it was the woman who had nurtured her early intellec-
tual and political consciousness, toughened her up for the world, and con-
soled her when that world was unkind. Baker took the long train ride home
to attend her mother’s funeral and put her affairs in order. She returned
north soon thereafter to her second home in Harlem with a renewed re-
solve to carry on the work that her mother had inspired her to embark on
many decades before. A critical component of that work was building polit-
ical bridges between struggles in the North and the front line struggles in
the South. One such bridge was the New York–based fundraising organiza-
tion, In Friendship.
In Friendship was formed as a way to funnel resources to the activists
who had launched and sustained the Montgomery Bus Boycott, which
began in December 1955. Only a few months before, the brutal murder of


--- PAGE 185 ---
162 cops, schools, and communism
young Emmett Till by white vigilantes in the Mississippi Delta had gal-
vanized national attention and black anger. These two events—new forms
of resistance coupled with the continuance of racial violence—symbolized
the promise and the perils facing southern blacks in the 1950s.
Montgomery activist Joanne Gibson Robinson and the Women’s Politi-
cal Council, as well as E. D. Nixon and the local naacp, had been looking for
ways to ﬁght back effectively against the humiliating treatment of Mont-
gomery’s black residents on city busses for some time. On December 5,
1955, naacp activist Rosa Parks gave them that long-awaited opportunity.
In her own personal protest, pregnant with political consequences that she
was well aware of, Parks refused to comply with the orders of the white bus
driver that she relinquish her seat to a white passenger as required by lo-
cal law. Parks’ arrest triggered a yearlong boycott of city busses, result-
ing in desegregation of those buses and catapulting young Martin Luther
King Jr. to national prominence as the eloquent and courageous leader of
the protest.
While most eyes were ﬁxed on the emergence of a new leader at the
apex of the movement, Baker was more concerned with the base. She
viewed the Montgomery boycott as an amazing event, ‘‘unpredicted, where
thousands of individuals, just black ordinary people, subjected themselves
to inconveniences that were certainly beyond the thinking of most folk. . . .
This meant you had a momentum that had not been seen, even in the work
of the naacp. And it was something that suggested the potential for wide-
spread action throughout the South.’’
∂≤ This example of commitment and
resolve on the part of the rank and ﬁle provided an opportunity for progres-
sive organizers like Ella Baker.
Baker’s close ties with Montgomery’s grassroots leaders Parks and Nixon
drew her attention to the struggle right from the start. When the implica-
tions of the Montgomery Bus Boycott became clear to the nation, Baker
quickly began to look for ways she could mobilize support for the protesters
and help sustain their militant, direct action movement. In 1956, while still
deeply immersed in local issues in New York, Baker and other northern civil
rights activists began to discuss the need to establish a northern-based
fund-raising organization that would be independent of other organiza-
tional agendas and could maximize its aid to those who were hardest hit
by reprisals for their civil rights activism. In Friendship was founded as
a result.
Ella Baker and two of her closest political allies at the time, Stanley
Levison and Bayard Rustin, were the core organizers of In Friendship,


--- PAGE 186 ---
cops, schools, and communism 163
which included representatives from various labor, religious, and political
groups based in the city. ∂≥ Levison was a wealthy Jewish lawyer and busi-
nessman who had been, at one time, afﬁliated with the Communist Party
in New York, which made him a lifelong target of fbi surveillance. He
and Baker met while working against the McCarran Act in the early 1950s.
In fact, Baker had once shared a platform with Eleanor Roosevelt at an anti-
McCarthy program organized by Levison.
∂∂ The McCarran Internal Se-
curity Act of 1950 required alleged communists to register with the attorney
general, and the McCarran-Walter Immigration Act of 1952 denied entry to
the U.S. of any immigrant with communist beliefs or afﬁliations.
∂∑ W. E. B.
Du Bois and Paul Robeson were but two of many prominent activists and
dissident intellectuals who were thereby affected. Eleanor Roosevelt and
other Cold War liberals saw themselves as both anti-McCarthyites and still
devoutly anticommunist. As Carol Polsgrove writes, they hated McCarthy
because he ‘‘was giving anti-communism a bad name.’’
∂∏ So, there was no
contradiction in their minds between purging communists from their orga-
nizations and opposing what they viewed as extremist practices initiated by
Senator Joseph McCarthy and continued by the House Un-American Ac-
tivities Committee after his censure by the Senate in 1954.
Bayard Rustin was a black Quaker from Pennsylvania with an eclectic
political past and a passion for social justice. He was also a bit of an ec-
centric. He joined the Young Communist League brieﬂy during the Great
Depression and later broke with the group to work with the more moderate
Congress of Racial Equality ( core) and the Fellowship of Reconciliation
(for).
Rustin was gay long before there was a gay rights movement, at a time
when such sexual choices, if made public, could and often did result in
severe personal and political penalties.
∂π So, he was not only at risk of
attacks from southern segregationists for his antiracism activity, but he
was also vulnerable to prejudice from within the movement because of his
sexual orientation.
Ella Baker knew Rustin was gay and seemingly accepted him without
condition, later reﬂecting that his homosexuality may have been one of the
reasons that he opted to keep a low public proﬁle during his long, active
political career in a wide range of organizations and campaigns. This strat-
egy was probably not much of a choice, considering the extent of homo-
phobia and his colleagues’ fear that his sexual orientation might draw
negative attention and damage their cause. One historian of the civil rights
movement describes Rustin this way: ‘‘An internationally respected paci-


--- PAGE 187 ---
164 cops, schools, and communism
ﬁst, as well as a vagabond minstrel, penniless world traveler, sophisticated
collector of African and pre-Colombian art, and a bohemian Greenwich
Village philosopher. . . . he lived more or less a hobo’s life, committed to the
ideals of world peace and racial brotherhood. . . . [He was] tall and bony,
handsome and conspiratorial, full of ideas that spilled out in a high pitched
voice, and a proud but squeaky West Indian accent.’’
∂∫
Baker, Levison, and Rustin were an unlikely threesome in many re-
spects, but their ideas and political passions drew them together and en-
abled them to become comrades and friends. Their close collaboration con-
tinued for a number of years, although their friendship was tried, tested,
and eventually weakened over the course of the next decade.
Baker was an important catalyst for pulling together the individuals and
organizations that comprised the In Friendship coalition in 1956. Among
them were dozens of individuals whom Baker had known or worked with
in other campaigns and projects over the years. They included Walter Pe-
tersen, a leader of the New York chapter of the Liberal Party; Levison, a
member of the American Jewish Congress; and Rev. Thomas Kilgore, the
minister at Baker’s own Friendship Baptist Church in Harlem. Other Baker
associates were active in supporting In Friendship: Fay Bennett of the Na-
tional Sharecroppers Fund; Rae Brandstein of the National Committee for
Rural Schools; Cleveland Robinson of the afl-cio, District 65; and Norman
Thomas, the Socialist Party leader. Ella Baker served as executive secretary
of the group, and A. Philip Randolph was persuaded to chair the new
coalition for its ﬁrst two months. The Socialist-afﬁliated Worker’s Defense
League, led by Thomas, provided temporary ofﬁce space. Initially, Baker’s
position was unpaid, but she managed the ofﬁce, handled correspondence
and bookkeeping, orchestrated publicity and outreach, and did virtually all
of the tasks necessary to keep the organization aﬂoat. The group was
eventually able to piece together a modest salary for her.
On February 29, 1956, In Friendship launched its inaugural fund-raising
campaign with an ‘‘Action Conference’’ held at the McAlpin Hotel on Broad-
way and 34th Street in Manhattan. Randolph had issued the call for the
conference in a letter, dated February 17, that conveyed a sense of urgency
about the situation in the South: ‘‘Reports from Mississippi indicate that the
white Citizens Councils have succeeded in choking off all sources of loans
and other credits on which [black] farmers depend. We must show that
those who are being attacked do not stand alone in their ﬁght for de-
cency.’’
∂Ω He noted in passing the occurrence of a similar conference being
convened in Washington D.C. by Oscar Lee and Roy Wilkins. Randolph


--- PAGE 188 ---
cops, schools, and communism 165
commented casually that the event would ‘‘add impetus to our work in this
area,’’ glossing over the competition implicit in the simultaneous formation
of two organizations to serve the same purpose.
∑≠
Despite the strong commitment and good intentions of its founders, In
Friendship had difﬁculties getting off the ground. Randolph abruptly re-
signed as chairman of the organization shortly after its formation and
before the New York fund-raiser even took place. He claimed that he was
overextended in his obligations and felt it inappropriate that he solicit
funds on behalf of In Friendship, since he had already done so recently on
behalf of other organizations. It is possible that something else may have
prompted Randolph’s action, since he was well aware of the existence of
competing organizations from the outset, as indicated by his February 17
letter. Perhaps he was persuaded by colleagues in more established organi-
zations to withdraw his support from the nascent group, or perhaps he
feared that such an endorsement could become a political liability in his
relationships with other groups. Since the initial supporters of In Friend-
ship believed that a roster of prominent sponsors was necessary to give
the group credibility, Randolph’s resignation came as a particularly sharp
blow. In a March 8, 1956, letter to Randolph, Norman Thomas pleaded with
him to reconsider his decision, saying that it would ‘‘almost wreck a pretty
promising beginning at worthwhile work.’’
∑∞ Randolph resigned anyway.
Perhaps in tribute to his long-standing friendship with and respect for Ella
Baker, perhaps in order to exert some control over the campaign, he con-
tinued to work with the group after he stepped down as chair.
The founders of In Friendship were painfully aware of the competition
and tensions with preexisting civil rights organizations, much of which
arose from political turf battles and the clash of overinﬂated egos. Since
a number of organizations were already engaged in similar efforts, the
founders sought to avoid the appearance of needless duplication. As Fay
Bennett of the National Sharecroppers Fund emphasized in a 1956 letter to
Norman Thomas: ‘‘It should be made clear at the beginning that the con-
templated work of the committee [In Friendship] will be handled through
existing machinery and that its primary purpose, at least in its initial
stages, would be to stimulate efforts on the part of other organizations to
help those in the South who need help and in other ways to make an impact
on the situation.’’
∑≤ Despite In Friendship’s attempts to avoid rivalry with
other organizations, some prominent civil rights ﬁgures were still reluctant
to view the group as an umbrella fund-raiser for the movement as a whole.
In the spring of 1956, three In Friendship leaders, including Baker,


--- PAGE 189 ---
166 cops, schools, and communism
worked nearly full time for six weeks building for a mammoth civil rights
rally that was held in Madison Square Garden in May. The other principal
sponsor for the event was Randolph’s Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters.
Leaders of In Friendship naturally assumed that they would process all
funds raised by the event, since they had formed the umbrella organization
meant to pull together everyone else’s efforts in civil rights activism. How-
ever, A. Philip Randolph had a different idea. As one of the top union
ofﬁcials involved, he opted to set up a separate special committee to direct,
monitor, and dispense funds raised by the afl-cio. The committee was to
have two labor representatives, hand-picked by the head of the afl-cio,
George Meany; representatives from several other organizations; and a
single delegate from In Friendship. Although In Friendship acquiesced to
the decision, it was clearly a slap in the face, given the organization’s
initiative in coordinating precisely the kind of tasks to be handled by the
new special committee. Nevertheless, Randolph’s powerful stature and the
relative newness of In Friendship prompted the group not to openly crit-
icize or oppose the decision. In fact, Ella Baker was at the July 11 meeting in
Randolph’s ofﬁce when the new formation was set up. Not wanting to be
divisive at the expense of the group’s larger goals, she went along with
Randolph’s move, conceding that it was ‘‘understandable that the unions
were reluctant to funnel moneys through an organization as young and
untested as In Friendship, and In Friendship would willingly participate as
one member of the larger committee.’’
∑≥ The ﬁnal insult was that the labor
representatives on the committee would have veto power over all funding
decisions, rendering the In Friendship forces fairly marginal to the whole
deliberative process. These events illustrate the internal tensions, hier-
archies, and competition for leadership that existed within the early civil
rights movement, even among its northern supporters.
The conﬂict between In Friendship and the union leaders also illustrates
the reluctance of established leaders to relinquish any of their power to,
or even make room for, upstart organizations. Baker encountered this
problem repeatedly over the years. National leaders, in civil rights and
other ﬁelds, were protective of their prominence and status as the ‘‘ofﬁcial’’
spokespersons for their respective constituencies. Baker was vividly im-
pressed by the deleterious effects of such rivalries and the stiﬂing and
coercive nature of the relationship between junior and senior partners in
coalitions. She carried these memories with her into the political work she
did in subsequent years. In particular, they shaped her desire to be vehe-


--- PAGE 190 ---
cops, schools, and communism 167
mently protective of the independence and autonomy of the Student Non-
violent Coordinating Committee when it was founded a few years later.
She defended the young militants’ right to make their own decisions, de-
spite their youthful inexperience, in the face of annexation attempts by
some of Baker’s well-established colleagues.
Difﬁculties and tensions with allies notwithstanding, the small core of
In Friendship supporters persevered and made some important contribu-
tions. Randolph’s resignation and his bid to control fund-raising did not
‘‘wreck’’ the organization, as Thomas had feared. In December 1956, In
Friendship hosted its second successful fund-raiser, a major concert at the
Manhattan Center featuring Coretta Scott King, Harry Belafonte, Duke El-
lington, and others to commemorate the ﬁrst anniversary of the Montgom-
ery boycott. The event raised $1,800, an appreciable sum at the time. Part
of the proceeds went to support the organizing efforts of the Montgomery
Improvement Association, the main community group that emerged from
the boycott. Funds were also set aside for other grassroots struggles as
well. Speciﬁcally, In Friendship provided funds to two groups of black
tenant farmers who were evicted from their plantations in Clarendon
County, South Carolina, and Yazoo, Mississippi, because of their involve-
ment in civil rights activities. The activists in these communities had tried
to test the victory of the 1954 Brown decision by enrolling their children in
previously all-white schools and had suffered harsh economic reprisals as a
result.
∑∂
Civil rights campaigns in places like Yazoo and Clarendon County did
not receive the widespread news coverage that the Montgomery campaign
did, so the grassroots activists in these rural communities lacked the mar-
gin of protection that national media attention and sympathetic support
from outsiders might have provided. Throughout the South, civil rights
activists who were poor, poorly educated, and economically vulnerable
were easy targets for retribution, for which they often had no recourse. In
Friendship provided assistance to the grassroots leaders whom Ella Baker
saw as the very backbone of the Black Freedom Movement; they were
likely, in her view, to be pivotal actors in whatever struggles were to emerge
in the years ahead.
Baker’s concept of progressive leadership was leadership that helped
people to help themselves and allowed ordinary people to feel that they
could determine their own future. When she lent her energies to In Friend-
ship, her mission was grassroots empowerment, to tap and build on the


--- PAGE 191 ---
168 cops, schools, and communism
activist spirit that the Montgomery boycott had unleashed and to nurture
and encourage the emergence of strong indigenous leadership in commu-
nities throughout the South. That mission was an extension of the objec-
tives she had worked toward in the naacp during the 1940s. She not only
wanted In Friendship to provide funds to meet the material needs of suffer-
ing families; she also wanted it to pay for local leaders to attend con-
ferences, meetings, and workshops, which would boost their conﬁdence as
organizers and give them intellectual perspectives and tactical ammunition
for the struggles they were engaged in. In other words, Baker believed in
the adage that it is more important to teach people to ﬁsh and farm than
simply to give them food. The funds In Friendship raised were, in Baker’s
view, leadership development funds, not simply relief funds. For example,
in the summer of 1956, while attending the annual naacp conference in
San Francisco, she learned about forty black farmers who were trying to
form an agricultural cooperative. Instead of providing a direct grant to the
co-op, Baker wanted the farmers to get a better sense of the scope and
history of the cooperative movement, so she arranged to have In Friendship
pay for a representative of the group, Orsey Malone, to attend a Coopera-
tive Institute being held at Bard College in New York later that year.
∑∑ Such
inclusive politics and broad objectives differentiated In Friendship from a
number of other support organizations.
In Friendship lasted ofﬁcially for about three years and provided much-
needed resources to sustain activists on the front lines of the southern
battle against racism, but ultimately it could not sustain itself. As the civil
rights movement grew in visibility and importance, larger organizations
stepped in to offer funds, although sometimes with ulterior motives and
camouﬂaged agendas. But the start-up and survival funds that In Friend-
ship provided in the immediate wake of the Montgomery boycott were
crucial. Even before its demise, its three founders—Rustin, Levison, and
Baker—had begun to redirect their energies from fund-raising to direct
consultation with movement leaders in the South, namely, Dr. King and the
emergent Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
From the very outset, Baker was thinking of ways she could get closer to
the action, conﬁding to her friend and pastor Rev. Kilgore that she was
literally ‘‘chaﬁng at the bit to be down there as a part of the struggle.’’
∑∏
Throughout the late 1940s and early 1950s, Baker was deeply engaged in
local political struggles in New York around issues near and dear to her
heart, but the new sparks of protest in Montgomery were too important to
ignore. That potential ultimately inspired her to return to the South and


--- PAGE 192 ---
cops, schools, and communism 169
resume the intense pace of organizing that had characterized her years
with the naacp during the 1940s.
The decade of the 1950s was ﬁlled with ambivalence for Ella Baker
and many others. She was divided between North and South; between
her pragmatic side and her principles; and between her loyalty to old
colleagues and her devotion to and empathy with new friends.


--- PAGE 193 ---
6
the preacher and the organizer
the politics of leadership in
the early civil rights movement
......
The Negro must quit looking for a savior, and work to save himself.
Ella Baker, 1947
Leadership never ascends from the pew to the pulpit,
but . . . descends from the pulpit to the pew.
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., 1954
Ella Baker traveled to the South in January 1957, as a representative of
In Friendship, along with her colleague Bayard Rustin, to help organize
the founding meeting of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference
(sclc), an organization that sought to spread across the South the seeds of
rebellion that had germinated in Montgomery. Baker was deeply com-
mitted to that goal, yet right from the start she had serious reservations
about the way in which sclc was organized and how it approached the
task of propagating the movement.
Baker welcomed the political developments that occurred in Montgom-
ery in 1955–56 as the beginning of what she hoped would become a new
wave of activism for black freedom based on a strategy of grassroots mass
mobilization. She had learned from her work with the naacp, both in the
South and in Harlem, that any viable social change organization had to be
built from the bottom up. ‘‘Authentic’’ leadership could not come from the
outside or above; rather, the people who were most oppressed had to take
direct action to change their circumstances. At best, national organizations
could offer activists the resources that they lacked: ﬁnancial support, me-
dia attention, and political education. During her years as a ﬁeld organizer


--- PAGE 194 ---
the preacher and the organizer 171
for the naacp, Baker had realized—as the national leadership consistently
did not—that the branches were the essence of the organization’s strength.
Although the naacp had been founded in the early twentieth century by
northern social reformers and intellectuals, since World War II it had been
transformed into a membership organization under whose name activists
organized locally in cities and small towns across the South, as well as in
northern cities whose black populations were swelling as the Great Migra-
tion continued. The national naacp’s persistent inability, or determined
refusal, to reinvent itself in the image of its changing mass base was at the
core of Baker’s frustration with the organization throughout the late 1940s
and early 1950s.
The new black freedom struggle that had ignited a spark in the South in
the mid-1950s had the potential to fulﬁll Baker’s ideal of a truly democratic
organization. The Montgomery boycott began not with a convention of
prominent race leaders, as the naacp had, but because masses of ordinary
people had gotten in motion. Veteran naacp organizer Rosa Parks initiated
a calculated protest action on her own, and a small network of activists
followed up with phone calls and leaﬂets to publicize what she was doing.
Those with ofﬁcial leadership status were then called on to convene a
meeting to plan a more organized response. Women, who Baker believed
were the ‘‘backbone’’ of the movement, were critical actors. Joanne Gibson
Robinson of the Women’s Political Council had helped launch the boycott,
and black domestic workers, many of whom walked long distances to work
to support the protest, had been indispensable. Baker believed that the
most effective leaders were ones who emerged directly out of struggle. She
was delighted that instead of working through the naacp, which eschewed
mass action, Montgomery’s activists formed a new, autonomous, and dem-
ocratic organization, the Montgomery Improvement Association (mia).
∞
In 1957 the U.S. Supreme Court declared enforced segregation on public
busses to be unconstitutional; it thereby delivered a high-proﬁle victory to
the Montgomery struggle and gave high-proﬁle status to its most eloquent
spokesman, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Ella Baker was most impressed with
the rank-and-ﬁle activism that had emerged during the bus boycott, and
she worked to provide moral support and material assistance to those
involved. The eyes of the world, however, were focused on Martin Luther
King Jr., the eloquent young minister who had become the leading spokes-
person for the campaign. Baker’s initial impressions of King were positive.
She recounted to an interviewer decades later that the ﬁrst time she heard
King speak, she was literally ‘‘carried away.’’
≤ He was earnest and articu-


--- PAGE 195 ---
172 the preacher and the organizer
late, and he struck Baker as less pompous than some of the ministers she
had encountered.≥ Baker knew that King came from a prominent family in
Atlanta and could have followed in his father’s footsteps rather than taking
the risks that political activism entailed. She respected him for choosing a
different path and trying to make a contribution to the movement. At the
same time, King’s sudden fame did not sit right with Baker, especially given
his youth and inexperience. Moreover, he did not seem to want to learn
about the process of organizing, at least not from her.
Seasoned political veterans like Ella Baker, many of whom moved in and
out of organizations and coalitions depending on existing opportunities
and pragmatic tactical considerations, were used to navigating person-
alities and negotiating ideological differences. However, as her relation-
ship with King and sclc wore on, issues of organization and leadership
took on heightened signiﬁcance in Baker’s mind. In the historiography of
the modern Black Freedom Movement, scholars have drawn a line between
charismatic leadership models and grassroots activist ones, with a parallel
distinction made between mobilizing (for big events) and actually organiz-
ing communities to feel empowered to assess their own needs and ﬁght
their own battles.
∂ The tensions between these two models of movement
building were apparent in Montgomery during the boycott, and they per-
sisted in sclc as it evolved. Still, Baker was willing to devote herself to the
organization, its limitations notwithstanding, to see what could be accom-
plished. She was even willing to serve as a provisional, rather than perma-
nent, member of the sclc staff. Her conﬂicted relationship with Martin
Luther King Jr. turned on such questions as leadership and organization,
especially the proper roles of national spokespersons and local participants
in mass-based struggles. Baker’s involvement in sclc was, from its incep-
tion, shaped by pervasive tensions and fundamental contradictions.
......
forming the southern christian leadership conference
In the wake of the victory in Montgomery, an informal network of activist
ministers began to take shape. Some had carried out similar protests on a
smaller scale in their home states, such as T. J. Jemison in Baton Rouge,
Louisiana. Many others had been in touch with King during and after the
boycott, as events in Montgomery attracted media attention. Baker had de-
veloped her own contacts with the new crop of southern activists through
In Friendship, adding to the independent network of militant naacp orga-
nizers she had maintained since the previous decade. Most of these activ-


--- PAGE 196 ---
the preacher and the organizer 173
ists felt greater loyalty to their local struggles and to itinerant organizers
like Baker than to any single national or regional organization. The prob-
lem facing King, Baker, and other civil rights organizers was that there was
no formal organization, national or regional, that could link these various
individuals and disparate local groups together and sustain and extend the
movement after the Montgomery boycott ended in December 1956.
The idea for a regionwide organization like sclc germinated in different
quarters simultaneously. As Baker herself understood, this idea could not
have been traced directly to a single source. Naturally, King and his minis-
terial colleagues in the South were strategizing about what their next steps
should be and how to coordinate their efforts. But they were not the only
ones having such conversations. By some accounts, the trio that directed In
Friendship laid out a blueprint for sclc in a series of intense late-night
conversations in New York. According to Adam Fairclough, ‘‘sclc might not
have come into being but for the political foresight of three northern radi-
cals: Bayard Rustin, Stanley David Levison, and Ella Jo Baker.’’
∑ Baker re-
called that she and her two New York colleagues spent many hours dis-
cussing ways that movement leaders might ‘‘enlarge upon the gains of
the Montgomery bus boycott.’’
∏ Rustin and Levison relayed the content of
those discussions to King and other ministers involved in the southern civil
rights movement, urging them to call a regional meeting to discuss the idea
further.
π These various efforts gave birth to sclc. Certainly, activists in
Alabama and Georgia did not need New York ‘‘experts’’ to tell them how to
mobilize a campaign. Nevertheless, these connections underline the fact
that the civil rights movement was not organized in isolation from veteran
activists such as Baker, Levinson, and Rustin, whose long histories in other
progressive struggles dated back to the 1930s.
During the months leading up to and following the victory in Montgom-
ery, Bayard Rustin and Stanley David Levison had become two of Martin
Luther King Jr.’s closest advisers. They helped garner important resources
for mia and sclc and offered tactical and strategic advice, earning them
King’s trust and friendship. Neither Rustin nor Levison played a very public
role, but both were in King’s inner circle of conﬁdantes. Interestingly, but
not surprisingly, their close friend Ella Baker was not. She was certainly as
politically sophisticated, articulate, and astute as her male counterparts,
and she had twenty years of political experience in the South as well as the
North. Yet King kept Baker at arm’s length and never treated her as a
political or intellectual peer. As Baker later put it: ‘‘After all, who was I? I
was female, I was old. I didn’t have any Ph.D.’’
∫ Furthermore, she ex-


--- PAGE 197 ---
174 the preacher and the organizer
plained, she was ‘‘not loathe to raise questions. I did not just subscribe to a
theory just because it came out of the mouth of the leader.’’ Ω She ‘‘was not
the kind of person that made special effort to be ingratiating.’’ ∞≠ She was
well aware, by the mid-1950s, that her forthrightness in the face of author-
ity carried a certain price, limiting her acceptance by those in positions of
ofﬁcial power, but it was a price she was willing to pay in order to think and
act according to her conscience.
Baker speculated that Levison’s inﬂuence over King stemmed from his
capacity to raise money and tap resources and that Rustin was most adept
at helping King to hone his ideas and garner greater publicity. Baker con-
cluded cynically that ‘‘persons who were in a position to provide both
ﬁnancial aid and public relations assistance to the furtherance of the orga-
nization or the furtherance of the career of the president [of sclc] would
be certainly high on the list of acceptable advisors.’’
∞∞ Rustin and Levison
were both great admirers of King, and they were as eager to see him ascend
as the leader of the movement as they were to see the movement itself
grow. They differed with Baker in this respect. In all fairness, King’s rela-
tionship with Rustin and Levison does not appear to have been as prag-
matic and opportunistic as Baker’s comments implied. There was an intel-
lectual and philosophical bond and seemingly genuine camaraderie among
the three men. Simply put, it was probably King’s sexist attitudes toward
women, at least in part, that prevented him from having the same kind of
collegial relationship with Baker.
∞≤
The founding meeting of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference
took place in Atlanta at Dr. Martin Luther King Sr.’s Ebenezer Baptist
Church on January 10, 1957. Ministers from nearly a dozen southern states
gathered under the banner of the Southern Leadership Conference on
Transportation and Nonviolent Integration. Ella Baker worked with Bayard
Rustin to draft statements that framed the issues and set the agenda for the
meeting.
∞≥ The new organization was planned from the outset to be a
loosely structured coalition linking church-based leaders in civil rights
struggles across the South. It was decidedly not a membership organiza-
tion so as not to appear to compete with the naacp, which may have
initially taken the edge off the rivalry, but did not eliminate it.
Just as the group was convening, the seriousness of their undertaking
was driven home by a night of violent attacks in Montgomery, targeting
leaders of the new organization. The home of Rev. Ralph Abernathy, a
leader of the boycott who was a close colleague of King, was ﬁrebombed
while his wife, Juanita, and their young daughter were inside; fortunately,


--- PAGE 198 ---
the preacher and the organizer 175
no one was seriously hurt. While Abernathy was on the phone with his
wife, several other explosions rocked the city, hitting churches and the
home of Rev. Robert S. Graetz, a white mia supporter. Abernathy imme-
diately left Atlanta for Montgomery. A sober determination informed the
remainder of the discussions held that weekend.
By the meeting’s conclusion, the group decided to emphasize nonvio-
lence as a means of bringing about social progress and racial justice for
southern blacks; the new organization would rely on the southern black
church for its base of support.
∞∂ The strength of sclc rested on the political
activities of its local church afﬁliates. By giving church activists a sense of
connection to one another and by infusing an explicitly political message
into the black theology of the 1950s, sclc envisioned itself as the ‘‘political
arm of the black church,’’ according to the sociologist Aldon Morris.
∞∑
However they viewed themselves, King and his colleagues represented an
activist minority within the politically heterogeneous black church. The
majority of black ministers in the 1950s still opted for a safer, less con-
frontational political path. This was especially true in the climate of the
1950s when any form of dissent was equated with communism and social,
if not legal, sanctions were possible.
Despite their embrace of activism, King and the sclc ministers still
deﬁned their political goals squarely within the respectable American main-
stream and were cautious about any leftist associations.
∞∏ This was con-
scious and strategic. They wanted to pose a challenge to white America: ‘‘We
are law-abiding, God-fearing citizens, now give us our rights.’’ King’s stance
would change as he and the movement evolved over the ensuing years.
∞π
The Atlanta group met as the Southern Leadership Conference on Trans-
portation and Nonviolent Integration; it later changed its name to the
Southern Christian leadership Conference. The choice of the new organiza-
tion’s name is a subtle indicator of the Cold War ethos that permeated black
politics, as it did white society, during the 1950s. The decision to include
Christian in the group’s name was not simply an afﬁrmation of people’s
faith that God was on their side but also a conscious effort to deﬂect any
allegations of communist inﬁltration or inﬂuence, since the materialist
worldview of communists meant that they were assumed to be atheists.
∞∫
The cultivated image of a ‘‘good citizen’’—elegantly clad, well spoken,
and generally well educated—was an important marker of respectability
for the ministerial leaders that came together to form sclc. Once it was
decided that the new coalition would be an extension of the church, a
patriarchal ethos took over. Neither Rosa Parks nor Joanne Gibson Robin-


--- PAGE 199 ---
176 the preacher and the organizer
son nor any of the women who had sacriﬁced so much to ensure the
Montgomery boycott’s success were invited to play a leadership role in the
new organization. Daisy Bates was eventually given a nominal seat on the
board, but, according to Baker, she never was very active. Baker felt that
her own involvement was tolerated more than it was appreciated. ‘‘Some-
one’s got to run the mimeographing machine,’’ she later observed, only
half-joking.
∞Ω
The founders of sclc were concerned primarily, but not exclusively,
about access to the ballot box and digniﬁed treatment in public accom-
modations. But theirs was a world apart from the lives of destitute share-
croppers and their families who constituted a considerable portion of the
South’s black population—people who could barely afford the fare to ride
on public transportation even after desegregation. It was this group that
Baker worried most about. After she left Atlanta on January 11, she spent
the next ﬁve days traveling around rural Mississippi meeting and talking
with landless and unemployed black farmers about the painful conditions
of their lives. She stayed with Amzie and Ruth Moore and kept a careful
journal of the families she met, what their names were, how they lived,
how many children they had. This heart-wrenching reconnaissance effort
was an attempt to identify families in need of In Friendship’s support.
Baker soon realized that In Friendship would be hard pressed to make a
real distinction between families who were victims of political reprisals and
those who were victims of economic violence, pure and simple, since such
violence saturated the social and political landscape of the rural South.
≤≠
They resigned themselves to provide aid wherever they could without try-
ing to discern whether the need was purely economic or primarily a result
of political activity.
The Southern Christian Leadership Conference ﬁrst stepped on the na-
tional political stage as an organization at the Prayer Pilgrimage for Free-
dom held at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., on May 17, 1957,
the third anniversary of the Brown decision. And Ella Baker was once again
instrumental in pulling off a successful large-scale event. Roy Wilkins, Mar-
tin Luther King Jr., and A. Philip Randolph were co-chairs of the pilgrim-
age, which was intended to expose to the nation the crime of racial in-
justice. Organizers billed it ‘‘as a protest to the bombings and violence in
the South.’’
≤∞ As the planning began, there were palpable tensions between
the naacp and the newly formed sclc, which the association’s national
leaders saw as a rival attempting to duplicate or interfere with its ongoing,
successful work for civil rights. Once again, the esteemed labor leader


--- PAGE 200 ---
the preacher and the organizer 177
A. Philip Randolph served as peacemaker, bringing Wilkins, the head of the
naacp and Ella Baker’s longtime friend and former colleague, to join him
and King on a three-man leadership committee for the pilgrimage. Ella
Baker and Bayard Rustin were the two staff organizers for the event, coor-
dinating communications and doing the day-to-day logistical work neces-
sary to plan the gathering.
The patriotic and religious tenor of the event underscored sclc’s main-
stream political orientation. The slogans and statements surrounding the
demonstration were carefully selected to present an image of the resurgent
civil rights movement as respectable and nonthreatening. Anticommunism
was so pervasive that any type of protest was immediately vulnerable to
red-baiting. The naacp had already caved in to these pressures by estab-
lishing a formal policy of exclusion. According to an FBI informant who
was surreptitiously spying on her, Baker was indeed worried that certain
individuals in New York were trying to ‘‘stack the delegation with commu-
nists.’’
≤≤ After the event, Rustin and Baker responded defensively to allega-
tions of communist participation. Their response to an Amsterdam News
article did not even entertain the possibility that such exclusion might be
unfair. Rustin and Baker cited a copy of the call for the pilgrimage to the
press, tacitly endorsing its Cold War politics: ‘‘The Prayer Pilgrimage for
Freedom will be a spiritual assembly, primarily by the Negro clergy, and the
naacp. In such an assembly, there will be no place for the irreligious. . . . No
communists have been or will be invited to participate in the program
either as a speaker, singer, prayer leader, or scripture leader. . . . The
Ofﬁcial Call, issued on April 5, 1957, invites all who love justice and dignity
and liberty, who love their country, to join in a Prayer Pilgrimage to Wash-
ington on May 17, 1957.’’
≤≥
The Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom drew a crowd of between 25,000 and
30,000 to the Lincoln Memorial. ≤∂ It is difﬁcult to quantify the success of
such campaigns. However, President Eisenhower did accede to a request
that he meet with civil rights leaders soon thereafter, and the rather tepid
Civil Rights Act of 1957 was signed into law in August, eventually putting
into place a Civil Rights Commission, which was authorized to review and
investigate voting rights abuses.
Ella Baker’s work as one of the two staff organizers for the pilgrimage is
a graphic illustration of her ability to straddle organizational divides, de-
liberately ignoring and minimizing rivalries and ideological battles that
sometimes raged all around her. Even though she was still on the payroll of
In Friendship, which had close ties to sclc, she worked out of the naacp


--- PAGE 201 ---
178 the preacher and the organizer
national ofﬁce on 40th Street in New York. And while she worked in the
same ofﬁce with her old colleague Roy Wilkins, who could barely contain
his hostility and resentment toward King, she would only six months later,
without seemingly missing a beat or proffering an explanation, accept an
offer to work with King’s organization in Atlanta on a full-time basis. Es-
sentially, Baker refused to take sides: when there were no fundamental
principles at stake, she did not take territorial claims or ego wounds too
seriously—instead she seemed to almost ﬂoat above it all. She indeed had
criticisms of both sclc and the naacp and of both King and Wilkins. At any
given moment as the ﬂurry of activities in the late 1950s was about to feed
into the frenetic pace of the 1960s, Baker’s organizational afﬁliations were
often unclear. Having been instrumental in the founding of sclc in January
1957, Baker remained active in the New York naacp branch and school
reform struggle led by Parents in Action and other New York–based groups
unafﬁliated with the naacp like In Friendship. It was all a part of the same
drama in Ella Baker’s mind, with different characters (all of them slightly
ﬂawed) engaged in different plots and subplots, but they were performing
on the same political stage and had to coordinate with one another. She
was clearly in the mind-set of building a movement rather than any one
organization.
After the pilgrimage, Baker returned to New York, where she, Rustin,
and Levison continued to discuss ways of sustaining the momentum of
protests in the South. Following a few months of ﬂoundering, sclc decided
to launch its own independent campaign, the Crusade for Citizenship, a
regionwide voting rights project they scheduled to kick off in February
1958. Hoping to capitalize on the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1957,
sclc leaders planned a sustained mobilization that would gain national
attention for voting rights and for the embryonic organization. The goal of
the Crusade for Citizenship was to double the number of black voters in the
South and to ‘‘challenge blacks to take on the responsibilities of ﬁghting for
their rights.’’
≤∑ The campaign’s letterhead proclaimed that ‘‘the franchise is
a citizen’s right . . . not a privilege.’’≤∏ Designed to put black voter rights on
the national political agenda, the campaign was also meant to simulta-
neously mobilize masses of ordinary African Americans against Jim Crow.
For a brand-new civil rights organization, the project was breathtakingly
ambitious in its scope, although still relatively moderate in the political
tack and tone it took.
The leaders of sclc had crafted the concept of a new campaign, but the
organization had no infrastructure, including the material and human re-


--- PAGE 202 ---
the preacher and the organizer 179
sources necessary to move a campaign forward. By January 1958, Rustin
and Levison realized that sclc’s plans for the new crusade were in serious
trouble, and they doubted that the group had the personnel and tactical
know-how to actually make it happen. The campaign was scheduled to
start on February 12, Abraham Lincoln’s birthday. The kick-off had already
been delayed once because plans were not in place, so this date was ﬁrm.
But sclc desperately needed to bring someone on board who had the
political sophistication and organizational abilities required to make the
necessary arrangements in a very short period of time. Levison and Rustin
immediately thought of Ella Baker. Baker certainly had the requisite skills
and experience, and she was available. She had separated from her hus-
band, Bob, and her niece, Jackie, was almost nineteen, so, as she later put
it, she did not have ‘‘any encumbrances’’ to prevent her from taking on this
challenge.
≤π
There had been some discussion about the possibility of having Bayard
Rustin serve as the executive director of sclc. After all, he knew the organi-
zation, had worked closely with King since the Montgomery bus boycott,
could bring considerable organizing experience to the task, and certainly
had the commitment. However, given his sexual orientation and the social
conservatism and homophobia of the church leaders he would be working
closely with, which was compounded by the narrow-minded snobbery of
Atlanta’s black middle class, he was not a tenable candidate for the job.
≤∫ In
retrospect, Baker explained that ‘‘Bayard was not prepared, nor could his
lifestyle have stood the test of going down there and being the person from
up here to stay in Atlanta and help to get things going, because Atlanta had
not reached that point where a certain lifestyle was accepted.’’
≤Ω This re-
mark hints at how Baker may have felt about Rustin’s homosexuality. She
always chose her words and deployed her language carefully. By describing
the attitudes of black Atlantans as not having reached a certain point of
acceptance, she implied that she had reached that point and that others
should do so as well. She could have described Rustin’s behavior in a
negative light or as a ﬂaw or weakness in an otherwise good character, as
many of his other friends and contemporaries did, but she did not.
Rustin and Levison agreed that Baker would be the ideal person to
organize the Crusade for Citizenship. She had built up a network of con-
tacts throughout the South through her work as a ﬁeld organizer for the
naacp.
≥≠ She had the political know-how and social skills to work with all
types of people, from proper, middle-class church members to uneducated
sharecroppers. Perhaps most signiﬁcantly, Baker was a skilled organizer


--- PAGE 203 ---
180 the preacher and the organizer
and was well connected. These talents were exactly what sclc needed to
pull off the Crusade for Citizenship within the tight timeline that had been
projected.
Levison and Rustin persuaded King to hire Baker as sclc’s ﬁrst full-time
staff member. The three men met at New York’s La Guardia Airport while
King was on a travel layover.
≥∞ King was initially reluctant to hire Baker,
because he had a different proﬁle of the type of person who should share
the leadership role with him at the helm of the coalition. King indicated
that he did not personally believe that the director had to be a minister, but
he recognized that many of his clerical colleagues strongly held that con-
viction. Of course, choosing a minister also meant that the director must be
a man. These preferences notwithstanding, there were few other options at
that juncture, and King’s two advisers were adamant.
King agreed to hire Baker on a temporary basis, until a more suitable
permanent director could be found. She was hired not as a ﬁeld orga-
nizer to work with grassroots activists but as the primary—and sometimes
the only—staff member for a fragile and sometimes fractious coalition of
clergymen led by Martin Luther King Jr. It was not an ideal arrangement.
Still, Rustin and Levison could not imagine that Baker would say no, so
they did not bother to discuss the particulars with her before making the
pitch to King that she be hired. Ultimately, they were right. But Baker did
not like the idea of anyone making decisions for her, even friends who
knew her as well as Levison and Rustin did: ‘‘To be drafted in the sense of
having it be said that I would go when I hadn’t been consulted . . . I suppose
in that aspect of it, my ego is easily touched; not to ask me what to do but to
designate me to do something without even consulting me.’’ The situation,
it seemed to her, ‘‘was a bit presumptuous’’ and insulting.
≥≤
The way in which Baker was recruited to work for sclc was oddly
reminiscent of her sudden and surprising appointment as the naacp’s di-
rector of branches in 1943. Nevertheless, she accepted the job with King’s
organization, just as she had accepted Walter White’s unilateral decision
to promote her in 1943. She agreed to join the sclc staff because, for
her, politics were more important than protocol. She felt strongly that the
movement was at a critical crossroads; there was a lot at stake—or at least
great potential. While Baker did not appreciate the way in which she was
asked to go to Atlanta, she was thrilled by the opportunity to get closer to
the action. So, she packed her bags and headed south for what she thought
would be another short-term stint, but which turned out to be a much more
extended one.


--- PAGE 204 ---
the preacher and the organizer 181
Ella Baker arrived in Atlanta in mid-January 1958, seven months after
the Prayer Pilgrimage, to begin her work at sclc headquarters. But the
organization had a headquarters in name only. When Baker arrived there
was no ofﬁce, no phone, and no other staff. ‘‘I had to function out of a
telephone booth and my pocketbook,’’ she recalled.
≥≥ ‘‘Nobody had made
any provisions for space, hadn’t even thought about it. . . . I had assumed
that certainly we might have been able to function with some degree of
sustained effort out of the church ofﬁce of Ebenezer Baptist Church since
the Rev. Dr. King, Sr. was the father of the Rev. Dr. King, Jr., but this was
not provided for in the full sense.’’
≥∂ Baker had to use the mimeograph
machine and other ofﬁce equipment at the church in the evening, after
the regular ofﬁce staff had gone home. It was a frustrating situation, and
her ties with other Atlanta activists were all that kept her sane. Eventually,
Rev. Samuel Williams, another minister afﬁliated with sclc, secured ofﬁce
space on Auburn Avenue, and Baker purchased enough furniture and sup-
plies to set up shop. This modest headquarters became the permanent
home of the new organization.
Baker knew her position with sclc would be a challenge. When she
uprooted herself from her home in New York and migrated to the South in
the winter of 1958, she was guardedly optimistic about the new organiza-
tion. Given the broad-based support that had been mobilized around the
bus boycott, Baker hoped that sclc would be able to galvanize the aspira-
tions of the masses of African American people and ignite the kind of
movement that would empower them to transform their lives, their com-
munities, and the nation. Yet she knew from the outset that the philosophy,
structure, and leadership of sclc would be problematic for her, and she
suspected that ultimately the new organization might itself become a bar-
rier to carrying out the localized, broad-based work that she envisioned.
Baker worked feverishly from mid-January to February 12 to make the
ambitiously conceived Crusade for Citizenship a relative success. She tried
to infuse it with her own political meanings and recapture the spirit of
rank-and-ﬁle activism that had deﬁned the earlier boycott. Some time later,
in a report to sclc’s Administrative Committee, Baker secularized the
term, insisting that ‘‘the word crusade connotes, for me, a vigorous move-
ment, with high purpose and involving masses of people.’’
≥∑
Events were scheduled to kick off in twenty-one cities on the same day.
Baker wrote letters, ﬂyers, and press releases to promote these events. She
made extensive phone calls to build support for the campaign, identify and
coordinate activities, and make sure all the necessary logistics were in


--- PAGE 205 ---
182 the preacher and the organizer
place. Within a few weeks she had a roster of speakers lined up for the
rallies, including a few prominent national leaders such as Adam Clayton
Powell Jr.
≥∏ Securing Powell’s support was particularly important, since
some other national leaders were reluctant to afﬁliate openly with sclc.
Taylor Branch, one of King’s biographers, points out that such key national
ﬁgures as Lester Granger and Ralph Bunche declined to endorse the Cru-
sade for Citizenship campaign because they wanted to remain nonpartisan
in what appeared to be, and in fact was, a rivalry between the sclc and the
naacp.
≥π
The Crusade for Citizenship was a pivotal test for the new coalition, the
ﬁrst major regionwide campaign for which it sought to obtain national
support and public attention. Initially, sclc had been very careful to avoid
stepping on the political toes of other organizations, most notably the
naacp. The Prayer Pilgrimage was a single event in which sclc shared the
spotlight with the naacp and organized labor. In contrast, the crusade was
being launched by sclc and its local afﬁliates and was planned as a sus-
tained mobilization. With this campaign, the embryonic sclc began to
encroach upon the turf of established civil rights groups.
The hard work that went into launching the Crusade for Citizenship
paid off, although not to the degree that Baker or her sclc colleagues
had hoped. Ironically, even though the crusade went forward without the
naacp’s ofﬁcial endorsement or practical support, it was Ella Baker’s naacp
contacts in cities and towns throughout the South who helped her to mobi-
lize a respectable turnout on February 12. The day was marked by church
rallies, press conferences, and prayer vigils in nearly two dozen cities. It
was a modest beginning that could form the base for future actions. Al-
though King had hired Baker somewhat reluctantly, he had to admit that
she worked tirelessly and selﬂessly on the campaign.
≥∫
Since Ella Baker’s style of political work placed more emphasis on pro-
cess than on singular, dramatic events, she understood that follow-up ac-
tivities would be even more important than the kick-off itself. After return-
ing to New York City to get her affairs in order, Baker returned to Atlanta,
agreeing to spend some additional time working to build on the contacts
she had made and the expectations that had arisen out of the February 12
mobilization. Ever the ﬁeld organizer, she was not satisﬁed by her phone
contacts with the various sclc afﬁliates, so she packed her bags and trav-
eled around the region speaking at local meetings and conferences and
conducting workshops to promote and help initiate local civil rights cam-
paigns in the spring and early summer of 1958.
≥Ω The strategy of sclc was


--- PAGE 206 ---
the preacher and the organizer 183
to encourage massive voter registration, working through local afﬁliate
organizations, and to document and report all instances of harassment or
interference with blacks attempting to exercise the ballot. The campaign
did make some inroads.
Historian Adam Fairclough presents the Crusade for Citizenship cam-
paign as a major shift in the organization’s strategy: ‘‘No sooner had sclc
formed than it switched its focus [from nonviolent direct action] to voter
registration’’ in an opportunistic response to the passage of the 1957 Civil
Rights Act.
∂≠ Perhaps for some neophyte activists the shift from nonviolent
direct action for integration to political organizing for voting rights was
indeed a major one. For Baker, however, this strategic move was more
complex. Drawing on the lessons she had gleaned during her naacp days,
she knew there had to be a catalyst for collective action. The everyday
routines of racism inspired spontaneous individual acts of resistance, but
these were usually limited responses. Sustained, concerted action required
a more proactive stance, grassroots organizing, and a focus. For Baker,
legislative victories were opportunities for organizing, not ends unto them-
selves. She saw the Civil Rights Act of 1957, although pathetically weak in
its enforcement capacity, as providing an opportunity to draw national
attention to the shame of southern racism and the undemocratic, racial
exclusion that dominated the political process. Equally important, the Civil
Rights Act could become a focal point for mobilizing local communities.
Organizing people to testify at hearings was a way to embolden local
leaders and prospective activists; it also served to challenge local elites in a
public arena to defend practices that had long been shielded by silence
from outside scrutiny and pressure. For Baker, mobilizing for voter reg-
istration campaigns, documenting the establishment’s corruption that
undermined such campaigns, and forcing the hand of the otherwise impo-
tent Civil Rights Commission would inevitably lead to direct action. Given
the realities of white vigilante violence in the South at the moment when
Jim Crow was facing a major challenge, Baker also recognized that direct
action might not always remain nonviolent.
......
gender inequity within the movement
Ella Baker launched sclc’s Crusade for Citizenship with a greater margin
of success than one might have expected given the time and resource
constraints, demonstrating that she had the skills and commitment the
nascent organization required. Yet Baker felt that she was never seriously


--- PAGE 207 ---
184 the preacher and the organizer
considered for the job of permanent executive director. At one meeting, a
minister from Nashville proposed that Baker be considered as a candidate
for the job, but his suggestion fell on deaf ears. ‘‘The ofﬁcialdom didn’t take
it seriously,’’ Baker recalled.
∂∞ The attitudes that King and other ministerial
leaders of the sclc held toward Baker were not unique to her situation;
rather, they were a manifestation of the larger problem of sexism within
the church, the organization, and the culture. By this time, Baker was well
aware that the sclc ministers were not ready to welcome her into the
organization on an equal footing. That would be to go too far aﬁeld from
the gender relations they were used to in the church. Baker observed that
‘‘the role of women in the southern church . . . was that of doing the things
that the minister said he wanted to have done. It was not one in which they
were credited with having creativity and initiative and capacity to carry
out things.’’
∂≤ While Baker may have slightly overstated her case—women
did have some power and agency—the basic point still had a great deal
of merit.
Clearly, women were instrumental forces in the church, but male lead-
ers seldom fully acknowledged women’s power and often attempted to
limit the authority women exercised.
∂≥ Many of Baker’s male colleagues,
like their counterparts in white society, viewed women as subordinates
and helpmates. Even though African American women have historically
worked both inside and outside the home and engaged in public, politi-
cal activity, the culture that prevailed in the 1950s, especially among the
black middle class, as among their white counterparts, emphasized the
primacy of women’s domestic roles.
∂∂ According to Baker, the majority of
the ministers in sclc wanted to relate to women in this very limited capac-
ity. They were most comfortable talking to women about ‘‘how well they
cooked, and how beautiful they looked,’’ she complained.
∂∑ Baker’s deliber-
ate avoidance of conventional femininity made a number of her male cleri-
cal colleagues rather uneasy. ‘‘I wasn’t a fashion plate,’’ she remarked,
‘‘[and] I made no bones about not being a fashion plate.’’
∂∏ More impor-
tantly, ‘‘I did not hesitate in voicing my opinion and . . . it was not a com-
forting sort of presence that I presented.’’
∂π The conditions under which she
worked, especially the sexist and often dismissive treatment she endured
from her male co-workers, annoyed and offended Baker. Some days she
could barely justify persevering in such an adverse situation.
∂∫ ‘‘I live to
serve’’ was the tongue-in-cheek way that Baker once described herself to a
cousin.
∂Ω This sarcastic statement had a sad ring of truth.
The work that Ella Baker and other women did for sclc was consistently


--- PAGE 208 ---
the preacher and the organizer 185
undervalued. As the organization grew and additional female staffers were
hired, Baker protested that these women were taken for granted and
treated unfairly as well.
∑≠ A rhetoric of racial equality marked the public
pronouncements of sclc leaders, while old hierarchies based on gender
inequities endured within their ranks. Baker refused to accept the situation
in silence. She criticized ministerial leaders who came to meetings late and
left early, disregarding the inconveniences they caused for the female cleri-
cal staff. They expected the women workers to cater to them, Baker com-
plained.
∑∞ Although she never publicly named names, Baker also alluded to
unprincipled sexual behavior on the part of some male ministers involved
in the movement. She conﬁded to one researcher that certain sclc minis-
ters would come into the ofﬁce in the afternoon ‘‘after spending the morn-
ing at some sister’s house doing what they shouldn’t have been doing . . .
you see, I know too many stories.’’
∑≤ The ministers’ arrogant assumption
that they stood above the moral rules they preached to others cost them
Baker’s respect as ministers and as men.
Despite her frustrations and resentments, Ella Baker assisted sclc lead-
ers in recruiting, screening, and selecting candidates for the executive di-
rector post, which they had tacitly deemed her unqualiﬁed to ﬁll. She
approached several prospective candidates with whom she had worked in
the past. John Tilley, who was hired as executive director, was among
them. Tilley was a Shaw alumnus and the pastor of a church in Baltimore.
∑≥
Baker thought he was a good candidate because he ‘‘had a clear voice and
good thinking’’ and some political experience in Baltimore.
∑∂ Baker and
Stanley Levison met with Tilley at an ice cream parlor in Harlem to discuss
the organization and the job.
∑∑ When King met Tilley, he was impressed
and agreed to bring him on as the new executive director in May 1958.
The ﬁrst sclc meeting after Tilley joined the staff took place in Clarks-
dale, Mississippi, that same month. The gathering was well attended by
some 200 delegates, indicating that in many places the organization’s work
was gaining support.
∑∏ Convening the group in Mississippi was a bold ges-
ture. Mississippi was so well known for antiblack violence that for many
southerners it served as a symbol of the crudest and most brutal brand of
white racism. Mississippi continued to hold that distinction as the civil
rights movement progressed. It was in Mississippi that young Emmett Till
had been murdered only three years earlier. It was in Mississippi that three
young civil rights workers—Andrew Goodman, Michael Schwerner, and
James Chaney—would be ambushed and murdered in 1964. And it was in
Jackson, Mississippi, that Medgar Evers, a state naacp leader who partici-


--- PAGE 209 ---
186 the preacher and the organizer
pated in this sclc meeting, would be assassinated in his own driveway in
1963. But on the weekend of May 29, 1958, the town of Clarksdale was the
site of something hopeful: serious discussions, debates, and strategy ses-
sions about the future direction of the Black Freedom Movement.
Baker went to Clarksdale a few days early to help set up for the meet-
ing.
∑π She was optimistic that things were ﬁnally coming together for the
new coalition. A permanent director was in place; local naacp leaders such
as Evers had agreed to attend the meeting, despite tensions between sclc
and the national naacp ofﬁce; and there were sparks of activity in several
cities.∑∫ The participation of Evers and Aaron Henry, a fellow naacp activ-
ist, reﬂected the willingness of naacp leaders at the state and local level to
work with whatever forces were in motion on the ground, often in direct
opposition to national directives.
∑Ω The men and women under attack in
the South did not always subscribe to the grandiose objectives and long-
term strategies of the national ofﬁces and high-level leaders of the organi-
zations with which they worked. Medgar Evers and Aaron Henry never
fully agreed with the decision by the naacp leaders in New York not to form
alliances with other civil rights groups, and both men worked closely with
sclc and other groups on particular campaigns.
∏≠ Baker was pleased with
the outcome of the 1958 Clarksdale meeting.∏∞ She hoped Tilley would be a
hands-on leader who would expand the base of supporters beyond the
church and embrace some of the more militant community-based leaders,
both secular and church-related. Toward that end, she invited him to stay
on in Mississippi for a few days after the Clarksdale meeting and familiar-
ize himself with the work Amzie and Ruth Moore were doing in Cleveland,
Mississippi, which he did. But even putting Tilley in contact with some of
the most embattled freedom ﬁghters in the South could not reinvigorate
the coalition.
∏≤
The internal problems of sclc continued after the meeting in Clarks-
dale. Tilley did not prove to be the stabilizing force that Baker and King had
hoped for. Rev. Tilley continued to head his congregation in Baltimore after
assuming his new responsibilities in Atlanta, and he was unable to combine
or balance these two demanding positions. His commuting back and forth
took its toll on Tilley and on the sclc’s work. In less than a year, King was
forced to ﬁre him. Again, by default, Baker was asked to take over as acting
or interim director; both titles were used.
Internal problems were compounded by external crises. In September
1958, while Martin Luther King Jr. was on a speaking tour to promote his
new book, Stride toward Freedom, he was stabbed by a mentally ill woman


--- PAGE 210 ---
the preacher and the organizer 187
in Harlem, within walking distance of Baker’s apartment on 135th Street.
Ella was in town at the time, trying to recover from her own health prob-
lems. Suffering from acute back pain, she was stretched out on her living
room ﬂoor when she heard the shocking news of King’s stabbing on the
radio.
∏≥ Baker immediately rushed to the hospital to see what she could do
to help. King survived the attack, but his recuperation took months. Once
again, Baker had to pick up the slack. She ﬁlled in for King as a speaker on
several occasions, answered his correspondence, explained his incapacita-
tion, and served as publicist and accountant for the sale of his book, a job
she did not relish.
After a year of hard labor in the sclc’s trenches, Baker was disappointed
that so little had been achieved in terms of regionwide coordinated work.
She blamed the clerical leaders. They had not given her the resources
necessary to run an ofﬁce or a campaign efﬁciently. She had to beg for a
working mimeograph machine, an air conditioner in the summer, and
secretarial help. She then had to deal with the added frustration of King’s
veto power within the organization. Nothing could be done, she com-
plained, without his approval.
∏∂ And, to add insult to injury, she was sad-
dled with the responsibility of all promotions of and sales for King’s book.
Still, Baker did not see too many other political options for herself in 1958–
59, especially if she wanted to be based in a black southern community,
which she did. So, she persevered.
Baker’s 1958 report to the Administrative Committee of sclc reﬂected
the goals that she would ﬁght to implement throughout her tenure. Baker
urged her sclc colleagues to develop programs for mass action and to
target women for activist campaigns. She speciﬁcally called for the forma-
tion of youth and action teams to help ignite the work. This report was her
effort to rally the troops, but the results were modest. Everyone nodded
and continued on as they had before. Without support from the principal
decision makers in the organization, there was little Baker could do.
∏∑
On some level, she and the ministers—at least the core of them—were
not too far apart in the kind of action they envisioned, but together they
could not seem to make it happen. Historian Glenn T. Eskew suggests that
Baker was at least in part to blame. He even sees the growing ‘‘cult of
personality’’ surrounding King as partly due to the absence of a sustained
mass-based campaign, a campaign Baker was responsible for getting off
the ground. For Baker, the inverse was true. King’s larger-than-life persona
inhibited the emergence of local struggles and local leaders.
In December 1958, at the third annual Montgomery Improvement Asso-


--- PAGE 211 ---
188 the preacher and the organizer
ciation Institute on Nonviolence, the program theme was ‘‘A Testimonial to
Dr. King’s Leadership.’’ Taylor Branch maintains that ‘‘[t]o Ella Baker, frus-
trated by sclc’s bare solvency and its paralyzed registration campaign, this
sort of activity was not mere froth but a harmful end in itself.’’ She asked
King directly why he allowed such hero worship, and he responded simply
that it was what people wanted.
∏∏ This answer did not satisfy Baker in
the least.
Baker felt that sclc’s increasing reliance on King’s celebrity and cha-
risma had all sorts of hidden dangers. Less polished leaders were likely to
receive less recognition and might become disaffected from the struggle.
For example, E. D. Nixon, the labor and civil rights activist who played a
pivotal role in the Montgomery bus boycott, resented the way that an
outsider eclipsed local leaders. In a 1958 letter to a friend, Nixon com-
plained bitterly about King’s fame and his own diminished stature in the
movement. It is disheartening, he explained, ‘‘when people give all recogni-
tion to one because of his academic training and forge[t] other[s] who do
not have that kind of training but are making a worthwhile contribution.’’
∏π
Furthermore, no one person could possibly meet the needs of a growing
and increasingly complex movement. Even leaders who were motivated by
high ideals rather than personal ambition and adopted a humble rather
than top-down style had to make way for many others to assume leadership
roles. According to Baker, organizations had to alter their very concept of
leadership: ‘‘Instead of the leader as a person who was supposed to be a
magic man, you could develop individuals who were bound together by a
concept that beneﬁted the larger number of individuals and provided an
opportunity for them to grow into being responsible for carrying out a
program.’’
∏∫
Ella Baker believed that all their lives poor black people had been spoon-
fed the notion that the key to their emancipation was something external
to themselves: ostensibly benevolent masters, enlightened legislators, or
skillful and highly educated lawyers. Such dependency reinforced poor
people’s sense of helplessness, Baker felt. Her message was quite the op-
posite. ‘‘Strong people don’t need strong leaders,’’ she argued.
∏Ω In Baker’s
view, oppressed people did not need a messiah to deliver them from op-
pression; all they needed was themselves, one another, and the will to
persevere. The clerical leaders of sclc, King included, held a very different
notion of leadership. As Baker put it, they saw themselves as the new
‘‘saviors.’’
π≠ As early as 1947, she had insisted that ‘‘the Negro must quit


--- PAGE 212 ---
the preacher and the organizer 189
looking for a savior and work to save himself.’’ π∞ She was even more con-
vinced of this by 1958.
Crisis after crisis and sacriﬁce after sacriﬁce, Baker’s dissatisfaction with
her circumstances grew. She became especially annoyed that many sclc
ministers viewed her as a gloriﬁed secretary who was there to simply ‘‘carry
out King’s orders.’’ π≤ Although the sclc needed Baker’s skills, it was not
willing to recognize or afﬁrm her leadership. As Eugene Walker put it in an
interview with Baker, sclc ministers seemed to ‘‘respect your abilities on
the one hand, and fear your independence on the other.’’
π≥ To be fair, not
all of the sclc board members felt this way, which in part was what kept
Baker going. By 1959, she had built strong ties with sclc activists in Shreve-
port and Birmingham, and she had alliances with naacp people in Mis-
sissippi. Yet, despite her independent base, Baker felt so suffocated by the
magnitude of King’s personality and presence that she could not make
herself comfortable within the organization.
......
baker and king
The relationship between Ella Baker and Martin Luther King Jr. is doubly
signiﬁcant. First, the incompatibility between the civil rights movement’s
most charismatic national spokesperson and one of its most effective grass-
roots organizers had signiﬁcant consequences for the development of the
movement itself. Baker’s decision to leave the sclc staff in 1960, her choice
to support mass-based, grassroots organizations, and her determination to
defend the autonomous, democratic decisions made by militant activists
changed the course of the Black Freedom Movement, not least by ensur-
ing that the nascent Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee was not
taken over by established civil rights organizations, including sclc and the
naacp. Second, the conﬂict between these two civil rights leaders reveals
more fundamental conﬂicts within black politics and African American
culture over the meanings of American democracy and the pathways to-
ward social change. If Baker’s criticisms of King were overly harsh and
unforgiving, that may be because they were intensiﬁed by her disappointed
hopes in King himself and by her accumulated outrage against the male
leaders who had treated her in demeaning ways over many decades.
In some of her harshest, perhaps even gratuitous, criticisms of King,
Baker described him as a pampered member of Atlanta’s black elite who
had the mantle of leadership handed to him rather than having had to earn


--- PAGE 213 ---
190 the preacher and the organizer
it, a member of a coddled ‘‘silver spoon brigade.’’ π∂ He wore silk suits and
spoke with a silver tongue. His followers were in awe of him, struggling in
vain to imitate him or just seeking to be near him. Young ministers would
try to dress like him, even sound like him, Baker observed, and their unsuc-
cessful attempts only reinforced the perception that he deserved the defer-
ence and adulation he received. King was, in her words, ‘‘the man of the
hour . . . [and others] got the reﬂective glory.’’
π∑ In Baker’s eyes, King did
not identify closely enough with the people he sought to lead. He did not
situate himself among them but remained above them. What Baker does
not give King credit for is the fact that while he may have allowed others to
applaud his leadership skills and oratory talents, he did not hesitate to take
risks, putting himself and his family in danger repeatedly for the sake of the
cause. So, while attention centered on him, so did the rage of those who,
like his assassin, blamed him for the movement’s success.
Still, Baker felt the focus on King drained the masses of conﬁdence in
themselves. People often marveled at the things King could do that they
could not; his eloquent speeches overwhelmed as well as inspired. This
disturbed Baker. While she appreciated King’s many contributions to the
struggle and valued the considerable talents he brought to bear, she was
angered and frustrated by the hero worship that surrounded him. Baker
challenged King on this matter repeatedly, arguing that he tolerated, even
if he did not encourage, such adulation.
π∏
In gauging the fairness of Ella Baker’s criticisms of King, one should
keep in mind that she was known for her patience, tolerance, and willing-
ness to work with individuals of diverse ideologies. She had collaborated
with other men who were well known for their inﬂated egos, from George
Schuyler to Walter White. And, as King’s biographers have noted, he was in
many ways quite humble, given the attention and ﬂattery he received from
others. He lived modestly and was initially quite ambivalent about all the
attention and accolades that were directed his way.
Why did King provoke Baker so much? Some of her friends and col-
leagues have asserted that Baker’s conﬂicts within sclc resulted as much
from different personal styles as from political disagreements. Septima
Clark, who admired Baker greatly, felt that sometimes she responded too
angrily to insults and slights from the male clerics in sclc, when these
situations could have been handled more effectively in a less confronta-
tional manner. There was undoubtedly a subjective component to Baker’s
criticisms of King and the other sclc ministers whom she felt did not
respect her as an equal. Anne Braden, who was much closer to Baker than to


--- PAGE 214 ---
the preacher and the organizer 191
King personally and politically, admitted that ‘‘Ella had a blind spot when it
came to King. It was just something about him. She and I differed on this.’’ππ
It would be misguided to view Baker’s analysis of King’s political ﬂaws
too narrowly, however. She did not see King as unique; rather, she saw
what she deﬁned as his weaknesses as reﬂective of prevalent tendencies in
American society. At the same time, she insisted that her criticism never
translated into personal animus, as some have alleged. Baker remarked
that ‘‘some of the King family have said that I hated him, but I didn’t.’’
π∫
King and Baker were bound together, from the very inception of sclc, by
manifold political ties and real interdependence. Their working relation-
ship was close enough—even with King in Montgomery most of the time
and Baker in Atlanta—that their fundamental differences became a recur-
ring source of friction.
Still, King and Baker were more alike than Baker was ever prepared to
admit. Both were southerners by birth, and both had grown up in the so-
cial and spiritual circles of the southern black Baptist church. Both were
college-educated intellectuals, articulate spokespersons for the cause of
black freedom and social justice, and eloquent public speakers. And both
came from class positions of relative advantage. But Baker and King had
made very divergent choices about how to utilize their skills and privileges.
They translated religious faith into their political identities in profoundly
different ways. Above all, they deﬁned the conﬂuence of their roles as
individuals and their roles as participants in a mass movement for social
change quite distinctly. Baker was a militant egalitarian, and King was a
sophisticated southern Baptist preacher.
In Baker’s view, the celebrity status that the movement afforded King
was not an aberration but rather a product of a dominant culture that pro-
moted individualism and egocentrism. People ‘‘just have to have these high-
powered individuals to worship,’’ Baker pointed out.
πΩ ‘‘It’s the culture
we’re in,’’ she insisted. ‘‘When the newspaper people come around, what do
they look for? They don’t look for the solid organizational drive . . . they
look for a miracle performer.’’
∫≠ Baker believed that when ordinary people
elevate their leaders above the crowd, they devalue the power within them-
selves. Her message was that we are all, as individuals, products of the
larger society, even as some of us struggle to change it. And all leaders,
however well intentioned, are susceptible to the corruption of personal am-
bition. According to Baker, ‘‘We on the outside, we want to be important . . .
so we ape the insiders.’’
∫∞ She argued that activists often unwittingly repli-
cate the values and attributes of those they oppose, which becomes a


--- PAGE 215 ---
192 the preacher and the organizer
detriment to the movement. While many black leaders criticized racial
hierarchies in the dominant society, they recreated hierarchies based on
class, gender, and personality within the movement itself. Baker insisted
that leaders live by the principles they espouse. In this sense, she argued,
not only is the personal political, but the political is inescapably personal.
Transformation has to occur at the societal and institutional level, but also
at the local and personal level.
Ironically, Ella Baker could not see in King what other colleagues and his
many biographers saw: a young man, talented, brilliant, eager to serve a
greater good but reticent about being lionized, and being pushed and
pulled in many directions all at once. In Baker’s view, he was indeed a
talented young man who had been given a precious opportunity to help
organize large numbers of people into a ﬁghting force for change, and
instead, she lamented, he settled for mesmerizing them.
......
missionaries and messiahs
King and Baker had been introduced to politics through the same institu-
tion: the southern black Baptist church. Since slavery, the black church had
been an inﬂuential pillar in the African American community and an im-
portant arena for black politics. The church provided blacks with the tech-
nical skills to enter the political arena: literacy, fund-raising, public speak-
ing, management, and organization. In addition, the church provided its
members with a powerful moral language within which to frame political
issues, if they so chose. In a high school essay, Baker wrote eloquently,
and uncritically, about the important leadership role played by the black
church.
∫≤ Her ideas and analysis of the role of the black church, and of
the clergy in particular, had changed considerably over the years, but her
understanding of the centrality of the institution in African American life
and culture remained intact.
Baker’s political awakening began within the black Baptist women’s
missionary movement in the early 1900s. Her mother was a devoted activ-
ist who dragged Ella and her two siblings to missionary meetings through-
out their home state of North Carolina. These churchwomen celebrated
strength, piety, and quiet, selﬂess service. Egos and individual accomplish-
ments were downplayed. Humility was a virtue. In contrast, King was
groomed from an early age to follow in his father’s footsteps into the
ministry. Playing a visible leadership role in the church, and thereby oc-


--- PAGE 216 ---
the preacher and the organizer 193
cupying a prominent place in the black community, was an honorable
career goal for a young man from such a deeply religious family.
King’s and Baker’s respective orientations within the church could not
have been more different. Ministers were trained to be shepherds of their
ﬂocks. The metaphor itself suggests the differences between the notions of
leadership that ministers practiced and those that missionary women ad-
hered to. Ministers directed their ﬂocks; missionaries gathered people to-
gether. In Baker’s view, most ministers expected to say their piece and have
their congregations obediently carry out their decisions. Baker saw no
model for collective or democratic decision making within the mainstream
ministerial tradition. The preacher’s presumed authority did not trouble
men like King, however. As he himself put it, ‘‘Leadership never ascends
from the pew to the pulpit, but . . . descends from the pulpit to the pew.’’
∫≥
But Baker saw this ﬂow of authority as a weakness, not a virtue. The
socialization of women missionaries meant that they practiced a more
democratic and decentralized style of religious service than male minis-
ters did.
Another philosophical position that distinguished Baker from King was
the issue of nonviolence. Baker accepted nonviolence as a tactic, but she
never internalized the concept as a way of life or made it a deﬁning fea-
ture of her worldview. Contrasting herself to her friend Bayard Rustin,
Ella Baker remarked: ‘‘He had a history of dedication to the concept of non-
violence. I have no such history; I have no such commitment. Not his-
torically or even now can I claim that because that’s not my way of func-
tioning.’’
∫∂ Rustin’s paciﬁsm was rooted in his Quakerism, while Baker’s
Christian faith carried no imperative to turn the other cheek or love your
enemies. For her, nonviolence and self-defense were tactical choices, not
matters of principle. ‘‘Mine was not a choice of non-violence per se,’’ Baker
reiterated.
∫∑
Indeed, Baker questioned the capacity of nonviolence to serve as a philo-
sophical basis on which to build a movement, even while she was working
for the sclc. She later questioned ‘‘how far non-violent mass action can go’’
as a mobilization strategy.
∫∏ Her critique of the limitations of nonviolence
was informed by her connections with the militant struggles of the 1930s
and the self-defense ethos of those she worked with in the 1940s, and it
foreshadowed her support of revolutionary militancy in the late 1960s.
Baker consistently gave voice to a radical vision for social transformation
and encouraged others to join her in the struggle necessary to realize that


--- PAGE 217 ---
194 the preacher and the organizer
vision. The realist in her understood that such a struggle might, at times,
become heated and even physical. Engaging in determined conﬂict en-
tailed utilizing a variety of tactics. Baker felt that oppressed people needed
to tap whatever resources they had at their disposal to forge a viable strat-
egy for resistance, especially in the dangerous and violent climate of the
Jim Crow South. She was not alone in this view. Some of sclc’s most
notable grassroots leaders, including C. O. Simpkins and Daisy Bates, ad-
mitted to having ﬁrearms for self-defense purposes.
∫π
Baker differed with King and other sclc leaders on questions besides
nonviolence and the meaning of leadership in militant mass movements.
Bernice Johnson Reagon has suggested that Baker’s worldview and politi-
cal practice can best be deﬁned as a type of radical humanism.
∫∫ It was
radical, in that she advocated fundamental social transformation, and it
was humanistic, because she envisioned that transformation coming about
through a democratic, cooperative, and localized movement that valued
the participation of each of its individual members. Baker’s unfaltering
conﬁdence in the common people was the bedrock of her political vision. It
was with them that she felt the locus of power should reside. This conﬁ-
dence was rooted in her understanding of the complex dialectical relation-
ship between deference and deﬁance in southern black culture. Despite the
facade of subservience and acquiescence to white rule and Jim Crow indig-
nities on the part of southern African Americans, many black people em-
bodied a ﬁghting spirit that needed only a viable outlet to demonstrate and
to express itself in subtle ways every day. It was important for political
organizers to understand and decode the culture of everyday life, and to
tap the reservoir of resistance that resided there, in order to pull people
into collective action.
∫Ω In Baker’s assessment, assuming that people were
quiescent was a misreading of southern black culture.
In this respect, Baker’s views parallel those of the anthropologist James
Scott, who writes eloquently about the ‘‘hidden transcript’’ of opposition
within oppressed populations and about the danger of not reading that
transcript carefully. Scott warns:
So long as we conﬁne our conception of the political to activity that is
openly declared, we are driven to conclude that subordinate groups
essentially lack a political life or that what political life they do have is
restricted to those exceptional moments of popular explosion. To do so
is to miss the immense political terrain that lies between quiescence and
revolt and that, for better or worse, is the political environment of sub-


--- PAGE 218 ---
the preacher and the organizer 195
ject classes. It is to focus on the visible coastline of politics and miss the
continent that lies beyond.Ω≠
Scott’s theoretical work on the nature of popular culture and resistance
resembles many aspects of the politics that Ella Baker lived but rarely
wrote about. From her point of view, it was a semi-spontaneous action
from below—Rosa Parks’s reasoned decision to violate a segregation ordi-
nance—that had sparked the Montgomery boycott. It was another semi-
spontaneous action—a handful of college students sitting in at a lunch
counter in Greensboro, North Carolina, in 1960—that would ignite the
next phase of movement activity. These actions were thought through and
conscious, but they were both examples of leadership coming from below
(the metaphorical pews) rather than from the political pulpits above.
These actions also tapped into a subterranean oppositional culture and
gave it a political outlet.
Baker’s political views were profoundly shaped by her analysis of the
complex class dynamics within the black community. As she put it, ‘‘There’s
always a problem in the minority group that’s escalating up the ladder in
this culture . . . it’s a problem of their not understanding the possibility of
being divorced from those who are not in their social classiﬁcation.’’
Ω∞ For
this reason, she argued, ‘‘I believe ﬁrmly in the right of the people who
were under the heel to be the ones to decide what action they were going to
take to get [out] from under their oppression.’’
Ω≤ She held fast to her con-
viction that the most oppressed sectors of society had to be in the forefront
of the struggle to change society.
Ella Baker’s job tenure with sclc was more frustrating than fruitful. She
was unsettled the entire time, politically, physically, and, to a certain ex-
tent, emotionally. She had no solid allies in the sclc ofﬁce that she could
rely on daily as she had done during her years with the naacp. Her close
and increasingly critical view of King put some distance between Baker and
her old In Friendship allies, Levison and Rustin, who adored King. More-
over, she had never really settled into her semifurnished apartment in
Atlanta and found herself on the road more than she was there. Emo-
tionally, there were some disconnects as well. Jackie was in college. Baker’s
marriage had ended in divorce in the summer of 1958 while she was in
Atlanta.
Ω≥ And her health had begun to effect her work. Her eyes were
bothering her, as were her back and encroaching arthritis. Still, there were
pockets of activity among some sclc afﬁliates that persuaded Baker to stay
with the organization a little bit longer.


--- PAGE 219 ---



--- PAGE 220 ---
Ella Baker in 1932. (Thanks to The Crisis Publishing Co., Inc.,
publisher of the magazine of the naacp, for use of this work,
ﬁrst published in The Crisis Magazine, January 1932)
 
 
Image Not Available


--- PAGE 221 ---
Ella Baker in suit, ca. 1942. (Library of Congress)


--- PAGE 222 ---
Ella Baker with naacp colleagues, September 1945.
(From the Gazette and Daily; photograph Schomburg Center for
Research in Black Culture, New York Public Library)
Ella Baker with group of girls at naacp fair, 1950s.
(Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture,
New York Public Library, Austin Hansen Collection;
courtesy of Joyce Hansen)
 
 
Image Not Available 
 
 
 
Image Not Available


--- PAGE 223 ---
Ella Baker with unidentiﬁed man in Shreveport, Louisiana, 1959.
(Courtesy of C. O. Simpkins)
Ella Baker
and Myles
Horton in lawn
chairs at
Highlander
Folk School,
ca. 1960.
(Wisconsin
Historical
Society,
WHi-3236)


--- PAGE 224 ---
Ella Baker smiling, 1962. (∫ Danny Lyon/Magnum Photos)


--- PAGE 225 ---
Ella Baker, Fannie Lou Hamer, Eleanor Holmes Norton, Stokely Carmichael, and
others at Atlantic City, New Jersey, 1964. (∫ 1978 George Ballis/Take Stock)
Ella Baker delivering a speech in Atlantic City, 1964.
(∫ 1978 George Ballis/Take Stock)
 
 
Image Not Available 
 
 
 
Image Not Available


--- PAGE 226 ---
Ella Baker at podium, with Charles Evers seated behind her and Ivanhoe Donaldson
to her right, delivering a speech in Jackson, Mississippi, 1964.
(∫ 1976 George Ballis/Take Stock)
 
 
Image Not Available


--- PAGE 227 ---
Ella Baker singing at scef luncheon, 1970s. (∫ 2002 Charmian Reading)


--- PAGE 228 ---
Ella Baker at Angela Davis rally, 1972. (Photograph by Charley Sands; permission
courtesy of the Daily Cavalier, University of Virginia, Charlottesville)


--- PAGE 229 ---
Ella Baker with David Dellinger and Marilyn Clement at CCR dinner, May 13, 1980.
(∫ 2002 Charmian Reading)
Ella Baker with William Kunstler and Marilyn Clement in New York City, 1980.
(∫ 2002 Charmian Reading)


--- PAGE 230 ---
Ella Baker in her bathrobe in her Harlem apartment, 1984.
(Photograph ∫ Harvey Wang, from Harvey Wang’s New York, 1990)


--- PAGE 231 ---
Ella Baker, Jackie Brockington, and Carolyn Brockington at City College, 1985.
(Courtesy of Jackie Brockington)


--- PAGE 232 ---
7
new battlefields and new allies
shreveport, birmingham, and the
southern conference education fund
......
I never worked for an organization but for a cause.
Ella Baker, 1968
In 1959, while continuing to work for the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference, Ella Baker devoted her energies to the grassroots struggles
that were developing in cities, small towns, and rural counties scattered
across the South. Many local civil rights leaders were afﬁliated with sclc,
but the organizations that conducted mass mobilizations were locally con-
trolled, and their political perspectives and strategies did not always con-
form to the sclc’s philosophy. That was just ﬁne with Ella Baker. Her
main contribution to the civil rights movement during her years with
sclc was not the building of a solid regional coalition, which was what
King had hired her to do, but rather the strengthening of several semi-
independent local struggles, which were more connected to one another
and to itinerant organizers like Baker than they were to the ofﬁcial sclc
leadership in Atlanta. Baker concentrated on those few local sclc afﬁliates
that were making changes in their communities, not just headlines in the
national press.
Two such organizations dear to Baker’s heart were the United Christian
Movement Inc. ( ucmi) in Shreveport, Louisiana, and the Alabama Chris-
tian Movement for Human Rights ( acmhr) in Birmingham. Led by com-
mitted husband-and-wife teams, these groups seemed to Baker excellent
models for sustained, militant democratic organizing. From the winter of
1958 through the summer of 1959, Baker spent a great deal of time shut-


--- PAGE 233 ---
210 new battlefields and new allies
tling back and forth between Birmingham and Shreveport, punctuated by
regular trips to her home base in Harlem. During this period, her senti-
ments toward sclc were mixed, but her loyalty to activists in places like
Shreveport and Birmingham was unwavering—and she would continue to
work with them after she left sclc. Baker had acted the same way in
the 1940s, when she resigned from the national naacp after serving as
its independent-minded director of branches. Baker’s fundamental com-
mitment was to grassroots activism, mass mobilization, and democratic
change, and wherever she saw signs of movement in that direction she was
eager to lend her support, expertise, and passion.
The struggle over racial justice was heating up in 1959. In May, Baker
expressed her outrage at the rape of a young black woman in Florida by
four white men, adding that ‘‘Negroes all over the south would watch
developments closely’’ in the case.
∞ Another case, the more widely pub-
licized death of Mack Charles Parker at the hands of a Mississippi lynch
mob aroused enormous anger, and the fact that his killers, like so many
others before, went free compounded the outrage. The long-standing rule
of ‘‘Judge Lynch’’ in the South seemed more than ever a travesty of justice
in the late 1950s, and increasing numbers of African Americans refused to
back down in the face of vigilante violence or ofﬁcial repression. The mili-
tant deﬁance of Robert Williams, a black activist in North Carolina, and, by
the early 1960s, the growing popularity of Malcolm X, the radical minister
of the Nation of Islam, signaled a changing mood across the country. Some
historians have suggested that established civil rights organizations were
paralyzed or weakened during the late 1950s by the conservative and con-
formist ethos of the Cold War. After all, the Brown decision had been
followed not by rapid integration of public schools but by a concerted
campaign of ‘‘massive resistance’’ across the white South. This view, while
not invalid at the national level, is only partly correct; the situation on the
ground in some places was quite different. Despite the precarious state
of national and regional Black Freedom organizations, there were local
pockets of ﬁerce antiracist resistance throughout the South during the late
1950s. Baker’s position with sclc enabled her to jump right into the fray,
drawing up battle plans with local leaders and urging other communities to
follow their lead.
In 1959, as she traveled the region, Baker searched for political commu-
nities where her day-to-day practice could more fully reﬂect her philosoph-
ical principles and political convictions. She concentrated her energies on
local sites of struggle that could, she hoped, become launching pads for


--- PAGE 234 ---
new battlefields and new allies 211
militant, regionwide mass action and serve as models of a democratic
practice. Birmingham, Alabama, and Shreveport, Louisiana, were two such
places. Fred and Ruby Shuttlesworth of Birmingham and C. O. and Doro-
thy Simpkins of Shreveport were effective organizers who shared Baker’s
commitment to mass mobilization. Baker also began to work very closely
with Anne and Carl Braden, radical white activists in the Southern Con-
ference Education Fund ( scef), an interracial desegregation and human
rights group based in the South. With comrades she trusted and close ties
to freedom struggles growing up at the grassroots, Ella Baker was slowly
creating a more comfortable political home for herself.
......
nothing too dear to pay for freedom
Baker gave voice to her radical ideas, even when they clashed with sclc’s
image and politics, in order to support and educate activists who were
organizing mass movements for civil rights in their own communities. On
June 5, 1959, in Birmingham, Alabama, she delivered one of the most
militant speeches of her political career. She had been invited to deliver the
keynote address at the third anniversary celebration for acmhr. The eve-
ning meeting was held at the New Pilgrim Baptist Church, and her friend
Ruby Shuttlesworth, a local activist, introduced her. As Baker rose to the
podium wearing one of her signature hats and a crisp summer dress, com-
plete with pocketbook and pumps, she must have looked more like a Sun-
day school teacher or Missionary Society member than the dangerous radi-
cal the fbi feared her to be.
≤ But when Baker spoke, she expressed radical
views that were based on her long experience in organizing for social
change and on local activists’ long experience of violent repression by the
city’s white racist ofﬁcials. Surrounded by a community of people she ad-
mired, who had continued their struggle despite beatings, bombings, and
economic reprisals, she delivered a provocative address titled ‘‘Nothing Is
Too Dear to Pay for Freedom.’’
Baker was unﬂinching in her indictment of racism and in her call for an
intensiﬁcation of antiracist struggle. Only a few months after King’s return
from a trip to India, where he reafﬁrmed his own unfaltering commitment
to Gandhian nonviolence, Baker publicly posed the loaded rhetorical ques-
tion, almost as a gauntlet thrown down for her listeners to pick up: ‘‘What is
the basic right of the individual to defend himself?’’
≥
Ella Baker’s speech in Birmingham in 1959, in both tone and substance,
exempliﬁed the militancy that predated the 1960s and stretched across


--- PAGE 235 ---
212 new battlefields and new allies
regions and generations. Urban black youth in the late 1960s were not the
ﬁrst African Americans to maintain that defending themselves from racist
attacks was morally justiﬁable. Foreshadowing Malcolm X’s famous decla-
ration, ‘‘by any means necessary,’’ Baker exhorted her audience, ‘‘Guide-
posts to ﬁrst-class citizenship call for the utilization of all resources at the
group’s command,’’ and told them that even life itself was not too high
a price to pay for freedom. After condemning the ‘‘accommodating type
Negro leader,’’ Baker questioned the viability of nonviolence in the face of
such extreme violence from segregationists. The Birmingham World, the
city’s black paper, described Baker as ‘‘calm, analytical, and eloquent’’ and
summarized her remarks at Pilgrim Church that summer evening as fol-
lows: ‘‘Calling for a re-examination of the doctrine of non-violence, Miss
Baker questioned the wisdom of allowing the more favored segment to
take violent and unlawful advantage without self-defense. . . . [S]he re-
minded her listeners that the constitution gives to every citizen the right to
defend himself.’’
∂ With clear logic and a direct challenge to her listeners,
Baker put her own radical views on the table and took her stand with the
emerging militant wing of the civil rights movement.
Baker further reminded her audience that the stakes for freedom were
high and applauded militant leaders like Fred Shuttlesworth who were
‘‘determined to secure the full loaf of freedom and not just the crumbs.’’
∑
Baker was not calling for guerilla warfare or riots in the streets; she was
simply afﬁrming a long-standing black tradition of self-defense against
mob violence, which whites had used to enforce the racial and economic
hierarchies of the Old South for generations. Undoubtedly fresh in Baker’s
mind and the minds of her listeners was a vivid example of the long history
of vicious antiblack violence that occurred only two months before: the
brutal lynching of Mack Charles Parker, a black Mississippian dragged from
his jail cell and murdered by a mob, which then threw his body into the
Pearl River.
∏
Baker had traveled extensively through Ku Klux Klan territory during
the 1940s, and she spent time with people who lived under the constant
threat of vigilante violence. In contrast to the predominant, but erroneous,
image of southern blacks as passive, foot-shufﬂing folk who acquiesced to
white domination, the southern blacks whom Baker knew and worked
with owned guns and were not afraid to use them for personal protection.
π
These were honest, hard-working, God-fearing people, but they were also
ﬁghters.


--- PAGE 236 ---
new battlefields and new allies 213
Robert F. Williams, a North Carolina activist to whom Baker alluded in
her Birmingham speech, identiﬁed with and embodied that tradition of
self-defense.∫ As head of the Monroe, North Carolina, branch of the naacp,
Williams became a symbol of southern black militancy and a source of
immense controversy within the resurgent Black Freedom Movement. In
May 1959, in response to the acquittal of a white man who had assaulted a
black woman, the outraged Williams declared that the time had come to
‘‘meet violence with violence,’’ since racist courts seemed to place little
value on either black rights or black lives.
Ω Press across the country picked
up the story. The headline of the New York Times  proclaimed: ‘‘ naacp
Leader Urges Violence.’’ Roy Wilkins, head of the national association, was
furious at Williams, publicly repudiated him, and on May 5 suspended him
from his post as president of the Monroe branch. Williams, like Baker, had
previously had numerous clashes with the naacp’s national ofﬁce, and he
still claimed many allies and admirers at the branch level. Many North
Carolinians wrote to Wilkins to protest Williams’s suspension.
∞≠ The Wil-
liams controversy was still raging when Baker arrived in Birmingham on
June 5. Although she shied away from explicitly endorsing Williams’s ac-
tions or ideas in her speech, she gave him a favorable nod.
∞∞ Emory O.
Jackson, the outspoken editor of the Birmingham World, who covered Ba-
ker’s speech, wrote that after ‘‘blistering the accommodating type Negro
leader’’ Baker went on by ‘‘citing three instances which reﬂect the shifting
status.’’ One of those examples was ‘‘the strike-back declaration of Robert
Williams, the unfrocked naacp branch leader in North Carolina.’’
∞≤ She
then went on to underscore the right to self-defense.
Six months earlier, Ella Baker’s old friend Conrad Lynn, a black leftist
lawyer she had worked with during the 1930s, had asked her to join the
campaign that he and Williams were organizing to defend two black boys,
aged eight and ten, who were jailed for allegedly kissing a white girl in
Monroe, North Carolina. Although she expressed sympathy for the defen-
dants in the highly publicized ‘‘kissing case,’’ Baker declined to become
directly involved. Perhaps she anticipated the disapproval of her sclc col-
leagues and was playing it safe at that point. Both Williams and Lynn were
controversial ﬁgures, and the involvement of the Socialist Workers Party in
the case had already drawn allegations of communist inﬂuence.
∞≥ Avoiding
controversy was uncharacteristic for Baker, but she sometimes tempered
her inclination to do and say whatever she saw ﬁt with a practical recogni-
tion of the possible consequences. By June 1959, she was willing to do so


--- PAGE 237 ---
214 new battlefields and new allies
less and less. In her eyes, the mass militancy of the resurgent civil rights
movement had the potential of bursting the bounds that regional and
national organizations were trying to impose.
Although Baker and Williams never worked together formally in the
naacp or on the ‘‘kissing case,’’ there were other political connections
between them. One of Baker’s dearest friends, the feminist lawyer Pauli
Murray, represented Williams at his hearing before the naacp’s national
board on June 8, 1959, speaking eloquently, but unsuccessfully, in his de-
fense.
∞∂ Carl and Anne Braden of scef also sympathized with Williams,
even though they criticized many of his tactics.∞∑ James Forman, who later
worked closely with Baker in the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Com-
mittee (sncc), was beaten and arrested in Monroe in 1961 because of his
association with Williams and his supporters. According to Tim Tyson,
Williams’s biographer, Baker encouraged Forman and his co-worker Paul
Brooks to visit Williams’s hometown that summer to investigate the situa-
tion there.
∞∏ They found the city in ﬂames. Fires of suspicious origins had
been set the night before their arrival, igniting accusations and counter-
accusations on both sides. Armed groups of white men roamed the streets,
and Forman feared for his life. In the heat of one of the nights of turmoil,
Williams detained a white couple who had entered a cordoned-off black
neighborhood. He claimed that he had kept them indoors to ensure their
safety, but the local authorities indicted him on a charge of kidnapping.
∞π
In the summer of 1962, just before Williams’s trial was scheduled to
begin, Baker visited Monroe to check out the situation for herself. The
opportunity had presented itself in the most unusual way. Dorothy Dawson
(Burlage), a young white civil rights worker originally from Texas, had
been sitting in Baker’s Atlanta ofﬁce when she received a phone call telling
her that a black teenage volunteer, Raymond Johnson, had died in a sus-
picious drowning accident in Monroe. Dorothy had befriended the boy’s
mother, Azalea Johnson, when the two were assigned to room together at
an sclc citizenship school in Dorchester, Georgia, some months earlier.
Dorothy had been so impressed with Mrs. Johnson that she drove to Mon-
roe several times over the summer to visit her and soak up some of her
wisdom. When the news of Raymond’s death came, a distraught Dorothy
decided to go to Monroe for the funeral. She was surprised when Baker
quickly volunteered to go along. ‘‘Miss Baker did not even know Mrs. John-
son at the time; I think she just wanted to comfort her and to be supportive
of me. That’s how she was.’’
∞∫ But there was more to it than that. Baker
cryptically conﬁded to her friend Anne Braden that the ‘‘kidnapping trial


--- PAGE 238 ---
new battlefields and new allies 215
was due to be held [in Monroe] on Monday, but I understand it has now
been postponed but there are some other developments which bear look-
ing into and this is one of the reasons I am taking this short trip.’’
∞Ω Yes,
Baker was genuinely concerned about Dorothy and the grieving mother,
but she was also constantly surveying the political landscape with her ﬁne-
tuned political radar, trying to detect signs of activity and to assess their
importance. This was an occasion to get a close-up look at what had been
brewing, and boiling over, in Monroe. Dorothy and Ella did not arrive in
time for the funeral, but they stayed several days with Azalea Johnson,
eating, drinking, and talking politics.
≤≠
Azalea Johnson was not just an ordinary citizen of Monroe, either. She
had been the secretary at the Monroe naacp branch when Williams was
expelled and remained in the inner circle of Robert and Mabel Williams.
The three of them had founded a newspaper, the Crusader, to which John-
son had contributed a regular column. She had traveled to New York with
the couple and to Tennessee to the Highlander Folk School with Mabel for
a conference. Azalea Johnson was a homegrown intellectual if there ever
was one. Not only was she an able writer and political analyst of local race
issues, but she was an astute observer of global politics as well. Dorothy
was shocked when her plainspoken and unassuming roommate at Dor-
chester pulled out a book by Mao Zedong and asked if she had ever read it.
Dorothy had not even heard of Mao at the time. It was an education on
many levels.
Ella and Dorothy got an earful about Williams and Monroe politics dur-
ing their stay at Johnson’s home. The three women sat at Azalea Johnson’s
kitchen table, Dorothy remembered, drinking Jim Beam bourbon, discuss-
ing the political situation in the South and remembering Raymond. Even
more memorable than the conversation was the image of black men sitting
in the front room and on the front porch with loaded pistols at their sides
virtually the whole time they were there. The situation in Monroe was just
that volatile.
≤∞
Fearing a long jail term for what many felt were trumped-up kidnapping
charges, Robert Williams ultimately ﬂed the country. He ended up in exile
in Cuba, by way of China, while the debate over self-defense within the
Black Freedom Movement continued long after his departure.
≤≤ Through-
out the Williams ordeal, Baker kept her ﬁnger on the pulse of militant
upsurges in Monroe and elsewhere.
At the time of her 1959 speech, Baker was not prepared to join forces
with Robert Williams and his militant allies. She did not call for the forma-


--- PAGE 239 ---
216 new battlefields and new allies
tion of paramilitary groups or for a symbolic public show of armed force;
she called, quite simply, for self-defense. At that time, like many black
freedom ﬁghters before her, she was unwilling to tolerate enemies of the
movement assaulting and murdering leaders with impunity. She had seen
too many friends and colleagues victimized by such violence. Moreover,
she understood that it was quite commonplace for southern blacks to de-
fend themselves when threatened or attacked, contrary to many northern
stereotypes and assumptions. Carrying guns was not a matter of principle
or political strategy for most black southerners; it was a means of survival.
Baker acknowledged that at times nonviolence was a viable and effective
tactic, but she never embraced it as a philosophy. As Baker became more
vocal about her radical views in 1959, the FBI became more interested
in her.
≤≥
None of the young militants who led the Black Freedom Movement
during the next decade were in the audience to hear Ella Baker’s remarks
that night at Pilgrim Church in June 1959, but they might as well have been.
Her remarks were circulated in the press and echoed through the coming
years. Seven months later, young people acted on her call for renewed
militancy and direct action by launching the historic desegregation sit-ins
in Greensboro, North Carolina. Seven years later, in 1966, others followed
Robert Williams’s lead by forming the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense
in Oakland, California. The young activists of the 1960s did not invent
either the radical antiracist ideas they espoused or the confrontational
tactics they embraced; rather, they inherited and reconﬁgured them.
......
birmingham
Baker’s intimate involvement in the black freedom struggle in Birmingham
extended back to the 1940s. Her June 1959 speech on self-defense grew out
of the relationship she had developed with local activists and the respect
and admiration she had earned. Baker had become comfortable in the
‘‘Magic City’’ during her visits there as a ﬁeld secretary for the naacp, when
she recruited new members in the city’s black barber shops and bars. Bir-
mingham was familiar turf. When Baker returned there during the late
1950s as a staff member of sclc, she reestablished contact with the old-
timers and met younger activists in the Alabama Christian Movement for
Human Rights ( acmhr). Baker understood the situation that had shaped
the struggles of the city’s black residents for more than a generation.
Birmingham was one of the most volatile and racially explosive cities in


--- PAGE 240 ---
new battlefields and new allies 217
the entire South, best known for its ruthless chief of police, Eugene ‘‘Bull’’
Connor and his rigid enforcement of the racist hierarchy of the South.≤∂ For
Baker, however, Birmingham’s signiﬁcance came from the fact that it was
home to tireless and courageous civil rights activists like Fred and Ruby
Shuttlesworth. By the 1950s, the Shuttlesworths were anchors of the local
movement there. They had worked with the state naacp before it was
banned and then had helped found the more activist-oriented acmhr. The
Shuttlesworths were no-nonsense ﬁghters who were as bold and deter-
mined as they were savvy and pragmatic. Their reputations as local mili-
tants were well earned.
Ella Baker’s respect for the Birmingham activists was also inspired by
what she viewed as their grassroots approach to organizing. Birmingham’s
leaders, Baker thought, were ‘‘much more mass-oriented’’ in their political
work than most organizers she had worked with.
≤∑ Baker felt that Fred
Shuttlesworth tried to act in accordance with the wishes of the ‘‘masses,’’
even if he did not always poll them to determine what those wishes were.
Notably, acmhr held regular mass meetings to which all were welcome and
at which substantive political and strategic discussions could take place.
Baker’s assessment of Shuttlesworth’s democratic tendencies contrasts
with that of some observers, even admiring ones, who described him as
more of an authoritarian preacher than an inclusive democrat.
≤∏ Fred Shut-
tlesworth was indeed a complex character. He was self-conﬁdent and ag-
gressive, and he sometimes acted unilaterally. At the same time, he reached
out to a wider constituency than most of his peers, and within the move-
ment he fought so that the voices of the poor and the working class, who
were frequently marginalized, would be heard. A colorful and charismatic
personality, Shuttlesworth was an egalitarian in his principles, if not always
a conscientious democrat in his practice. Baker seemed willing to tolerate
whatever other shortcomings Fred may have had, praising him as a person
of ‘‘undaunted courage, even in the face of violence,’’ and applauding his
personal integrity and ‘‘unselﬁshness as a leader.’’
≤π She viewed his zeal and
charisma as talents applied in the service of the collective interests of the
disenfranchised rather than as self-aggrandizing gestures on the part of a
single individual, a distinction that, for her, was critical.
The backdrop to Baker’s visit to Birmingham in June 1959 was a raging
controversy between Fred Shuttlesworth and local attorneys who wanted
to charge fees for their civil rights litigation. Shuttlesworth had openly
criticized the attorneys’ stance as opportunistic and greed-driven, and he
characterized many of their middle-class supporters as selﬁsh and elitist.
≤∫


--- PAGE 241 ---
218 new battlefields and new allies
Over the years, Fred and Ruby Shuttlesworth had numerous run-ins and
conﬂicts with the city’s black leaders; many moderates saw them as too
brash and militant to be effective. However, under Fred’s leadership acmhr
was in closer touch with mass black sentiment in Birmingham than any of
its more moderate counterparts. Working-class black youth were in an
especially restive, even rebellious mood.
≤Ω By engaging in and encouraging
aggressive challenges to Birmingham’s white power structure, the acmhr
was responding to a popular mass sentiment. As the historian Robin Kelley
has put it, ‘‘The Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights (acmhr),
under the leadership of the Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, had the largest
working poor membership of any of the city’s civil rights organizations.’’
≥≠
In most southern towns with an active movement in the 1950s and
1960s, the black community had two distinct political factions. There were
the deal-makers, who bargained for incremental change, and then there
were troublemakers, who raised a ruckus. While the deal-makers com-
plained about the troublemakers’ disruptive tactics, the two tendencies
were at times complementary; the troublemakers often created the climate
in which the deal-makers had greater leverage to negotiate. The problem
was that what moderates saw as a victory, militants saw as a token conces-
sion. The Shuttlesworths and Ella Baker found themselves more often in
the second camp than the ﬁrst, although they crossed over to play the role
of negotiator when the situation required it. Fred Shuttlesworth was a
member of the clergy, but he represented a minority tradition of militant
social activism within the black church that Baker deeply respected. He
embodied what Cornel West refers to as a ‘‘combative spirituality,’’ a term
that Andrew Manis, Shuttlesworth’s biographer, also uses to describe his
subject.
≥∞ Shuttlesworth was as critical as Baker was of the self-promoting
type of ministers who preached passive compliance with injustice and con-
solation in better times to come while pumping up their own egos and
lining their pockets.
Fred Shuttlesworth came from Oxmoor, Alabama, an impoverished
mining community just outside Birmingham.
≥≤ Baker had talked to him
about his background and had inquired about, in her typical fashion, who
his people were. Unlike Dr. King, Shuttlesworth was not a product of the
southern black aristocracy. His parents were never married; he suffered
from an abusive stepfather through most of his childhood; and at the age of
eighteen he was convicted of illegally distilling whiskey and sentenced to
two years probation.
≥≥ Despite this gritty past, or perhaps because of it,
Baker concluded with admiration that Fred Shuttlesworth ‘‘came out of the


--- PAGE 242 ---
new battlefields and new allies 219
masses, . . . [and] he was a part of the masses.’’≥∂ Shuttlesworth had broken
ranks with the majority of Birmingham’s more prominent black clergy
over politics and protocol. He was blunt and confrontational, while others
were more reticent and cautious. Some viewed him as a hothead and an
attention-seeker, but Ella Baker saw something else in him and his wife.
Fred and Ruby Shuttlesworth not only engaged in dramatic acts of bravery
but worked very hard to build an inclusive, grassroots movement in Bir-
mingham that bridged deep-seated class divisions.
The Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights consciously deﬁed
the social and economic barriers that divided black Birmingham, reaching
out to all sectors of the community without privileging local elites with
college degrees and social standing.
≥∑ In her travels, Baker found that ‘‘in
many southern cities, at that stage especially, there were very sharp class
lines in terms of what you had and how much education you had.’’ ≥∏ She
admired those who rejected this type of class stratiﬁcation. After Fred
Shuttlesworth had obtained an education and attained quasi-middle-class
status, he made it his business to reach back across that class divide as a
matter of principle. In 1950, before his move to Birmingham, he accepted a
job as pastor of the prestigious First Baptist Church of Selma, Alabama. His
identiﬁcation with poor and working-class black folk was a constant source
of tension and controversy with the largely middle-class congregation. One
of the church elders advised Fred bluntly, ‘‘You are pastor of First Baptist
now, you don’t need to fool around with those little niggers.’’ Fred replied
indignantly, ‘‘God must have loved those little niggers since he made so
many of them.’’
≥π Fred Shuttlesworth’s class sensibilities were still ﬁrmly in
place when he and his family moved to Birmingham some years later.
Ruby L. Keeler Shuttlesworth was as much Fred’s colleague and com-
rade as she was his wife. Her role in the Birmingham movement is often
overlooked or underrated. Ruby’s adoptive father was a railroad clerk,
union ofﬁcial, and part-time undertaker who scraped together enough
money so that Ruby could study nursing at Tuskegee Institute in the late
1930s. Not much is known about her mother, who was a homemaker. Ruby
left school in 1941 to marry Fred, who was working as a handyman in a
local doctor’s ofﬁce where she was employed part-time.
≥∫ Like most men of
his generation, and despite his egalitarian tendencies in community orga-
nizing, Fred Shuttlesworth held many sexist views about women and mar-
riage. He once commented, only half-jokingly, that no one had the right to
tell his wife what to do except him. And while he viewed himself as a
political renegade who often disregarded what others thought of him, he


--- PAGE 243 ---
220 new battlefields and new allies
pressured Ruby to conform to the expectations of his parishioners—singing
in the choir and keeping a spotless home—which is what was expected of a
minister’s wife. The strong-willed Ruby refused to submit to his wishes on
this and many other matters. She had always admired Fred’s principled
deﬁance in the face of racism, but when that same bull-headed manner
carried over to their domestic life, she resented and resisted it. She was also
annoyed by the fact that he was sometimes reckless and irresponsible when
it came to family ﬁnances. In 1959, she decided to return to school, over
Fred’s objections, in order to improve her own earnings. Fred’s continuing
conﬂicts with Ruby once erupted into a shoving match, and eventually, in
1970, the couple divorced. Years after Ruby’s death, Fred admitted re-
morsefully that he had been too domineering and chauvinistic in his mar-
riage. Personal conﬂicts and struggles over gender issues were as much a
part of the Shuttlesworths’ thirty-year relationship as their shared commit-
ment to social justice.
≥Ω
Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, even when they could not reach con-
sensus in their personal lives, Fred and Ruby Shuttlesworth made decisions
together to take certain risks for the sake of the civil rights movement. As a
result, the entire family was targeted for reprisals, and, as was typical
throughout the South, Ruby was not spared because she was a woman and
supposedly less threatening. The enemies of the movement knew better
than to underestimate her. On Christmas Eve 1956, the Shuttlesworths’
home was bombed and two of their children were injured after they an-
nounced that acmhr would launch a desegregation campaign against the
city busses, which had become the site of intense confrontations. Two
African American men had been shot on the busses not long before.
∂≠ The
bombing shook the Shuttlesworths, but they remained undeterred.
The following year, in the spring of 1957, Ruby and Fred together faced
down a jeering mob to desegregate the local Greyhound bus station. They
sat in the whites-only section and traveled from Birmingham to Atlanta in
deﬁance of public protests by the Ku Klux Klan. Ruby could have stayed at
home with the children and allowed Fred to go with one of his male allies,
but they chose to take a political stand together.
∂∞ On September 9, 1957, as
the school desegregation battle in Little Rock, Arkansas, dominated the
headlines, the Shuttlesworths decided to test the Brown decision in Bir-
mingham by attempting to enroll their daughters, Ruby Fredericka and
Patricia Ann, in one of the city’s premier white schools. In correspondence
with school ofﬁcials throughout the month of August, the Shuttlesworths


--- PAGE 244 ---
new battlefields and new allies 221
were warned in subtle and not-so-subtle terms that there would likely
be retribution if they proceeded with their plans. When Ruby, Fred, and
their two daughters, along with two other black students, approached the
school on the designated day they were once again confronted by a white
mob. Both sides refused to back down. Fred was beaten nearly unconscious
with brass knuckles and bicycle chains, and Ruby was stabbed in the hip.
One of their daughters was slightly injured as well.
∂≤ That night, acmhr
stationed armed guards outside its meeting, not an uncommon practice in
those days.
∂≥
The Shuttlesworths’ home was repeatedly targeted for attack. Despite
the danger, Baker maintained a close association with the family, placing
her own safety in jeopardy. She visited Birmingham often in the 1950s and
early 1960s and always stayed with Ruby and Fred. During one such trip in
1958, Baker’s niece, Jackie, happened to be visiting Atlanta from New York
and joined Ella for a short trip to Birmingham. This was both a social and
political excursion. Jackie slept in the bedroom that had been ﬁrebombed
not long before. With that knowledge in mind, she slept uneasily. Ella had
deliberately kept Jackie safely out of harm’s way even as she herself took
risks and traveled into volatile situations. That night Jackie fully appreci-
ated just how dangerous her Aunt Ella’s work really was. Jackie had known
this abstractly before, but as she lay there, feeling her own fear, the magni-
tude of Ella Baker’s courage became apparent to her.
∂∂
In 1958 and 1959, acmhr was leading an intense struggle in Birmingham.
Fred Shuttlesworth’s church was ﬁrebombed for a second time in June
1958, and there were cross burnings and ﬁrebombings throughout the sum-
mer. In October, fourteen people were arrested and held without bail for
protesting the revised segregation policy on the city busses. Baker remained
in constant contact with the Shuttlesworths throughout this period, as did
Anne Braden. Ruby and Fred Shuttlesworth, like Ella Baker, were drawn to
the Bradens. They struck up a friendship and began to explore ways that the
Southern Conference Education Fund (scef) and acmhr could collaborate.
Ignoring red-baiting and the warnings of his ministerial associates, Fred
went on a series of highly publicized speaking tours that were jointly spon-
sored by scef and acmhr. Between 1958 and 1963, Fred Shuttlesworth
became more intimately linked to the Bradens and their network of south-
ern white radicals. Many sclc supporters were dismayed by his open ties
with left-wing antiracists.
∂∑ For example, Alice Spearman, a liberal sclc
supporter, conﬁded to Baker that she was concerned about the inﬂuence


--- PAGE 245 ---
222 new battlefields and new allies
that ‘‘radicals’’ like Shuttlesworth were having on Dr. King. Ironically, the
naive Spearman seemed unaware of the fact that Baker shared Shut-
tlesworth’s radical ideas.
∂∏
......
shreveport
In 1959, Ella Baker also devoted a considerable amount of her time to aiding
the local struggle in Shreveport, Louisiana. The principal organizers in
Shreveport, Dorothy Simpkins and C. O. Simpkins, were both militants and
democrats, in line with Baker’s own politics. She ﬁrst met C. O. Simpkins at
an sclc meeting in Atlanta in 1956. Simpkins had heard Dr. King speak in
Chicago earlier that year, and after the talk he told him what was going on
in Louisiana. King invited the young dentist to visit Atlanta and join forces
with sclc. At his ﬁrst sclc board meeting, Simpkins was extremely im-
pressed with Baker. She did not talk much, he recalled; but when she did,
she was articulate, direct, and insightful. She advocated aggressive actions
and placed great emphasis on indigenous leadership. Simpkins liked what
he heard.
∂π From then on, Baker and Simpkins had regular telephone con-
versations concerning not only sclc but also the larger issues related to the
movement. In the winter of 1958, when the Shreveport activists were about
to launch a major voter registration campaign in preparation for the July
hearings of the Commission on Civil Rights, Simpkins appealed to Baker to
spend an extended period of time there to oversee the work. At that point,
she was eager to get out of Atlanta and away from her ministerial col-
leagues, so she agreed without hesitation.
Ella Baker had conferred with the activists in both Shreveport and Bir-
mingham about how to take maximum advantage of the Commission on
Civil Rights’s scheduled hearings on voting discrimination.
∂∫ She saw the
hearings as an opportunity to mobilize around citizenship rights and invig-
orate ongoing local struggles. Baker was well aware of the commission’s
shortcomings, and she viewed its hearings as a catalyst for organizing local
people. As activists put the South’s racist and undemocratic electoral prac-
tices on trial, they urged disfranchised black citizens to come forward and
testify.
∂Ω
The Civil Rights Commission originally scheduled hearings in Shreve-
port for July 1959, and the Simpkinses’ United Christian Movement Inc.
(ucmi) was prepared to take full advantage of the opportunity. However,
lawsuits by white ofﬁcials challenging the constitutionality of the commis-
sion eventually forced the hearings to be postponed until September 1960.


--- PAGE 246 ---
new battlefields and new allies 223
Baker was well aware of the type of organizing necessary to put teeth into
legislative victories. For her, the passage of a law was the beginning rather
than the end point of a struggle. Challenging an interviewer in 1968 who
invited her to assess the value of such victories, she responded: ‘‘As you well
know, we had some very ﬁne laws passed prior to the birth of either of
us . . . [but] they died as a result of the lack of implementation. Even the
recent laws that have been passed are only as valuable as the people you
have alerted and [who are] capable of using their combined power to see
that they are implemented.’’
∑≠ Courageous and persistent leaders on the
grassroots level were key to creating change: their agitation drew attention
to the larger issues at stake and generated the climate for the implementa-
tion of old laws and the passage of new ones.
When Baker went to Shreveport for a two-month stay, she was looking
forward to the battle that lay ahead. She knew she would be ﬁghting along-
side some tough people with whom she had a strong afﬁnity. Like Baker,
the Simpkinses—though educated and from middle-class backgrounds—
had, as a matter of principle, little use for what historians have termed the
‘‘politics of respectability,’’ a strategy of conforming to dominant standards
of respectable behavior and appearance in order to prove that oppressed
people were worthy of citizenship and economic opportunities. Like his
father, C. O. was a dentist, and he had served in the military in Korea.
Dorothy had been a teacher in civil rights workshops. Yet the movement
they led was inclusive and democratic. The Simpkinses worked closely with
poor and working-class people in the Shreveport struggle, making every
attempt to blur and downplay the class differences between them. Most
importantly, they were rough-and-tumble ﬁghters and had battle scars to
prove it.
Dorothy Simpkins had repeatedly challenged segregation ordinances on
local trolleys and busses and in the local school system. Early in 1957, she
and three others were plaintiffs in a lawsuit against the Shreveport Trade
School’s policy of excluding black students. In December 1957, she was part
of another group that ﬁled suit against the city’s policy of segregation on
public trolleys and busses. Federal authorities forced the state legislature
to repeal the transportation segregation statute in 1958.
∑∞ State lawmakers
then passed a series of so-called safety ordinances that allowed drivers full
discretion in making seat ‘‘assignments’’ to passengers, supposedly in the
interest of safety but in practice enforcing racial segregation. The intrepid
Dorothy Simpkins was one of the ﬁrst to test the new policy. In 1959, when
confronted with a trolley driver attempting to enforce the ordinance, Doro-


--- PAGE 247 ---
224 new battlefields and new allies
thy recognized a prime opportunity to teach the thirty-two young Boy
Scouts and Cub Scouts whom she was escorting on a ﬁeld trip, a lesson
in political resistance and personal integrity. When Simpkins was told to
move to a segregated section of the trolley, she steadfastly refused. The
driver summoned the police, who grabbed her by the arm and arrested her
on the spot. Some of the boys were visibly shaken by the incident, but
others beamed with pride that Mrs. Simpkins had stood up to the white
authorities.
∑≤
C. O. shared Dorothy’s courageous convictions. They were a team, per-
sonally and politically, for nearly thirty years. In 1957, after state ofﬁcials
temporarily outlawed the naacp in Louisiana (as had also occurred in Ala-
bama), C. O. was the only nonminister among the founders of the United
Christian Movement Inc. The Simpkinses both suffered extensive harass-
ment, intimidation, and violent attacks for their activism. C. O. Simpkins
‘‘was arrested often, and crosses were burned on his lawn; his newly built
house was bombed.’’
∑≥ In the most gruesome harassment of all, dead ani-
mals with bullets through their heads were left at the family’s front door as
a warning of what might happen if they continued their agitation. The
couple was forced to leave Shreveport in the early 1960s. Later, they sepa-
rated and amicably divorced. C. O. Simpkins did not return to Louisiana on
a permanent basis until 1987.
∑∂
For nearly a decade, the Simpkinses spearheaded the civil rights move-
ment in Shreveport. In Baker’s view, Shreveport, like Birmingham, served
as a model of how a local community could organize itself effectively. C. O.
Simpkins, like Fred Shuttlesworth, shared Baker’s view of nonviolence as
more a limited tactic than a way of life. When white vigilantes shot at
Simpkins, he shot back. For example, in 1958, when he was returning from
a meeting late one night, racist hoodlums tried to intimidate him by shoot-
ing at his car, breaking the passenger window. He had a German Luger
pistol in his glove compartment; so, he hit the brakes, reached for his gun,
and returned ﬁre. His attackers sped off.
∑∑
The community elder and local griot known as Papa Tight was another
respected ﬁgure in the civil rights movement in Shreveport. Papa Tight was
a ﬁxture at the town’s only barbecue joint, where he held court most after-
noons, chatting about politics, people, and current events. Even someone
like C. O. Simpkins knew very little about Papa Tight, including his real
name, which suggests he was not treated or viewed as a social equal in all
respects; but neither was he looked down on. He was recognized as a
movement adviser and supporter. Neither educated nor from the middle


--- PAGE 248 ---
new battlefields and new allies 225
class, Papa Tight surely gained his nickname from being the quintessential
town drunk. He never went to church; he drank too much and too often;
and he had frequent run-ins with the law, most of which had nothing to do
with politics.
∑∏ Papa Tight was not given to eloquent oratory. He spoke in
the plain dialect of the mass of ordinary black southerners who had little
formal schooling. In other words, Papa Tight was the antithesis of the
model Negro citizen that the national civil rights movement leadership was
trying to project to the national media. But he was sympathetic to the
movement, and he was well connected among the city’s down-and-outers.
While established race leaders might have seen Papa Tight as a source of
embarrassment, ucmi leaders welcomed him into the movement. ‘‘We were
not going to close the door on him if he wanted to help,’’ C. O. Simpkins
explained. ‘‘We needed him and he did good work putting the word out to
support the movement.’’
∑π Papa Tight not only served the movement as
a recruiter, but he was also sought out for the insight and advice he had
to offer.
Ella Baker took a special liking to Papa Tight and enjoyed many long
conversations with him during her stay in Shreveport. She was interested
in what problems he thought Shreveport blacks were facing and what
would motivate ordinary folk to get involved in making a change. Indeed, it
would have been out of character for Baker to have shunned Papa Tight in
any way.
∑∫ She often railed against the social snobbery and political short-
sightedness that led some black leaders not to take seriously the grievances
or political insights of those at the bottom of the social and economic
ladder and of those who, like Papa Tight, did not conform to bourgeois
standards of respectable behavior.
∑Ω
Baker repeatedly recounted the example of how some middle-class Ne-
gro leaders distanced themselves from the so-called town drunk to the
point of being unwilling to defend him if he were attacked by local racists
or beaten by the police. In her experience, ‘‘There were those people who, if
John Jones was a drinker and not a church goer, they might have had grave
doubts about the virtue of going down and . . . getting him out of jail,’’ even
if he had been a victim of police brutality.
∏≠ The sinful, hard-drinking,
tough-talking fellow with little social standing among the ﬁner families in
town was viewed as an embarrassment to the race whose ‘‘uncouth’’ be-
havior undermined group progress. In the words of Roy Wilkins, Baker’s
former colleague at the naacp, ‘‘We must clean up and educate and orga-
nize our own people, not because they must be perfect in order to be
accorded their rights, but they cannot be ﬁrst-class citizens in truth until


--- PAGE 249 ---
226 new battlefields and new allies
they appreciate the responsibilities of that station.’’ ∏∞ Baker’s view was
quite different. Poor people should not have to be made deserving of their
citizenship or their economic claims; such rights were fundamental.
Much of the social and political interaction Baker had witnessed be-
tween elite and nonelite black people occurred within the conﬁnes of what
historians have termed ‘‘uplift ideology.’’ These were relationships of un-
equals, the groomed and educated tutoring and guiding their social subor-
dinates.
∏≤ The obsession with respectability, in Baker’s opinion, was a po-
litical trap that undermined critical thinking and lessened the ability of
activists to be truly radical in their ideas, actions, and alliances. This class-
biased ideology also cast middle- and upper-class blacks as the natural
leaders and spokespersons for the race, to the exclusion of others.
∏≥ Baker’s
ideas represented a sharp break with this dominant bourgeois ideology
and the political strategies that it spawned, and those ideas opened up the
possibility for working-class and poor people to take hold of the mantle of
leadership.
∏∂
In addition to crossing some of the many class barriers that existed
within the black community, the leaders of the Shreveport movement made
more tepid gestures toward challenging conventional gender roles. The
movement boasted a very active core group of women leaders. Many of
these women were self-employed, often as beauticians, and thus were less
vulnerable to direct economic pressures than domestic workers were.
Mamie Love Wallace, Bernice Smith, and Ann Brewster were among the
best known.
∏∑ ‘‘We had a lot of strong women involved,’’ C. O. Simpkins
recalled; ‘‘Ella and Dorothy weren’t the only ones.’’∏∏
When Baker arrived at the airport in Shreveport in February 1959 with
her beat-up suitcase in one hand, her pocketbook in the other, and one of
her signature hats perched on her head, she did not look much like the
polished political organizer that she was. Her arrival probably went un-
noticed by local police ofﬁcials, but she soon made her presence known.
The Simpkinses had arranged for Baker to stay with their neighbor, Willa
Bell Clark, a single woman with an extra room. Although Clark was not
directly involved in the civil rights struggle, she was one of its many silent
supporters. She worked for a wealthy white family in town and was fearful
that a more open association with ucmi would jeopardize her job. Let-
ting Baker stay with her was her small, secret way of contributing to the
movement. Clark exempliﬁes the popular support that the Simpkinses had
helped to mobilize in Shreveport. Baker appreciated Clark’s hospitality and


--- PAGE 250 ---
new battlefields and new allies 227
made sure to write her a detailed thank-you note upon her departure,
reafﬁrming that her contribution to the struggle was appreciated.∏π
Baker’s routine in Shreveport was to rise early and head over to the ucmi
ofﬁce, situated in a corner of C. O. Simpkins’s dental ofﬁce, to begin a long
day of typing, phone calls, visits, and meetings. She often remained there
until late into the evening and then joined the Simpkinses for dinner and
conversation. Ella had great affection for Dorothy and C. O., and the senti-
ments were mutual.
∏∫ The three friends sat up late many nights talking
about personal and political matters. As close as she felt to her Shreveport
friends, Baker kept her secrets. She told them all about Jackie, her pride
and joy, but never mentioned that she had been married and was only
recently divorced. She was always very private about what she termed her
‘‘domestic relationship,’’
∏Ω and by 1959 there wasn’t much of a relationship
left to conceal. She and Roberts had been separated for some time, and her
move to Atlanta had put even more distance between them. Their divorce
became ﬁnal in the summer of 1958.
The friendship Baker shared with the Simpkinses helped sustain her
throughout the Shreveport campaign. She knew when she went to Caddo
Parish that she was entering a volatile and dangerous situation. Shreveport
segregationists had made heinous threats and carried out many of them.
Churches and homes had been bombed. Activists had been beaten in the
street, some of them in broad daylight. Local segregationists were not at all
fond of interfering outsiders. In a newspaper report during the voter regis-
tration protests, the registrar singled Baker out for particular contempt.
‘‘She is not even a Louisianan,’’ he grumbled, indignantly describing her as
‘‘that Baker woman from Atlanta.’’ Like many white segregationists who
blamed ‘‘outside agitators’’ for stirring up trouble in communities they
sought to control, he attributed much of the local unrest to her organiz-
ing efforts.
π≠
Although Baker reported back to the sclc ofﬁce periodically, she func-
tioned in Shreveport as a freelance organizer and political consultant while
on sclc’s payroll. Despite some media attention and the Simpkinses’ ref-
erences to her as the coordinator of the Shreveport campaign, she con-
sciously downplayed her role and resisted becoming the primary spokes-
person for the group. She directed the day-to-day, behind-the-scenes work
related to the campaign, and she served as ucmi’s principal strategist,
tactician, and staffperson during her seven-week stay. It was the oppor-
tunity to dig in and work shoulder-to-shoulder with local activists that most


--- PAGE 251 ---
228 new battlefields and new allies
appealed to Baker. She respected the autonomy of the local leadership and
resisted any attempts to promote herself as ‘‘the’’ leader or outside expert.
Local people would be there long after she had gone. In the ﬁnal analysis,
the major political decisions had to be theirs. She intended to leave behind
a more skilled, conﬁdent, and emboldened local leadership rather than a
singular victory.
Baker worked in Shreveport off and on from early February until late
March 1959. She met with local groups and leaders on a weekly basis,
worked on the ucmi newsletter, and helped launch and sustain a ucmi
youth group.
π∞ A typical week’s schedule for Baker was packed. On Febru-
ary 22, she spoke at the 11:00 a.m. service at Evergreen Baptist Church.
The next day she spoke to the Stoner Hill Civic Group in the morning, and
at 8:00 p.m. she was standing in the pulpit at Hopewell Baptist Church
preaching the virtues of electoral participation. On February 24, she ad-
dressed the Shreveport Parent Teacher Association council at the Lakeside
Branch Library at 5:30 p.m. and met with the Federated Club Women
Presidents group at 8:30 p.m. At 7:30 p.m. the next evening, she gave a talk
at Shady Grove Baptist Church. Her schedule often began at 8:00 a.m. and
ended well after midnight with a summary report or an informal evalua-
tion meeting reviewing the day’s events with Dorothy and C. O.
π≤
The citywide voter registration campaign in Shreveport culminated on
March 19, which local activists had designated ‘‘R-day,’’ or registration day.
Activists led a mass attempt to register. They hoped this campaign would
either add to the city’s black electorate or offer evidence of the obstruction-
ist practices of local ofﬁcials, which could then be presented to the Com-
mission on Civil Rights. Black Shreveporters who were already registered
were asked to gather at 9:30 a.m. on the third ﬂoor of the Caddo Parish
Courthouse in downtown Shreveport and to bring along at least one friend
or family member who was not yet registered.
π≥
On R-day, C. O. Simpkins canceled all his dental appointments, closed
his ofﬁce, and encouraged his patients to attend the protest instead. At
the crack of dawn, Dorothy and Ella sat sipping coffee at the Simpkinses’
kitchen table and going over lists of tasks for the day, including reminder
calls that had to be made and people to be picked up. Over 200 people
participated in R-day. The organizers had hoped for a bigger crowd, but
they were pleased that those who did turn out were steadfast and un-
daunted by the pouring rain and by the intimidation tactics of the local
segregationists.
One of the routine tactics of the registrar of voters was to stall the


--- PAGE 252 ---
new battlefields and new allies 229
registration process with unwarranted delays. The protest on March 19
became a ‘‘stand-in,’’ as dozens of prospective voters stood for hours in long
lines, only to be turned away on an array of technicalities. Some were told
they had given the wrong birth date if the date they gave differed by even a
day from that recorded by the county. Others were told that the identiﬁca-
tion they presented was insufﬁcient proof that they resided in the state.
π∂
Many prospective voters never made it inside the ofﬁce. At the end of the
day, only forty-ﬁve of those who stood in line were actually allowed inside,
and only a handful of those were actually allowed to register.
π∑
Baker had no intention of accepting such treatment silently. When by
midday the registration process was creeping along at a snail’s pace, she
went back to C. O. Simpkins’s ofﬁce and angrily telephoned the Caddo
Parish registrar, U. Charles Mitchell, to complain, insisting on more timely
and efﬁcient processing of applicants. Mitchell was outraged by her gall
and hung up on her.
π∏ Baker also assiduously detailed every obstructionist
tactic in preparation for what she hoped would be public hearings that
would put local white political leaders and ofﬁcials on trial.
The voter registration campaign was countered by intensiﬁed opposi-
tion from white segregationists. While civil rights activists campaigned to
increase black voter registration and to document electoral fraud for the
beneﬁt of the Civil Rights Commission, Louisiana segregationists were re-
doubling their efforts to maintain white control by decertifying black vot-
ers who were already registered. State Senator W. M. Rainach, a rabid
racist who chaired the joint legislative committee on segregation and was
considering a run for governor, was a high-proﬁle spokesman for white
supremacy in Louisiana. Milking antiblack fears and hostilities among the
white electorate, Rainach toured the state in 1959 ‘‘lecturing voter regis-
trars on strict enforcement of voter qualiﬁcation laws,’’ admitting that,
while some of those excluded would be whites, most would be blacks.
ππ
Rainach worked in open collusion with the Louisiana White Citizens’ Coun-
cils to purge black voters systematically from the voting rolls. The council
members routinely showed up at registrars’ ofﬁces around the state and
insisted on seeing the list of eligible voters. They combed through the list,
highlighted black registrants’ names with the letter ‘‘C’’ for ‘‘colored,’’ and
petitioned the registrar to review these voters’ eligibility on a variety of
ﬂimsy grounds. In the southeastern dairy town of Franklinton, in Wash-
ington Parish, the local registrar of voters actually appealed to the courts to
impose an injunction blocking the council’s campaign because it was inter-
fering with the daily functions of his ofﬁce. The court refused.


--- PAGE 253 ---
230 new battlefields and new allies
On Friday, March 21, two days after the protest at the Caddo Parish
Courthouse, Judge C. A. Barnett threw out the request for an injunction,
applauded the segregationists’ actions, and called on other white citizens
of the state to ‘‘stand up and be counted’’ by joining the crusade to ensure
that ‘‘unqualiﬁed’’ persons did not exercise the vote. This response reﬂects
the extent of antiblack sentiment and the depth of the commitment to
black disfranchisement that permeated all levels of government in the
state, as was true across the South during this period.
π∫
......
Ella Baker understood that the struggles in Louisiana and Alabama repre-
sented only the tip of the iceberg of southern racism and injustice and gave
only a hint of black people’s willingness to resist oppression. She was
committed to the struggle for the long haul, having devoted thirty years to
progressive causes. In 1959, she had not yet found the right political organi-
zation to serve as her base of operations, but she was ﬁnding like-minded
allies in the mass movements that were emerging in the South.
One way that she sustained herself physically during times of intense
struggle, and psychologically and emotionally during lulls, was by recon-
necting with old friends and comrades. They took care of her and provided
her with refueling stations and respite from battle as she continued her
itinerant insurgency across the South. One such person was Odette Harper
Hines, a woman who had overlapped with Baker in Harlem in the 1930s
and worked alongside her during her naacp days in the 1940s. By 1959,
Hines had relocated to Alexandria, Louisiana, not far from Shreveport;
after several weeks of tireless work in Shreveport, Baker took time out
to visit Hines for a few days to relax and regenerate herself. Hines was a
true fan of Baker’s, describing her as ‘‘a person with great integrity . . .
very human and warm,’’ with a sharp ‘‘clarity of analysis’’ about political
matters—overall, ‘‘an extraordinary woman.’’
πΩ The two middle-aged activ-
ists ‘‘talked politics a little,’’ but the purpose of the trip was really to give
Ella a break. Hines recalled that when her old friend arrived, ‘‘her tongue
was hanging out. She was exhausted.’’
∫≠ So Hines was content to pamper
her a bit, make her her favorite shrimp salad, and provide her with some
rare moments of solitude and calm. After her stay in Alexandria, Ella Baker
went back to the battleﬁeld in Shreveport for a few weeks more and then
on to Birmingham, Atlanta, and New York for meetings and mobilizations.


--- PAGE 254 ---
new battlefields and new allies 231
......
carl and anne braden and the
southern conference education fund
In the late 1950s, Ella Baker began a relationship with Carl and Anne
Braden, two southern white radicals who would over time become two of
her closest friends and most trusted allies. Looking back in 1999 at the
couple’s political contributions, Julian Bond referred to them as ‘‘modern
abolitionists.’’
∫∞ In 1957, the Bradens joined the staff of the Southern Con-
ference Education Fund ( scef), which had grown out of the Southern
Conference on Human Welfare (schw), a New Deal organization formed in
1938, ‘‘based on a vision of a new democratic south that would be built
jointly by black and white people.’’
∫≤ Among schw’s supporters were Elea-
nor Roosevelt, Mary McCleod Bethune, and Charlotte Hawkins Brown.∫≥ In
1946, scef was formed as the tax-exempt educational arm of schw; and
when schw folded in 1948, scef carried on the work of grassroots organiz-
ing. The organization raised funds for embattled black activists, lobbied for
implementation of Truman’s civil rights proposals, and tried to educate
southern whites about the evils of racism. In the 1950s, the members of
scef lent support to sclc’s efforts as much as it would allow, and in the
1960s they became stalwart supporters of the renewed black protest move-
ment. Fred Shuttlesworth joined scef’s board in 1958, and Baker accepted
a full-time job with the organization in 1962, after serving as a consultant,
paid and unpaid, for several years.
∫∂
The Bradens were part of a small network of progressive white south-
erners who shared their antiracist views and activist orientation. In their
politics, however, they were decidedly to the left of most of their col-
leagues, both white and black, and the notoriety the Bradens had earned
during and after the McCarthy era meant that many civil rights activists
were reluctant to work with them.
∫∑ In the context of the Cold War South,
where antiracism and communism were virtually synonymous in the segre-
gationist imagination, people committed to equal justice were lumped to-
gether regardless of their actual political afﬁliations; the whole lot of them
were labeled subversives and made the targets of reproach, harassment,
and reprisals. The Bradens’ outspoken advocacy of social justice and racial
equality had cost them dearly, although, like Ella Baker, they focused on
the struggle rather than the sacriﬁces it entailed. The couple endured loss
of work, death threats, and years of government surveillance and persecu-
tion. Carl twice served time in prison for his political work, and Anne


--- PAGE 255 ---
232 new battlefields and new allies
was jailed repeatedly for short stints. Throughout these tumultuous years,
Anne raised their three children and held the family together. ∫∏ The Bra-
dens’ stubborn perseverance endeared them to Baker. Their unﬂagging
allegiance to the cause of racial justice was all the more impressive in
comparison to the ‘‘ambivalence’’ expressed and the ‘‘moderation’’ advo-
cated by most white liberals and some leftists during the 1950s.
∫π
Anne Gamrell McCarty and Carl Braden, both natives of Louisville, Ken-
tucky, met in 1947 while working as reporters for the Louisville Times and
married in 1948. From then on, they fought side by side as radicals and
social reformers, gaining regional and then national reputations. They
were quite a pair. Thin, wiry, and intense, Anne was a keen strategist with
an intuitive ability to size people up right away. Carl, a stout, blustery, and
sometimes brash working-class union organizer, made up for his lack of
ﬁnesse with an unconditional commitment to social justice that earned
him friends and foes alike. Carl’s political passion had won Anne’s atten-
tion and ultimately her heart. Anne and Carl complemented one another
personally and politically, and their mutually supportive relationship sus-
tained their activism over many years.
∫∫
The Bradens challenged racial injustice in all of its forms, from lynching
and segregation to the denial of voting rights. In 1951, Anne went to jail
brieﬂy for protesting the unfair prosecution of a black Mississippi man,
Willie McGhee, for the alleged rape of a white woman, which evidence
suggested he did not commit.
∫Ω In early 1954, the Bradens surreptitiously
bought a house in a white section of Louisville on behalf of a black couple,
Andrew and Charlotte Wade, deliberately violating the city’s segregation
laws and triggering a storm of violent protest among whites. Not only were
they maligned and hounded for their actions, but Carl Braden was con-
victed under a World War I–era sedition law and sentenced to eight months
in prison.
Ω≠ The prosecution argued that the Bradens engaged in a conspir-
acy to foment chaos by purchasing the house for a black family. In 1958, Carl
was targeted again, this time by the Un-American Activities Committee of
the U.S. House of Representatives (huac). He refused to cooperate with the
committee, and in 1961 he spent ten months in prison for contempt of
Congress.
Ω∞ While the Bradens were not open members of the Communist
Party (cp), they believed that socialism represented a more humane way of
organizing society than capitalism—a view that Baker had long held—and
they refused to countenance the denial of civil liberties to radicals.
Ω≤
Baker was heartened by the moral stamina the Bradens had demon-
strated, and she was eager not only to support them but also to ﬁnd a way


--- PAGE 256 ---
new battlefields and new allies 233
to work with them more closely and more consistently. She felt they shared
more of her political values than the majority of her sclc colleagues. In
addition to their committed left-wing and antiracist views, the Bradens
shared Baker’s conﬁdence in the political capacity of ordinary people to
change their own lives. According to Anne Braden, one of the most impor-
tant lessons that she learned during her early political involvement was
that poor black people were their own best advocates; while they needed
allies and resources, they did not need middle-class whites (or blacks, for
that matter) telling them what to do.
Ω≥ This is a concept that southern
segregationists and the fbi found difﬁcult to grasp. They persisted in the
erroneous assumption that southern blacks would simply not stand up for
themselves and demand fair treatment unless someone ‘‘smarter’’—white
or northern—put them up to it. Baker and the Bradens vehemently rejected
such racist and elitist assumptions.
On the surface, Ella Baker and Anne Braden were very different women.
One black, the other white, they were nearly a generation apart. Anne did
her political work in tandem with her husband, who was her closest politi-
cal comrade until his death in 1975. Ella Baker was ﬁercely independent all
of her adult life and consciously disassociated her marriage and family life
from the political circles in which she traveled. But in other, more funda-
mental ways, they were very much alike. Both were women of great prin-
ciple and integrity. Anne and Ella demonstrated a deep determination to
ﬁght injustice that was tempered by patience and generosity toward those
alongside whom they fought. Neither was fully recognized or ﬁnancially
recompensed for her achievements and service. Yet each had a major inﬂu-
ence on an entire generation of younger activists. Ella Baker and Anne
Braden had crafted for themselves identities and work that deﬁed assump-
tions about what women from middle-class families, black or white, should
be and do. Both served as powerful alternative role models for young
women who came of age politically during the early 1960s. Bold, conﬁdent,
and intellectually sophisticated, they were tireless organizers and gener-
ous mentors.
Ω∂
Ella Baker met Anne Braden in the winter of 1956, during the campaign
to win Carl’s release from prison the ﬁrst time. Anne was traveling around
the country desperately trying to drum up support for her husband’s case,
and in New York a mutual friend who worked with the Emergency Civil
Liberties Committee put her in touch with Baker. They got together at a
tiny neighborhood restaurant in Harlem. Anne remembered that Ella’s im-
mediate response to her request for help was to take out a pen and paper


--- PAGE 257 ---
234 new battlefields and new allies
and begin to list the names of other people she could contact in New York.
Baker thought it was outrageous that the Bradens would be abandoned by
former friends because of their alleged communist afﬁliation. In February
1956, Baker helped organize a support rally for Carl Braden at the Commu-
nity Church in Manhattan.
Ω∑ At the time, Baker was immersed in the New
York City school struggle, but she made the time for a stranger in need. Her
unqualiﬁed support made a lasting impression on Anne Braden, beginning
a close and enduring friendship.
Ella Baker and Anne Braden became reacquainted in the midst of the
civil rights campaign in Birmingham in 1958. One chilly fall evening in
Ruby and Fred Shuttlesworths’ home, Anne recalled, Ella was sitting at a
table, ‘‘wearing a black pillbox hat pushed to the back of her head,’’ making
yet another list—this time a list of what had to be done the next day for the
desegregation and voter registration campaign. Anne had driven from Lou-
isville to lend her support. She and Ella chatted, compared observations
about civil rights activities in Birmingham and elsewhere throughout the
South, and found a bit of humor to share as well.
Ω∏ They swapped stories,
laughed, and bonded. There was something visceral in the connection.
Anne and Carl Braden became familiar faces to civil rights activists dur-
ing this period. Like Baker, they gravitated to wherever struggles were tak-
ing place. The Bradens crossed paths with Baker and the Shuttlesworths
routinely at meetings, late-night strategy sessions, workshops, picket lines,
and the homes of mutual friends. Their personal and political bonds deep-
ened as a result. Anne Braden later described Ella Baker as one of her
‘‘strong and brave allies’’ who ‘‘never feared association with us and always
provided support.’’
Ωπ
Although Anne Braden appreciated Ella Baker’s principled stance in her
defense and recognized Baker as one of the most effective opponents of
red-baiting within the Black Freedom Movement of the 1960s, she also
acknowledged that Baker’s position had evolved slowly over time. Like all
historical actors, Baker was inescapably inﬂuenced by the society and his-
tory that she fought so hard to change. During the late 1950s and early
1960s, when American political culture was deﬁned by the ideology and
rhetoric of the Cold War, anticommunism was prevalent in the Black Free-
dom Movement as well. Baker’s position on communism and anticommu-
nism was ambivalent at best. She was resolute on most issues, but on this
one she vacillated. She worked with Stanley Levison against the anticom-
munist McCarran Act, then served on the ‘‘watchdog’’ committee to keep
communists out of the naacp, then befriended the Bradens as they were


--- PAGE 258 ---
new battlefields and new allies 235
being hounded by huac, and then participated in a 1957 mobilization that
openly prohibited communist participation.Ω∫
We can infer a few things from Baker’s awkward navigation of this issue.
One, she could have been considered a part of what Herbert Hill has de-
scribed as the anticommunist left of the 1930s, although she would be
more aptly characterized as a noncommunist than an anticommunist. She
never attacked her communist friends, but she worked with and was sur-
rounded by people who did: A. Philip Randolph, Lester Granger, Pauli
Murray, and others. The disagreements were real, but the different sectors
of the left—socialists, communists, and other factions—worked together
off and on during the 1930s. For some in Baker’s circle, they acted prin-
cipally on their convictions, disagreeing without denouncing their oppo-
nents. Others saw Bolshevism and later Stalinism as so detrimental to
social progress that they sought to undermine communists at any cost.
When the Cold War and McCarthyism set in, the stakes changed, and
old adversaries of the cp had some hard choices to make. Would they join
the government crusade against the ‘‘reds’’ or take a stand in defense of the
larger principle of civil liberties? Some tried to navigate a position some-
where in between: challenging McCarthyism as the persecution of inno-
cents while implying that the persecution of real communists was justiﬁed.
Baker seems to have straddled the fence on the question at least for a while,
leaning on the pragmatic side of condemning red-baiting without defend-
ing the rights of communists. Baker’s relationship with the Bradens may
have been the critical variable that moved her to a more well deﬁned
position. They were closely associated with the left and made no apologies
for it, but Baker sided with them anyway, eventually coming to the con-
clusion that the corrosive effect of anticommunism had to be fought ag-
gressively if any broad-based progressive movement was going to survive.
Interestingly, even though Baker sat on a committee that expelled commu-
nists from the naacp’s New York branch in the 1950s, she would join the
Angela Davis defense committee to win the release of the jailed communist
leader in the 1970s. Like Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X, and Du Bois,
Baker did not hold to static political positions. Her views evolved over the
course of her long political career as a result of her engagement with and
reassessment of the world and the forces around her. The inﬂuence of
those she met and respected also had an effect.
......
Baker worked directly with the Bradens for the ﬁrst time in a sustained way
when she and Carl joined forces to organize a set of mock civil rights


--- PAGE 259 ---
236 new battlefields and new allies
hearings called ‘‘The Voteless Speak,’’ which were held in Washington,
D.C., in January 1960. Both scef and sclc hoped that the hearings would
reactivate the stalled U.S. Civil Rights Commission, which had become
dormant soon after its creation under the 1957 Civil Rights Act. In response
to the moratorium on ofﬁcial government hearings on civil rights viola-
tions, scef decided to establish a volunteer commission that would hold its
own unofﬁcial hearings on electoral abuses, collect data on voting fraud
and discrimination, and use that information to try to resuscitate the ofﬁ-
cial commission.
In order to broaden participation and gain publicity, scef invited other
groups to cosponsor the hearings. Reactions were mixed. Some of the more
mainstream civil rights groups viewed scef with suspicion, primarily be-
cause of Carl Braden’s imprisonment for contempt of huac and the couple’s
openly radical views. There was a debate inside sclc about whether to
even cosponsor the hearings. Baker was a strong proponent of the hear-
ings, and sclc ﬁnally agreed to sign on.
On January 21, 1960, Ella Baker arrived in Washington to join Carl
Braden as a co-coordinator of the project.
ΩΩ Ella and Carl became close
friends during those intense weeks of organizing. While spending long
hours arranging conference logistics, they talked about everything from
world politics to family life.
∞≠≠ Few of her close political associates even
knew about her private life, but Carl and Anne knew more than most.
Although there is no evidence that Baker shared her innermost feelings
with Carl or revealed the more personal details of her private life, they
talked about what politics, struggle, and sacriﬁce meant to each of them.
Their friendship deepened as a result. Baker commented soon after that ‘‘if
Carl was a communist, we need more of them.’’
∞≠∞ She never asked either
Carl or Anne whether they were, in fact, members of the cp. As time went
on, it simply did not matter to Baker.
Aaron Henry, a militant Mississippi naacp leader, came to Washing-
ton, D.C., for the hearings, and Braden recruited John McFerren, a rep-
resentative of the black sharecroppers’ struggle in Tennessee, to testify
about his experiences. They were also able to involve the veteran activist
and educator Nannie Helen Burroughs.
∞≠≤ Baker held the legendary anti-
racist and women’s rights crusader in high esteem. In their 1959 correspon-
dence, Baker expressed her eagerness to feast on Burroughs’s ‘‘wit and wis-
dom’’ and applauded her ‘‘organizational drive and accomplishments.’’
∞≠≥
Although Baker could be enormously charming when she chose to be, she
never doled out ﬂattery insincerely. When she began doing outreach to


--- PAGE 260 ---
new battlefields and new allies 237
D.C.-area civil rights activists to mobilize local support for the mock hear-
ings, the elderly Burroughs responded enthusiastically, helping Baker and
Braden to secure a site for the hearings when the church they had booked
canceled at the last minute.
∞≠∂ This campaign was one of Burroughs’s last;
she died in 1961.
Ella Baker and Carl Braden were optimistic that the voting rights hear-
ings cosponsored by sclc and scef in Washington, D.C., set to begin on
January 31, 1960, had the potential to make a signiﬁcant impact on na-
tional politics and reignite the stalled civil rights movement—or at least
light a few sparks. Much to their surprise and delight, the black student sit-
in movement began the very next day, entirely independently of their ef-
forts, and immediately overshadowed the hearings.
......
the advent of the sit-in movement
On February 1, 1960, four black college students sat down at the ‘‘whites
only’’ lunch counter at the Woolworth’s in Greensboro, North Carolina, and
refused to move. After several successive days of sit-ins, the store gave
in and served the young black patrons without serious incident. The stu-
dents’ actions ignited a blaze of sit-in demonstrations that spread quickly
across the South. By the spring, over 100 cities had been affected, sev-
eral thousand youthful protesters had been arrested, and violent counter-
demonstrations had made headlines across the country. What began as a
single protest action had rapidly generated the sparks of a movement,
freeing the pent-up political ambitions of students, in particular black stu-
dents, all over the country.
∞≠∑
When the sit-ins erupted seemingly spontaneously, involving clusters of
young people throughout the South, they energized and piqued the inter-
est of civil rights activists everywhere, black and white, young and old. The
sit-in was a more dramatic and confrontational tactic than the bus boycott
of ﬁve years before. By doing something, instead of withholding participa-
tion, young people put their bodies on the line in order to challenge seg-
regation and second-class citizenship. They steadfastly endured hostility
and violence. Lit cigarettes were gouged into some protestors’ backs, and
food was dumped in their laps. Solidarity demonstrations and picket lines
sprang up in cities throughout the North.
When Baker heard about the sit-ins, the protests were still local and
small in scale; they had not yet made national headlines. Recognizing the
demonstrations’ potential to catalyze a mass movement, Baker called her


--- PAGE 261 ---
238 new battlefields and new allies
contacts in other cities to ﬁnd out what was going on. When she returned
from Washington to sclc headquarters in Atlanta, Fred Shuttlesworth
called with the news that the sit-ins had just spread to High Point, North
Carolina, where he had been visiting. Fred was already excitedly urging
students in Birmingham to conduct their own demonstrations. The sit-ins
had become contagious. Baker, Shuttlesworth, and the Bradens were all
ecstatic.
Baker later recalled that she was not surprised that the initial sit-ins had
occurred, since in her view oppressed people had always fought back in
one way or another. What did surprise her was how rapidly the protests
had caught on in city after city.
∞≠∏ Baker attributed this chain of events, in
part, to social and family networks among southern blacks. When sit-ins
occurred at one school, students would call relatives and friends in nearby
towns and spread the word in advance of media coverage. Baker knew that
organizers had to appreciate and tap into these social and familial net-
works in order to mobilize southern black communities. During the next
few years, with Baker’s encouragement, this is precisely what young orga-
nizers did under the banner of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Com-
mittee ( sncc), the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party ( mfdp), and
their half-dozen or so local organizational afﬁliates. The sit-in demonstra-
tions and the militant new leadership that emerged from them were the
answer to Ella Baker’s political prayers.
By the end of 1959, Baker was already preparing to leave sclc. King in-
vited her to stay on in a diminished capacity once the new director, Wyatt T.
Walker, was hired. But there was more promising political work on the
horizon, and Baker was ready to go. In 1960, young activists took up the
challenge she had laid out in her speech in Birmingham in June 1959. Once
again, Baker was invigorated and hopeful about the political possibilities
for the South and the nation. ‘‘This may only be a dream of mine,’’ she
conﬁded to Anne Braden, ‘‘but I think it can be made real.’’
∞≠π


--- PAGE 262 ---
8
mentoring a new generation
of activists
the birth of the student nonviolent
coordinating committee, 1960–1961
......
Throughout the decade of the sixties, many people helped to ignite or were touched by
the creative ﬁre of sncc without appreciating the generating force of Ella Jo Baker.
James Forman, 1972
In the young and determined faces of the sit-in leaders, Ella Baker saw the
potential for a new type of leadership that could revitalize the Black Free-
dom Movement and take it in a radically new direction. Baker wanted to
bring the sit-in participants together in a way that would sustain the mo-
mentum of their actions, provide them with much needed skills and re-
sources, and create space for them to coalesce into a new, more militant,
yet democratic political force. Maintaining the neophyte activists’ auton-
omy from established civil rights organizations was one of her key objec-
tives. But she also hoped they would develop their own vision and strategy
based on the transformative experience of confronting injustice personally
and collectively. The students’ direct assaults on Jim Crow had done more
to demolish the most ubiquitous and offensive everyday forms of segrega-
tion than years of carefully orchestrated national campaigns. While exem-
plary local movements such as the Montgomery bus boycott seemed difﬁ-
cult to replicate in other locations, the sit-in tactic had spread with startling
rapidity. Above all, the young activists themselves seemed transﬁgured by
their success, and their challenge to segregation was reshaping national
politics.
After the success at Greensboro and the wave of sit-ins that rippled


--- PAGE 263 ---
240 mentoring a new generation
across the South, Baker took immediate steps to help the students consoli-
date their initial victories and make linkages with one another, and she set
the stage to move them in what she hoped would be a leftward direction.
Under the auspices of sclc, Baker called for a gathering of sit-in leaders to
meet one another, assess their respective struggles, and explore the possi-
bilities for future actions. The Southwide Student Leadership Conference
on Nonviolent Resistance to Segregation was held on April 16–18 (Easter
weekend), 1960, and attracted some 200 participants, more than double
the number Baker had anticipated. Many of the young people came out of
sheer curiosity, eager to protect their local autonomy but interested to hear
what others were doing. The gathering took place at Baker’s alma mater,
Shaw University, in Raleigh, North Carolina, where she herself had begun
her activist career more than forty years earlier. Around the country, a
number of similar meetings were convened by various organizations to
support the southern students, analyze the signiﬁcance of their actions,
and capitalize on the momentum they had generated. The gathering that
Baker convened in Raleigh had the most profound and lasting results.
A month before the Shaw meeting, Baker conducted her own political
reconnaissance, contacting friends around the country to collect informa-
tion on the political mood of the students and others’ responses to their
actions. She wanted to put her ﬁnger on the political pulse and assess the
protests’ potential before deciding what role she would play at the con-
ference. During the week of March 7–12, Ella Baker met and talked with
literally hundreds of students and community leaders about the impact of
the sit-ins and potential for future actions. She then wrote up a ten-page
report for the Southern Christian Leadership Conference ( sclc) that re-
ﬂected her ﬁndings.
∞ Baker also talked the issue over with Doug Moore, a
young minister from Durham, who had convened a smaller meeting of sit-
in demonstrators in North Carolina in February, and Rev. Glen Smiley, a
white ofﬁcial with the Fellowship of Reconciliation, and persuaded them
that the students would be better off as a new and independent group.
≤
When the Shaw meeting got under way, Baker had already decided to
support what she determined was the sit-in leaders’ desire for autonomy.
Her ‘‘basic hope from the beginning was that it would be an independent
organization of young people.’’
≥
A politically shrewd and purposeful organizer, Baker clearly had her
own political goals going into the Raleigh meeting, but—ever the demo-
crat—she was careful not to be too presumptuous about what the students
themselves did or did not want. She had to strike a balance between put-


--- PAGE 264 ---
mentoring a new generation 241
ting forward her own very strongly held views and values and being careful
not to intimidate, overwhelm, or alienate her prospective allies. After all, in
the spring of 1960 there was no basis for them to ‘‘embrace me with open
arms,’’ as she put it.
∂ She had yet to earn their trust. Baker appreciated and
encouraged their desire to arrive at their own consensus and even make
their own mistakes. She was also a stickler for process. She did not want to
rush things; she knew that forming an organization, like building a move-
ment, took time and patience.
Even if Baker had been so inclined, she could not simply have dictated
what direction the student movement was going to take. The young activ-
ists were inexperienced, but they were not blank slates on which Baker or
Martin Luther King Jr. could write a political script. They each brought
something with them: ambitions, passions, ideas, and ways of doing things.
In the case of the Nashville students, they had already embraced the philos-
ophy of nonviolence as articulated by their mentor, a Vanderbilt seminarian
named James Lawson, who was an admirer of Gandhi and a resolute de-
votee of nonviolence as a philosophy and way of life. The Atlanta students,
led by Julian Bond and Lonnie King, had their own ideas as well. They had
participated in sit-ins, but they had also drafted a document, the Atlanta
Appeal for Human Rights, which had been published in a local paper and
which embodied their concept of how the struggle should be framed. So the
students had ideas of their own, and no one understood or appreciated this
more than Ella Baker.
......
setting the stage and planting the seeds
The atmosphere on Shaw’s campus that weekend was electric. The discus-
sions were lively, and the mood was optimistic. For many of the students, it
was not until the gathering in Raleigh that they fully appreciated the na-
tional signiﬁcance of their local activities. They felt honored by the pres-
ence of Dr. King, whom they had watched on television or read about in the
black and mainstream press. He was a hero for most black people in 1960,
and his presence gave the neophyte activists a clear sense of their own
contribution to the growing civil rights movement. Baker was content to
use King’s celebrity to attract young people to the meeting, but she was
determined that they take away something more substantial. Most of the
student activists had never heard of Ella Baker before they arrived. Yet she,
more than King, became the decisive force in their collective political fu-
ture. It was Baker, not King, who nurtured the student movement and


--- PAGE 265 ---
242 mentoring a new generation
helped to launch a new organization. It was Baker, not King, who offered
the sit-in leaders a model of organizing and an approach to politics that
they found consistent with their own experience and would ﬁnd invaluable
in the months and years to come.
Baker’s imprint was all over the Raleigh meeting. She did not make any
unilateral decisions, but she handled virtually all of the logistical details.
∑
She understood how important details were in shaping the character of an
event like this, and she gave every task her utmost attention. She collected
news clippings about sit-in protests in various cities and made proﬁles of
the organizations and individuals involved for her own knowledge and for
publicity purposes. The group that gathered at Shaw was an amorphous
body that, at the outset, had the potential to take any number of political
paths. Baker structured the meeting so that those who were politically
engaged rather than those who claimed the label of ‘‘expert’’ would be at
the center of the deliberations.
The ﬁrst goal was to provide those who had been directly involved in the
protests the opportunity to confer, compare notes, and brainstorm about
future possibilities in private. Baker urged those in attendance to give
southern students, who were disproportionately black and less politically
experienced, the time and space to meet separately, setting the stage for
them to be the principal framers of whatever organization might emerge.
‘‘The leadership for the South had to be a southern leadership,’’ Baker in-
sisted. In her view, the sit-in leaders were on the front lines. They had taken
the initiative and endured the violence. Therefore, they should retain the
prerogative to structure and direct whatever organization emerged from
the conference. It was a matter of self-determination, deﬁned broadly. Ella
Baker was wary of experienced leaders’ tendency to move in and take
control of locally initiated struggles because they saw themselves as more
capable than the local folk. She had seen such dynamics again and again
within the naacp and sclc. Baker was determined not to let this happen to
the nascent sit-in movement.
On the second day of the Raleigh conference, Baker was invited—or, as
she described it, she invited herself—to a private meeting at the home of
the president of Shaw University, William Russell Strassner. The incoming
executive director of sclc, Rev. Wyatt T. Walker, was there, along with
Ralph Abernathy and Dr. King. According to Baker, an effort was made to
‘‘capture’’ the youth movement, an effort to which she refused to be a
party.
∏ There are different versions of the meeting, and certainly differing
views about whether sclc intended to ‘‘capture’’ and subordinate the emer-


--- PAGE 266 ---
mentoring a new generation 243
gent student movement. In Baker’s account of what occurred, she repri-
manded the presumptuous ministers for their territorial ambitions and
walked out of the meeting.
π
Although Baker was generally a sharp judge of character, her suspicions
of King’s motives may not have been fully warranted in this instance. King’s
speech to the Raleigh delegates praised the students for having taken ini-
tiative and leadership. Yet Baker remained skeptical. Her distrust of sclc
leaders had deepened over the course of her three-year tenure with the
organization. In her view, the sclc ministers had badly mismanaged their
own organization, and she wanted to minimize their control over this new
crop of activists. She feared their efforts to annex the new group would
stiﬂe and suppress the militancy and creativity that the students had dis-
played. She also understood that since her own troubled relationship with
sclc was about to come to an end, if the students opted to become a part of
King’s organization, her role would be sorely limited.
While Baker wanted to protect the students’ autonomy, she was not the
hands-off facilitator that some have made her out to be. She understood
that the students needed guidance, direction, and resources from veterans
like herself who shared their general political orientation. As she put it at
the time, ‘‘However hopeful might be the signs in the direction of group-
centeredness, the fact that many schools and communities, especially in the
South, have not provided adequate experience for young Negroes to as-
sume initiative and think and act independently has accentuated the need
for guarding the student movement’’ against those who might steer them in
an undemocratic direction.
∫ Simply stated, Baker saw some forms of inter-
vention and inﬂuence as empowering and supportive of the students, and
others as meddling and self-serving. This may seem like a double standard,
but it was a position that grew out of Baker’s honest assessment of the
political forces at play at the time. She feared that the heavy-handed min-
isters would usurp the mantle of leadership and the media spotlight. Her
own intention was to provide a gentle mentorship that would enable the sit-
in movement to develop in a direction that she could inﬂuence but would
not determine.
Baker’s push for the students to remain unafﬁliated did not stem pri-
marily from the fact that they were young and the more moderate forces
were older, although this was part of the rhetoric that she and others used
to make a case for their autonomy. She saw the emergent movement not as
a youth-only movement, but as ‘‘an opportunity for adults and youth to
work together to provide genuine leadership.’’
Ω The fundamental divide


--- PAGE 267 ---
244 mentoring a new generation
was not generational. After all, King, who was only thirty-one years old in
1960, was closer in age to the students than Baker was. The hypothetical
case could have been made that sclc’s ministerial leaders, most of whom
were some twenty years younger than Baker, were also youthful activists
who deserved protection and insulation from the critical interference of
old-timers. This was not at all Baker’s position. In fact, she argued just as
passionately for the autonomy of middle-aged sharecroppers and commu-
nity activists when student organizers began lending support to their strug-
gles beginning in 1961. In Baker’s view, the students who convened at
Raleigh needed to be encouraged to take the lead because they were at the
forefront of the struggle and represented the greatest hope for a renewed
militant, democratic mass movement, not simply because they were young.
For Baker, radical youth did have a unique, although not isolated, role to
play in the movement for social change. The energy and passion they
brought to bear was a vital resource. Students were less inhibited than
adults by concerns about jobs, children, and reputations. Still, Baker was
living proof that one did not have to be young to be radical. Her friend
Howard Zinn was another example: a white antiracist professor at Spel-
man College, he became one of the early adult advisers of sncc. Septima
Clark, the civil rights activist who organized Citizenship Schools, ﬁrst on
the Sea Islands, then for sclc in Georgia, was another middle-aged radical.
So were Fred and Ruby Shuttlesworth of Birmingham, Dorothy and C. O.
Simpkins of Shreveport, and, of course, Anne and Carl Braden of scef.
Since young people were less socialized and less indoctrinated with pre-
vailing ideas than their elders, they were generally more rebellious and
more open to new ways of thinking. But certainly youth was no guarantee
of political radicalism, and age did not always mean moderation.
It was radical youth Baker was concerned with. She wanted to preserve
the brazen ﬁghting spirit the students had exhibited in their sit-in protests.
She did not want them to be shackled by the bureaucracy of existing orga-
nizations. At this early stage, the nascent political ideas of the students
were not much more radical than those of sclc’s leadership. However,
Baker saw enormous promise in their courageous actions, their creativity,
and their openness to new forms of struggle, and she wanted to give them
the space and freedom for that potential to develop.
Another move Baker made that inﬂuenced the climate of the Raleigh
meeting was to limit media access to the proceedings. In closed-door strat-
egy sessions, the young people were able to express their views and expec-
tations candidly, without the intrusive presence of reporters. Some of the


--- PAGE 268 ---
mentoring a new generation 245
students had already been captivated by the publicity their actions had
garnered, and Baker did not want to encourage any grandstanding or
speech making. As she put it, ‘‘the step that I took as far as the conference
was concerned, was to prevent the press from attending the sessions at
which kids were trying to hammer out policy. . . . You see, I’ve never had
any special inclination to being publicized and I also knew that you could
not organize in the public press. You might get a lot of lineage, but you
really couldn’t organize.’’
∞≠
The sum of Baker’s inﬂuence in shaping the outcome of the Raleigh
conference was both strategic and ideological. If the group that came to-
gether on Easter weekend at Shaw was going to become a permanent
organization, a myriad of unanswered questions had to be broached. What
type of structure would it adopt, if any? Would the group become a coali-
tion of local chapters or a membership organization? Would it be inter-
racial or all-black? Would it be national or regional? Would it be an explic-
itly Christian group, or would it be secular? What place would the philos-
ophy of nonviolence have in the group’s identity? What tone would the
spokespersons set in articulating its politics and purpose? Finally, would
the group tackle only the problem of segregation or, as Ella Baker urged,
would it take on a more expansive political agenda? All of these were
critical questions in the spring of 1960. How they would be answered was
not at all clear. In the end, while many factors informed the course of
events, Ella Baker had more inﬂuence than any other single individual on
the development and sustenance of the new organization.
Baker was one of several keynote speakers at the Raleigh conference,
and the only woman to address a plenary session. When her opportunity
came to speak, she urged the students to see their mission as extending
beyond the immediate demand to end segregation. She reiterated this goal
in an article published a few weeks later in the Southern Patriot summariz-
ing the conference. In her remarks, Baker drew a clear distinction between
the ‘‘old guard’’ leadership, which implicitly included the four-year-old
sclc along with the more established naacp, and the more militant new
leadership represented by the students. She warned against having the
sparks the students had ignited smothered by bureaucratic organizations.
She praised the neophyte activists for their ‘‘inclination toward group-
centered leadership’’ rather than toward following a charismatic individ-
ual. In a thinly veiled criticism of King, she observed that many had felt
‘‘frustrations and the disillusionment that come when the prophetic leader
turns out to have heavy feet of clay.’’
∞∞ In her Patriot article, Baker empha-


--- PAGE 269 ---
246 mentoring a new generation
sized the students’ unwillingness to tolerate any treatment by their elders
that ‘‘smacked of manipulation or domination.’’ This was as much a warn-
ing from Baker as it was an account of the sit-in leaders’ sentiments.
∞≤
In her formal remarks at Shaw and in individual interactions with par-
ticipants over the ensuing weeks, Baker gave the students an enlarged
sense of the importance of their actions. The sit-in movement was part of a
worldwide struggle against many forms of injustice and oppression, she
insisted. Baker encouraged the participants to see themselves—not their
parents, teachers, ministers, or recognized race leaders—as the main cata-
lysts for change. She was trying to pull the student activists beyond the
conﬁnes of the South and the nation to grapple with, and connect to, a
large and complex political world. Her comments made quite an impact on
her listeners. Max Heirich, a young white staff person for the American
Friends Service Committee working in Chapel Hill, had driven over to
attend the conference and was overwhelmed by Ella Baker’s presence. ‘‘She
spoke simply but powerfully. It was as if she was speaking right to you
about such large and important issues. She was much more effective than
the men,’’ he recalled.
∞≥
No one was more impressed by Baker’s message and the compelling
image she projected at the conference than Diane Nash. An idealistic
eighteen-year-old, Nash was a native of Chicago and a student at Fisk
University. She had become the leader of and principal spokesperson for
the sit-in movement in Nashville, Tennessee. Nash looked up to the youth-
ful Reverend James Lawson, who was a political guru for many Nashville
students. But, with few female role models, Nash was uncertain of her own
abilities as a leader and insecure about the leadership role that she had
come to hold. When she went to Raleigh that weekend, she was looking for
reassurance and afﬁrmation. Ella Baker provided both.
Diane Nash’s involvement in the sit-ins in Nashville was her ﬁrst taste of
politics, and she was both excited and nervous about meeting other stu-
dents and civil rights leaders. She drove from Nashville to Raleigh with a
young seminarian named James Bevel, whom she later married (and di-
vorced), and Marion Barry, soon to be elected the ﬁrst executive secretary
of the new student organization (and, much later, mayor of Washington,
D.C.). Articulate, poised, and beautiful by conventional standards, Diane
Nash was one of the few young black women leaders who rose to national
visibility in the early months of the student sit-in movement. By the time
she attended the Raleigh meeting, she had faced down the mayor of Nash-
ville at a press event, braved rowdy mobs, delivered speeches to large


--- PAGE 270 ---
mentoring a new generation 247
crowds, and given interviews to the national press—all bold acts of political
leadership she had never dreamed of for herself before February 1960. Yet
her sophisticated exterior concealed a scared and naive young woman who
was deeply ambivalent about assuming the mantle of leadership. When she
saw Ella Baker in action, speaking without a glimmer of self-doubt and
exuding conﬁdence with every gesture, Nash’s political self-esteem was
buoyed. She was struck by Baker’s self-possession and eloquent command
of language. She recalled thinking to herself, ‘‘I’d love to be able to make
contributions like that.’’
∞∂ Ella Baker became a conﬁdence-builder, role
model, and adviser for Nash as she evolved into one of the most inﬂuential
young personalities within the student movement during its ﬁrst few years.
Raleigh was the launching pad for a new phase of the Black Freedom
Movement and a new phase of Ella Baker’s career. Northern-based white
leftists, southern antiracist liberals, and even anticolonialist leaders abroad
followed media coverage of the gathering to see what would come out of it.
At the end of the weekend, the conference participants formed the
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee ( sncc). Ella Baker, Dr. Mar-
tin Luther King, Howard Zinn, Connie Curry, and several other observers at
the Raleigh meeting were invited to serve as adult advisers to the new
organization. For King, this meant lending his name to the effort and
attending its formal gatherings. For Baker, it meant much more: she coor-
dinated the business of the new organization. In her words, ‘‘The writing
that took place between the conference in April and the activities of the
group in the summer came out of the ofﬁce where I was and much of it I
had to do.’’
∞∑ She typed minutes, drafted internal documents, maintained a
mailing list, kept in phone contact with interested students, and recruited
new ones. She found meeting sites and ofﬁce space and secured funds from
sclc and other sympathetic donors. Although Baker was still being paid by
sclc, she was now working for the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Com-
mittee.
......
the summer of 1960
At Baker’s side for most of the summer of 1960 was the hard-working and
tenacious Jane Stembridge, who had attended the Shaw meeting and vol-
unteered to take a leave from her studies at Union Theological Seminary in
New York to work for the new organization. Stembridge was ﬁrst moved to
act after hearing a speech by King in New York City. His words touched a
chord. As a liberal white southerner, she had never felt at ease with the


--- PAGE 271 ---
248 mentoring a new generation
racism that permeated her childhood world, and now she had a way to
act on that uneasy feeling. Baker and Stembridge did much of the day-to-
day work to hold the embryonic organization together during its ﬁrst few
months of life. Baker’s leadership and Stembridge’s tireless labor were
indispensable at that critical stage. Ella Baker was a heroine for Jane Stem-
bridge, just as she was a model of black female leadership for Diane Nash.
All of the young people who came into Baker’s and sncc’s orbits in the
1960s did so at a formative time in their lives, roughly ages eighteen
to twenty-four, when they were enormously impressionable. Most were
searching. They had been living on their own, away from their parents, for
only a short time, if at all. So, they were ﬁguring out their adult identities in
a new way in the midst of trying to ﬁgure some other very important
questions about social change and American society. For Jane Stembridge,
coming to grips with her sexuality as a lesbian at a time and place where
‘‘absolutely no one talked about such things,’’ as she put it years later,
was extremely difﬁcult. In fact, it was ‘‘awful’’ in some ways. Here she
was rearranging her life to be a part of a struggle and she could not even
reveal to her closest co-workers what she was feeling and going through
personally. Like Nash, Stembridge was looking for afﬁrmation and for role
models. She turned ﬁrst to Lillian Smith, the author of Strange Fruit, an
activist, and a rebel against what it meant to be a southern white woman in
those days. Smith was a militant antiracist, an outspoken social critic, and a
closeted but suspected middle-aged lesbian. Stembridge visited Smith at
her home in Atlanta in search of counsel and support, but she was quickly
turned off by Smith’s vitriolic anticommunism and her insensitivity to some
of the personal dynamics of race. Even though Stembridge never directly
came out to Baker and discussed her sexual orientation, she was ‘‘open,
and didn’t hide anything consciously.’’
∞∏ The perceptive Baker did not miss
much. Stembridge found in Baker an accepting mentor whose politics and
sensibilities about social change and her personal open-mindedness were in
line with her own.
Bob Moses, like Diane Nash and Jane Stembridge, was drawn to Baker’s
humanistic style of political acumen. A deeply spiritual young man with
a sharp intellect and a perceptive ear, Moses read Camus, loved math,
and wanted to change the world, especially, but not exclusively, the black
world. A resident of New York City, Moses had not participated in the sit-ins
and did not attend the Easter weekend meeting. Baker deliberately pulled
him into the expanding orbit of sncc in the summer of 1960, when it was
still in the making. From 1961 on, Moses played a critical role in the organi-


--- PAGE 272 ---
mentoring a new generation 249
zation. He and others who made a full-time commitment to activism even-
tually displaced many of the students who had ignited the sit-in protests in
February 1960. Bob Moses, like his mentor Ella Baker, led the group in a
radical democratic direction.
In 1960, Moses was working as a math teacher at New York City’s pres-
tigious Horace Mann School. He had previously been an undergraduate at
Hamilton College and, brieﬂy, a graduate student at Harvard University.
During his spring break, in the immediate aftermath of the sit-ins, Moses
traveled to Newport News, Virginia, to visit his uncle, a faculty member at
Hampton Institute and an activist in the local naacp. While there, he went
to hear Wyatt T. Walker, the incoming director of sclc, speak about the
growing civil rights movement in the South. Moses had already read about
the sit-ins in the mainstream and black press. Although the student move-
ment was sweeping the region and plans were already under way to form a
southern-based student organization, Walker said little about them. Moses
went home energized about the southern struggle—but still unaware that
sncc was in formation.
∞π
After returning to New York, Moses immediately went to the Harlem
sclc ofﬁce and became reacquainted with Bayard Rustin, whom he had
met some years before. Rustin, a paciﬁst, had been a conscientious objector
during World War II, and Moses had sought him out for counsel when he
was confronted with a similar moral dilemma. Moses hung around sclc’s
small Harlem ofﬁce for a while, where he met and got to know the veteran
leftist organizer and former union leader Jack O’Dell and other northern
supporters of the movement. But he was still itching to return to the South.
So he persuaded Rustin to write a letter of introduction, which was actually
addressed to Ella Baker, that would open the door for him to go to Atlanta
as an sclc volunteer.
∞∫
When Moses arrived in Atlanta in the summer of 1960, he got a room in
the Butler ymca and reported for duty at the sclc ofﬁce on Auburn Avenue,
letter of introduction in hand, eager to throw himself into the struggle. But,
far from feeling he was on the front lines of the resurgent Black Freedom
Movement, Moses quickly realized that there was virtually no meaningful
work for him to do. He rarely even caught a glimpse of the sclc leaders. So
he spent his time getting acquainted with Jane Stembridge, hearing about
sncc’s embryonic campaigns, and learning his way around the city. Stem-
bridge and Moses struck up a friendship right away, talking about religion
and philosophy, reminiscing about their common East Coast ties, and shar-
ing their thoughts about the ideals that had brought them both to Atlanta.


--- PAGE 273 ---
250 mentoring a new generation
They debated the writings of philosophers Paul Tillich and Albert Camus
and pondered their relevance to the realities of the agrarian South.
A couple of weeks after Moses arrived, Ella Baker returned to Atlanta
from an extended trip, and things began to look up. Baker and Moses
developed an immediate rapport, beginning a relationship that changed
both of their lives over the coming decades. When Baker ﬁrst noticed the
bespectacled and pensive-looking Moses sitting around the sclc ofﬁces,
she took an immediate interest in him. As was her manner, she called him
over to her desk one day and began to query him about his life, his family,
and his ideas. Who were his people? Where did he attend school? What did
he want to accomplish? Ella Baker was always interested in people’s life
stories, even though she often found it necessary to protect her own pri-
vacy. Her personal interest impressed Bob Moses.
Baker’s initial response to Moses stood in stark contrast to his ﬁrst meet-
ing with Dr. King. Moses recalled that one day, after weeks of feeling
invisible to the higher-ups in sclc, King summoned him to his ofﬁce and
grilled him on his participation in a rally that had been sponsored by
members of Atlanta’s white antiracist left. Moses, who had attended the
rally, had been identiﬁed in the Atlanta newspapers as an afﬁliate of sclc.
To King, this meant bad press for the organization. No one in sclc had
endorsed the protest, and Moses had inadvertently linked the group to it.
King warned the earnest young student to be more careful. Unlike Baker,
he did not bother to ﬁnd out who Bob Moses was, why he had come to the
South, or what he had to offer the movement. His concerns were wholly
pragmatic. Moses was sorely disappointed.
∞Ω What King’s reaction also
illustrated was how strictly sclc sought to police its public image in 1960,
quietly working with leftist allies, like Rustin, Levison, and Baker, but care-
ful not to tarnish its respectability by associating too closely in public with
those who may have been labeled subversive by the government.
Baker’s and King’s differing responses to Moses are telling. King was
focused on external perceptions of the movement and how negative pub-
licity might undermine sclc’s efforts. He overlooked what Baker would
have regarded as more important: the possible alienation of a talented
young recruit. Baker was not worried about bad publicity, especially at that
stage. She was more concerned with identifying and developing potential
leaders like Moses, who could contribute to the movement’s future, than
she was about maintaining an organization’s public proﬁle.
Moses had been exposed to a brand of politics that predisposed him to


--- PAGE 274 ---
mentoring a new generation 251
progressive ideas and to the direction that the new student movement,
under Baker’s inﬂuence, was headed. He had attended New York’s Stuyve-
sant High School during the 1950s, and many of the young people in his
circle had leftist parents. He remembered meeting the radical folk singer
Pete Seeger while visiting the apartment of some friends in Greenwich
Village. The psychiatrist Alvin Pouissant was a high school classmate of
Bob’s. According to Moses, Pouissant’s father was a black printer who had a
number of left-wing clients and customers, which also exposed Bob to
these ideas in a roundabout way.
≤≠
Moses credited his own humble but politically astute father with instill-
ing in him certain values and sensibilities that he later applied in his politi-
cal work. The senior Moses, an educated blue-collar worker in Harlem for
most of his life, always emphasized the integrity of ‘‘the common person.’’
Bob Moses recalled that his father ‘‘viewed himself as the man on the
street . . . and the person at the bottom.’’
≤∞ The egalitarian values Moses
learned in childhood from his father were reinforced during the 1960s by
the woman who became his political mother. Baker did not spoon-feed new
ideas to Bob or any other young activist. Rather, she looked for and con-
nected with individuals who had a predisposition to the ideas and values
she embraced, and she worked with them to deepen and reﬁne those ideas.
When Moses entered the movement, he admittedly ‘‘hadn’t worked out any
notions of leadership,’’ but he had an inclination toward ‘‘what people later
termed grassroots leadership.’’ Baker helped turn that inclination into a
conviction.
≤≤
Bob Moses became Ella Baker’s political apprentice. He was one of the
young people whom she spent a lot of time talking with and listening to,
and he continued in her political tradition—teaching, listening to, and
organizing young people—long after her death.
≤≥ Ella and Bob had similar
sensibilities. Both were intellectuals, thoughtful and analytical, yet at the
same time practical and personable. Both were deeply attentive to ideology
and the ideological implications of certain tactical decisions, but both were
equally willing to do the messy, hands-on work necessary to implement
those ideas. ‘‘What is the larger picture we are framing here?’’ was the
implicit, if not explicit, question both of them often asked. Moses absorbed
Baker’s message that revolution was an ongoing process intimately bound
up with one’s vision of the future and with how one interacted with others
on a daily basis. Moses also shared Baker’s conﬁdence and faith in young
people. After leaving sncc in the mid-1960s and living for several years in


--- PAGE 275 ---
252 mentoring a new generation
Tanzania, he became a radical teacher, in Ella Baker’s style and tradition,
focused on creative methods of teaching and learning as a strategy for
empowerment and social change.
≤∂
Connie Curry, like Jane Stembridge, immersed herself in the work of the
newly formed student wing of the movement during the summer of 1960.
A white antiracist southerner, Curry had attended Agnes Scott College,
where she was introduced to what was called intergroup work for whites, a
euphemism for civil rights and antiracist organizing, through the ywca.
After college she moved to Atlanta to take a job with the National Student
Association. Curry often felt quite lonely as a progressive white person in
the Jim Crow South, which was nearly as hostile to antiracist whites as it
was to all blacks. Curry was ecstatic to meet Ella Baker and the interracial
group of young people in the sit-in movement. In 1960–61, Baker used
Curry’s apartment as a sort of local youth hostel to accommodate the
varied assortment of female volunteers who ﬂoated through Atlanta. Curry
was evicted from one apartment because one of her roommates had enter-
tained a black guest, an act that was viewed as so scandalous she was
forced to move out right away. Curry ofﬁcially became one of sncc’s ‘‘adult
advisors,’’ but she was not much older than the students themselves were.
She was typical of a small minority of white southerners who did not ﬁt
into their own communities, and sometimes even their own families, be-
cause of their open-mindedness about race issues and sympathy with black
aspirations for freedom.
≤∑
Baker appreciated the importance of progressive white allies like Connie
Curry, but she understood the even greater importance of cultivating allies
among southern black activists. Baker knew that the students who started
the sit-in movement had to move into other areas of political activity and
forge a broader base of black support throughout the South if they were
going to have a sustained impact. Toward that end, Baker decided to work
with Bob Moses to make links and initiate contacts that would pull the
students away from the lunch counters and their campuses and into the
front lines of the southern battleﬁelds against racism. She wanted to ex-
pose them to the kind of grassroots organizers she had worked closely
with, most recently the sclc afﬁliates in Shreveport and Birmingham and,
before that, the activist branches of the naacp.
The summer of 1960 was ﬁlled with hopefulness and newfound cama-
raderie for Baker as well as for the students. Curry remembers many occa-
sions when the small group of activists deliberated about the possibilities
for the resurgent Black Freedom Movement while eating ice cream sundaes


--- PAGE 276 ---
mentoring a new generation 253
in the back room of B. B. Beamon’s, Atlanta’s legendary black-owned res-
taurant.≤∏ Baker’s personal regard for them endeared many of the young
people in sncc to her. She was clearly not a peer, but she was willing to
engage them on their turf, not just intellectually but socially too—over ice
cream sundaes, in smoke-ﬁlled back rooms, or on long, uncomfortable
rides in jalopies of various sorts. Baker was often shuttled back and forth
to meetings and conferences in Curry’s beloved convertible Karmen Ghia
sports car, which Curry emphasized was not a jalopy, holding onto her hat
so it wouldn’t ﬂy off. Despite her age and encroaching health problems,
Baker often rejected anything that could even remotely be construed as
special treatment that would put distance between herself and the stu-
dents. If they sat in uncomfortable chairs for long hours debating this or
that, so would she. If they walked long distances, she walked with them at
least as far as she could. If they slept in cramped accommodations on road
trips, she did the same.
≤π Lenora Taitt-Magubane, a Spelman student who
became involved in the movement through the ywca and became a dear
friend of Ella Baker near the end of her life, remembered one such in-
stance. The two had traveled to Albany, Georgia, in 1961 after there had
been numerous arrests of civil rights demonstrators. They were staying at
the home of a local activist, Irene Moore, but there were not enough beds
to accommodate everyone. Lenora offered to give up her bed, but Baker,
then almost sixty, insisted they share the tiny bed since she did not want
anyone to have to sleep on the ﬂoor, even though Lenora knew Baker
‘‘hated sleeping in the bed with someone else.’’
≤∫ Her example, in this
instance and many others, was a lesson in personal egalitarianism that the
young people in sncc applied to their own organizing efforts with southern
farmers, workers, and youth.
......
personal matters
July and August 1960 were especially busy months for Ella Baker. She was
wrapping up loose ends for sclc, tallying the sales of King’s book, Stride
toward Freedom (a task she did not relish), and getting sclc’s ﬁles in order.
At the same time, she was helping to launch a brand new organization.
During these months, Baker departed from her usual pattern by giving
greater attention to her own personal affairs. Surgery for cataracts was
followed by enforced rest and a brief vacation with Anne Braden and her
family. Then, in September, her niece Jackie married Henry Brockington,
marking a moment of great fulﬁllment in Baker’s family life.


--- PAGE 277 ---
254 mentoring a new generation
Her long neglected health concerned her friends and family more than it
did Baker herself. Like her mother, Baker was plagued with health prob-
lems for her entire life. But she rarely allowed them to slow her down.
She sometimes joked with friends that she was entirely too busy to get sick.
Baker’s chronic asthma was a constant source of discomfort to her. In
a period when the health hazards of second-hand smoke were not well
known, she often endured long meetings in smoke-ﬁlled rooms, sitting pa-
tiently with a handkerchief over her mouth and quietly gasping for breath,
while impassioned discussions continued on for hours. Baker’s vision,
which was seriously impaired by cataracts, was the most immediate con-
cern. Years of typing, writing, and reading in poorly lit ofﬁces and on trains
and busses probably did not help. In the summer of 1960, she ﬁnally had
the eye surgery she had postponed for months.
Baker took a long overdue vacation while recuperating from her surgery.
She had maintained a hectic schedule since the April meeting, and by the
middle of the summer she was thoroughly exhausted. Many summers,
Baker’s only vacation was an extended speaking engagement in one place
or another. Her friend Anne Braden, who always took a special interest in
Baker’s physical and psychological well-being, managed to persuade her to
ﬂy to Rhode Island to spend a few days with her at a wooded cabin owned
by some movement friends, the O’Connors. Anne and Ella sat on the long
front porch of the house in the evenings talking about the direction of the
movement and about their own lives and families. Ella enjoyed a glass of
expensive Jack Daniels whiskey—one of the very few indulgences she al-
lowed herself—as Anne sat next to her sipping a glass of wine.
≤Ω The two
women warriors were refueling themselves physically and emotionally for
the battles that lay ahead.
Baker left Rhode Island for a meeting at the Highlander Folk School,
made a brief stop in Atlanta, and then ﬂew to New York for the big family
event: Jackie’s wedding. Ella found herself in the ill-ﬁtting role of the
mother of the bride. Her sister Maggie, Jackie’s biological mother, was still
alive and even attended the wedding, but she had long before relinquished
her role as Jackie’s primary parent.
Baker had raised Jackie since the age of nine. She had watched Jackie
enter high school and excel, experiment with smoking cigarettes, experi-
ence her ﬁrst kiss, and go on to college. Jackie was inﬂuenced more by her
independent, generous, and strong-willed Aunt Ella than by any other
single adult in her life. It was a source of great pride for Ella to see Jackie all
grown up and going out on her own to establish a family.


--- PAGE 278 ---
mentoring a new generation 255
Ella Baker liked and trusted Henry Brockington, the man Jackie had cho-
sen to marry. More importantly, she trusted Jackie to be her own woman
and to pursue her own goals in the context of marriage, a balancing act that
Baker herself had struggled to manage. So, amid the ﬂurry and excitement
of political activity that marked the summer of 1960, Baker took time off to
return to New York, shop for a dress and, of course, a hat, and help make
catering arrangements. Jackie’s wedding took place at St. Mark’s Church in
Harlem. The reception was held in the legendary Audubon ballroom, where
Malcolm X (El Haj Malik El Shabazz) was assassinated four years later
while delivering a speech calling for a reinvigorated militant black move-
ment. On September 17, 1960, the Audubon was the site of a happy family
occasion. Baker put her political concerns and dilemmas aside to relax and
enjoy the celebration. Her family and close personal friends were all there.
It was also good for Ella Baker to see her sister Maggie again. They had
not spent much time together since Ella’s move to Atlanta, but Jackie’s
wedding was a happy reunion. In a photograph with Jackie pinning Aunt
Ella’s corsage on her new suit, Ella is absolutely beaming. Jackie was her
personal success story. Although Ella had not had much luck in love and
marriage, her relationship with Jackie had met all of her expectations.
They remained close until Baker’s death a quarter of a century later. Like a
good and loving daughter, Jackie nursed Ella during her last years. In 1960,
as Jackie and Henry set off on their honeymoon and began a new life
together, Ella went back to the love of her life, political work, and to her
growing political family in the South.
≥≠
The wedding was a high point in Ella Baker’s personal life, but few of her
political associates were invited or even knew about the celebration. She
was familiar with some of the most intimate details of the lives of her co-
workers, especially her younger comrades, but few of them knew very
much about her private side, which she consciously kept separate from the
movement. There were rumors of an ex-husband, but Baker refrained from
discussing her marriage and divorce even with some of her closest women
friends, including Anne Braden. She had a repertoire of family stories that
she shared, usually to make a political point, but the messy areas of her
personal life were off limits.
≥∞ It is hard to explain why she was so guarded
about her private life. Perhaps this was her refuge from the fractious politi-
cal environment that she inhabited most of the time. Perhaps she did not
want her personal choice of a spouse or lover to become a matter of public
scrutiny within the movement. Or perhaps she was resisting the ways in


--- PAGE 279 ---
256 mentoring a new generation
which public female ﬁgures were so often deﬁned in conjunction with male
partners and in terms of their sexual identities. Baker wanted to be re-
spected for her work and her ideas; to open up her personal life to public
view might have made her politically vulnerable. Two of her male politi-
cal colleagues admitted that there were whispers and rumors about Ella
Baker’s sexuality during the 1930s and 1940s. Her marriage was not a
widely known fact. She was ‘‘Ella Baker’’ when she arrived in Harlem as a
single woman in 1927, and she remained ‘‘Ella Baker’’ even after her mar-
riage to Roberts; so, many of her associates thought she was single the
whole time. ‘‘A strong single woman always leads to rumors,’’ remarked
John Henrik Clarke, ‘‘but none of that stuff was true about Ella.’’
≥≤
......
an alternative model of womanhood
Most young women entering the Black Freedom Movement during the
early 1960s knew very little about Ella Baker’s personal life. Instead, they
were awe inspired by her public example as they sought to construct their
own identities as independent activist women.
≥≥ Many of them had to con-
tend with circumscribed notions of middle-class black womanhood passed
down from their families and teachers. Even those from working-class
and poor backgrounds, whose mothers and grandmothers were formida-
ble ﬁgures, had been inﬂuenced by the socially conservative gender mes-
sages from churches and schools. Although some families encouraged their
daughters’ activism, many young women were told by relatives, ministers,
and school ofﬁcials that protesting and getting arrested were simply ‘‘not
ladylike’’ and therefore unacceptable. Fortunately for the movement, many
of them did not listen.
Baker offered an alternative image of womanhood that many young
women had not previously encountered. As Dorie Ladner, who organized
with sncc in Mississippi, observed, ‘‘I never knew anyone quite like Miss
Baker.’’
≥∂ Her external appearance was reserved, even a bit conservative.
She was a small, brown-skinned woman with a ﬂawless complexion, sharp
features, a commanding voice, and a hearty laugh. Her deep, almost bari-
tone voice belied her diminutive frame. Her hair was generally pulled back,
often tucked neatly into a hat. She dressed simply in skirts, suits, or dresses,
usually in muted tones, never wearing anything revealing or the least bit
ﬂamboyant, and no makeup, save for a scant bit of lipstick now and then.
Juanita Abernathy, whose husband Ralph was an sclc leader, remembered
gray suits as Baker’s typical uniform during her years on the sclc staff.


--- PAGE 280 ---
mentoring a new generation 257
Juanita speculated that ‘‘this is how she had to dress to ﬁt in with the men’’
and perhaps to allay their wives’ concerns that she was interested in any-
thing but business.
≥∑
Baker never developed much of a personal relationship with Coretta
Scott King, perhaps because of her deepening criticisms of Martin, but she
did with Juanita Abernathy, which was a typical practice of hers. She had
made a habit of reaching out to the wives of the male political leaders with
whom she worked, even if the woman in the family was not herself ex-
plicitly an activist. Juanita played more of a background role in the sclc,
but Baker always acknowledged her presence and welcomed her contribu-
tions. Sometimes huddled in the dining room of Juanita’s home with the
men, Baker would consciously excuse herself and go pay her respects to
Juanita. When she was based in Atlanta and Abernathy and King were still
in Montgomery, she stayed at the Abernathys’ home during visits to the
city. This was another opportunity to share her ideas and observations with
Juanita. The two women bonded during these visits; and while they were
never close friends, there was mutual respect and much cordiality.
≥∏
Baker situated herself in the dining room debates of the men and kitchen
conversations of the women, and through her roles in these often mutually
exclusive discussions she came to occupy a category and style all her own.
In interviews of any real length, those who knew her well invariably de-
scribe Baker as someone with a ‘‘presence.’’ ‘‘She commanded attention just
by the way she came into a room and the way she carried herself,’’ sncc
activist Ivanhoe Donaldson said. According to Lenora Taitt-Magubane,
‘‘She just had a certain presence.’’
≥π In Bob Moses’s words, ‘‘She had this
black woman’s manner, and she carried that with her into the dangerous
arena of radical politics.’’
≥∫ It was partly the carriage and comportment that
Anna had taught her—a reminder to always walk into a room as if you
belonged. She retained that conﬁdence of movement and she used it. Baker
traveled in all-male circles, and she sometimes found herself in all-white
contexts, but she never hesitated. By the 1950s, she maneuvered within
these spaces as a middle-aged black woman with her purse tucked under
her arm, her hat carefully placed, and her good southern manners. To
Moses, a woman taking the digniﬁed and self-respecting manner that was a
familiar feature of black family life into the rugged political domain was
nothing short of revolutionary.
A white male co-worker found her persona more puzzling. She ‘‘was
warm’’ but always had a certain ‘‘formality’’ about her, Howard Zinn ob-
served; ‘‘she was friendly enough but you never felt you could go up and


--- PAGE 281 ---
258 mentoring a new generation
give her a hug.’’ ≥Ω Ivanhoe Donaldson agreed: she was ‘‘always digniﬁed,
never casual,’’ and it was disarming ‘‘because physically she was not threat-
ening.’’∂≠ Baker kept her boundaries between what was public and private,
formal and informal. But she was not rigid about it. Dorothy Dawson (Bur-
lage), a sncc volunteer and staff member, once ‘‘slipped’’ and called her
‘‘Ella’’ (instead of Miss Baker), a mistake Dawson immediately regretted,
feeling she had transgressed a boundary. Baker reassured her, ‘‘People
know when they are ready to call me Ella. Don’t worry about it.’’
∂∞
To young women, black and white, Baker embodied the possibility of
escaping the restrictions that deﬁned conventional femininity. Authorita-
tive yet unassuming, self-conﬁdent and assertive, forcing others to take her
seriously simply by presuming that they would, Baker was a revelation. At
the time, few of these young women thought they could actually emulate
Ella Baker. She was a larger than life ﬁgure more than twice their ages.
Still, because of her, many young women in the movement did realize that
they could deﬁne their own identities rather than be deﬁned by others, and
in the course of their work with sncc they developed new ways of inter-
acting with women and men, with other young people and their elders,
both in the movement and in the larger black community. Decades after
their involvement in the movement, dozens of women remember their lives
were touched at a formative stage by a woman who, through her example,
showed them a different way of being in the world. Prathia Hall, an African
American woman who went south from Philadelphia in 1962 and lived and
worked in Terrell County, Georgia, for a year, remembered quite vividly the
impact Baker had on her. Qualifying a recollection by saying she did not
mean to actually compare herself to Baker, she nevertheless said, ‘‘I would
see myself in her . . . I was a wandering pilgrim . . . [and] the more I talked
to her, the more I understood myself.’’
∂≤
Ella Baker was the comforting, nurturing, rock-solid mother to the
movement. Yet there was nothing maternal about her in the traditional
sense of that term. She was a militant activist, an insurgent intellectual,
and a revolutionary, descriptors that are usually associated with men
rather than women and with youth rather than the middle-aged. Baker’s
complex, carefully crafted persona enabled her to cross gender and genera-
tional boundaries within the movement. Even in retrospect, she deﬁes
categorization.
Baker maintained a digniﬁed public self-presentation partly as a form
of camouﬂage that allowed her to operate in male-dominated and some-


--- PAGE 282 ---
mentoring a new generation 259
times mainstream political circles. She was a freethinker at heart, accept-
ing of alternative lifestyles, personal eccentricities, and violations of social
etiquette.
∂≥ For example, in contrast to her ever-so-sober public posture,
Baker frequently enjoyed a stiff shot of bourbon or a glass of red wine at the
end of the day. She was not as prim and proper as her conservative gray
suits suggested. Baker would talk comfortably about almost any subject,
including sex. She often gently teased her young colleagues about their
romantic interests or inquired about the lack thereof.
∂∂
The growing irreverence for conventional standards of morality and re-
spectability among sncc members disturbed some of their more moderate
adult supporters, but it did not bother Baker. Virginia Durr, a white civil
rights activist in Montgomery, complimented Baker on her ability to social-
ize with the young people and tolerate what Durr viewed as their ‘‘wild’’ be-
havior. Baker responded that she ‘‘was prepared to forgo manners’’ for the
sake of the larger politics that were at stake.
∂∑ She was, in fact, prepared
to do more than that. She was instrumental in sncc’s rejection of bour-
geois respectability as a defensive political strategy, a rejection that opened
the organization up to historically marginalized sectors of the black com-
munity. When sncc broke with the largely middle-class, male-centered
leadership of existing civil rights organizations, it stripped away the class-
based and gender-biased notions of who should and could give leadership
to the movement and the black community. Some of the manners and
decorum that Durr valued were evident at the Shaw conference in April
1960. Within a year, a visible change was well under way. The young
activists’ dress, comportment, and language changed considerably, making
the organization more welcoming to those traditionally excluded from
formal leadership circles. They donned blue jeans and overalls instead of
skirts and suits, resembling in their dress workers and peasants of the
South rather than preachers and teachers.
Baker encouraged and afﬁrmed the young people’s boldness, their grow-
ing radicalism, and their risk-taking. Her reasoned approval was important
to them. Diane Nash recalls that, as the movement intensiﬁed, many of her
own relatives were worried about her safety. ‘‘Older people would look at
you and say you were young and you would calm down when you matured.
So, she was the ﬁrst older person I had known who was so progressive. And
I needed that reinforcement. It was important that someone like
her thought we were right. It was really important when things got hot
and heavy.’’
∂∏


--- PAGE 283 ---
260 mentoring a new generation
......
molding a new organization
Ella Baker gave up her plans to move back to Harlem after leaving sclc in
the fall of 1960, deciding to stay in the South in order to work as closely as
possible with the young sit-in activists in sncc. She still needed a paying
position. Although scef had offered her a full-time job, which she was
tempted to accept, she ultimately declined it because she thought it would
demand too much of her time. Aware of Baker’s need for autonomy and
some ﬂexibility in hours in order to continue her unpaid work with the
students, her friend Rosetta Gardner helped her get a job with the ywca.
Gardner was typical of Baker’s lesser-known female friends and admirers.
She supported the movement but never became a leader herself. As one
Atlanta activist who worked alongside the two women remarked, ‘‘Rosetta
just loved Ella.’’
∂π Women like Gardner admired Baker’s competence, her
self-possession, her intellect, and her compassion. Above all, they admired
her courage to forge another path and assert herself in all kinds of situa-
tions. These are the things that most of Baker’s close associates loved about
her. So, Rosetta did what she could to make it possible for Ella to do the
work that was important to her. Ella in turn used her position at the Y to
build, nurture, and protect sncc. Lawrence Guyot recalled that Baker ob-
tained ywca and ymca membership cards for young civil rights workers as
soon as they came south to give them local identiﬁcation in case they were
stopped by the police and were accused of being outside agitators.
∂∫ More
signiﬁcantly, she traveled around the South conducting workshops for the
Y on human relations, which essentially meant trying to foster greater
interracial understanding—not as simple a task as one might think given
the racially polarized context of the 1960s South. It was through this work
that she met and subsequently recruited to sncc a number of serious, ideal-
istic young women searching for meaningful ways to apply themselves.
∂Ω
In describing her southern-based work with the ywca in a 1962 report,
Baker used the metaphor of planting and cultivation to describe the slow
methodical process of bringing young people into political consciousness.
She wrote of planting ‘‘ﬁrst the seed,’’ alluding to the outreach recruit-
ment and orientation of new activists, which would nurture their motiva-
tion to want to make a difference. Part two of her report, entitled ‘‘Then
the Blade,’’ described the ﬁrst rumblings of political activity among ‘‘Y
women,’’ some of whom had participated in desegregation sit-ins. This was
the ﬁrst visible result of the seeds having been planted. Next, in Baker’s


--- PAGE 284 ---
mentoring a new generation 261
narrative of organic leadership development, ‘‘the full corn appears.’’ This
section describes the need for creating concrete channels for ‘‘meaningful
social action.’’
∑≠ The same metaphor could have applied to her work with
sncc.
......
Ella Baker once conﬁded in Vincent Harding, her friend and colleague, that
if she ever wrote her memoir, which she never managed to do, she would
entitle it ‘‘Making a Life, Not Making a Living,’’ because while she did a very
good job of the former, she barely accomplished the latter.
∑∞ In the summer
of 1960, she made the same choices as before: ﬁnding a job that barely paid
the bills, she focused instead on creating a meaningful life for herself by
building a movement. The movement was more important to Baker than
religion, money, or even romantic love; the movement had become her life
and her extended family.
Baker was relieved ﬁnally to be free from her obligations to sclc, and
she was excited about the emerging student movement. The young peo-
ple’s optimism and sheer energy were uplifting. When Baker was immersed
in this kind of struggle, she felt most alive and her creative talents could
soar. She had always enjoyed the challenge of building something new: the
yncl in the 1930s, local naacp branches in the 1940s, even sclc at the
outset. These had been the high points of her political career before 1960.
Inherent in Baker’s philosophy, however, was the recognition that no orga-
nization should last forever. Each must yield to something new as historical
circumstances changed. Just as sclc was yielding, albeit unwillingly, to
sncc, so sncc would have to be prepared to make room for whatever new,
grassroots organizations it might help to create. These politics and sen-
sibilities pervaded sncc from its inception.
Baker realized that the radical pulse she had detected needed to be
sustained, cultivated, and propagated. In the summer of 1960, as several
leaders of the emergent organization went off to make speeches to the
political elites of the Democratic and Republican Party Conventions in Los
Angeles and Chicago, she assigned Bob Moses to meet and speak with an
entirely different constituency, one that Baker thought was far more impor-
tant than national elected ofﬁcials. She freed Moses up from his mundane
clerical duties at sclc and dispatched him on a bus tour of Alabama, Mis-
sissippi, and Louisiana to do outreach for sncc and to recruit local activists
of all ages to attend the group’s October conference. Baker had another
objective in mind as well. She wanted to put the students in touch as
quickly as possible with a set of elders who represented a different class


--- PAGE 285 ---
262 mentoring a new generation
background and political orientation than the ministerial clique heading
sclc.∑≤ This was her way of planting the seeds.
Ella Baker placed great conﬁdence in the smart and earnest Bob Moses.
In him, she saw the makings of the kind of leader she herself had striven to
become: modest, principled, and able to empower others through the force
of example. Moses did not disappoint her. Baker wrote down the names of
contacts in each state, and Moses set off for a monthlong journey with a
bus ticket and a list of telephone numbers in his pocket. The contacts he
made that summer laid the foundation for some of sncc’s most important
community organizing work.
The October conference of sncc, when it ofﬁcially formed, was the
culmination of Baker’s efforts over the spring and summer to help build a
permanent organization. Marion Barry, the conﬁdent and charismatic
young chemistry graduate student from Fisk, stepped down as chair, and
Chuck McDew, a stocky, dark-skinned former football player from South
Carolina State with a quick wit and disarming sense of humor, was con-
ﬁrmed to replace him. Others were jockeying for the position, but Baker
had her eyes on McDew. She had probably been observing him in meetings
and recognized his ability to gently but effectively steer the organization
forward without indulging his own ego. McDew had to leave the October
conference early, so he was not even present when he was nominated and
elected as the group’s new leader. ‘‘Ella Baker made me chairman,’’ McDew
later recalled. She persuaded him to accept the nomination and urged
others to support it. This was a little behind-the-scenes meddling, but
Baker was convinced she was placing the organization in fair and able
hands.
∑≥
Several issues of a newsletter, which Baker suggested they call the Stu-
dent Voice, were published during the spring and summer. The group ac-
quired temporary ofﬁce space in one corner of the sclc ofﬁce on Au-
burn Avenue and hired one staff person, Jane Stembridge. Representatives
made their mark on national electoral politics by testifying before the two
major party conventions. Student leaders also met with the nation’s top
civil rights leaders, from King and the ministers of sclc to the national
ofﬁcials of the naacp. Moses established contact with older activists who
were conducting their own campaigns and with other students throughout
the Deep South who had not been directly involved in the original wave
of sit-ins. Already the movement was growing beyond its circumscribed
beginnings.
Early on, one of sncc’s difﬁcult decisions concerned the plans for the


--- PAGE 286 ---
mentoring a new generation 263
October conference and involved Baker’s friend Bayard Rustin. The Pack-
inghouse Workers Union had pledged some funds to help ﬁnance the con-
ference. When the union ofﬁcials learned that Rustin was a scheduled
speaker, they threatened to pull the money because of his radical past.
Nervous about alienating new allies, especially funders, but not terribly
scrupulous about retaining existing ones, sncc awkwardly disinvited Rus-
tin. The details of this decision remain unclear. There is no indication that
Baker intervened to question or challenge the decision, and she likely had
been instrumental in obtaining the funds since she was handling most of
the outreach and fund-raising over the summer. Stembridge, however, was
highly upset and feared sncc was abandoning its principles before it had
even gotten off the ground. She abruptly resigned but declined to make a
public issue of the matter. Years later, she reasoned that it was probably as
much Rustin’s sexuality as his leftist past that caused the union to reject
him and prompted sncc not to stand up in his defense. For Baker’s part, she
was either opting to choose her battles or, in a pragmatic vein, allowing the
students to make their own mistakes as they groped to deﬁne themselves.
Still, Stembridge was ‘‘sure’’ that ‘‘Ella would not have approved of this if
she had been asked.’’ The sncc of 1960 took the easy way out. Four years
later, the outcome would have likely been quite different.
∑∂ Rustin, used to
being mistreated by colleagues, had developed a thick skin. He continued
to advise and work with sncc despite the affront.
Throughout 1960 and early 1961, sncc staged sit-ins and stand-ins at
lunch counters, bus stations, movie theaters, and other segregated public
facilities and mounted support campaigns for protesters who were arrested.
The group also coordinated Christmas boycotts of segregated businesses in
December 1960. Meanwhile, bitter debates and personal power struggles
embroiled the more established civil rights leadership, even though they
maintained the appearance of unity in public. Baker felt that much of this
wrangling was attributable to a kind of egocentrism and organizational
competition that she desperately hoped would not infect sncc, but the
young organization was inescapably drawn into the quarrel.
Roy Wilkins of the naacp was upset that Martin Luther King’s supporters
were portraying sclc as the vanguard of the civil rights movement. Wilkins
was particularly outraged when Jim Lawson, a sit-in leader and ally of
King, was quoted in the New York Times as dismissing the naacp as ‘‘a black
bourgeois club.’’
∑∑ Both sclc and sncc tried to distance themselves from
these comments, and Lawson claimed that his words were taken out of
context. In another political skirmish, Harlem congressman Adam Clay-


--- PAGE 287 ---
264 mentoring a new generation
ton Powell harshly criticized both Wilkins and King for the protests that
occurred outside the Democratic National Convention in August. Powell
threatened to spread erroneous rumors about King if he did not sever his
ties with Bayard Rustin, whose left-leaning politics Powell objected to.
Rustin was a socialist, not a communist, but he was still labeled a ‘‘red’’ by
those who did not care about the distinction between one type of leftist and
another. However, the nature of Powell’s threat, which was that he was
going to leak the false rumor that King and Rustin were lovers, suggests
that his dislike of Rustin had as much to do with homophobia as with
anticommunism, especially since Powell himself had a radical political
past. This is what movement inﬁghting had come to.
In the midst of all this animus and rancor, Ella Baker accompanied a
small delegation of sncc leaders and several members of sclc to a meeting
with naacp ofﬁcials to try to clear the air. The response was lukewarm,
but the fact that the meeting was held signaled the student group’s grow-
ing reputation as an organization to be reckoned with in national black
politics.
Through the summer of 1960 and the winter of 1960–61, a core of about
twenty sncc activists huddled together in a series of meetings to map their
future course. While the work in Mississippi was still being contemplated,
there were continuing sparks of direct action protest that were inspired by
the 1960 sit-ins. One such spark was in Rock Hill, South Carolina, in the
early months of 1961. A group of young people had been agitating there for
months, picketing, conducting sit-ins, and getting themselves arrested. Fi-
nally, they decided to up the ante and refuse bail. They sent out a call to
others to join them. The coordinating committee of sncc was in a meeting
at the Butler Y in Atlanta when word of the Rock Hill stance came. A group
immediately latched onto the idea and prepared to go. Ella Baker went
along to inspect the situation, visit those who had already been arrested,
and make sure parents, lawyers, and the media were contacted. She and
Connie Curry stayed with a local minister who was supportive of the pro-
tests, and the two women drove back to Atlanta two days later to get the
word out to allies and the press. Rock Hill was sncc’s ﬁrst collective protest
action after its founding, and Baker was there to urge the students on and
help minimize their losses.
∑∏


--- PAGE 288 ---
mentoring a new generation 265
......
freedom rides
The following spring, sncc was propelled into a much more visible national
spotlight by its involvement in the Freedom Rides. The rides were begun in
April 1961 by the Congress of Racial Equality (core), a northern-based civil
rights group, to desegregate interstate transportation. Still reeling from
their stay in the Rock Hill jail, sncc members looked to the Freedom Rides
as their next challenge. Interracial teams of freedom riders took busses
from the North to the South and attempted to use waiting rooms and
restrooms in violation of the ‘‘Whites Only’’ and ‘‘Colored’’ signs that were
posted everywhere. Southern segregationists’ response to this campaign
was swift and vicious. Vigilantes ﬁrebombed busses and angry mobs pum-
meled the freedom riders, threatening them with death and beating some
protesters within inches of their lives. Even the U.S. Justice Department
ofﬁcials who were sent South to observe the civil rights protests and the
news reporters who were assigned to cover them were caught up in the
violence; some of them were also beaten severely by white mobs. Several
freedom riders were hospitalized after an especially bloody melee in Annis-
ton, Alabama. Fearing that the next attack might be fatal, core leaders
then called off the rides.
∑π
So that the protesters would not appear to be caving in to vigilante
violence, brazen sncc activists immediately intervened to continue the
Freedom Rides. A determined Diane Nash ﬂew to Birmingham to be part of
a team to coordinate a resumption of the rides. sncc activists, such as John
Lewis, a Nashville student who would become sncc’s chairman and later a
member of Congress, volunteered for the dangerous assignment. When the
rides resumed, so did the violence. The situation provoked a clash between
civil rights activists and the new administration in the White House. John
F. Kennedy, the son of Irish immigrants and the nation’s ﬁrst Catholic
president, had been elected in 1960 with strong African American support
by promising to be an ally of civil rights and racial equality. The spectacle of
violence in reaction to the Freedom Rides and Kennedy’s fairly slow re-
sponse to the open violation of federal law caused many movement activ-
ists to question how strong an ally the young president was really going to
be. This distrust of the federal government deepened as the struggle in the
South intensiﬁed over the next few years.
Ella Baker did not participate directly in the 1961 Freedom Rides. In
1947, she and her close friend Pauli Murray had volunteered to engage in


--- PAGE 289 ---
266 mentoring a new generation
the same kind of action during the Journey of Reconciliation, but they were
rebuffed because they were women.∑∫ This time, even though she was still
not a rider, she would not be excluded. In daily contact with Diane Nash,
who was on the front lines, Baker dispatched a written critique and analy-
sis to the committee coordinating the rides, raising issues about publicity,
future strategies, and what she viewed as bungled negotiations with At-
torney General Robert Kennedy.
∑Ω Baker insisted that a better media and
outreach strategy had to be crafted: ‘‘Although one can understand that the
demands upon the committee in recruiting and processing riders would
consume a great deal of time and energy, one is, nevertheless, also aware
that the full value of the Freedom Rides could only be realized in propor-
tion to the degree to which an aroused and vocal public made its voice
felt.’’
∏≠ She went on to discuss the committee’s mistake in its meeting with
Robert Kennedy, on which she had been briefed, probably by Nash, after
the fact. ‘‘It would seem clear to me,’’ she chided, ‘‘that the point to have
been concentrated on in the conference with the Attorney General was not
that of seeking his aid to release persons from jail directly [since they had
declined bond already to make a point] but that of urging action in the
enforcement of existing laws and regulations which prohibited segregation
practices in interstate commerce especially.’’
∏∞ She pointed out that Robert
Kennedy had already noted this contradiction in some of his public com-
ments to the media as a way to get himself off the hook.
It is unclear if Baker ever received a formal reply to her letter, but a
three-page typed memo from someone as well connected and inﬂuential
on the grassroots level as Baker would not have been taken lightly by the
committee coordinating the rides. Her motive for such a formal and force-
ful intervention, as opposed to her preferred mode of communication by
telephone, is not fully clear. On the last page of the document, however,
there is a hint that this was a gesture to bolster Nash’s authority and
conﬁdence and to protect sncc from other organizations that may have
wanted to claim the Freedom Rides as their own organizational victory. In
this regard, she wrote: ‘‘What coordination is to be expected or exacted in
connection with public appeals for ﬁnancial support? All of us, I am con-
ﬁdent, will have to agree that the Freedom Rides are the primary basis on
which recent contributions to constituent agencies have been made. There-
fore, it would appear that the question of stewardship in the handling
of public funds is one that deserves more attention than may have been
given.’’
∏≤ She then demanded to know what would happen to ‘‘the students
who are spending the longest periods in jail [and] will be in need of money


--- PAGE 290 ---
mentoring a new generation 267
for maintaining themselves and for scholarships next school term. Where
will this come from?’’ ∏≥ In other words, since sncc had salvaged the Free-
dom Rides and provided most of the courageous volunteers, it deserved its
rightful place in the leadership and its share of funds to further advance
its work.
∏∂
Eventually, federal authorities had no choice but to offer some protec-
tion to the unﬂagging freedom riders, whose bloody and bandaged faces
appeared on nightly television newscasts across the country. Attorney Gen-
eral Kennedy, brother of the president, cut a deal with local ofﬁcials in
Mississippi, but the deal compromised rather than aided the activists’ im-
mediate goals. They were protected, but only by being taken into police
custody and charged with violating Mississippi’s segregation ordinances,
which prevented the protest from continuing. Hundreds of protesters even-
tually served jail time in Mississippi’s notorious Parchman Prison as a result
of the so-called protection they were provided. Among those prisoners was
Ruby Doris Smith, who later recalled the experience as a transformative
moment in her life. It was also a watershed in sncc’s political maturation.
∏∑
In November 1961, after dozens of freedom riders had been beaten,
some nearly to death, and while dozens more were still imprisoned, the
Interstate Commerce Commission ﬁnally mandated the full desegregation
of all interstate travel facilities, implementing a Justice Department ruling
made in September. The freedom riders felt at least partly vindicated. Now
sncc had a concrete national victory to its credit. sncc activists had dem-
onstrated determination and courage under ﬁre. And they had garnered
visibility and recognition as a major political force in the growing civil
rights movement. After 1961, sncc members were increasingly viewed as
the movement’s shock troops. They were able to quickly mobilize people to
go to sites of intensiﬁed racial conﬂict: Birmingham in 1963, Selma in 1965,
and James Meredith’s short-circuited one-man march from Memphis, Ten-
nessee, to Jackson, Mississippi, in the summer of 1966. And the activists
were willing to take on difﬁcult and dangerous organizing challenges—
such as voter registration in the Mississippi Delta—that other civil rights
groups were unwilling to touch.
In the summer of 1961, after a difﬁcult ﬁrst year, sncc activists came
together to grapple with the question of the political course the organiza-
tion should take. Smaller groups had met in June in Louisville and in July
in Baltimore, but it was the August meeting at the Highlander Folk School
in Monteagle, Tennessee, itself an institution under siege and soon to be
closed down because of its radical and antiracist politics, that was the most


--- PAGE 291 ---
268 mentoring a new generation
intense. Highlander was the site of many historic meetings. This gathering
included new people, discussed new proposals, and faced new political
challenges. The political landscape in the country was changing rapidly,
and the young people in sncc were changing as well. One impulse was to
do more of the same, to continue nonviolent direct action tactics on an ever
more massive scale until the last bastions of segregation fell before the
onslaught. After all, the tactic had been successful, although the victories
were purchased at a high human cost. Some veterans of the sit-ins and the
Freedom Rides wanted to move beyond the demand for desegregation and
the tactic of nonviolent direct action. The number of people who were
willing to risk their lives to achieve desegregation was limited, and segre-
gated public transportation and accommodations were not the only, or
even the most important, forms of oppression that southern blacks faced.
The sncc activists wondered whether they could confront those in power
over such issues as citizenship rights and economics.
Layered on top of everything else was the question of allies and af-
ﬁliations. By attending the national conference of the Students for a Demo-
cratic Society (sds) in June, Chuck McDew, Casey Hayden, and Bob Zellner
had linked sncc to the nascent antiwar movement. Baker was working
with Myles Horton to defend the Highlander School against the threat of
closure, and in so doing she linked sncc to the southern white left that had
been one of the targets of government red-baiting. Even more signiﬁcant
than the Highlander connection was sncc’s deepening relationship with
scef, which Baker had largely facilitated and encouraged. Anne Braden
had attended most of sncc’s meetings, and scef, at Ella Baker’s urging, had
pledged an annual contribution to sncc’s budget. On the liberal front, poli-
ticians attached to foundation funding sources were also vying for sncc’s
attention.
As it tried to chart its own course, sncc was presented with an op-
portunity to receive funds from several liberal foundations, including the
Taconic Foundation, if it joined a Voter Education Project to be admin-
istered by the Southern Regional Council. This project was strongly sup-
ported by the Kennedy administration. With a hefty residue of suspicion
left over from the federal government’s response to the Freedom Rides,
sncc activists debated the White House’s motives. The Kennedys may well
have been sympathetic to civil rights in principle, but they also had a direct
interest in promoting voter registration. A campaign that added thousands
of new voters to the rolls, most of whom were likely to vote Democratic,
would certainly increase the administration’s chances of reelection. Some


--- PAGE 292 ---
mentoring a new generation 269
sncc members thought that such an intimate involvement with electoral
politics would compromise the organization’s values and lessen its effec-
tiveness. They felt that the Democrats’ obvious opportunism should not be
rewarded with cooperation. At one point, the controversy threatened to
split the young organization wide open.
∏∏
Bob Moses had come to the conclusion that the disenfranchisement of
poor southern blacks was the cutting-edge issue the movement needed to
address. He was not so naive as to think that voting would solve all the
problems African Americans faced, but he did become convinced, strongly
inﬂuenced by Amzie Moore, that their oppression hinged in large part on
their total political powerlessness. Moses could not attend the Highlander
meeting, but Charles McDew, Charles Sherrod, and Charles Jones were in
favor of the voter registration project and argued for that position in the
meeting. In contrast, Diane Nash and many of the Nashville activists had
retained an almost spiritual investment in the tactic of nonviolent direct
action. Becoming involved in the messy business of electoral politics, they
concluded, would take the group away from its strength and the moral
high ground that they felt the protests embodied. John Lewis feared that
the ‘‘voter registration push by the government was a trick to take the
steam out of the movement, to slow it down.’’
∏π Passions were heated;
tensions were high; and some of the participants felt that the only way both
factions could remain true to their convictions was to part ways.
∏∫
Baker vehemently disagreed with the formation of two organizations.
And it was her aggressive intervention that calmed the situation, abated
the rancor, and preserved unity. ‘‘I opposed the split as serving the purpose
of the enemy,’’ she recalled years later.
∏Ω The importance of this interven-
tion in sncc’s decision making is generally acknowledged, even by those
who remain unaware of the crucial role Baker played at many other mo-
ments of decision. She understood that the two approaches being proposed
were not mutually exclusive. While she leaned in the direction of expand-
ing the scope of sncc’s work and activities to include voting rights, she
knew from her recent experience with sclc’s Crusade for Citizenship and
from her years with the naacp that organizing for voting rights did not
preclude direct action. In fact, any attempt to register black voters would
precipitate confrontations with white registrars and public ofﬁcials in small
towns and big cities. As both sides stated their case with great fervor, Baker
saw that if some compromise were not reached, the group was headed for
an even more serious crisis. She stood up and spoke forcefully in the meet-
ing, calling for the formation of two wings of one organization. Rather than


--- PAGE 293 ---
270 mentoring a new generation
two organizations, one wing would focus on direct action and the other on
voter education and registration. Nash would head the direct action cam-
paign, and Charles Jones would coordinate the voting rights project.
π≠ Not
everyone was completely won over to the idea, but Baker made a compel-
ling case. No one was prepared to stand up in a meeting and argue vehe-
mently against her.
Although the compromise appeared to give equal weight to both posi-
tions, this decision to expand the group’s political agenda began the pro-
cess of redirecting sncc’s energies in signiﬁcant ways. The shift from transi-
tory, high-proﬁle events like the sit-ins and freedom rides to protracted,
day-to-day grassroots organizing in local communities was a signiﬁcant
turning point. Baker insisted that a movement was a web of social relation-
ships. Charismatic leaders could rally an anonymous mass of followers to
turn out for a single event or series of events; millions could watch televi-
sion coverage of heroic actions by a brave few or speeches by mesmerizing
orators; but that was mobilization, not organization.
π∞ In order to be ef-
fective organizers in a particular community, Baker argued, activists had to
form relationships, build trust, and engage in a democratic process of deci-
sion making together with community members. The goal was to politicize
the community and empower ordinary people. This was Baker’s model,
and in 1961 it became sncc’s model.
π≤
From the spring of 1960 through the summer of 1961, the new student
movement and the group that emerged out of it toughened and matured
tactically and ideologically. In the beginning, sncc was not Baker’s ideal
organization. As a result of the Rock Hill jail action, the Freedom Rides,
and its growing reputation for boldness, sncc’s practices and philosophy
became more recognizably similar to Baker’s own vision and values. But
exactly what were those political values? Dorothy Miller (Zellner), a young
white leftist from New York, who worked in sncc’s Atlanta ofﬁce, admired
Ella Baker but always found her politics ‘‘a bit of a mystery.’’
π≥ What Doro-
thy really meant by this was that she could not precisely situate Baker
within the various ideological tendencies of the left, and Baker was neither
a nationalist nor a liberal.
π∂ She deﬁed orthodoxy, and her views tran-
scended traditional political categories.
Since Baker never wrote an organizing manual or an ideological trea-
tise, her theory was literally inscribed in her daily work—her practice.
Some of the most powerful political lessons that she taught were through
example, which represented an articulation of her unwritten theory in a


--- PAGE 294 ---
mentoring a new generation 271
conscious set of actions and practices. In no sense an armchair radical,
Baker pursued a politics of action more than of words. The concept of
political ‘‘praxis,’’ meaning the marriage of theory and practice, is a helpful
way to try to map Baker’s political ideas on the bumpy landscape of her
work of more than half a century.
π∑
Baker had enormous conﬁdence in the knowledge base of poor and
oppressed communities and in the intellectual and analytic capacities of
people without formal academic training. This was in part what she mod-
eled in her own exchanges with students, sharecroppers, and movement
co-workers. Because she and other women did clerical work, it was as-
sumed that they could not think, analyze, and articulate. Baker rejected
the artiﬁcial division between mental and manual labor. It was, she said, a
problem that ‘‘so many people who are ‘not educated’ always defer to those
who have got book learning.’’
π∏ She spelled out this problem in the move-
ment’s own practice: ‘‘The clerical people are the people who take the
dictation, . . . put it on paper . . . you don’t expect them to be the ones to
have the ideas . . . it’s not a given.’’
ππ Baker made this observation critically,
suggesting that there should be no distinct intellectual leadership; rather,
thinking and analysis should be incorporated into all aspects of movement
work. She was willing to run the mimeograph machine and type letters, but
she was just as determined to offer historical insights and theoretical cri-
tiques to the process.
......
Ella Baker earned the incontestable position of resident elder and intellec-
tual mentor of sncc during its ﬁrst six years of existence. Her ideas and
teachings permeated the group’s discussions, shaped its ethos, and set its
tone. She was consulted on issues ranging from strategy and analysis to lo-
gistics and fund-raising on an almost daily basis. As Jim Forman, executive
secretary of sncc, later remarked, ‘‘Throughout the decade of the sixties,
many people helped to ignite or were touched by the creative ﬁre that was
sncc without appreciating the generating force of Ella Jo Baker.’’
π∫
Even though the national media never cast the spotlight on Baker’s
political career in the 1960s, her colleagues and coworkers fully appreci-
ated the contribution she made. When Howard Zinn, a historian and move-
ment activist, published SNCC: The New Abolitionists , the ﬁrst account of
the organization’s development, he dedicated the book to Baker. In his
words, she was ‘‘more responsible than any other single individual for the
formation of the new abolitionists [ sncc] as an organized group.’’
πΩ In the


--- PAGE 295 ---
272 mentoring a new generation
1960s, her lifelong friend Pauli Murray, a keen observer of progressive
politics, praised Ella Baker as ‘‘the gal who I think has done so much for
spearheading the revolutionary movement among Negroes in the South.’’
∫≠
Stokely Carmichael, another sncc leader, recalled that by the mid-1960s
Baker ‘‘was just so overwhelming and ubiquitous in sncc that it seems as if
she was always present.’’∫∞


--- PAGE 296 ---
9
the empowerment of an indigenous
southern black leadership , 1961–1964
......
One of the major emphases of sncc, from the beginning,
was that of working with indigenous people, not working for them,
but trying to develop their capacity for leadership.
Ella Baker, 1967
Between 1961 and 1964, sncc launched over a dozen projects in rural and
urban communities across the South. Young civil rights activists partici-
pated in grassroots struggles in places like Pine Bluff, Arkansas; Danville,
Virginia; Albany, Georgia; and, later, Lowndes County, Alabama, and the
heart of the Mississippi Delta. In some cases, sncc supported and helped
sustain desegregation and voter rights projects that were already under
way. In other places, where protest campaigns had stagnated or had been
halted after violent reprisals, sncc organizers had to start over, identifying
people who were ready to take action, helping them select targets and
tactics, and offering them whatever resources they could mobilize to con-
front their adversaries. Whether sncc sent activists into a community to
support an ongoing campaign or to reinvigorate a local movement, its
approach to organizing was a direct outgrowth of Ella Baker’s teachings
and represented a major shift in the way Black Freedom Movement groups
operated in the South.
Ella Baker’s unofﬁcial political curriculum was not the only contributing
factor to the formation of sncc’s radical democratic approach, but it was a
major one. Her message was simple and subtle. She urged sncc organizers
to suppress their own egos and personal and organizational ambitions as


--- PAGE 297 ---
274 indigenous southern black leadership
much as possible and to approach local communities with deference and
humility. She stressed the need to resist organizational chauvinism or any
attempts to make proprietary claims on political campaigns that might
emerge from their efforts. Finally, she rejected the notion that the black
middle class had special claims on leadership of the black community. Even
though most of the black youth who were attracted to sncc in the early
1960s were not wealthy, and some came from very modest means, virtually
all of them were college-educated and consequently had social, if not mate-
rial, capital. Baker appreciated the skills and resources that educated black
leaders brought to the movement, but she urged sncc organizers to look
ﬁrst to the bottom of the class hierarchy in the black community, not the
top, for their inspiration, insights, and constituency.
∞ Baker inﬂuenced
sncc’s emergent politics and values primarily by exposing the young activ-
ists to people and situations that represented alternative adult leadership—
people who would demonstrate to them ﬁrst-hand the willingness, ability,
and determination of oppressed people to resist and overcome their op-
pression while speaking for themselves: people who were not lawyers or
ministers but just as capable as a Martin Luther King or a Thurgood Mar-
shall.
≤ Nothing made this point more dramatically than the struggle in
Fayette County, Tennessee.
......
solidarity with the black poor in fayette county
In the fall of 1960, sncc’s national leadership, with Ella Baker’s strong
encouragement, began building ties to the constituency that soon became
the focal point of its southern organizing efforts: the rural and small-town
black poor. In August 1959, a group of impoverished black tenant farmers
in Fayette County (and later in adjacent Haywood County), a cotton-
producing region of southwestern Tennessee, had begun an intense and
protracted struggle that was as much about economics as it was about
segregation and citizenship. This conﬂict between black sharecroppers and
white landowners was precipitated by black people asserting their right to
participate in elections. The response of whites to this political initiative
revealed the extent to which land ownership and economic prowess deter-
mined the racial hierarchy of the South. White landlords evicted dozens of
sharecropping families from the land they had worked and lived on for
years because they dared to go down to the county courthouse and attempt
to register to vote. Unbowed despite their tactical defeat, the landless farm
families had refused to leave the community, opting to stay while they


--- PAGE 298 ---
indigenous southern black leadership 275
petitioned the federal government for redress. In an unprecedented act of
collective resistance, they built makeshift homes on a 200-acre plot of land
donated for their use by a sympathetic black landowning farmer, Shepard
Towles. The encampment was dubbed ‘‘Freedom Tent City.’’
≥
The struggle in Fayette County received wide coverage in the African
American press. The naacp, core, and other civil rights and social justice
groups, along with several labor unions, raised funds and collected dona-
tions of food and clothing to sustain and support the Tennessee activists.
Before he joined sncc, James Forman helped establish the northern-based
Fayette County Emergency Relief Committee and spent many months go-
ing back and forth between Chicago and Tennessee with supplies and
advice. Forman saw the struggle in Fayette County as a kind of ‘‘watershed’’
in the movement because, in this instance, an indigenous leadership had
emerged and was connecting demands for full citizenship and civil rights to
economic issues. Forman became so immersed in the Fayette County strug-
gle that at one point he was accused of trying to take it over from the local
people. Whether or not this charge was justiﬁed, he took it seriously and
brought the lessons he had learned in Fayette County with him into sncc.
∂
Ella Baker shared this concern, and from the outset sncc strove to avoid
even the perception of trying to dominate local struggles. sncc activists
publicized the Fayette County struggle through the Student Voice and con-
ducted a food drive to provide material aid.∑
Baker followed the Tennessee story closely, and in the early months of
1961 she urged Ed King, who was then the executive secretary of sncc, to
travel to Tennessee to explore ways in which the young people could lend
greater support. The newly formed organization provided both material
and moral support to the Fayette County ‘‘freedom ﬁghters.’’ For sncc staff
person Jane Stembridge, the struggle graphically illustrated ‘‘the connec-
tion between poverty and civil rights.’’
∏ In addition to collecting food and
clothing, sncc’s leadership cosigned a statement directed at the federal
government demanding intervention and relief aid for the embattled for-
mer sharecroppers. The signiﬁcance of this struggle and the heroism of the
local people became the topic of many informal discussions around the
sncc ofﬁce from the fall of 1960 through the summer of 1961.
π John Lewis
recalled that the example of Fayette County was a sobering one for many
young sncc organizers and gave them a glimpse of what lay ahead.
∫
The Student Voice, sncc’s newsletter, highlighted the courage and suffer-
ing of Fayette County activists and cast them as pivotal forces in the strug-
gle for freedom in the South. The sncc newsletter covered the issue quite


--- PAGE 299 ---
276 indigenous southern black leadership
differently from the Crisis, the naacp’s journal. Perhaps encouraged by
Baker’s editorial guidance, the Student Voice emphasized the leadership,
courage, and oppression of the evicted sharecroppers. Although the Crisis
also described the desperate conditions of the tent dwellers, it stressed the
fact that respectable, middle-class blacks as well as semiliterate sharecrop-
pers had been denied the ballot in Fayette and Haywood Counties. In
praising the Justice Department for ﬁling suit in November 1959 against
nineteen white Democratic Party ofﬁcials for excluding blacks from the
local primary, Gloster Current, the naacp’s director of branches, pointed
out that among those who were denied the right to vote were a ‘‘well-to-do
grocer,’’ a teacher, and a minister. Current described another would-be
voter as a ‘‘high school teacher, educated at Iowa State University, and
possessor of a master’s degree.’’
Ω These four individuals, however, were
certainly not representative of the 100 illiterate and semiliterate tenant
farmers who were at the center of the struggle in Tennessee.∞≠
Ella Baker visited Fayette County in January 1961, met with residents of
the tent city, and wrote her own story about the conditions there for the
Southern Patriot , the newsletter of the Southern Conference Education
Fund (scef). Baker’s report, like the coverage in sncc’s newsletter, differed
sharply in tone and emphasis from how the naacp portrayed the situation.
Baker conveyed vividly to her readers the depth of southern black poverty
and the harshness of white reprisals against activists. The sharecroppers
she visited lived in ‘‘olive-drab tents without ﬂoors, surrounded by inches
of mud and mire: the darkness within these tents that are lighted by kero-
sene lamps and heated by wood stoves; the not-too-well-clad children
crowded into the tents or squashing around in the mud; and the hungry
shivering dogs wandering about; all of this painted a picture of anything
but hope for the new year.’’
∞∞
While the Crisis applauded the small steps taken by the U.S. Justice
Department, Baker’s article in the Southern Patriot  expressed outrage at
how little government intervention there had been. Indicting any notion of
American progress that would leave destitute black farmers behind, Baker
wrote that ‘‘the real tragedy is that in the wealthiest country in the world,
in the jet-propelled atomic age of 1961, human beings could honestly say
that their mud-ﬂoored tents were more comfortable than the shacks they
formerly called ‘home’ for ﬁve, ten or 30 years.’’ The material hardships
that activists suffered in Freedom Tent City were similar to those they had
endured during their entire lives as sharecroppers; and once they had
undertaken this act of resistance, their outlook and morale had actually


--- PAGE 300 ---
indigenous southern black leadership 277
improved. Baker was optimistic that the resolve of the oppressed them-
selves, rather than the benevolence of the government, meant ‘‘a new
dawn of freedom [was] breaking through the age-old social, economic and
political discrimination that blighted the lives of both whites and Negroes
in the South.’’
∞≤
The Tennessee activists founded their own independent group, the Fay-
ette County Civic and Welfare League, which was led by John McFerren, a
store owner who had become a militant. The McFerrens had a home of
their own, so they did not live in the tent city; but they strongly sym-
pathized with the evicted families because they had previously been tenant
farmers themselves. The White Citizens Council orchestrated a campaign
of harassment and intimidation against the league. White merchants re-
fused to sell medicine, food, or supplies to tent city residents, and McFerren
and his wife, Viola, were subjected to constant surveillance and harass-
ment, including many threatening phone calls.
∞≥ Moreover, John McFerren
was deliberately run over by a truck and nearly killed. Despite these re-
prisals, neither the McFerrens nor the members of the Fayette County Civic
and Welfare League gave up their crusade to document and protest politi-
cal and economic discrimination against blacks in the county.
Baker had known some of the Fayette County activists before their strug-
gle hit the national press. On the eve of the Greensboro sit-ins in January
1960, she and Carl Braden had brought John McFerren to Washington,
D.C., to testify at the civil rights hearings cosponsored by scef and sclc.
His emotional testimony was one of the most compelling moments of the
hearings. As she did with many of the local activists whom she met during
her years of organizing, Baker adopted the McFerrens into her political
family and kept in touch with them long after the struggle in Fayette
County had subsided.
∞∂
Baker introduced young sncc activists to the McFerrens so that they
could learn from the example, experiences, and perspectives of poor black
people.
∞∑ The struggle in Fayette and Haywood Counties was in crucial
respects a model of indigenous black deﬁance and self-defense. The Ten-
nessee tenant farmers were the victims of enormously exploitative and
repressive conditions. Once moved to act, however, they were not afraid to
stand up for themselves with unrelenting courage and defend themselves
forcefully if necessary. When shots rang out one night from a passing car-
load of white men, a group of armed black men immediately mobilized to
defend the tent encampment. Early B. Williams, who had been shot, was
transported to a nearby hospital under armed escort.
∞∏ For Ella Baker, this


--- PAGE 301 ---
278 indigenous southern black leadership
situation underscored not only the terribly oppressive conditions under
which so many rural black people suffered but also, perhaps more impor-
tantly, the depth of the determination that resided in such communities.
Poor black southerners were not downtrodden victims; they were eager to
ﬁght to improve their lot.
Baker was rarely surprised by an upsurge of protest in places like Fayette
County because, as a keen observer of southern black culture, she could
detect rumblings beneath the surface of seemingly calm situations. As she
talked with people like Papa Tight in Shreveport and the sharecroppers in
Tennessee, they sometimes spoke about things only tangentially related to
politics, but she was collecting valuable information all the same. In such
seemingly casual conversations, she listened for what historian Earl Lewis
calls the ‘‘semi-public transcript’’ of opposition within oppressed commu-
nities. Building on the work of political scientist James Scott, historian
Robin Kelley, and others, Lewis suggests that what people laugh at, the
songs they create and listen to, and the slang they use are all subtle indica-
tors of a nascent political consciousness. A careful, reﬂective listener can
ascertain what those people, if organized, might be prepared to do politi-
cally.
∞π Ella Baker wanted the young activists in sncc to hear the stories of
Tennessee sharecroppers, to look to them as sources of inspiration, and to
extract lessons about the potential, and the dangers, as they could be
applied to similar struggles in the future.
∞∫
......
developing a philosophy from practice
Between 1960 and 1962, as the historian Clayborne Carson’s organizational
biography of the group demonstrates, sncc underwent a dramatic evolu-
tion in its politics, culture, and personnel. Many of the students who had
attended the Shaw meeting dropped out to pursue other interests or to
return to their studies. Those who remained with the organization were
augmented by a new cadre of activists who were more determined and
more politically savvy than their predecessors. One of them was James
Forman. A thirty-three-year-old former teacher from Chicago, Forman
joined sncc’s staff in 1961 after he had gained a reputation for his orga-
nizing skills in Fayette County. Years later, he recalled that he was told
by Charles Jones that he had to meet with Ella Baker’s approval before
sncc would make a ﬁnal decision to hire him. Of course, this practice was
entirely unofﬁcial; Baker did not believe that any leader should exercise
veto power. But because sncc staff held her in such high esteem, her


--- PAGE 302 ---
indigenous southern black leadership 279
opinion was sought on virtually every important decision. Forman made
the obligatory pilgrimage to Baker’s Harlem apartment to discuss the job,
the organization, and politics in general. She sized him up and authorized
the hire.
∞Ω
With the skills and passions that Forman and other new recruits brought
with them and the help of Ella Baker’s subtle, yet powerful guidance, sncc
grew far beyond what its founders had envisioned. Explicit references to
religion gradually gave way to a more secular and militant rhetoric, and
nonviolence was increasingly viewed as a necessary tactic rather than as a
sacred philosophy. Most signiﬁcantly, the sncc activists’ involvement in
struggles like the one in Fayette County directly impacted their class poli-
tics, grounding them ﬁrmly with black people who were rich in wisdom
and courage but poor in terms of economic assets.
When sncc members went into small towns and cities throughout the
South, for example, they ﬁrst paid their respects to the clergy and to others
who might cast themselves as the leaders and representatives of the black
community. But then the activists knocked on doors in the most run-down
parts of town and in the most remote and impoverished rural areas. Gradu-
ally, those doors creaked open. The activists sat down with individuals who
had little formal education and asked them to analyze the situation around
them and help shape the agenda for change. This was a major departure,
both in substance and in style, from the practices of national and regional
groups like the naacp, core, and sclc, which operated on the assumption
that leadership came from an educated, professional, or clerical class.
≤≠
Baker understood, however, that small-town black communities were
often polarized by class differences, even as they were united by Jim Crow
segregation. She had learned from experience that using local elites as
conduits to the masses could actually backﬁre, lessening the credibility of
outside organizers who were trying to gain access to a particular commu-
nity.
In pursuing a more egalitarian political practice, sncc broke new ground.
According to the Mississippi historian John Dittmer, ‘‘Not since Reconstruc-
tion had anyone seriously proposed that illiterate sharecroppers had the
same right to the franchise as did teachers, lawyers and doctors.’’
≤∞ This
radical departure from the approach favored by liberal civil rights groups
was heavily inﬂuenced by Ella Baker’s ideas and organizing style. Through
her own life, teaching, and example, she connected the young activists to a
tradition of black radicalism that hearkened back to the early twentieth
century and before.


--- PAGE 303 ---
280 indigenous southern black leadership
In the early 1960s, sncc organizers were not only challenging white
supremacy; they were contributing to the dismantling of the caste system
that existed within many black communities.≤≤ At every opportunity, Baker
reiterated the radical idea that educated elites were not the natural leaders
of black people. Critically reﬂecting on her work with the naacp, she ob-
served, ‘‘The leadership was all from the professional class, basically. I
think these are the factors that have kept it [the naacp] from moving to a
more militant position.’’ She urged sncc, as she had urged sclc and the
naacp, to seek out ‘‘indigenous leaders,’’ ordinary people engaged in strug-
gle, regardless of credentials or social class, and to afﬁrm their right to
deﬁne the politics and direction of the movement.
≤≥
Local autonomy was the cornerstone of a meaningfully engaged demo-
cratic practice. If local people did not have ownership of the struggle they
were engaged in, they would be beholden politically to others who would
not necessarily experience the consequences of that struggle. Julian Bond
observed that the goal of sncc organizers in local struggles was to help
generate ‘‘a community movement with local leadership, not a new branch
of sncc.’’
≤∂ Jane Stembridge, who spent time in the Greenwood ofﬁce after
working closely with Baker in Atlanta, put it this way: ‘‘The ﬁeld staff
saw itself as playing a very crucial but temporary role in this whole thing.
Go into a community. As soon as local leadership begins to emerge, get out
of the community, so that the leadership will take hold and people will
not continue to turn to you for guidance. You work yourself out of a job
rather than trying to maintain yourself in a position or your organization. It
doesn’t matter if you go in and call yourself a sncc worker or a core worker
or just a person who is there.’’
≤∑
The real test of a democratic leadership was whether groups and in-
dividuals could downplay their partisan and personal interests for the
greater good. Proprietary claims to or by an organization, or to any posi-
tion within it, were corrupting, Baker believed, arguing instead for placing
the ideals and politics of the movement above the interests of any one
organization, including sncc itself. This approach stood in contrast to that
of the naacp, which sought to exert tighter control over its branches de-
spite, and sometimes because of, aggressive local leadership and resistance
to centralized authority.
Baker recognized that an organizer’s own personal interests and desires
might readily become conﬂated with the larger goals of the group, and the
group’s partisan interests might get conﬂated with the goals of a larger
movement; so she took deliberate steps to prevent such confusion. Her


--- PAGE 304 ---
indigenous southern black leadership 281
motto was ‘‘I was never working for an organization. I always tried to work
for a cause. And that cause was bigger than any organization.’’ ≤∏ Having
repeatedly built, let go, and rebuilt movement groups, on some level, Baker
considered the process healthy and rejuvenating.
This philosophy accounts, in part, for Baker’s rather nomadic political
existence and explains why she never stayed with any one organization for
very long. Although she maintained a home base in New York City for most
of her adult life, she was on the road more often than not. From 1957 on,
she had a sparsely furnished apartment in Atlanta’s all-black Wallahuje
residential hotel. Aside from the family photographs she brought with her
from New York, the apartment revealed little about the tastes, preferences,
or private life of its occupant. Her interests were revealed primarily by the
papers, magazines, books, reports, clippings, and letters that accumulated
in piles awaiting her attention. This was a place to read, to catch up on
what was happening in other places, and to reﬂect on the struggle. Except
for ﬁxing her signature lamb stew occasionally, she did not cook much, and
her refrigerator and cupboards were usually bare. She also paid little atten-
tion to other domestic tasks.
≤π
Baker’s mobility and her belief that organizational loyalties should re-
main ﬂuid made for a migratory political existence. Before she became
involved in sncc, her political ties were tenuous at best. Because she never
stayed in any one organization for very long, she was never able to inﬂu-
ence how an organization like the naacp or sclc would evolve politically or
structurally, as she had once hoped to do. At the naacp and sclc, she
worked around the centers of power, organizing those who remained on
the margins. Yet her identity as a political vagabond helped her because she
was always perceived as an independent person without vested interests in
one faction or another. This earned her enormous credibility with the
young people of sncc, as it had done with grassroots activists. In the early
1960s, sncc became the political home and family that she had sought for
so long. She was ﬁnally settling down—at least temporarily.
......
southwest georgia: political differences
and personal loyalties
As sncc became a more visible and formidable political force, the more es-
tablished civil rights groups viewed the upstarts as naive and cocky. They
resented sncc for encroaching on what they regarded as their political turf.
These tensions came to a head in the small town of Albany, Georgia (‘‘all


--- PAGE 305 ---
282 indigenous southern black leadership
benny’’ as the locals called it), where competing strategies and personali-
ties made national headlines and revealed the growing political rifts within
the civil rights movement. The naacp, sncc, and sclc were all involved
with local activists in Albany, and they eventually came into conﬂict over
issues of tactics, turf, and leadership. Although Baker dissuaded sncc from
sectarian inclinations, the group had to ﬁght for its autonomy and visibility
vis-à-vis other civil rights groups that were throwing their weight around
and, in Baker’s view, attempting to undermine sncc’s efforts at grassroots
organizing.
In November 1961, Charles Sherrod and Cordell Reagon were asked by
sncc’s coordinating committee to go to Albany to help bolster the local
movement there. Sherrod, whom Baker had recruited as one of sncc’s ﬁrst
ﬁeld secretaries, placed a high priority on building a strong base with
ordinary people in the community.
≤∫ So, the two sncc activists settled in,
got to know community residents, and slowly gained the conﬁdence of a
signiﬁcant number of them, especially the young people. As Cordell Rea-
gon put it, he and Sherrod ‘‘acted like neighborhood boys,’’ doing ‘‘work
with the common people ﬁrst.’’
≤Ω This down-to-earth approach became
sncc’s trademark. In describing the mode of organizing that the young
people in sncc adopted, John Lewis recalled: ‘‘We were meeting people on
their terms, not ours. If they were out in the ﬁeld picking cotton, we would
go out in that ﬁeld and pick with them. . . . Before we ever got around to
saying what we had to say, we listened. And in the process we built up both
their trust in us and their conﬁdence in themselves.’’
≥≠
The Albany Movement, the local umbrella organization, coordinated
street demonstrations to protest segregation, organized consumer boycotts
against racist businesses, launched a bus boycott, and initiated a campaign
to promote black voter registration. As in most other places in the South,
Albany’s black electorate was virtually immobilized. The naacp, which had
been organizing in the region for years, counseled its local allies to docu-
ment discrimination and prepare for litigation. The naacp’s national lead-
ers strongly objected to what they viewed as provocative, illegal actions on
the part of the ‘‘young Turks’’ in sncc. Roy Wilkins believed that sncc had
acted irresponsibly in Albany when it pushed for an escalation of protests.
Moreover, he resented the young activists’ ungrateful attitude. Wilkins felt
the naacp had supported the neophytes, even helping to get some of them
out of jail, ‘‘only to be insulted for being on the wrong side of the genera-
tion gap.’’
≥∞
When sclc came to Albany, the situation became even more complex.


--- PAGE 306 ---
indigenous southern black leadership 283
William Anderson, a doctor of osteopathic medicine and a local leader of
the Albany Movement, appealed to Martin Luther King to visit the town in
order to gain publicity for the struggle and pressure white ofﬁcials to act on
the movement’s demands. Many sncc organizers strongly opposed this
move, as did some local activists. Although some early sncc supporters had
tightened their ties to sclc and some, like James Bevel, had even joined the
sclc payroll, the core leadership of sncc had grown increasingly skeptical
of sclc’s style of organizing and of Dr. King’s charismatic style of leader-
ship. Some of the young activists had taken to mockingly calling King ‘‘da
lawd’’ behind his back.
≥≤
On his arrival in Albany in December 1961, King ignited controversy.
After being arrested in a protest demonstration, he allowed himself to be
bailed out of jail and gave a tacit nod to the city leaders’ offer to negotiate
an end to the protests. Although recollections vary, there was apparently a
breakdown in communication between King and sectors of the Albany
Movement. He felt that he was adhering to the consensus of the local
leadership, but some local movement participants and sncc organizers
disagreed.
≥≥ Baker saw King’s highly publicized visits as undermining local
people’s conﬁdence and autonomy and lessening the visibility of the Al-
bany Movement’s own spokespersons. When he came to town, she com-
plained, ‘‘you can imagine who the press looked to.’’
≥∂ Several sncc leaders
were very vocal about their criticisms of King, making comments to re-
porters that revealed schisms and tensions within the movement that had
not previously been made public.
≥∑
From the fall of 1961 through the summer of 1962, both Baker and King
shuttled in and out of Albany. However, Baker’s low-key interventions were
in contrast to King’s high-proﬁle appearances. Howard Zinn recalled that
when he ﬁrst arrived in Albany in December 1961, Baker was engaged in
practical work:
Hundreds of people were coming out of jail. Many of them had been
ﬁred by their white employers, and they gathered in the Shiloh Baptist
Church for help. Ella Baker sat in the corner of the church, pen and
paper in hand. . . . She was a middle-aged handsome woman with the
resonant voice of a stage actress, who moved silently through the protest
movements in the South, doing the things the famous men did not have
time to do. Now, hour after hour, she sat there as people lined up before
her, patiently taking down names, addresses, occupations, immediate
money needs.
≥∏


--- PAGE 307 ---
284 indigenous southern black leadership
In addition to her role as an analyst and political strategist, Baker held
another job in the movement: attending to the mundane details necessary
to keep organizations and individuals going.
The confrontations in Albany were rooted in the political histories of the
organizations involved, but personal relationships were entangled in the
mesh as well. Vernon Jordan, then a savvy young lawyer, and Ruby Hurley,
the tough veteran organizer, were the two top naacp staffers dispatched
from the national ofﬁce in the fall of 1961 to take charge of the situation in
Albany. The naacp naturally felt it had a proprietary claim to defend,
having been active in the area for years; Baker had even spoken there
under its auspices. So, the naacp’s national leadership was ﬂustered both
by King’s appearance and by sncc’s militant activism. Charles Sherrod and
other sncc activists experienced ‘‘very sharp confrontations’’ with Hur-
ley.
≥π But while Hurley was one of sncc’s chief adversaries in the Albany
struggle, she was not just another naacp bureaucrat to Ella Baker: she was
an old and dear friend.
The two women had signiﬁcant bonds. Both had worked as ﬁeld secre-
taries in the naacp during the 1940s, and on more than one occasion they
had been allies against the top leadership of the organization. They had
socialized together too, eating at one another’s homes and commiserating
about their egotistical male ‘‘superiors’’ in the New York ofﬁce. Hurley
remained part of Baker’s extended political family in New York City during
the 1950s. In fact, Hurley had taken Ella’s niece Jackie shopping to buy her
ﬁrst pair of high-heel shoes, a rite of passage Jackie remembered fondly
some forty years later.
≥∫ In Albany, however, Hurley and Baker found them-
selves on opposite sides of a struggle within the movement. Yet their friend-
ship, even then, survived.
Ella Baker’s ability to sustain long-term friendships with other activists
when particular political circumstances put them in adversarial positions
was one of her most important gifts. Her talent for making and keeping
connections, for recognizing in people more than their ideological stance
or organizational position, was an important, if sometimes invisible, con-
tribution to the movement. Although she strove to be principled and con-
sistent in her own politics, she allowed for divergent opinions between
herself and others, keeping in mind the need for broader networks and
coalitions. In turn, people who knew her trusted and respected Ella Baker,
even if they did not always agree with her about strategy and tactics.
Baker and Hurley had taken divergent political paths some years before.
When Baker decided to break with the national ofﬁce of the naacp over


--- PAGE 308 ---
indigenous southern black leadership 285
questions of democracy and leadership, Hurley opted to stay. The political
differences that were reﬂected in those choices were at the heart of the
internal movement struggles that were played out more than a decade later
in Albany. Baker had become even more convinced that grassroots activists
had to confront their oppression directly, by challenging exploitative land-
owners, biased voter registrars, and ofﬁcial and vigilante enforcers of seg-
regation. Although she knew full well that racial inequality was structural,
to her it was not an abstract system to be tackled indirectly. People them-
selves had to make a change by challenging inequality concretely, as they
encountered it in their daily lives. From the perspective of Hurley and the
naacp leadership in New York, on the other hand, a nationwide organiza-
tion and a centralized, well-coordinated strategy gave coherence and sta-
bility to local struggles. In their view, it was ultimately the Congress and
the Supreme Court, not protests in the streets, that would determine the
outcome of the struggle. What Baker viewed as suffocating interference by
outside national leaders, Hurley saw as supportive, expert guidance.
As civil rights struggles sharpened after 1960, militant, confrontational
tactics became a key area of disagreement. The naacp had charted the
legal route to political empowerment. This route was not narrow or exclu-
sive, but it had to be navigated very carefully to ensure success. The naacp
did engage in protests, and at times its presence elicited violent and repres-
sive reactions from southern segregationists. Hurley and her co-workers
were certainly experienced and politically sophisticated enough to under-
stand this dynamic. Still, the law was the national naacp’s weapon of
choice against racism and discrimination, and it had already secured some
important victories. Ella Baker, on the other hand, did not have much faith
in lawyers, judges, or legislators. In order to shift the political climate and
effect real change, the masses had to push against and even disrupt the
status quo, and the pressure they applied had to be steady and sustained,
not sporadic. In Baker’s view, if people did not feel they had taken an active
part in their own emancipation, but believed that it had been won for
them, then half the battle had already been lost; ordinary people’s sense of
their own power would be compromised.
The struggle in Albany wore on for nearly eighteen months. Although
more than 1,000 activists were arrested, sncc’s participation yielded few
tangible concessions from the city government or local businesses. Some
observers deemed the Albany struggle a failure, but historians agree that
it was an important testing ground for sncc. Clayborne Carson, Vincent
Harding, and Howard Zinn have argued convincingly that sncc’s involve-


--- PAGE 309 ---
286 indigenous southern black leadership
ment in the Albany Movement had long-term implications for the organiza-
tion: the young activists gained greater conﬁdence in their capacity to orga-
nize in the face of sustained repression. Carson emphasizes that sncc was
‘‘able to bring previously dormant elements of the black populace into a sus-
tained struggle for civil rights’’ through the use of militant nonviolent tac-
tics.
≥Ω Because of sncc’s democratic organizing practices, Albany’s youth, its
poor, and its working class came to be active participants in the movement.
......
scef
Although Ella Baker devoted most of her political energy in the early 1960s
to sncc, she continued to maintain multiple afﬁliations, in keeping with
her view that one’s chief loyalty should be to the movement and not to any
one organization. From 1961 to 1963, her income came principally from her
involvement in the special human relations project sponsored by the south-
eastern regional ywca, but she also had a very close working relationship
with her friends in scef, including the Bradens, the Shuttlesworths, and
black South Carolina radical Modjeska Simkins.
∂≠ As soon as her tenure
with sclc ended in the fall of 1960, Baker embarked on an association with
scef that eventually led her to join its small staff in the spring of 1963. As
rifts developed between various organizations within the movement, she
sought to build bridges, in particular between scef and sncc. Each year,
scef donated several thousand dollars to support sncc’s work, and Anne
Braden attended most of sncc’s meetings during its ﬁrst few years.
In a consulting capacity, Baker attended scef board meetings, spoke at
scef conferences, and documented anti–civil rights activity in the Florida
legislature as a part of a monitoring project there. In October 1961, Baker,
the Bradens, and allies of theirs, including C. T. Vivien and Myles Horton,
formed Operation Freedom, something of a successor to In Friendship,
which funneled money to activists ‘‘suddenly in dire straits.’’ Their ﬁrst
project was to aid the militant farmers in Fayette County, Tennessee, and
they later provided support to Mississippi activists who were victims of
economic retaliation by local whites.
∂∞
One of scef’s political priorities during the early 1960s was to combat
the corrosive effect of anticommunism within the civil rights movement.
Toward that end, scef launched a concerted effort to link civil rights and
civil liberties, pointing out in its literature that the two issues were insepa-
rable; it organized workshops, conferences, and lectures throughout the
Southeast to bring attention to the issue. As Ella Baker’s respect and admi-


--- PAGE 310 ---
indigenous southern black leadership 287
ration for the Bradens strengthened, her ambivalence about the role of
suspected communists in the movement seemed to weaken. She became
one of the strongest voices within sncc advocating the principle of free
association without any ideological litmus test, the opposite of the naacp
policy she had defended in the 1950s.
In October 1961, Baker helped organize a scef-sponsored conference on
freedom and the First Amendment in Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Hoping
to attract a more mainstream audience, she and Anne Braden went to great
lengths to put together a roster of well-respected presenters, such as retired
New York City judge Hubert Delany, whom Baker had known in Harlem in
the 1930s; Methodist bishop Edgar Love of Baltimore; and sclc’s executive
director, Baker’s successor, Rev. Wyatt T. Walker. Most of the speakers were
ministers, professors, lawyers, or judges; of the nineteen people listed on
the program, only three—Baker, Anne Braden, and Casey Hayden—were
women.
A lot was riding on this conference for Anne Braden. The explicit harass-
ment and subtle slights that she and Carl had experienced were taking
their toll on her emotionally and psychologically, and she simply needed
some positive results. She did not mind ﬁghting southern segregationists,
the real enemies of racial justice, but, as she would conﬁde to Ella Baker a
year later, she was weary at having to ‘‘ﬁght for [her] right to ﬁght’’ along-
side supposed allies.
∂≤ The hope was that the 1961 conference would tem-
per some of the anticommunist antagonism within the movement and
generate more support for scef and other left-wing forces.
The Bradens may have felt shunned by some in liberal circles, but they
had won many friends. Some people opposed red-baiting in the southern
movement largely out of personal loyalty to Carl and Anne, whose determi-
nation, commitment, and courage were admired. They did not operate like
party functionaries, if they were indeed members of the Communist Party.
They were such staunch antiracist ﬁghters that allowing them to suffer
government attacks was deemed by their allies to be indefensible.
∂≥ In Ella
Baker’s case, friendship may have been the factor that led her to shed her
own ambivalent anticommunism, but she quickly developed a more sophis-
ticated and deeply reﬂective position on civil liberties that extended well
beyond her personal relationship with the Bradens.
Around the time of the Chapel Hill conference, Anne and Ella discussed
the fact that framing the red-baiting issue in terms of personal friendships
and individuals had severe limitations. Anne felt that both Wyatt T. Walker
and Fred Shuttlesworth had overemphasized their support of the Bradens


--- PAGE 311 ---
288 indigenous southern black leadership
as a gesture of personal loyalty rather than as a matter of political principle.
She complained, for example, that Shuttlesworth had given a speech in
Louisville in which he praised her generously but failed to even mention
huac’s harassment or the issue of civil liberties. Anne explained to Jim
Dombrowski that she and Ella had agreed on the need for more internal
education and candid private conversations in order to politicize the issue
in people’s thinking.
∂∂
Ella Baker and Anne Braden devised a list of people that they thought it
important to engage in this process. Among the students they identiﬁed
were Diane Nash, Bob Moses, Charles Jones, Henry Thomas, and Dion
Diamond. Anne commented that Jones had previously testiﬁed voluntarily
before huac but seemed apologetic about it later. Ella had suggested him
because she thought he was someone who ‘‘responds to his environment
and in a civil liberties gathering would be better’’ than in other settings.
∂∑
Anne also suggested to Baker that she invite her friends John and Viola
McFerren from Fayette County to attend.
∂∏
The daylong conference was held on October 27, 1961, at the Educa-
tional Building of the Presbyterian Church in Chapel Hill. As chairperson of
the afternoon session, Baker had the difﬁcult task of facilitating an intense,
unwieldy, and sometimes fractious discussion involving some ﬁfty people.
In her opening remarks, she speculated that ‘‘the reason I was asked to
preside at this session is because I have had a great deal of experience in
being pummeled from both sides [presumably the right and the left] and so
I am here to try to keep the session going.’’
∂π She guided and contained the
debate with ﬁnesse and humor. The audience included some of the most
active and engaged intellectuals and organizers on the left, such as Tom
Hayden from the Students for a Democratic Society (sds) and the socialist
leader Michael Harrington, and all of them had something to say. Sym-
pathizing with an especially long-winded questioner, but still trying to get
him to wrap up his comments, Baker asked him to get to the point, confess-
ing that she was also restraining herself from speaking: ‘‘You don’t know
how I am burning to talk because I love it.’’
∂∫
Another person expressed an unpopular opinion about huac, eliciting
boos and calls of ‘‘liar’’ from the audience before he stormed out of the
conference in frustration. After that incident, Baker had to wrestle back
control of the ﬂoor, chastise the audience, apologize to the speaker for the
heckling, and invite him to come back into the room and restate his minor-
ity opinion, assuring him he would have the right to do so as long as she
was chairing the meeting. Freedom of speech was not only about protest-


--- PAGE 312 ---
indigenous southern black leadership 289
ing the government’s suppression of dissent but also about insisting that
the left not engage in suppression within its own ranks. ∂Ω In terms of the
goal of garnering a coalition of forces to challenge political repression and
link it to civil rights, this did not occur. What the conference scenes il-
lustrate, however, is how an individual like Ella Baker navigated the ideo-
logical mineﬁeld that surrounded the burgeoning black freedom struggle
where she had located her efforts.
Throughout the early 1960s, Ella Baker worked with scef to highlight
the principles of civil liberties and freedom of association within the move-
ment and within sncc in particular. In March 1962, she wrote an article for
the Southern Patriot titled ‘‘Lack of Thought Cripples the South’’ in which
she noted: ‘‘Today freedom of speech, association, the right to protest for
redress of grievances, and freedom from excessive bails and inhumane
punishment are daily being denied in the South under the guise of defend-
ing the country against communism, and we should no longer be hood-
winked by that.’’
∑≠ She put the point more directly in an article in Liberty
Magazine a few years later: ‘‘Man can only be free if he is free to question
the postulates of a society. It is the perversion of this position that has given
birth to the McCaran Act, huac, McCarthyism and the little huacs of such
states as Louisiana, Alabama, and Mississippi.’’
∑∞ In advance of a workshop
on civil liberties in the spring of 1963, and later that year as a follow-up,
Baker traveled to communities throughout the South and West to speak at
small community gatherings about the need to defend civil liberties as an
extension of the goals of the civil rights movement.
∑≤
In June 1963, some seventy-ﬁve people gathered in Atlanta for a three-
day workshop titled ‘‘How Free Are the ‘Free’?’’ Anne Braden and Ella Baker
were again the principal organizers, and once again they were faced with
the question of whom to invite. Unlike at the conference in Chapel Hill, no
formal presentations were scheduled. The workshop was meant to be an
opportunity for key people in the movement to speak candidly about the
issue of civil liberties and challenge one another on areas of disagreement.
Six months before the event, Anne expressed her frustration with sclc,
feeling that she had to nag them to get their support for anything related to
civil liberties, including Carl Braden’s clemency petition, which both Wyatt
T. Walker and Martin Luther King did endorse. ‘‘I am tired’’ Anne con-
fessed. ‘‘I have pursued them [people at sclc] for almost two years on this
civil liberties question (and longer in a sense), and to put it bluntly I have
had it.’’
∑≥ But she had become more optimistic and even argued with Ella
about the strategic importance of inviting Walker to be involved in the June


--- PAGE 313 ---
290 indigenous southern black leadership
workshop. Baker reluctantly conceded after Anne pleaded Walker’s case,
pointing out that while he was not perfect, she felt he had spoken out more
than others had and was worth cultivating as an ally.
∑∂
The three-day discussion was lively, with Ella Baker and Bob Moses
ﬁnding themselves sometimes slightly at odds. Moses expressed his con-
cerns frankly. He did not have a gripe with communists; but he was trying
to be practical. Fearing the loss of much needed foundation money, he
suggested that funders would ‘‘pull the rug out from under us if we don’t
face up to this situation.’’ Baker responded with a warning: ‘‘I’m very much
afraid of this ‘Foundation complex.’ We’re getting praise from places that
worry me.’’
∑∑ According to Moses, the police were using the charge of
communism to attack and undermine the movement; such attacks, he felt,
were causing real hardship and undermining the movement’s work. Anne
Braden challenged Moses to consider whether alleged communists were in
fact the cause of the attacks, indicating that she would leave the South
immediately if she thought it would further the goal of black freedom.
When someone added that organizations like sncc should look at the
person and not the ideology, Moses rejected this as an oversimpliﬁcation of
a complex question. ‘‘We don’t necessarily accept people just because they
are helpful,’’ he argued.
∑∏ Moses noted that he had invited Carl Braden to
speak on civil liberties in Mississippi the previous summer and had gotten
raked over the coals in the local press. ‘‘We were tied up in Mississippi’’ as a
result, he concluded.
∑π This made him leery. Still, the majority of those in
attendance seemed less uncomfortable about communist afﬁliations, and
many spoke of the need to challenge huac more forcibly.
At its December 1963 retreat, sncc took up the issue of civil liberties yet
again. The ofﬁcial position was not to exclude anyone based on organiza-
tional afﬁliation but also not to pick a ﬁght with huac by launching a
campaign against it. For her part, Ella Baker was not willing to let huac off
the hook so easily. She continued to raise concerns about civil liberties in
her speeches and writings and at sncc meetings.
∑∫ The issue would haunt
sncc for years to come.
In the meantime, Baker had formally joined the scef staff. Jim Dom-
browski, scef’s executive director, was a Christian socialist and an early
supporter of the Highlander Folk School; he had been trying since 1961 to
bring Ella Baker on board. Because of his conﬁdence in her good judgment,
political instincts, and reputation, he conveyed to Anne Braden his willing-
ness to support unequivocally just about any project that Baker proposed.
∑Ω
Once she was on the scef staff, she enjoyed more freedom and ﬂexibility


--- PAGE 314 ---
indigenous southern black leadership 291
than she had ever previously experienced within an organization. Dom-
browski offered her a paycheck along with the autonomy to choose and
deﬁne her work. During the years that followed, Baker was essentially a
free-ﬂoating movement consultant, adviser, teacher, and resource person.
Not surprisingly, one of her ﬁrst projects after she joined scef’s staff was to
go on a three-week organizing tour with scef ﬁeld secretary John Salter, a
white former Tougaloo College professor, to rally movement support in
several western and midwestern states. The pair traveled to Iowa, Ne-
braska, and Arizona, meeting with church and civic groups and cosponsor-
ing events with local core and naacp people in Des Moines.
∏≠
......
gender politics and grassroots organizing
Bernice Johnson Reagon, who became politicized by the Albany struggle,
has pointed out that, although gender politics were not explicitly articu-
lated in the southern-based Black Freedom Movement of the early 1960s,
gender was nonetheless deeply implicated in the daily lives and inter-
actions of movement participants. As the young freedom ﬁghters in sncc
set out to dismantle white supremacy in the South, they began, sometimes
inadvertently, to challenge and transgress conventional notions of gender.
Rather than replicating the patterns of male dominance and female defer-
ence that characterized middle-class culture, traditional politics, and cer-
tain aspects of working-class culture, the movement created alternatives to
them. In Albany and elsewhere, young women who deﬁed segregation in-
evitably deﬁed the norms that deﬁned middle-class femininity. By being
bold, brave, and independent, they stepped out of their ‘‘place.’’ The organi-
zational ethos of sncc also provided a space for older women, who had
long worked as rank-and-ﬁle troops at the grassroots in local community
struggles, to act as leaders and serve as role models for younger people. The
emergence of women as indigenous leaders transformed gender relations
within the movement. For example, many movement participants recalled
seeing more women in the pulpit of the otherwise male-dominated black
church during the 1960s than at any time before or after.
In places like Albany, Georgia, and Fayette County, Tennessee, women
engaged in acts of protest and suffered arrests and beatings alongside the
men. In a sense, this was neither new nor unusual. During the 1940s and
1950s, in places like Birmingham and Shreveport, women had led naacp
branches and local desegregation organizations and had consequently be-
come targets of harassment and violence. In the eyes of many participants


--- PAGE 315 ---
292 indigenous southern black leadership
and observers, the acts of retribution were regrettable instances of white
barbarity, but the role of female militancy remained obscured. What was
new about sncc was its embrace of women as key participants in mass
protests and as leaders at the center of the struggle.
Because of its deepening irreverence for conventional standards of au-
thority and respectability, sncc bestowed credibility and honor on women
and girls who protested and fought back in the most unladylike fashion.
Young Ola Mae Quarterman drew attention to the Albany bus boycott by
confronting a driver who attempted to force her into Jim Crow seating. ‘‘I
paid my damn twenty cents and I can sit where I want,’’ she proclaimed
loudly before being arrested and carted off to jail.
∏∞ Sixteen-year-old Shirley
Gaines was arrested and beaten by the police after a protest to desegregate
a bowling alley. Glenda Fleming, a rebellious junior high school student,
participated in demonstrations in open deﬁance of her parents’ wishes.
College students like Bertha Gober and Bernice Johnson risked expulsion
from Albany State—and placed their coveted degrees in jeopardy—by con-
tinuing their involvement in the protests. Bernice later left school volun-
tarily in order work in the movement full time.
∏≤ Ella Baker, who sum-
moned Bernice to her apartment to discuss her decision, gave her blessing
once she was convinced the young woman had thought through the options
carefully.
∏≥ Ignoring the prevailing gender norms, these young women
were warmly applauded by sncc as exemplary militants. Quarterman’s
language and Gaines’s recalcitrance contrasted sharply with the genteel,
ladylike demeanor that Rosa Parks exhibited, which had made her an ideal
candidate to personify respectable black resistance to segregation in Mont-
gomery in 1955.
Women were also prominent in the struggle in McComb, Mississippi,
where sncc participated in an ongoing desegregation campaign and initi-
ated a voter registration project. Brenda Travis, a tough and tenacious
teenager, typiﬁed the kind of young women sncc attracted there. The Tra-
vises were not one of town’s upstanding families. Brenda’s parents were
poor and often out of work. In her class origins and deﬁant demeanor,
Brenda resembled Claudette Colvin, the young girl whom the leaders
of Montgomery’s desegregation movement had deemed unsuitable to rep-
resent them in 1955. Colvin, pregnant, poor, and unmarried, had been
thrown off a Montgomery bus weeks before Rosa Parks took her now-
famous stand, but because Colvin did not ﬁt the image of a respectable,
middle-class citizen—because she was not a ‘‘lady’’—her case was passed
over by those who were looking for an opportunity to test the segregation


--- PAGE 316 ---
indigenous southern black leadership 293
laws and launch a public campaign. In McComb, sncc welcomed Brenda
Travis, even though, or perhaps because, she was labeled a rabble-rouser.
She was only ﬁfteen years old, but she was so determined to join the
movement that she lied to Bob Moses about her age in order to be accepted
as a volunteer.
∏∂
In August 1961, Brenda Travis and other students from Burgland High
School sat in at a Greyhound bus terminal in Pike County, Mississippi. This
bold action netted the leaders jail sentences, even though they were mi-
nors.
∏∑ After two months in detention, Travis was released on probation,
but she was arrested again shortly thereafter for participating in yet an-
other protest. This time, Travis was sent to the Colored Girls Industrial
School, a reform school for delinquents in Oaklie, Mississippi. When she
was released from custody several months later, her future was uncertain.
She was headstrong and stubborn, and her family had problems. Ella Baker
quietly intervened and agreed to become Brenda Travis’s legal guardian.
For several years, Baker arranged for Brenda’s care and education.
∏∏
As her political children entered into more and more dangerous situa-
tions, facing formidable enemies at great personal sacriﬁce, Ella Baker
struggled to minimize the casualties of activism. She did not urge vulner-
able people to take such risks and then abandon them to the tender mer-
cies of white society. Brenda Travis might have become one of the move-
ment’s casualties had Baker not been willing to help out by ‘‘accepting a
responsibility that [she] had not looked for but consequently [could] not
refuse to accept.’’
∏π It was a difﬁcult and frustrating undertaking, and for a
time the situation with Brenda put Baker in a state of ‘‘constant turmoil.’’
Nevertheless, she saw to it that Brenda had schooling, went to summer
camp, and could stay with her in New York for a while. Eventually, Brenda
Travis was reunited with her family. Years later, she reﬂected that her
relationship with Baker ‘‘changed the direction of my life.’’
∏∫
Baker’s personal politics and radical humanist philosophy meant that
she stayed in touch with local people after the smoke of battle had cleared.
She made sure that parents were contacted when their children were ar-
rested, that people going to jail had toothbrushes and hair combs, that
those who were expelled from school for their activism found other institu-
tions to accept them and obtained scholarships to support them. She al-
ways tried to minimize the emotional and physical hardships experienced
by young people like Brenda Travis.
Baker paid particular attention to nurturing the development of young
women, whether they had joined local campaigns or had volunteered as


--- PAGE 317 ---
294 indigenous southern black leadership
ﬁeld organizers.∏Ω Ruby Doris Smith, who became one of the more vocal
and active members of sncc in 1961, beneﬁted from Ella Baker’s guidance
and support. π≠ A Georgia native and student at Spelman College, Smith
joined the Atlanta Committee of Appeal for Human Rights, a sncc afﬁliate,
in the fall of 1960 as the group picketed segregated businesses in down-
town Atlanta. Her initial foray into politics was modest, and so was her
manner; but as she read books about social justice and met more young
people involved in the growing movement, her interest and commitment
deepened. Along with other sncc activists, Smith went to Rock Hill, South
Carolina, in February 1961 as an act of solidarity with local sit-in leaders
who had been jailed and were refusing bail as a matter of principle. This
was a bold act for Ruby Doris Smith, but sncc’s Judy Richardson has noted
that ‘‘it later became a badge of courage.’’
π∞
Smith’s brief jail stint in South Carolina was nothing compared to what
she and other activists endured a few months later. In May 1961, Smith
spent two hellish months in Mississippi’s notorious Parchman Prison for
her participation in the Freedom Rides. These experiences made Smith
more mature politically, more militant tactically, and more determined
than ever. Like Ella Baker, she was more inclined toward self-defense than
nonviolence. A serious organizer who never hesitated to speak her mind,
she became by the fall of 1961 a formidable force within sncc. According to
Cynthia Griggs Fleming, her biographer, Smith had a reputation within the
movement as ‘‘a savvy veteran . . . who was incredibly brave, as well as
politically sophisticated.’’
π≤ Five years later, she succeeded Jim Forman as
sncc’s executive secretary, becoming the ﬁrst woman to hold that powerful
position.π≥
The relationship between Ruby Doris Smith and Ella Baker was marked
by genuine affection and mutual respect. When Smith was in the Hinds
County jail in 1961, Baker wrote her a letter to boost her spirits and remind
her of the value of her sacriﬁce: ‘‘I hope your present experience has not
been too trying for you.’’ Baker spoke of her ‘‘continued pride in the cour-
age you have manifested on more than one occasion’’ and expressed ‘‘the
hope that your health will not suffer as a result of your stay in Jackson.’’
π∂
In seeking to strengthen the resolve and conﬁdence of Smith and other
young women, Baker wanted them to rise toward leadership roles in the
larger movement.
The transformative process of involvement in a democratically consti-
tuted social change movement represented a personal rite of passage for
Ruby Doris Smith and the other young activists engaged in the struggle.


--- PAGE 318 ---
indigenous southern black leadership 295
Men and women found that, as the meanings of ‘‘whiteness’’ and ‘‘black-
ness’’ began to change, so too did the meanings of womanhood and man-
hood. Men were moved to rethink masculinity, questioning the place to
which white society had relegated adult black men and, at times, even
questioning black men’s aspirations to fulﬁll white norms of manhood.
When Charles McLaurin talked about the day he accompanied to the court-
house door three elderly women who were attempting to register to vote in
Ruleville, Mississippi, he said that this was ‘‘the day I became a man.’’ It was
not the day he was jailed or pummeled or delivered his ﬁrst speech to a
large audience or ‘‘led’’ someone from one place to another; it was the
day he became the kind of humble warrior whom Baker so often praised.
McLaurin’s political and personal coming of age was signiﬁed by his sup-
porting the political empowerment of a group of poor black women.
Many teenagers became men and women in the dangerous and dynamic
context of the evolving civil rights movement. They fell in love, had their
ﬁrst sexual experiences, and deﬁed their parents or allied with them on
issues that were more important than doing chores or smoking cigarettes.
They experienced local government ofﬁcials’ wrath and vigilantes’ violence
as adults, not as children. They made life or death choices every day that
had consequences not only for themselves but also for people whose trust
and conﬁdence they had earned. It was a coming of age like no other. They
matured intellectually and emotionally in the Freedom Houses and Free-
dom Schools that sncc established in dusty southern towns. In these rural
communities, sncc volunteers taught and learned from black folk who
were old enough to be their parents or grandparents. In the process, they
forged new identities at the same time that they forged new political ideas
and strategies.
As the sncc activists were tried and tested by the violence that so often
met black people’s open resistance to white supremacy, it is no wonder that
young men in the movement were tempted to reach for the conventional
mantle of manhood and act as protectors of ‘‘their’’ women or as the gen-
erals and soldiers in a war of liberation. Many of these young men had been
socialized into the dominant society’s attitudes about gender and behaved
in sexist, even macho ways. What is surprising is not the degree of confor-
mity to social norms but rather the extent to which many young men in
sncc began to rethink and reject conventional notions of gender in the
process of reconsidering the meanings of race and class and redeﬁning
their own identities. For example, reﬂecting years later on his maturation
in the movement, Charles McDew recalled that he embraced his male


--- PAGE 319 ---
296 indigenous southern black leadership
comrades and told them that he loved them in a way he could not have
conceived of doing before he entered the movement. It was not a conscious
decision to transgress gender roles; instead, it came somewhat organically
out of the situation he found himself in. The ethos of heroism combined
with humility bred such displays of warmth and affection. It was a different
time, and McDew was consciously becoming a different kind of man.
π∑
Lawrence Guyot, a tough, husky Louisianan who attended Tougaloo
College and then worked with sncc in Mississippi, was humbled by his
exposure to women like Ella Baker and Pauli Murray, to whom Baker intro-
duced him. He once made what he later admitted was a sexist comment in
Baker’s presence, and she calmly corrected him with a brief history lesson
about women’s role in the struggle. ‘‘I made one of the most idiotic state-
ments I ever made,’’ he confessed, ‘‘and I have never said anything like that
since.’’ In his opinion, there was ‘‘no one more compassionate or tougher’’
than Ella Baker; her example inspired him to see differently not only wom-
en’s role in the movement but his own role as a man as well.
π∏
Ivanhoe Donaldson, a New Yorker who attended Michigan State Univer-
sity, was described as a ‘‘shrewd and savvy hand at civil rights work’’ and a
‘‘polished pool player.’’
ππ He understood his own transformation in the
context of the patriarchal training he and most others had received before
coming into the movement. ‘‘We came from homes where dinner didn’t
start until [the father] sat down, and he determined the rules of the house.
But then in sncc you are thrown in with women who are smarter and more
talented . . . [and you come to realize] that manhood isn’t the ability to
knock someone down but ﬁnding your own humanity.’’
π∫
What made these alternative practices and philosophies of gender pos-
sible within sncc? In the early 1960s, it was clearly not any explicitly
proclaimed feminist principles on the part of the organization. Probably a
combination of factors was involved, but Baker’s example and inﬂuence
were crucially important. She was a striking exception to the predomi-
nant images that deﬁned black womanhood; her style and demeanor en-
compassed socially ascribed masculine and feminine qualities—nurturing
warmth coupled with a ruggedly unshakable conﬁdence. That made her an
inspiration to those who wished to step outside the boundaries of conven-
tional, middle-class gender norms. It is tempting to attribute these norms
to the ‘‘middle class’’ because they were certainly embraced more enthusi-
astically by that sector of the black community. However, through school
and church institutions, working-class blacks also adhered to certain pa-


--- PAGE 320 ---
indigenous southern black leadership 297
triarchal family practices and restricted gender roles, even when the reali-
ties of their everyday lives prevented black women from conforming to the
idealized model of homemaker and helpmate. Yet in regard to gender, as in
sncc’s alternative approach to class, Baker’s indirect inﬂuence was even
more powerful than her direct presence. In sncc’s grassroots campaigns,
young activists met and learned from poor and working-class women who
had developed a striking independence of thought and action through
years of hard work and repeated confrontations with whites in day-to-day
resistance to Jim Crow. As sncc activists followed these women’s examples,
they learned other ways of being men and women.
Although women had always been central to community-based cam-
paigns for civil rights, they seldom were accorded recognized leadership
roles, and their contributions were often unknown outside the locality and
often forgotten after the struggle was over. In the Montgomery bus boycott
of 1955–56 and the school desegregation battles in Little Rock and else-
where, for example, Joanne Gibson Robinson and Daisy Bates played cen-
tral leadership roles, but in the organizations with which they were afﬁli-
ated, the Montgomery Improvement Association and the national naacp,
men were the principal spokespersons and decision makers. The mia and
the naacp were hierarchical in their structures, with the result that gender
and class inequities were perpetuated by the overwhelmingly male leader-
ship. The strategy of racial uplift in the early and mid-twentieth century
was rooted in the notion that the educated elite would skillfully guide the
race toward progress, on the one hand lobbying and litigating for reforms
and on the other grooming and socializing the ‘‘lower-class’’ elements to
prepare themselves for integration. Restrictive norms of masculinity and
femininity were part and parcel of the mainstream, middle-class approach
to social change and to leadership roles.
πΩ
The sncc activists always had to struggle against the tendencies toward
elitism and male domination, but sncc did enable women, workers, farm-
ers, and youth to emerge as strong, effective, and publicly recognized lead-
ers of the movement. This achievement was in no small measure the result
of an active assertion of leadership on the part of sncc women themselves.
As sncc developed a bold and brazen public image, bold and brazen women
were attracted to it; and once they joined, no one sought to constrain them.
Ella Baker nudged them along this path and cleared obstacles from their
way whenever she could. As architect of sncc’s democratic approach, she in
effect widened the space of leadership, so that those most marginalized or


--- PAGE 321 ---
298 indigenous southern black leadership
excluded from the centers of power in society and in civil rights politics
could stand up and be heard. Her fundamental commitment to a demo-
cratic vision and inclusive political practice was not based on a feminist
perspective per se, but unconsciously, Baker had laid a foundation for
subsequent black and white radical feminist work.


--- PAGE 322 ---
10
mississippi goddamn
fighting for freedom in the belly
of the beast of southern racism
......
Alabama’s gotten me so upset
Tennessee made me lose my rest
And everybody knows about Mississippi Goddamn.
Nina Simone, 1963
During the tumultuous and decisive years of the early 1960s, sncc played a
leading role in the Black Freedom Movement in Mississippi. Young ﬁeld
organizers put the principles that Ella Baker had taught them into practice
by working alongside poor and working-class black people in rural commu-
nities where white supremacy had seemed impossible to challenge. As a
result, the organizers found themselves at the center of a mass uprising
that overturned old stereotypes of downtrodden, passive, and terrorized
black folk. Americans outside the South, both white and black, became
aware of Mississippi Freedom Summer, the grassroots voting rights cam-
paign conducted in 1964, only after the revelation that three young work-
ers had been ambushed and brutally murdered by segregationists. By risk-
ing their lives for justice in the face of vigilante violence, sncc’s organizers
experienced profound change in their lives, but they were sustained by the
example of many black people in Mississippi for whom facing such risks
had long been the price of defending their dignity. In Freedom Schools that
were founded on the radically democratic pedagogy that Baker espoused
and exempliﬁed within sncc, organizers taught literacy skills and aca-
demic subjects to young blacks and, in turn, learned about the underlying


--- PAGE 323 ---
300 mississippi goddamn
economic structures of white supremacy from their students. Discovering
the enormous power of people acting together to confront injustice and
inequality, sncc volunteers and staff felt reassured of the vision that had
drawn them to the organization.
One of the critical organizing principles that Ella Baker taught, and sncc
absorbed, was the meaning of self-determination in the context of grass-
roots organizing in the South. For Baker, this principle was not an exclu-
sively racial proposition, as it was often deployed, but simply the demo-
cratic idea that an oppressed group, class, or community had the right to
determine the nature of the ﬁght to end its oppression. Such self-control of
the movement’s leadership by those it purported to represent was essential
in Baker’s view. Most of sncc’s Mississippi work in the summer of 1964 was
carried out under the auspices of a loose coalition called the Council of
Federated Organizations ( cofo). So, through cofo and the Mississippi
Freedom Democratic Party ( mfdp), sncc worked to advance the right of
poor black Mississippians to determine their own future.
The decision by sncc to conduct a major grassroots voting rights cam-
paign in Mississippi in 1961–64 was audacious. From Baker’s long experi-
ence in the state and from the local activists with whom she had put them
in contact, sncc activists knew that Mississippi’s notorious reputation was
well earned. Some within the organization dubbed the project the ‘‘Move
on Mississippi,’’ as if an invasion of enemy territory were being planned.
Some of the most brazen and vicious southern segregationists in the South
were at the helm of state government there, and Mississippi had a long
history of unchecked, often ofﬁcially sponsored racial violence toward the
black population. Many national civil rights leaders had simply written off
the state. As Andrew Young, then an sclc staff person, put it :‘‘We knew the
depths of the depravity of southern racism. We knew better than to try to
take on Mississippi.’’
∞
Baker’s perspective on Mississippi was precisely the opposite of Young’s.
She felt that the movement had to organize within the belly of the beast of
southern racism rather than on its safer margins. This viewpoint was an
expression of her class politics as well. In her words, ‘‘If you were supposed
to be interested in bettering the lot of the have nots, where . . . [would] be a
better start [than] . . . in the rural areas . . . [where] people had the hardest
lives?’’
≤ Baker taught sncc activists to look to the rural towns and planta-
tions of Mississippi—‘‘areas of greatest direst need . . . where people had
[the] least’’—as their central organizing challenge.
≥ This was not a chal-
lenge to be undertaken lightly or quickly. The project that burst on the


--- PAGE 324 ---
mississippi goddamn 301
national stage in 1964 as Mississippi Freedom Summer grew out of years of
less publicized, but no less arduous, work throughout the state.
Ella Baker’s contacts with grassroots activists in Mississippi stretched
back for decades, and she kept in close touch with her friends and allies
there even when her work centered on other places. As sncc sought to
extend its organizing efforts into rural and small-town communities across
the South, Baker turned to veteran activists in Mississippi to teach a new
crop of organizers about mobilizing the masses of people to confront the
power of southern elites.
......
amzie and ruth moore
Amzie and Ruth Moore were sncc’s ﬁrst real contacts in Mississippi in
1960, and Bob Moses returned to the South to reconnect with them in 1961.
Ella Baker had known the Moores for years. In many ways, they were
exceptional people, but their story was not unlike that of many other mili-
tant local activists scattered throughout the region who had long fought
racism and repression without much support from outside the South. As
Charles Payne put it, they ‘‘had been accumulating political capital for a
decade, in the form of contacts, networks, knowledge of resources, and
personal credibility, capital they were able to transfer to the younger activ-
ists’’ whom Bob Moses and Ella Baker would introduce them to.
∂ They were
eager to receive the help that sncc was offering, especially with the under-
standing that local leadership would remain in charge.
Amzie Moore had grown up dirt poor and left Mississippi for the ﬁrst
time when he was drafted into the military during World War II. He had
joined the Black and Tan Party, a group of Negro Republicans active in
the South during the 1930s, and later he helped found the Regional Coun-
cil for Negro Leadership. After the war, Moore served as the head of the
Cleveland, Mississippi, chapter of the naacp. As the owner-operator of a
small gas station, he had a greater margin of economic independence from
whites than most black people in and around Cleveland. But even indepen-
dent black business people were hardly immune to racist discrimination.
During the 1950s, Amzie and his wife, Ruth, suffered constant harassment
and economic reprisals as a result of their activism. Ruth Moore, a beauti-
cian whose small business also gave her a certain independence, was as
active, committed, and fearless as her husband. Ella Baker and Ruth Moore
maintained a close relationship, even when Ruth’s and Amzie’s marriage
fell apart during the early 1960s.
∑


--- PAGE 325 ---
302 mississippi goddamn
Amzie Moore, like Ella Baker, had numerous run-ins with the national
ofﬁce of the naacp. He felt that the ofﬁcers in Washington and New York
were sometimes insensitive to the perilous conditions faced by organizers
in the Deep South. An outspoken militant, Moore often slept with a gun
under his pillow.
∏ He was as intolerant of the snobbery of local black elites
as he was of the vitriolic racism of Mississippi whites. In 1955, he com-
plained: ‘‘The Negroes with money are in a world of their own here in the
State of Mississippi. They live to themselves and they don’t want things to
change . . . they are not interested in the freedom of the common Negro
of Mississippi, but they buy their ﬁne cars, furs, homes and stay very much
to themselves.’’
π Despite their slight degree of economic independence,
Ruth and Amzie Moore never enjoyed much ﬁnancial stability, and by the
mid-1950s they had been pushed to the verge of ﬁnancial ruin. White-
owned banks and businesses, in a carefully concerted effort, threatened
them with foreclosure and bankruptcy. After Amzie Moore insisted that
these problems were the result of his naacp activities, the national of-
ﬁce had offered some help, but the couple’s ﬁnancial situation remained
precarious. It was, in part, the desperate plight of organizers like the
Moores that had led Baker and her New York allies to form In Friendship in
1956. Amzie and Ruth Moore were among of the ﬁrst recipients of In
Friendship’s aid.
Ella Baker made frequent visits to Mississippi during the 1950s and
1960s, often staying at the Moores’ home in Cleveland. The bustling house-
hold felt more like an ofﬁce, meeting place, and movement hotel than a
private residence. In a letter to Ruth expressing gratitude for her hospi-
tality, Baker joked, ‘‘Thank you for the very lovely stay in your home. It
meant so much to me to be able to ‘rest’ for a few days. I say rest advisedly
because there is not too much difference between your home and my ofﬁce
[as far as] the number of calls and requests for information and assistance
are concerned.’’
∫ The Moores, like the Shuttlesworths in Birmingham and
the Simpkinses in Shreveport, were the kind of fervent and unwavering
ﬁghters Baker was always drawn to. She wanted the young people in sncc
to meet them and learn from their example.
More than any other person in sncc, Bob Moses beneﬁted from Amzie
Moore’s political tutelage. Baker knew that Moore, who had only ﬁnished
two years of high school, had much to teach the Harvard-trained Moses
about the politics and economics of racism in the Delta and how to orga-
nize against it. Years later, Bob Moses acknowledged his debt: ‘‘Amzie was
my father in the movement . . . that was how I learned to organize . . . I


--- PAGE 326 ---
mississippi goddamn 303
heard my way through the world. I listened to Amzie. I just listened and
listened. I watched him, how he moved.’’ Ω Moses was immediately con-
vinced that the national movement had to support the kind of work that
Amzie and Ruth Moore had been doing in Mississippi. The initial contacts
between Moses and the Moores were the organizational beginnings of the
efforts that would peak in the summer of 1964 with the national focus on
the Mississippi movement, Freedom Summer, and the Mississippi Freedom
Democratic Party.
When Bob Moses said, ‘‘We did for the people of Mississippi what Ella
Baker did for us,’’
∞≠ he meant that sncc ﬁeld organizers and volunteers
tried to absorb the wisdom of indigenous leaders, to build respectfully on
the preexisting strength within the communities where they organized,
and to provide whatever was lacking—funds, time, youthful energy, and
certain skills. In other words, Moses followed the example that Baker
had set within sncc. She never professed to having created sncc’s ide-
ology; rather, she identiﬁed and nourished the radical democratic tenden-
cies apparent in the thinking of many of those who were drawn to the
organization.
When Bob Moses returned to Mississippi in the summer of 1961 to lend
his services to the ﬂedgling movement there, Amzie Moore advised him
that conditions were not right for a campaign centered in Cleveland, Mis-
sissippi. Moore felt that there was not enough local support there, even
though he was personally eager to work with sncc, having been impressed
by what he saw and heard at the newly formed organization’s Atlanta
conference the previous October. So Moses looked around for another
home base from which to launch the Mississippi organizing drive. He set-
tled on McComb, a small town in the hilly southwest corner of the state, to
be the headquarters for sncc’s voter registration project. An activist in the
town had read about Moses’s plans to register voters in Mississippi in Jet
Magazine; he contacted Amzie Moore, who suggested that Moses look to
McComb for a more promising start.
∞∞ Moses enthusiastically agreed. This
would be his ﬁrst real attempt at organizing and the ﬁrst major community-
based campaign for sncc’s voting rights initiative.
The McComb campaign proved to be a baptism by ﬁre. Within a few
months of Moses’s arrival, there were mass arrests, beatings, expulsions
from school, and at least one murder—that of Herbert Lee on September
25, 1961. Lee—an illiterate black dairy farmer, the father of nine children,
and a longtime member of the local naacp—had driven Moses around town
to meet local people. According to movement observers, he was singled out


--- PAGE 327 ---
304 mississippi goddamn
for retribution by local racists and was shot dead on a public street by a
local white man, allegedly over a personal dispute.∞≤ After the controversy
and violence of those ﬁrst few months, the people who had initially wel-
comed Moses with open arms began to pull away. C. C. Bryant, the person
who had invited Moses to McComb, was a railroad worker, part-time bar-
ber, naacp branch leader, local bibliophile.
∞≥ But after arrests, beatings,
and confrontational protests, especially the unpopular arrest of some 100
high school students, Bryant took a step back and distanced himself from
the organization.
∞∂ Moses and the volunteers who came to work with him
in McComb nevertheless persevered, even when support from their initial
contacts began to wane.
What kept Moses in McComb was the support that sncc received from
groups that had previously been on the margins of the town’s black society
and had been largely ignored by its civil rights leaders. Perhaps sncc’s
greatest accomplishment in McComb was its ability to recruit local young
people into its ranks. Brenda Travis, the intrepid teenager whom Baker
protected and guided, was a native of McComb and joined the movement
there. Hollis Watkins and Curtis Hayes, two teenagers from just outside
McComb, also joined forces with sncc as a result of the 1961 campaign;
they eventually became two of the movement’s strongest local organiz-
ers.
∞∑ Watkins had grown up on a farm in southwest Mississippi, gone off to
California after high school, and returned south after witnessing the Free-
dom Rides on television.
∞∏ The local teenagers participated in desegrega-
tion protests at the local Woolworth’s drugstore and the Greyhound bus
station, leading to their arrest. Brenda Travis was expelled from school for
her participation in the movement, an action that triggered a walk-out by
sympathetic classmates. Impressed by the boldness and courage that sncc
organizers demonstrated, impatient youths were inspired to join the move-
ment and soon provided inspiration to others.
Another variable that sustained sncc during its difﬁcult early campaigns
was the unwavering moral and material support of Ella Baker. While one-
time supporters like C. C. Bryant criticized sncc for endangering children,
Baker obtained ﬁnancial resources from scef, offered strategic advice and
encouragement at meetings, and aided individuals whose personal lives
were thrown into turmoil because of their involvement. She also reminded
sncc organizers to involve parents and seek parental permission before
working with minors in order to minimize opposition. Time and again,
Baker expressed her conﬁdence in sncc’s leaders, encouraging them to go


--- PAGE 328 ---
mississippi goddamn 305
forward despite their inevitable mistakes. Such reassurance from the voice
of experience was essential to young visionaries just entering the vicious
fray of race politics.
∞π
According to John Dittmer, one of the lessons sncc learned from the
McComb campaign was that ‘‘the black middle class was under severe
economic constraints and could not be counted on to support the assault
against segregated institutions.’’
∞∫ This observation points to a pivotal fac-
tor in the campaign. ∞Ω Although sncc was initially welcomed by the local
black middle class—the people with education, reputations, and clout—as
the struggle intensiﬁed that support quickly evaporated.
≤≠ Dittmer con-
cludes that during the course of the McComb campaign sncc ‘‘intuitively
grasped a vital part of its future mission in Mississippi: developing a sense
of worth and leadership among people who had never been held in high
regard in their communities.’’
≤∞
The sncc organizers shook hands with sharecroppers who had dirt un-
der their ﬁngernails and sat at the feet of workers with dust on their boots.
They sat on the front porches of ramshackle tenant houses not only to teach
but also to learn. Their attitude, like Baker’s, was based on the understand-
ing that expertise and wisdom could emanate from outside a formally
educated cadre of leaders. According to one sncc activist, Baker taught the
young people in the movement who had achieved some level of formal
education that they were no smarter, and certainly no better, than the
uneducated farmers and workers in the communities where they were
organizing.
≤≤ Barbara Jones (Omolade), a black sncc worker from New
York City, saw in Baker an example of how educated black organizers
should comport themselves. ‘‘There was no room for talking down to any-
one,’’ she recalled. ‘‘There was never the expressed attitude that a person
who was illiterate had something less to offer.’’ Rather, Baker set a tone
that said, ‘‘you’ve got your education, now sit and learn . . . learn what the
conditions are that people have around . . . and it was hip to do that at that
time.’’
≤≥
As she had done in the past, Baker emphasized that when the privileged
took it upon themselves to speak for the underprivileged, the whole move-
ment was in danger of losing its direction. Referring to whites with class
and racial advantages and to blacks with ‘‘good positions,’’ she argued that
‘‘those who are well-heeled don’t want to get un-well-heeled. . . . If they are
acceptable to the Establishment and they’re wielding power which serves
their interest, they can assume too readily that that also serves the interest


--- PAGE 329 ---
306 mississippi goddamn
of everybody.’’≤∂ This perspective on oppression and leadership crystallized
during sncc’s early years in Mississippi and became a critical component of
sncc’s work from that point on.
......
driving deeper into the delta
The McComb campaign led sncc organizers to conclude that the struggle
had to be intensiﬁed if any meaningful change was going to occur. But how
that should be done was the subject of ongoing debate. Those who joined
Bob Moses in McComb—including Reggie Robinson, John Hardy, Chuck
McDew, Charles Sherrod, Ruby Doris Smith, Travis Britt, and Marion
Barry—had varying views on what route the Mississippi movement should
take. A lingering source of disagreement, which had only been temporarily
resolved at the Highlander Folk School meeting on August 11, 1961, was the
question of whether sncc should focus on direct action desegregation cam-
paigns or on the voter registration drive that Bob Moses had initially envi-
sioned. Slowly surfacing was another issue: what should be the future role
of northern, mostly white, volunteers? Some sncc activists reasoned that
rural Mississippi’s isolation was itself part of the problem of engendering
signiﬁcant change; from their point of view, sncc needed to draw the glare
of media attention to the conditions of disenfranchised blacks in places like
McComb and lean on their northern white liberal allies, who professed to
be great believers in black freedom, to take a ﬁrmer stand in defense of civil
rights. One possible scenario was to bring in more outside supporters
whose presence would attract such attention. But there was not unanimity
on this. Some sncc staff felt that the initiative should remain with the
local people themselves. If sncc focused on strengthening their skills,
conﬁdence, and resolve, they argued, all else would ﬂow from that
strength.
≤∑
sncc undertook its massive voter registration campaign in Mississippi
under the umbrella of the Council of Federated Organizations ( cofo), a
Mississippi-based coalition that was originally organized by Aaron Henry
as an ad hoc group in 1961 and was reconstituted a year later by the new
constellation of organizations active in the state. It included sncc, core, a
somewhat reluctant naacp, and an even less active sclc.
≤∏ Much of the
personnel and leadership came from sncc and core. In 1962, cofo re-
ceived a $14,000 grant through the Voter Education Project ( vep) admin-
istered by the Southern Regional Council, with funds provided by the Field
and Taconic Foundations. The money helped defray the costs of purchas-


--- PAGE 330 ---
mississippi goddamn 307
ing supplies, printing literature, and providing subsistence-level stipends
(in some cases ten dollars a week) to organizers, who were called ﬁeld
staff.
≤π While cofo was most visible to the campaign’s northern, white
supporters, sncc and, in some places, core represented the campaign to
black Mississippians.
Of the nearly two dozen local projects that sncc initiated in Mississippi
during the early 1960s—including ones in Canton, Holly Springs, Natchez,
Harmony, Clarksdale, and Jackson—the movement in the Delta community
of Greenwood perhaps best reﬂected the spirit of organizing that Ella Baker
advocated. Here, in what would become sncc’s state headquarters, lucra-
tive cotton plantations were thriving while white vigilantes carried out
ruthless repression. In the summer of 1962, young Sam Block, a native of
Cleveland, Mississippi, and one of Amzie Moore’s protégés, arrived on the
scene and began the tedious process of meeting people, building relation-
ships, trying to identify local militants, and earning people’s trust through
his dogged perseverance, thus following Baker’s edict that activists meet
people where they are. Block walked the streets and met local people. He
not only talked to people about sncc, voting rights, segregation; he also
listened to the locals talk about their fears, concerns, and aspirations. Even-
tually, he asked people to come together in small meetings at the Elks Hall,
where at ﬁrst all they did was sing freedom songs. He gradually introduced
political topics to the discussion. The project was slow to gain momentum,
but after a while Greenwood would produce some of sncc’s most talented
and hard-working local organizers, such as Laura McGhee and June
Johnson. Julian Bond, a sncc leader, described Sam Block’s organizing
style as essentially the formula for sncc’s day-to-day work: ‘‘ sncc orga-
nizers spent their ﬁrst weeks in a new community meeting local leadership,
formulating with them an action plan for more aggressive registration
efforts, and recruiting new activists through informal conversation, pains-
taking house to house canvassing, and regular mass meetings.’’
≤∫
While Greenwood remained a vital center of movement activity through-
out the 1960s, sncc’s work in Ruleville, Mississippi, in adjacent Sunﬂower
County, attracted a middle-aged black woman who would come to person-
ify the heart and soul of the Mississippi movement: Fannie Lou Hamer. One
of twenty children born to impoverished sharecroppers in Montgomery
County, Mississippi, Hamer never had the opportunity to obtain much
formal education, but she was acutely aware of the world around her and
the injustices that deﬁned it. A woman of deep religious faith, she once
remarked that the civil rights movement appealed to her as much as it did


--- PAGE 331 ---
308 mississippi goddamn
because she was simply ‘‘sick and tired of being sick and tired.’’ When in
August 1962 sncc’s James Forman and sclc’s James Bevel held a meeting
about voter registration in Ruleville, Hamer was in attendance and volun-
teered, along with seventeen others, to travel to nearby Indianola, the
closest courthouse, to register to vote. On her return home, she was ﬁred
from the plantation she had worked on for eighteen years; later, she was
harassed and shot at by local vigilantes. These attacks only steeled her
resolve, she allied herself with sncc and began to work full time for the
movement. In 1963, on her way back from a voter registration workshop
in Charleston, South Carolina, Hamer and several others were jailed in
Winona County and beaten in retaliation for their activism, an experience
that Hamer would never forget and would often talk about. Buoyed by her
strong religious faith, she was undeterred. What did she have to lose? she
reasoned. ‘‘The only thing they could do to me was to kill me and it seemed
like they’d been trying to do that a little bit at a time ever since I could
remember.’’
≤Ω
The ﬁrst statewide campaign that sncc and cofo carried out in Mis-
sissippi, and in which Fannie Lou Hamer and Ella Baker were intimately
involved, was Freedom Vote. Held in November 1963, this was a mock
election campaign meant to prove that the black electorate would cast their
ballots if they were not blocked or intimidated from doing so. The cam-
paign was carried out with the aid of student volunteers, most of whom
were white, many of them from elite northern universities. Bob Moses, Ella
Baker, and Amzie Moore had long understood that bringing outside re-
sources to bear on the situation in Mississippi was necessary if things were
ever going to change. Who, when, and on what terms were always in
question. Allard Lowenstein, an eccentric white liberal activist and part-
time academic, became the controversial ﬁgure at the center of the effort to
get some of the attention and human resources the movement so desper-
ately needed. Unfortunately, he made every effort to try to deﬁne the terms
on which that support would be provided, which meant that he wanted the
focus to be on him and his own liberal Cold War agenda. With some reser-
vations, Moses agreed to allow Lowenstein, who had been introduced to
sncc through Clarksdale activist Aaron Henry, to recruit some of his for-
mer students from Yale and Stanford to work on the Freedom Vote mock
election.
≥≠ The decision to accept the role proposed for Lowenstein and this
new cohort of volunteers was not made lightly. It would have far-reaching
consequences, both positive and negative, for the evolution of the Mis-
sissippi movement.


--- PAGE 332 ---
mississippi goddamn 309
The plan was to have volunteers travel around the state collecting bal-
lots in an unofﬁcial election process free of intimidating and uncooperative
registrars and other deterrents that typically thwarted black participation.
A successful turn-out would expose the fact that vigilante violence, eco-
nomic harassment, and blatant corruption, not apathy, were the obstacles
that rendered 98 percent of the state’s black electorate voteless.
≥∞ Orga-
nizers ran an interracial slate in the November election, in part to demon-
strate that the campaign was not solely about race but about building a
more inclusive democracy in Mississippi. The gubernatorial candidate was
Aaron Henry, the black Clarksdale pharmacist and state naacp president,
and Ed King, the antiracist white chaplain of Tougaloo College, ran for
lieutenant governor.
≥≤
While there may have been some rationale for a biracial gubernatorial
ticket in 1963, the reason that two men headed a political campaign in
which women formed the largest base of local support is more complex. It
foreshadowed the intricate gender politics of the late 1960s.
Some men and women in sncc felt that black men should be the titular
heads of black freedom organizations, thus serving as a counter to the
racist culture that sought to systematically relegate them to the denigrated
status of boys.
≥≥ Some also felt that black women, long denied the ‘‘provi-
sions’’ and ‘‘protection’’ ostensibly afforded to southern white ladies, de-
served to be shielded from the harshest aspects of political combat. These
sentiments notwithstanding, there were inclinations and ideological inﬂu-
ences pulling sncc and local activists in another, more egalitarian, direc-
tion. Passionate new democratic tendencies pushed hard against old pa-
triarchal habits. The determination to allow each individual to make a
contribution and play a role in his or her own emancipation; the emphasis
on giving voice and space to those who had previously been excluded from
leadership; and the desire to ‘‘free men’s minds’’ as Charles Sherrod once
put it—all of these sentiments (none of which were articulated speciﬁcally
in terms of gender) informed the creation of a ﬂuid structure in which
women’s leadership could and did thrive.
≥∂
The inclination toward inclusion and a genuinely participatory democ-
racy militated against the tendency to replicate the dominant society’s
concept of proper gender roles, which most black southern colleges ac-
tively encouraged. Even though the violation of dominant gender roles
may have seemed an awkward form of racial transgression (black women
who challenge sexism to this day are sometimes made to feel like betrayers
of black men), it was a violation many women in sncc made in their


--- PAGE 333 ---
310 mississippi goddamn
actions, if not in their verbal or written expressions. This nonsexist cli-
mate was attributable in no small measure to Ella Baker’s inﬂuence. Writer
Carol Mueller argues that Baker actually introduced the concept of par-
ticipatory democracy to the progressive movements of the 1960s.
≥∑ Others
attribute it to Tom Hayden of the Students for a Democratic Society.
Whether or not Baker technically introduced the idea, she lived and
breathed and modeled it. It was the practice of a new type of inclusive,
consensus-oriented democracy, which opened organizational doors to
women, young people, and those outside of the cadre of educated elites.
Baker helped mold a political environment that did not offer any explicitly
feminist rhetoric but in practice countered overt sexist practices and rigidly
circumscribed gender roles. This does not mean that sexism did not exist—
but it was not institutionally supported or encouraged.
There were chauvinist comments, to be sure. The most often-cited is
Stokely Carmichael’s off-handed remark in 1964 that the role of women in
the struggle was ‘‘prone.’’ Even so, there was no serious language, consis-
tent with sncc’s ethos, that allowed Carmichael or anyone else to justi-
ﬁably exclude women, especially black women, from work they wanted to
do.
≥∏ This was one of the points he wanted to make emphatically in an
interview in 1995 when he was deathly ill and bedridden. ‘‘I would not have
been taken seriously as a leader of an organization like sncc if I had not
taken seriously the leadership of women,’’ he insisted. ‘‘A woman like Ella
Baker would not have tolerated it,’’ he added.
≥π Carmichael’s actions back
up his words to a large extent. He appointed several women to posts as
project directors during his tenure as chairman and applauded and occa-
sionally deferred to the leadership of women like Ella Baker and Fannie
Lou Hamer.
Some sociologists and some historians argue that as the 1960s wore on
and militancy increased, a certain macho rhetoric began to undermine the
full participation of women. This is only partly true. There was indeed
more macho rhetoric, but militancy and radicalism, if deﬁned broadly,
were not masculine domains. In fact, in the latter half of the 1960s more
women were in charge of sncc projects than during the ﬁrst half. Those
sectors of the movement most prone to subjugating and marginalizing
women were those individuals and organizations that portrayed women in
a ‘‘black nation’’ as supportive complements to male political and decision-
making roles. It was this kind of romanticized male dominance that Ella
Baker worried about, although this was not a commonly held view in sncc.
Still, she felt it was important enough that she made a public statement


--- PAGE 334 ---
mississippi goddamn 311
about it. In a 1969 speech to the Institute of the Black World in Atlanta, she
raised a concern that she discussed more in depth in an interview with
John Britton a year earlier. This was the idea that a distorted view of black
history led some in the movement to argue that women were beholden to
men. Baker argued against the ‘‘concept,’’ prevalent after 1965, ‘‘that black
women had to bolster the ego of the male.’’ In her words, ‘‘This implied that
the black male had been treated in such a manner as to have been emascu-
lated both by white society and by black women because the female was
the head of the household. We began to deal with the question of the need
of black women to play the subordinate role. I personally have never
thought of this as being valid.’’
By the late 1960s, sncc embodied many variations of nationalism, but
the more sexist formulations of cultural nationalists that Baker pointed to
never materialized. Women like Muriel Tillinghast, Fay Bellamy, and Ruby
Doris Smith Robinson were vocal in bringing the organization’s popular
chairman, Carmichael, down a notch or two when he began to make state-
ments without consulting the organization.
≥∫ From 1960 until the organi-
zation’s demise, many committed and capable women organizers found
the expression of their political ambitions in sncc, in ways that were simply
not possible in sclc or even the naacp. As Charles Payne put it: ‘‘Women
obviously represented an enormous pool of untapped leadership poten-
tial. . . . sncc, despite the traditional expectations of sex roles held by many
of its members, was structurally and philosophically open to female par-
ticipation in a way that many older organizations would not have been.’’
≥Ω
And if any place was fertile ground for the growth of black women’s leader-
ship, it was Mississippi.
While the struggle for political power in Mississippi represented a land-
mark in the southern-based struggle for black freedom, that forward move-
ment came at a hefty price. Violence, harassment, and intimidation esca-
lated, and movement leaders lived with the constant threat of attack.
∂≠ And
women were not spared. Homes and ofﬁces were routinely ﬁrebombed,
and arrests, beatings, and death threats were commonplace. Regular acts
of violence directed at so-called uppity or dissident black individuals had
kept the old order in place. As the black resistance movement grew, vio-
lence was increasingly directed at it.
Ella Baker got a ﬁrst-hand look at the political terrorism that dominated
the local scene when she traveled through the state drumming up support
for the Freedom Vote campaign in the fall of 1963. On October 31, Hallo-
ween night, Baker and two of her young colleagues had a frightening


--- PAGE 335 ---
312 mississippi goddamn
encounter with a gang of local white thugs. Baker had just delivered a
speech to a group of black businessmen in Natchez, Mississippi. The en-
gagement had not been a rousing success. Baker was anxious to move on to
her next appointment in Port Gibson, some forty miles away. Two vol-
unteers, George Green, a twenty-year-old African American activist from
Greenwood, and Bruce Payne, a twenty-one-year-old white political sci-
ence graduate student from Yale University, were assigned to escort her
from Natchez to her next stop. Even though she virtually lived on the road,
Baker had never learned to drive; so she often relied on others to help her
get from place to place.
When Payne arrived to pick Baker up at the house where she had been
staying, he told her he was being followed. In an obvious gesture of intimi-
dation, the two cars that had been following him circled the house while he
was inside. After some hesitation, Baker, Payne, and Green decided to take
their chances and travel as planned. When they started off, the cars con-
tinued to follow them; and when they stopped for directions at a gas sta-
tion outside of Natchez, Payne was attacked and brutally beaten. As he got
out of the car, the men jumped out of their car and punched and kicked
him; they banged his head against the gas pumps before jumping back into
their car and speeding off. Although Payne suffered facial lacerations and
bruises, he did not need to be hospitalized, and the threesome drove on to
Port Gibson, where they immediately ﬁled complaints with the U.S. At-
torney General’s Ofﬁce and the FBI. Several days later, Green and Payne,
who were both warned to stay out of town, had another run-in with the
two same men and were shot at and run off the road.
∂∞
Ella Baker had seen the ugly face of southern vigilantism many times,
yet every encounter was horrifying. The beating she witnessed that Hallo-
ween proved to be a preview of the even more deadly violence that awaited
sncc activists as their campaign for racial and economic justice in Mis-
sissippi shifted into high gear. Baker was both fearful and determined.
Despite harassment and intimidation by local ofﬁcials, between 80,000
and 85,000 Mississippians cast their ballots for Freedom candidates. The
mock election contradicted the myth that blacks in the state were politi-
cally apathetic and would not vote even if given the opportunity.
Despite the relative success of Freedom Vote that year, 1963 was marked
by escalating violence against the southern-based Black Freedom Move-
ment and in the society in general. The type of assault Baker witnessed out-
side Natchez was not uncommon. Between February and May 1963, sncc
workers and supporters in Greenwood were under constant threat, endur-


--- PAGE 336 ---
mississippi goddamn 313
ing shootings, ﬁrebombings, beatings, and arrests. In June, protesters in
Danville were so brutally beaten by local police after a series of desegre-
gation protests that observers labeled the event ‘‘Bloody Monday.’’ Med-
gar Evers, an naacp organizer, was shot to death in the driveway of his
home that same month. His assassination sent anger and fear ricocheting
through movement circles and elevated Evers to the status of a national
martyr.
∂≤ Headlines across the country blazoned the brutal force that Bir-
mingham’s police chief, Eugene ‘‘Bull’’ Connor, unleashed against young
civil rights demonstrators and the racist recalcitrance of Alabama’s newly
elected governor, George Wallace, who made a personal pledge to block
school desegregation in the state. The violence in Alabama peaked in Sep-
tember 1963 with the bombing of Birmingham’s 16th Street Baptist Church,
resulting in the tragic deaths of four young black children. The year was
also punctuated by events that put civil rights on the national political
agenda. The widely publicized March on Washington was held in Au-
gust 1963, and President Kennedy met with key black leaders before the
march. Some civil rights leaders were optimistic, while others saw the con-
tinued violence as the prelude to a second Civil War. The assassination of
President Kennedy in November struck many as a culmination of the cre-
scendo of violence that had been building up the whole year. While the na-
tion mourned the death of the president, movement activists mourned the
growing number of those wounded and killed within its own ranks. Civil
rights advocates wondered whether the new president, Lyndon B. John-
son, a liberal Texan, would be more or less sympathetic to the growing
black freedom struggle and willing to defend it against the attacks it was
suffering.
......
reflecting on experience and setting a course
In November 1963, a week after the Freedom Vote, cofo leaders, including
members of sncc, came together for a meeting in Greenville to reﬂect
on their experiences in the voter registration campaign and the events
of the year and to make plans for the group’s future work.
∂≥ One of the
most contentious topics of discussion was the role of white students within
cofo, particularly the upper-middle-class whites who had been recruited
by Lowenstein to work on the November campaign. It was at the Green-
ville meeting that the idea for Freedom Summer began to percolate. Even
though Bob Moses supported the idea of utilizing white volunteers in the
project, there was not unanimous support. John Dittmer reported that


--- PAGE 337 ---
314 mississippi goddamn
‘‘many of the veteran organizers favored, at best, a limited future role for
white students,’’ and some were opposed even to that. Ivanhoe Donaldson,
a sncc staff person, made his feelings known: ‘‘I came into sncc and saw
Negroes running things and I felt good.’’ Inviting an inﬂux of whites, he
concluded, would mean that they would be losing ‘‘the one thing where
the Negro can stand ﬁrst.’’ The heated discussion included accusations
that the presence of rich white students might reinforce a deferential ‘‘slav-
ery mentality’’ in southern blacks. This meeting was the continuation of a
long and layered process of grappling with the movement’s internal racial
dynamics.
∂∂
At year’s end, the sncc staff met again, this time in Atlanta, in order
to revisit some of the issues that had been debated so passionately in
Greenville and to confront other dilemmas as well. As was sncc’s prac-
tice by 1963, the ﬁve-day meeting was divided into two parts. For the
ﬁrst four days, there was open discussion involving staff, ex-staff, and ad-
visers, which presented an opportunity to discuss any issues of concern
that people wanted to raise. The ﬁnal day was ‘‘a closed executive commit-
tee [meeting] in which ﬁnal decisions and implementation were decided
upon, based on the consensus of the larger meeting.’’
∂∑ Ella Baker partici-
pated actively in both parts of this important gathering.
The marathon meeting in Atlanta proved, if nothing else, that sncc’s
members had moved decidedly to the left. While the events of 1964 would
further radicalize some individuals within the organization, transforming
them from reformists into dedicated revolutionaries, the tone and sub-
stance of the discussions at this key meeting indicate that by December
1963 a core element of sncc’s leadership was already there. Those in atten-
dance included Bob Moses, Charles Sherrod, Frank Smith, Gloria Richard-
son, John Lewis, Courtland Cox, Michael Thelwell, Stokely Carmichael,
Jim Forman, Dottie Zellner, Ivanhoe Donaldson, and Joyce Ladner, along
with a host of staff and volunteers who ﬂoated in and out. Gloria Richard-
son’s presence is particularly signiﬁcant because she had just led a pitched
battle with police in the streets of Cambridge, Maryland, in which shots
were ﬁred on both sides, protesters were teargassed, and many feared for
their lives. The demands of the Cambridge activists were economic as
well as political; the large number of unemployed workers there wanted
jobs, as well as elected ofﬁcials who were accountable to community
needs.
∂∏
The scope of the questions that the group wrestled with over the course
of the ﬁve-day gathering was posed by Howard Zinn in a presentation on


--- PAGE 338 ---
mississippi goddamn 315
the ﬁrst day. Having consulted with Baker beforehand about the state of
the movement and the proposals that would be considered, Zinn presented
their joint views when he spoke. Sounding much like Baker, he posed the
questions: ‘‘What is our economic and political goal? What kind of revolu-
tion do we want?’’ Pushing sncc to clarify and more clearly articulate its
priorities, Zinn asked, ‘‘Do we compromise on some questions to achieve
other goals?’’ He went on to juxtapose long- and short-term goals and
suggested the importance of having an organizational structure that could
help realize those goals. Baker immediately seconded Zinn’s commentary
and urged that there be a more in-depth and focused political discussion of
some of the points he had raised before any policy decisions were made.
This was Freirean teaching by two masters of the technique. Through a se-
ries of probing questions, the two veteran activists challenged their young
counterparts to tap their own experiences in order to come up with the
answers.
∂π At the same time, they did not hesitate to put their own views on
the table. Zinn was very speciﬁc in his attack on ‘‘the proﬁt motive’’; he
emphasized that ‘‘the race problem, where sncc got its start, has emerged
into a different and bigger issue.’’ Baker had always believed that the ﬁght
against racism was a ‘‘bigger issue,’’ with economic, cultural, and inter-
national implications that could serve as a catalyst for more comprehensive
social change agendas.
∂∫
Baker reminded those at the Atlanta meeting that the purpose of voter
registration efforts was not simply to enable black people to cast a ballot for
one political party or the other. For her, voter registration, like integration,
was never an end in itself, even if the campaign’s outside funders may have
thought so. ‘‘We got into the Voter Education Project program as a conve-
nient method of organizing and working in the ﬁeld, knowing we might
lose the money because we weren’t serving vep’s purpose,’’ she argued.
∂Ω
The role of whites in the upcoming summer project was also taken up
again. Moses pointed out that the earlier cofo meeting in Greenville had
decided to limit the number of white volunteers to 100, but the plan being
‘‘pushed by Al Lowenstein [was to] pour in thousands of students and force
a showdown between local and federal governments in an election year.’’
∑≠
Joyce Ladner then questioned whether ‘‘there might be a negative reaction
from local Negro leadership because of this outside invasion.’’
∑∞ Marion
Barry ‘‘argued in favor of the saturation proposal,’’ insisting it was sncc’s
‘‘big chance to force Johnson to commit himself.’’ ∑≤ Moses declined to give
a ‘‘personal opinion’’ because it was ‘‘a divisive issue,’’ stating he would
defer to the will of the group.
∑≥ Ella Baker too was silent at this point,


--- PAGE 339 ---
316 mississippi goddamn
allowing the group to air its feelings; she would weigh in on the issue at a
subsequent meeting.
There were disagreements on this and other issues, but what was most
palpable in this lengthy discussion was that no one on sncc’s core staff was
thinking along the narrow lines of integration and gradual, legal reform, as
most had been in 1960. Instead, they were considering broader goals and
strategies that would empower the masses of black people. Activists es-
poused competing visions of the speciﬁc goals and objectives of the move-
ment, but all were looking for a longer-term, more radical perspective.
Their political ambitions had swelled along with their courage and deter-
mination. Frank Smith’s comments in the meeting are but one example of
the militant positions that were being put forward: ‘‘We need to get more
hungry people to be massed to turn over the government . . . what we need
on February 1 is not a demonstration but a general strike.’’
∑∂
As the discussion grew more intense, Moses intervened to suggest that
what the group really needed was a systematic program of study to assess
the implications of one course of action versus another. Zinn and Baker had
hoped that such a program would come out of the meeting, not as a way to
delay a move toward greater militancy but rather to ensure that the move
was a steady and sober one. Following up on Moses’s suggestion, Zinn urged
sncc to ‘‘enlist some of the best minds around’’ to explore ways of transform-
ing or reordering the society. Zinn further pointed out that many academics
had historical and theoretical understandings but lacked the close contact
with grassroots people and struggles that informed sncc activists’ views.
After several hours, ‘‘Ella Baker expressed the consensus of the group, that
sncc develop a formal program of economic education for its staff.’’
∑∑
Zinn later led a discussion on internal staff education and posed the
dilemma of activist-intellectuals: ‘‘Education in the classroom tends to be
removed from the real problems because educators are by nature removed
from where most people live. That is the nature of academic life and why
most sncc workers have left it.’’
∑∏ Zinn proposed a different type of educa-
tion and scholarship, one grounded in political struggle and everyday life.
A priority for Ella Baker was to ensure that the group was thinking through
carefully the political implications of the actions being planned. She gently
criticized the group for placing ‘‘too much value on action and not enough
on planning,’’ strongly supporting the proposal for expanding internal edu-
cation, and later requesting permission to pull together a broader group of
advisers, beyond just herself and Zinn, to help the young activists navigate
their way forward. The group agreed.
∑π


--- PAGE 340 ---
mississippi goddamn 317
The December meeting was intense and exhausting. Many sessions
lasted well into the night; even on New Year’s Eve, the group did not
adjourn until 9:30 p.m.∑∫ The meeting proved to be a pivotal moment in the
life of the organization, and Ella Baker was actively engaged in pushing the
process along. The leadership group emerged with a deepened commit-
ment to the poor and working class and to the economic issues that plagued
their lives; a more open and ﬂexible, although still ill-deﬁned, policy on
self-defense, reafﬁrming the tactical efﬁcacy of nonviolence while factoring
in local traditions of self-protection; and ﬁnally a reiterated commitment to
the importance of education within the movement.
......
freedom day, january 1964
January 22, 1964, was designated Freedom Day in Hattiesburg, Mississippi,
and sncc’s leadership convened again, this time for a day of action rather
than of talking. Freedom Days were frequently organized as a speciﬁc time
to orchestrate massive voter registration efforts in a public fashion. Cleve-
land Sellers remembered these events as afﬁrming and proud moments for
the young organizers: ‘‘There is nothing so awe-inspiring as a middle aged
sharecropper trudging up the steps to the voter registrars ofﬁce clad in
brogans, denim overalls, and a freshly starched white shirt—his only one. I
grew to love Freedom Days. More than anything else they provided the
motivation that kept me going.’’
∑Ω
A medium-sized city by Mississippi standards, located in the southwest
quadrant of the state, Hattiesburg had a resistance tradition that dated
back to the 1940s and before. During the late 1950s, naacp militants such
as Vernon Dahmer and Medgar Evers, two movement martyrs, had worked
to build an naacp youth chapter in the city. Joyce and Dorie Ladner, who
became legendary sncc organizers, grew up in Hattiesburg and were men-
tored by Dahmer and other local activists. Both women also acknowledged
Ella Baker as an empowering role model who inspired, taught, and encour-
aged them as they matured politically. Despite the efforts at activism, there
had not been much progress in Hattiesburg by 1962. So blatant was the
disenfranchisement of blacks there that the federal government had in-
dicted the local registrar, Theron Lynd, for his persistent refusal to regis-
ter qualiﬁed black voters. Injunctions notwithstanding, Lynd continued to
hold his post in deﬁance of federal mandates and continued to deny Negro
citizens the right to vote.
∏≠
In the spring of 1962, sncc workers Curtis Hayes and Hollis Watkins


--- PAGE 341 ---
318 mississippi goddamn
arrived in Forrest County, of which Hattiesburg was a part, and began
organizing. In the sncc tradition, such organizing meant getting rooted
and building personal relationships that could be converted into political
ones. By November, Hayes and Watkins had built a core of local supporters,
rented a house that served as sncc’s headquarters, and held several small
informal meetings.
∏∞ sncc’s civil rights organizing focused more attention
on the sleepy little town than its residents expected. Bob Moses and Dona
Richards, also a dedicated sncc activist, had just married. They moved into
the second ﬂoor of the sncc headquarters and devoted their time and
energies to the organizing effort in Hattiesburg. Over many months of
agitation and steady, tedious outreach, sncc developed a base in Hatties-
burg that included the likes of the tireless seventy-year-old Mrs. Virgie
Robinson and a homemaker and small business person Victoria Gray, who
joined sncc’s staff full time in September of 1962.
∏≤
There was a special emphasis on the 1964 Freedom Day in Hattiesburg.
Encouraged by their success in the mock elections in November and eager
to keep the momentum going, sncc members, working within the context
of cofo, planned a massive one-day voter registration campaign targeting
Hattiesburg. This strategy closely resembled the R-day protests that Baker
had organized with the Simpkinses in Shreveport several years earlier.
On January 21, new troops arrived in town, including Fannie Lou Hamer,
Aaron Henry, and Dave Dennis, core’s Mississippi director. Ella Baker and
John Lewis, who traveled together by train from Atlanta, arrived in the late
afternoon. By that time, a serious strategy session was under way at the
sncc headquarters to plan the next day’s events. Organizers made detailed
contingency plans in case of arrests and the ever-present possibility of
police or vigilante violence, which in Mississippi were often one and the
same. Since some ﬁfty ministers and rabbis were coming to Hattiesburg
from northern cities to act as observers, sncc planners felt sure that the
national media would also be present in force.
∏≥
As Baker considered the strategies being proposed for Freedom Day, she
also mulled over the speech she was scheduled to deliver at the mass
meeting later that evening. The strategy session had to be cut short in order
for the group to walk over to the church, which was already overﬂowing
with Hattiesburg residents. As one participant described it, ‘‘Every seat
[was] ﬁlled, every aisle packed, the doorways jammed; it was almost im-
possible to get in.’’
∏∂ The speakers on the roster had all earned their battle
scars in the struggle: John Lewis had been bloodied during the Free-
dom Rides; Annelle Ponder had been beaten with Fannie Lou Hamer in


--- PAGE 342 ---
mississippi goddamn 319
the Winona County Jail; and Lawrence Guyot, the young sncc worker
from Louisiana, had done time in the Mississippi’s notorious Parchman
Prison. All were inspirational. Baker sat patiently nodding and applauding
the other speakers’ remarks. And then it was her turn.
Aaron Henry, the Freedom gubernatorial candidate, gave his long-time
co-worker a special introduction. There was mutual respect between the
two veteran activists as they shared the stage that evening. Henry was the
son of Mississippi sharecroppers who served in World War II, then went to
college on the GI bill, and became active in the naacp. He had been jailed,
harassed, and ﬁrebombed.
∏∑ In other words, he had paid his political dues
and earned Baker’s respect in the process. A reluctant but gifted orator,
Baker lived up to the praise Henry had bestowed on her. She began her
remarks by reminding the crowd, ‘‘We have come here tonight to renew our
struggle.’’ Evoking the memory of Medgar Evers, the Mississippi organizer
who had been shot dead by Ku Klux Klan assassins when he returned home
from a late-night meeting only six months before, Baker roused the crowd.
Evers had spent time in Hattiesburg, and the people there knew and loved
him. Her remarks were punctuated by applause and shouts of ‘‘amen.’’
Evers’s murder was a painful and sobering reminder of the risks entailed in
the actions they were collectively undertaking that evening. Although the
next day’s events were on everyone’s mind, Baker did not address the
immediate questions at hand; rather, she took the opportunity to remind
her audience of the movement’s larger goals. This was Baker the revolu-
tionary in action, transcending more attendant concerns and reaching for
something larger, greater, more inspirational. What was at stake? What
were they really ﬁghting for and why? These were the fundamental ques-
tions Baker wanted her audience to ponder.
∏∏
As Howard Zinn’s report on Baker’s speech attests, she offered her lis-
teners ‘‘a vision beyond the immediate.’’ She advised those gathered that
evening that, even as they prepared to face hostile crowds and potentially
violent police in defense of their right to vote and to use public facilities like
any other citizen, these goals alone were not enough. She challenged her
listeners to consider the importance of economic and systemic changes,
insisting that ‘‘even if segregation is gone, we will still need to be free; we
will still have to see that everyone has a job. Even if we can all vote, but if
people are still hungry, we will not be free . . . Singing alone is not enough;
we need schools and learning . . . Remember, we are not ﬁghting for the
freedom of the Negro alone, but for the freedom of the human spirit, a
larger freedom that encompasses all of mankind.’’
∏π For many people, the


--- PAGE 343 ---
320 mississippi goddamn
movement was about the ballot and defeating Jim Crow, but in Hattiesburg
and elsewhere Baker pushed repeatedly, passionately, and irrepressibly
against those cramped ambitions to draw people toward a more compre-
hensive vision. Reiterating the sentiments expressed at the sncc retreat a
month before, she stressed the importance of linking economic justice to
racial justice: ‘‘People cannot be free until there is enough work in this land
to give everybody a job.’’ We are not free, she continued, because ‘‘in this
country, in a land of great plenty and great wealth, there are millions of
people who go to bed hungry every night.’’
∏∫ As sncc embarked on another
leg of its historic crusade into Mississippi, Ella Baker reminded both young
organizers and veteran activists alike that poverty and class inequality and
racism were intimately and inextricably bound up together and had to be a
part of any truly liberatory freedom agenda.
On Freedom Day, over 150 local black citizens showed up on the steps of
the Hattiesburg courthouse to register, in a town where—according to
activists’ estimates—only a handful of blacks who were eligible to vote
were actually registered. Many of them had been in the church meeting the
night before. Few were successful in registering, but organizers were
pleased with the turnout and with the protesters’ determination. Some
aspiring black voters stayed on the courthouse steps from 9:30 in the
morning until late in the afternoon despite the pouring rain.
∏Ω
Hattiesburg was one of many sites of struggle in the campaign to deseg-
regate and democratize the state of Mississippi during the 1960s, and each
one of those sites had battle scars as a result. sncc ofﬁces and the homes
where sncc organizers were staying were ﬁrebombed. Felony charges were
leveled against organizers, and some did prison time as a result. In this in-
tense and violent time, there was the scent of freedom in the air, and young
people ﬂocked to sncc and its afﬁliate organizations to be a part of the
social revolution that was sweeping the South, the epicenter of which was
Mississippi. In a series of long and difﬁcult staff and executive committee
meetings, between January and June, Ella Baker assiduously guided, nur-
tured, and steadied the group as it built up steam going into Freedom
Summer.
......
freedom summer
Freedom Summer was the most widely publicized of the sncc projects
in Mississippi, in part because hundreds of student volunteers arrived in
Mississippi in several successive waves to aid the ongoing Black Freedom


--- PAGE 344 ---
mississippi goddamn 321
Movement in the state. After a brief but intense orientation in Oxford,
Ohio, the summer volunteers—the overwhelming majority of whom were
white—were assigned to projects throughout Mississippi with the expecta-
tion that they would assist more experienced ﬁeld staff in voter education
and registration campaigns, stafﬁng freedom schools and keeping the of-
ﬁces up and running.
The concept of Freedom Summer was to draw northern white students
directly into the battle for racial democracy in the South and give them,
their families, and communities—and hopefully the nation—a greater stake
in the outcome. The 1963 Freedom Vote campaign had been the trial run.
Charles Payne explains that the unchecked violence against black Mississip-
pians was one of the principal factors that convinced Bob Moses of the need
to pull other forces into the fray.
π≠ There had been ﬁve mysterious murders
in the state between December 1963 and February 1964, but few people
outside the area seemed to notice or to care. As a white sncc staff member,
Mendy Samstein, put it, before 1964 Mississippi organizers often felt iso-
lated without any ‘‘relief from the daily and brutal confrontation they had
with the whole local state system. There was no relief from that, there was
no outrage . . . when Negroes were beaten or killed. Nobody seemed to care
about that, nobody seemed to give a damn.’’
π∞ Black southerners had been
resisting racism, collectively and individually, all along, placing themselves
in danger with each challenge to white rule. The new idea was to ask others
to take some of the risks and in the process to raise the stakes.
The renewed black freedom struggle had never been a blacks-only af-
fair. Whites had been involved from the beginning. A handful of whites
participated in the sit-ins, and a larger number, many of them northerners,
had participated in sncc’s founding conference. And Bob Zellner, Bill Han-
sen, Connie Curry, Jane Stembridge, Mary King, and Casey Hayden had
been involved with sncc for two or three years by 1963. With Charles
Sherrod’s encouragement, white organizers had begun working in the
Southwest Georgia Project in small numbers in the summer of 1963.
π≤
However, Freedom Summer would bring many unseasoned volunteers into
Mississippi to work in communities alongside blacks in all facets of the
organizing effort. At the outset, the two principal concerns were whether
they would in some way undermine or usurp less conﬁdent black leader-
ship and whether their mere presence would provoke local whites to more
acts of violence. Baker understood these concerns, but she was a steadfast
supporter of the project. In a series of sncc executive committee meetings,
she laid out her reasons.


--- PAGE 345 ---
322 mississippi goddamn
On June 9–11, 1964, before the summer volunteers descended on Mis-
sissippi, sncc veterans cloistered themselves away for a two-day meeting
and retreat to review one last time the politics surrounding the project,
examining what they wanted to accomplish and what dangers and obsta-
cles they would likely encounter over the course of the summer. Ella Baker
played an active role in the meeting. She began by framing the purpose of
the project in this way: ‘‘One of the reasons we’re going into Mississippi is
that the rest of the United States has never felt much responsibility for what
happens in the Deep South. The country feels no responsibility and doesn’t
see that as an indictment. Young people will make the Justice Department
move. . . . If we can simply let the concept that the rest of the nation bears
responsibility for what happens in Mississippi sink in, then we will have
accomplished something.’’
π≥
......
self-defense and nonviolence in the summer project
Another key issue taken up at the June meeting was the likelihood of
violence against sncc staff, volunteers, and allies and the implications of
any form of self-defense. To some, it already seemed a bit of an oxymoron
to call the movement nonviolent when it was under violent assault almost
daily. And even though sncc’s name still embodied the concept of non-
violence, four years of vicious assaults, including several murders, had led
some activists to reconsider that philosophical stance. For some veterans of
the struggle, nonviolence was an ideal whose practical viability had faded
over time. There had also been a turnover in sncc personnel. Some of
the more recent recruits had never been invested in the concept of non-
violence, regarding it as a reasonable tactic given the array of ﬁrepower
amassed against the movement in the South, but never embracing it as a
way of life, as most of the Nashville group had. The question of nonviolence
was also reconﬁgured at this point because earlier political activity had
been of a mass, public nature. Getting arrested or being beaten when
standing with a group of protesters on the courthouse steps was very dif-
ferent from being attacked by vigilantes while driving on lonely roads at
night. Doing grassroots work in communities where organizers lived in
isolated areas with local families meant that they might encounter a dif-
ferent type of violence altogether.
One sobering factor for the young organizers was the fact that so many
of the southern black people with whom they worked in the early 1960s
were armed and prepared to shoot if shot at. The nonviolence training that


--- PAGE 346 ---
mississippi goddamn 323
freedom riders had received in 1961 and Freedom Summer volunteers re-
ceived as a part of their orientation in 1964 emphasized avoiding conﬂict
and deﬂecting blows if attacked; it did not prepare them to dodge bullets or
consider how they might respond to local black traditions of self-defense.
Many of the indigenous leaders whom sncc workers encountered were not
disciples of nonviolence at all. For them, being armed and ready to ﬁre if
ﬁred on was a more effective deterrent to vigilante attacks than turning the
other cheek. As Bob Moses summed up the contradiction, ‘‘We were non-
violent, but we were in the houses of people with riﬂes.’’ He pointed out
that Amzie Moore, whom he identiﬁed as his political father, sat up at night
with a riﬂe across his lap protecting his home, his family, and the activists
who were passing through. Amzie Moore shared Ella Baker’s views about
the limits of nonviolence.
π∂
Baker was generally respectful of the commitment that some young
people still had to the concept of nonviolence. Yet, when she was most
candid, as she was in a 1980 interview, she acknowledged her inability to
be passive in the face of violence: ‘‘I frankly could not have sat and let
someone put a burning cigarette on the back of my neck as some young
people did. Whether this is right or wrong or good or bad, I have already
been conditioned, and I have not seen anything in the nonviolent tech-
nique that can dissuade me from challenging somebody who wants to step
on my neck.’’
π∑
When the issue of nonviolence came up in the June meeting, Baker
spoke her mind. Charlie Cobb posed a question about a hypothetical situa-
tion in which a sncc staff member or volunteer would come to the aid of a
local person who was ﬁghting back in self-defense. Would sncc support
this person? Baker’s response was: ‘‘I can’t conceive of the sncc I thought
I was associated with not defending Charlie Cobb. What is the basis on
which it is now necessary to raise this question? In my book, Charlie would
not be operating outside of sncc if he did what he said.’’
π∏ Baker shared
her views in other contexts as well. Stokely Carmichael (Kwame Ture)
recalled conversations with Baker in which she openly discussed her sup-
port of black farmers in the 1940s who carried guns to defend themselves
when their naacp involvement became known and their physical safety
was threatened.
ππ Judy Richardson recalled that three stalwart local sup-
porters of the Mississippi movement, E. W. Steptoe and Hartman and
Sweets Turnbow, were known to have a shotgun nearby in any situation
and were also known to profess their intentions to use a gun in self-defense
if the need arose.
π∫ Bob Moses explained to Mary King: ‘‘Self-defense is so


--- PAGE 347 ---
324 mississippi goddamn
deeply engrained in rural southern America that we as a small group can’t
affect it. It’s not a contradiction for a farmer to say he’s nonviolent and also
pledge to shoot a marauder’s head off.’’
πΩ
The group listened to Baker’s admonitions about not carrying their philo-
sophical commitment to nonviolence too far, but for security reasons they
decided it was best to avoid associations with weapons of any kind. The
group voted ofﬁcially the next day to bar any summer project participant
from carrying a weapon. On a practical level, Baker agreed with this posi-
tion, pointing out the likelihood that carrying guns would only give local
sheriffs an excuse to use even greater force against the movement. How to
negotiate this thorny issue in day-to-day situations was in practice left up to
each individual’s conscience. Some individuals did carry weapons at vari-
ous times over the course of the summer and thereafter, but this was never a
part of sncc’s ofﬁcial policy.
∫≠
Another equally difﬁcult issue that came up at the June meeting con-
cerned the racial and political implications of allowing so many whites to
join the ranks of the southern-based movement. A young volunteer, Willie
Blue, questioned whether blacks would let white civil rights workers into
their homes. This had been a problem in other projects. Hollis Watkins
asked how black activists would deal with their own ‘‘hatred of whites.’’
And Don Harris further questioned whether the egos and conﬁdence of
local blacks would be diminished by the presence of educated white north-
erners. Baker cut through the litany of questions with a decisive challenge
to the group: ‘‘The conversation sounds like this is the ﬁrst discussion of
white involvement. The problem is basically one of insecurity: Perhaps we
have an inﬂated ego. Are we prepared to take the revolution one step
further? We can’t grow without examining our own [fears and doubts].’’
∫∞
Baker’s meaning here is best understood by placing her comments in a
broader context. The marathon meeting had drifted from discussions of
direct action and bond money to ‘‘animosity’’ toward Mississippi staff mem-
bers ‘‘because of the emphasis given to Mississippi.’’
∫≤ It had ended up
considering the problems that white volunteers might present. If sncc
activists were serious, Baker was saying, they would have to stretch beyond
their differences, fears, and inhibitions to build a larger movement, forge
uncomfortable but principled alliances, and raise the stakes in Mississippi.
That is precisely what they did.
The inﬂux of hundreds of young white students into the small towns and
cities of Mississippi produced culture shock on both sides. It was not the
southern dialect, the pace of life, or the food that represented the biggest


--- PAGE 348 ---
mississippi goddamn 325
challenge for the new arrivals; it was the sobering intensity of the situation
the volunteers found themselves in. For those who might not have been
fully aware of what could be in store for them as the trekked down to Dixie,
June 20 was a baptism by ﬁre. On that day, local authorities arrested three
young civil rights workers—Michael Schwerner, James Chaney, and An-
drew Goodman—who had been investigating a church bombing. They
were reportedly released from jail and then mysteriously disappeared and
were never heard from again. Their disappearance—and the eventual dis-
covery of their brutally murdered bodies—brought a huge amount of public
attention to the project and had a chilling effect on all those involved,
especially sncc’s newest recruits. The case of the three missing civil rights
workers, whose fate remained unknown all that summer, offered a graphic
illustration of the dangerous ground sncc veterans and volunteers were
traversing. Still, only a handful of the volunteers withdrew from involve-
ment after the disappearance of Schwerner, Chaney, and Goodman. But
another critical question arose: was the movement exploiting the naive
young volunteers who had ventured south over the summer? At the sum-
mer’s end, Baker published a column in the Southern Patriot in response to
that allegation. While she had feared for the lives of all young civil rights
workers, she had hoped that Freedom Summer would enhance and trans-
form their lives. So, it was not just a matter of what the volunteers could do
for the movement, but also of what the movement might offer them. ‘‘We
wanted their coming to mean something creative for each of them person-
ally as well as for the movement,’’ Baker wrote.
∫≥ As always, Baker had faith
in people’s capacities to learn from the situations in which they placed
themselves and from the people with whom they undertook to struggle
for justice.
For the duration of the summer, Ella Baker played her customary dual
role as logistical coordinator and movement philosopher. She helped with
such details as funding, housing, and publicity, as well as with ﬁnding
community contacts for project staffers and volunteers. But her most sig-
niﬁcant contribution was ideological. Baker wanted to make sure that the
core leadership of the project, who would be working within the cofo
coalition, had a clarity of purpose and a ﬁrm consensus about their politics
and priorities for the summer. One priority she emphasized throughout
was the need for an agenda and a curriculum for liberatory education.


--- PAGE 349 ---
326 mississippi goddamn
......
freedom schools
One of the most visible outcomes of the summer’s efforts was the establish-
ment of over ﬁfty Freedom Schools involving hundreds of students and vol-
unteer teachers throughout the state.
∫∂ The ﬁrst experiment with an alter-
native classroom as a site for political organizing and popular education
was undertaken during sncc’s ﬁrst few months in McComb, after dozens of
students were suspended from public school for their political activity.
During Freedom Summer, a more ambitious plan was put in place to link
political and practical education to community organizing in Mississippi.
Ella Baker drew on her work with the Worker’s Education Project in the
1930s to advise the architects of McComb’s Nonviolent High School and the
subsequent Freedom Schools modeled after it. The Freedom Schools were
a welcome supplement to black education in Mississippi, which was in a
desperately impoverished condition because the state government spent
nearly four times as much money per year on white students as it did on
black ones.
∫∑
In 1964, Charlie Cobb, a student from Howard University and a talented
young writer, was the prime mover behind the Freedom School idea, later
aided by Bob Moses, Freedom School director Staughton Lynd, a phalanx
of volunteers, and a crop of eager students, mostly adolescents and teen-
agers.
∫∏ Ella Baker’s inﬂuence in this project, as was the case with most
other sncc efforts, was subtle but palpable. When she taught New York
workers about consumer issues, labor laws, and African history during the
Great Depression, she did so as a way to both bolster their literacy and to
embolden them politically. Similarly, when sncc set up Freedom Schools,
the teacher-organizers fashioned a learning environment and method of
instruction consistent with their evolving political and philosophical be-
liefs. Rigid hierarchy was abandoned, and the curriculum was designed to
reﬂect the world and heritage of the schools’ students.
∫π These were dif-
ferent kinds of classrooms than the Mississippi students had previously
encountered. Nonviolent High and the Freedom Schools that followed
were the ﬁrst manifestations of a type of ‘‘free space’’ within the movement
for creative and intellectual work.
Coordinated by Staughton Lynd, a white history professor at Spelman,
the ﬁrst schools opened on July 4, 1964. Lynd ran off the outline on an old
hectograph machine, loaded the copies in the trunk of his car, and deliv-
ered them to the Freedom Summer orientation in Oxford, Ohio, in June.


--- PAGE 350 ---
mississippi goddamn 327
According to Lynd, the curriculum was not a blueprint for the inexperi-
enced young teacher-organizers but ‘‘a security blanket,’’ of potential help
in case they ran out of things to do.
∫∫ Lynd neither met nor conferred with
Ella Baker about how to run the schools. He did not even recall her pres-
ence at the New York meeting funded by the National Council of Churches
that mapped out the logistics for the schools, but her inﬂuence was perva-
sive and undeniable. The orientation at Oxford, the informal instructions
that were given to summer volunteers (some of whom were teachers by
profession), and the curriculum itself bore a striking resemblance to every-
thing Baker modeled and advocated with regard to education.
It was almost poetic that radical education had assumed center stage in
a movement inspired by the reluctant but relentless teacher Ella Baker. The
establishment of the Freedom Schools was an amazing accomplishment.
Literacy and an understanding of the Constitution were necessary for black
citizens to pass the qualifying test enabling them to vote; so there were
practical goals similar to those of the Citizenship Schools, but the Freedom
Schools went well beyond the basics. Indeed, they embraced a radical
pedagogy and a radical philosophy that were an extension of Baker’s teach-
ing style and method, which had been reinforced and popularized through
her interactions with sncc activists every day for four years. Tom Wahman,
a twenty-six-year-old teacher from New York, described his understanding
of the goals of the Freedom Schools as follows: ‘‘We want to bring the
student to a point where he questions everything he reads or is taught—the
printed word, movies, the ‘power structure’—everything.’’ Teachers hoped
to encourage students to be more literate and knowledgeable and to apply
those intellectual skills to the black freedom struggle.
∫Ω
When the curriculum and structure were still in the planning stages,
Baker was called in to help shape the content and philosophy of the project.
A sncc supporter, Lois Chaffee, helped coordinate a major conference on
Freedom Schools in March 1964 and invited veteran activists and educators
like Baker and Septima Clark to attend and give guidance. When Baker
accepted the invitation, Chaffee wrote to her to say that the organizers of
the conference were ‘‘ecstatic’’: ‘‘We really do want your stamp on the stuff
we tell those kids this summer.’’
Ω≠ Ella Baker served as ‘‘chairman’’ at the
conference held at the union hall of District 65, located at Astor Place in
Greenwich Village, and funded by the National Conference of Churches.
The meeting helped lay the groundwork for the Freedom Schools.
Ω∞ Baker
also consulted with Bob Moses and John O’Neal, a cofo staffer, about the
screening and recruitment of prospective teachers.Ω≤ During an all-day con-


--- PAGE 351 ---
328 mississippi goddamn
ference at Tougaloo College on April 25, Baker met with the summer school
administrative committee.Ω≥ The schools were designed as much to build
youthful leadership for the movement as they were to facilitate the acquisi-
tion and sharing of knowledge.
Ω∂ In the Freedom School curriculum, self-
knowledge, applied knowledge, and critical thinking were all strongly em-
phasized as essential components of a participatory democratic process.
Although the Freedom School project had a clear approach and deﬁnite
curriculum, Lynd emphasized that each teacher and class had a great deal
of autonomy in deciding what worked best for them. This was an extension
of the decentralized structure of sncc itself.
Ω∑ The freedom schools were
sites for creative teaching and learning. Judy Richardson, a black New
Yorker from working-class roots who had attended Swarthmore College,
was impressed with the use of haiku poetry as one of the many innovative
teaching devices employed in the schools.
Ω∏
Ella Baker’s inﬂuence was evident in each Freedom School classroom.
When sncc’s core leadership talked about teaching and learning within the
context of the Black Freedom Movement, they talked about Ella Baker.
‘‘She was a consummate teacher,’’ one sncc member recalled, ‘‘never
pounding us, ‘You must do this, you must do that,’ [but simply] by raising
questions.’’
Ωπ So, what are we trying to accomplish? she would probe. Are
we all in agreement? What do we really mean by that? These were her kind
of questions. Her method of inquiry often helped anchor or center an
unwieldy conversation. Another sncc activist made similar observations:
‘‘Miss Ella would ask key questions, and through the asking of the ques-
tions, certain things became revealed.’’
Ω∫ Ella Baker’s approach to teaching
and learning was the governing ethos of the Freedom School experiment.
Baker’s pedagogical style paralleled that of her contemporary, Paulo
Freire, the radical Brazilian educator. Three key tenets of Freire’s educa-
tional philosophy can be found in Baker’s practice and in the Freedom
Schools themselves. The ﬁrst is the notion that ‘‘to teach is not to transfer
knowledge but to create the possibility for the production or construction
of knowledge.’’
ΩΩ The second is the idea that teaching and learning should
be reciprocal; it would be a contradiction for a teacher who believed in
‘‘democracy and freedom’’ to ‘‘at the same time act with arrogance’’ and be
unwilling to listen across boundaries of difference.
∞≠≠ The ﬁnal perspective
that Freire and Baker shared, one that was manifest in the practices and
philosophy of sncc’s Freedom Schools, is skepticism about the conserva-
tive impact of traditional ways of teaching and a conviction that a more
democratic learning environment has a liberatory potential. Baker had


--- PAGE 352 ---
mississippi goddamn 329
long complained about black female teachers having their freedom of ex-
pression ‘‘curbed.’’ Freire criticized ‘‘the reductionist mentality that talks
only of training skills’’ meant to strengthen ‘‘the authoritarian manner of
speaking from the top down. In such a situation speaking with, which is
part and parcel of any democratic vision of the world, is absent, replaced by
the more authoritarian form: speaking ‘to.’ ’’
∞≠∞ These were Baker’s senti-
ments about education as well. Forging an arena for democratic learning
and teaching was a critical component of Baker’s revolutionary vision of
individual, institutional, and societal change.
∞≠≤
The ﬁnal signiﬁcant feature of the Freedom Schools was the type of
student that they targeted. Everyone was welcome, but in their orientation
the Freedom School teachers were told to expect the children of sncc’s
main constituency, the southern black poor. In an analytical article about
the impact of the Freedom Schools written for Southern Exposure in 1965,
author and attorney Len Holt wrote: ‘‘The teachers-to-be had been told
that most of their students would be from the ‘block,’ the ‘outs’ who were
not part of the middle class of Mississippi.’’ He added, ‘‘The purpose of the
Freedom Schools is to help them begin to question.’’
∞≠≥
In a memo to sncc’s executive committee in January 1964, Charlie Cobb
made a strong case for Freedom Schools as a critical component of sncc’s
work over the summer. First of all, he indicted Mississippi’s schools and
then laid out the importance of education as a battleﬁeld of struggle.
‘‘Mississippi’s impoverished educational system is also burdened with vir-
tually a complete absence of academic freedom, and students are forced to
live in an environment that is geared to squash intellectual curiosity and
different thinking.’’ He concluded that ‘‘[t]he state of Mississippi destroys
‘smart niggers’ and its classrooms remain intellectual wastelands.’’ The
challenge facing sncc and cofo then was to invigorate the intellectual
lives of young black Mississippians, to ‘‘ﬁll an intellectual and creative
vacuum . . . and get them to articulate their own desires, demands and
questions.’’
∞≠∂ The next challenge was to help them to act on those desires
and demands.


--- PAGE 353 ---
11
the mississippi freedom democratic
party and the radical campaigns of
the 1960s and 1970s
......
What Ella Baker did for us, we did for the people of Mississippi.
Bob Moses, 1996
The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party ( mfdp) came into being on
April 26, 1964, at a rally of 200 people in the state capital of Jackson. It
represented in its humble birth a truly democratic alternative to the whites-
only state Democratic Party, and it had a brief moment on the national
political stage at the Democratic Party Convention in Atlantic City, New
Jersey, in August 1964. The formation of the mfdp was the successful cul-
mination of four years of life-altering, heart-wrenching, awe-inspiring or-
ganizing by a determined little band of freedom soldiers advancing county
by county throughout the state. Its success was not determined by what
would be won at the convention but rather by what had already been
achieved by virtue of the delegation’s arrival there. The bus and car car-
avans began to roll into Atlantic City early on the morning of August 21.
Some had driven all the way from Jackson; others from different parts of
the South and North. Ella Baker had arranged the logistics and planned for
delegates to stay at a hotel called the Gem. And a gem it was not, but the
rooms there were all Baker could squeeze out of the mfdp’s meager budget.
Aaron Henry, the leader of the delegation, complained about ‘‘the worst
accommodations imaginable.’’
∞ However, what mfdp delegates lacked in
resources and physical conveniences, they made up for with their righteous
determination.
Ella Baker navigated the treacherous, yet familiar waters of national


--- PAGE 354 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 331
politics with a ﬁerce resolve that made it possible for grassroots activists
such as Fannie Lou Hamer to elude politicians’ attempts to silence them
and speak to a national audience about the oppression they suffered and
their hopes for American democracy. The pivotal events of August 1964 not
only transformed the national context for the civil rights movement but
also reshaped sncc’s political perspective, strategic approach, and evolving
identity. Two objectives guided mfdp: afﬁrming black self-determination
and challenging northern-based white allies to take a stronger stance in
support of the southern-based movement. For some, like Ella Baker, it was
a calculated political gamble. It would either win a tactical victory, provid-
ing Mississippi activists with another tool with which to push for full free-
dom, or it would expose the limitations of mainstream party politics and
strengthen the resolve of those same activists to ﬁnd creative and truly
democratic methods to realize radical social change.
Mississippi blacks were excluded from participation in Democratic Party
precinct meetings—the ﬁrst phase of the delegate selection process—
through a variety of extralegal means: economic threats, physical intimida-
tion, and chicanery. The mfdp delegates and their supporters documented
this process of systematic exclusion and moved on to form their own alter-
native delegate selection process and state party. The mfdp was a grass-
roots independent initiative, but the goal was to operate sufﬁciently within
Democratic Party rules to be able to demand recognition at the Democratic
National Convention.
Freedom Summer volunteers and sncc and cofo staff circulated litera-
ture and canvassed rural and urban communities throughout the state to
urge Mississippians to participate in the alternative process of electing
their own freedom delegates to go to the Democratic National Convention
and hold up two Mississippi alternatives to the nation; one racist and
backward-looking, the other democratic and forward-looking. Many activ-
ists had decided that black political exclusion was the linchpin holding the
entire southern system together. Once that was broken, other possibilities
would be created, and black Mississippians would be a force to be reckoned
with. Baker was not at all convinced of this, but she thought that any
militant mobilization that bolstered local nonelite leadership was a good
thing; so she was prepared to support it with all the energy she could
muster. The mfdp was another attempt by sncc to give some of the most
oppressed sectors of the black community something of their own, an
independent political organization run for and by Mississippi blacks. Once
this new political tool was ﬁrmly in hand, the idea was that it could be


--- PAGE 355 ---
332 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
used to extract concessions from northern liberals, to confront them in the
most direct way possible to acknowledge the legitimacy of the grievances
and claims of Mississippi blacks, and to rally and mobilize the collective
strength of black Mississippians. Northern liberal Democrats had taken a
hands-off policy while professing support in principle for black political
rights. The idea of forming an alternative Democratic Party in the state that
was based on inclusion rather than exclusion was designed to force the
hand of northern liberals and simultaneously empower local blacks and
their allies.
While young sncc ﬁeld secretaries donned overalls and boots and trav-
eled the back roads of the state to drum up support, Baker put on her
respectable gray suit and knocked on the doors of Congress, labor organi-
zations, and civil rights groups to make sure mfdp delegates had the sup-
port they needed when they arrived in Atlantic City. Ella Baker was still on
the payroll of scef, but Jim Dombrowski and the Bradens shared her as-
sessment about the importance of the mfdp campaign; so the focus of her
activity from the summer through the fall of 1964 was the mfdp. She
agreed to act as director of the mfdp’s Washington, D.C., ofﬁce. Because
the ﬂedgling party had such meager funds, it could not have afforded to
pay a full-time staff person, which made Baker’s volunteer services all the
more welcome.
≤
Much of the struggle to guarantee that the mfdp got a hearing at the
Atlantic City convention occurred over the ﬁve-month period between the
founding conference in April and the national convention in August. The
mfdp was founded against the backdrop of African nations declaring their
independence from European colonialism. Similarly, black Mississippians
declared their independence from the prosegregationist state Democratic
Party, which of course they had never really been a part of, and invited any
whites bold enough to break ranks to join with them. Few did. But the
mfdp was not simply trying to make a symbolic gesture; it wanted to test
the resolve of northern Democrats, to have them make good on their prom-
ise of inclusion, and ultimately to obtain the power to elect politicians more
responsive to their needs. The Democratic Party’s convention in Atlantic
City would become the place where the gauntlet would be thrown down.
The mfdp would demand that the all-white delegation, the state party’s so-
called regulars, be ousted in favor of a ‘‘freedom’’ delegation.
Baker, the sncc activists, and the members of the mfdp knew that this
was not an effort they could undertake without allies. The new faction had
to persuade enough delegates to support them if the issue was going to


--- PAGE 356 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 333
make it to the convention ﬂoor. In March 1964, even before the mfdp’s
founding convention, Ella Baker and Bob Moses attended the United Auto
Workers convention, also in Atlantic City, and met at length with Joseph
Rauh, a uaw lawyer who was a leading member of Americans for Demo-
cratic Action, a liberal organization. Rauh was eager to get involved in the
mfdp campaign, after having talked with Moses earlier that year.
≥ Also
present was Mildred Jeffrey, a Democratic national committeewoman from
Michigan and the mother of a Freedom Summer volunteer. Moses and
Baker laid out a convincing case, and Rauh and Jeffrey were on board. On
May 20, Moses and Baker went to Washington to again rally support. At
a conference that had just ended, the Americans for Democratic Action
had passed a resolution supporting the mfdp. Rauh recalls having another
meeting with Moses and Baker in a Washington, D.C., park, where they
discussed at length various contingencies related to the challenge.
∂ Rauh
agreed to serve as the mfdp’s ofﬁcial legal counsel. Ella Baker then went
over to the left-leaning Institute for Policy Studies and solicited white law-
yer Bill Higgs to serve as another legal adviser to the campaign. He agreed.
∑
At the outset, and in principle, all the major civil rights leaders and most
left-leaning liberals were behind the challenge. But how far would sncc
and the Mississippi delegates be willing to push the issue? What victory
meant for them and what victory meant for many of their more moderate
supporters was ultimately quite different. In preparing for the convention,
sncc and the mfdp had to chart a rugged political terrain to ﬁgure out who
could be trusted and who could not. Baker helped them steer the course.
For example, when Wiley Branton called a ‘‘Meeting of the Council for
United Civil Rights Leadership for May 14 [1964] in Atlanta,’’ sncc staff
feared that Branton’s group would dilute their plans to orchestrate some
type of direct action in Atlantic City; and Baker advised that ‘‘it would be
important for the militant elements’’ to meet before the larger Branton
meeting in order ‘‘to resist the pressure’’ to conform to a type of ‘‘unity’’ that
would compromise sncc and the mfdp’s own agenda.
∏
In the ﬁnal analysis, what appeared to be sncc’s and the mfdp’s plea for
inclusion into mainstream politics actually became the watershed that sig-
naled sncc’s departure from the liberal fold toward much more radical
directions. As a grassroots organizing strategy, the mfdp was a real success.
It politicized many poor black Mississippians, developed new grassroots
leaders, and even brought the dire situation of black people in the state to
national attention. But the mfdp delegation’s experience at the Atlantic
City convention was frustrating. Because considerations of partisan politics


--- PAGE 357 ---
334 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
outweighed those of justice and democracy, even the leaders of national
civil rights organizations defected from the mfdp’s cause. Ella Baker was
not surprised to discover that politicians and the civil rights leaders who
looked to them to produce change were reluctant to embrace a grassroots
organization when it took an uncompromising stance.
Over the course of the spring and summer, thousands of people joined
the mfdp. They were overwhelmingly black. While some of the ofﬁcial party
leaders were men, the most visible, vocal, and inﬂuential leaders were
women: Fannie Lou Hamer, the impoverished sharecropper from Ruleville,
Mississippi, who had participated in Freedom Vote and who spoke power-
fully about her life in struggle; Annie Devine, a one-time schoolteacher,
insurance agent, and core organizer from Canton, Mississippi; and Victoria
Gray, a young mother of three who ran a small cosmetics business in Hat-
tiesburg and resented the middle-class leaders of the local naacp because
they functioned as a ‘‘closed social group.’’
π The gender composition and
dynamics of the mfdp reﬂected the characteristics of the grassroots move-
ment of the 1950s and 1960s rather than the male domination that prevailed
within more hierarchical organizations. In his book on the movement in
Mississippi, Charles Payne asserts that by the early 1960s civil rights activity
was deﬁned by a ‘‘higher participation of women,’’ in contrast to an earlier
period when men, many of them World War II veterans, dominated the
movement in the state.
∫
......
Southern black communities were emboldened and empowered as a result
of the mfdp mobilization. The stranglehold of fear had been loosened, and
the silence had been broken. And once the world saw the ugly reality of
Mississippi’s racism, some participants believed, it would be unable simply
to look the other way. At least in part, they were right. Throughout the
summer of 1964, Freedom Summer volunteers and sncc/cofo volunteers
and staff went door to door in small towns and cities throughout the state
spreading the gospel about the mfdp and documenting instances of black
voter intimidation and outright obstruction. They were joined by local
young people who had been angry and dissatisﬁed with their lot long
before the sncc and cofo organizers arrived and were happy to ﬁnally have
allies, resources, and a clear outlet for their pent-up political energies.
Ω
Young Mississippians like Sam Block, Willie Peacock, Curtis Hayes, Hollis
Watkins, June Johnson, and Dorie and Joyce Ladner were among them.
When the mfdp held its nominating convention on August 6 in Jackson


--- PAGE 358 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 335
to select sixty-eight delegates to travel to Atlantic City as representatives of
the party, Baker was once again asked to deliver the keynote address. This
speech was different. Only two days before, the risks that the struggle for
justice entailed had been dramatically revealed by the discovery of the
bodies of the three missing civil rights workers. James Chaney, Andrew
Goodman, and Michael Schwerner had been brutally murdered, and their
mangled bodies had been buried in a dam near Philadelphia, Mississippi.
Ella Baker stood before the grief-stricken crowd of 800 that had gathered
in Jackson’s Masonic Hall on that hot summer night and delivered a politi-
cal message full of anger and determination. Sensitive to the agony that the
families of the victims must have felt at that moment, Baker was both
mournful and militant as she eulogized the three young men, and she
urged movement activists to carry on where their three brave young com-
rades had left off. At the same time, she underscored the lesser value that
white society placed on black lives: ‘‘Until the killing of black mothers’ sons
is as important as the killing of white mothers’ sons, we who believe in
freedom cannot rest.’’
∞≠ And Baker did not rest. From speech making in
Mississippi churches and meeting halls to lobbying in Congressional of-
ﬁces, she gave her all to the mfdp campaign.
As director of the Washington, D.C., ofﬁce of the party, Baker played an
important role in coordinating the mfdp’s national political strategy and in
anchoring its northern-based lobbying effort. Building on the groundwork
she and Moses had laid through their spring outreach visits, Baker rallied
liberal allies to pledge support for the Freedom Democrats. A white male,
Walter Tillow, and a black female, Barbara Jones (Omolade), both New
Yorkers and both nineteen years old, were assigned to assist her. They re-
ceived an apprenticeship like no other. Baker did not relocate to Washing-
ton, but she oversaw the business of the ofﬁce through routine visits and
lengthy phone communications. Tillow recalls: ‘‘She would take the train
from New York and take a cab over to the ofﬁce. No one went to pick her up.
We wouldn’t do anything big or do any written stuff without talking to her
on the phone. . . . We talked to her a lot on the phone to check with her.
Money matters we had to discuss with her. We were supposed to be funded
by cofo, but in essence we were funded by sncc. To rent something, etc.,
we called her up at her apartment and she would contact Moses or Forman.
Even news releases were discussed with Ms. Baker. She played a big role
even though she wasn’t there each day.’’
∞∞ Later, after the Atlantic City con-
vention, Lawrence Guyot and Michael Thelwell, who were more seasoned


--- PAGE 359 ---
336 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
but only slightly older than Jones and Tillow, came on board to coordinate
the next phase of the mfdp’s challenge, but for much of the summer of 1964
Baker, Tillow, and Jones handled the work to be done in Washington.
Even after she accepted the post as director of the mfdp’s Washington
ofﬁce, Baker continued to harbor serious doubts about exactly what the
mfdp contingent could manage to accomplish at the convention, and she
certainly never expected an all-out victory. Yet she acted as if she were
at least guardedly optimistic as plans for Atlantic City moved forward.
She hoped for an experience that would mature and radicalize the mfdp’s
young supporters and give activists from Mississippi a glimpse of the na-
tional political stage and their ability to wield some inﬂuence on it. So,
with these broader goals in mind and her doubts tucked away, Ella Baker
worked tirelessly to mobilize support. She called in some favors, utilized
contacts with labor and civic leaders who had political clout, and deployed
her media connections. She orchestrated mailings to sympathetic dele-
gates, made extensive phone calls, and arranged personal meetings to
lobby Democratic Party leaders face to face. Tillow and Jones were in awe
of the ﬁnesse and savvy Baker exhibited in running the ofﬁce. She was just
as comfortable talking with a senator or a congressman as she was with
one of the local activists from Mississippi.
∞≤
The naive young Walter Tillow remembered being dragged along to a
meeting Baker had with Harlem’s congressman, Adam Clayton Powell, a
longtime associate whom she knew to be more interested in his own career
and notoriety than in the democratic principles that sncc and the mfdp
represented. After Powell praised Baker, embraced her, and pledged his
loyalty, she quietly told Tillow as they left the meeting, ‘‘He’s not going to
do a thing.’’ The point of the meeting, Tillow later surmised, was to neutral-
ize Powell and make sure he did not oppose the effort—and to demystify
the presumed omnipotence of big-shot politicians for a young organizer
like Tillow.
∞≥
......
a political gamble in atlantic city
When the weary but determined delegation of Mississippi farmers, beauti-
cians, schoolteachers, and one pharmacist arrived in New Jersey in late
August, the outcome of their long, arduous journey was still unclear. Baker
had worked long and hard to mobilize support within the Democratic
Party’s left wing. At least ten state delegations seemed to be on board, and


--- PAGE 360 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 337
a handful of individuals were resolute advocates, including Edith Greene, a
women’s rights advocate and strong supporter of the mfdp, whose ideas
would take a sharp turn to the right after the convention. ∞∂ The uaw and
Americans for Democratic Action had ofﬁcially endorsed the mfdp dele-
gates, as had Martin Luther King, A. Philip Randolph, and the naacp. So, on
the eve of the convention, many of the Mississippi activists were hopeful.
Two weeks after President Johnson signed the 1964 Civil Rights Act on
July 2, an act Baker saw as too little too late, Baker and Fannie Lou Hamer
went on a three-week campaign tour punctuated by rallies, press confer-
ences, and meetings with prospective supporters and donors. They stopped
in Washington, D.C., Baltimore, Cambridge, and Philadelphia and ended
up in New York City on August 5 before heading back to Jackson for the
nominating convention.
∞∑ On July 20, Baker sent out a memo to mfdp
supporters tying the importance of what was about to take place in Atlantic
City to the presumed murder of the three young civil rights workers (which
would be conﬁrmed two weeks later): ‘‘Three mothers’ sons who sought to
secure political democracy for the people of Mississippi probably lie buried
beneath the murky swamps near Philadelphia, a small town in that state. If
they have paid with their lives for believing in the right of the governed to
have a voice in the election of those who govern them, all Democrats who
can register and vote with freedom are now challenged as never before.’’
∞∏
The three young men who had come to symbolize the hope of the
summer—that good would win out over evil, that hard work would be
rewarded with their safe return, that even the brutality of Mississippi ra-
cists had its limits—were gone. With large photographs and posters of the
three held high, the Mississippians heading off to Atlantic City were all the
more determined to make sure the young men had not died in vain.
The ﬁrst confrontation after they arrived in New Jersey was with the cre-
dentials committee of the national convention. Fannie Lou Hamer, the vice
chairperson of the mfdp delegation, made an impassioned plea for recogni-
tion. All she had to do to make a compelling case against the blatant oppres-
sion and disenfranchisement of Mississippi blacks was to tell her own story.
She had been threatened, evicted, and beaten by local police for daring to
assert her rights as an American citizen. How could northern liberals who
professed their commitment to equality and democracy ignore Hamer’s
ordeal or fail to recognize the challenge it represented for the Democratic
Party? But President Johnson was so fearful that Hamer’s remarks would
upset his electoral ambitions that he called an emergency press conference


--- PAGE 361 ---
338 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
just as her speech was going to be aired on network television to deﬂect
attention away from the mfdp’s most powerful spokesperson.
Protests outside the convention demanding the Democratic leadership
take a stand, coupled with the unbending resolve of the Freedom delegates
to be seated at the convention, created a series of crises for Johnson and
his supporters. They did not want to give any political ammunition to
the Republican candidate, Barry Goldwater, by having disruptions or de-
fections in Atlantic City, nor did they want to appear to be callously in-
sensitive to the compelling grievances of black Mississippians. White lib-
erals such as Allard Lowenstein and Joe Rauh, who operated a bit more on
the fringes of the Democratic Party mainstream, also faced a crisis. They
wanted to please the Mississippi civil rights activists, with whom they had
allied themselves going into the convention, but they wanted to do so with-
out alienating the top leadership of the Democratic Party. The crisis spilled
over to high-ranking black leaders, such as King, Wilkins, and Rustin.
Northern black elected ofﬁcials and civil rights leaders in attendance at the
convention were lobbied hard by supporters of Hubert Humphrey, the as-
piring vice presidential nominee, to try to avert a scene; and not wanting to
alienate the man who was likely to be vice president, they did.
Much of the drama in Atlantic City was played out behind closed doors.
There were numerous late-night strategy sessions in Martin Luther King’s
hotel suite, in the mfdp’s makeshift ofﬁce, and in the corridors of the
convention hall. There were also impromptu vigils and the singing of free-
dom songs outside the hall. The top Democratic Party leadership sought,
above all, to avoid bad publicity and a messy ﬁght on the convention ﬂoor.
Humphrey, aided by Walter Mondale and a coterie of aides, pushed for
some type of compromise short of an all-out concession. The right-wing
position at the convention was summed up by Texas governor John Con-
nally, who blurted out in one discussion that he’d walk out if the mfdp
‘‘baboons’’ were seated. In the face of such racist opposition, mfdp sym-
pathizers groped for a solution.
∞π Congresswoman Edith Greene proposed
one compromise, which would have likely resulted in seating nearly the
entire mfdp delegation, but this proposal somehow got lost in the shufﬂe.
The compromise offer that emerged was that the mfdp would be given two
symbolic seats on the convention ﬂoor alongside the regular all-white dele-
gation. ‘‘We didn’t come all this way for no two seats,’’ replied an insulted
and adamant Fannie Lou Hamer.
∞∫
A series of confusing and overlapping meetings with a shifting list of
participants resulted in the erroneous public perception, fueled by com-


--- PAGE 362 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 339
ments made by Joe Rauh, that the mfdp’s representatives had accepted the
compromise, which put at least two factions within the mfdp coalition
sharply at odds. When news of the deal was aired, many of the mfdp
delegates, who had not even had a chance to discuss—let alone vote on—
the proposal, were outraged. Issues of process melded with debates about
the merits of the compromise itself. Through maneuvering and wrangling
that no one owned up to after the fact, a ‘‘deal’’ was announced before a full
debate and deliberations could occur among the delegates. This put the
Freedom Democratic contingent in the awkward position of either going
along with a deal that had not actually been negotiated or publicly reject-
ing it and alienating some of their friends. Baker’s old friend Bayard Rustin
was a strong proponent of the compromise, insisting that it was a strategic
step forward. Baker remained wholly unconvinced. This was not the ﬁrst
time she had principled differences with a friend; still, this was a heartfelt
issue, and there must have been some disappointment in Rustin on Baker’s
part. Rustin’s biographer, Jervis Anderson, describes this moment as a
watershed in Rustin’s career.
∞Ω His defection cost him the respect of the
young sncc activists, some of whom he had developed close ties with over
the years. Ever the democrat with a small ‘‘d,’’ Baker was more concerned
about the closed character of the decision-making process than about the
backsliding of individuals, even those she respected. She was furious at
how the so-called decision had been made and at the presumptuousness of
those who tried to persuade the mfdp delegates to go along with it after
the fact.
When it was announced that a compromise had been reached, Baker
was in a meeting with the Nebraska delegation, lobbying hard to persuade
its sympathetic members to support the mfdp’s request to be seated as a
group. She was suspicious as the discussion dragged on ‘‘that the man who
was in charge of the meeting apparently had been alerted to stall until he
got some feedback’’ from another delegate, who Baker realized was gover-
nor of the state. When the chairperson interrupted the discussion to make
an announcement, Baker ‘‘could tell what had taken place.’’ After the com-
promise was announced, some expected that Baker would bow out grace-
fully as the chair attempted to end the meeting and declare the issue
resolved. They did not know her very well if they did. Baker had no inten-
tion of complying. ‘‘[H]e acknowledged my presence with the hope that I
wouldn’t have anything to say. Of course I took the position that the great
loss was that of the people who were at the Convention, who had no
opportunity to participate in any decision making.’’
≤≠ Baker was angry and


--- PAGE 363 ---
340 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
disappointed but not wholly surprised. She had seen political chicanery
before, but her a priori doubts about partisan politics did not mute her
anger at the ﬁnal outcome.
In one of the private sessions after the compromise was broadcast as a
done deal, Joe Rauh, who claimed to have been misled and misquoted in
the original announcement to the press, pleaded with mfdp delegates to
support the decision anyway, forgive any insults or injuries that might have
been inﬂicted, and seize the opportunity to make an ally out of Hubert
Humphrey. Baker cringed at the duplicitous nature of his appeal, which
called on black people’s ‘‘demonstrated . . . capacity for forgiveness and
understanding.’’ A fuming Ella Baker replied with a sharp impatience un-
characteristic of her usual manner of speech, ‘‘to call upon us to be under-
standing of Mr. Humphrey’s desire to win, was saying, forget your need,
your winning, and support his winning.’’
≤∞ Baker resented this attempt to
manipulate the good will of the delegates and persuade them that someone
else’s interests were more important than their own. This was the ultimate
insult in her opinion. Baker gave Rauh a tongue-lashing that he would
never forget. He had made some remarks to the delegates and received
polite applause until Baker spoke and the tone of the meeting shifted. ‘‘I
don’t care about traitors like Humphrey,’’ Baker thundered, and then she
turned her wrath directly at Rauh. ‘‘She just cut me to ribbons,’’ he recalled
a few years later, partly offended by the attack but partly impressed by its
skillfulness. ‘‘If you’re going to get it,’’ he remarked, ‘‘might as well get it
from an expert . . . and I got it from an expert. She just cut me up.’’
≤≤ Baker
viewed Rauh as a power broker attempting to use his knowledge and savvy
to coerce inexperienced and idealistic activists into following a political
course that was not in their best interest. She found this intolerable, and
she was not afraid to say so. Baker made a point of publicly criticizing Rauh
because she wanted to make it clear that while she had recruited him to
serve as counsel to the mfdp, the partnership was not unconditional.
Another white liberal of dubious motives was Allard Lowenstein, who,
after an extended absence from the movement, resurfaced during the At-
lantic City convention. Baker was wary of Lowenstein from the start of
his involvement in the movement, and the animus between them grew
stronger over the years. Much of their antagonism was political, but some
of it was attributable to their very different personalities. Lowenstein’s
overt arrogance, his sense of self-importance as a white person in a pre-
dominately black struggle, rubbed Ella Baker the wrong way. He was too
impatient, too pragmatic, too eager to place himself at the center of activity


--- PAGE 364 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 341
and unwilling to wade through the tedious process of democratic decision
making that Baker viewed as absolutely essential. Contrasting sncc’s
model of organizing with Lowenstein’s, biographer Bill Chafe wrote that
Lowenstein’s ‘‘elevated hierarchy and decisiveness; the other [sncc’s] pro-
moted egalitarianism and tolerated ambiguity.’’
≤≥
Lowenstein recognized and deplored the vast extent of Baker’s inﬂuence
in sncc. He saw her as allied with the more radical forces within the larger
movement and believed she was the most effective and persistent force in
pulling sncc to the left, which disturbed him greatly. Conversely, Baker
was critical of the liberalism that Lowenstein so openly embraced.
≤∂ For
Lowenstein, organizing was necessary to make the existing system work for
everyone. For Baker, systemic change was necessary. She was as skeptical
of career politicians and civilian elites as Lowenstein himself seemed leery
of the masses. Much of Baker and Lowenstein’s political sparring occurred
indirectly. He pushed for a closer alliance with Democratic Party politi-
cians, while she pulled for closer ties to the masses and their radical sup-
porters. Competing worldviews clashed in Atlantic City: a pragmatic liber-
alism that placed faith in the Democratic politicians versus a principled
radical vision that saw a circuitous long-term process of movement build-
ing as the salvation for the oppressed.
So, what was the mfdp to do? A handful of the delegates initially wanted
to accept the compromise. The two ofﬁcial leaders of the delegation, Aaron
Henry and Ed King, even argued its merits. And some of those who had
been allies throughout the campaign were also advising moderation, com-
promise, and cooperation with the Democratic Party, even though estab-
lishment party leaders were unwilling to fully support the mfdp. It was the
practical thing to do, urged King, Rustin, Wilkins, and Rauh. But the major-
ity of activists who had trekked to Atlantic City on their own political
pilgrimage were in no mood to compromise. In an all-night meeting at a
local church, speaker after speaker pleaded with the mfdp delegates to be
reasonable, to think strategically, to remember who their friends were.
Baker said nothing. Her sentiments had already been expressed and were
no secret. After the speech making, the delegates met alone to confer
and opted to reject the compromise. Later that night, there was a vigil
on the boardwalk where the group sang freedom songs; some cried, and
others expressed anger and disbelief at what had happened—all against
the backdrop of three haunting images, those of Chaney, Goodman, and
Schwerner. The next day, the mfdp again captured media attention and
disrupted the convention by forcibly occupying a row of seats with false


--- PAGE 365 ---
342 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
credentials given to them by sympathetic delegates from other states. They
had no intention of retreating quietly.≤∑
The showdown in Atlantic City was a turning point in the movement.
Many hopes had been riding on the outcome of the convention. Those
hopes had been dashed. Time, energy, dollars, and lives had been invested
to obtain this small slice of freedom. Many mfdp activists went away from
the 1964 convention feeling cheated and betrayed. Baker had been less
optimistic at the outset; so she was less disappointed in the end. She did
not view the mfdp campaign as a defeat. Rather, she saw it as a ‘‘testing
force’’ and an ‘‘alerting process.’’ It had not wrested political power from
the hands of the Democratic Party elites, but it had successfully mobilized a
solid core of Mississippi activists. The experience had provided a set of
political lessons for organizers, as she hoped it would, lessons that could
not have been obtained from any book, lecture, or workshop. In Baker’s
mind, the mfdp experiment had ‘‘settled any debate’’ about ‘‘the possibility
of functioning through the mainstream of the Democratic Party.’’
≤∏ It also
stiffened the resolve and determination of those who were not wholly
alienated and disheartened to ﬁght harder and to ﬁght for more radical
kinds of changes.
......
Shortly after the ordeal in Atlantic City, sncc members gathered in October
at the Gammon Seminary in Atlanta and the following month at Gulfside
Church in Waveland, Mississippi, to map out what they would do next.
Disappointed at the way things had unfolded in New Jersey and confused
about who were and were not reliable allies, sncc pondered its future. At
the Gammon meeting, Ella Baker tried to negotiate with both sides of the
growing rift between those who wanted sncc to become a more disciplined
organization (Forman) and those who wanted it to remain loose, informal,
and familial (Moses). These two factions eventually referred to one an-
other as the hard-liners and the ﬂoaters, respectively. In the meeting, Baker
supported the idea that more power should be given to local people, as
Moses did, but still felt that veteran sncc organizers had a role to play and
that more accountability was needed. She urged sncc to consolidate, eval-
uate, and clarify its existing problems before it ambitiously took on new
projects. She was trying to anchor the group as it grew, expanded its
mission, and grappled with internal tensions and external attacks and
criticisms.
≤π
At the Waveland retreat, which Baker did not attend, fundamental ques-
tions were put on the table in over thirty position papers. The group de-


--- PAGE 366 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 343
bated issues of race, class, ideology, structure, and strategy. Some ques-
tioned again whether whites should play as major a role as they had in
Freedom Summer. Since over seventy volunteers, most of them white, had
requested to stay on and work with sncc after the summer, the implica-
tions were considerable. Forman proposed a tighter structure and more
discipline for the organization, while others complained that the spontane-
ous and decentralized character of sncc would be lost.
A paper on sexism in sncc emerged from a workshop on women’s con-
cerns. Crafted largely by two white women, Casey Hayden, a staff mem-
ber in the Jackson ofﬁce, and Mary King, who worked closely with Julian
Bond on communications in Atlanta, the paper compared the treatment of
women in the movement with the condition of blacks in the society. Those
who might have been receptive at another moment were not terribly recep-
tive then, when the organization was facing what they viewed as more
pressing crises. It was also a time of heightened tensions about the growing
number of whites in sncc; since the paper originated from two white
women, it was more readily dismissed by blacks in the organization, men
and women, who felt it did not represent their gender experiences in sncc.
Many issues were aired at Waveland, but few were resolved.
≤∫
Overwhelmed and frustrated by the magnitude of the work, the deci-
sions that had to be made, and the internal rifts that were brewing within
the once harmonious family of freedom ﬁghters, some sncc veterans pulled
back from the movement. Sherrod went back to school; Forman took a brief
medical leave; and in December Moses dropped out and eventually traveled
to Tanzania, where he lived for several years. For those who remained,
there were enormous organizational challenges to overcome.
The year after the confrontation in Atlantic City sncc took increasingly
militant positions and came under increasingly bitter attacks from the
media and mainstream politicians. Immediately after the Democratic Party
convention, the naacp held a meeting of liberal forces in New York at which
Gloster Current attacked sncc and its emphasis on grassroots democracy,
as did Allard Lowenstein. Rustin would later concur, arguing that one of
sncc’s problems was that it believed it could win a struggle relying solely
on poor people. The principal targets of the attacks were those whom the
fbi, liberals, and conservatives saw as radicalizing inﬂuences and, for very
different reasons, wanted to undermine. Bob Moses was denounced as a
draft dodger by Mississippi senator James Eastland because of his consci-
entious objector status in opposition to the war in Vietnam.
≤Ω And Ella
Baker was singled out for ruthless attack by conservative columnists Row-


--- PAGE 367 ---
344 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
land Evans and Robert Novak in the New York Herald Tribune from Septem-
ber 3, 1964 to April 9, 1965. ≥≠ The columnists excoriated sncc as
communist-dominated and raked Ella Baker over the coals as one of the
‘‘unquestioned leaders’’ of the mfdp, saying that her involvement was
‘‘cause . . . for concern.’’ ≥∞ One of Baker’s allegedly sinister acts was her
effort, according to Evans and Novak, to link the mfdp to scef and the
Highlander Folk School. Another of their columns linked Baker and the
mfdp to the National Guardian (a left-wing publication), the National Law-
yers Guild (a radical association of lawyers and legal professionals), and
leftist trade unions, such as the United Electrical Workers (to which Russell
Nixon, general manager of the Guardian was formerly afﬁliated). When
Baker addressed the annual convention of the United Electrical Workers in
September 1964, calling for a greater alliance between the civil rights and
labor movements, Evans and Novak characterized her as a ‘‘veteran left-
ist.’’
≥≤ Conservative criticism was to be expected, but as Baker became more
openly allied with the left wing of the movement, supporting sncc even as
it became more militant and agreeing to work for the huac-labeled subver-
sives in scef, liberals also attacked her.≥≥
......
coming to grips with black power
Between the events in Atlantic City and the summer of 1966, both the move-
ment and the nation underwent convulsive changes. Accelerating anti–
Vietnam War protests melded with black uprisings in the streets of nearly a
dozen cities. Ella Baker’s beloved Harlem erupted in 1964, followed by
Watts in 1965 and dozens of urban areas in the years thereafter. These
tumultuous times tested even Baker’s characteristic calm. After 1966, sncc
went through a profound transformation, not simply an escalation in mili-
tancy but also a shift in vision, philosophy, and structure. The demand for
inclusion into mainstream institutions gave way, by the late 1960s, to the
goal of revolutionary social transformation, and the goal of an interracial
beloved community gave way to the call for black power, which for some—
not all—meant black nationalism and racial separatism of some type. Baker
thought that some aspects of that shift were progressive, while others were
wholly counterproductive.
Ella Baker did not let her differences with the new tendencies within
sncc get in the way of her continued support for the original ideals of the
organization as she understood them or her love and affection for the
individuals involved, some of whom she had nurtured to political adult-


--- PAGE 368 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 345
hood. After all, if she had sustained her relationship with the naacp and
sclc, despite some very fundamental differences, why should she sever her
relationship with sncc because it had departed from the path she had
envisioned for it? Baker’s personal investment in the group was much
deeper. So she continued to aid and defend sncc even as many of its
positions deviated from her own. At the same time, she began to devote her
energies and attentions to other related organizations and causes.
The transition from the politics, personalities, and tactics of the early
1960s to those of the late 1960s has been analyzed as a shift from nonvio-
lence to self-defense, from a southern focus to a northern one, and from
interracial solidarity to black nationalism and separatism. The shorthand
version of the polar vision of the early versus the late sixties is often
summed up in the personas of the moderate and peace-loving ministers of
sclc, on the one hand, and the militant, angry warriors of the Black Pan-
ther Party, with whom sncc brieﬂy afﬁliated, on the other. As with all
simple bifurcations, this one does not hold up, especially when one factors
Ella Baker into the mix. She was a militant and a democrat, a Harlemite
born in the South, who in many ways considered both places home. She
was an internationalist who grounded herself unapologetically in black
communities and working-class black culture, at the same time that she
forged strong and enduring ties with white radicals and liberals and other
peoples of color.
The years between 1964 and 1966 were intense, hectic, and confusing.
The early consensus within sncc had begun to unravel, an unraveling
precipitated by internal and external factors. A spiral of unsettling and
debilitating events hit the movement hard. Malcolm X, whom some in sncc
had come to admire, was assassinated in Harlem in February 1965. In
Alabama, sncc member Jimmy Lee Jackson was killed that February after
a demonstration, and Sammy Younge was shot in January 1966. With great
hopes for building an oasis of black political empowerment in the Deep
South, sncc helped launch the Lowndes County Freedom Organization in
Alabama, using the black panther as its symbol. Those hopes quickly faded.
And headlines and television newscasts across the country blazoned the
images of civil rights workers brutally attacked by policemen on horseback
on the Edmund Pettus Bridge outside Selma in March 1965. That event,
termed ‘‘Bloody Sunday,’’ further aggravated growing ﬁssures within the
movement over strategy and leadership. Some were disappointed with
King’s leadership, viewing it as vacillating and unresponsive to local de-
sires. Prathia Hall, the former director of sncc’s project in Terrell County,


--- PAGE 369 ---
346 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
Georgia, and a devout apostle of nonviolence herself, was so upset by the
way nonviolence was preached so rigidly by sclc forces after the Selma
attack that she left the movement entirely, exhausted and disillusioned.≥∂
In a June 1966 protest march across the state of Mississippi, Stokely
Carmichael, the newly elected, charismatic, and controversial head of
sncc, began to popularize the slogan ‘‘Black Power,’’ with militant sncc
staffer Willie Ricks leading the chants as they caravanned from town to
town. The march had been hastily convened by Martin Luther King in an
effort to resume a one-man protest march initiated by James Meredith,
who had been shot soon after he had started on it. Both the nonviolent and
more militant factions of the rapidly evolving Black Freedom Movement
were involved. King led the marchers, and the paramilitary group, Deacons
for Defense, provided security, something to which King had reluctantly
conceded.
Carmichael had defeated John Lewis for the chairmanship of sncc in a
close vote that some felt was less than fair. But once the organizational
reins were in his hands, Carmichael was determined to steer the group in a
more militant and nationalist direction. ‘‘Black power’’ as he conceived it
was a part of that vision. The very tone of it made some of the movement’s
more mainstream supporters nervous. ‘‘ Power’’—as opposed to ‘‘rights’’—
was a scary proposition to white liberals and to many black liberals as well.
It was not a term that scared Ella Baker, but she wanted to know whom this
power was for and how it would be exercised.
Even though Baker was still held in high regard by Carmichael and
others who had grown up politically within the environs of sncc, she rec-
ognized that the organization had changed in fundamental ways, as had
her relationship to it. The distance that developed between Baker and sncc
gave her a sense of loss. After all, sncc had been her political family; the
group made her feel at home more than any other organization with which
she had been afﬁliated. Throughout her political life before 1960, she was
in a constant struggle to be heard and listened to. As a sncc adviser, she
was revered, and she accepted that status with great humility. In the end,
there was not a sharp break but a gradual drift and erosion of the relation-
ship. She attended fewer and fewer meetings and was called less and less
for consultation. Still, she spoke supportively of the new sncc leadership,
explaining that people held down so long would naturally be angry and
impatient.
A sign of Baker’s eroding relationship with sncc was her low visibility in
an organization in which she was once a ubiquitous presence. When Kath-


--- PAGE 370 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 347
leen Cleaver joined sncc’s New York staff in 1967, she never saw Ella Baker
come into the ofﬁce, even though she sat at the front desk and greeted all
visitors and Baker was frequently in the neighborhood. But Cleaver’s recol-
lections are a bit misleading. Ivanhoe Donaldson, who was in charge of the
New York ofﬁce at that time, recounted that he visited Baker regularly at
her apartment on 135th Street to talk things over and solicit her advice.
‘‘Ella didn’t come to the ofﬁce,’’ Donaldson said; ‘‘the ofﬁce came to her.’’
≥∑
Baker was still a valued adviser and sounding board for those who, like
Donaldson, had come up through the ranks of sncc in the early 1960s. Yet
she was not the ﬁxture that she had once been. Baker’s involvement was
diminishing, as was her health. She was no longer able to keep up physi-
cally with a hectic pace of activity.
Ella Baker never broke with sncc emotionally, despite her political dif-
ferences. The organization and the group of people in it were the political
love of her life. In Baker’s view, even the expulsion of whites from the
organization was not a reason to condemn it or write off its remaining
leaders, although this action clearly did not please her. Among her closest
political allies in the 1960s were white radicals like the Bradens. At the
same time, Baker had a keen sense of the cultural and psychological char-
acter of racism and the importance of black self-determination. In a cul-
tural context in which whites were generally more educated, more privi-
leged, and often more self-assured because of conditioning, it was easy for
black leadership, especially the leadership of poor black southerners, to
get displaced. Baker saw black power as a response to that fear. It was not
her response, but it was one she understood. Baker had worked in all types
of organizations, including all-black ones. In the 1930s, she and George
Schuyler had made the tactical decision, based on the realities of segrega-
tion at the time, to organize all-black cooperatives and buying clubs while
maintaining an afﬁliate relationship with the predominately white cooper-
ative movement. And Baker’s work with the naacp branches had been, for
all intents and purposes, black community organizing. Even when sncc
was formed, Baker understood and insisted on the importance of black
leadership. But she never argued for a separatist/nationalist agenda. In her
words: ‘‘The logical groups for blacks to coalesce with would be the im-
poverished white, the misrepresented and impoverished Indians . . . or the
alienated Mexican-American. These are the natural allies in my book.’’
However, she added the caveat that groups had to be united before they
tried to forge coalitions with other groups: ‘‘You’ve got to coalesce from a
position of power, not just for the sake of saying ‘we’re together.’ ’’
≥∏


--- PAGE 371 ---
348 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
It should be noted that by 1966 there were several cleavages within
sncc, and those advocating black power were by no means homogeneous.
Stokely Carmichael and Cleveland Sellers called for black power while
asserting they were never antiwhite. However, the Atlanta sncc group,
which had undergone an enormous transformation from the early days
when Julian Bond and Lonnie King had been involved, made no such
professions. The members of the Chicago sncc afﬁliate went so far as to
call on blacks to ‘‘ﬁll ourselves with hate for all things white.’’
≥π It was
Carmichael’s more thoughtful advocacy of black power to which Baker was
sympathetic. In an interview with John Britton in 1967, Baker explained
that if one really listened to Carmichael, there was nothing offensive in his
explication of the concept. From her point of view, he was talking about
what sncc had talked about for years: self-determination for oppressed
people, namely, black people.
≥∫
Still, Baker felt the organization getting away from itself, as well as from
her. She wanted to re-anchor it. She wanted to sit people down and push
them to think through the issues they were taking on, sometimes without
much thought or deliberation. As an almost last ditch effort, she proposed
at a May sncc retreat in Kingston Springs, Tennessee, that the organization
consider a series of seminars on ‘‘revolutionary ethics,’’ to be led by third
world revolutionaries. The idea never bore fruit, but it seems as though
Baker may have been groping for a way to challenge ideologically the
direction she perceived the group was headed in. And since a delegation of
sncc people had just traveled to Africa and many were hungrily devouring
The Wretched of the Earth  by Franz Fanon, along with works by the Gha-
naian leader Kwame Nkrumah and the Guinean revolutionary Amilcar
Cabral, perhaps Baker hoped that bringing in third world revolutionaries
could be a unifying force.
≥Ω
From the summer of 1966 until December of that year, sncc was moving
more and more toward a black nationalist position. Carmichael had popu-
larized the slogan ‘‘Black Power,’’ but black power was not the same thing
as black separatism. White and black antiracists could still work together in
Carmichael’s scenario, but whites needed to take up the task of working in
white communities to combat racism there. As their roles became in-
creasingly circumscribed and some slogans and attitudes turned explicitly
antiwhite, many whites voluntarily left sncc. Stalwarts like Bob and Dottie
Zellner stayed the longest. In December 1966, sncc met at the summer
home of a black entertainer, Peg Leg Bates, in upstate New York. The
secluded setting was chosen so that the group could focus on some of the


--- PAGE 372 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 349
internal tensions that were plaguing it and hopefully achieve a greater
degree of peace in the large and fractious family. This was not to be. A
general call went out that everyone should try to attend this meeting. So,
even people who were no longer on sncc’s payroll or actively working in
a project came to see whether fences could be mended and what could
be salvaged of the organization they so deeply loved. The Atlanta ofﬁce
headed by Bill Ware was advocating a rigid nationalist agenda and came to
the meeting to argue that whites should be expelled from sncc altogether.
Judy Richardson recalls that tempers were so inﬂamed that it was the ﬁrst
sncc gathering—which were known for their passionate debates—where
she actually feared for her physical safety.
Ella Baker was there, too. She drove up from New York City with Joanne
Grant and Bob Zellner, a white southerner who began working with sncc
in the fall of 1961 after a summer internship at the Highlander Folk School.
He had been arrested, beaten, and tortured in a Louisiana prison and had
proven himself time and again as one of sncc’s most loyal members. His
wife Dorothy had made similar sacriﬁces. Zellner did not know quite what
to expect at the meeting, but it was an emotionally charged moment in his
political and personal life. Ella Baker softened the blow he was about to be
dealt. During the hour-long ride to the meeting site, ‘‘she prepared me for
what was going to happen,’’ Bob recalled. ‘‘She told me that she had been
talking to people and that there was a strong move to make the organiza-
tion a black organization so that it could be more effective in the north. She
told me that Stokely and others intended to support the idea that we [Bob
and Dorothy] be made exceptions because we had been with sncc from the
beginning and there would be a place for us. It was not cut and dry,’’ he
recalled her telling him. She did not advise him what to do but had likely
arranged the car ride as a time to raise the issue and give Zellner a chance
to reﬂect on the situation he was walking into. It was at this meeting that
Zellner proposed a sncc-sponsored project focused on building support for
sncc’s agenda in the white community, which he and Dorothy would run
and raise funds for. The idea was rejected because, as he put it, he was
unwilling to be a second-class member of the organization; even though he
supported black power, he felt strongly about the principle of black and
white together in a single movement organization. He and Dorothy reluc-
tantly parted ways with sncc at that point.
∂≠
Three weeks later, despite palpable tensions and outright animus be-
tween certain factions of sncc, Baker still retained conﬁdence in the
group’s larger humanitarian mission, explaining to an interviewer that


--- PAGE 373 ---
350 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
‘‘sncc deﬁnes itself in terms of the blacks, but is concerned with all ex-
cluded people.’’∂∞ The group’s deepening interest in and ties to revolution-
ary movements in other parts of the world bore her out on that point. But
she was stretching it. Clearly, not everyone in sncc, particularly the group
in Atlanta, felt that way. When asked during the same interview, ‘‘What is
the basic goal of sncc?,’’ Baker replied, ‘‘To change society so that the have-
nots can share in it.’’
∂≤ This had been her basic goal for some thirty-ﬁve
years. After the upstate New York meeting, she had her doubts about the
group’s sustainability, but publicly she still wanted to put the best face
on things.
For its ﬁrst four years of existence as a collective, sncc functioned like a
political family. When the family broke up in the late 1960s, the results
were traumatic for many. There were bitter debates, resignations, self-
imposed exiles, and the severance of longstanding friendships. It was un-
clear to many exactly where Baker stood in all of the conﬂict. Perhaps most
saw her as standing above it. Each side claimed her as its own. She never
supported black separatism or the macho posturing that sometimes accom-
panied it, but Carmichael still held her in the highest esteem and vice versa.
When he was asked to pay tribute to her at a scef fund-raiser in 1968, even
though it meant sharing the stage with white sncc members whom he had
done battle with not long before, he ‘‘simply could not say, no.’’
∂≥ His loyalty
to and reverence for Baker outweighed any negative feelings he might have
had toward former comrades.
In April 1968, at one of the most critical and confusing moments in the
movement’s evolution, Carmichael appeared at the Roosevelt Hotel in New
York City to speak at the dinner for Baker, ﬂanked by bodyguards and
accompanied by an entourage. The atmosphere at the hotel that evening
was palpably tense. It was an extension of the tension that was in the air
throughout the nation. Only three weeks before, Martin Luther King had
been assassinated while visiting Memphis, Tennessee, in support of a black
sanitation workers’ strike. Black urban neighborhoods across the country
had erupted in violent protest at the news of his murder. The rubble was
still smoldering when the interracial audience gathered on April 24 to
honor Ella Baker. Rosa Parks had been scheduled to appear, but she was
still too distraught over King’s death to even make the trip. The gathering
had been conceived of as a tribute, a fund-raiser, and a unity dinner. Anne
Braden, who coordinated the event on behalf of scef, asked Carmichael if
in his speech he might try to be conciliatory, to use the opportunity to
bridge some of the gulfs and schisms that had been growing within the


--- PAGE 374 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 351
movement. He refused. ‘‘I was not there to gloss over serious political
differences. I was there to honor Miss Baker plain and simple.’’ ∂∂ Although
scef raised some $30,000 that evening, no political bridges were built.
In Ella Baker’s view, ‘‘black power’’ was a misunderstood and sometimes
misappropriated term. When it was framed as self-determination, she
could identify with the concept to some extent. Referring to Carmichael,
Baker observed, ‘‘I’ve seen him make some very profound developments
from this whole concept of black power. I’ve seen him do it at a level that
there is nothing irritating about it for anybody who is willing to have sense
enough to deal with the facts at all.’’ Her concern about the excesses and
reckless use of black power rhetoric can be partly attributed to the fact that
‘‘black power’’ became, in some cases, an empty slogan taken up by young
people ‘‘who had not gone through any experiences or steps of thinking’’
that Carmichael had.
∂∑ For the inexperienced, it simply meant ‘‘give us
what we are demanding now.’’ But sncc members who had marched, pick-
eted, petitioned, and pleaded had, in Baker’s view, earned the right to be
impatient. They had also earned the consent of poor black southerners to
speak in tandem with them and at times on their behalf.
Baker was supportive of intensiﬁed struggle, increased confrontation,
and even sharper, more revolutionary rhetoric. She viewed explicitly anti-
white sentiments, however, as counterproductive, misguided, and short-
sighted. She saw some sncc members’ use of the term ‘‘honky,’’ for ex-
ample, as unfortunate and born of frustration and anger rather than a
calculated political gesture.
∂∏
Baker compared the appeal of the new revolutionary rhetoric to the stale
and unmoving demands and language of the more mainstream civil rights
organizations and leaders at the time. Referring to a leaﬂet for ‘‘Solidarity
Day,’’ drafted by her friend Bayard Rustin, Baker confessed, ‘‘This doesn’t
touch me’’; it ‘‘leaves me cold.’’ She concluded: ‘‘I would think it would leave
people who are closest to the activist movement, the younger people, even
more chilled—so, I don’t think it’s unnatural for them [young black activists
in sncc] to feel the need for the more revolutionary method.’’
∂π When she
tried to explain to an interviewer in 1968 why she thought white liberals
had such a hard time understanding the urgent demand for black power,
she recited some lines of verse: ‘‘The frog beneath the harrow knows, where
the nail point goes, while the butterﬂy upon the road, preaches content-
ment to the toad.’’
∂∫ In other words, those with privilege and insulation
from certain abuses have the luxury to insist on patience and moderation.
Those experiencing the painful results of injustice, and those who identify


--- PAGE 375 ---
352 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
with them and try to see the world through their eyes, have a different
perspective altogether. For most of her adult political life, Baker’s perspec-
tive was that of the frog beneath the harrow.
Baker worked as a paid member of scef until 1967 and functioned as
consultant and board member after that. She continued to lend her name
and waning energies to other campaigns and causes as well. The two prin-
cipal areas of political work Baker focused on in the 1970s were opposition
to political repression and persecution at home and to war, imperialism,
and colonialism abroad. She also accepted an increasing number of invita-
tions from women’s organizations and participated in several of the found-
ing meetings of the Third World Women’s Alliance and the Women’s Emer-
gency Committee.
∂Ω In 1969, Ella Baker went to Atlanta to deliver a talk at
the Institute for the Black World titled ‘‘The Black Woman in the Civil
Rights Struggle.’’ There, she criticized sexist practices and attitudes within
the civil rights movement and went on to describe women as the ‘‘back-
bone’’ of the movement, explaining that ‘‘[w]hen demonstrations took
place and when the community acted, usually it was some women who
came to the fore.’’
∑≠
......
free angela, free ourselves
One campaign around a prominent woman activist that Baker took special
interest in was the ‘‘Free Angela’’ campaign. A Communist Party member
and Black Panther Party supporter, Angela Y. Davis had been implicated in
a failed prisoner rescue attempt in California in which several people were
killed. Davis was not directly involved, but a gun registered to her was
found at the scene, and she was closely associated with two of the men
involved, prisoner-activist George Jackson and his younger brother, Jon-
athan. This provided enough of a reason for the authorities to issue a
warrant for her arrest and, when she ﬂed, for the fbi to declare her one of
its ten most wanted persons. Davis was eventually captured, and an inter-
national campaign was mounted to win her release, with her supporters
arguing that putting her in jail was an attempt by the government to silence
a radical black voice for change.
At one of its regular board meetings held in Birmingham, Baker pro-
posed that scef should get involved in the National Free Angela Coalition.
Anne Braden recalled years later that she was not altogether convinced
that Angela’s campaign was where scef should place its limited energies,
or that it could make a difference, but Baker was adamant.
∑∞ Feeling re-


--- PAGE 376 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 353
spect and sympathy for Davis’s plight, she understood all too well how
government persecution targeted outspoken political activists. Other scef
board members were sympathetic, too, having had their own run-ins with
the fbi and huac. Baker’s speciﬁc suggestion was that the group contact
Davis’s mother, Sallye Davis, herself a veteran civil rights activist and for-
mer member of the Southern Negro Youth Congress, and look into the idea
of having some type of support rally in the family’s hometown of Bir-
mingham.
∑≤ When scef accepted Baker’s proposal, she called up Sallye
Davis, who came over right away to where the group was meeting. After
all, Baker knew the landscape in Birmingham. She also knew Sallye Davis
by reputation and thought they would have no trouble pulling off a suc-
cessful event there. In December 1970, a citywide Committee to Defend
Angela Davis was formed in Birmingham, and on Monday, January 11, 1971,
Baker ﬂew into town to deliver the keynote address at the city’s ﬁrst ‘‘Free
Angela’’ rally, held at the First Congregational Church. Baker’s fbi ﬁle,
which had been fairly dormant for several years, was reactivated as she
began speaking across the country on behalf of Communist Party member
Davis.
∑≥
For Baker, Angela Davis’s imprisonment had concrete and symbolic sig-
niﬁcance. As a young black woman and a radical intellectual who had
refused to be intimidated or silenced by harassment (she had been ﬁred as
a professor in the California state university system by Governor Ronald
Reagan for her political views), Davis represented, Baker felt, a spirit of
resistance that had to be defended. Although different in style, age, and
demeanor, Baker may have identiﬁed with Davis on some level. She imme-
diately felt protective. She claimed Davis as one of her own, praising her
‘‘strength and moral courage,’’ even though the two women had never met.
Davis had been jailed in October 1970, and the campaign for her release
was growing. Baker contacted friends around the country to ask them to
support the campaign. On February 24, 1971, Baker spoke on the University
of Virginia campus in Richmond in a call for Angela Davis’s release from
prison, saying that ‘‘we have rights only as long as we are willing to struggle
for them.’’
∑∂
By the 1970s, when she was in her seventies and suffering from a variety
of physical ailments, Ella Baker was no longer able to maintain the rigorous
day-to-day organizer’s regimen that had characterized most of her adult
life, yet she remained as engaged as health and stamina would allow—
giving speeches, offering counsel, lending her name to petitions, and help-
ing to raise funds for a variety of campaigns and organizations.


--- PAGE 377 ---
354 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
During the 1970s, Baker became deeply involved in an effort to organize
a viable left-wing political party; the Mass Party Organizing Committee
(mpoc) was an exploratory committee that lasted nearly seven years but
never actually formed a party. Some of her former sncc colleagues were
also involved. In 1977, Baker served as co-chairperson of mpoc, along with
a leftist lawyer, Arthur Kinoy. ∑∑ The mpoc experiment was an attempt to
transcend the painful limitations of the two-party system that the mfdp
had encountered in 1964 and create a truly progressive alternative. A paper
that Kinoy wrote in 1974, ‘‘Toward a Mass Party of the People,’’ served as a
call to action and as the group’s founding document. The group articulated
a progressive and far-reaching platform that encompassed many of the
goals the mfdp had aspired to in terms of the democratic representation of
the disenfranchised, but it went further. Based in New York City with afﬁli-
ates throughout the country, the mpoc hoped to solidify an interracial
antiracist constituency.
∑∏ The group also embraced an explicitly socialist
vision and took strong positions against the War in Vietnam and on behalf
of Puerto Rican independence. Poverty and racism, as well as the plight of
workers, were critical domestic issues highlighted by the mpoc. Baker par-
ticipated in several workshops, retreats, and administrative meetings in
1976 and 1977 trying to consolidate the mpoc’s eclectic base of supporters.
Unfortunately, it never bore the fruit that its founders had hoped for.
∑π
More than ever, Ella Baker identiﬁed closely with leftist and radical
forces on the international scene. The issue of Puerto Rican independence
was especially relevant to her internationalist vision. Her treasured clip-
pings ﬁle was full of news articles and literature on Puerto Rico. For some-
one who had lived lived in New York City over many decades, the Puerto
Rican community was a large and politically vibrant presence. In the 1950s,
Baker worked closely with Puerto Rican community activists in the school
reform struggle. So, when her friend Annie Stein, who had been involved
in the same struggle and many other progressive causes thereafter, got
involved with the Puerto Rican Solidarity Organization ( prso), Baker
did, too.
∑∫
By the time she became active in prso in the 1970s, Baker’s asthma had
worsened, and arthritis slowed her down even more. She did attend meet-
ings, write letters of support, and speak at rallies, but her ability to travel
was limited. In 1974, along with Noam Chomsky, Fran Beal, Dave Dellinger,
and Jim Forman, she lent her name to the roster of the planning committee
for the National Puerto Rican Independence rally.
∑Ω In 1978, she agreed to
serve as ‘‘spokesperson for the ‘U.S. People’s Delegation’ ’’ to the United


--- PAGE 378 ---
campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s 355
Nations Special Committee on Decolonization.∏≠ She delivered an eloquent
keynote address to an overﬂow crowd at a Puerto Rican Independence rally
in Madison Square Garden—featured in the ﬁnal frame of Joanne Grant’s
ﬁlm documentary Fundi—that reﬂected the passion and insights that Baker
brought to the the issue.
∏∞
Even though she could not be as active as she would have liked, Baker
encouraged her younger sncc comrades, whom she still kept in touch with
and advised when they would listen, to take a wider interest in global
politics and to travel and meet revolutionaries from other parts of the
world. She did not have to do too much persuading because this was the
direction sncc was headed in anyway. A delegation had visited Africa, and
Carmichael toured a half-dozen countries in the late 1960s, meeting with
radical and revolutionary leaders. Puerto Rico, because of its proximity
and colonial relationship to the United States, was of particular signiﬁ-
cance, Baker argued. She made arrangements for Carmichael and Ivanhoe
Donaldson to visit the island and participate in a conference on the Inde-
pendista movement. ‘‘Her contacts were so extensive,’’ Ivanhoe marveled.
‘‘She knew what had gone on [in Puerto Rico] by the time we got back
because she had talked to people down there. Her connections were amaz-
ing.’’ Even though she did not travel internationally, her vision and her
network did.
∏≤
Ella Baker maintained international connections by building personal
relationships with people from around the world who were visitors to the
United States. In 1976, in the immediate wake of the historic Soweto youth
uprising against South African apartheid, Baker befriended Violet Cherry,
a South African living temporarily in the United States. The woman’s son
had been arrested for political activism in the South African city of Durban,
and she was trying to publicize his case and garner support. Baker agreed
to host a meeting of New York activists to talk about the case of twenty-two-
year-old Lloyd Padayachi. Baker extended herself to his mother as she had
done with so many other mothers of young activists over the years. Na-
tional boundaries were not relevant.
∏≥
Ella Baker maintained a myriad of political afﬁliations in the 1970s,
most of which involved more than simply lending her name to a letterhead;
she was engaged in real consultation and strategizing. She attended sev-
eral antiwar rallies, spoke twice at International Women’s Day activities in
New York, and signed numerous letters and petitions for various progres-
sive and left-wing causes. She had always been politically promiscuous in
this way, insisting that no one organization could ever claim her full loy-


--- PAGE 379 ---
356 campaigns of the 1960s and 1970s
alty, which she reserved for the larger movement and its larger goals.
However, in the early 1970s, it was not the survival of any single organiza-
tion that worried Baker; rather, it was the survival of the movement to
which she had devoted her life. Ultimately, she remained convinced that
the protracted democratic revolution that she believed in so ﬁercely, that
awkward circuitous process of generation after generation of people striv-
ing to push the world toward a greater justice and humanity would con-
tinue. But the question was, In what form? Would external repression or
internal divisions undo what she had watched a generation of activists
build? At age seventy-six, she mused, ‘‘I don’t claim to have any corner
on an answer, but I believe that the struggle is eternal. Someone else
carries on.’’
∏∂
Even as sncc began to unravel organizationally, Baker looked for prom-
ise and hope in the plethora of local, national, and international struggles
that blossomed in the 1960s and 1970s. They were sometimes poorly orga-
nized or short-lived, but they were cause for optimism that a spirit of
resistance was alive. The extensive clippings ﬁle that Baker kept in the
1970s carefully followed the plight of the Soledad prison activists in Cali-
fornia, the Attica prison uprising in New York, the Native American strug-
gle at Wounded Knee, as well as events in Puerto Rico, South Africa, and
Vietnam.
∏∑
In her thinking and in the way she lived her life, Baker was much more
of a materialist (in the sense of being proactive) than an idealist. That is,
she was a practical, action-oriented kind of person. Exploring how ideas
were relevant and linked to concrete experiences was her approach. Yet,
despite the importance of her deeds, perhaps her most lasting contribution
to social justice movements of the late twentieth century was in the form of
her ideas. She provided movement activists in the 1960s and 1970s with a
philosophy, a worldview, an approach to social change that they took with
them into cultural, political and global arenas and into their personal lives,
careers and relationships. Baker’s radical democratic humanism was the
core philosophy that gave meaning to her personal and political practice
for over a half century. In her role as a movement teacher and insurgent
intellectual, she sparked new ideas, both reafﬁrmed and rejected old ones,
and gave a new generation the intellectual, political, and, at times, mate-
rial wherewithal to carry on.


--- PAGE 380 ---
12
a freirian teacher,
a gramscian intellectual, and
a radical humanist
ella baker’s legacy
......
Intellectual work for radical democrats must always link the visionary to the practical.
Cornel West, 1990
If there is any philosophy, it’s that those who have walked a certain path
should know some things, should remember some things that they can pass on,
that others can use to walk the path a little better.
Ella Baker, 1980
Ella Baker performed her share of menial movement chores over the years,
from typing leaﬂets to licking stamps to buying toiletries for jailed pro-
testers. She assumed multiple and ﬂuctuating titles and identities, but her
most enduring role in the black freedom movement of the 1960s and early
1970s was that of ‘‘master teacher’’ and resident griot.
∞ This role was most
pronounced during her work with sncc from 1960 to 1966. Baker was a
powerful intellectual presence within the organization and a moral and
ethical compass for the young activists with whom she worked so inti-
mately and intensely. Her young protégés went from their classrooms at
Spelman, Howard, Fisk, and Tougaloo Colleges to Ella Baker’s classroom
without walls. It was a very different kind of classroom, indeed, one in-
fused with a radical pedagogy, epistemology, and worldview. In an article
about the inﬂuence that Baker and her friend and colleague Septima Clark,
both ‘‘activist community educators,’’ had on the radical curricula of the
Citizenship and Freedom Schools of the 1960s, the scholar-activist Bill


--- PAGE 381 ---
358 ella baker’s legacy
Ayers writes: ‘‘This kind of education opposes fear, ignorance, and helpless-
ness by strengthening knowledge and ability. It enables people to question,
to wonder, and to look critically . . . it is an education for freedom.’’
≤
......
teacher and practitioner of a
radical democratic pedagogy
Baker had insisted all her life that she would never become a teacher
because of the restrictive social role it represented for women and because
of the class and gender expectation that all capable black girls of her
generation were obliged to become teachers. She saw the teaching profes-
sion as an elite and conservative one, for the most part, requiring women to
be prim and proper and to follow the dominant protocol for ladylike be-
havior. In describing early-twentieth-century uplift ideology, the historian
Kevin Gaines writes, ‘‘The bourgeois morality of their cultural mentors was
drummed into black students: piety, thrift, self-control and the work
ethic,’’ as well as a ‘‘Victorian sexual morality’’ and a sense of bourgeois
etiquette.
≥ Teachers collaborated in this socialization and were victims
of it at the same time, in Baker’s view. She noticed, for example, that
when ‘‘progressive’’ and open-minded young women who were sent off for
teacher training returned, they were frequently ‘‘no longer that type of
person. . . . [A]nyone with spirit would be curbed.’’
∂ This was not what
Baker wanted for herself, and so she declined to pursue a traditional teach-
ing career, in spite of or perhaps because of her mother’s wishes, and
turned down a relatively prestigious offer from the president of Bennet
College.
∑ She was stubbornly determined to be her own woman, and she
would encourage the young women of sncc to do the same. As sncc ac-
tivist Barbara Jones (Omolade) observed, Baker ‘‘was really . . . able to
disavow all those other kinds of womanhood that were offered to black
women’’ and to carve out her own identity as a radical, an intellectual, and,
ultimately, a teacher.
∏
In the context of sncc, much of Ella Baker’s leadership was didactic. She
was the teacher-activist in every sense. Joyce Ladner described Baker’s
teaching style this way: she ‘‘was a quiet presence in a way. What she did
was to distill, sum up and take [discussions] to the next level, point out
gaps in your own information, enlighten you in some broader sense, bring
information to you about what other people were doing and voids that you
could ﬁll.’’
π In Baker’s view, people had many of the answers within them-
selves; teachers and leaders simply had to facilitate the process of tapping


--- PAGE 382 ---
ella baker’s legacy 359
and framing that knowledge, of drawing it out. Given this view, debate and
the open exchange of ideas were critically important. Ladner continued:
‘‘You see, Miss Baker’s presence was felt at meetings even when we stood
there and talked and screamed, with her tacit approval, and she just stood
there but she always knew that we would at some point have to stake an
opinion about it.’’
∫ This description of Ella Baker’s subtle teaching style is
reminiscent of Gerald Graff ’s creative pedagogical theory, which advocates
using conﬂict itself as a teaching tool.
Ω
Ella Baker’s early reservations about traditional methods of teaching
came in part from the conservatizing impact she felt teacher training had
on the young women of her generation and her mother’s generation. She
objected not only to how most schools taught but also to what they taught:
conformity and obedience. In contrast, Baker’s pedagogy was democratic
and reciprocal. Although they never met, and there is no evidence that she
was familiar with his writings, Baker’s teaching style very much resembled
that of the Latin American educator and activist Paulo Freire. Within the
circle of inexperienced but courageous young activists who became Baker’s
students, she challenged the conventional meanings of both education and
leadership. Building on the progressive philosophy of education she had
embraced during her time as a teacher for the Workers’ Education Project,
and augmented by her own political experiences and personal sensibilities,
Baker concluded that curricula had to be socially relevant and that learn-
ing needed to be based on a ﬂuid and interactive relationship between
student and teacher.
∞≠
Baker’s approach to learning and teaching was consistent with that of
Italian Marxist and theorist Antonio Gramsci. ‘‘Every teacher,’’ he said, ‘‘is
always a pupil and every pupil is always a teacher.’’
∞∞ Baker tried to build
camaraderie with her young allies because it was her belief that young
people should be able to ‘‘feel a sort of communion and friendship with
their teachers.’’
∞≤ Moreover, her view of teaching for liberation was based
on the need to empower ordinary people to dig within themselves and their
collective experiences for the answers to social and political questions. She
did not want her students to see her as the repository of all knowledge but
to discover their own insights and knowledge base.
∞≥ As the sociologist and
movement historian Charles Payne put it, ‘‘Miss Baker was reluctant to see
people entrust too many of their dreams to individual leaders,’’ or teach-
ers.
∞∂ They had to rely on their own judgments.
According to sncc member Prathia Hall, Baker’s style of teaching was a
lesson in itself. She ‘‘was a consummate teacher, always opening us to new


--- PAGE 383 ---
360 ella baker’s legacy
understandings,’’ Hall remembered. ‘‘It was never the pounding, ‘you must
do this, you must do that,’ but by raising a question and then raising
another question and then helping us to see what was being revealed
through the answer was her mode of leadership. She was the one who
taught us how to organize . . . to organize in such a way that when we left,
the people were fully capable of carrying on the movement themselves.’’
∞∑
Baker taught by inquiry and by example. She did not tell people what to do
or think; she guided them toward answers and solutions by teasing out the
ideas and knowledge that already existed within the group, and within
individuals, and then by encouraging people to express that information
in their own words. She was also patient enough to allow this process
to unfold.
Echoing Hall’s and Ladner’s observations, a former Spelman College
activist, Lenora Taitt-Magubane, recalled, ‘‘Miss Ella would ask questions,
key questions . . . and sometimes people don’t recognize or appreciate this
as leadership. . . . She would sit there and she would literally almost let a
meeting fall apart. People were at each other before she would intervene,
because she wanted the decision to come out of the group and not be hers.
She would say: ‘Well, what about so and so?’ or ‘Well, have you thought
through this or that?’ She was always pushing people to think and chal-
lenging you.’’
∞∏ Mary King, a young white woman whom Baker recruited
to sncc through her ywca work and who worked closely with Baker in
Atlanta, remembers her mentor as a powerfully effective teacher. ‘‘With
Socratic persistence, in her resonant and commanding voice, she would
query, ‘Now let me ask this again, what is our purpose here? What are we
trying to accomplish?’ Again and again she would force us to articulate our
assumptions. . . . She encouraged me to avoid being doctrinaire. ‘Ask ques-
tions, Mary,’ she would say.’’
∞π
Ella Baker also pushed Eleanor Holmes Norton, a young African Ameri-
can law graduate from Yale, to think for herself and to ask questions: ‘‘Miss
Baker’s presence and her contributions were different than telling us what
to do. Which was one of her gifts, real gifts—such that the intervention
always seemed to be, ‘Wow, isn’t that exactly right? Why didn’t we think of
that?’ ’’ At the same time, she adds, Baker brought seriousness, sobriety
and maturity to sncc’s deliberations. ‘‘What professionalized the meetings
was Ella Baker,’’ Holmes Norton concluded.
∞∫ Baker’s powerful moral and
intellectual presence and the conﬁdence she exuded were critical in inspir-
ing Holmes Norton to conﬁgure her own identity as a politician and a
feminist.


--- PAGE 384 ---
ella baker’s legacy 361
Ella Baker taught, but she rarely lectured. Part of her criticism of south-
ern preachers was that they constituted what she termed ‘‘a verbal society’’
and did little more than verbalize. ∞Ω As a young child, Baker had been an
eloquent public speaker; tutored in diction, grammar, and presentation by
her mother, she competed in oratory contests around the South and often
spoke at church and school events. However, she was turned off by certain
types of speech making early on. When she was about seven or eight years
old, her parents took her to hear a public lecture by Charles Sachel Mor-
ris Jr. Baker was initially impressed by his ‘‘ﬂowery speech’’ and ‘‘good
articulation’’; but when she heard him another time deliver the exact same
speech, she realized it was more performance than substance. So, when
one of her professors suggested she might consider going on the lecture
circuit after graduation, she ‘‘was saved from that’’ by the nega-
tive encounters she had had with disingenuous orators who had turned her
off entirely.
≤≠
Baker’s feeling was that even though ‘‘I had the oratorical chords, I
resented oratory. You should be able to have some speech making that has
some purpose,’’ rather than simply dazzling an audience to boost your
ego.
≤∞ Again, Baker’s views on social action and the formulation and ex-
change of ideas were consistent with Gramsci’s. He wrote: ‘‘The mode of
being of the new intellectual can no longer consist in eloquence, which is
an exterior and momentary mover of feelings and passions, but in active
participation in practical life, as constructor, organizer, ‘permanent per-
suader’ not just a simple orator.’’
≤≤ Baker expanded on this notion, insisting
that one’s words are important ‘‘only as they help people to do things that
are of value to themselves. And we’ve had too much of the mesmerizing
type of talking.’’
≤≥ Catherine Orr has characterized Baker’s rhetorical style
as a conscious reﬂection of her egalitarian and democratic politics and as
being deliberately engaging rather than mesmerizing. According to Orr,
the way she spoke, her choice of pronouns, where she stood relative to her
audience, and the cadence of her voice all conveyed a message about who
she was and what kind of political vision she wanted to project to her
listeners.
≤∂
Baker had a talent for making complex ideas simple. This was another
carryover from her experience with the Worker’s Education Project, in
which it was stressed that teachers should ‘‘use words workers can under-
stand.’’
≤∑ Her teaching method resembled a conversation more than a tu-
torial. sncc activist Joyce Ladner attested to this: ‘‘I don’t remember her
citing works of particular authors that we should read. I think what she did


--- PAGE 385 ---
362 ella baker’s legacy
more of was instill information and put it in a form that would be palatable
to us. . . . [S]he may have mentioned Garvey or mentioned someone else,
but she used that as a launching pad more than anything else. She was a
practitioner, . . . for her it was always getting back to the practical aspects of
how do you go about changing things.’’
≤∏
Ella Baker, like Paulo Freire, viewed education as a collective and cre-
ative enterprise requiring collaboration and exchange at every stage. She
would have likely agreed with Freire’s statement that ‘‘to teach is not to
transfer knowledge but to create the possibilities for the production or
construction of knowledge.’’
≤π A part of that process, both Freire and Baker
insisted, was the ability to humble oneself and to simply listen. This was
also a part of the process of taming the ego, in Baker’s opinion. She repeat-
edly criticized unchecked, inﬂated egos and excessive individualism as
obstacles to social change. ‘‘The importance of silence in the context of
communication is fundamental,’’ Freire wrote. He went on: ‘‘It is intoler-
able to see teachers who give themselves the right to behave as if they own
the truth. . . . [T]he democratic-minded teacher who learns to speak by lis-
tening is interrupted by the intermittent silence of his or her own capacity
to listen, waiting for that voice that may desire to speak from the depths of
its own silent listening.’’
≤∫ Baker spent many hours sitting silently through
long and cumbersome sncc discussions, making her interventions often at
the very end of the meeting. She interrupted only to make sure that others
were allowed to speak and that the more conﬁdent speakers were made to
listen. This was the pattern she established early on in her relationship with
the youth activists in sncc, and it was a practice that became characteristic
of sncc’s deliberations and Baker’s role in them. Prathia Hall took the
lessons seriously when she began organizing in small communities in Geor-
gia: ‘‘We’d sit sometimes and rock on the porch for hours. Our intention
was to ﬁnally convince a person to go and register. But we’d sit and we’d
listen, and we’d listen to the person talk about survival and talk about
families . . . I think some of the most important lessons I learned were on
the porches of people who couldn’t read or write their names.’’
≤Ω
Baker’s political philosophy emphasized the importance of tapping op-
pressed communities for their own knowledge, strength, and leadership in
constructing models for social change. She took seriously and tried to
understand seriously the ways in which poor black people saw and ana-
lyzed the world. And her own base of knowledge came primarily from
those same communities. In many respects, Baker was what Gramscian
theorists refer to as an ‘‘organic intellectual.’’
≥≠ Part of her work as a writer,


--- PAGE 386 ---
ella baker’s legacy 363
orator, and analyst was not to invent or impose ideas on the masses but
rather to help them, as she put it, ‘‘see their own ideas.’’≥∞
Baker functioned as an organic intellectual to the extent that she vali-
dated and relied on the collective wisdom that resided in poor and op-
pressed communities and to the extent that she respected and afﬁrmed the
intellectual capacity and political astuteness of individuals who had no
formal academic training or credentials. ‘‘I have never been diploma con-
scious,’’ Baker once remarked.
≥≤ For her, wisdom came from many sources
and was transmitted via many different languages, including the language
of action. Academic credentials alone did not impress Baker, especially
when such training was used to advance individual careers rather than for
some greater good. From her point of view, her own political education was
derived not only from her formal training at Shaw University but also from
what she learned on the streets and in meeting places and union halls of
New York City, as well as at rural and urban churches, barber shops, and
kitchen tables throughout the South. This type of popular education she
saw as vital.
Radical black women intellectuals who have tried to function in this
same tradition have articulated Baker’s epistemological stance in their
writings. The historian and political activist Elsa Barkley Brown, for exam-
ple, has identiﬁed her mother and the larger southern black community of
which she was a part as her primary intellectual mentors while she was
growing up. They taught her the indispensable lessons of ‘‘how to ask the
right questions’’ and of having respect ‘‘for people’s abilities to understand
their own lives.’’
≥≥ Ella Baker learned the same lessons from her child-
hood community and from the people she worked with in New York and
throughout the South.
Ella Baker was Edward Said’s kind of intellectual. For Said, a Palestinian
activist and literary scholar, being an intellectual means, as Baker her-
self once wrote, ‘‘to think in radical terms.’’
≥∂ Said elaborates, explaining
that the role of a radical intellectual is ‘‘to confront orthodoxy and dogma
(rather than reproduce them), to be someone who cannot easily be co-
opted by governments or corporations, and whose raison d’être is to repre-
sent all those people and issues that are routinely forgotten or swept under
the rug.’’
≥∑ Said uses the compelling metaphor of the exile to further am-
plify his point:
Even if one is not an actual immigrant or expatriate, it is still possible to
think as one, to imagine and investigate in spite of barriers, and always


--- PAGE 387 ---
364 ella baker’s legacy
to move away from the centralizing authorities towards the margins,
where you see things that are usually lost on minds that have never
traveled beyond the conventional and comfortable. . . . [T]o be as mar-
ginal and undomesticated as someone who is in real exile is for an
intellectual to be unusually responsive to the traveler rather than the
potentate, to the provisional and risky rather than the habitual, to inno-
vation and experiment rather than the authoritatively given status quo.
The exilic intellectual does not respond to the logic of the conventional
but to the audacity of daring, and to representing change, to moving on,
not standing still.’’
≥∏
The content of Ella Baker’s teachings and her style of ‘‘renegade intellec-
tual’’ work, as Robin Kelley might describe it, was a powerful force in the
Black Freedom Movement of the 1960s and beyond.
≥π But what was the
substance of her ideas and her worldview? Her political and moral inﬂu-
ence on sncc from 1960 to 1966 can be divided into several areas. First, she
encouraged a democratic practice and an egalitarian structure as an alter-
native to the normative presence of many undemocratic traditions in both
the black and the white American institutions that the young people had
been a part of, mainly schools and churches. Second, she gently nudged the
students in the direction of embracing a class analysis of racism and in-
justice that allied them with those at the bottom of the social and economic
hierarchy—those who were sometimes at the margins of mainstream so-
cieties, black and white, but who were central to resistance efforts.
Third, Ella Baker afﬁrmed in her practice and her teachings a style of
personal grassroots organizing that, while more common among women
than men, was a part of a radical democratic humanist tradition that both
men and women could lay claim to. With the subtle power of her presence,
Baker offered a different model of gender relations and a broader spec-
trum of gender identities. Her own transgressive female identity was rep-
resented by her uninhibited occupation of predominately male political
spaces, her refusal to be a conventional teacher, and her rejection of a
social identiﬁcation as someone’s wife. Her way of being a black woman
challenged men in sncc to rethink manhood and masculinity, just as it gave
women in the movement a widened sense of their own possibilities as
doers, thinkers, and powerful social change agents.
In essence, Baker’s leadership from 1960 to 1966 helped create within
sncc the space where traditional hierarchies of race, class, and, to a les-
ser extent, gender could be turned on their heads.
≥∫ As the progenitor


--- PAGE 388 ---
ella baker’s legacy 365
and presiding elder of sncc for the better part of the decade, Baker
helped set the terms for an interracial and interclass organization of men
and women to function in a principled and nontraditional manner, rein-
forcing a new set of social and interpersonal relations in the process. To say
this is not to portray sncc as an egalitarian utopia; it was not. However,
Ella Baker’s leadership and presence helped fashion the practice and phi-
losophy of the group in such a way that traditional norms of male domi-
nance, white privilege, and class elitism were overturned in much of the
day-to-day functioning of the group and in the public image it projected.
In the Jim Crow South, in an America still unready to afford black citi-
zens the most basic civil rights, a small cadre of whites were persuaded (at
least in principle and to a large extent in practice) to accept a secondary,
supportive role in a black-led organization.
≥Ω And, in a society and cul-
ture whose main institutions still accorded women a subordinate status,
men were persuaded to accept an organization whose intellectual, spiri-
tual, and political guide was—rather than a towering male patriarch or a
messiah of some kind—an unassuming middle-aged woman. This was radi-
cal indeed.
By rejecting the dominant values of society and the elitist markers of
supposed success, Baker encouraged young people to wrap themselves in a
different culture, not as an escape but as part of their re-envisioning and
redeﬁning a new form of social relations that prioritized cooperation and
collectivism over competition and individualism.
The inversion of conventional class hierarchies within sncc was most
pronounced. Talented and educated young black people were persuaded to
forfeit their privileged claim to leadership of the race, a status that would
naturally have been afforded them according to pre–World War II uplift
ideology, and instead to defer to the collective wisdom of sharecroppers,
maids, and manual laborers, many of whom lacked even a high school
education. White activists were encouraged to reject existing race and class
hierarchies and do the same. This was a fundamental break with black
politics as usual. Poor southern black people were not merely sncc’s con-
stituency; they were revered for their knowledge, commitment, and sacri-
ﬁce. Women like Fannie Lou Hamer and others became the heroines of the
movement. Biographer Chana Kai Lee points out that Fannie Lou Hamer
was a serious movement strategist and analyst and that those who worked
closely with her understood this quite clearly and valued it.
∂≠
sncc’s decidedly open and ﬂuid structure, especially during the ﬁrst few
years, made it possible for those who were poor and working-class, women,


--- PAGE 389 ---
366 ella baker’s legacy
youths, and political novices to exercise enormous inﬂuence within the
group and play central roles. Structurally, sncc had a chairperson and an
executive secretary, but when asked who the leader of the group was, sncc
members would often reply, ‘‘We all are.’’ Even with strong personalities
like Jim Forman and later Ruby Doris Smith Robinson and Stokely Carmi-
chael in ofﬁcial leadership positions, there was a rambunctious conﬁdence
among the rank and ﬁle that militated against heavy-handed top-down
leadership, something that Ella Baker applauded and encouraged.
......
a different construction of gender identity
Baker was much more explicit in the expression of her ideas about social
class and race than she was when it came to gender. Diane Nash once ob-
served, ‘‘Ella Baker was a feminist more in what she did than what she
said.’’
∂∞ Her views and lessons about gender politics and identities were
deeply embedded in her daily work and in the public image she cultivated.
Through private advice and public example, Baker helped young women
activists navigate the mineﬁeld of gender and sexual politics within the
movement and within their own lives. For example, Casey Hayden, a young
white ﬁeld secretary from Texas, consulted Baker about whether she should
apply for a job as a full-time organizer given her impending marriage to
Tom Hayden, leader of the Students for a Democratic Society (sds). Baker’s
answer was an unfaltering yes. Years later, after Hayden’s marriage had
ended and other problems set in, Ella was there for Casey once again,
bolstering her conﬁdence that she could make it on her own. ‘‘Ella got me
through that period’’ with many late-night conversations, Casey recalled
years later with great emotion and affection.
∂≤
Similarly, Prathia Hall, a seminary student and Southwest Georgia ﬁeld
secretary for sncc, conﬁded her marriage plans to Baker and worried
about how her independence might be compromised if she were to become
someone’s wife. In turn, Baker shared with Hall something she shared with
very few people: her own difﬁculties with juggling marriage and poli-
tics. Baker did not, however, encourage Hall to follow the path she her-
self had taken—ultimately choosing politics over domesticity—but simply
warned her about what problems she might anticipate.
∂≥
Some young women did not fully appreciate the impact Baker had on
their lives in these formative years until much later. When Barbara Jones
(Omolade)—now a successful teacher, writer, and feminist activist—began
to analyze the gender politics within the movement twenty years after


--- PAGE 390 ---
ella baker’s legacy 367
sncc’s demise, she immediately thought of Ella Baker as a radical model of
black womanhood. ∂∂ Baker was independent, a ‘‘social theorist and an
intellectual,’’ a no-nonsense person who could hold her own in any situa-
tion and commanded respect from those around her. This model of a con-
ﬁdant, committed, and savvy black woman was one that many of the young
women whose lives Baker touched would strive to emulate.
∂∑
Eleanor Holmes Norton, who met Baker when she was in her early
twenties and fresh out of Yale law school, remembered Baker as ‘‘a woman
who seemed unintimidated by the fact that she was a woman in a move-
ment led by men. She was just very smart. And she wasn’t afraid to be a
smart woman.’’ Baker never called herself a feminist. She could not have,
Norton insists—‘‘there wasn’t any such animal then.’’ At the same time,
‘‘Ella Baker performed and acted as a feminist.’’ She operated with conﬁ-
dence, intelligence, and authority, and consequently ‘‘she was not treated
as a woman. She was treated as one of the most talented people in the
room.’’ Ella Baker was not a feminist per se. That is, she did not use or
embrace the term. But, through her actions and what her work repre-
sented, she could safely be called what Joy James refers to as ‘‘profeminist,’’
someone who is a strong advocate of gender equality and liberatory con-
cepts of manhood and womanhood, without a self-conscious investment in
the term ‘‘feminist’’ or its attendant theories.
∂∏
In a sense, Ella Baker simply ignored conventional gender mandates. As
a result, in some contexts, she was not treated the way other women were
treated, even by men who held sexist views on the proper place of women.
She was so savvy and had so many of the skills and insights the movement
needed that her gender was sometimes ‘‘overlooked,’’ if only to exploit her
talents. She was at certain moments seemingly able to negotiate an exemp-
tion from the existing conﬁnes of patriarchal gender roles. But there was
also a limit to the sexual neutrality she was afforded. There were many
times when her gender became quite important and she was reminded that
she had overstepped the bounds. Baker’s role was somewhat unique: be-
cause of her skills, experience, and knowledge of an organization’s inner
workings—as in the case of the naacp or sclc—she was allowed to sit at the
table but was rarely dealt into the game. As her friend Septima Clark
observed, these insulting reminders infuriated Baker.
∂π Most of the time,
however, Baker was able to navigate the bumpy gender terrain of the Black
Freedom Movement and make signiﬁcant contributions anyway. She devel-
oped strategies to insulate herself and minimize the psychological damage.
Such strategies understandably took a toll.
∂∫


--- PAGE 391 ---
368 ella baker’s legacy
......
situational democracy and humanistic practice
Baker’s emphasis on grassroots participatory democracy stemmed from
her realization that the forces being mobilized by sncc in the 1960s were
potentially some of the most radical in the nation. Her philosophy was not
simply to ‘‘let the people decide,’’ as the popular sncc and sds slogan
suggested. Rather, it was to let the disenfranchised vote, let the silenced be
heard, let the oppressed be empowered, and let the marginalized move to
the center.
∂Ω The distinction is an important one. In other words, she was
not advocating a simple populist formula of majority rule or ‘‘one person,
one vote,’’ a paradigm that, as the work of the legal scholar Lani Guinier
illustrates, is sorely limiting and essentially unfair in certain situations.
Democracy, for Ella Baker, was about fairness and inclusion, not sheer
numbers. Therefore, democratic practice could never be formulaic but
rather had to revolve around real participation and deliberation. It was
given meaning by the speciﬁc situation or historical moment in which it
was tested. In their book on race and democracy, The Miner’s Canary ,
Guinier and Gerald Torres argue that in order to realize a more meaning-
ful and inclusive democracy we must ‘‘disrupt certain habits of individual
thought or self-defeating rituals, while introducing new possibilities for
reciprocity, collaboration, problem solving, networking and innovation. To
do this, [a] community needs the capacity to confront embedded hier-
archies and to engage with the untidiness of conﬂict over time.’’
∑≠ Such a
view very closely resembles Baker’s.
Embracing this radical approach of situational democracy meant Baker
had to constantly assess and reassess the power dynamics in any given
situation and then tilt the leadership scales in the direction of the least
powerful. For example, Baker’s shifting posture within the movement re-
ﬂected her understanding of the power dynamics in each new organiza-
tional setting she found herself in. She had a greater degree of authority
and inﬂuence in sncc than she had ever had before, but, instead of exercis-
ing it forcefully, she relented and exercised her power lightly and subtly.
She could have intimidated and dominated, as certain leaders had at-
tempted to overpower and dominate her, but she did not. She took pre-
cisely the opposite approach.
Ella Baker’s vision of radical democracy was a profoundly historical
concept, based on the idea that in order to achieve democratic ideals one
ﬁrst had to assess the speciﬁc historical parameters of exclusion, especially


--- PAGE 392 ---
ella baker’s legacy 369
racism, sexism, and class exploitation. It is important to note that Baker
would have been the last to argue the conservative colorblind argument
with regard to race and inequality.
∑∞ Her conviction was that previously
oppressive practices had to be radically reversed, not simply halted—those
with racial, class, and gender privileges had to relinquish them, and correc-
tive measures had to be put into place. This was as true within the move-
ment as it was in the larger society. And this explains what may have
appeared to be an inverted social hierarchy within sncc. Black leadership
had to be emphasized and poor people’s voices ampliﬁed because in abso-
lutely every other facet of social life the opposite pressures and privileges
were in force.
The challenge of a radical democratic practice was both a personal and
an organizational one. Group relations had to be reorganized, but individ-
uals had to grapple with personal changes as well. The process of building
a movement for social transformation had to allow for, encourage, and
nurture the transformation of the human beings involved. Individuals had
to rethink and redeﬁne their most intimate personal relations and their
identities. Activists could not simply ‘‘ape the insiders,’’ Baker insisted.
∑≤
Social change organizations could not replicate the cold impersonalism of
the market-driven dominant culture. Personal relations were key building
blocks for a new, more humane social order and for a successful revolution-
ary movement. It is in this sense that Ella Baker was a humanist. While she
bemoaned the fact that ‘‘our whole society has been built to a large extent
upon the ascendancy of the individual, of individual leadership,’’ she also
celebrated the importance and dignity of each person.
∑≥ She saw value and
a complex beauty in human beings, despite all their imperfections. She
embraced ‘‘the concept that . . . all contacts with people, if you are inter-
ested in people, can be valuable.’’
∑∂
It was her contention that the political was inherently personal long
before it was a slogan for Second Wave feminism. Just as teachers had to
know their students, organizers had to know their communities, and com-
rades had to know one another and treat one another decently. Movement
leaders could not condemn hierarchy, elitism, and impersonalism in the
society and emulate those same values in their own work and personal
interactions. ‘‘Anytime you continue to carry on the same kind of organiza-
tion that you say you are ﬁghting against, you can’t prove to me that you
have made any change in your thinking,’’ Baker observed in an interview in
the 1970s.
∑∑ Activists could not make themselves feel more important by
disparaging and ‘‘tyrannizing over others.’’ Baker went on to explain: ‘‘As


--- PAGE 393 ---
370 ella baker’s legacy
we begin to grow in our own strength and as we ﬂex our muscles of leader-
ship, we can begin to feel that the other fellow should come through us. But
this is not the way to create a new world . . . [which] requires understand-
ing that human beings are human beings.’’
∑∏
Ella Baker’s political praxis—the combination of her theory and prac-
tice—reﬂected what political scientists describe as a deliberative model.
Interaction, discussion, debate, and consensus building were key compo-
nents of that praxis. In contrast, voting, lobbying the corridors of power,
and getting favored candidates elected were secondary considerations.
Once people were in motion in a committed and sustained mass struggle,
Baker felt that access to legislators and media would follow. ‘‘If you are
involved with people and organizing them as a force, you didn’t have to go
and seek out the establishment people. They would seek you out,’’ she
insisted, explaining that politicians had passed numerous laws over time
with little impact on people’s daily lives until the people themselves de-
cided to make implementation of those laws real and meaningful.
∑π South-
ern black youth could have petitioned the president and the attorney gen-
eral ad nauseam without a reply before February 1, 1960. But once they
were engaged in a set of protests that disrupted business as usual, govern-
ment ofﬁcials in Washington were ready to listen.
∑∫ For Baker, elections,
court decisions, and even legislative victories were the events that punctu-
ated the real ongoing political process, which consisted of a discursive
exchange, the building of a set of trusting relationships, individual and
organizational, the transmission of skills and conﬁdence, and the forging
of a shared democratic vision for the future. That was the meat of political
work for Ella Baker. The rest was extra.
∑Ω This political orientation put
Baker on the ideological margins of the predominantly male black political
leadership circle and mainstream civil rights organizations. Still she lo-
cated herself at the center of grassroots struggles.
......
the outsider within
The concept of the ‘‘outsider within,’’ a person who functions in close
proximity those in power but who is never given ofﬁcial recognition as a
member of the club, is a useful way to understand one aspect of Ella Baker’s
complex and unique political career.
∏≠ The ‘‘outsider within’’ has the bene-
ﬁt of observation up close, but she is still not an authentic member of the
inner circle in terms of actual power, access to resources, or social status
within the group. Baker knew and worked with some of the most powerful


--- PAGE 394 ---
ella baker’s legacy 371
black male political leaders of the twentieth century: A. Philip Randolph,
W. E. B. Du Bois, Walter White, Thurgood Marshall, and Martin Luther
King Jr. She knew them all, but she was never really what sclc minister
Ralph Abernathy’s wife, Juanita, perceived her as being, which was ‘‘one of
the boys.’’
∏∞ In contrast, Baker consistently described herself as operating
on the periphery of respected black leadership circles.
Baker was an ‘‘outsider within’’ the national leadership of several major
civil rights organizations, with direct access to a host of powerful male
leaders, yet she consciously compromised her insider status by speaking
her mind forcefully, because in her words, she had ‘‘no capacity for wor-
shipping the leader.’’
∏≤ The inescapable fact that she was a woman amid a
decidedly male political elite only compounded her difﬁculties. She was
not a team player because she often contested the rules of the game, which
angered and annoyed many male organizers and some women. Still, it
would be wrong to assume that this status rendered her powerless. She had
real power and real inﬂuence, largely because she secured it for herself.
She insinuated herself into situations where others thought she did not
belong, speaking out in a way that some thought she should not. She built
up a loyal network of local allies that gave her some protection from possi-
ble capricious actions on the part of her ‘‘superiors.’’ Baker was an outsider,
in part, because of circumstance and in part because of her own political
choice and agency. She knew that sexist traditions limited her ability to
function as a top leader. However, her own political views, as they evolved,
brought her to the conclusion that she did not want to function in that
capacity, as it was construed, and she was critical of those who did. At the
same time that Baker developed a strategy for navigating the undemocratic
structures and practices that threatened to keep her and others at the
margins of national black political leadership, she fought to transform the
structural pillars of elitism within the Black Freedom Movement into some-
thing more democratic. Historian Darlene Clark Hine observes that ‘‘Afri-
can American women had to create a patchwork of identities just to get
through most days.’’
∏≥ Baker certainly had to maintain a variety of public
and private identities in order to carry out the work that she did in dif-
ferent venues and in disparate political and social climates. There were
times when she was a quiet, dutiful ‘‘worker in the vineyards,’’ as her
mother’s missionary group would have said. At other times, she was a bold
and formidable presence, motivating some and challenging and confront-
ing others.
For much of her adult political life, Ella Baker was a socialist without a


--- PAGE 395 ---
372 ella baker’s legacy
party or a party line. As a friend of hers, the author and ﬁlmmaker Joanne
Grant, observed, Baker was not often explicit about her socialist beliefs,
but there were times when she was as straightforward as one could be.
‘‘The only society that can serve the needs of large masses of poor people is
a Socialist society,’’ she declared in a 1977 interview.
∏∂ She was a harsh
critic of capitalism, but resisted any hints of sectarianism or ideological
orthodoxy. She loathed dogma of any kind and was openly critical when
she observed this kind of rigid thinking on the part of friends and col-
leagues. Her own worldview was constructed from an amalgam of different
ideologies and traditions, combining the black Baptist missionary values of
charity, humility, and service with the economic theories of Marxists and
socialists of various stripes who advocated a redistribution of wealth. She
also embraced the militant self-defense tradition of the black South. Her
afﬁliation with the openly socialist Mass Party Organizing Committee
(mpoc) and her defense of Communist Party member Angela Davis are
further indicators of her unequivocal identiﬁcation with the left by the
1970s. She had become her own unique kind of revolutionary.
For Baker, revolution was above all about a protracted and layered dem-
ocratic process. The journey was as important as the destination. In the
ﬁnal analysis, Baker’s political philosophy was undergirded by a deep and
profound sense of connection to and love of humanity. This spirit of radical
humanism, with its embedded understanding and appreciation of the hu-
man process of struggle, is also reﬂected in the life and writings of the
Caribbean-born socialist C. L. R. James.
∏∑ In the following words, James
summed up much of his view of revolutionary transformation and his
sensitivity to the human characters that are the agents of that change: ‘‘A
revolution is ﬁrst and foremost a movement from the old to the new, and
needs above all new words, new verse, new passwords—all the symbols in
which ideas and feelings are made tangible. The mass creation and appro-
priation of what is needed is a revealing picture of a whole people on
their journey into the modern world, sometimes pathetic, sometimes vastly
comic, ranging from the sublime to the ridiculous, but always vibrant with
the life that only a mass of ordinary people can give.’’
∏∏ Baker lived her life
engaged in political struggle and forged relationships and sustained orga-
nizations as if she believed precisely what James’s statement conveys.
......
In trying to delineate Ella Baker’s life and harness and distill it in well-
ordered chapters, I felt her resistance. There was an elegant ﬂuidity about
her life that proved to be both the source of her amazing ‘‘presence’’ and, at


--- PAGE 396 ---
ella baker’s legacy 373
times, a biographer’s nightmare. In looking back on the semi-coherence of
a life lived, one is humbly reminded that life is an art and not a science. In
eavesdropping on Ella Baker’s life story, I found parts of it that made a
visceral impact and simply could not be poured adequately into words. As I
sought advice from friends, relatives, and colleagues who knew Ella Baker
or had themselves researched her life, I was repeatedly reminded that ‘‘she
was bigger than that’’ and that no term or label quite captured her. She was
forever shrugging off every deﬁnitional shawl I tried to gently drape over
her shoulders. She really lived outside categories and labels, as difﬁcult as
that is for some academics to accept. And yet she was still an intellectual
with a very coherent, although dynamic, worldview. As my jazz-aﬁcionado
husband would say, like Duke Ellington she was ‘‘beyond category.’’ Still,
going back to the beginning of my story of her life, she was both a self-
made woman and a product of the world, country, culture, and ideas that
surrounded her. In celebrating her life, I do not want to mystify or circum-
scribe it. While, as my son constantly reminds me, we are all products of the
multitude of experiences, inﬂuences, and stimuli that touch us as we strug-
gle to formulate ideas and identities, those experiences are the raw mate-
rial we then mold into our own unique form. So, trying to sum up and
repackage a life full of detours, depth, and contradictions is like trying to
hold water in your hands. You can feel it, but you can’t quite contain it.
Some metaphors and comparisons are better than others for trying to
convey a sense of what Ella Baker’s life was all about. In an eloquent eu-
logy given at a sncc reunion in 2000 in Raleigh, North Carolina, Timothy
Jenkins, a former sncc member and a national student leader in the 1960s,
described Ella Baker as the ‘‘mortar between the bricks’’ holding different
sectors of the movement together with a tacit strength that was indispens-
able but almost invisible. I love Timothy Jenkins’s metaphor, but for me it is
still not quite right—too hard, too harsh, perhaps. For me, in looking back
at Baker’s life in all of its rich complexity, I am reminded of the eclectic
crazy quilt that has hung on my wall since I began this project and is of the
same generation as Ella Baker. It reminds me of how she patched together
her worldview from the ideological fragments in her repertoire, binding
together seemingly mismatched theories and traditions, stitching it all to-
gether into something both functional and utterly amazing. The patchwork
quilt reminds me of how Baker served the movement: identifying the value
in people who were raggedy, worn, and a little bit tattered—people who
were seen by some as the scraps, the remnants, the discarded ones. In each
one, as in each strip of fabric, Ella Baker saw enormous beauty and poten-


--- PAGE 397 ---
374 ella baker’s legacy
tial. And, like the quilting tradition itself, her life’s work was collective
work. She understood the labor-intensive process required to stitch to-
gether all the tiny pieces and hold them in place. She knew it could not be
done alone and required the skill, trust, and commitment of a team of
quilters. Ella Baker’s legacy then is a collective legacy, bound up with the
work of the Pauli Murrays, the Lucille Blacks, the Septima Clarks, the
Fannie Lou Hamers, the Amzie Moores, the Bob Moseses, and the Anne
Bradens of the world and many more. She has not left us a manifesto,
perhaps quite deliberately so. Manifestos make us lazy. Rather, she has left
us a warm and complex work of art, a reminder of a process, a way of
working and living, a way of looking at that which may seem of little value
and ﬁnding its enormous transformative power.


--- PAGE 398 ---
appendix
ella baker’s organizational affiliations, 1927–1986
(A Partial List)
Ad Hoc Committee on the Sunﬂower (County) Elections, 1960s
American Labor Party, 1930s
American League against War and Fascism, 1930s
Americans for Traditional Liberties, 1950s
Angela Davis Defense Committee, 1970s
Aubrey Williams Foundation, 1968
Charter Group for a Pledge of Conscience, 1970s
Coalition of Concerned Black Americans, 1970s
Committee to Defend the Harlem Five, 1970s
Fund for Educational and Legal Defense, 1960s–1970s
Harlem Branch Library, Young People’s Forum, 1930s
Harlem’s Own Cooperative Inc., 1930s
Highlander Folk School, 1950s–1960s
Independent Black Voters’ League, 1970s
In Friendship, 1950s
Jeannette Rankin Brigade, 1968–1969
Liberal Party, 1950s
Mass Party Organizing Committee, 1970s
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, 1960s
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 1940s–1950s
National Association of Consumers, 1940s
National Committee to Abolish HUAC, 1950s
National Sharecroppers Fund, 1960s–1970s
National Urban League, 1930s
New York Public Schools Intergroup Committee, 1950s
Operation Freedom, 1960s
Parents in Action, 1950s
Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom, 1957
Puerto Rican Solidarity Committee, 1970s
Rand School, 1930s


--- PAGE 399 ---
376 appendix
Southern Christian Leadership Conference, 1950s
Southern Conference Education Fund, 1960s
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, 1960s
Third World Women’s Alliance, 1970s
Volunteer Civil Rights Commissions, 1950s
We Care, 1960s
Women’s Emergency Coalition, 1960s
Works Progress Administration Workers Education Project, 1930s
World Fair Boosters and Friends of Africa, 1934
Young Negroes’ Cooperative League, 1930s
Young Women’s Christian Association, Harlem Branch, 1930s
Youth Committee of One Hundred against Lynching, 1930s
ywca Regional Committee on Human Relations, 1960s


--- PAGE 400 ---
notes
note on primary sources
The Ella Baker Papers (EBP) cited here are housed at the Schomburg Center for Re-
search in Black Culture, which is part of the New York Public Library system, Harlem,
New York. It consists of nine boxes of documents and correspondence. Unfortunately, at
the time this book is going to press, the papers are still being processed and cataloged,
and are not open to the public. I have viewed these papers in their entirety and consulted
with the curator of the collection about how they will be organized for purposes of
citation. I have indicated as clearly as possible where other researchers can ﬁnd the
documents referenced here. The collection will be organized chronologically, with a
separate correspondence ﬁle that will contain letters not directly associated with a major
organization or campaign. There will also likely be two separate ﬁles, one of Ella Baker’s
writings (which will be small) and another miscellaneous ﬁle containing documents and
newspaper clippings that Baker collected pertaining to events and activities that she
herself was not directly involved in. In addition, my own collection of approximately ten
boxes of materials pertaining to Ella Baker’s life and collected during the course of my
research—some of which overlaps with the contents of the EBP—will be cataloged and
deposited at the Schomburg for reference by other researchers.
Through the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), I petitioned the U.S. Department of
Justice to obtain Ella Baker’s FBI ﬁles, which date from the 1940s through the 1970s.
There are three distinct ﬁles: Atlanta (ﬁle no. 100-5837), New York (ﬁle no. 100-136886),
and Headquarters (ﬁle no. HQ 100-430167). In the notes they will simply be referred to
as ‘‘Ella Baker’s FBI ﬁles’’ with the relevant location. Unfortunately, these ﬁles are not a
reliable source of empirical information. There are numerous factual inaccuracies in
them, ranging from the wrong birthdate to a misidentiﬁcation by one agent of Ella
Baker’s husband as her cousin. The most useful function these declassiﬁed government
documents seem to serve is as a convenient ﬁle of clippings showing the coverage of
Baker’s various afﬁliations and speaking appearances. I have not relied on this mate-
rial for any information that is not veriﬁable elsewhere without offering qualiﬁers or
disclaimers.
introduction
The epigraph introducing this book appears as an addendum to Joanne Grant’s Ella
Baker. As it happens, Robert Moses and Charles Cobb chose the same epigraph to intro-
duce their book Radical Equations. Initially, I worried about using the very same words
for an introductory statement. But then I realized that Moses, Cobb, and Grant, all of
whom worked closely with Ella Baker in the heyday of SNCC, had selected a quotation
that best represented her philosophy and politics. That being the case, it seemed al-
together appropriate to highlight again the remarks about radicalism that Baker made in
1969.
1. Evans, Personal Politics ; Mueller, ‘‘Ella Baker and the Origins of ‘Participatory
Democracy’ ’’; Omolade, interview by author; Holmes Norton, interview by author.


--- PAGE 401 ---
378 notes to pages 8–17
2. Darlene Clark Hine, ‘‘Rape and the Inner Lives of Black Women: Thoughts on the
Culture of Dissemblance,’’ in Hine Sight, 37.
3. Ibid., 43.
4. Kochiyama, telephone interview by author.
5. Joyce Ladner made this observation about Baker at the SNCC reunion at Shaw
University, Raleigh, N.C, Apr. 2000.
chapter one
1. Giddings, interview by author.
2. Census records and transcribed interviews vary in the spelling of Ella Baker’s pater-
nal grandfather’s name, with some identifying him as ‘‘Teemer’’ and others ‘‘Teema.’’
3. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 13.
4. Minutes of the Thirteenth Annual Session of the Women’s Auxiliary Progressive
Baptist Convention of North Carolina, Elizabeth City, N.C., Oct. 29–Nov. 1, 1931, North
Carolina Collection (NC Collection), Wilson Library, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, 5.
5. Gilmore, Gender and Jim Crow . For more discussion of how black women negoti-
ated race, class, and gender identities in this period, see Perkins, ‘‘The Impact of the
‘Culture of True Womanhood’ on the Education of Black Women’’; Gaines, Uplifting the
Race; and Shaw, What a Woman Ought to Be and to Do.
6. Shaw, What a Woman Ought to Be and to Do , 91. Shaw argues that, despite some
elitist underpinnings, black middle-class women formed an identity that included ser-
vice to those less fortunate, even when providing such service involved some seemingly
unfeminine behavior by conventional standards. She further argues that the black com-
munity’s expectation of public works by women undermined the cult of true woman-
hood’s emphasis on domesticity. The emphasis on humility undermined class snobbery
toward the black poor.
7. Baker, interview by Hogan, 15.
8. Minutes of the Thirteenth Annual Session of the Woman’s Auxiliary Progressive
Baptist Convention, 7.
9. Eric Anderson, Race and Politics in North Carolina, 12.
10. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 26, 28.
11. U.S. Census Population Schedule, North Carolina, 1870 and 1880.
12. Warren County Sunday School Convention proceedings, July 14, 1926, bulletin
no. 82, NC Collection.
13. Baker, interview by Hogan, 14.
14. Ibid., 14–15.
15. Minutes of the Thirteenth Annual Session of the Woman’s Auxiliary Progressive
Baptist Convention, 4. These were the only extant minutes I could locate with Anna Ross
Baker’s name in them. Even though Baker was a young adult in 1931, all of her interview
accounts suggest that the missionary work her mother did in the 1930s was a continua-
tion of the same kind of work she had done when Ella Baker was a child. So, I am
inferring that these service projects are representative examples of earlier work. Note
that on p. 5 of the minutes the session is described as the fourteenth annual session. It is
unclear whether the gathering was the thirteenth or the fourteenth, but all other infor-
mation is consistent.
16. Baker, interview by Hogan, 15.
17. See Salem, To Better Our World, and Bekeley, ‘‘ ‘Colored Ladies Also Contributed.’ ’’
18. See Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent , 13–18, 221–229; and Gilmore, Gender


--- PAGE 402 ---
notes to pages 18–23 379
and Jim Crow, for further discussion of the political and community service intervention
of middle-class black women in the South in the early 1900s.
19. Minutes of the Thirteenth Annual Session of the Women’s Auxiliary Progressive
Baptist Convention, 13.
20. Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent, 120–21.
21. ‘‘Lifting as we climb’’ was the motto of the National Association of Colored
Women, formed in 1896. See Giddings, When and Where I Enter, 93–98.
22. There is a very lively debate in the literature about the nature of class, leadership,
and respectability among African Americans in the early 1900s. Shaw argues for the
sense of obligation black middle class women felt for the masses of black folk. Despite
some elitism, she contends, social status was actually dependent on social responsibility
to the community. This relationship was underwritten by the close proximity and shared
racial discrimination faced by all blacks regardless of class. Gaines and Higginbotham
place greater emphasis on the ways in which the black middle class policed the moral
behavior of the poor and earned beneﬁts as a result. Gilmore sees the politics of respect-
ability as a shrewd strategy by middle-class blacks to win reform victories for the entire
community.
23. See Gaines, Uplifting the Race , for further discussion of the limits and contradic-
tions of ‘‘uplift’’ ideology that privileged black middle-class male leadership and inadver-
tently reinforced antiblack racism. Also see Frankel and Dye, Gender, Class, Race, and
Reform.
24. Burroughs quoted in Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent, 208.
25. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 59.
26. Ibid.
27. Ibid., 60.
28. For more evidence of middle-class black women’s belief in the compatibility of
successful private and public lives in the ﬁrst quarter of the twentieth century, see Shaw,
What a Woman Ought to Be and To Do, and Gilmore, Gender and Jim Crow.
29. Minutes of the Thirteenth Annual Session of the Woman’s Auxiliary Progressive
Baptist Convention, 7.
30. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 59.
31. Collins, Black Feminist Thought, 119.
32. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 26.
33. Baker, interview by Hogan, 86.
34. Ibid.
35. Ibid., 82, 85. The term ‘‘precise-spoken’’ is from Baker, interview by Hayden and
Thrasher, 9.
36. Baker, interview by Boyte, 4.
37. Baker, interview by Hogan, 86.
38. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 22.
39. Ibid., 22.
40. Ibid., 23.
41. Ibid., 22.
42. Ibid., 22–23.
43. U.S. Census Population Schedule, Norfolk City, Virginia, 1900, Norfolk Public
Library, Norfolk, Va. This census schedule lists the year of marriage.
44. Du Bois, ‘‘Forethought,’’ in The Souls of Black Folk , 34. Du Bois ﬁrst made this
famous statement in his address to the ﬁrst Pan-African conference, held in London in
July 1900.


--- PAGE 403 ---
380 notes to pages 23–30
45. Ella Baker’s maternal family was from Littleton, N.C., which is now a part of
Warren County; however, Littleton was formerly a part of both Warren and adjacent
Halifax Counties.
46. U.S. Census Population Schedule, North Carolina, 1900 and 1910. This cen-
sus listed whether respondents could read or write and whether they owned or rented
land.
47. Black sociologist E. Franklin Frazier’s Black Bourgeoisie  attacked the snobbery
and selﬁsh attitudes of privileged African Americans. However, Baker’s family does not
ﬁt his proﬁle.
48. Geospatial and Statistical Data Center, University of Virginia Library. Rich-
mond City had a larger population, with 85,050. U.S. Historical Census Data Browser,
»http://ﬁsher.lib.virginia.edu/census….
49. Earl Lewis, In Their Own Interest, 10.
50. Ibid., 22–23.
51. ‘‘Judge Fines Insolent Negro $25,’’ Norfolk Landmark, July 8, 1910, 2.
52. For more information on Jim Crow and segregation, see Chafe et al., Remembering
Jim Crow; Dailey et al., Jumpin’ Jim Crow; and Perman, Struggle for Mastery.
53. Earl Lewis, In Their Own Interest , 21–22. Black disenfranchisement was not the
sole intent of the redistricting in Norfolk, but it was the net result.
54. ‘‘Fourth Ends in Turmoil of Riot,’’ Norfolk Landmark, July 5, 1910, 1. For details on
antiblack violence after the Jack Johnson ﬁght, see Roberts, Papa Jack.
55. Norfolk City Directory, 1895–96, Norfolk Collection, Norfolk Public Library, Nor-
folk, Va., 93.
56. Norfolk City Directory, 1897, 565.
57. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 6.
58. Norfolk City Directory, 1897, 565, and 1900, 749.
59. Norfolk City Directory, 1910, 740.
60. Ibid.
61. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 11.
62. Baker, interview by Hogan, 11. The transcript says, ‘‘I don’t think it was Dennis
Austin—was tall and very black . . .’’ I think there was an error in the transcription from
the audio, since census records indicate that Dennis Alston of North Carolina was a
neighbor of the Bakers in Norfolk and otherwise ﬁts Ella Baker’s description. He is likely
the person she is referring to as the Black Money King. See also Norfolk City Directory,
1910, 740, and Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 14.
63. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 14.
64. Baker, interview by Hogan, 10–11.
65. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 2.
66. Baker, interview by Hogan, 81.
67. Ibid., 81–82.
68. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 8.
69. Ibid., 12.
70. Ibid., 11.
71. Ibid., 16.
72. Ibid., 12.
73. Ibid., 21.
74. Norfolk City Directory, 1908, 1217.
75. ‘‘Fourth Ends in Turmoil of Riot,’’ Norfolk Landmark, July 5, 1910, 1.
76. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 21.


--- PAGE 404 ---
notes to pages 31–39 381
77. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 58–60; Baker, interview by Hogan, 14–16,
86–89; Baker, interviewer not known, Duke University Oral History Program (DUOHP),
Durham, N.C., 8.
78. Warren County Register of Deeds, Warrenton, N.C., 1888; and Baker, interview by
Hayden and Thrasher, 19.
79. Baker, interview by Britton, 2–3; Warren Co. Register of Deeds, 1888.
80. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 2, 24.
81. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 57.
82. Baker, interviewer not known, DUOHP, 4–9.
83. Newell, interview by author; ‘‘Our Colored People,’’ Littleton News Reporter, June
18, 1897, 5.
84. Newell, interview by author. Jenny Newell was a classmate and neighbor of Ella
Baker in the 1910s.
85. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 21.
86. On Maggie, see Solomon, interview by author. On Blake Curtis, see U.S. Census
Population Schedule, North Carolina Census, 1920, v. 42, ED 138, sheet 19, line 11.
87. Solomon, interview by author. Maude Solomon was a neighbor of the Baker
family and a friend of Ella Baker’s younger sister in the 1910s and 1920s.
88. Newell, interview by author.
89. Johnson, Shadow of the Plantation, 129; also Jaynes, Branches without Roots.
90. Ella Baker, interview by Morris, 17A.
91. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 16–17.
92. Baker, interview by Morris, 13A; the ‘‘tomboy’’ reference is from Baker, interview
by Hogan, 89.
93. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 11–13, 16; Baker, interviewer not
known, DUOHP, 1.
94. Baker, interview by Hogan, 86.
95. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 16.
96. Baker, interview by Hogan, 86.
97. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 8.
98. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 73.
99. Baker, interview by Morris, 12A.
100. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 15.
101. Ibid., 25. For more on class and preaching styles see, Wheeler, Uplifting the Race.
102. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 14.
103. Baker, interview by Morris, 12A.
104. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 57.
105. Ibid., 5, 61; Gilchrist, interview by author.
106. Warren County Register of Deeds, 1888.
107. North Carolina Real Estate Index for Warren County, 1888, book 53, 625, N.C.
State Archives, Raleigh, N.C.; 1889, book 54, 156; 1890, book 54, 848.
108. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 61.
109. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 61.
110. Baker, interview by Hogan, 74.
111. Charles Payne, ‘‘Ella Baker and Models of Social Change.’’
112. Eric Anderson, Race and Politics in North Carolina, 2–5.
113. Ibid., 5. For more on African Americans in North Carolina politics during this
period, see Helen Edmonds, The Negro and Fusion Politics in North Carolina; Ray Gavins,
‘‘Black Leadership in North Carolina to 1900.’’


--- PAGE 405 ---
382 notes to pages 39–49
114. Baker’s childhood memories are documented in nine in-depth personal inter-
views conducted with her by various researchers between 1968 and 1981.
115. Baker, interview by Boyte, 3.
116. Ibid., 3–4.
117. Newell, interview by author; Solomon, interview by author.
118. Escott, ‘‘White Republicanism and Ku Klux Klan Terror,’’ 29; Williamson, A Rage
for Order, 128–33.
119. Littleton Courier, Sept. 1, 1892, 4.
120. Littleton News Reporter, Aug. 16, 1897, 2, column by Bill Arp.
121. Littleton News Reporter , June 4, 1897, 5. The mid-1890s were marked by wide-
spread economic hardship.
122. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 60.
123. Solomon, interview by author.
124. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 20.
125. Ibid., 10.
126. Solomon, interview by author.
127. Ibid.
128. For discussions on the class politics within the African American community in
the South in the early 1900s, see Gatewood, Aristocrats of Color.
129. Baker, interview by Hogan, 79–80.
130. Blake Baker’s Estate, Warren County Estates Records, 1831. Blake Baker’s will
lists Temer Baker as property to be distributed to his heirs.
131. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 60.
132. Ibid., 58.
133. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 25.
134. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 73.
135. Gilchrist, interview by author.
chapter two
1. Baker, interviewer not known, Duke University Oral History Program (DUOHP),
Durham, N.C., 5.
2. Baker, interview by Britton, 1–2. This additional year of schooling explains why
Ella Baker was slightly older than her classmates upon graduation in 1927.
3. Baker, interviewer not known, DUOHP, 5.
4. Ibid., 4; Baker, interview by Hogan, 14.
5. Nash, interview by author, Oct. 1990.
6. Baker, interview by Hogan, 14.
7. James D. Anderson, The Education of Blacks in the South .
8. Carter, Shaw’s Universe, 223.
9. Gutman, ‘‘Schools for Freedom,’’ 260–61.
10. Minutes of the Thirteenth Annual Session of the Women’s Auxiliary Progressive
Baptist Convention of North Carolina, Elizabeth City, N.C., Oct. 29–Nov. 1, 1931, North
Carolina Collection, Wilson Library, University of North Carolina.
11. Baker, interview by Hogan, 82.
12. Carter, Shaw’s Universe, 5, 225.
13. Ibid., iv.
14. James D. Anderson, The Education of Blacks in the South , 240–42; Goggin, Car-
ter G. Woodson.
15. Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent, 187.


--- PAGE 406 ---
notes to pages 50–54 383
16. Catalogue and Announcements of Shaw University, session of 1927–1928, North
Carolina Collection (NC Collection), Wilson Library, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill. Absences from religious services could result in loss of scholarships and
honors.
17. ‘‘Shaw University,’’ pamphlet, 1945, Shaw University Archives (SUA), Raleigh,
N.C., 6.
18. Baker, interview by Hogan, 76.
19. Ibid., 85.
20. Ibid., 82.
21. Shaw University Journal, Nov. 1925, box 59, 4, SUA.
22. Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent, 24–28.
23. David Levering Lewis, W. E. B. Du  Bois: Biography of a Race , 549. Also see Abra-
hams, ‘‘Negotiating Respect.’’ Although Du Bois popularized the phrase ‘‘the talented
tenth’’ beginning in 1903, it was coined by Henry Morehouse, executive secretary of the
American Baptist Home Mission Society from 1897 to 1893 and from 1902 to 1917. See
Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent, 20, 25.
24. Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent, 25–27.
25. Ibid., 20.
26. Sundquist, The Oxford W. E. B. Du Bois Reader, 10.
27. Carter, Shaw’s Universe, 139.
28. Catalogue and Announcements of Shaw University, session of 1926–1927, 16, NC
Collection.
29. Carter, Shaw’s Universe, 49.
30. Shaw University Faculty Council Minutes, Jan. 26, 1925, and Apr. 22, 1925, box
146, SUA.
31. Carter, Shaw’s Universe, 139–40.
32. Shaw University Bulletin, 1922, 14, NC Collection.
33. Catalogue and Announcements of Shaw University, session of 1926–1927, 16. This
training might have prepared young women to work as domestic servants. However,
Shaw apparently presumed that women would perform such work on behalf of their
own families. Similar work requirements were common at elite private colleges for white
women during this time. Of course, having students do this work also saved money.
34. For further discussion of contemporary ideas regarding black women’s domestic
responsibilities and their professional and public roles, see Shaw, What a Woman Ought
to Be and to Do.
35. Yergan, interview by author. Efﬁe Yergen is a cousin of Max Yergan, the famous
Shaw alumnus, missionary, and later political associate of Paul Robeson.
36. Ibid., 3.
37. Shaw University Faculty Council Minutes, Feb. 12, 1925, box 22, 5, SUA.
38. Carter, Shaw’s Universe, 139–40.
39. Catalogue and Announcements of Shaw University, session of 1927–1928, 16.
40. Carter, Shaw’s Universe, 139–40. For a discussion of how black urban working-
class leisure activities were negatively viewed by middle-class black leaders, see Hunter,
To ’Joy My Freedom, chaps. titled ‘‘Dancing and Carousing the Night Away’’ and ‘‘Whole-
some and Hurtful Amusements.’’
41. Franklin and Moss, From Slavery to Freedom, 294.
42. For more information on black politics during and after World War I, see Ellis,
Race, War, and Surveillance.
43. Delany and Delany, Having Our Say, 99.


--- PAGE 407 ---
384 notes to pages 55–59
44. See Ella Baker, ‘‘Shaw Valedictorian Speech,’’ 1927, Ella Baker Papers (EBP),
Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, N.Y.; and Ella Baker’s high
school transcripts, 1918–1923, Shaw University Registrar, SUA. Copy of transcript in
author’s possession.
45. Yergan, interview by author.
46. Benjamin Brawley (1882–1939) was the author of ten scholarly books including A
Short History of the American Negro (New York: Macmillan, 1913); Women of Achievement
(Chicago: Woman’s American Baptist Home Mission Society, 1919; Early American Negro
Writers (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1935); Paul Lawrence Dunbar,
Poet of His People (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1936); A New Survey of
English Literature: A Text Book for Colleges  (New York: Knopf, 1925); and The Negro in
Literature and Art in the United States (New York: Dufﬁeld, 1930).
47. Carter, Shaw’s Universe, 216.
48. Ibid., 111.
49. Ibid., 217.
50. Yergan, interview by author.
51. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 64.
52. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 217; Ella Baker to Brawley, circa 1931,
EBP, correspondence ﬁles (1930s).
53. Shaw University Journal, Jan. 1924, box 59, SUA.
54. Shaw University Journal, Nov. 1925, box 59, SUA.
55. Ella Baker’s Shaw University transcript, Shaw University Registrar, SUA.
56. Ella Baker’s résumé, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572, Library of Congress,
Washington, D.C.
57. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 45.
58. Brockington, interview by author, Feb. 1990.
59. See Grant, Ella Baker, 21. Roberts was also known by the name Robinson.
60. Yergan, interview by author.
61. Carter, Shaw’s Universe, 49.
62. Lynch, Black American Radicals and the Liberation of Africa , 17–18.
63. Yergan ultimately moved to the far right and repudiated the left-wing ideas he
had once embraced; see ibid., 51.
64. Shaw University Bulletin, 1922.
65. Baker, interviewer not known, DUOHP, 5.
66. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 55.
67. Shaw University Journal, Mar. 1925, 5, box 59, SUA.
68. Ibid.
69. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 35.
70. Ibid.
71. Baker, ‘‘The Negro Church, the Nucleus of the Negroes’ Cultural Development,’’
EBP.
72. Ibid.
73. Ibid.
74. Protests against rigid, conservative policies occurred on a number of southern
black college campuses during the decade following World War I. Shaw experienced
comparatively little of this turmoil. See Wolters, The New Negro on Campus.
75. Baker, interview by Walker, 8.
76. Shaw University Bulletin, 1923, 3.
77. Baker, interview by Hogan, 82.


--- PAGE 408 ---
notes to pages 59–67 385
78. Ibid.
79. Ibid., 83.
80. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 31.
81. Baker, interview by Hogan, 83.
82. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 30.
83. Catalogue and Announcements of Shaw University, session of 1927–1928.
84. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 31.
85. Ibid.
86. Shaw University Faculty Council minutes, Feb. 1, 1926, box 146, SUA.
87. Ibid.
88. Ella Baker’s Shaw University transcript, Shaw University Registrar, SUA.
89. Yergan, interview by author, 2.
90. For ‘‘inevitable,’’ see Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 37; for ‘‘rebellious
streak,’’ see Baker, interviewer not known, DUOHP, 11.
91. Baker, interviewer not known, DUOHP, 12.
92. Ibid., 11.
93. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 37–38.
94. Baker, interview by Britton, 4.
95. ‘‘Our Heritage and Its Challenge,’’ Ella Baker’s valedictorian speech, EBP.
chapter three
1. This description of Harlem streets and of Ella Baker’s reaction is drawn from several
sources: Baker, interview by Scott; Amsterdam News , issues from Sept. through Nov.
1927; Naison, Communists in Harlem ; and David Levering Lewis, When Harlem Was in
Vogue.
2. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 72.
3. Ibid.
4. Baker, interviewer not known, Duke University Oral History Program (DUOHP),
Durham, N.C., 17.
5. Ibid., 5.
6. Telegrams from Roberts (aka Robinson) to Ella Baker, Mar. 6, 1928, June 15, 1936,
July 14, 1929, Ella Baker Papers (EBP), correspondence folder, Schomburg Center for
Research in Black Culture, New York, N.Y. No explanation of why Roberts/Robinson was
known by two different surnames can be found.
7. Ibid.
8. Murray, Autobiography of a Black Activist, 75.
9. For studies with a focus on the Great Migration, see Sernett, Bound for the
Promised Land ; Trotter, The Great Migration in Historical Perspective ; and Adero, Up
South.
10. See Naison, Communists in Harlem, and Turner and Turner, Richard B. Moore.
11. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 64.
12. Naison, Communists in Harlem, 67–72.
13. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 64. Books that capture some of the ﬂavor
and culture of Harlem in this period include Huggins, Harlem Renaissance; David Lever-
ing Lewis, When Harlem Was in Vogue ; Clarke, Harlem; Jervis Anderson, This Was Har-
lem; Kirby, Black Americans in the Roosevelt Era ; Weiss, Farewell to the Party of Lincoln ;
Naison, Communists in Harlem ; Watkins-Owens, Blood Relations ; and Greenberg, ‘‘Or
Does It Explode?’’
14. Baker, interview by Morris, 10A.


--- PAGE 409 ---
386 notes to pages 68–75
15. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 33.
16. Greenberg, ‘‘Or Does it Explode?’’ 76.
17. Ella Baker’s valedictorian speech, ‘‘Our Heritage and Its Challenge,’’ 1927, EBP.
18. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 35.
19. Baker, interview by Scott, 4.
20. Ibid., 5.
21. Lynn, interview by author. This is not to imply that Ella Baker was a Marxist per se.
She was not. However, she functioned at a time and in a political milieu in which
Marxism and other socialist ideas were taken seriously.
22. Hughes, ‘‘My Early Days in Harlem,’’ 62.
23. Betty Jenkins, ‘‘A White Librarian in Black Harlem.’’
24. Watkins-Owens, Blood Relations, 93.
25. Baker, interview by Morris, 17A.
26. Ella Baker to Columbus Alston, Young People’s Protective League, Apr. 17, 1936,
EBP; and Ella Baker to Columbus Alston, May 10, 1936, EBP.
27. Ella Baker, letter of application to Walter White, Sept. 26, 1938, NAACP Papers,
group II, box A572, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
28. Sinnette, Arthur Alfonso Schomburg, 170.
29. Ella Baker’s Experience Sheet, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572.
30. Ernestine Rose to ‘‘Dear Sirs,’’ June 11, 1940, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572.
31. Ibid.
32. Murray, Autobiography of a Black Activist, 74–75.
33. Ibid., 75.
34. The descriptions of women in Harlem are drawn from Marvel Cooke, interview by
author; Weisenfeld, African American Women and Christian Activism ; and Greenberg,
‘‘Or Does it Explode?’’ For an analysis of black women and the YWCA, see Adrienne Lash
Jones, ‘‘The Struggle among Saints,’’ and Hedgeman, The Trumpet Sounds.
35. Deborah Gray White, Too Heavy a Load, 17.
36. Pauli Murray to Ella Baker, Dec. 1945; and Pauli Murray to Ella Baker, Feb. 11,
1961, EBP.
37. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 64.
38. George S. Schuyler, ‘‘The Young Negro Co-operative League,’’ 472.
39. Watkins-Owens, Blood Relations, 92.
40. Ibid.
41. Lynn, interview with author. For more on Brookwood, see Aktenbaugh, Education
for Struggle ; Kates, Activist Rhetorics and American Higher Education ; Howlett, Brook-
wood Labor College; Murray, Autobiography of a Black Activist, 105–6.
42. Kates, Activist Rhetorics and American Higher Education, front jacket ﬂap.
43. Lipsitz, A Life in the Struggle , 10. Joy James, a feminist scholar-activist, has ques-
tioned the use of Gramsci’s writings on organic intellectuals to describe Ella Baker. She
sees such comparisons as serving to ‘‘deradicalize’’ Baker and erroneously casting her as
a proponent of vanguard politics rather than of popular democratic politics. Joy James,
Transcending the Talented Tenth, 86. My reading of both Gramsci’s work and Baker’s life
leads me to different conclusions. Gramsci is useful for understanding Baker because he
distinguishes between those who see the source of their knowledge as formal academic
training and those who see their knowledge as arising from practice and engagement
with a community, which is itself seen as a reservoir of knowledge and analytic insights.
In his detailed glossary to his edited collection of Gramsci’s writings, David Forgacs
offers the following useful summary of Gramsci’s democratic and nonelitist view of


--- PAGE 410 ---
notes to pages 75–80 387
intellectual work as a part of a revolutionary process: ‘‘Gramsci is thus able to envisage a
situation in which, as part of the revolutionary transformation of society, the intellectual
function is massively expanded—in other words more and more people share the tasks of
mental activity, of organizing, deliberating and leading, both politically and within the
sphere of economic production. For Gramsci, this would also be a process of democratiz-
ation and would inhibit the formation of bureaucracies, which arise precisely where
decision-making is monopolized by a specialized elite of intellectuals.’’ This description
is consistent with my own reading of Gramsci’s writings and with my understanding of
Ella Baker’s practice as a nonuniversity-based public intellectual—and, indeed, with Joy
James’s description of nonelite intellectuals. See Forgacs, The Antonio Gramsci Reader ,
425.
44. Hedgeman, The Trumpet Sounds, 56–57.
45. Baker and Cooke, ‘‘The Bronx Slave Market,’’ 330.
46. The author’s interview with Marvel Cooke conﬁrmed that she and Baker did not
have any signiﬁcant disagreements about the ﬁnal article. There were apparently some
political disagreements about language and details that Cooke declined to comment on;
it is likely she did not even remember them after ﬁfty years. Therefore, this article can be
analyzed as an expression of Baker’s views without in any way diminishing Cooke’s
contribution.
47. See Crenshaw, ‘‘Mapping the Margins’’; hooks, Feminist Theory from Margin to
Center; and Guy-Sheftall, Words of Fire, introduction.
48. Cooke, interview by author.
49. Baker, interview by Scott, 8.
50. See David Levering Lewis, W. E. B. Du Bois: The Fight for Equality, 539.
51. Floyd J. Calvin, ‘‘Schuyler Launches Program to Awaken Race Consciousness,’’
Pittsburgh Courier, Feb. 7, 1931, 1, 4.
52. Cooke, interview by author.
53. Lynn, interview by author.
54. Baker, interview by Morris, 56A.
55. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 39.
56. Cooke, interview by author.
57. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 40.
58. For discussions of black intellectuals’ responses to Jürgen Habermas’s concept of
the public sphere, see Black Public Sphere Collective, The Black Public Sphere, especially
the afterword, ‘‘Mapping the Black Public Sphere,’’ by Thomas C. Holt; also see Banks,
Black Intellectuals.
59. Cooke, interview by author.
60. Calvin, ‘‘Schuyler Launches Program,’’ 1, 4.
61. Schuyler, a onetime socialist turned anarchist, became a staunch conservative by
the end of his life. A rabid anticommunist during the McCarthy era, he even maintained
friendly relations with the racist John Birch Society, opposed the awarding of the Nobel
Prize to Martin Luther King Jr., and condemned Malcolm X as a ‘‘pixilated criminal.’’ See
Peplow, George S. Schuyler. Also see Schuyler, Black Empire, and Schuyler, Rac(e)ing to
the Right, ed. Leak. The Leak collection covers Schuyler’s conservative views but does not
mention much about the YNCL.
62. Jervis Anderson, A. Philip Randolph , 143–44. See also Chateauvert, Marching
Together; Harris, Keeping the Faith ; Arnesen, Brotherhoods of Color ; Pfeffer, A. Philip
Randolph.
63. Jervis Anderson, A. Philip Randolph, 141.


--- PAGE 411 ---
388 notes to pages 80–86
64. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 39.
65. Jervis Anderson, A. Philip Randolph, 144.
66. Lynn, interview by author.
67. Ibid. Lynn indicated that he never knew Baker to attend church ‘‘or express much
interest in religion. She was interested in other ideas.’’
68. George Schuyler, ‘‘Views and Reviews,’’ Pittsburgh Courier, May 24, 1930, Nov. 8,
1930.
69. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 40.
70. Baker, interview by Morris, 22A.
71. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 40.
72. I argue elsewhere in the book that Baker supported the idea that how one behaves
as a civilian, so to speak, was related to how one conducts political organizing work. It
was important to be principled and fair in personal relations as an extension of re-
creating social relations in the public sphere.
73. There is a lively ongoing debate among contemporary feminists and historians
about the politics and signiﬁcance of marital inﬁdelity on the part of public ﬁgures.
Baker seems to have viewed Schuyler’s sexual behavior as unprincipled but private. This
stance is at variance with much of her work, which sees the cultivation of personal
relationships and the private behavior of political organizers as critical to their effective-
ness as leaders and their ability to construct a vision of a transformed society based on a
different set of personal values as well as public policies.
74. Baker, interviewer not known, DUOHP, 29.
75. George Schuyler, ‘‘Views and Reviews,’’ Pittsburgh Courier, Nov. 15, 1930.
76. Ibid.
77. George Schuyler, ‘‘The Young Negro Cooperative League,’’ Crisis, Jan. 1932, 456.
78. ‘‘Schuyler Heads Up League,’’ Pittsburgh Courier, Oct. 24, 1931, 1, 4.
79. Report of First Conference of YNCL held at Center Avenue Branch of YMCA in
Pittsburgh, Oct. 18, 1931, EBP, YNCL ﬁles.
80. Ella Baker, form letter, ca. 1931, EBP, YNCL ﬁles.
81. Open letter from Ella Baker to membership of YNCL, Sept. 26. 1932, EBP.
82. George Schuyler, ‘‘An Appeal to Young Negroes’’ (pamphlet issued by the Young
Negroes’ Cooperative League), 10, EBP, YNCL ﬁles.
83. Schuyler, ‘‘The Young Negro Cooperative League,’’ 456.
84. Ibid.
85. Ibid., 472.
86. Ibid., 456.
87. George Schuyler to Mordecai Johnson, Dec. 18, 1931, EBP.
88. Schuyler, ‘‘The Young Negro Cooperative League,’’ 456.
89. Ella Baker, letter to ‘‘Irvena,’’ EBP. The content of the letter suggests that the date
is roughly Dec. 1931. The letter mentions the Urban League meeting site. A receipt for
$2.00, Mar. 2, 1932, from Urban League for YNCL use of meeting room. EBP.
90. Ella Baker, acting secretary treasurer of YNCL, memo, n.d., EBP, YNCL ﬁles.
91. Ella Baker, letter to John M. Gray, chairman of Committee for International Negro
Youth Conference in Chicago, May 19, 1933, EBP, YNCL ﬁles, correspondence folder.
92. Sam Cantrell, ‘‘Consumer Coops,’’ unpublished article, EBP, YNCL ﬁles.
93. Payne, ‘‘Ella Baker and Models of Social Change,’’ 884.
94. Schuyler, ‘‘An Appeal to Young Negroes,’’ 10.
95. Ella Baker, ‘‘Youthful City Workers Turning to Cooperative Farming,’’ Amsterdam
News, May 11, 1935, 2.


--- PAGE 412 ---
notes to pages 86–94 389
96. George Schuyler, Pittsburgh Courier, Nov. 22, 1930.
97. George Schuyler, Pittsburgh Courier, Nov. 15, 1930.
98. Ella Baker, untitled article written in Philadelphia, circa Feb. 12, 1940, EBP, Ella
Baker Writings ﬁle.
99. Ella Baker, interview by Urban Review editors, 23.
100. Marable, W. E. B. Du Bois, 147–48.
101. Ibid., 148.
102. Ibid., 147–49.
103. For biographical information on Divine, see Weisbrot, Father Divine and the
Struggle for Racial Equality, and Watts, God, Harlem, U.S.A.
104. Peplow, George S. Schuyler, 27.
105. Ibid., 117 n. 25.
106. The caption under a front-page photo of Schuyler in the Pittsburgh Courier, Oct.
17, 1931, reads: ‘‘He recently returned from a six month visit in Europe where he studied
intensively the fundamental principles of the Consumer’s Co-operative Societies of Great
Britain.’’
107. ‘‘A Century of Progress’’ (1932; brochure announcing Chicago World’s Fair), EBP.
Baker, interview by Scott, 2, 4–9, 11–13, 19; Clarke, interview by author; Ella Baker’s
résumé, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572; Harlem’s Own Cooperative letterhead
(blank), EBP, 1930s folder.
108. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 35.
109. Ibid., 55.
110. For information on African Americans and the WPA, see Sitkoff, A New Deal for
Blacks; Sullivan, Days of Hope; Ferguson, Black Politics in New Deal Atlanta.
111. Murray, Autobiography of a Black Activist, 104.
112. Ibid., 104.
113. Ibid., 90.
114. Lynn, interview by author.
115. Ibid. The Triangle Shirtwaist ﬁre occurred in New York City in 1911 and took
the lives of more than 100 immigrant workers, mostly women, who were trapped
in the unsafe building. The tragedy galvanized public support for safer working
conditions.
116. Pauli Murray, to Miss (Isabel) Taylor and Miss (Floria) Pickney, ‘‘Recruiting and
Promotion,’’ Oct. 28, 1938, Murray Papers, WPA ﬁles, box 72, Schlesinger Library, Rad-
cliffe College, Cambridge, Mass.
117. Works Progress Administration, Workers Services Division, NYC reports, 1938–
39, Works Progress Administration (WPA) Papers, box 19, National Archives, Wash-
ington, D.C.
118. Ibid.
119. Ella Baker, ‘‘A Course in Consumer Education,’’ prepared for Worker’s Education
Project of WPA, WPA Papers, box 18, folder: ‘‘New York, Programs Miscellaneous, 1936–
1939.’’
120. Works Progress Administration, NYC reports, report for Feb. 1938, WPA Papers,
box 19.
121. Pauli Murray, ‘‘Report on Worker’s Education Exhibit,’’ Oct. 13, 1938, to Mr. E.
Rosenberg, (no title given), 1–3, Murray Papers, WPA ﬁles, box 72.
122. Murray, Autobiography of a Black Activist, 104.
123. Conrad Lynn, There Is a Fountain, 66.
124. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 64.


--- PAGE 413 ---
390 notes to pages 94–98
125. On Oct. 11, 1936, Baker writes D. Mines, stating that she will meet him at Rand
School where she will be attending a lecture. Also, see letter from Julia Primoff of
Women’s Afternoon Classes, Rand School, to Baker, Apr. 30, 1937, EBP, asking her to
lecture at the school.
126. Swanson, ‘‘Rand School of Social Science.’’ For more information, see Cornell, ‘‘A
History of the Rand School.’’
127. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 51–52.
128. Conrad Lynn, There Is a Fountain, 66.
129. Ella Baker, ‘‘A Course in Consumer Education,’’ prepared for Workers Education
Project of WPA, WPA Papers, box 18, folder: ‘‘New York, Programs Miscellaneous, 1936–
1939.’’
130. Ibid.
131. Ibid.
132. Ibid.
133. Ibid.
134. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 51.
135. A ‘‘cell’’ is a small, tightly knit working group within the larger pyramid structure
of a ‘‘democratic centralist’’ organization like the Communist Party and many other
Communist organizations throughout the world. What the ‘‘cell’’ does and organizes
around could vary depending on the analysis, ‘‘line,’’ or politics of the larger organization
at any given time. Given the anticommunism of Baker’s later political career, which did
not preclude personal relationships or even political collaborations with Communists,
she was likely applauding the form of the ‘‘cell’’ rather than the content of the CP’s
political ideology.
136. Lynn, interview by author.
137. Ibid., and Conrad Lynn, There Is a Fountain, 66.
138. Naison, Communists in Harlem, 309.
139. On Lovestone and his faction, see Alexander, The Right Opposition ; Morgan, A
Covert Life ; and Wald, The New York Intellectuals , 153–54. The Lovestonites were fol-
lowers of Russian socialist Nikolai Bukharin. Later, the faction underwent a major inter-
nal split, and the remaining leadership moved considerably to the right by the 1950s. Jay
Lovestone eventually became a strong CIA supporter and rabid anticommunist within
the right wing of the American labor movement.
140. Lynn, interview by author; and Clarke, interview by author.
141. Murray, Autobiography of a Black Activist, 103.
142. Solomon, The Cry Was Unity.
143. Ibid., 64–65.
144. Ibid., 75.
145. The Workers (Communist) Party changed its name to the Communist Party USA
in 1929. Bertram Wolfe was a Marxist during the 1930s, but he moved steadily to the
right along with Jay Lovestone and ultimately helped found the Hoover Institute, a
conservative think tank. Details taken from Buhle et al., The Encyclopedia of the American
Left, 435–37. See also Alexander, The Right Opposition, and Morgan, A Covert Life.
146. Buhle et al., The Encyclopedia of the American Left, 435–37.
147. Clarke, interview by author.
148. Baker, interview by Morris, 8A.
149. Clarke, interview by author.
150. Lynn, interview by author.
151. Ibid., and Conrad Lynn, There is a Fountain, 68.


--- PAGE 414 ---
notes to pages 98–103 391
152. Lynn, interview by author.
153. Naison, Communists in Harlem, 16.
154. Ibid., 157. See also Winston James, Holding Aloft the Banner of Ethiopia , and
Solomon, The Cry Was Unity.
155. Baker and Imes collaborated on a number of projects during these years. See Ella
Baker’s résumé, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572, listing Imes as a reference. Invitation
to a meeting, June 25, 1935, co-sponsored by Dunbar Housewives League and Citizens for
Fair Play, listing Imes as a convener, EBP. Also, Baker was in charge of education and
publicity for the Harlem’s Own Cooperative, Inc., of which William Imes was president;
there is a letterhead in her papers with her name on it, EPB.
156. Ella Baker, ‘‘Light on a Dark Continent,’’ EBP, Ella Baker’s Writings ﬁle.
157. Marable, W. E. B. Du Bois, 147.
158. Typed essay by Ella Baker, no title, circa Feb. 12, 1940, written in Philadelphia,
Pa., EBP, Ella Baker’s Writings ﬁle. This essay reads as if written for a publication, but no
published version was located.
159. Baker, interview by Britton, 68.
160. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 12.
161. Ibid., 36–37; Baker, interviewer not known, DUOHP, 19.
162. Ibid.
163. Emma Lance, letter to Ella Baker, circa 1930s, EBP, correspondence ﬁles.
164. Freeman H. Hubbard, letter to Ella Baker, June 8, 1934, EBP, correspondence
ﬁles.
165. A series of telegrams from Roberts to Baker dated Oct. 25, 1927, and Mar. 6,
1928–June 14, 1929, EBP, correspondence ﬁles.
166. No record of the marriage could be located, probably because of the confusion
regarding T. J. Roberts/Robinson’s last name. Marriage registries were checked in all of
the boroughs of New York, in Warrenton and Halifax Counties in North Carolina, and in
Newark, N.J. It is clear that Baker and Roberts were legally married, however, because
divorce papers (1958) were located in the Ofﬁce of the City Clerk in New York.
167. Gilchrist, interview by author.
168. Ella Baker Files, FBI, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C., NY ﬁle, misc.
report, Sept. 10, 1941.
169. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 57–58.
170. Bernice Johnson Reagon, telephone interview by author. Jackie Brockington
declined to discuss Bob or the marriage in much detail because, in her words, ‘‘Aunt Ella
never wanted to talk about it.’’
171. Joyce Ladner, interview with author.
172. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 58.
173. Prathia Hall (Wynn), interview by author.
174. T. J. Roberts, letter to a railway express agency’s complaint department, EBP,
correspondence ﬁles.
175. Ella Baker, letter to D. J. Philips, President, Consolidated Tenants League, Inc.,
Sept. 21, 1945, EBP, correspondence ﬁles.
176. In her correspondence with her landlord, Baker uncharacteristically used her
married name, referring to herself as Ella Roberts, perhaps to avoid complications
or questions of marital legitimacy. See letter from Ella Baker (Roberts) to Roy Zisser,
Dophen Realty Co., Dec. 7, 1955, EBP, correspondence ﬁles.
177. Clarke, interview by author.
178. Taitt-Magubane, interview by author.


--- PAGE 415 ---
392 notes to pages 103–12
179. Ibid.
180. Brockington, interview by author.
181. T. J. Roberts, letter in response to a New York Times classiﬁed job advertisement,
Jan. 8, 1939, EBP.
182. Ella Baker, letter to League for Mutual Aid, 104 5th Ave., NYC, Jan. 24, 1940, EBP.
183. Clarke, interview by author.
184. Baker, interview by Britton, 4.
chapter four
1. Baker, interview Hayden and Thrasher, 56.
2. Hill, interview by author.
3. For background information on the NAACP, see Tushnet, The NAACP’s Legal Strat-
egy against Segregated Education ; Ware, William Hastie ; Zangrando, The NAACP Cru-
sade against Lynching; David Levering Lewis, W. E. B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race and W.
E. B. DuBois: The Fight for Equality and the American Century ; Kellogg, NAACP; B. Joyce
Ross, J. E. Spingarn and the Rise of the NAACP ; and Walter Francis White, A Man Called
White.
4. See Kellogg, NAACP, and Zangrando, The NAACP Crusade against Lynching . See
also Hine et al., The African American Odyssey, 2:484.
5. Baker, interview by Hogan, 27.
6. Rudwick and Meier, ‘‘The Rise of the Black Secretariat in the NAACP.’’
7. David Levering Lewis, W. E. B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race ; Marable, W. E. B. Du
Bois; and Rampersad, The Art and Imagination of W. E. B. Du Bois . Du Bois later aban-
doned his talented tenth formula, embraced Marxism, joined the Communist Party, and
died in exile in Ghana in 1963 at the age of ninety-ﬁve.
8. Baker, interview by Britton, 7.
9. Horne, Race Woman.
10. Walter White, letter to ‘‘CH,’’ Feb. 8, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572,
folder: Ella Baker, staff, 1940–1942, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
11. For information on Daisy Lampkin, see Edna Chappell McKenzie, ‘‘Daisy Lamp-
kin,’’ in Hine et al., Black Women in America, 1:690–93.
12. C. Herbert Marshall Jr., letter to Walter White, Mar. 24, 1941, NAACP Papers,
group II, box A572, folder: Ella Baker, staff, 1940–1942.
13. E. Frederic Morrow, branch coordinator, letter to Jerry Gilliam, Norfolk, Va., Sept.
22, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II, box C307. For more biographical background on
Morrow, see Branch, Parting the Waters, 180–81.
14. Ella Baker, letters to Roy Wilkins, Mar. 10, 1941; Mar. 21, 1941; Apr. 11, 1941, NAACP
Papers, group II, box A572, folder: Ella Baker, staff, 1940–1942.
15. Braden, interview by author, Apr. 13, 1991.
16. Williams, Eyes on the Prize, 180.
17. A state law required the group to turn over its membership lists to authorities and
banned it for refusing to do so. NAACP leaders rightly feared reprisals against its mem-
bership if such a list were made public and did not want to set a precedent for cooperat-
ing with this type of harassment.
18. Ella Baker, letter to Mr. and Mrs. J. J. Green, Apr. 15, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II,
box C307.
19. Baker, interviewer not known, Duke University Oral History Program (DUOHP),
Durham, N.C., 33.
20. Louise B. Gibbs, letter to Ella Baker, July 25, 1944; Baker, letter to Gibbs, July 27,


--- PAGE 416 ---
notes to pages 112–19 393
1944; Baker, letter to station manager, Union Station, Washington, D.C., July 27, 1944;
NAACP Papers, group II, box A573, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1943–1944.
21. Ella Baker, letter to Roy Wilkins, Mar. 20, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572,
folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1940–1955.
22. Ibid.
23. Ella Baker, letter to Roy Wilkins, Mar. 11, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572,
folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1940–1955.
24. Ibid.
25. Baker, interview by Scott, 13.
26. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 72.
27. Ibid., 70.
28. Sacks, Caring By the Hour, 3.
29. Ella Baker to J. M. Tinsley, Apr. 3, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II, box C301.
30. J. M. Tinsley, letter to Walter White, Apr. 7, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II, box
C210.
31. Baker, interview by Hogan, 43.
32. Ibid., 38–39.
33. J. M. Tinsley, letter to Walter White, June 3, 1941, NAACP Papers, II, box C210,
folder: Virginia State Conference.
34. Report of Dept. of Branches to Board of Directors, May 1941 meeting (n. 6),
NAACP Papers, group II, box C390, folder: Monthly Reports, 1940–1942.
35. Ibid.
36. Baker, interview by Hogan, 21; Baker, interviewer not known, DUOHP, 19; Baker,
interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 49–50.
37. Ella Baker, ‘‘Report of Dept. of Branches,’’ May 1941, Board of Directors Meeting,
NAACP Papers, group II, box C390, folder: Monthly Reports, 1940–1942.
38. Baker, interview by Hogan, 39.
39. Ella Baker, letter to Ruth Tinsley, Richmond, Va., ca. Dec. 1942 or 1943, EBP,
NAACP ﬁles. The content of the letter suggests it was written in December of either 1941
or 1942, when Baker was still a ﬁeld staff member of the NAACP.
40. Baker, interview by Hogan, 23.
41. Ella Baker, ‘‘Report of Dept. of Branches’’ (report no. 6), Dec. 1941 Board of Direc-
tors Meeting, NAACP Papers, group II, box C390, folder: Monthly Reports, 1940–1942.
42. Ibid.
43. Ibid.
44. Ibid.
45. Ella Baker, letter to Walter White, Oct. 4, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II, box C307,
General Branch Files.
46. Ella Baker, letter to Walter White, Feb. 18, 1943, NAACP Papers, group II, box B98.
47. NAACP Papers, group II, box C307, General Branch Files. Letters throughout the
ﬁle illustrate this pattern.
48. Lynn, interview by author. The comment was made to Lynn by Baker, and he
recalled it in precise and convincing detail ﬁfty years later.
49. Ella Baker to ‘‘Mr. Green,’’ Feb. 13, 1948, EBP, mentions that her husband is
hospitalized in North Carolina. Also, see Ella Baker to Lester Granger, July 10, 1947, EBP.
50. Hill, interview by author.
51. Ibid.
52. Ella Baker, letter to Lucille Black, May 4, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572,
folder: Ella Baker, staff, 1940–1942.


--- PAGE 417 ---
394 notes to pages 119–25
53. Ella Baker, letter to Lucille Black, May 25, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box C307,
General Branch Files.
54. Ella Baker, letter to Lucille Black, May 4, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572,
folder: Ella Baker, staff, 1940–1942.
55. Ella Baker to Lucille Black, Mar. 11, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572,
folder: Ella Baker, staff, 1940–1942.
56. Baker, interview by Walker, 6.
57. For more information on the politics of respectability in the black community, see
Gaines, Uplifting the Race ; Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent ; and Gilmore, Gender
and Jim Crow.
58. Charlotte Crump, letter to Ella Baker, Oct. 9, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II, box
A572, folder: Ella Baker, staff, 1940–1942.
59. Memos to Charlotte Crump from Walter White, Dec. 19, 1941, and Jan. 22, 1942,
reprimanding her for her performance; memo to Charlotte Crump from Roy Wilkins,
Jan. 10, 1942, also reprimanding her. NAACP Papers, group II, box A579, folder: Staff,
Charlotte Crump.
60. Ella Baker, letter to Roy Wilkins, Apr. 1, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572,
folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1940–1955. ‘‘Into Fifth’’ refers to the building where the NAACP
ofﬁces were located.
61. Charlotte Crump, letter to Ella Baker, Mar. 2, 1942; Baker, letter to Wilkins, Apr. 1,
1942; and Walter White, memo to Ella Baker, Oct. 18, 1941; NAACP Papers, group II, box
A572, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1940–1955.
62. Ella Baker to Ruby Hurley, June 7, 1944, NAACP Papers, pt. 10, series B, 1940–
1955, reel 16 (microﬁlm).
63. Ibid.
64. Ruby Hurley to Pauli Murray, July 11, 1945, NAACP Papers, reel 16 (microﬁlm).
65. One measure of Jackson’s elitism and snobbery is the ostentatious wedding she
hosted for her daughter, Juanita, when she married Clarence Mitchell Jr., a lawyer with
the National Urban League. For a detailed description of the elaborate gala, see Den-
ton L. Watson, Lion in the Lobby, 117–19.
66. Watson, Lion in the Lobby, 117.
67. Carl Murphy to Walter White, Aug. 9, 1944, and Ella Baker to Walter White, Oct. 4,
1941, NAACP Papers, group II, box C76; Lillie Jackson, letter to Walter White, Oct. 19,
1941, NAACP Papers, group II, box C76.
68. Hill, interview by author.
69. Lillie Jackson, letter to Walter White, Oct. 19, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II,
box C76.
70. Ibid.
71. Roy Wilkins, letter to Walter White, Oct. 21, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II, box C76.
72. Assistant ﬁeld secretary report, in Report of the Dept. of Branches, NAACP Pa-
pers, group II, box C390, Monthly Reports folder.
73. Roy Wilkins, letter to Walter White, Oct. 21, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II,
box C76.
74. Ibid.
75. Walter White, letter to Lillie Jackson, Oct. 21, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II,
box C76.
76. Baker, interviewer not known, Duke University Oral History Program (DUOHP),
33–34. This incident probably took place in 1942, in either Savannah or New Brunswick,
Ga.


--- PAGE 418 ---
notes to pages 125–35 395
77. Ibid., 34.
78. Ibid., 33.
79. Ella Baker, memo to Roy Wilkins, June 1, 1943, NAACP Papers, group II, B184. See
C. E. Bell (Seaboard Railway Company) to W. P. Bartel (Interstate Commerce Commis-
sion), Sept. 14, 1943. Copy in this ﬁle is a carbon sent to Thurgood Marshall (NAACP
Legal Defense and Education Fund), NAACP Papers, group II, B184.
80. Ibid.
81. Ibid.
82. Ibid.
83. G. W. Laird (Interstate Commerce Commission) to Thurgood Marshall, July 28,
1943, NAACP Papers, group II, 184.
84. See Duster, Crusade for Justice , and Giddings, When and Where I Enter , 22. See
also McMurry, To Keep the Waters Troubled.
85. EBP, NAACP folder.
86. In his biography of Harry Moore, Before His Time, Ben Green argues that Moore
was too independent and militant for the New York ofﬁce and was nudged out of leader-
ship shortly before he was killed.
87. Ella Baker ﬁles, FBI, Washington, D.C.
88. Ella Baker Files, FBI, Washington, D.C., ‘‘Correlation Summary,’’ July 19, 1965, 17.
This summary cites the speculation about her instability.
89. Ella Baker, letter to Lucille Black, May 25, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572.
90. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 46.
91. Mable Davis of Wise, N.C., letter to Ella Baker, n.d., NAACP Papers, group II, box
C307, General Branch Files, folder: Letters and Memos, 1940–1942.
92. Gilchrist, interview by author.
93. Ella Baker to Madison Jones, Apr. 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, A572, 1940–
1942, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1941–42; Brockington, interview with author, Feb.
1990.
94. Rollins, All Is Never Said, 76–77.
95. Ella Baker, memo to Committee on Branches, July 6, 1943, NAACP Papers, group
II, box C307, General Branch Files.
96. Brier et al., Who Built America?, 2:408, 453.
97. Ella Baker, letter to Lucille Black in N.Y., Nov. 2, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box
C307, General Branch Files.
98. Ibid.
99. Ella Baker, letter to Walter White, Feb. 18, 1943, NAACP Papers, group II, box B98.
100. Ella Baker, letter to Walter White, Dec. 3, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box B98;
and Ella Baker, letter to Walter White, Feb. 18, 1943, NAACP Papers, group II, box B98.
101. Ella Baker, letter to Walter White, Dec. 3, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box B98,
1–2.
102. Ibid.
103. Ibid.
104. Ibid.
105. Ibid.; and Ella Baker, letter to Walter White, 3 Dec. 1942, NAACP Papers, group II,
box B98, 1–2, and Dec. 18, 1943, NAACP Papers, group II, box B98.
106. William A. Fowlkes, ‘‘U.S. Warned to Make Democracy Work at Home: Miss Ella
Baker Electriﬁes Jan. 1 Bethel Audience,’’ Atlanta Daily World, Jan. 2, 1947, 1.
107. Ella Baker, letter to Lillian Coleman in Fairﬁeld, Ala., Apr. 16, 1941, NAACP
Papers, group II, box C307, General Branch Files.


--- PAGE 419 ---
396 notes to pages 136–41
108. Ella Baker, letter to Mr. Robert H. McLaskey, Apr. 18, 1945, NAACP Papers, group
II, box C66.
109. Campaign Manual for Branches, n.d., EBP; and NAACP Papers, group II, box
C307, General Branch Files.
110. Ella Baker to Mr. and Mrs. J. J. Green, Apr. 14, 1941, NAACP Papers, group II, box
C307, General Branch Files.
111. Ella Baker, memo to Walter White, May 3, 1946, NAACP Papers, group II, box
C307, General Branch Files.
112. Ella Baker, memo to Walter White, June 4, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box
A572, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1940–1945.
113. Ella Baker, letter to Roy Wilkins, Mar. 11, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572,
folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1940–1950.
114. Ella Baker, letter to Walter White, May 14, 1946, NAACP Papers, group II, box
A573, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 2.
115. Ibid.
116. Baker, interview by Hogan, 32.
117. Green’s biography of Harry Moore, Before His Time , gives more background on
tensions between the national ofﬁce and militant local branches.
118. Ella Baker, letter to Roy Wilkins, Mar. 11, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572,
folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1940–1950.
119. Ella Baker, ‘‘Conducting Membership Campaigns,’’ a document prepared for the
33d Annual NAACP Convention in Los Angeles, 1942, NAACP Papers (microﬁlm), 4, reel
11. The document consists of reports from three ﬁeld secretaries; the quotation is taken
from the section authored by Ella Baker.
120. Ella Baker, memo to Walter White, May 3, 1946, NAACP Papers, group II, box
C307, General Branch Files.
121. Ella Baker, ‘‘Conducting Membership Campaigns,’’ presented at 33rd annual
NAACP conference, Los Angeles, 1942, NAACP Papers (microﬁlm), reel 11.
122. Ibid.
123. Marable, W. E. B. Du Bois, 168–69.
124. Ella Baker, letter to Lucille Black, May 4, 1942, NAACP Papers, group II, box A572,
1940–42.
125. Ella Baker, memo to the Branch Ofﬁcers, Oct. 2, 1944, NAACP Papers, group II,
box C376, folder: Leadership Training Conference, National Ofﬁce, Oct. 1944.
126. Ella Baker, memo to the Branch Ofﬁcers, Oct. 2, 1944, NAACP Papers, group II,
box C376, folder: Leadership Training Conference, National Ofﬁce, Oct. 1944.
127. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 50.
128. Pauli Murray, letter to Walter White, July 23, 1944, NAACP Papers, group II, box
A426, folder: Pauli Murray.
129. Pauli Murray, letter to Roy Wilkins, Aug. 2, 1944, NAACP Papers, group II, box
A426, folder: Pauli Murray.
130. Pauli Murray, letter to Walter White, July 23, 1944, NAACP Papers, group II, box
A426, folder: Pauli Murray.
131. Roy Wilkins, letter to Ella Baker, July 3, 1946, NAACP Papers, group II, box A573,
folder: Staff, Ella Baker.
132. Ella Baker, memo to the Branch Ofﬁcers, Oct. 2, 1944, NAACP Papers, group II,
box C376, folder: Leadership Training Conference, National Ofﬁce, Oct. 1944.
133. Ibid.
134. Tulsa Leadership Conference, 1946, NAACP Papers, group II, box C376, folder:


--- PAGE 420 ---
notes to pages 141–46 397
Leadership Training Conference, Nov. 1944; and Report of the Dept. of Branches for Feb.
11, 1946 Board of Directors Meeting, NAACP Papers, group II, box C390, Monthly reports,
1945–46.
135. Ella Baker, memo to the Branch Ofﬁcers, Oct. 2, 1944, NAACP Papers, group II,
box C376, folder: Leadership Training Conference, National Ofﬁce, Oct. 1944.
136. Ibid.
137. Ibid.
138. Ibid.
139. Baker, interview by Hogan, 45–49.
140. Braden, interview by author, Jan. 3, 1997.
141. Parks, telephone interview by author.
142. Hill, interview by author; Current, telephone interview by author.
143. Hill, interview by author.
144. Baker, interview by Britton, 5–6.
145. Hill, interview by author.
146. The speciﬁc nature of the issue at Sydenham hospital remains unclear. The tenor
of Walter White’s memo suggested that he was more concerned with the recalcitrant
behavior of two female staff members than with the actual substance of the issue itself.
He described their dissension as ‘‘embarassing’’—presumably to him. Memo from Walter
White to Ella Baker and Ruby Hurley, May 17, 1944, NAACP Papers, group II, box A573,
folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1943–44; Baker, interview by Hogan, 30; Ella Baker, letter
to Walter White, May 14, 1946, NAACP Papers, group II, box A573, folder: Staff, Ella
Baker, 2.
147. Ella Baker, memo to Walter White and Thurgood Marshall, Nov. 5, 1945, NAACP
Papers, group II, box A573, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1945.
148. Walter White, letter to Ella Baker, Nov. 13, 1945, NAACP Papers, group II, box
A573, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1945. Also see Ella Baker, memo to Walter White in which
Ella Baker rebuffs criticisms for violating procedures, ca. 1945, EBP.
149. Ella Baker, letters to Walter White, Feb. 23, 1943 and Dec. 27, 1943, NAACP
Papers, group II, box A573, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1943–44. These memos indicate
speciﬁc health problems and doctor’s visits.
150. Ella Baker, letter to Miss Freeland, Aug. 11, 1945, NAACP Papers, group II, box
A573, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1945.
151. Walter White, telegram to Ella Baker, Oct. 18, 1945, NAACP Papers, group II, box
A573, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1945. The staff was small and spent long hours working in
close proximity. It would have seemed appropriate for the executive ofﬁcer to attend the
funeral of a close family member of one of his staff. In his telegram, White acknowledged
Martha as Ella Baker’s sister, indicating that he realized she was an immediate family
member.
152. Letter to Ella Baker, signed ‘‘your brother,’’ Jan. 3, 1946, EBP.
153. Solomon, interview by author.
154. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 56.
155. Brockington, interview by author.
156. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 58.
157. Clarke, interview by author.
158. For biographical information on Bethune, see Ross, ‘‘Mary McLeod Bethune and
the National Youth Administration; Hine et al., eds., Black Women in America , vol. 1
(Bethune entry by Elaine M. Smith).
159. Ella Baker, letter to Mary McLeod Bethune, Nov. 18, 1945, NAACP Papers, group


--- PAGE 421 ---
398 notes to pages 146–53
II, box A573, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 1945; and see Bethune, letter to Ella Baker, Nov. 27,
1945, EBP.
160. Ella Baker, letter to Walter White, May 14, 1946, NAACP Papers, group II, box
A573, folder: Staff, Ella Baker, 2 (resignation letter); also see Shirley Graham Du Bois,
‘‘Why Du Bois Was Fired in 1948,’’ Masses and Mainstream  1, no. 9 ( November 1948):
15–26.
161. Current, interview by author.
162. John L. Leﬂore, letter to Ella Baker, July 12, 1946, NAACP Papers, group II, box
A573, folder: Staff, Ella Baker. Leﬂore was an especially good friend of Baker’s, since the
two of them had worked together through the YNCL during the 1930s. He was listed as
council chairman of the YNCL in Mobile, Ala., on the Young Negroes Cooperative League
stationery of around 1932. See EBP, YNCL ﬁles.
163. William A. Fowlkes, ‘‘U.S. Warned To Make Democracy Work at Home: Miss Ella
Baker Electriﬁes Jan. 1 Bethel Audience,’’ Atlanta Daily World, Jan. 2, 1947, 1.
chapter five
The epigraph is from Braden, The Wall Between, 341.
1. On Baker’s involvement in the New York City NAACP branch, see NAACP Papers,
group II, series C, B127, branch ﬁle, New York, Library of Congress.
2. Ella Baker to ‘‘Dear Sir,’’ n.d., EBP, cites the 1950 call for the Emergency Mobiliza-
tion. Horne, Black and Red ; Gloster Current, memo to Thurgood Marshall, Nov. 7,
1952, NAACP Papers, group II, box A128, folder: Committee on Political Domination.
Current’s memo, which outlines the NAACP’s stance on the exclusion of communists,
reads: ‘‘The 41st Annual Convention in Boston adopted an anti-communist resolution on
June 23, 1950.’’ That resolution (which was attached to the memo) empowered the
Board of Directors ‘‘to take the necessary action to eradicate such inﬁltration [by com-
munists] and if necessary to suspend and reorganize or lift the charter and expel any
unit, which . . . comes under Communist or other political control or domination.’’
Current went on to cite a January 2, 1951, recommendation from the board of the NAACP
that required branch ofﬁcials to report ‘‘communistic or other political inﬁltration or
domination.’’ Similar resolutions were passed in 1956 at the San Francisco annual
convention.
3. Baker acknowledged that Communists and socialists of various stripes had been
some of the most militant ﬁghters against racial discrimination and economic injustice.
4. Baker, interview by Urban Review editors, 10. For information on Bea Levison, see
Markowitz and Rosner, Children, Race, and Power, 46, 111, 147.
5. See Clarence Taylor, Knocking at Our Own Door. In Baker, interview by Hayden and
Thrasher, 59, mention is made of Galamison and Stein.
6. Ella Baker to Mamie and Kenneth Clark, July 28, 1952, Kenneth B. Clark Papers,
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C., box 60, folder 7; Kenneth Clark to ‘‘Dear Friend,’’
ca. 1953, letter on Intergroup Committee on New York Public Schools letterhead (Ella
Baker is listed on the letterhead as a member of the steering committee), Clark Papers,
box 56, folder 2.
7. Markowitz and Rosner, Children, Race and Power, 24, 27, 32–33.
8. Ibid., 18.
9. ‘‘Harlem Students Learn Inferiority,’’ Amsterdam News , May 1, 1954, 1. ‘‘Dear
Friends’’ letter from Kenneth Clark, June 14, 1954; press release regarding ‘‘Children
Apart’’ conference, Apr. 23, 1954; Clark Papers, box 56, folder 2. Ella Baker to Kenneth
Clark, July 18, 1953, Clark Papers, box 93, folder 10.


--- PAGE 422 ---
notes to pages 153–59 399
10. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 68.
11. See Bates, The Long Shadow of Little Rock, for a vivid, ﬁrst-person account.
12. Clarence Taylor, Knocking at Our Own Door, 67–69.
13. Ibid., 70.
14. Sara Black, ‘‘Don’t Forget N.Y. Has Its Own School Problem,’’ Amsterdam News,
Sept. 28, 1957, 1.
15. Ibid.
16. See Markowitz and Rosner, Children, Race and Power; Biondi, To Stand and Fight.
17. Letter to Ruth Moore from Ella Baker, Feb. 25, 1957, on In Friendship letterhead,
Amzie Moore Papers, box 2, folder: Correspondence, 2, State Historical Society of
Wisconsin (SHSW), Madison.
18. NAACP Papers, group II, box A456, folder: New York City police brutality, 1953–54;
and ‘‘Law Which Police Flaunted,’’ Amsterdam News, Feb. 21, 1953, 2.
19. ‘‘Resignation Urged of 2 Top Ofﬁcials,’’ Amsterdam News, Feb. 21, 1953, 2.
20. ‘‘Two Public Protests Set for Sunday,’’ Amsterdam News, Feb. 28, 1953, 3. See Feb.
19, 1953, press release from NAACP national ofﬁce, ‘‘Civic groups demand action against
secret rights pact,’’ NAACP Papers, group II, box A456, folder: New York City police
brutality.
21. Telegram to Mayor Vincent R. Impelliteri from Ella Baker, Feb. 16, 1953, NAACP
Papers, group II, box A456, New York City police brutality folder, 1953–54.
22. NAACP Papers, group II, box A456, folder: New York City police brutality, 1953–54.
23. Telegram to Mayor Vincent R. Impellitteri from Ella Baker, Feb. 16, 1953, NAACP
Papers, group II, box A456, folder: New York City police brutality, 1953–54; ‘‘Two Public
Protests Set for Sunday,’’ Amsterdam News, Feb. 28, 1953, 3.
24. ‘‘Two Public Protests Set for Sunday.’’
25. ‘‘A ‘Red’ Plot Says Police Assn.—NAACP Leaders Answer Charges,’’ Amsterdam
News, Mar. 21, 1953, 2.
26. ‘‘Monaghan Starts Anti-Bias Training,’’ Amsterdam News, Mar. 28, 1953.
27. ‘‘Ella Baker Liberal Party Candidate’’ (ﬂyer), EBP, 1950s ﬁles, Liberal Party or New
York Politics folder.
28. By 1951 Baker had known Robinson for at least three years. She had proposed to
work with him in garnering support for the Morningside Community Center, but these
plans did not materialize. Ella Baker to James Robinson, Jan. 26, 1948, EBP.
29. For information on Baker’s city council candidacy, see ‘‘Ella Baker Resigns to Run
for Council,’’ Amsterdam News, Sept. 12, 1953.
30. Pauli Murray to Ella Baker, Nov. 2, 1953, EBP.
31. See also Murray, Autobiography of a Black Activist , and Pauli Murray Papers,
‘‘Liberal Party,’’ box 73h, Schlesinger Library, Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Mass.
32. Yevette Richards, Maida Springer, 71.
33. Naison, Communists in Harlem, 232–47; and Yevette Richards, Maida Springer, 71.
34. The House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) became a permanent
standing committee of the U.S. House of Representatives in 1946, after two previous
incarnations.The committee then zealously took up the task of ferreting out alleged
Communists and subversives ostensibly to protect U.S. national security from pro-Soviet
spies and enemies of the government. The commmittee’s hearings, held around the
country, put dissidents of all sorts on trial to prove they were not Communists. Many
were blacklisted; careers were destroyed; and several people went to jail for refusing on
prinicpal to cooperate with such an undemocratic body.
35. For more on anticommunism and the American left, including African American


--- PAGE 423 ---
400 notes to pages 159–72
progressives and organized labor, see Polsgrove, Divided Minds, and Dudziak, Cold War,
Civil Rights.
36. ‘‘Lovestonites,’’ in Encyclopedia of the American Left, ed. Buhle et al., 436.
37. FBI report, Ella Baker ﬁles, New York. There are numerous unsigned reports
throughout Baker’s ﬁle. My conclusions are drawn from extracting information from
nearly a dozen short, unsigned reports.
38. NAACP Papers, group II, box A128, folder: Committee on Political Domination,
1952.
39. ‘‘Report’’ of the New York Branch of the NAACP, Internal Security Committee, Oct.
14, 1957, submitted by Aloncita J. Flood; and James Robinson to Roy Wilkins, letter with
committee report attached, Nov. 18, 1957, NAACP Papers, group III, box C102, folder:
‘‘Internal Security Committee.’’
40. Russell Crawford to Benjamin J. Davis Jr., Nov. 9, 1957, ibid.
41. Grant, Ella Baker, 99.
42. Baker, interview by Walker, 29.
43. Garrow, Bearing the Cross, 84.
44. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 61.
45. Moss, Moving On, 79–80.
46. Polsgrove, Divided Minds, 43.
47. Branch, Parting the Waters , 168–72. For more information on Rustin, see Jervis
Anderson, Bayard Rustin, which deals very little with Rustin’s sexuality. A forthcoming
biography by John D’Emilio promises to take up the issue in greater depth. Homo-
sexuality and Communism were closely related offenses in the twisted minds of McCar-
thyites, giving Rustin good reason to be doubly cautious.
48. Branch, Parting the Waters, 168.
49. A. Philip Randolph to ‘‘Dear Friends,’’ Feb. 17, 1956, A. Philip Randolph Papers,
box 23, In Friendship folder, 1956, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
50. A. Philip Randolph, letter to In Friendship, Feb. 17, 1956, Norman Thomas Papers
(microﬁlm), reel 30, General Correspondence folder, New York Public Library.
51. Norman Thomas, letter to A. Philip Randolph, Mar. 8, 1956, Randolph Papers, box
23, In Friendship folder, 1956.
52. J. Oscar Lee, letter to Norman Thomas, Jan. 30, 1956, outlines other activities
under way; Fay Bennett, letter to Norman Thomas, Jan. 19, 1956, Norman Thomas
Papers (microﬁlm), reel 30.
53. Minutes of the Executive Committee of ‘‘In Friendship,’’ June 20, 1956, New York
City, A. Philip Randolph Papers, LC, box 23, ‘‘In Friendship’’ folder, 1956, 2.
54. Baker, interview by Walker, 7.
55. Ella J. Baker, memo to Executive Committee of In Friendship, July 26, 1956,
NAACP Papers, group III, box A177.
56. Ella Baker to Rev. Kilgore, Feb. 26, 1956, EBP.
chapter six
1. For an account of the participation of women in the initiation of the boycott, see Jo
Anne Gibson Robinson, The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Started It.
2. Baker, interview by Morris, 24A.
3. Brockington, interview by author, includes an assessment of Baker’s views about
King.
4. See Morris, Origins of the Civil Rights Movement ; and Payne, I’ve Got the Light of
Freedom.


--- PAGE 424 ---
notes to pages 173–82 401
5. Fairclough, To Redeem the Soul of America, 38.
6. Baker, interview by Walker, 10.
7. Ibid., 9–10.
8. Ibid., 91.
9. Ibid., 19.
10. Ibid., 20.
11. Ibid., 27.
12. Ling, ‘‘Gender and Generation.’’
13. Baker, interview by Britton, 10.
14. Morris, Origins of the Civil Rights Movement, 83–86.
15. Ibid., 99.
16. Fairclough and others point out that King was never openly anticommunist,
as some of his NAACP colleagues were, but he was at times politically pragmatic and
at other times ambivalent when it came to this question. For example, he continued
his association with Stanley Levison despite the latter’s Communist past, but he re-
buked Bob Moses for participating in a demonstration organized by white leftists in
Atlanta.
17. Garrow, ‘‘From Reformer to Revolutionary,’’ 427; see also Harding, Martin Luther
King, 58–81.
18. Baker, interview by Britton, 23.
19. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 63.
20. Ella Baker to Bayard Rustin, Jan. 30, 1957, Southern Christian Leadership Con-
ference (SCLC) Papers (microﬁlm), reel 20, King Center, Atlanta, Ga.
21. Thomas Kilgore Jr., Bayard Rustin, and Ella Baker to James Hicks, June 4, 1957,
EBP, SCLC ﬁles, Prayer Pilgrimage folder.
22. Ella Baker’s FBI ﬁles, New York.
23. Thomas Kilgore Jr., Bayard Rustin, and Ella Baker to James Hicks, June 4, 1957,
EBP.
24. Branch, Parting the Waters, 217; see also Garrow, Bearing the Cross, 92.
25. Morris, Origins of the Civil Rights Movement, 106.
26. Correspondence on Crusade for Citizenship letterhead is represented throughout
the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) Papers, King Center, Atlanta, Ga.
27. Baker, interview by Morris, 31B.
28. Branch, Parting the Waters, 172. Rustin had been arrested on ‘‘morals charges’’ for
allegedly having sex in public in a car with another man. Rustin’s sexual orientation, in
the context of a homophobic culture, meant he was always vulnerable to a potential
scandal.
29. Baker, interview by Hogan, 60.
30. Ibid., 62.
31. Branch, Parting the Waters, 231.
32. Baker, interview by Walker, 5.
33. Ibid., 1.
34. Ibid., 2.
35. Memo, ‘‘SCLC as a Crusade,’’ Oct. 23, 1958, EBP, SCLC ﬁles.
36. Martin Luther King Jr. to Hon. A. Clayton Powell, Feb. 7, 1958, SCLC Papers, box
32, folder 7; Baker, interview by Walker, 2.
37. Branch, Parting the Waters, 231.
38. See Ella Baker correspondence, SCLC Papers, Jan.–June 1958, regarding details
of the Crusade.


--- PAGE 425 ---
402 notes to pages 182–88
39. Flyers announcing Ella Baker as a speaker in Apr. 1958, EBP, SCLC ﬁles, ﬂyers and
announcements folder.
40. Fairclough, Martin Luther King, Jr., 53.
41. Baker, interview by Walker, 17–18.
42. Ibid., 18.
43. Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent, 3, writes: ‘‘Male-biased traditions and rules
of decorum sought to mute women’s voices and accentuate their subordinate status vis-
à-vis men. Thus, tainted by the values of the larger society, the black church sought to
provide men with full manhood rights, while offering women a separate and unequal
status.’’
44. See Shaw, What a Woman Ought to Be and To Do , and Kevin Gaines, Uplifting the
Race, for more discussion of the politics of respectability as they relate to gender and
black protest and activism in the early twentieth century. See also May, Homeward
Bound, for a discussion of gender and the Cold War.
45. Baker, interview by Walker, 20.
46. Ibid., 19.
47. Ibid., 15–16.
48. Ella Baker, letter to ‘‘Dear Mattie,’’ June 3, 1958, EBP.
49. Ella Baker, letter to Vincent (Baker), Mar. 22, 1960, EBP. He appears to have been
a cousin of Baker’s with whom she had not been in close touch.
50. Ella Baker, memo to SCLC Administrative Committee on ofﬁce procedures and
personnel, June 2, 1960, EBP, SCLC ﬁles.
51. Baker, interview by Morris, 31B. A call for democratizing the movement’s clerical
work was analogous to women’s demand that men share in household chores. Baker was
critical of the gendered division of labor between primarily female clerical staff and
primarily male ‘‘professional’’ staff. This issue recurred in SNCC in 1964 when female
staffers—half serious and half teasing—‘‘called a strike in the Atlanta [SNCC] ofﬁce to
protest always being asked to take minutes.’’ Richardson, interview by author.
52. Baker, interview by Morris, 31B. King’s alleged extramarital affairs are discussed
by Garrow in his biography of King, Bearing the Cross , and by Abernathy in his auto-
biography, And the Walls Came Tumbling Down.
53. Baker, interview by Walker, 11–12.
54. Ibid., 11, 14.
55. Ibid., 12.
56. Branch, Parting the Waters, 233.
57. Alethea Wyatt, letter to Ella Baker, May 27, 1958, SCLC Papers, King Center, box
32, folder 7.
58. SCLC Papers, box 32, folder 7.
59. See Green, Before His Time.
60. See Dittmer, Local People, 76–78, for details on Evers and the NAACP-SCLC rivalry
in Mississippi.
61. Baker, interview by Walker, 13.
62. John Tilley to Amzie Moore, Oct. 30, 1958, Amzie Moore Papers, box 1, folder:
1958 Correspondence, State Historical Society of Wisconsin, Madison.
63. Baker, interview by Morris, 81A.
64. Ibid., 83A.
65. SCLC Administrative Report, July 3, 1958, EBP, SCLC ﬁles.
66. Eskew, But for Birmingham, 28; Branch, Parting the Waters, 247.
67. Quoted in Tyson, Radio Free Dixie, 117.


--- PAGE 426 ---
notes to pages 188–212 403
68. Baker, interview by Morris, 42A.
69. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 53.
70. See Morris, Origins of the Civil Rights Movement, 115.
71. ‘‘U.S. Warned to Make Democracy Work at Home,’’ Atlanta Daily World , Jan. 2,
1947, 1.
72. Baker, interview by Walker, 5.
73. Ibid., 19.
74. Baker, interview by Morris, 65A.
75. Ibid., 80A.
76. Branch, Parting the Waters, 247.
77. Clark, interview by Hall, 87; Braden, interview by author, June 1991
78. Baker, interview by Britton, 36.
79. Baker, interview by Morris, 39A.
80. Ibid., 55A.
81. Ibid., 48A.
82. Ella Baker, ‘‘The Negro Church, the Nucleus of the Negroes Cultural Develop-
ment,’’ unpublished high school paper (circa 1923), EBP.
83. Fairclough, Martin Luther King, Jr., 19.
84. Baker, interview by Walker, 32.
85. Ibid., 24.
86. Baker, interview by Walker, 32.
87. Tyson, Radio Free Dixie, 153; Simpkins, interview by author.
88. Bernice Johnson Reagon, interview by author.
89. Ella Baker, letter to Ruth Tinsley, Richmond, Va., ca. Dec. 1942 or 1943, EBP,
NAACP ﬁles.
90. Scott, Domination and the Arts of Resistance, 199.
91. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 70.
92. Ibid., 84.
93. Divorce decree, City Clerk’s Ofﬁce for the Borough of Manhattan, N.Y., ﬁle num-
ber 30849-1958.
chapter seven
1. ‘‘Four To Be Charged in Negro Co-eds Rape,’’ Washington Evening Star, May 4, 1959.
2. Ella Baker was under FBI surveillance off and on from the 1940s through the 1970s.
She was heavily monitored in 1959, and even though, at certain points, agents reported
her to be a ‘‘non-threat,’’ her ﬁles were repeatedly closed only to be reopened. The
FBI was especially interested in Baker’s connections to Stanley Levison, Anne and Carl
Braden, and Bayard Rustin. Ella Baker FBI Files, New York and Atlanta.
3. Note that I use the term ‘‘militancy’’ to refer speciﬁcally to the willingness to justify
physical force as an act of self-defense. This position was directly contrary to paciﬁsm
and to King’s philosophical convictions. King would have argued, some years later, that
he too was a militant, although a nonviolent one; he was prepared to be confrontational
but was not prepared to strike a physical blow or resort to the use of arms. Baker was not
willing to rule these tactics out. Emory O. Jackson, ‘‘ ‘Nothing Is Too Dear to Pay for
Freedom,’ Miss Baker,’’ Birmingham World, June 10, 1959, 1.
4. Ibid., 6. She did not publicly criticize the politics of SCLC very often. In fact, a
month after her ﬁery speech in Birmingham, Baker was on a panel at the Institute on
Nonviolent Resistance to Segregation, held at Spelman College, in which her copanelists
championed nonviolence. Baker talked about the importance of local grassroots struggle


--- PAGE 427 ---
404 notes to pages 212–19
and the pivotal moment of history that the movement was witnessing, but in this context
she declined to tackle the issue of nonviolence head on.
5. Manis, A Fire You Can’t Put Out, 217.
6. For more information on the Mack Parker lynching, see Smead, Blood Justice.
7. For examples of activists possessing guns for protection, see Daisy Bates quoted in
Tyson, Radio Free Dixie , 165; Simpkins, interview by author; Payne, I’ve Got the Light of
Freedom, 204.
8. Tyson, Radio Free Dixie.
9. Ibid., 149.
10. Ibid., 51–58.
11. Emory O. Jackson, ‘‘ ‘Nothing Is to Dear to Pay for Freedom,’ Miss Baker,’’ Bir-
mingham World, June 10, 1959, 1, 6.
12. Ibid., 6.
13. Tyson, Radio Free Dixie, 116.
14. Ibid., 159.
15. Ibid., 216–17. For nuances of Braden’s support and Forman and Brooks’s visit, see
Anne Braden to Jim Dombrowski, July 27, 1961, 2, Carl and Anne Braden Papers, ‘‘White
SCEF Student Project,’’ folder 1, State Historical Society of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis.
16. Tyson, Radio Free Dixie, 262.
17. Ibid., 279–82.
18. Burlage, telephone interview by author.
19. Ella Baker to Anne Braden, Aug. 16, 1962, 1, Braden Papers, 38:5, Southern Patriot
and Field Organizers ﬁles, correspondence, Apr.–Aug. 1962, SHSW.
20. Burlage, telephone interview with author. See also Tyson, Radio Free Dixie , 81,
193–207.
21. Burlage, telephone interview by author.
22. Tyson, Radio Free Dixie, 248–308. After living in Cuba and spending time in North
Vietnam and China, Williams returned to the United States in 1969.
23. On Jan. 26, 1959, the FBI was contacting the Department of Motor Vehicles for
information on Baker; since she never had a driver’s license, this was of no use. On Jan.
29, 1959, a special agent for the FBI called Baker under pretext of wanting information
about getting involved. Ella Baker FBI Files, Atlanta and New York.
24. Eskew, But for Birmingham, 124–50.
25. Baker, interview by Britton, 28.
26. Manis, A Fire You Can’t Put Out, 72, 329.
27. Ella Baker to Fred Shuttlesworth, n.d. [circa Apr. 1960], EBP, correspondence ﬁle
(1960s).
28. Manis, A Fire You Can’t Put Out, 215.
29. See Kelley, ‘‘Birmingham’s Untouchables,’’ 77–100. The ACMHR’s orientation to-
ward its mass base was a matter of conscious policy; this point is underlined by the fact
that, as in most civil rights organizations, its paid membership was predominantly mid-
dle class, but it retained a large following among the poor.
30. Kelly, ‘‘Birmingham’s Untouchables,’’ 84. See also, Manis, A Fire you Can’t Put Out,
329.
31. Manis, A Fire You Can’t Put Out, 8.
32. Ibid., xvi, 13.
33. Ibid., 11–17.
34. Baker, interview by Morris, 37A.
35. Eskew, But for Birmingham, 122–25.


--- PAGE 428 ---
notes to pages 219–26 405
36. Baker, interview by Hogan, 20.
37. Eskew, But for Birmingham, 123.
38. Manis, A Fire You Can’t Put Out, 36.
39. Ibid., 100, 224–25, 256, 436–39.
40. Eskew, But for Birmingham, 31.
41. Ibid., 135.
42. Ibid., 140–41.
43. Ibid.
44. Brockington, telephone interview by author, May 1994.
45. Braden, interview by author, April 13, 1991. See also Linda Reed, Simple Decency
and Common Sense, 177.
46. Alice Spearman to Ella Baker, Dec. 1959, Ella Baker Papers (EBP), SCLC ﬁles,
correspondence, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, N.Y. Pete
Daniel, Lost Revolutions , 229–34, gives more biographical information on Spearman’s
politics.
47. Simpkins, interview by author.
48. Branch, Parting the Waters, 221. King and Baker both saw the bill as limited.
49. Proviser and Pederson, Grassroots Constitutionalism, 147.
50. Baker, interview by Britton, 38.
51. Burton, On the Black Side of Shreveport, 95.
52. Ibid., 95–96.
53. Ibid., 95–96.
54. Ibid., 96–97.
55. Simpkins, interview by author.
56. Ibid.
57. Ibid.
58. Ibid.
59. The standard of conduct embraced by working-class and nonelite blacks did not
endorse excessive drinking either. However, the middle-class leaders who sought to
police black behavior not only targeted alcohol, dancing, gambling, and other ‘‘vices’’ but
attempted to regulate speech, dress, and comportment as well, and they linked all of
these standards to the requirements and expectations of citizenship.
60. Baker, interview by Hogan, 25.
61. Roy Wilkins, speech before National Negro Publishers Association meeting, May
18, 1958, reprinted in Wilson, ed., In Search of Democracy, 384.
62. Baker, interview by Hogan, 35.
63. See Gaines, Uplifting the Race , which stresses the connections between uplift
ideology and a conservative, patriarchal view of family and gender. Also see Cohen,
Boundaries of Blackness , for a late-twentieth-century version of the politics of respect-
ability as it applies to the AIDS crisis and the response of traditional black leaders.
Cohen, a political scientist, argues that in order to project an image of black respectabil-
ity many leaders initially distanced themselves from the AIDS issue, even as it ravaged
black communities, to avoid the stigma of homosexuality and drug use that were associ-
ated with the disease.
64. See also Joy James, Transcending the Talented Tenth; and Shaw, What a Woman
Ought to Be and Do.
65. Burton, On the Black Side of Shreveport , 104. Tragically, Brewster became a local
movement martyr. After many years of open civil rights agitation, including hosting
meetings at her home and experiencing several arrests and routine harassment by the


--- PAGE 429 ---
406 notes to pages 226–32
Shreveport police, she died in 1963 under suspicious circumstances. Although her death
was ascribed to suicide, some speculated that she may have been killed; no indictments
were ever made.
66. Simpkins, interview by author.
67. Ibid.
68. Ibid. Years later, when the Simpkinses were living in New Jersey and Baker was
back in Harlem, they rekindled their friendship and spent many hours together.
69. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 57.
70. ‘‘200 Negroes Appear, 14 Register in Drive.’’ Shreveport Times, Mar. 20, 1959.
71. Simpkins, interview by author.
72. Shreveport folder, 1950s, EBP. Composite sketch of activities drawn from exten-
sive memos and clippings throughout this folder.
73. Ibid.
74. ‘‘Negro Voter Purge Aided by Decision,’’ Shreveport Times, Mar. 21, 1959.
75. Shreveport folder, 1950s, EBP. Composite sketch of activities drawn from exten-
sive memos and clippings throughout this folder.
76. ‘‘Negro Voter Purge Aided by Decision,’’ Shreveport Times, Mar. 21, 1959.
77. Ibid.
78. Ibid.
79. Rollins, All Is Never Said, 76–77.
80. Ibid.
81. Julian Bond, foreword to Braden, The Wall Between, xiii.
82. Braden, The Wall Between, 322. See also Linda Reed, Simple Decency and Common
Sense, 33.
83. Linda Reed, Simple Decency and Common Sense, 31–32.
84. Ibid., 102, 128–29, 176; Klibaner, Conscience of a Troubled South ; Klibaner, ‘‘The
Travail of Southern Radicals’’; and Braden, telephone interview by author, Jan. 3, 1997.
85. See Linda Reed, Simple Decency and Common Sense, on SCHW; and Sullivan, Days
of Hope , for more details on SCEF, SCHW, and white southern liberals and antiracists
before and during the civil rights movement era.
86. See Braden, The Wall Between.
87. See Polsgrove, Divided Minds.
88. For more biographical information, see Fosl, Subversive Southerner.
89. Braden, telephone interview by author, Jan. 3, 1997.
90. Ibid.
91. The House Un-American Activities Committee emerged out of a Cold War political
climate in which anyone who challenged any government policy was labeled a Commu-
nist. People who were subpoenaed by HUAC were required to testify before the commit-
tee, which asked them whether they and others were then or had ever been members of
the Communist Party or various ‘‘front’’ organizations. Some ‘‘took the Fifth,’’ refusing to
answer on the grounds that they might incriminate themselves, but that was generally
regarded as a confession of Communist afﬁliation. Others refused to testify on the
grounds that the First Amendment protected free speech and free association. Imprison-
ment for contempt of Congress was one possible consequence of refusing to testify. For
information on HUAC during the late 1950s, see Shrecker, Many Are the Crimes . For
details of the Bradens’ political careers before 1958, see Braden, The Wall Between.
92. Braden, telephone interview by author, June 2002. See Linda Reed, Simple De-
cency and Common Sense, 161–62, and Braden, The Wall Between. As late as 2002, over a
generation after the end of the 1960s phase of the Black Freedom Movement, Anne


--- PAGE 430 ---
notes to pages 233–40 407
Braden still declined to say deﬁnitively whether she and Carl were or were not members
of the CP, even to her own biographer, Catherine Fosl, or me. In her view, whether one is
a Communist is still wrongly used as a litmus test of political respectability, and it should
not matter. My view is that it matters if in fact some of the most stalwart antiracist
whites in the movement were Communists. It potentially deﬂates, rather than fuels, anti-
Communist stereotypes.
93. Braden, The Wall Between, 32.
94. See Evans, Personal Politics; and Omolade, The Rising Song of African American
Women.
95. Anne Braden to Ella Baker, ca. Feb. 1956, EBP; Braden, interview by author, June
1991.
96. Braden, interview by author, Apr. 13, 1991.
97. Braden, The Wall Between , 325. Anne Braden also lists Vincent Harding, Martin
Luther King Jr., James Forman, and Fred Shuttlesworth in this category of brave allies.
98. Braden, telephone interview by author, June 2002. When Anne Braden asked for
Baker’s help in 1965, Baker explained her position to her this way. ‘‘She did not think
Communists should be allowed to be members of the NAACP because it put the organiza-
tion at risk’’ of persecution by the government, which was not an unfounded fear. At the
same time, she disagreed with her NAACP cohorts that the organization should not aid
or defend those who were the objects of persecution. This was a ﬁne line indeed. Such a
position had the potential of going either way ‘‘to challenge or reinforce anti-Communist
sentiments.’’
99. Braden, interview by author, Apr. 13, 1991. Anne was nearly nine months preg-
nant at the time and unable to make the trip. The Bradens’ baby was born on Feb. 7, one
week after the hearings and one week after the student desegregation sit-ins began in
Greensboro, North Carolina. Anne and Carl jokingly referred to their daughter as their
‘‘sit-in baby.’’
100. Braden interview by author, Jan. 3, 1997.
101. Braden, interview by author, June 1991.
102. The opportunity to work alongside Nannie Helen Burroughs was a special honor
for Ella Baker, since Burroughs had been an inspiration for the Baptist women’s move-
ment that Georgianna Ross Baker had been so devoted to. Baker and Burroughs had met
on at least one previous occasion.
103. Baker to Nannie H. Burroughs, Jan. 8, 1959, Southern Christian Leadership
Conference (SCLC) Papers, Ella Baker correspondence, Jan. 1959–Jan. 1960, King Cen-
ter, Atlanta, Ga.
104. Braden Papers, SCEF ﬁles, SHSW.
105. In places like Nashville and Atlanta, groups of black students had been plotting,
planning, and praying for an opportunity to strike back at Jim Crow indignities.
106. Baker, interview by Carson, 4–5. The sparks ignited by the Greensboro students
set off a ‘‘wildﬁre’’ of protest.
107. Ella Baker to Anne Braden, Mar. 21, 1960, SCLC Papers, box 32, folder 18.
chapter eight
1. ‘‘Report,’’ 10-page handwritten report from Ella Baker (on SCLC letterhead), Mar.
12, 1960, EBP, SCLC ﬁles; Ella Baker to ‘‘Students’’ requesting biographical information,
Apr. 8, 1960, SNCC Papers (microﬁlm), reel 11.
2. Garrow, Bearing the Cross, 68, 131.
3. Baker, interview by Carson, 8.


--- PAGE 431 ---
408 notes to pages 241–56
4. Baker, interview by Hogan, 6.
5. Baker met with and consulted King, but she sent out the actual correspondence and
made most of the ﬁnal decisions about logistics, program, structure, and precisely who
would be invited. This authority was not bestowed on Baker; rather, it was a byproduct
of her location within the organization. She did most of the planning and outreach; so
the details were left to her. The details in shaping the Raleigh meeting were important
and ultimately politically signiﬁcant.
6. Baker, interview by Carson, 9. According to Garrow, Bearing the Cross , 132–33,
King was receiving pressure from advisers to push for an afﬁliation with the new sit-in
movement without getting into an all-out ﬁght with Ella Baker. King relented and never
made an effort to ‘‘capture’’ the group, as Baker feared he would.
7. Forman, The Making of Black Revolutionaries , 217. See also Robnett, How Long?
How Long?, 99, for a portion of Ella Baker’s comments about her walkout at the SNCC
conference.
8. Baker, ‘‘Bigger than a Hamburger,’’ 4.
9. Ibid.
10. Baker, interview by Britton, 43–44.
11. Baker, ‘‘Bigger than a Hamburger,’’ 4.
12. Ibid.
13. Hierich, interview by author.
14. Nash, interview by author, Sept. 1997.
15. Baker, interview by Carson, 12.
16. Stembridge, interview by author.
17. Moses and Cobb, Radical Equations, 28.
18. Moses, interview by author.
19. Ibid.
20. Moses, interview by author; Moses and Cobb, Radical Equations, 108.
21. Moses and Cobb, Radical Equations, 8.
22. Moses, interview by Carson, 3.
23. Baker’s inﬂuence on Moses is evident in his writings. A larger-than-life poster of
Baker greets visitors as they walk into the ofﬁces of the Algebra Project in Cambridge,
Mass., which Moses heads. His book, with Cobb, quotes and pays homage to Baker
throughout. The Algebra Project is a math literacy project based on Moses’s view that
unequal access to mathematical knowledge perpetuates social, racial, and economic
inequities.
24. See Moses and Cobb, Radical Equations.
25. See the personal accounts of white women in the movement in Constance Curry
et. al., Deep in Our Hearts.
26. Curry, interview by author.
27. Taitt-Magubane, interview by author. Taitt-Magubane would later become one of
Ella Baker’s closest friends in New York City, hosting annual birthday parties in her
friend’s honor.
28. Ibid.
29. Braden, interview by author, June 1991.
30. Brockington, interview by author, Feb. 1990.
31. Reagon, interview by author; and Joyce Ladner, interview by author.
32. Clarke, interview by author.
33. In 1960 most young women activists admired Ella Baker and saw her level of
political savvy as being far out of their reach; but, as they matured, many of them found


--- PAGE 432 ---
notes to pages 256–67 409
they had modeled their identities as politically active adult women after Baker. See
author’s interviews with Diane Nash, Eleanor Holmes Norton, Bernice Johnson Reagon,
and Dorie Ladner. See also Evans, Personal Politics.
34. Dorie Ladner, interview by author.
35. Abernathy, interview by author.
36. Ibid.
37. Author’s interviews with Donaldson, Taitt-Magubane, Dorothy Miller Zellner, and
Nash.
38. Moses, interview by author.
39. Zinn, interview by author.
40. Donaldson, interview by author.
41. Burlage, interview by author.
42. Hall (Wynn), interview by author, 1–2.
43. Author’s interviews with Curry and Taitt-Magubane.
44. Curry, interview by author.
45. Grant, Fundi.
46. Nash, interview by author, Sept. 1997.
47. Curry, interview by author.
48. Guyot, interview by author.
49. Mary King and Casey Hayden both entered SNCC via the YWCA, and Connie
Curry had Y afﬁliations, as did Lenore Taitt-Magubane and Bobby Yancy, all of whom
would remain a part of Baker’s life until the end.
50. Baker, ‘‘Report for the Southeastern Region, 9/1/61–8/31/62,’’ YWCA F iles,
YWCA New York Branch Collection, YWCA National Headquarters, New York.
51. Harding, interview by author.
52. It would be inaccurate to characterize all SCLC ministers as privileged. But even
though these ministers comprised the more activist wing of the black church, Baker felt
they were resistant to grassroots leadership, democratic organiztion, and militant tactics.
53. Grant, Ella Baker, 144.
54. Stembridge, interview by author; Carson, In Struggle, 29.
55. Claude Sitton, ‘‘Negro Criticizes N.A.A.C.P. Tactics,’’ New York Times, Apr. 17, 1960,
32.
56. Student Voice  2, no. 2 (Feb. 1961): 1; Curry, interview by author; Coordinat-
ing Committee meetings, Feb. 3–5, 1961, Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee
(SNCC) Papers. For Powell controversy, see Branch, Parting the Waters, 847.
57. Farmer, Lay Bare the Heart, 195–203.
58. For information on 1961 freedom rides, see Branch, Parting the Waters; for 1947
rides, see Grant, Ella Baker, 91–92.
59. Nash, interview by author, Sept. 1997; and Branch, Parting the Waters, 466.
60. Ella Baker, memo to ‘‘Coordinating Committee of the Freedom Rides,’’ n.d. [ca.
May 1961], 1, SNCC ﬁles, EBP.
61. Ibid., 2.
62. Ibid., 3.
63. Ibid.
64. Baker’s partisan intervention on behalf of SNCC during the Freedom Rides re-
ﬂects the tension embedded in her advice that organizational afﬁliation and loyalty
should not matter. In the context of competing organizations, the group that is least
selﬁsh or self-promoting is likely to get the least attention and resources, which then has
a negative bearing on its practical ability to continue and expand its work.


--- PAGE 433 ---
410 notes to pages 267–74
65. Fleming, Soon We Will Not Cry.
66. Dittmer, Local People, 119–20; Carson, In Struggle, 70; and Lewis, Walking with the
Wind, 178–81.
67. Lewis, Walking with the Wind, 180; and Carson, Struggle, 41–42.
68. Minutes for Meeting of Co.-Committee, August 11, Highlander Research and Edu-
cation Center Papers, box 71, folder 16, State Historical Society of Wisconsin (SHSW),
Madison, are handwritten and incomplete. The tone of the meeting and the debate
about splitting the organization are recounted in numerous SNCC interviews and chroni-
cled in secondary sources.
69. Baker, interview by Emily Stoper, in Stoper, The Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee, 269.
70. Ibid.
71. This is a distinction that sociologists Aldon Morris and Charles Payne elaborate on
in their works on the movement.
72. Payne, ‘‘Ella Baker and Models of Social Change.’’
73. Dorothy Miller Zellner, interview by author.
74. Ibid.
75. The best deﬁnition of praxis, a term introduced by theorist Antonio Gramsci, is ‘‘a
philosophy which is also politics.’’ The function of praxis ‘‘draws out and elaborates that
which people already ‘feel’ but do not ‘know,’ in other words that which is present in
nascent or inchoate form in their consciousness but which is contradicted and immo-
bilized by other conceptions.’’ In discussing the idea of praxis, Gramsci describes the
work of revolutionary intellectuals as that of ‘‘drawing out and elaborating elements of
critical awareness and good sense.’’ Forgacs, The Antonio Gramsci Reader, 323.
76. Baker, interview by Morris, 69A.
77. Ibid., 29A.
78. Forman, The Making of a Black Revolutionary , 215.
79. Zinn, SNCC, the New Abolitionists, dedication and acknowledgements.
80. Murray, interview by Martin.
81. Ture (Carmichael), interview by author.
chapter nine
1. Although SNCC staff and volunteers came from varied backgrounds, most of them
were college students when they joined the movement. In 1960 only a small percentage
of African Americans had ever attended college. Still, education was a critical marker of
class status and a criterion for leadership posts in traditional civic and social organiza-
tions. Therefore, even those who were not from well-off families had a certain social
capital as a result of their access to education. Cleveland Sellers illustrated the point in
his movement biography, River of No Return. His family was not rich, but it was better off
than most.
2. Payne, in I’ve Got the Light of Freedom , and Moses and Cobb, in Radical Equations,
reiterate the point that small-business owners, landowners, and those with a source of
income independent of whites were key in the support they offered to the movement.
Two other factors should be noted with regard to these individuals. First, they often also
found themselves economically threatened because of their political stances despite
their semi-independent circumstances; and second, even though they had some ﬁnan-
cial security that others did not, most were rebels against certain middle-class values,
especially snobbery and exclusivity. While they enjoyed certain advantages, they identi-
ﬁed with the poor as social if not economic peers.


--- PAGE 434 ---
notes to pages 275–83 411
3. ‘‘Freedom Village Tennessee,’’ Student Voice  2, no. 1 (Jan. 1961); Forman, The
Making of Black Revolutionaries, 114–45.
4. Forman, The Making of Black Revolutionaries ; Forman, interview by author; Sell-
ers, River of No Return.
5. ‘‘Let’s Help Fayette County Fight for Free Rights,’’ Student Voice 1, no. 4 (Nov. 1960):
2.
6. Stembridge, interview by author.
7. Curry, interview by author, and Sherrod, interview by author.
8. John Lewis, Walking with the Wind, 180.
9. Gloster Current, ‘‘Which Way Out?’’ Crisis, Mar. 1961.
10. Curry, interview by author, and Sherrod, interview by author.
11. Baker, ‘‘Tent City: Freedom’s Front Line.’’
12. Ibid.
13. See Forman, The Making of Black Revolutionaries , 137–45, for a detailed descrip-
tion of Fayette Tent City.
14. See ‘‘The Fight for the Vote—Fayette County,’’ testimony of John McFerren, Jan.
31, 1960, in Grant, ed., Black Protest, 274–77; Brockington, interview by author.
15. Anne Braden to Ella Baker, June 20, 1963, Carl and Anne Braden Papers, box 41,
folder 1, State Historical Society of Wisconsin (SHSW), Madison, Wis.
16. Forman, The Making of Black Revolutionaries, 116–17.
17. Lewis is both borrowing from and expanding on James Scott’s notion of the
‘‘hidden transcript,’’ that is, the covert messages in which oppressed communities ex-
press how they really feel about the society and their condition in it. See ‘‘Race, Equity
and Democracy.’’
18. Ed King, ‘‘SNCC Visits Fayette,’’ Student Voice 2, no. 1 (Jan. 1961): 1.
19. Forman, interview by author.
20. Patterson, Brown v. Board of Education, mentions a number of grassroots commu-
nity activists who were instrumental in building support and recruiting litigants for the
NAACP’s legal cases during the 1950s. See references to Gardiner Bishop, Barbara Johns,
and Albert DeLaine.
21. Dittmer, Local People.
22. For an interesting comparison of the U.S.-based Black Freedom Movement’s inter-
nal class politics and the Dalit Movement of the so-called untouchable caste in India, see
Rajshekar, Dalit.
23. Baker, interview by Britton, 76.
24. Carson, In Struggle, 62.
25. Jane Stembridge, interview by Emily Stoper, in Stoper, The Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee, 248.
26. ‘‘Ella Baker’s Hattiesburg Speech,’’ Jan. 21, 1964, Hattiesburg, Miss. Speech tran-
scribed by and provided courtesy of Catherine Orr.
27. This composite sketch of Baker’s apartment is drawn from author’s interviews
with Mary King, Connie Curry, and Casey Hayden.
28. Sherrod, interview by author.
29. Carson, In Struggle, 57.
30. John Lewis, Walking with the Wind, 187.
31. Wilkins, Standing Fast, 286.
32. See Carson, In Struggle, 63.
33. In some ways the movement in Albany, Georgia, in 1962 signaled the beginning of
open tensions between the SCLC and SNCC. However, it would be wrong to assume that,


--- PAGE 435 ---
412 notes to pages 283–90
from that time on, hostilities necessarily dominated the relationships between individ-
uals in the two organizations. Most SNCC people respected Martin Luther King Jr. even
though they might disagree with him politically. Many of them continued to maintain
cordial personal relationships with him until his death in April 1968. Stokely Carmichael
enjoyed occasional dinners at the King home in Atlanta as late as 1967. For details, see
Carson, In Struggle, 56–65; Garrow, Bearing the Cross , 173–230; and Ricks, ‘‘ ‘De Lawd’
Descends and Is Cruciﬁed,’’ 5–12.
34. Baker, interview by Morris, 70A.
35. Carson, In Struggle, 63; Forman, The Making of Black Revolutionaries , 256; Ricks,
‘‘ ‘De Lawd’ Descends and Is Cruciﬁed.’’
36. Zinn, You Can’t Be Neutral, 51.
37. Sherrod, interview by Britton, 26.
38. Brockington, interview by author.
39. Carson, In Struggle, 56–57.
40. Based in Columbia, South Carolina, Simkins had been active in the NAACP in the
1940s and 1950s; she had also been loosely associated with the Communist Party and
communist popular front organizations like the Southern Negro Youth Congress. See
Woods, ‘‘Modjeska Simkins.’’
41. ‘‘Operation Freedom’’ (ﬂyer), 1961, EBP, Operation Freedom folder, 1960s ﬁles.
42. Anne Braden to Ella Baker, Oct. 4, 1962, Braden Papers, box 39, folder 2, Southern
Patriot and Field Organizers Files, Correspondence, Sept.–Dec. 1962, SHSW.
43. In the minutes of a workshop two years after the Chapel Hill conference, Septima
Clark and Charles Girard still spoke about how their conﬁdence in interracial work and
opposition to anticommunism were inﬂuenced by their personal relationships with the
Bradens. Minutes/Summary of Civil Liberties–Civil Rights Conference, June 28–30,
1963, Atlanta, Ga., Braden Papers, box 47, folder 9, SHSW.
44. Anne Braden to Jim (Dombrowski), June 20, 1961, Braden Papers, box 35, folder
5, SHSW.
45. Anne Braden to Jim (Dombrowski), Oct. 4, 1961, Braden Papers, box 36, folder 5,
SHSW.
46. Braden, interview by author, June 1991.
47. ‘‘Freedom and the First Amendment,’’ Oct. 27, 1961, conference transcript, Braden
Papers, box 48, folder 8, panel 3, p. 1, SHSW.
48. Ibid., 3.
49. Ibid., 3–11.
50. Baker, ‘‘Lack of Thought Cripples South.’’
51. Baker, ‘‘Great Society or Grim Society.’’
52. Anne Braden to Victor Rabinowitz, Apr. 13, 1963, Braden Papers, box 47, folder 9,
SHSW.
53. Anne Braden to James Dombrowski, Dec. 24, 1962, Braden Papers, box 47, folder
9, SHSW.
54. Anne Braden to Ella Baker, Apr. 18, 1963, Braden Papers, box 47, folder 9, SHSW.
55. Minutes/Summary of Civil Liberties–Civil Rights Conference, June 28–30, 1963,
Atlanta, Ga., Braden Papers, box 47, folder 9, p. 6, SHSW.
56. Ibid.
57. Dittmer, Local People, 231; Moses, interview by author. A newspaper headline in
the Daily News of Jackson, Miss., blazoned: ‘‘Red Crusader Active in Jackson Mixed Race
Drive.’’
58. The issue of association with reputed Communists came up again for SNCC when


--- PAGE 436 ---
notes to pages 290–94 413
the leftist National Lawyers Guild offered legal assistance to southern civil rights work-
ers. SNCC accepted the aid. Dorothy Miller Zellner, interview by author.
59. James Dombrowski to Anne Braden, June 21, 1961, Braden Papers, box 35, folder
5, SHSW.
60. John Salter to Anne and Carl (Braden), Oct. 25, 1963, Braden Papers, box 41,
folder 8; John Salter to Jim (Dombrowski), Nov. 20, 1963, Braden Papers, box 41, folder
8; Ella Baker to Anne Braden, n.d. (in June–Nov. 1963 folder), and Salter letter dated
Nov. 20, 1963, Braden Papers, box 41, folder 8, SHSW.
61. Zinn, Albany, 5.
62. See Reagon, interview by author; Ricks, ‘‘ ‘De Lawd’ Descends and Is Cruciﬁed’’;
and Zinn, Albany. Reagon eventually returned to school, obtaining a Ph.D. from How-
ard University and developing a successful career as a cultural worker with the wom-
en’s a capella group, Sweet Honey in the Rock, and as a historian at the Smithsonian
Institution.
63. Reagon, interview by author.
64. Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 120.
65. Carson, In Struggle, 48.
66. Ella Baker to Anne Braden, Aug. 16, 1962, Braden Papers, box 38, folder 5; Braden
Papers, Southern Patriot and Field Organizers Files, Correspondence, Apr.–Aug. 1962,
SHSW.
67. Ella Baker to Anne Braden, Aug. 16, 1962, Braden Papers, box 38, folder 5, Corre-
spondence, Apr.–Aug. 1962, SHSW.
68. Brenda Travis, conversation with author at Shaw SNCC Reunion, Apr. 2000,
Raleigh, N.C.
Baker aided young men as well as young women. Travis Britt was another troubled
teenager whom she took under her wing and tried to help. A native of North Carolina,
Britt was expelled from Albany State as a result of his involvement in the 1961 Freedom
Rides and then spent time organizing in McComb. According to Baker, he had also ‘‘seen
too much of the seamy side of life’’ and did not have many resources to help him get back
on his feet. When he turned up jobless and needy in New York, Baker referred him to her
friend Rev. Thomas Kilgore, asking that he try to help the young man get counseling and
a job. Ella Baker to Thomas Kilgore, ca. 1963, EBP.
In the case of Elroy Embery, a sit-in participant expelled from Alabama State College,
Baker appealed to Rev. John Marion of the United Presbyterian Church in New York, ask-
ing for a scholarship contribution. If Baker could not meet a need or resolve a problem her-
self, then she found someone else who could. Ella Baker to Rev. John Marion, ca. 1965, EBP.
69. Nash, interview by author; Omolade, interview by author; King, interview by
author; Reagon, interview by author; Burlage, interview by author.
70. Ruby Doris Smith married Clifford Robinson in 1963 and changed her name to
Ruby Doris Smith Robinson. However, she was Ruby Doris Smith when she joined the
movement in 1960.
71. Richardson, interview by author.
72. Fleming, Soon We Will Not Cry , 90. For general biographical information on
Robinson, including her views on self-defense, see ibid., 82–88.
73. Jane Stembridge’s brief tenure as secretary was in 1960, when SNCC was still
forming as an organization. The role of secretary was quite different in subsequent years.
Smith Robinson’s position, following Forman’s lead, held a great deal of power.
74. Ella Baker to Ruby Doris Smith, EBP, correspondence folder. Baker was concerned
about the health of all those who served time in prison. Although Baker had no particu-


--- PAGE 437 ---
414 notes to pages 296–306
lar reason at that time to be especially concerned about Ruby Doris Smith’s health, Smith
died of cancer before she was thirty.
75. Charles McDew’s comments at Shaw University conference on Ella Baker, Apr.
1960, Raleigh, N.C. For McLaurin quote, see Dittmer, Local People, 136.
76. Guyot, interview by author.
77. Neary, Julian Bond, 76.
78. Donaldson, interview by author, Jan. 18, 2002.
79. See Gaines, Uplifting the Race; Higginbotham, Righteous Discontent.
chapter ten
1. Quoted in Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 103.
2. Baker, interview by Carson, 15.
3. Ibid., 11.
4. Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 176.
5. Moses, interview by author; ‘‘Amzie Moore,’’ the biographical statement that pre-
cedes the ‘‘Guide to the Amzie Moore Papers,’’ Amzie Moore Papers, State Historical
Society of Wisconsin (SHSW), Madison, Wis. (bio of Moore in inventory).
6. ‘‘You don’t know what it’s like to have to sleep with your gun in your hand, where
every passing car might bring Death!’’ Amzie Moore to Roy Wilkins, June 21, 1955, 2,
NAACP Papers, group II, box A422, Amzie Moore folder, Library of Congress, Wash-
ington, D.C.
7. Ibid. The preceding information on Moore is drawn from the same source.
8. Ella Baker to Ruth Moore, Feb. 6, 1957, Amzie Moore Papers, SHSW.
9. Comments from Robert Moses at the Conference on Ethics and Morality: Voices of
the Civil Rights Movement, National Museum of American History, Washington, D.C.,
Feb. 3, 1980, 5 (transcript courtesy of the Martin Luther King Papers Project, Stanford
University).
10. Moses, interview by author. Moses repeated this statement quite often to inter-
viewers and in speeches and publications.
11. Moses, ‘‘Comments of Robert Moses,’’ Conference on Ethics and Morality: Voices
of the Civil Rights Movement.
12. Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 121–124; Dittmer, Local People, 109.
13. Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 113; Dittmer, Local People, 73, 106.
14. Dittmer, Local People, 109, 111.
15. Ibid., 106, 113.
16. Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 118–119.
17. Dittmer, Local People, 111. Nash, interview by author. Nash reiterates how impor-
tant Baker’s encouragement was because other adults were critical.
18. Dittmer, Local People, 115.
19. Also see Clyde Woods, Development Arrested, for an economic and cultural analy-
sis of the racial and class politics in the region.
20. Dittmer, Local People, 104, 111–15.
21. Ibid., 113.
22. Hall (Wynn), interview by author.
23. Omolade, interview by author.
24. Baker, interview by Britton, 82.
25. Dittmer, Local People, 105–7; Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 117.
26. Dittmer, Local People, 118–19. The NAACP eventually withdrew from COFO. The


--- PAGE 438 ---
notes to pages 307–15 415
national NAACP was hostile to the COFO project from the outset. It was the state NAACP
that worked with COFO for a while.
27. Ibid., 119–20.
28. Bond, ‘‘SNCC: What We Did,’’ 19.
29. Hamer, To Praise Our Bridges, 12. For a fuller discussion of Hamer’s life, see Lee,
For Freedom’s Sake, and Kay Mills, This Little Light of Mine.
30. This involvement was the stepping stone to Freedom Summer. See Moses refer-
ence to Lowenstein in Minutes of the Meeting of the SNCC Executive Committee, Dec.
27–31, 1963, SNCC Papers (microﬁlm), reel 3, 28–29, subgroup A, series II, Executive
and Central Committees 1961–1967 ﬁles, King Center, Atlanta, Ga..
31. Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 1. Payne calculates that in 1960 98 percent of
black Mississippians eligible to vote were not even registered.
32. See Henry and Curry, Aaron Henry.
33. See Hall (Wynn), interview by author; Robnett, How Long? How Long? ; Olson,
Freedom’s Daughters; and Moses, interview by author.
34. Sherrod comment in SNCC, ‘‘Southwest Georgia Report,’’ Dec. 27, 1963, EBP.
35. Mueller, ‘‘Ella Baker and the Origins of Participatory Democracy.’’
36. White women may have been excluded from certain roles because they were
white and the priority within a self-consciously black freedom movement was on black
leadership.
37. Ture (Carmichael), interview by author.
38. Ruby Doris Smith Robinson memo to Executive Committee, July 2, 1966, EBP,
SNCC ﬁles; ‘‘A Little Old Statement from Fay Bellamy,’’ Sept. 1, 1966, EBP, SNCC ﬁles.
39. For 1969 Ella Baker speech, see Grant, Ella Baker, 229; for Payne quote, see Payne,
I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 268.
40. In I’ve Got the Light of Freedom , Payne documents gruesome acts of violence, but
he argues that some of the worst forms of violence actually abated when local blacks
fought back. Violence directed at SNCC remained considerable, however.
41. ‘‘Statement on Events in Natchez, Miss.—November 1 and 2, 1963,’’ MFDP Papers,
Appendix A to SNCC Papers, reel 69, frame 504. Ella Baker’s FBI ﬁles also indicate that
Payne reported to the FBI. Whether he did so as an individual or whether he was
reporting the incident in hopes of receiving protection for the group is unclear.
42. See Vollers, Ghosts of Mississippi.
43. Dittmer, Local People, 207.
44. Ibid., 208–9, 210, 211.
45. Minutes of the Meeting of the SNCC Executive Committee, Dec. 27–31, 1963,
SNCC Papers, reel 3. It should be noted that the minutes from SNCC meetings are fairly
inconsistent in depth and quality. Some are handwritten, some partially in shorthand,
and some illegible. A few are not dated. In at least one instance, there are two sets of
slightly different handwritten minutes, obviously taken by different note takers, for the
same meeting. Neither is signed. The Dec. 27–31, 1963, minutes are exceptionally precise
and extensive. The document is thirty-two pages long, typed single-space. There are also
detailed quotes from individual participants in the minutes.
46. Ibid.
47. Ibid., 2.
48. Ibid.
49. Ibid., 8.
50. Ibid., 28.


--- PAGE 439 ---
416 notes to pages 315–26
51. Ibid.
52. Ibid., 29.
53. Ibid., 28.
54. Ibid., 5.
55. Ibid., 6.
56. Ibid., 16.
57. Ibid., 3, 9, 26.
58. Ibid., 32.
59. Sellers, The River of No Return, 100.
60. Dittmer, Local People, 180.
61. Ibid., 178–83.
62. Ibid., 181–83.
63. Zinn, SNCC, 105–6.
64. Ibid., 105.
65. Henry and Curry, Aaron Henry, xii, 65.
66. Zinn, SNCC, 105.
67. Ibid., 106.
68. Ibid.
69. Student Voice, Jan. 27, 1964, 2; Zinn, SNCC, 105–6.
70. Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 299.
71. Mendy Samstein, interview by Romaine, 138–39.
72. Minutes of the Meeting of the SNCC Executive Committee, Dec. 27–31, 1963,
SNCC Papers, reel 3.
73. Quoted in Mary King, Freedom Song, 319.
74. Discussion of black self-defense among local people in SNCC Executive Commit-
tee minutes, June 11, 1964, in Howard Zinn Papers, box 2, folder 7, State Historical
Society of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis. See also Moses, ‘‘Comments of Robert Moses,’’ 6.
75. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 82.
76. Quoted in Mary King, Freedom Song, 324.
77. Ture (Carmichael), interview by author.
78. Richardson, interview by author. See also Dittmer, Local People , 106, 191, 285;
McDew, interview by Shannon.
79. Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 204.
80. SNCC minutes indicate that the group decided that no SNCC staff or volunteer
should carry weapons. However, in a 1966 interview with Emily Stoper, Baker inter-
preted the decision to mean that whether to aid a local person in defending his home if it
came under attack was ‘‘left to the individual.’’ Baker, interview by Emily Stoper, in
Stoper, Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, 269; Grant, Ella Baker, 196.
81. Minutes of the Meeting of the SNCC Executive Committee, June 9–11, 1964, 30–
31, EBP.
82. Ibid., 12, reel 47.
83. Untitled article by Ella Baker, Southern Patriot 22, no. 8 (Oct. 1964): 3.
84. These ﬁgures are an estimated rounding off of several sets of ﬁgures with overlap-
ping discrepancies. See Student Voice 5, no. 17 (July 22, 1964): 1; Dittmer, Local People,
259; Student Voice 5, no. 19 (Aug. 5, 1964): 2–3.
85. Mc Adam, Freedom Summer, 24.
86. Description of Cobb from Holt, ‘‘Freedom Schools,’’ 42.
87. Perlstein, ‘‘Teaching Freedom’’; Rothschild, ‘‘The Volunteers and the Freedom
Schools.’’


--- PAGE 440 ---
notes to pages 327–37 417
88. Lynd, interview by author.
89. ‘‘Volunteers to Open Freedom Schools,’’ Washington Post, July 5, 1964, A11.
90. Lois Chaffee to Ella Baker, Mar. 10, 1964, MFDP Papers, in SNCC Papers (micro-
ﬁlm), reel 64, 90.
91. Ibid.; ‘‘Dear Friends’’ letter from Lois Chaffee about logistics of curriculum meet-
ing, n.d., MFDP Papers, in SNCC Papers (microﬁlm), reel 64, 90.
92. John O’Neal to Ella Baker, Apr. 13, 1964, MFDP Papers, in SNCC Papers (micro-
ﬁlm), reel 67.
93. Ibid. O’Neal’s letter refers to conversations between Moses and Baker regarding
assignments and hires for the Freedom Schools project; he is also soliciting advice. See
also Freedom Now Newsletter, May 4, 1964, in SNCC Papers (microﬁlm), reel 42.
94. Lois Chaffee to Ella Baker, Mar. 10, 1964, SNCC papers (microﬁlm), reel 64.
95. Teodori, The New Left, 103.
96. Richardson, interview by author.
97. Hall (Wynn), interview by author.
98. Taitt-Magubane, interview by author.
99. Freire, Pedagogy of Freedom, 30.
100. Ibid., 61.
101. Ibid., 103.
102. The Italian theorist Antonio Gramsci spelled out an approach to education that
Ella Baker embodied in her daily work. He distinguished between ‘‘instruction (impart-
ing of knowledge)’’ and ‘‘education (drawing out of the pupils’ capacities).’’ He further
emphasized the importance of ‘‘the truly active participation of the pupil in the school,
which could only exist if the school is related to life.’’ See Forgacs, The Antonio Gramsci
Reader, 314, 416 n. 3.
103. Holt ‘‘Freedom Schools.’’
104. Memo, Charles Cobb to SNCC Executive Committee, COFO Summer Program
Committee, Jan. 14, 1964, SNCC Papers (microﬁlm), reel 68.
chapter eleven
1. Henry and Curry, Aaron Henry, 180.
2. Ibid., 166.
3. Rauh, interview by Romaine, 302–6.
4. Ibid., 302–3.
5. Higgs, interview by Romaine.
6. Minutes of meeting on the challenge to the Democratic National Convention (only
6 persons attending), May 5, 1964, SNCC Papers (microﬁlm), reel 47.
7. Gray quoted in Dittmer, Local People, 182.
8. Payne, ‘‘Men Led, but Women Organized,’’ 2.
9. I conﬂate SNCC and COFO because many volunteers identiﬁed with both.
10. Quoted by Orr, ‘‘ ‘The Struggle Is Eternal,’ ’’ 1. The speech was delivered on Aug. 6,
1964 in Jackson, Miss. See also Student Voice 5, no. 20 (Aug. 12, 1964): 1, 4; Student Voice
5, no. 21 (Aug. 19, 1964): 1; Grant, Ella Baker, 163–64.
11. Tillow, interview by author; Anderson, Bayard Rustin, 277.
12. Ibid.; Omolade, interview by author.
13. Ibid.
14. John Painter Jr., ‘‘A Synonym for Oregon: Congresswoman Green Focused on
Education,’’ Oregonian Weekly, Apr. 22, 1987, B8.
15. ‘‘Mississippi Freedom Rally Series . . . ,’’ Amsterdam News, July 25, 1964, 35.


--- PAGE 441 ---
418 notes to pages 337–51
16. Ella Baker to ‘‘Dear Convention Delegate,’’ July 20, 1964, SNCC Papers (micro-
ﬁlm), reel 41.
17. Lee, For Freedom’s Sake , 85. Dittmer, Local People , 290, has a slightly different
version of the quote: ‘‘If you seat those black buggers, the whole South will walk out.’’ We
can infer that some variation on these comments was what was said. The venomous tone
and meaning of the message is the same.
18. Lee, For Freedom’s Sake, 99.
19. Rustin, Strategies for Freedom, 51–54. Rustin had felt that the compromise was the
best deal MFDP could get at that particular juncture and that to reject it would be a
‘‘strategic error.’’ In Strategies, he points out that, although a few years later SNCC
‘‘collapsed,’’ the MFDP challenge was the impetus for a democratization and diversiﬁca-
tion of the delegate selection process within the Democratic Party.
20. Baker, interview by Romaine, 369.
21. Ibid., 382.
22. Rauh, interview by Romaine, 340.
23. Chafe, Never Stop Running, 205.
24. Ibid., 198.
25. Mary King, Freedom Song, p. 343–49; Lee, For Freedom’s Sake , 86–101; Dittmer,
Local People, 272–302; Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 340–41.
26. Baker, interview by Romaine, 382–83.
27. Staff meeting, Oct. 11, 1964, SNCC Papers (microﬁlm), reel 3.
28. Carson, In Struggle, 145–48; Ture (Carmichael), interview by author; Mary King,
Freedom Song, 465.
29. Carson, In Struggle, 181; Anderson, Bayard Rustin, 280.
30. Rowland Evans and Robert Novak, ‘‘Inside Report: Freedom Party Postscript,’’
New York Herald Tribune, Sept. 3, 1964.
31. Ibid.
32. Rowland Evans and Robert Novak, ‘‘Inside Report: A Longer Look at Snick,’’ New
York Herald Tribune, Apr. 9, 1965.
33. John Dittmer points out that Curtis Gans of the Americans for Democratic Action,
the group Joe Rauh is most closely associated with, expressed concern about Baker’s
inﬂuence in the MFDP. Dittmer, Local People, 317.
34. Hall (Wynn), interview by author.
35. Donaldson, interview by author, Jan. 18, 2002.
36. Baker, interview by Britton, 68.
37. ‘‘We Want Black Power,’’ Chicago SNCC leaﬂet reprinted, in section titled ‘‘We
Must Fill Ourselves with Hate for All Things White,’’ in Black Protest Thought in the
Twentieth Century, ed. Meier et al., 487.
38. Baker, interview by Britton, 67.
39. Carson, In Struggle, 201–4.
40. For Zellner quotes, see Robert Zellner, interview by author; for Richardson’s
views, see Richardson, interview by author.
41. Baker, interview by Stoper, 268.
42. Ibid., 265.
43. Ture (Carmichael), interview by author.
44. Ibid.; Braden, interview by author, Apr. 13, 1991.
45. Baker, interview by Britton, 67.
46. Ibid., 66.
47. Ibid., 68.


--- PAGE 442 ---
notes to pages 351–57 419
48. Ibid., 88–89.
49. Beal, interview by author; also see Ella Baker, letter to ‘‘dear friends’’ mentioning
the Emergency Women’s Committee, n.d. [circa 1970s], Ella Baker Papers (EBP), corre-
spondence ﬁles (1970s), Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York,
N.Y.
50. Grant, Ella Baker, 230.
51. Braden, interview by author, June 1991.
52. Ibid. For more information on Sallye Davis’s interesting political background, see
Davis, interview by Painter.
53. ‘‘Ella Baker to Speak on Angela’s Defense Here January Eleventh,’’ Birmingham
Times, Jan. 7, 1971. This clipping included in the FBI’s Ella Baker ﬁles, New York.
54. Richmond Times Dispatch , Mar. 17, 1971. A reference to this same article can
be found in an internal FBI memo dated Apr. 7, 1971, to ‘‘Director, FBI,’’ from ‘‘SAC
100-136886,’’ in the FBI’s Ella Baker ﬁles, New York ﬁle. The memo does not mention the
article’s title. See also Brian Siegle, ‘‘Baker Attacks Public Complacency,’’ Daily Cavalier
(University of Virginia), Feb. 26, 1971.
55. For more information, see EBP, Mass Party folder, 1970s ﬁle; general Mass Party
literature in Arthur Kinoy Papers, State Historical Society of Wisconsin (SHSW), Madi-
son, Wis.; and Saltzman, interview by author.
56. EBP, Mass Party folder and correspondence; Glick, interview by author.
57. EBP, Mass Party folder and correspondence.
58. Baker, interview by Britton, 56, Paul Horowitz to Ella Baker, Aug. 2, 1978, and
Annette Rubinstein to Ella Baker, June 24, 1974, EBP, correspondence ﬁles (1970s);
Baker, interview by Allen, 2; Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 59.
59. Puerto Rico Solidarity Organization, statement in support of Puerto Rican inde-
pendence, n.d. [ca. 1974], with list of names of supporters including Ella Baker, EBP,
1970s Puerto Rico Solidarity ﬁles.
60. Paul Horowitz of Puerto Rico Solidarity Organization to Ella Baker, Aug. 2, 1978,
EBP, Puerto Rican Solidarity Organization folder.
61. EBP, Puerto Rican Solidarity Organization folder.
62. Donaldson, interview by author, Apr. 23, 2002.
63. Violet Cherry to Ella Baker, Sept. 7, 1976, EBP, correspondence folder (1970s).
64. Cantarow and O’Malley, ‘‘Ella Baker,’’ 93.
65. Political clippings folder, EBP.
chapter twelve
In comparing Ella Baker to Gramsci and Freire—two men, one a European and the other
a Latin American—I am reminded of radical philosopher Lewis Gordon’s powerful cri-
tique of the way in which Eurocentric intellectual traditions push scholars to subsume
black thinkers and theorists beneath white ones in order to somehow legitimate them.
This is a danger, but the other danger is to essentialize and isolate black thought from
parallel ideologies. I have not asserted that Baker learned from, borrowed from, or
imitated these two well-known theorists; instead, I contend that through her own pro-
cess of political evolution she arrived at a very similar place. In distinct cultural and
historical contexts, those struggling to analyze injustice and realize a more humane
alternative can and do arrive at similar conclusions without one being a derivative of the
other. See Gordon, Existentia Africana.
1. This is a point illustrated effectively in Grant’s documentary ﬁlm Fundi when Bob
Moses refers to Baker as a master teacher, ‘‘mfundi or fundi’’ in Swahili. It is a point


--- PAGE 443 ---
420 notes to pages 358–61
reiterated in Ayers, ‘‘ ‘We Who Believe in Freedom,’ ’’ 54, and in Moses and Cobb, Radical
Equations, 23–57.
2. Ayers, ‘‘ ‘We Who Believe in Freedom,’ ’’ 524. The term griot refers to a story-
teller/teacher and in some cases to a visionary and adviser.
3. Gaines, Uplifting the Race, 33, 35.
4. Baker, interview by Hayden and Thrasher, 37.
5. Ibid., 38. Other scholarship suggests that while many teachers erred on the side
of avoiding political controversies to keep their jobs and make a difference that way,
others did in fact reject their socialization and engage in protest politics. See Fairclough,
‘‘ ‘Being in the Field of Education,’ ’’ 75 (‘‘the image of the black teacher as Uncle Tom or
race traitor is a grotesque stereotype’’). See also Gilmore, Gender and Jim Crow, regard-
ing teachers and political leadership. John Dittmer asserts that there were few places
where teachers got involved in movement activity in signiﬁcant numbers before 1965.
Dittmer, Local People, 75.
6. Omolade, interview by author.
7. Joyce Ladner, interview by author.
8. Ibid.
9. Graff, Beyond the Culture Wars.
10. See Baker, interview by Urban Review editors; and ‘‘The Workers Education Proj-
ect,’’ n.d., Works Progress Administration (WPA) Papers, Workers Service Division, New
York City Reports, National Archives, Washington, D.C.
11. Cited in Morera, ‘‘Gramsci and Democracy,’’ 26.
12. Baker, interview by Urban Review editors, 20.
13. An illustration of this methodology and approach to teaching in action is reﬂected
in an account written by Jane Stembridge as an observer in a Freedom School class
taught by SNCC activist Stokely Carmichael, ‘‘Notes on Class,’’ in Carmichael, ed., Stokely
Speaks, 3–4.
14. Payne, I’ve Got the Light of Freedom, 409.
15. Hall (Wynn), interview by author.
16. Taitt-Magubane, interview by author. See author’s interviews with Hall (Wynn),
Moses, Reagon, and King for the same sentiment.
17. Mary King, Freedom Song, 60. Baker’s students went on to enjoy illustrious ca-
reers, likely attributable, at least in part, to her encouragement and tutelage. Joyce
Ladner became a sociologist, author, and interim president of Howard University. Mary
King served in the administration of President Jimmy Carter. Eleanor Holmes Norton is a
congresswoman from the District of Columbia.
18. Holmes Norton, interview by author.
19. Baker, interviewer not known, Duke University Oral History Program (DUOHP),
13.
20. Ibid., 21.
21. Ibid.
22. Gramsci, Selections from Prison Notebooks, 9, 10. Citation from Lipsitz, A Life in the
Struggle, 9.
23. Baker, interview by Morris, 55A.
24. Orr, ‘‘ ‘The Struggle Is Eternal.’ ’’
25. ‘‘Report of Conference of Educational Directors and Educational Committee
Members of Labor Organizations Cooperating with the Workers Education Project:
Methods of Promoting Educational Programs,’’ Jan. 22, 1938, 2, Pauli Murray Papers,
WPA ﬁles, box 72, Schlesinger Library, Radcliffe College, Boston, Mass.


--- PAGE 444 ---
notes to pages 362–69 421
26. Joyce Ladner, interview by author.
27. Freire, Pedagogy of Freedom, 30.
28. Ibid., 104.
29. Hall (Wynn), interview by author.
30. Radical black intellectual Cornel West also identiﬁes Martin Luther King Jr. as an
‘‘organic intellectual.’’ See ‘‘Martin Luther King Jr: Prophetic Christian as Organic Intel-
lectual,’’ in West, The Cornel West Reader, 424–34.
31. Baker, interview by Morris, 89A.
32. Baker, interviewer not known, DUOHP, 14.
33. Elsa Barkley Brown, ‘‘Mothers of Mind,’’ 8–9.
34. Ella Baker, ‘‘The Black Woman in the Civil Rights Struggle,’’ a speech delivered in
Atlanta, Ga., in 1969. Reprinted in Grant, Ella Baker, 230.
35. Said, Representations of the Intellectual,’’ 11.
36. Ibid., 63–64.
37. Kelley, Freedom Dreams.
38. In interviews later in her life, Baker insisted she was not a leader but a facilitator. I
respectfully disagree with her humble self-portrait. She was a leader in that she had a
profound, conscious, and deﬁning impact on the politics and culture of the campaigns
and organizations with which she was afﬁliated. She was indeed a leader if we can
conceive of leadership in horizontal as well as vertical terms. She led and was led by the
masses and her comrades. She was, however, not a traditional leader and did not exhibit
the characteristics of self-promotion sometimes associated with individual leadership.
39. See Curry et al., Deep in Our Hearts , for discussion of white women activists’
varied views of their necessarily supportive role as whites.
40. Lee, For Freedom’s Sake.
41. Nash, interview by author.
42. Hayden in Browning, Curry, and Hayden, group interview by author.
43. Hall waited awhile, but ultimately did marry. Hall (Wynn), interview by author.
44. Omolade, The Rising Song of African American Women , has a chapter devoted to
Ella Baker’s legacy.
45. Omolade, interview by author.
46. Holmes Norton, interview by author; James, Transcending the Talented Tenth.
47. Clark, interview by Hall, 81, 87.
48. Baker, interview by Morris, 56A.
49. See hooks, Feminist Theory from Margin to Center, for an elaboration of the notion
of bringing the marginal sectors of the community to the center as an empowerment
strategy and also as a means of enriching a movement’s theoretical understanding of
oppression and liberation.
50. Guinier and Torres, The Miner’s Canary, 159.
51. For example, Baker’s views are inconsistent with those of black conservatives like
Shelby Steele who argue that colorblindness was the goal of the civil rights movement,
that it has been achieved, and that now we need a raceless political agenda. Baker felt
that differences had to be acknowledged and debated and that marginality could actu-
ally be harnessed as a resource rather than treated as simply a liability. Unlike Steele, her
goal was not simply assimilation.
52. Baker, interview by Morris, 48A.
53. Baker, interview by Carson, 10–11.
54. Baker, interview by Britton, 75.
55. Baker, interview by Morris, 49A.


--- PAGE 445 ---
422 notes to pages 370–71
56. Ibid., 52A. Anthropologist Karen Brodkin Sacks, in her research on the Duke
University Hospital Workers struggle in Durham, N.C., documents a style and method of
political organizing that revolved around a set of personal and political relationships
sustained largely by women workers, who on the surface might not have appeared to be
leaders in any traditional sense. The socially connected women who were key in holding
these networks together and putting them to political use were in Sacks’s terminology
‘‘centerwomen.’’ Sociologist Belinda Robnett has borrowed that concept and expanded
on it in her formulation of female ‘‘bridge organizers,’’ who, she points out, connected
grassroots networks and everyday acts of resistance to the formal campaigns and na-
tional organizations during the civil rights movement. Chana Kai Lee’s biography of
Fannie Lou Hamer further exempliﬁes these theories of black women’s leadership. All of
these approaches to leadership and political community are variations and reformula-
tions of an understanding that Ella Baker incorporated tacitly into her own political
practices as early as the 1940s. See Sacks, Caring by the Hour ; Robnett, How Long? How
Long?; and Lee, For Freedom’s Sake.
57. Baker, interview by Britton, 6, 38.
58. SNCC leaders were able to obtain access to members of the Justice Department
and the president’s staff during the Freedom Rides and Freedom Summer in a way that
they would not have been able to if not for the grassroots organizing and mobilizing and
visible campaigns in the streets. Of course, the reality was that access still did not
translate into the physical protection that movement workers so desperately needed or
into all of the rights and reforms that were being demanded.
59. Ella Baker’s view of situational or contextual democracy is effectively articulated,
in part, by political scientist and philosopher Iris Marion Young, who argues for what she
terms the ‘‘deepening of democracy,’’ an inclusive, historical concept of democratic prac-
tice, which takes into account group differences and inequalities. For Young, as for
Baker, simple inclusion is not enough; the terms of that inclusion are key. Every citizen or
participant does not come to the table with the same resources and privileges, so the
differences and inequalities have to be a part of the democratic equation. Like legal
scholar Lani Guinier, Baker never bought into artiﬁcially simplistic notions of democracy
as deﬁned by an aggregate model of calculated group interests. See Iris Marion Young,
Democracy and Inclusion, and Guinier, Tyranny of the Majority.
60. The notion of a conditional insider, as conceptualized by black feminist sociolo-
gist Patricia Hill Collins, describes the positionality of black women domestics who on
the one hand worked, and often lived, in intimate proximity to their ‘‘white family’’ but
who simultaneously understood they would never be full-ﬂedged members of such a
family. Yet their exploited labor ensured the family’s day-to-day survival, and their loca-
tion allowed them to wield subtle power and provided them with unique social and
political insights that whites did not have. Collins, Black Feminist Thought, 11.
61. Abernathy, interview by author. Abernathy made this observation because of
Baker’s relative insider status versus her own feelings of exclusion as the wife of a
prominent male leader. She watched Ella Baker sit in the living room with the men while
the wives were attending to household matters. What she did not fully appreciate from
her vantage point was that Baker was an ‘‘outsider within.’’ She was close to the center of
political power within civil rights groups but was never fully welcomed into the club
because of her gender, her politics, and at times her age and personality.
62. Baker, interview by Britton, 40.
63. Hine, Speak Truth to Power, 41.


--- PAGE 446 ---
notes to page 372 423
64. Grant, Ella Baker, 218, citing an interview with Ella Baker by Wesley Brown and
Arverna Adams, New York, N.Y., 1977.
65. Ella Baker shared some of C. L. R. James’s views but by no means all of them. She
was never a Trotskyist and never as absorbed as James in the internal ideological feuds
within the organized left. This comparison does not mean to locate Baker in one particu-
lar political camp. As has been emphasized throughout the book, she was a very inde-
pendent thinker, who nevertheless valued lessons learned from myriad theories and
traditions.
66. Untitled essay by C. L. R. James, Race Today 6, no. 5 (1974): 144.


--- PAGE 447 ---



--- PAGE 448 ---
bibliography
archival materials
Ann Arbor, Michigan
Hatcher Library, University of Michigan
Joseph Labadie Collection
Atlanta, Georgia
Archives, Martin Luther King Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Inc.
Anne Romaine Oral History Collection (interviews from Romaine, ‘‘The Mississippi
Freedom Democratic Party through August 1964,’’ are on deposit in the King
Center)
Fred Shuttlesworth Papers
Southern Christian Leadership Conference Papers
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee Papers, 1959–1972 (microﬁlm)
MFDP Papers
Birmingham, Alabama
Birmingham Public Library
Birmingham Collection
Boston, Massachusetts
Mugar Library, Boston University
Martin Luther King Papers
Cambridge, Massachusetts
Schlesinger Library, Radcliffe College
Virginia Foster Durr Papers
Pauli Murray Papers
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Wilson Library, University of North Carolina
North Carolina Collection (Baptist Missionary Pamphlets)
Southern Oral History Project
Chicago, Illinois
Chicago Historical Society
Claude Barnet Papers (Associated Negro Press)
National Archives Regional Center
U.S. Census Population Schedules for Virginia and North Carolina (microﬁlm)
Detroit, Michigan
Walter P. Reuther Library, Wayne State University
Rosa Parks Papers
Durham, North Carolina
Duke University Oral History Program


--- PAGE 449 ---
426 bibliography
Ithaca, New York
M. P. Catherwood Library, Cornell University
International Ladies Garment Workers Union Papers
Charles S. Zimmerman Papers
Madison, Wisconsin
State Historical Society of Wisconsin
Carl and Anne Braden Papers
Highlander Research and Education Center Papers
Myles Horton Papers
Arthur Kinoy Papers
Staughton Lynd Papers
‘‘Mississippi’s ‘Freedom Summer’ Revisited’’ (1979)
Amzie Moore Papers
Charles Sherrod Papers
Southern Conference Education Fund Papers
Howard Zinn Papers
New Orleans, Louisiana
Tulane University
Amistad Collection
Fannie Lou Hamer Papers (microﬁlm)
New York, New York
New York Public Library
Division of Rare Books and Manuscripts
Norman Thomas Papers (microﬁlm)
Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture
Ella Baker Papers
William Pickens Papers, NAACP Files
Bayard Rustin Papers (microﬁlm)
Teachers College, Columbia University
New York Public School Papers—Mayor’s Committee on Schools
Young Women’s Christian Association National Headquarters
YWCA New York Branch Collection (Harlem Y)
Norfolk, Virginia
Norfolk Public Library
Norfolk Collection
Raleigh, North Carolina
North Carolina State Archives
U.S. Census Population Schedule, Raleigh, North Carolina
Shaw University Archives
Shaw University Journal
Stanford, California
Martin Luther King Jr. Papers Project, Stanford University
Syracuse, New York
Syracuse University
George Schuyler Papers, Arents Collection


--- PAGE 450 ---
bibliography 427
Warrenton, North Carolina
Warren County Estate Records
Warren County Register of Deeds
Washington, D.C.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, U.S. Department of Justice
Ella Baker Files
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee Files
Library of Congress
Nannie H. Burroughs Papers
Kenneth B. Clark Papers
NAACP Papers
A. Philip Randolph Papers
Joseph Rauh Papers
Bayard Rustin Papers (microﬁlm)
Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Howard University
Benjamin Grifﬁth Brawley Papers
Civil Rights Documentation/Ralph Bunche Collection
Pauli Murray Papers
National Archives
Works Progress Administration Papers
Winston-Salem, North Carolina
Wake Forest University Library
Black Baptist Collection
interviews by author
Abernathy, Juanita. Interview by author. Atlanta, Ga., September 1998.
Beal, Frances. Interview by author. Oakland, Calif., February 12, 1991.
Braden, Anne. Interview by author. Louisville, Ky., April 13, 1991.
— — —. Interview by author. Chapel Hill, N.C., June 1991.
— — —. Telephone interview by author. January 3, 1997.
— — —. Telephone interview by author. June 2002.
Brockington, Jackie. Interview by author. New York, N.Y., February 1990.
— — —. Telephone interview by author. May 1994.
Browning, Joan, Connie Curry, and Casey Hayden. Group interview by author. Atlanta,
Ga., November 8, 1997.
Burlage, Dorothy (Dawson). Telephone interview by author. May 13, 2002.
Clarke, John Henrik. Interview by author. Harlem, N.Y., September 12, 1993.
Cooke, Marvel (Jackson). Interview by author. Harlem, N.Y., April 14, 1996.
Current, Gloster. Telephone interview by author. September 3, 1996.
Curry, Connie. Telephone interview by author. November 3, 1997.
Donaldson, Ivanhoe. Telephone interview by author. January 18, 2002.
— — —. Telephone interview by author. April 23, 2002.
Forman, James. Interview by author. Ann Arbor, Mich., January 22, 1991.
Giddings, Paula. Interview by author. Chapel Hill, N.C., June 10, 1996.
Gilchrist, Helen. Interview by author. Littleton, N.C., June 10, 1991.
Glick, Ted. Telephone interview by author. May 2002.
Grant, Joanne. Interview by author. New York, N.Y., October 4, 1989.
— — —. Interview by author. New York, N.Y., October 5, 1989.


--- PAGE 451 ---
428 bibliography
Guyot, Lawrence. Interview by author. Washington, D.C., March 26, 1990.
Hall, Prathia (also known as Prathia Hall Wynn). Interview by author. Denver, Colo.,
June 25, 1997.
Harding, Vincent. Interview by author. Denver, Colo., June 26, 1997.
Harris, Doug. Interview by author. New York, N.Y., November, 1990.
Heirich, Max. Interview by author. Ann Arbor, Mich., September 5, 1996.
Hill, Herbert. Interview by author. Madison, Wis., May 24, 1996.
Holmes Norton, Eleanor. Telephone interview by author. March 1997.
King, Mary. Interview by author. Washington D.C., October 30, 1997.
Kochiyama, Yuri. Telephone interview by author. May 2002.
Ladner, Dorie. Interview by author. Washington, D.C., March 24, 1990.
Ladner, Joyce. Interview by author. Washington, D.C., March 23, 1990.
Lynd, Staughton. Telephone interview by author. April 11, 2002.
Lynn, Conrad. Interview by author. Nanuet, N.Y., February 6, 1990.
Moses, Robert. Interview by author. Cambridge, Mass., July 9, 1996.
Nash, Diane. Telephone interview by author. October 1990.
— — —. Interview by author. Chicago, Ill., September 4, 1997.
Newell, Jenny. Interview by author. Littleton, N.C., June 10, 1991.
Omolade, Barbara (Jones). Telephone interview by author. February 5, 1997.
Parks, Rosa. Telephone interview by author. July 5, 1990.
Reagon, Bernice Johnson. Telephone interview by author. April 9, 1991.
Richardson, Judy. Telephone interview by author. April 25, 2002.
Saltzman, Steven. Interview by author. Chicago, Ill., April 18, 2002.
Sherrod, Charles. Interview by author. Denver, Colo., June 24, 1997.
Simpkins, C. O. Telephone interview by author. August 27, 1997.
Solomon, Maude. Interview by author. Littleton, N.C., June 10, 1991.
Stembridge, Jane. Telephone interview by author. April 13, 2002.
Taitt-Magubane, Lenora. Interview by author. New York, N.Y., February 6, 1990.
Tillow, Walter. Telephone interview by author. August 19, 1997.
Ture, Kwame (Stokely Carmichael). Interview by author, Chicago, Ill., June 1997.
Yergan, Efﬁe. Interview by author. Raleigh, N.C., June 11, 1991.
Zinn, Howard. Interview by author. Cambridge, Mass., July 8, 1996.
Zellner, Dorothy (Miller). Telephone interview by author. April 28, 2002.
Zellner, Robert. Telephone interview by author. April 2002.
interviews by others
Baker, Ella. Interview by Archie E. Allen. November 7, 1968. Private papers of Archie E.
Allen, Santa Barbara, Calif.
— — —. Interview by Harry G. Boyte. January 15, 1977. Boyte Family Papers, 1941–81,
Special Collections, Duke University, Durham, N.C. (Hard copy of interview in
author’s possession.)
— — —. Interview by John Britton. June 19, 1968. Civil Rights Oral History Project,
Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Howard University, Washington, D.C.
— — —. Interview by Clayborne Carson. New York, N.Y., May 5, 1972. Martin Luther King
Jr. Papers Project, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif.
— — —. Interview by Casey Hayden and Sue Thrasher. New York, N.Y., April 19, 1977.
Southern Oral History Program, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
— — —. Interview by Lenore Bredeson Hogan. New York, N.Y., March 4, 1979. Highlander
Research and Education Center, New Market, Tenn.


--- PAGE 452 ---
bibliography 429
— — —. Interview by Aldon Morris. New York, N.Y., August 28, 1978. (In author’s
possession.)
— — —. Interview by Anne Cooke Romaine. New York, N.Y., 1967. Martin Luther King Jr.
Center Archives, Atlanta, Ga.
— — —. Interview by Julius Scott. New York, N.Y., n.d. (circa 1974). Permission to use
interview tape courtesy of Julius Scott; transcribed by Sarah Wood.
— — —. Interview by Urban Review editors. Urban Review 4, no. 3 (May 1970): 19–23.
— — —. Interview by Eugene Walker. September 4, 1974. Southern Oral History Project,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
— — —. Interviewer not known. N.d. (circa 1980). Duke University Oral History Program,
Durham, N.C.
Clark, Septima. Interview by Jacquelyn Dowd Hall. July 25, 1976. Southern Oral History
Project, Wilson Library, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Davis, Sallye. Interview by Nell Irvin Painter. Birmingham, Ala., Oct. 17, 1976. Southern
Oral History Project, Wilson Library, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Higgs, Bill. Interview by Anne Cooke Romaine. January 1967. In Romaine, ‘‘The
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party through August 1964,’’ 280–300.
Lawson, James. Interview by Milton Viorst. Los Angeles, January 1978. Moorland-
Spingarn Research Center, Howard University, Washington, D.C.
Levison, Stanley. Interview by James Mosby. New York, N.Y., February 14, 1970.
Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Howard University, Washington, D.C.
Lewis, John. Interview by Milton Viorst. Washington, D.C., June 1978. Moorland-
Spingarn Research Center, Howard University, Washington, D.C.
McDew, Charles. Interview by Katherine Shannon. Washington, D.C. August 24, 1967.
Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Howard University, Washington, D.C.
Murray, Pauli. Interview by Robert Martin. New York, N.Y., August 15, 1968. Moorland-
Spingarn Research Center, Howard University, Washington, D.C.
Rauh, Joseph. Interview by Anne Cooke Romaine. Washington, D.C., June 1967.
Romaine, ‘‘The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party through August 1964,’’ 302–6.
Samstein, Mendy. Interview by Anne Cooke Romaine. Knoxville, Tenn., September
1966. Romaine, ‘‘The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party through August 1964,’’
136–82.
Sherrod, Charles. Interview by John Britton. June 19, 1968. Civil Rights Oral History
Project, Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Howard University, Washington, D.C.
newspapers and periodicals
Amsterdam News
Atlanta Constitution
Atlanta Daily World
Baltimore Afro-American
Birmingham World
Chicago Defender
Crisis
Liberty
Littleton Courier
Littleton News Reporter
Nashville Banner
National News
New York Times


--- PAGE 453 ---
430 bibliography
Norfolk Journal and Guide
Norfolk Landmark
Pittsburgh Courier
Richmond Times Dispatch
Shreveport Times
Southern Patriot
Student Voice
Washington Evening Star
West Indian News
published sources, dissertations, theses,
and unpublished comments
Abernathy, Ralph David. And the Walls Came Tumbling Down. New York: Harper and
Row, 1989.
Abrahams, Roger D. ‘‘Negotiating Respect: Patterns of Presentation among Black
Women.’’ Journal of American Folklore 88 (1975): 58–80.
Adams, Frank, with Myles Horton. Unearthing Seeds of Fire: The Idea of Highlander.
Winston-Salem, N.C.: John F. Blair, 1975.
Adelson, Alan. SDS. New York: Scribner, 1972.
Adero, Malaika, ed. Up South: Stories, Studies, and Letters of This Century’s African
American Migrations. New York: New Press, 1992.
Aktenbaugh, Richard J. Education for Struggle: The American Labor Colleges of the 1920s
and 1930s. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1990.
Alexander, Robert Jackson. The Right Opposition: The Lovestonites and the International
Communist Opposition of the 1930’s. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1981.
Anderson, Carol Elaine. ‘‘Eyes off the Prize: African-Americans, the United Nations, and
the Struggle for Human Rights, 1944–1952.’’ Ph.D. diss., Ohio State University, 1995.
Anderson, Eric. Race and Politics in North Carolina, 1972–1901: The ‘‘Black Second’’
Congressional District. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1981.
Anderson, James D. The Education of Blacks in the South, 1860–1935 . Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1988.
Anderson, Jervis. A. Philip Randolph: A Biographical Portrait. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1972.
— — —. Bayard Rustin: Troubles I’ve Seen. New York: HarperCollins, 1997.
— — —. This Was Harlem: A Cultural Portrait, 1900–1950. New York: Farrar Straus Giroux,
1982.
Anderson, William G. ‘‘The Spirit of Albany.’’ Labor Today 3 (Winter 1962–63).
Arnesen, Eric J. Brotherhoods of Color: Black Railroad Workers and the Struggle for
Equality. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2001.
Avery, Sheldon. Up from Washington: William Pickens and the Negro Struggle for
Equality, 1900–1954. Newark, Del.: University of Delaware Press, 1989.
Ayers, William. ‘‘ ‘We Who Believe in Freedom Cannot Rest until It’s Done’: Two
Dauntless Women of the Civil Rights Movement and the Education of a People.’’
Harvard Educational Review 59, no. 4, (November 1989): 520–28.
Baker, Ella. ‘‘Bigger Than a Hamburger.’’ Southern Patriot 18, no. 5 (June 1960): 4.
— — —. ‘‘The Black Woman in the Civil Rights Struggle.’’ In Ella Baker: Freedom Bound, by
Joanne Grant, 227–31. New York: Wiley, 1998.
— — —. ‘‘Developing Community Leadership.’’ In Black Women in White America, ed.
Gerda Lerner, 345–52. New York: Random House, 1972.


--- PAGE 454 ---
bibliography 431
— — —. ‘‘Great Society or the Grim Society.’’ Liberty (June 1965): 3.
— — —. ‘‘Lack of Thought Cripples South.’’ Southern Patriot 20 (March 1962).
— — —. ‘‘Tent City: Freedom’s Front Line.’’ Southern Patriot 19 (February 1961): 1.
Baker, Ella, and Marvel Cooke. ‘‘The Bronx Slave Market.’’ Crisis 42 (November 1935):
330–331, 340.
Bambara, Toni Cade, ed. The Black Woman: An Anthology. New York: Signet, 1970.
Banks, William M. Black Intellectuals: Race and Responsibility in American Life . New
York: Norton, 1996.
Barnard, Hollinger F., ed. Outside the Magic Circle: The Autobiography of Virginia Foster
Durr. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1985.
Barnes, Catherine A. Journey from Jim Crow: The Desegregation of Southern Transit.
New York: Columbia University Press, 1983.
Barnett, Bernice McNair. ‘‘Invisible Southern Black Women Leaders in the Civil Rights
Movement: The Triple Constraints of Gender, Class, and Race.’’ Gender and Society 7,
no. 2 (June 1993): 162–82.
— — —. Sisters in Struggle: Invisible Black Women in the Civil Rights Movement 1945–1970 .
New York: Routledge, 1996.
Bartley, Numan V. The New South, 1945–1980 . Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
Press, 1995.
Bass, Jack. Unlikely Heroes. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1981.
Bates, Daisy. The Long Shadow of Little Rock. New York: David McKay, 1962.
Bekeley, Kathleen. ‘‘ ‘Colored Ladies Also Contributed’: Black Women’s Activities from
Benevolence to Social Welfare, 1866–1896.’’ In The Web of Southern Social Relations,
ed. Walter J. Fraser Jr. et al., 181–203. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1985.
Belfrage, Sally. Freedom Summer. New York: Viking, 1965.
Bell, Inge Powell. CORE and the Strategy of Nonviolence. New York: Random House,
1968.
Bennett, Lerone, Jr. ‘‘SNCC: Rebels with a Cause.’’ Ebony, July 1965, 146–53.
Bianchi, Eugene C. The Religious Experience of Revolutionaries. Garden City, N.Y.:
Doubleday, 1972.
Biondi, Martha. To Stand and Fight: The Civil Rights Movement in Postwar New York City.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2003.
Black Public Sphere Collective, ed. The Black Public Sphere: A Public Culture Book.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Bloom, Jack M. Class, Race, and the Civil Rights Movement. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1987.
Blumberg, Rhoda L. Civil Rights: The 1960s Freedom Struggle. Boston: Twayne
Publishers, 1984.
Bond, Julian. ‘‘SNCC: What We Did.’’ Monthly Review, October 2000, 14–28.
— — —. A Time to Speak, a Time to Act: The Movement In Politics . New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1972.
Bosmajian, Haig A., and Hamida Bosmajian, eds. The Rhetoric of the Civil Rights
Movement. New York: Random House, 1969.
Boynton, Amelia P. Bridge across Jordan. New York: Carlton Press, 1979.
Bracey, John, August Meier, and Elliot Rudwick, eds. Black Protest in the 1960’s. New
York: M. Wiener, 1990.
— — —, eds. Conﬂict and Competition: Studies in the Recent Black Protest Movement.
Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1971.
— — —, eds. The Rise of the Ghetto. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1971.


--- PAGE 455 ---
432 bibliography
Braden, Anne. ‘‘The Southern Freedom Movement in Perspective.’’ Monthly Review,
July–August 1965, 1–93.
— — —. The Wall Between. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1958.
Branch, Taylor. Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954–1963 . New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1988.
Breines, Wini. Community and Organization in the New Left, 1962–1968: The Great
Refusal. South Hadley, Mass.: J. F. Bergin, 1982.
Brier, Stephen, et al. Who Built America?: Working People and the Nation’s Economy,
Politics, Culture, and Society. 2 vols. New York: Pantheon, 1992.
Brown, Cynthia Stokes, ed. Ready from Within: Septima Clark and the Civil Rights
Movement. Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press, 1980.
Brown, Elsa Barkley. ‘‘Mothers of Mind.’’ Sage 6 (Summer 1989): 4–11.
Browning, Joan C. ‘‘Invisible Revolutionaries: White Women in Civil Rights
Historiography.’’ Journal of Women’s History 8 (Fall 1996): 186–204.
Buhle, Mari Jo, Paul Buhle, and Dan Georgakas, eds. The Encyclopedia of the American
Left. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1992
Burner, Eric. And Gently He Shall Lead Them: Robert Parris Moses and the Civil Rights
Movement in Mississippi. New York: New York University Press, 1994.
Burns, Stewart. Social Movements of the 1960s: Searching for Democracy. Boston:
Twayne Publishers, 1990.
— — —, ed. Daybreak of Freedom: The Montgomery Bus Boycott. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1997.
Burran, James Albert. ‘‘Racial Violence in the South during World War II.’’ Ph.D. diss.,
University of Tennessee, 1977.
Burton, Willie. On the Black Side of Shreveport. Self-published, circa 1979. Courtesy of
Shreveport, La., Public Library, Special Collections.
Button, James. Blacks and Social Change: The Impact of the Civil Rights Movement in
Southern Communities. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989.
Cabral, Amilcar. Unity and Struggle: Speeches and Writings of Amilcar Cabral. New York:
Monthy Review Press, 1979.
Cagin, Seth, and Philip Dray. We are Not Afraid: The Story of Goodman, Schwerner, and
Chaney and the Civil Rights Campaign for Mississippi . New York: Macmillan, 1988.
Campbell, Clarice. Civil Rights Chronicle: Letters from the South. Jackson: University
Press of Mississippi, 1997.
Cantarow, Ellen, and Susan Gushee O’Malley. ‘‘Ella Baker: Organizing for Civil Rights.’’
In Moving the Mountain: Women Working for Social Change, ed. Ellen Cantarow,
Susan Gushee O’Malley, and Sharon Hartman Strom, 53–93. New York: Feminist
Press, 1980.
— — —. ‘‘NAACP, SCLC, and SNCC—Ella Baker Got Them Moving.’’ MS. Magazine, June
1980, 56–58, 79–80, 82.
Carmichael, Stokely. Stokely Speaks: Black Power Back to Pan-Africanism. New York:
Vintage Books, 1971.
Carmichael, Stokely, and Charles V. Hamilton. Black Power: The Politics of Liberation in
America. New York: Random House, 1967.
Carson, Clayborne. In Struggle: SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981.
— — —. ‘‘Martin Luther King, Jr.: Charismatic Leadership in Mass Struggle.’’ Journal of
American History 74 (September 1987): 448–54.


--- PAGE 456 ---
bibliography 433
— — —, ed. The Student Voice: Periodical of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.
Westport, Conn.: Meckler, 1990.
Carson, Clayborne, Ralph E. Luker, and Penny A. Russell, eds. The Papers of Martin
Luther King, Jr. 4 vols. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992–.
Carter, Wilmoth. Shaw’s Universe. Rockville: D.C. National Publishing, Inc., 1973.
Chafe, William H. Civilities and Civil Rights: Greensboro, North Carolina, and the Black
Struggle for Freedom. New York: Oxford University Press, 1980.
— — —. ‘‘The Greensboro Sit-Ins.’’ Southern Exposure 6 (Fall 1978): 78–87.
— — —. Never Stop Running: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American
Liberalism. New York: Basic Books, 1993.
Chafe, William H., et al., eds. Remembering Jim Crow: African Americans Tell about Life
in the Segregated South. New York: New Press, 2001.
Chappell, David. Inside Agitators: White Southern Women in the Civil Rights Movement.
Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1994.
Charity, Ruth H., Christiana Davis, and Arthur Kinoy. ‘‘Danville Movement.’’ Southern
Exposure 10 (July–August 1982): 35–45.
Chateauvert, Melinda. Marching Together: Women of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car
Porters. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1998.
Clark, Septima B. Echo in My Soul. New York: Dutton, 1962.
Clark, Wayne Addison. ‘‘Analysis of the Relationship between Anti-Communism and
Segregationist Thought in the South, 1948–1964.’’ Ph.D. diss., University of
Wisconsin, Madison, 1976.
Clarke, John Henrik, ed. Harlem: A Community in Transition. New York: Citadel, 1964.
Cluster, Dick, ed. They Should Have Served That Cup of Coffee . Boston: South End Press,
1979.
Cobb, Charles. ‘‘Prospectus for a Summer Freedom School Program.’’ Radical Teacher,
Fall 1991, 36.
Cobb, James. ‘‘ ‘Somebody Done Nailed Us to the Cross’: Federal Farm and Welfare
Policy and the Civil Rights Movement in the Mississippi Delta.’’ Journal of American
History 75 (December 1990): 912–36.
Cohen, Cathy J. The Boundaries of Blackness: AIDS and the Breakdown of Black Politics .
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Collier-Thomas, Bettye, and V. P. Franklin, eds. Sisters in the Struggle: African-American
Women in the Civil Rights–Black Power Movement. New York: New York University
Press, 2001.
Collins, Patricia Hill. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics
of Empowerment. Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1990.
— — —. Fighting Words: Black Women and the Search for Justice. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 1998.
Cone, James. For My People: Black Theology and the Black Church. Maryknoll, N.Y.:
Orbis Books, 1984.
Cooke, Michael. Review of Memories of the Southern Civil Rights Movement , by Danny
Lyon. Mississippi Quarterly 47 (Spring 1994): 353–55.
Cornell, Frederick. ‘‘A History of the Rand School of Social Science, 1906–1956.’’ Ph.D.
diss., Columbia University, 1976.
Crawford, Vicki L., Jacqueline Anne Rouse, and Barbara Woods, eds. Women in the Civil
Rights Movement: Trailblazers and Torchbearers, 1941–1965. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1993.


--- PAGE 457 ---
434 bibliography
Crenshaw, Kimberle. ‘‘Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and
Violence against Women of Color.’’ Stanford Law Review 43 (1991): 1241–99.
Cross, Theodore. The Black Power Imperative: Racial Inequality and the Politics of
Nonviolence. New York: Faulkner, 1986.
Crowe, Jeffrey, and Robert E. Winters Jr., eds. The Black Presence in North Carolina.
Raleigh: North Carolina Museum of History, 1978.
Cruse, Harold. The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual. New York: William Morrow, 1967.
Curry, Constance. Silver Rights. New York: Harvest/Harcourt, 1996.
Curry, Constance, et al. Deep in Our Hearts: Nine White Women in the Southern Civil
Rights Movement. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2000.
Dailey, Jane, et al., eds. Jumpin’ Jim Crow: Southern Politics from Civil War to Civil
Rights. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000.
D’Angelo, Raymond N. The American Civil Rights Movement: Readings and
Interpretations. Guilford, Conn.: McGraw-Hill/Dushkin, 2000.
Daniel, Pete. Lost Revolutions: The South in the 1950s. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 2001.
Davidson, Osha Gray. The Best of Enemies: Race and Redemption in the New South . New
York: Scribner, 1996.
Davis, Benjamin J. Communist Councilman from Harlem. New York: International
Publishers, 1969.
Davis, Vanessa Lynn. ‘‘Midwifery and Grassroots Politics: Ella Jo Baker and Her
Philosophy of Community Development.’’ M.A. thesis, Vanderbilt University, 1992.
Dawson, Michael C. Black Visions: The Roots of Contemporary African-American Political
Ideologies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Delany, Sarah L., and A. Elizabeth Delany. Having Our Say: The Delany Sisters’ First 100
Years. New York: Bantam, 1993.
Demuth, Jerry. ‘‘Tired of Being Sick and Tired.’’ Nation, 1 June 1964, 548–51.
— — —. ‘‘The Movement as History.’’ Reviews in American History 18 (December 1990):
562–67.
Dent, Thomas C. Southern Journey: A Return to the Civil Rights Movement . New York:
William Morrow, 1997.
Dittmer, John. Local People: The Struggle for Civil Rights in Mississippi. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1994.
— — —. ‘‘The Movement as History.’’ Reviews in American History 18 (December 1990):
562–67.
Draper, Alan. Conﬂict of Interests: Organized Labor and the Civil Rights Movement in the
South, 1954–68 . Ithaca: ILR Press, 1994.
Duberman, Martin B. Paul Robeson. New York: Knopf, 1988.
Du Bois, W. E. B. The Autobiography of W. E. B. Du Bois. New York: International
Publishers, 1968.
— — —. The Souls of Black Folk. Chicago: A. C. McClurg and Co., 1903.
Dudziak, Mary. Cold War, Civil Rights: Race and the Image of American Democracy.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000.
Dulaney, W. Marvin, and Kathleen Underwood, eds. Essays on the American Civil Rights
Movement by John Dittmer, George C. Wright, and W. Marvin Dulaney. College
Station: Texas A&M University Press, 1993.
Duster, Alfreda M., ed. Crusade for Justice: The Autobiography of Ida B. Wells Barnett.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970.
Eagles, Charles. Review of Inside Agitators: White Southern Women in the Civil Rights


--- PAGE 458 ---
bibliography 435
Movement, by David Chappel. Journal of Interdisciplinary History  27 (Summer
1996): 171–72.
— — —, ed. The Civil Rights Movement in America. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi,
1986.
Edelman, Marion Wright. Lanterns: A Memoir of Mentors. Boston: Beacon Press, 1999.
Edmonds, Helen. The Negro and Fusion Politics in North Carolina, 1894–1901 . Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1951.
Egerton, John. Speak Now against the Day: The Generation before the Civil Rights
Movement in the South. New York: Knopf, 1994.
Elliot, Aprele. ‘‘Ella Baker: Free Agent in the Civil Rights Movement,’’ Journal of Black
Studies 26 (May 1996): 593–603.
Ellis, Mark. Race, War, and Surveillance: African Americans and the United States
Government during World War I. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2001)
Erenrich, Susie, ed. Freedom Is a Constant Struggle: An Anthology of the Mississippi Civil
Rights Movement. Montgomery, Ala.: Black Belt Press, 1999.
Escott, Paul. ‘‘White Republicanism and Ku Klux Klan Terror: The North Carolina
Piedmont during Reconstruction.’’ In Race, Class, and Politics in Southern History,
ed. Jeffrey J. Crow, Paul Escott, and Charles Flynn Jr. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press, 1989.
Eskew, Glenn T. But for Birmingham: The Local and National Movements in the Civil
Rights Struggle. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1985.
Evans, Sara. Personal Politics: The Root of Women’s Liberation in the Civil Rights
Movement and the New Left. New York: Vintage Books, 1980.
Evers, Charles, and Andrew Szanton. Have No Fear: The Charles Evers Story. New York:
J. Wiley and Sons, 1997.
Evers-Williams, Myrlee, and William Peters. For Us, the Living. Jackson: University Press
of Mississippi, 1996.
Eynon, Bret. ’’Cast upon the Shore: Oral Histories and New Scholarship on the
Movements of the 60’s.’’ Journal of American History 62 (September 1996): 560–70.
Fairclough, Adam. ‘‘ ‘Being in the Field of Education and Also Being a Negro . . .
Seems . . . Tragic’: Black Teachers in the Jim Crow South.’’ Journal of American
History 87 (June 2000): 65–91.
— — —. Martin Luther King, Jr. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1995.
— — —. Race and Democracy: The Civil Rights Struggle in Louisiana, 1915–1972 . Athens:
University of Georgia Press, 1995.
— — —. To Redeem the Soul of America: The Southern Christian Leadership Conference and
Martin Luther King Jr. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1978.
— — —. ‘‘The Southern Christian Leadership Conference and the Second Reconstruction,
1957–1973.’’ South Atlantic Quarterly 80 (Spring 1981): 177–94.
Farmer, James. Lay Bare the Heart: An Autobiography of the Civil Rights Movement . New
York: Arbor House, 1985.
Ferguson, Karen J. Black Politics in New Deal Atlanta. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 2002.
Finch, Minnie. The NAACP: Its Fight for Justice. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1981.
Findlay, James F., Jr. Church People in the Struggle : The National Council of Churches
and the Black Freedom Movement, 1950–1970 . New York: Oxford University Press,
1997.
Fleming, Cynthia Griggs. Soon We Will Not Cry: The Liberation of Ruby Doris Smith
Robinson. Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 1998.


--- PAGE 459 ---
436 bibliography
Forgacs, David, ed. The Antonio Gramsci Reader. New York: New York University Press,
2000.
Forman, James. The Making of Black Revolutionaries: A Personal Account . Washington,
D.C.: Open Hand, 1985.
Fosl, Catherine. Subversive Southerner: Anne Braden and the Struggle for Racial Justice in
the Cold War South. New York: Palgrave, 2002.
Frankel, Nora Lee, and Nancy Dye. Gender, Class, Race, and Reform in the Progressive
Era. Lexington: University of Kentucky Press, 1991.
Franklin, John Hope, and Alfred Moss Jr. From Slavery to Freedom. 7th ed. New York:
Knopf, 1988.
Frazier, E. Franklin. Black Bourgeoisie. New York: Free Press, 1957.
Freire, Paulo. Pedagogy of Freedom: Ethics, Democracy and Civic Courage. Lanham, Md.:
Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 1998.
— — —. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Trans. Myra Bergman Ramos. New York: Continuum,
1989.
Friedman, Leon, ed. The Civil Rights Reader: Basic Documents of the Civil Rights
Movement. New York: Walker, 1967.
Gaillard, Frye. The Dream Long Deferred. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1988.
Gaines, Kevin K. Uplifting the Race: Black Leadership, Politics, and Culture in the
Twentieth Century. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996.
Garﬁnkel, Herbert. When Negroes March: The March on Washington Movement in the
Organizational Politics of the FEPC. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1959.
Garrow, David J. Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference. New York: William Morrow, 1986.
— — —. ‘‘Black Ministerial Protest Leadership, 1955–1970.’’ In Encyclopedia of Religion in
the South, ed. Samuel S. Hill, 106–8. Macon, Ga.: Mercer University Press, 1984.
— — —. The FBI and Martin Luther King Jr. New York: Norton, 1981.
— — —. ‘‘From Reformer to Revolutionary.’’ In Martin Luther King Jr.: Civil Rights Leader,
Theologian, Orator, ed. David Garrow, 2:427–36. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishing,
1989.
— — —. Protest at Selma: Martin Luther King Jr. and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1978.
Gatewood, Willard. Aristocrats of Color: The Black Elite, 1880–1920 . Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1990.
Gavins, Raymond. ‘‘Black Leadership in North Carolina to 1900,’’ in The Black Presence
in North Carolina, ed. Jeffrey Crowe and Robert E. Winter Jr. Raleigh: North
Carolina Museum of History, 1978.
— — —. ‘‘The NAACP in North Carolina during the Age of Segregation.’’ In New Directions
in Civil Rights Studies, ed. Armstead Robinson and Patricia Sullivan, 105–25.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1991.
Geschwender, James A., ed. The Black Revolt: The Civil Rights Movement, Ghetto
Uprisings, and Separatism. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1971.
Giddings, Paula. When and Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Women on Race and Sex
in America. New York: William Morrow, 1984.
Gilkes, Cheryl. ‘‘Building in Many Places: Multiple Commitments and Ideologies in
Black Women’s Contemporary Work.’’ In Women and the Politics of Empowerment,
ed. Ann Bookman and Sandra Morgen, 53–76. Philadelphia: Temple University
Press, 1988.


--- PAGE 460 ---
bibliography 437
Gilmore, Glenda Elizabeth. Gender and Jim Crow: Women and the Politics of White
Supremacy in North Carolina, 1896–1920 . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1996.
Gitlin, Todd. The Whole World Is Watching: Mass Media in the Making and Unmaking of
The New Left. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980.
Goggin, Jacqueline. Carter G. Woodson: A Life in Black History. Baton Rouge: Louisiana
State University Press, 1993.
Goings, Kenneth W. The NAACP Comes of Age: The Defeat of Judge John Parker.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990.
Gordon, Lewis. Existentia Africana: Understanding Africana Existential Thought. New
York: Routledge, 2000.
Graff, Gerald. Beyond the Culture Wars: How Teaching the Conﬂicts Can Revitalize
American Education. New York: Norton, 1992.
Gramsci, Antonio. Selections from Prison Notebooks. Edited by Quintin Hoare and
Geoffrey Nowell Smith. New York: International Publishers, 1971.
Grant, Joanne. Ella Baker: Freedom Bound. New York: Wiley, 1998.
— — —. Fundi: The Story of Ella Baker. Film documentary. New York: First Run/Icarus
Films, 1986.
— — —. ‘‘Mississippi Politics—A Day in the Life of Ella Baker.’’ In The Black Woman, ed.
Toni Cade, 55–62. New York: Signet, 1970.
— — —. ‘‘Political Mama.’’ In The American Civil Rights Movement: Readings and
Interpretations, ed. Raymond D’Angelo, 290–302. Guilford, Conn.: McGraw-
Hill/Dushkin, 2001.
— — —, ed. Black Protest: 350 Years of History, Documents, and Analyses. 1968. Reprint,
New York: Ballantine, 1996.
Green, Ben. Before His Time: The Untold Story of Harry T. Moore (New York: Free Press,
1999).
Greenberg, Cheryl Lynn. ‘‘Or Does It Explode?’’: Black Harlem in the Great Depression.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Grossman, James R. Land of Hope: Chicago, Black Southerners, and the Great Migration .
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.
Guinier, Lani. Tyranny of the Majority: Fundamental Fairness in Representative
Democracy. New York: Free Press, 1994.
Guinier, Lani, and Gerald Torres. The Miner’s Canary: Enlisting Race, Resisting Power,
Transforming Democracy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002.
Gutman, Herbert. ‘‘Schools for Freedom: The Post-Emancipation Origins of Afro-
American Education.’’ In Power and Culture: Essays on the American Working Class,
by Herbert Gutman, 260–61. New York: Pantheon Books, 1987.
Guy-Sheftall, Beverly, ed. Words of Fire: An Anthology of African American Feminist
Thought. New York: New Press, 1995.
Haines, Herbert H. Black Radicals and the Civil Rights Mainstream, 1954–1970 .
Knoxville: University of Tennessee, 1988.
Halberstam, David. The Children. New York: Random House, 1998.
Hall, Jacquelyn Dowd. ‘‘The Mind That Burns in Each Body.’’ Southern Exposure 12
(November-December 1984): 64–69.
Halpern, Rick. ‘‘Organized Labor, Black Workers, and the Twentieth Century South:
The Emerging Revision.’’ Social History 19 (October 1994): 359–83.
Hamer, Fannie Lou. To Praise My Bridges: An Autobiography. Jackson, Miss.: KIPCO,
1967.


--- PAGE 461 ---
438 bibliography
Hamilton, Charles V. Adam Clayton Powell Jr.: The Political Biography of an American
Dilemma. New York: Macmillan, 1991.
Hampton, Henry, Steve Fayer, and Sarah Flynn, eds. Voices of Freedom: An Oral History
of the Civil Rights Movement from the 1950s through the 1980s. New York: Bantam
Books, 1990.
Hansberry, Lorraine. The Movement: Documentary of a Struggle for Equality . New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1964.
Harding, Vincent. Martin Luther King: The Inconvenient Hero. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis
Books, 1996.
— — —. There Is a River: The Black Struggle for Freedom in America. New York: Vintage
Books, 1981.
— — —. ‘‘Where Have All the Lovers Gone?’’ New South 21 (Winter 1966): 27–38.
Harris, William H. Keeping the Faith: A. Philip Randolph, Milton P. Webster, and the Broth-
erhood of Sleeping Car Porters, 1925–37. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1991.
Haygood, Will. King of the Cats: The Life and Times of Adam Clayton Powell. Boston:
Houghton Mifﬂin, 1993.
Hedgeman, Anna Arnold. The Trumpet Sounds: A Memoir of Negro Leadership. New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1964.
Henry, Aaron, and Constance Curry. Aaron Henry: The Fire Ever Burning. Jackson:
University Press of Mississippi, 2000.
Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks. Righteous Discontent: The Women’s Movement in the
Black Baptist Church, 1880–1920 . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Hill, Lance E. ‘‘The Deacons for Defense and Justice: Armed Self-Defense and the Civil
Rights Movement.’’ Ph.D. diss., Tulane University, 1997.
Hill, Robert A., ed. The FBI’s RACON: Racial Conditions in the United States during World
War II. Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1995.
Hine, Darlene Clark. Hine Sight: Black Women and the Re-construction of American
History. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997.
— — —. Speak Truth to Power: Black Professional Class in United States History. Brooklyn,
N.Y.: Carlson Publishing, 1996.
Hine, Darlene Clark, Elsa Barkley Brown, and Rosalyn Terborg-Penn, eds. Black Women in
America: An Historical Encyclopedia. 2 vols. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishing, 1993.
Hine, Darlene Clark, William C. Hine, and Stanley Harrold. The African American
Odyssey. 2 vols. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 2002.
Holt, Len. ’’Freedom Schools.’’ 1965. Reprint, Southern Exposure 9, no. 1 (Spring 1981):
42.
— — —. The Summer That Didn’t End. London: Heinemann, 1965.
Honey, Michael. Black Workers Remember: An Oral History of Segregation, Unionism,
and the Freedom Struggle. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000.
hooks, bell. Feminist Theory from Margin to Center. Boston: South End Press, 1984.
Horne, Gerald. Black and Red: W. E. B. Du Bois and the Afro-American Response to the
Cold War. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986.
— — —. Race Woman: The Lives of Shirley Graham Du Bois. New York: New York University
Press, 2000.
Horton, Aimee Isgrig. The Highlander Folk School: A History of Its Major Programs,
1932–1961 . Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishing, 1989.
Horton, John B. Not without Struggle. New York: Vantage Press, 1979.
Howlett, Charles F. Brookwood Labor College and the Struggle for Peace and Social Justice
in America. Lewiston, N.Y.: Edwin Mellen Press, 1993.


--- PAGE 462 ---
bibliography 439
Huggins, Nathan Irvin. Harlem Renaissance. New York: Oxford University Press, 1971.
— — —. ‘‘Martin Luther King Jr.: Charisma and Leadership.’’ Journal of American History
74 (September 1987): 477–81.
Hughes, Langston. ‘‘My Early Days in Harlem.’’ In Harlem, a Community in Transition,
ed. John Henrik Clarke, 62–64. New York: Citadel Press, 1964.
Hunter, Tera. To ’Joy My Freedom: Southern Black Women’s Lives and Labors after the
Civil War. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1997.
Jackson, James E. ‘‘Democratic Uprising of the Negro People.’’ Political Affairs 42
(October 1963): 17–21.
James, Joy. Transcending the Talented Tenth: Black Leaders and American Intellectuals.
New York: Routledge, 1997.
James, Winston. Holding Aloft the Banner of Ethiopia: Caribbean Radicalism in Early
Twentieth Century America. New York: Verso, 1998.
Jaynes, Gerald. Branches without Roots: Genesis of the Black Working Class. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1986.
Jenkins, Betty. ‘‘A White Librarian in Black Harlem.’’ Library Quarterly 60 (July 1990):
216–31.
Johnson, Charles S. Shadow of the Plantation. 1934. Reprint, New Brunswick, N.J.:
Transaction Press, 1996.
Jones, Adrienne Lash. ‘‘The Struggle among Saints: African American Women and the
YWCA, 1870–1920.’’ In Men and Women Adrift: The YMCA and the YWCA in the City ,
ed. Nina Mjagkij and Margaret Spratt, 160–87. New York: New York University
Press, 1997.
Jones, Jacqueline. Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and the Family
from Slavery to the Present. New York: Basic Books, 1985.
Kapur, Sudarshan. Raising Up a Prophet: The African American Encounter With Gandhi .
Boston: Beacon Press, 1992.
Kates, Susan. Activist Rhetorics and American Higher Education, 1885–1937 . Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press, 2000.
Katz, Milton S. ‘‘Peace Liberals and Vietnam: SANE and the Politics of ‘Responsible’
Protest.’’ Peace and Change 9 (Summer 1983): 21–39.
Kelley, Robin D. G. ‘‘Birmingham’s Untouchables: The Black Poor in the Age of Civil
Rights.’’ In Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class, by Robin D. G.
Kelley. New York: Free Press, 1994.
— — —. Freedom Dreams: The Black Radical Imagination. Boston: Beacon Press, 2002.
— — —. Hammer and Hoe: Alabama Communists during the Great Depression. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1990.
Kellogg, Charles Flint. NAACP: A History of the National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1973.
Kenzer, Robert C. Enterprising Southerners: Black Economic Success in North Carolina,
1865–1915 . Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1997.
King, Coretta Scott. My Life with Martin Luther King, Jr. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1969.
King, Martin Luther, Jr. Stride toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story. New York:
Harper and Brothers, 1958.
— — —. The Trumpet of Conscience. New York: Harper and Row, 1964.
— — —. Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community? New York: Harper and Row,
1967.
— — —. Why We Can’t Wait. New York: New American Library, 1964.


--- PAGE 463 ---
440 bibliography
King, Mary. Freedom Song: A Personal Story of the 1960s Civil Rights Movement. New
York: William Morrow, 1987.
King, Robert Thomas, ed. Fighting Back: A Life in the Struggle for Civil Rights, from Oral
History Interviews with James B. McMillan Conducted by Gary E. Elliott . Reno:
University of Nevada Oral History Program, 1997.
King, Slater. ‘‘The Bloody Battleground of Albany.’’ Freedomways 4 (Winter 1964): 93–
101.
Kirby, John. Black Americans in the Roosevelt Era. Knoxville: University of Tennessee
Press, 1980.
Klibaner, Irwin. Conscience of a Troubled South: The Southern Conference Educational
Fund, 1946–1966. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishing, 1989.
— — —. ‘‘The Travail of Southern Radicals: The Southern Conference Education Fund,
1946–1976,’’ Journal of Southern History 49 (May 1983): 179–202.
Korstad, Robert, and Nelson Lichtenstein. ‘‘Opportunities Found and Lost: Labor,
Radicals and the Early Civil Rights Movement.’’ Journal of American History 75
(December 1988): 786–811.
Kotz, Nick, and Mary Lynn Kotz. A Passion for Equality: George A. Wiley and the
Movement. New York: Norton, 1997.
Krueger, Thomas A. And Promises to Keep: The Southern Conference for Human Welfare,
1938–1948 . Nashville, Tenn.: Vanderbilt University Press, 1967.
Kunstler, William M. Deep in My Heart. New York: William Morrow, 1966.
Laue, James H. Direct Action and Desegregation, 1960–1962: Toward a Theory of the
Rationalization of Protest. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishing, 1989.
Lawrence, Ken. ‘‘Mississippi Spies.’’ Southern Exposure 9 (Fall 1981): 8–86.
Lawson, Steven F. Black Ballots: Voting Rights in the South, 1944–1969 . New York:
Columbia University Press, 1976.
— — —. ‘‘Freedom Then, Freedom Now: The Historiography of the Civil Rights
Movement.’’ American Historical Review 96 (April 1991): 456–71.
— — —. In Pursuit of Power: Southern Blacks and Electoral Politics, 1965–1982 . New York:
Columbia University Press, 1985.
Lawson, Steven F., and Charles Payne. Debating the Civil Rights Movement, 1945–1968 .
Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 1998.
Lee, Chana Kai. For Freedom’s Sake: The Life of Fannie Lou Hamer. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 1999.
Lerner, Gerda, ed. Black Women in White America. New York: Random House, 1972.
Levine, Daniel. Bayard Rustin and the Civil Rights Movement. New Brunswick, N.J.:
Rutgers University Press, 2000.
Levine, Lawrence. Black Culture and Black Consciousness. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1977.
Levy, Charles J. Voluntary Servitude: Whites in the Negro Movement. New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1968.
Levy, Peter B., ed. Documentary History of the Modern Civil Rights Movement . Westport,
Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1992.
Lewis, David Levering. King: A Critical Biography. Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
1970.
— — —. W. E. B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race, 1868–1919 . New York: Henry Holt, 1993.
— — —. W. E. B. Du Bois: The Fight for Equality and the American Century, 1919–1963 . New
York: Henry Holt, 2000.
— — —. When Harlem Was in Vogue. New York: Random House, 1979.


--- PAGE 464 ---
bibliography 441
Lewis, Earl. In Their Own Interest: Race, Class, and Power in Twentieth-Century Norfolk,
Virginia. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.
— — —. ‘‘Race, Equity and Democracy: African Americans and the Struggle for Civil
Rights.’’ In The Social Construction of Democracy, 1870–1990 , ed. George Reid
Andrews and Herrick Chapman, 193–217. New York: New York University Press,
1995.
Lewis, John, with Michael D’Orso. Walking with the Wind: A Memoir of the Movement.
New York: Simon and Schuster, 1998.
Ling, Peter. ‘‘Gender and Generation: Manhood at the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference.’’ In Gender in the Civil Rights Movement, ed. Peter J. Ling and Sharon
Monteith, 101–6. New York: Garland Publishers, 1999.
— — —. ‘‘Local Leadership in the Early Civil Rights Movement: The South Carolina
Citizenship Education Program of the Highlander Folk School.’’ Journal of American
Studies 29 (December 1995): 399–422.
Ling, Peter J., and Sharon Monteith, eds. Gender in the Civil Rights Movement. New
York: Garland Publishers, 1999.
Lipsitz, George. A Life in the Struggle: Ivory Perry and the Culture of Opposition .
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1988.
Litwack, Leon. Trouble in Mind: Black Southerners in the Age of Jim Crow. New York:
Knopf, 1998.
Logan, Rayford Whittingham, ed. What the Negro Wants. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1944.
Lomax, Louis. The Negro Revolt. New York: Signet, 1962.
Lowen, James W., and Charles Sallis. Mississippi: Conﬂict and Change. New York:
Pantheon Books, 1974.
Lowery, John. ‘‘Should Violence Be Met With Violence?’’ Realist 32 (March 1962): 7–9.
Luker, Ralph. A Historical Dictionary of the Civil Rights Movement . Lanham, Md.:
Scarecrow Press, 1992.
— — —. ‘‘Racial Matters: Civil Rights and Civil Wrongs.’’ American Quarterly 43 (March
1991): 165–71.
Lynch, Hollis. Black American Radicals and the Liberation of Africa: The Council on
African Affairs, 1937–1955 . Ithaca: Cornell University Monograph Series, 1978.
Lynd, Staughton. ‘‘The New Negro Radicalism.’’ Commentary 36 (September 1963):
252–56.
Lynn, Conrad. There Is A Fountain: The Autobiography of a Civil Rights Lawyer. Westport,
Conn.: Lawrence and Hill, 1979.
Lynn, Susan. Progressive Women in Conservative Times: Racial Justice, Peace, and
Feminism, 1945 to the 1960s. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1992.
Lyon, Danny. Memories of the Southern Civil Rights Movement . Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1992.
Macedo, Stephen, ed. Reassessing the Sixties: Debating the Political and Cultural Legacy.
New York: Norton, 1997.
MacNair, Ray H. ‘‘Social Distance among Kin Organizations: Civil Rights Networks in
Cleveland and Birmingham.’’ Ph.D. diss., University of Michigan, 1970.
Manis, Andrew M. A Fire You Can’t Put Out: The Civil Rights Life of Birmingham’s
Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1999.
Marable, Manning. From the Grassroots. Boston: South End Press, 1980.
— — —. Race, Reform, and Rebellion: The Second Reconstruction in Black America, 1945–
1982. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1991.


--- PAGE 465 ---
442 bibliography
— — —. W. E. B. Du Bois: Black Radical Democrat. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1986.
Marable, Manning, and Leith Mullings. ‘‘The Divided Mind of Black America: Race,
Ideology and Politics in the Post Civil Rights Era.’’ Race and Class 36 (July–
September 1994).
Markowitz, Gerald, and David Rosner. Children, Race, and Power: Kenneth and Mamie
Clark’s Northside Center. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1996.
Marsh, Charles. God’s Long Summer: Stories of Faith and Civil Rights. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1997.
Martin Luther King Jr. Papers Project Staff, eds. The Student Voice, 1960–1965:
Periodical of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. Westport, Conn.:
Meckler, 1990.
Marx, Gary, and Michael Useem. ‘‘Majority Involvement in Minority Movements: Civil
Rights, Abolition, and Untouchability.’’ Journal of Social Issues 27 (1971): 81–104.
Matusow, Allen J. ‘‘From Civil Rights to Black Power: The Case of SNCC, 1960–1966.’’ In
Twentieth Century America, ed. Barton J. Bernstein and Allen J. Matusow, 494–520.
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1972.
May, Elaine Tyler. Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era. New York:
Basic Books, 1988.
McAdam, Doug. ‘‘The Decline of the Civil Rights Movement.’’ In Social Movements of the
Sixties and Seventies: How Women Entered Party Politics, ed. Jo Freeman, 279–319.
New York: Longman, 1983.
— — —. Freedom Summer. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.
— — —. ‘‘Gender as a Mediator of the Activist Experience: The Case of Freedom Summer.’’
American Journal of Sociology 97 (March 1992): 1211–40.
— — —. Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency, 1930–1970 . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1982.
McCord, William. Mississippi: The Long, Hot, Summer. New York: Norton, 1965.
McClain, Paula D. ‘‘Black Politics at the Crossroads? Or in the Cross-Hairs?’’ American
Political Science Review 90 (December 1996): 867–73.
McFadden, Grace Jordan. ‘‘Septima P. Clark and the Struggle for Human Rights.’’ In
Women in the Civil Rights Movement: Trailblazers and Torchbearers, 1941–1965, ed.
Vicki L. Crawford, Jacqueline Rouse, and Barbara Woods, 85–97. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1990.
McKenzie, Edna B. ‘‘Daisy Lampkin: A Life of Love and Service,’’ Pennsylvania Heritage,
Summer 1983.
McLemore, Leslie B. ‘‘The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party: A Case Study of
Grassroots Politics.’’ Ph.D. diss., University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 1971.
McMillen, Neil, ed. Remaking Dixie: The Impact of World War II on the American South.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1997.
McMurry, Linda O. To Keep the Waters Troubled: The Life of Ida B. Wells. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1999.
McWhorter, Diane. Carry Me Home: Birmingham, Alabama: The Climactic Battle of the
Civil Rights Revolution. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2001.
Meier, August. CORE: A Study in the Civil Rights Movement, 1942–1968 . Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1974.
— — —. ‘‘The Dilemmas of Negro Protest Strategy.’’ New South 21 (Spring 1966): 1–18.
— — —. ‘‘New Currents in the Civil Rights Movement.’’ New Politics 2 (Summer 1963): 7–
32.
— — —. ‘‘On the Role of Martin Luther King.’’ New Politics 4 (Winter 1965): 52–59.


--- PAGE 466 ---
bibliography 443
— — —. ‘‘The Revolution against the NAACP.’’ Journal of Negro Education 32 (Spring 1963):
146–52.
Meier, August, Elliott Rudwick, and Francis L. Broderick, eds. Black Protest Thought in
the Twentieth Century. 2d ed. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1971.
Meyers, David R., ed. Toward a History of the New Left: Essays from Within the
Movement. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishing, 1989.
Miller, James. Democracy Is in the Streets: From Port Huron to the Siege of Chicago. New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1987.
Mills, Kay. This Little Light of Mine: The Life of Fannie Lou Hamer. New York: Dutton, 1993.
Mills, Nicholas. Like a Holy Crusade: Mississippi ’64, the Turning Point of the Civil Rights
Movement in America. Chicago: I. R. Dee Publishing: 1992.
Mjagkij, Nina, and Margaret Spratt, eds. Men and Women Adrift: The YMCA and the
YWCA in the City. New York: New York University Press, 1997.
Moody, Anne. Coming of Age in Mississippi. New York: Dell, 1968.
Morera, Esteve. ‘‘Gramsci and Democracy.’’ Canadian Journal of Political Science 23,
no. 1 (March 1990): 28–37.
Morgan, Ted. A Covert Life: Jay Lovestone, Communist, Anti-Communist, and Spy. New
York: Random House, 1999.
Morris, Aldon. ‘‘The Black Southern Student Sit-in Movement: An Analysis of Internal
Organization.’’ American Sociological Review 46 (1981): 744–67.
— — —. Origins of the Civil Rights Movement. New York: Free Press, 1984.
Moses, Bob. ‘‘Mississippi: 1961–1962.’’ Liberation 14 (January 1970): 7–17.
Moses, Robert. ‘‘Comments of Robert Moses.’’ Conference on Ethics and Morality:
Voices of the Civil Rights Movement. National Museum of History, Washington,
D.C., February 3, 1980. Transcript courtesy of Clayborne Carson.
Moses, Robert, and Charles Cobb Jr. Radical Equations: Math Literacy and Civil Rights.
Boston: Beacon Press, 2001.
Moss, George Donelson. Moving On: The American People since 1945. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1994.
Mueller, Carol. ‘‘Ella Baker and the Origins of ‘Participatory Democracy.’ ’’ In Women in
the Civil Rights Movement: Trailblazers and Torchbearers, 1941–1965, ed. Vicki L.
Crawford, Jacqueline Anne Rouse, and Barbara Woods, 51–70. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1993.
Murray, Pauli. The Autobiography of a Black Activist, Feminist, Lawyer, Priest, and Poet.
Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1987.
Myrdal, Gunnar, Richard Sterner, and Arnold Rose. An American Dilemma: The Negro
Problem and Modern Democracy. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1944.
Naison, Mark. Communists in Harlem during the Depression. New York: Grove Press,
1984.
Nash, Diane. ‘‘Inside the Sit-ins and Freedom Rides.’’ In The New Negro, ed. Mathew
Ahmann, 43–60. Notre Dame, Ind.: Fides Publishers, 1961.
Nash, Gary B. ‘‘Free People of Color: Inside the African-American Community.’’ African
American Review 5 (Summer 1996): 285–86.
Neary, John. Julian Bond: Black Rebel. New York: Morrow, 1971.
Norrell, Robert J. Reaping the Whirlwind: The Civil Rights Movement in Tuskegee. New
York: Knopf, 1985.
Oates, Stephen. Let the Trumpet Sound: The Life of Martin Luther King, Jr. New York:
Harper and Row, 1982.
Oberschall, Anthony. ‘‘The Decline of the 1960s Social Movements.’’ In Research in


--- PAGE 467 ---
444 bibliography
Social Movements, Conﬂicts and Change, ed. Louis Kriesberg, 1:257–89. Greenwich,
Conn.: JAI Press, 1978.
O’Dell, J. H. ‘‘Climbin’ Jacob’s Ladder: The Life and Times of the Freedom Movement.’’
Freedomway 9 (Winter 1969): 7–23.
Olson, Lynne. Freedom’s Daughters: The Unsung Heroines of the Civil Rights Movement
from 1830 to 1970. New York: Scribner, 2001.
Omolade, Barbara. The Rising Song of African American Women. New York: Routledge,
1994.
Orange, James. ‘‘With the People.’’ Southern Exposure 9 (Spring 1981): 110–14.
O’Reilly, Kenneth. Racial Matters: The FBI’s Secret File on Black America, 1960–1972 .
New York: Free Press, 1989.
Orr, Catherine M. ‘‘ ‘The Struggle Is Eternal’: A Rhetorical Biography of Ella Baker.’’
M.A. thesis, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1991.
Osofsky, Gilbert. Harlem: The Making of a Ghetto. New York: Harper and Row, 1966.
Patterson, James. Brown v. Board of Education: A Civil Rights Milestone and Its Troubled
Legacy. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Paul, Ellen Frankel, Fred D. Miller Jr., and Jeffrey Paul. Reassessing Civil Rights.
Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell Publishers, 1991.
Payne, Charles. ‘‘Ella Baker and Models of Social Change.’’ Signs: Journal of Women in
Culture and Society 14, no. 4 (Summer 1989): 885–99.
— — —. I’ve Got the Light of Freedom: The Organizing Tradition and the Mississippi Freedom
Struggle. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995.
— — —. ‘‘Men Led, but Women Organized: Movement Participation by Women in the
Mississippi Delta.’’ In Women in the Civil Rights Movement: Trailblazers and
Torchbearers, 1941–1965, ed. Vicki L. Crawford, Jacqueline Anne Rouse, and Barbara
Woods, 1–12. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishing, 1990.
Peake, Thomas R. Keeping the Dream Alive: A History of the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference from King to the 1980s. New York: P. Lang, 1987.
Peck, James. Freedom Ride. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1962.
Peek, Edward. The Long Struggle for Black Power. New York: Scribner, 1971.
Peplow, Michael W. George S. Schuyler. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1980.
Perkins, Linda. ‘‘The Impact of the ‘Culture of True Womanhood’ on the Education of
Black Women.’’ Journal of Social Issues 39 (1983): 17–28.
Perkins, Margo V. Autobiography as Activism: Three Black Women of the Sixties. Jackson:
University Press of Mississippi, 1998.
Perlstein, Daniel. ‘‘Teaching Freedom: SNCC and the Creation of the Mississippi
Freedom Schools.’’ History of Education Quarterly 30, no. 3 (Fall 1990): 297–324.
Perman, Michael. Struggle for Mastery: Disenfranchisement in the South, 1888–1908 .
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001.
Petty, Pamela. ‘‘Non-positional Leadership: The Case of Ella Baker and the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.’’ Ph.D. diss., University of Michigan, 1997.
Pfeffer, Paula. A. Philip Randolph: Pioneer of the Civil Rights Movement . Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 1990.
Piven, Frances Fox. Poor People’s Movements: Why They Succeed, How They Fail. New
York: Vintage Books, 1979.
Plumer, Brenda Gayle. Rising Wind: Black Americans and U.S. Foreign Affairs, 1935–
1960. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996.
Polsgrove, Carol. Divided Minds: Intellectuals and the Civil Rights Movement. New York:
Norton, 2001.


--- PAGE 468 ---
bibliography 445
Posnock, Ross. ‘‘How It Feels to Be a Problem: Du Bois, Fanon, and the ‘Impossible Life’
of the Black Intellectual.’’ Critical Inquiry 23 (Winter 1997): 323–49.
Powlege, Fred. Free at Last?: The Civil Rights Movement and the People Who Made It.
Boston: Little, Brown, 1991.
Proviser, Norman W., and William D. Pederson, eds. Grassroots Constitutionalism:
Shreveport, the South, and the Supreme Law of the Land . Lanham, Md.: University
Press of America, 1988.
Raines, Howell. My Soul Is Rested: The Story of the Civil Rights Movement in the Deep
South. New York: Putnam, 1977.
Rajshekar, V. T. Dalit: The Black Untouchables of India. Atlanta: Clarity Press, 1987.
Ralph, James, Jr. Northern Protest: Martin Luther King, Chicago, and the Civil Rights
Movement. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Rampersad, Arnold. The Art and Imagination of W. E. B. Du Bois. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1976.
— — —. The Life of Langston Hughes. Vol. 1: 1902–1941, I Too, Sing America. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1986.
Ransby, Barbara. ‘‘Ella J. Baker and the Black Radical Tradition.’’ Ph.D. diss., University
of Michigan, 1996.
Reagon, Bernice J. ‘‘Songs of the Civil Rights Movement, 1955–1965: A Study in Culture
History.’’ Ph.D. diss., Howard University, 1975.
Reddick, L. D. ‘‘The State vs. the Student.’’ Dissent 7 (Summer 1960): 219–28.
Reed, Adolph. Class Notes: Posing as Politics and Other Thoughts on the American Scene .
New York: New Press, 2000.
Reed, Christopher R. The Chicago NAACP and the Rise of Black Professional Leadership,
1910–1966 . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997.
Reed, Linda. Review of Women in the Civil Rights Movement: Trailblazers and
Torchbearers, 1941–65, ed. Vicki L. Crawford, et al. Journal of Southern History 58
(May 1992): 384–86.
— — —. Simple Decency and Common Sense: The Southern Conference Movement, 1938–
1963. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991.
Richards, Johnetta. ‘‘The Southern Negro Youth Congress: A History.’’ Ph.D. diss.,
University of Cincinnati, 1987.
Richards, Yevette. Maida Springer: Pan-Africanist and International Labor Leader.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2000.
Ricks, John A. ‘‘ ‘De Lawd’ Descends and Is Cruciﬁed: Martin Luther King, Jr., in Albany,
Georgia.’’ Journal of Southwest Georgia History 2 (Fall 1984): 3–14.
Riggs, Marcia Y., ed. Can I Get a Witness?: Prophetic Religious Voices of African American
Women, an Anthology. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1997.
Roberts, Randy. Papa Jack: Jack Johnson and the Era of White Hopes. New York: Free
Press, 1983.
Robinson, Armstead, and Patricia Sullivan, eds. New Directions in Civil Rights Studies.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1991.
Robinson, Cedric. Black Movements in America. New York: Routledge, 1997.
— — —. Black Marxism: The Making of the Black Radical Tradition. Chapel Hill: University
of North Carolina Press, 1983.
Robinson, Jo Anne Gibson. The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Started It.
Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1987.
Robnett, Belinda. How Long? How Long?: African-American Women in the Struggle for
Civil Rights. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.


--- PAGE 469 ---
446 bibliography
Rollins, Judith. All Is Never Said: The Narrative of Odette Harper Hines . Philadelphia:
Temple University Press, 1995.
Romaine, Anne Cooke. ‘‘The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party through August
1964.’’ M.A. thesis, University of Virginia, 1970.
Ross, B. Joyce. J. E. Spingarn and the Rise of the NAACP, 1911–1939 . New York:
Atheneum, 1972.
— — —. ‘‘Mary McLeod Bethune and the National Youth Administration: A Case Study of
Power Relationships in the Black Cabinet of Franklin D. Roosevelt.’’ In Black Leaders
of the Twentieth Century, ed. John Hope Franklin and August Meier, 191–219.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1982.
Ross, Kenneth. Review of Free At Last?: The Civil Rights Movement and the People Who
Made It, by Fred Powledge. Journal of Southern History 59 (February 1993): 171–72.
Rothschild, Mary Aiken. A Case of Black and White: Northern Volunteers and the
Southern Freedom Summers, 1964–65 . Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press: 1982.
— — —. ‘‘The Volunteers and the Freedom Schools: Education for Social Change in
Mississippi.’’ History of Education Quarterly 22, no. 4 (Winter 1982): 401–20.
Rudwick, Elliot, and August Meier. ‘‘The Rise of the Black Secreteriat in the NAACP,
1909–1935.’’ In Along the Color Line: Explorations in the Black Experience , ed. Elliot
Rudwick and August Meier, 94–127. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1976.
Rustin, Bayard. Down the Line: The Collected Writings of Bayard Rustin. Chicago:
Quadrangle Books, 1971.
— — —. Report on Montgomery, Alabama. New York: War Resisters League, 1956.
— — —. Strategies for Freedom: The Changing Patterns of Black Protest. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1976.
Sacks, Karen Brodkin. Caring by the Hour: Women, Work, and Organizing at Duke
Medical Center. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1988.
Said, Edward. Representations of the Intellectual. New York: Pantheon Books, 1994.
Sale, Kirkpatrick. SDS. New York: Random House, 1973.
Salem, Dorothy. To Better Our World: Black Women in Organized Reform, 1890–1920.
New York: Carlson Publishing, 1990.
Sales, William W., Jr. From Civil Rights to Black Liberation: Malcolm X and the
Organization of Afro-American Unity. Boston: South End Press, 1994.
Schmeidler, Emilie. ‘‘Shaping Ideas and Actions: CORE, SCLC, and SNCC in the
Struggle for Equality, 1960–1966.’’ Ph.D. diss., University of Michigan, 1980.
Schulke, Flip. He Had a Dream: Martin Luther King and the Civil Rights Movement . New
York: Norton, 1995.
Schuyler, George. Black and Conservative. New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1966.
— — —. Black Empire. Edited by Robert A. Hill and R. Kent Rasmussen. Boston:
Northeastern University Press, 1991.
— — —. Rac(e)ing to the Right: Selected Essays of George S. Schuyler. Edited by Jeffrey B.
Leak. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2001.
— — —. ‘‘The Young Negro Cooperative League.’’ Crisis 38 (January 1932): 456, 472.
Scott, James C. Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts. New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1990.
Sellers, Cleveland, with Robert Terrell. The River of No Return: The Autobiography of a
Black Militant and the Life and Death of SNCC. New York: Morrow, 1973.
Sernett, Milton C. Bound for the Promised Land: African American Religion and the Great
Migration. Durham: Duke University Press, 1997.


--- PAGE 470 ---
bibliography 447
Sessions, Jim, and Sue Thrasher. ‘‘A New Day Begun: An Interview with John Lewis.’’
Southern Exposure 4 (Fall 1976): 14–21.
Shapiro, Herbert. White Violence and Black Response: From Reconstruction to
Montgomery. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1988.
Shaw, Stephanie. What a Woman Ought to Be and to Do: Black Professional Women
Workers during the Jim Crow Era. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.
Shrecker, Ellen. Many Are the Crimes: McCarthyism in America . Boston: Little, Brown,
1998.
Shultz, Debra. Going South: Jewish Women in the Civil Rights Movement. New York: New
York University Press, 2001.
Silver, James. Mississippi: The Closed Society. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World,
1966.
Sinnette, Elinor Des Verney. Arthur Alfonso Schomburg: Black Bibliophile and Collector .
Detroit, Mich.: New York Public Library and Wayne State University Press, 1989.
Sinsheimer, Joseph A. ‘‘The Freedom Vote of 1963: New Strategies of Racial Protest in
Mississippi.’’ Journal of Southern History 55, no. 2 (May 1989): 217–44.
Sitkoff, Harvard. ‘‘African American Militancy in the World War II South: Another
Perspective.’’ In Remaking Dixie: the Impact of World War II on the American South,
ed. Neil McMillen, 70–92. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1997.
— — —. A New Deal for Blacks: The Emergence of Civil Rights as a National Issue: The
Depression Decade. New York: Oxford University Press, 1978.
— — —. ‘‘Racial Militancy and Interracial Violence in the Second World War.’’ Journal of
American History 58 (1971): 663–83.
— — —. The Struggle for Black Equality, 1954–1980 . New York: Hill and Wang, 1981.
Smead, Howard. Blood Justice: The Lynching of Mack Charles Parker. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1986.
Solomon, Mark I. The Cry Was Unity: Communists and African Americans, 1917–1936 .
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1998.
Southern Exposure, editors of. ‘‘The Mississippi Movement: Interviews with Ella Jo
Baker and Fannie Lou Hammer.’’ Southern Exposure 9 (Spring 1981): 40–41.
Southern Regional Council. The Freedom Ride. Atlanta: Southern Regional Council,
1961.
Spivey, Donald. Schooling for the New Slavery: Black Industrial Education, 1868–1915 .
Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1978.
Stoper, Emily. The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee: The Growth of
Radicalism in a Civil Rights Organization. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Carlson Publishing, 1989.
— — —. ‘‘The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee: Rise and Fall of a Redemptive
Organization.’’ Journal of Black Studies 8 (September 1977): 13–34.
Sugarman, Tracy. Strangers at the Gates: A Summer in Mississippi. New York: Hill and
Wang, 1966.
Suggs, Henry Lewis. P. B. Young, Newspaperman: Race, Politics and Journalism in the
New South. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1988.
Sullivan, Patricia. Days of Hope: Race and Democracy in the New Deal Era. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1996.
Sundquist, Eric J., ed. The Oxford W. E. B. Du Bois Reader. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1996.
Sutherland, Elizabeth ed. Letters from Mississippi. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965.
Swanson, Dorothy. ‘‘Rand School of Social Science.’’ In The Encyclopedia of the


--- PAGE 471 ---
448 bibliography
American Left, ed. Mari Jo Buhle, Paul Buhle, and Dan Georgakas, 640–42. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1992.
Tanksley, Amma. ‘‘Ella Josephine Baker: An Analysis of Liberatory Leadership.’’ M.A.
thesis, Cornell University, 1997.
Taylor, Clarence. Knocking at Our Own Door: Milton A. Galamison and the Struggle to
Integrate New York City Schools (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997).
Taylor, Ula. ‘‘The Historical Evolution of Black Feminist Theory and Praxis.’’ Journal of
Black Studies 29, no. 2 (November 1998): 234–53.
Taylor, Verta. ‘‘Social Movement Continuity: The Women’s Movement in Abeyance.’’
American Journal of Sociology 54 (October 1987): 761–75.
Teodori, Massimo, ed. The New Left: A Documentary History . Indianapolis: Bobbs-
Merrill, 1969.
Thelwell, Michael, ed. Duties, Pleasures, and Conﬂicts. Amherst: University of
Massachusetts Press, 1987.
Trotter, Joe William, ed. The Great Migration in Historical Perspective: New Dimensions
of Race, Class, and Gender. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991.
Turmos, Allen. Review of Speak Now against the Day: The Generation before the Civil
Rights Movement in the South, by John Egerton. Virginia Quarterly Review 73 (Winter
1997): 179–83.
Turner, W. B., and Joyce Moore Turner, eds. Richard B. Moore: Caribbean Militant in
Harlem: Collected Writings, 1920–1972 . Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1988.
Tushnet, Mark V. The NAACP’s Legal Strategy against Segregated Education, 1925–1950.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1987.
Tyson, Timothy B. Radio Free Dixie: Robert F. Williams and the Roots of Black Power.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1999.
Unger, Irwin. The Movement: A History of the American New Left, 1959–1972 . New York:
Harper and Row, 1974.
U.S. Congress. Senate. Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with
Respect to Intelligence Activities [Church Committee]. Hearings: Federal Bureau of
Investigation. Vol. 6. 94th Cong., 1st sess., 1976. Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Ofﬁce, 1976.
Van Deburg, William L. New Day in Babylon: The Black Power Movement and American
Culture, 1965–1975 . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.
Vincent, Theodore G., ed. Voices of a Black Nation: Political Journalism in the Harlem
Renaissance. Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press, 1990.
Vollers, Maryanne. Ghosts of Mississippi: The Murder of Medgar Evers, the Trials of Byron
de la Beckwith, and the Haunting of the New South . Boston: Little, Brown, 1996.
Wald, Alan. The New York Intellectuals: The Rise and Decline of the Anti-Stalinist Left from
the 1930s to the 1980s. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1987.
Walker, Eugene P. ‘‘A History of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, 1955–
1965.’’ Ph.D. diss., Duke University, 1978.
Walker, Jack L. ‘‘Protests and Negotiation: A Case Study of Negro Leadership in Atlanta,
Georgia.’’ Midwest Journal of Political Science 7 (May 1963): 99–124.
Ward, Brian, and Tony Badger, eds. The Making of Martin Luther King and the Civil
Rights Movement. New York: New York University Press, 1996.
Ware, Gilbert. William Hastie: Grace under Pressure. New York: Oxford University Press,
1984.
Warren, Robert Penn. ‘‘Two for SNCC.’’ Commentary, July 1965, 38.


--- PAGE 472 ---
bibliography 449
Watkins-Owens, Irma. Blood Relations: Caribbean Immigrants and the Harlem
Community, 1900–1930. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996.
Watson, Denton L. Lion in the Lobby: Clarence Mitchell Jr.’s Struggle for the Passage of
Civil Rights Laws. New York: Morrow, 1990.
Watson, Steven. The Harlem Renaissance: Hub of African-American Culture, 1920–1930 .
New York: Pantheon Books, 1995.
Watters, Pat. Down to Now: Reﬂections on the Southern Civil Rights Movement. New York:
Random House, 1971.
Watters, Pat, and Reese Cleghorn. Climbing Jacob’s Ladder. New York: Harcourt, Brace
and World, 1967.
Watts, Jill. God, Harlem, U.S.A.: The Father Divine Story. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1995.
Webb, Sheyann, and Rachel West Nelson. Selma, Lord, Selma. Tuscaloosa: University of
Alabama Press, 1980.
Wedin, Carolyn. Mary White Ovington and the Founding of the NAACP. New York: John
Wiley and Sons, 1997.
Weisbrot, Robert. Father Divine and the Struggle for Racial Equality. Urbana: University
of Illinois Press, 1983.
— — —. Freedom Bound: A History of America’s Civil Rights Movement . New York: Norton,
1990.
Weisenfeld, Judith. African American Women and Christian Activism: New York’s Black
YWCA, 1905–1945 . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1998.
Weiss, Nancy. Farewell to the Party of Lincoln. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983.
West, Cornel. The Cornel West Reader. New York: Basic Books, 1999.
— — —. Race Matters. Boston: Beacon Press, 1993.
West, Guida, and Rhoda Lois Blumberg, eds. Women and Social Protest. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1990.
Wheeler, Edward L. Uplifting the Race: The Black Minister in the New South, 1985–1902 .
Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1986.
White, Deborah Gray. Too Heavy a Load: Black Women in Defense of Themselves, 1894–
1994. New York: Norton, 1999.
White, Walter Francis. The Fire in the Flint. 1924. Reprint, Athens: University of Georgia
Press, 1996.
— — —. A Man Called White. New York: Viking, 1948.
Whorley, Tywanna. ‘‘Harry Tyson Moore: A Soldier for Freedom.’’ Journal of Negro
History 79 (Spring 1994): 197–211.
Wigginton, Eliot, and Sue Thrasher. ‘‘To Make the World We Want: An Interview with
Dorothy Cotton.’’ Southern Exposure 10 (September 1982): 25–31.
Wilkins, Roy. 40 Years of the NAACP. New York: NAACP, 1949.
— — —. Standing Fast: The Autobiography of Roy Wilkins. New York: Viking Press, 1982.
Williams, Juan. Eyes on the Prize: America’s Civil Rights Years, 1954–1965 . New York:
Viking, 1987.
Williamson, Joel. A Rage for Order: Black-White Relations in the American South since
Emancipation. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Wilson, Sondra Kathryn, ed. In Search of Democracy: The NAACP Writings of James
Weldon Johnson, Walter White, and Roy Wilkins, 1920–1977. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1999.
Wolters, Raymond. The New Negro on Campus: Black College Rebellions of the 1920s .
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1975.


--- PAGE 473 ---
450 bibliography
Woods, Barbara. ‘‘Modjeska Simkins and the South Carolina Conference of the NAACP,
1939–1957.’’ In Women in the Civil Rights Movement: Trailblazers and Torchbearers,
1941–1965 , ed. Vicki L. Crawford, Jacqueline Anne Rouse, and Barbara Woods, 99–
120. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1993).
Woods, Clyde. Development Arrested: Race, Power and the Blues in the Mississippi Delta.
London: Verso, 1998.
Woodward, C. Vann. The Strange Career of Jim Crow. 2d ed. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1966.
Woodward, C. Vann, Paul Feldman, and Bayard Rustin. Civil Rights: The Movement Re-
examined. New York: A. Philip Randolph Educational Fund, 1967.
Young, Andrew. An Easy Burden: The Civil Rights Movement and the Transformation Of
America. New York: HarperCollins, 1986.
Young, Iris Marion. Democracy and Inclusion. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Young, Richard P. The Roots of Rebellion: The Evolution of Black Politics and Protest since
World War II. New York: Harper and Row, 1970.
Youngblood, Susan. ‘‘Testing the Current: The Formative Years of Ella J. Baker’s
Development as an Organizational Leader in the Modern Civil Rights Movement.’’
M.A. thesis, University of Texas, Austin, 1983.
Zangrando, Robert I. The NAACP Crusade against Lynching, 1909–1950. Philadelphia:
Temple University Press, 1980.
Zieger, Robert. CIO, 1935–1955 . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995.
Zinn, Howard. Albany: A Study in National Responsibility. Atlanta: Southern Regional
Council, 1962.
— — —. SNCC, the New Abolitionists. 1964. Reprint, Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press,
1985.
— — —. You Can’t Be Neutral on a Moving Train: A Personal History of Our Times. Boston:
Beacon Press, 1994.


--- PAGE 474 ---
index
Abernathy, Juanita, 174–75, 256–57, 371
Abernathy, Ralph, 174–75, 242, 256
Abyssinian Baptist Church (Harlem), 11
Accommodationism, 51, 66, 107, 120
AFL (American Federation of Labor),
132–35
AFL-CIO, 164, 166
Africa, 67, 94, 99; and decolonization
movement, 57–58, 99, 100, 109, 332;
Ella Baker’s interest in, 58, 91, 99,
355; SNCC delegation to, 348, 355
Alabama Christian Movement for Human
Rights (ACMHR), 209–10, 211, 217–21
Albany, Ga., 253, 273
Albany Movement, 282–86, 291–92, 411–
12 (n. 33)
Algebra Project, 408 (n. 23)
Alston, Dennis, 27–28, 380 (n. 62)
American Baptist Home Mission Society,
48
American Federation of Labor (AFL),
132–35
American Labor Party, 159
American League against War and Fas-
cism, 98–99
American Mercury, 80
American Negro Labor Congress, 97
Americans for Democratic Action, 333,
337, 418 (n. 33)
Amin, Jamil Al- (H. Rap Brown), 12
Amsterdam News, 56, 86, 155, 177
Anderson, Eric, 16
Anderson, Jervis, 339
Anderson, William, 283
Anticommunism, 399 (n. 34), 406
(n. 91); Baker’s views on, 10, 160, 161,
177, 234–35, 287, 407 (n. 98); and
Schuyler, 78, 87, 387 (n. 61); and
NAACP, 134, 150–51, 157, 160–61, 177,
234, 407 (n. 98); and Cold War lib-
erals, 159, 163; and civil rights move-
ment, 159, 175, 177, 231, 234, 286–90;
and SCLC, 175, 177, 250; and SCEF
civil liberties campaign, 286–90;
King’s position on, 401 (n. 16). See
also House Un-American Activities
Committee; McCarthyism
Antiwar protests. See Vietnam War
Atlanta, Ga.: and NAACP, 141–42, 147;
and SCLC, 174–75, 179, 181, 189; and
SNCC, 241, 249–50, 252, 262, 314–17,
346, 348, 350; Baker’s YWCA job in,
260–61; Baker’s apartment in, 281;
‘‘How Free Are the ‘Free’?’’ workshop
in, 289
Atlanta Appeal for Human Rights, 241
Atlanta Committee of Appeal for Human
Rights, 294
Atlantic City convention. See Democratic
National Convention (1964)
Attica prison uprising, 356
Audubon ballroom (Harlem), 255
Ayers, Bill, 357–58
Baker, Anna Georgianna Ross (mother),
14–24, 103, 145; as inﬂuence on Baker,
9, 13, 14–15, 21, 31, 46–48, 58, 64, 65,
192, 257; beliefs and personality of,
15, 16–21, 27–30, 33–34, 35, 43–44,
56, 101, 151, 192, 407 (n. 102); mar-
riage of, 23, 26; miscarriages and still-
births of, 26, 28, 34; and teaching
career plans for Baker, 46, 62, 358;
importance of proper language to, 47,
361; Baker’s continued adult ties to,
131; death of, 161
Baker, Blake (father), 14, 21, 23, 25–29,
30, 39, 43, 44, 103
Baker, Curtis (brother), 14, 29, 145
Baker, Ella: and SNCC. See Student Non-


--- PAGE 475 ---
452 index
violent Coordinating Committee; po-
litical and social agenda of, 1, 5–6, 38,
44–45, 90, 113–14, 194, 239, 356, 363,
364–74; political and social impact of,
3–7, 233, 270–71, 293–94, 368–69;
friendships with women activists, 4,
72, 119, 120–22, 230, 233–34, 257, 260,
284–85, 294; and NAACP, 4, 9–10, 13,
103–47; as ‘‘outsider within,’’ 4, 173–
74, 367, 370–72; and SCLC, 4, 10, 35,
139, 170, 172–95, 209–30, 236–38,
243, 261; and labor movement, 5, 93–
98, 132–35; as organic intellectual, 6,
74–75, 362–63; and Puerto Rican in-
dependence movement, 6, 100, 156,
354–55; as role model and mentor, 6–
7, 246–47, 251–53, 256–57, 259, 269–
74, 293, 317, 357, 358, 360, 366–67;
marriage of, 7, 34, 101–4, 118–19, 256,
366; private life of, 7, 8–9, 34, 57, 66,
102, 118–19, 145, 179, 195, 227, 233,
253–56, 366; in 1930s Harlem, 9, 64–
104; female role models for, 9, 20–23,
31; mother’s importance to, 9, 14–15,
21, 58, 161; at Shaw Academy and
University, 9, 32, 45, 46–63, 363; and
anticommunism, 10, 160, 161, 177,
234–35, 287, 407 (n. 98); death and
funeral of, 10–12; and New York City
reform activities, 10, 148–69, 354;
eclectic associates of, 11–12, 78–82,
97–98, 101, 158–59, 164, 232–34, 284–
85, 347; family background and youth
of, 13–45, 191, 192; and gender iden-
tity, 33, 34, 102, 112, 135–37, 184, 256–
59, 296–97, 310, 311, 358, 364, 366–
67, 371; rejection of traditional teach-
ing career by, 46, 62, 358; rhetorical
skills of, 47–48, 361, 362–63; public
speaking style of, 55, 56, 131, 147, 246,
361; as journalist, 56, 76–77, 86, 91,
98; and Young Negroes’ Cooperative
League, 56, 82–91; internationalist
outlook of, 57–58, 66–67, 98–101,
354, 355–56; radicalization of, 63, 66,
68, 75; short-term jobs held by, 65,
67–70, 72–73, 91, 104, 147; worldview
of, 66, 261, 364, 372, 373; political ed-
ucation of, 69–70, 74–75, 95–96, 104,
192, 363; and Workers Education
Project, 72, 75, 91–98, 132, 359, 361;
Brookwood Labor College experi-
ence, 73–74; friendship with
Schuyler, 78–82; political philosophy
of, 90, 97–98, 100–101, 114, 167–68,
194–95, 235, 261, 270–71, 281, 341,
356, 357, 362–63, 368, 370, 372; ﬁnan-
cial problems of, 91, 103–4; and Com-
munist Party, 95–96, 159, 160; and
Lovestonites, 97; FBI surveillance of,
102, 129–30, 160, 177, 216, 353, 403
(n. 2), 404 (n. 23); continued family
ties of, 103, 131, 144–45; divorce of,
103, 179, 195, 227, 391 (n. 166); ﬁerce
independence of, 104, 233; outspoken
assertiveness of, 107, 127, 142–43, 146,
174, 184, 371; appearance and de-
meanor of, 112, 126–27, 211, 256–57,
296; organizing philosophy and style
of, 113–14, 115, 136–37, 139, 170–71,
179–80, 270, 355–56; personal growth
of, 130–31; adopted daughter of, 145,
253, 254–55; coalition-building by,
149; teaching style and philosophy of,
151–56, 326–29, 357–62, 364; and
electoral politics, 157–58; self-help
philosophy of, 167–68, 170, 270; view
of King’s leadership, 171–72, 173–74,
187–92, 195, 243, 245, 257; overlap-
ping organizational afﬁliations of,
178, 281, 286; and self-defense vs.
nonviolence issue, 183, 193–94, 215–
16, 323, 403–4 (nn. 3, 4); as radical
humanist, 194, 293, 369, 372; health
problems of, 195, 253, 254, 347, 353,
354; Birmingham 1959 speech of, 211–
16, 238; view of civil rights legisla-
tion, 223, 337; and SCEF, 231–37,
286–91; friendship with Bradens,
233–34, 253–55, 286, 347; importance
of the movement to, 261, 286, 356;
and Freedom Tent City, 276–77;
nomadic political life of, 281, 291; and
civil liberties, 287–88; and vigilante
violence, 311–12; and white Freedom
Summer volunteers, 324, 325; and
Freedom Schools, 326–29, 357–58;
and Mississippi Freedom Democratic


--- PAGE 476 ---
index 453
Party, 330–42; conservative and lib-
eral attacks on, 344; and black power
movement, 346, 348; on black separa-
tist/nationalist agenda, 347; Car-
michael’s tribute speech to, 350–51;
and ‘‘Free Angela’’ campaign, 352–53,
372; 1970s political focus of, 352–56;
democratic humanism of, 356, 364;
legacy of, 356, 357–74; as radical in-
tellectual, 363–64
Baker, Maggie (Margaret Odessa) (sis-
ter), 14, 15, 26, 30, 32, 143, 144, 145,
254, 255
Baker, Margaret (grandmother), 14, 30–
31, 43
Baker, Prince (deceased infant brother),
26, 28
Baker, Teema (grandfather), 14, 30–31,
43
Baltimore, Md., 122–24, 185
Baltimore Afro-American, 79
Baptist church. See Black Baptist church
Baptist Ministers Conference, 116
Bard College, 168
Barry, Marion, 246, 262, 306, 315
Bates, Daisy, 154, 176, 194, 297, 404 (n. 7)
Bates, Peg Leg, 348–49
Baton Rouge, La., 172
Beal, Fran, 354
Beard, Charles, 94
Belafonte, Harry, 167
Bellamy, Fay, 311
Bennet College, 358
Bennett, Fay, 164, 165
Bethune, Mary McLeod, 4, 128, 145–46,
231
Bevel, James, 246, 283, 308
Birmingham, Ala.: Baker’s organizing in,
10, 111–12, 189, 209–13, 216–22, 252;
reputation for racism, 111, 216–17,
313; Baker’s militancy speech in, 211–
12, 213, 215, 216, 238; Shuttlesworths’
activism in, 217–22, 244; Bradens’
civil rights involvement in, 234; Free-
dom Rides in, 265; women activists
in, 291–92; vigilante violence in, 313;
‘‘Free Angela’’ rallies in, 353
Birmingham World, 212, 213
Black, Lucille, 4, 110, 119, 133, 140, 141, 374
Black and Tan Party, 301
Black Baptist church: women’s role in, 6,
15, 17–18, 136, 192, 193, 407 (n. 102);
Baker’s family roots in, 14, 27–28, 31,
35, 44, 58, 191, 192; as major force in
Baker’s youth, 16–20, 372; missionary
values of, 17–20, 58, 74; and preach-
ing skills, 48; afﬁliated colleges, 51–
52; Baker’s critique of, 81, 192, 361;
and SCLC, 172, 174–75, 177, 185, 187;
and markers of respectability, 175;
sexism within, 184, 219, 220; King’s
and Baker’s background in, 191, 192–
95; and Fred Shuttlesworth’s militant
activism, 218–19
Black Baptist women’s missionary move-
ment, 6, 13, 15, 17–19, 48, 192, 193,
407 (n. 102)
Black Bourgeoisie (Frazier), 380 (n. 47)
Black capitalism, 89, 109
Black feminism, 4–5, 66, 71, 77, 298
Black Freedom Movement: time span
and scope of, 3; Baker’s place in, 4, 6,
189, 364–65, 370–72; and rejection
of accommodationism, 107, 120;
Montgomery bus boycott as spark in,
127; nonviolence vs. militancy debate,
211–15; SNCC’s role in, 239–329. See
also Civil rights movement
Black nationalism, 12, 66, 80, 96, 344,
345–52; Baker’s critique of, 6, 99,
310–12, 347, 350; and macho rhetoric,
310–11, 350; and SNCC, 311, 348, 349;
and antiwhite rhetoric, 348, 349
Black Panther Party for Self-Defense,
216, 345, 352
Black power movement, 10, 12, 344–52;
and cleavages in SNCC, 348; Baker’s
view of, 351; and white liberals, 351–
52
‘‘Black Power’’ slogan, 346, 348, 351
Black separatism. See Black nationalism
‘‘The Black Woman in the Civil Rights
Struggle’’ (Baker), 352
Black women: as social change activists.
See Women activists; and Baptist mis-
sionary movement, 6, 13, 15, 17–19,
48, 192, 193, 407 (n. 102); and ‘‘cul-
ture of dissemblance,’’ 8; and middle-


--- PAGE 477 ---
454 index
class respectability, 15, 20, 21, 52, 62,
112, 128, 184, 256, 291, 292–93, 309;
and homemaker role, 20, 135, 184,
297; effects of Great Depression on,
76–77; Baker as radical model of,
296, 367; teaching profession’s re-
strictions on, 329, 358, 359; as radical
intellectuals, 363. See also Gender
roles
Black women’s club movement, 146
Block, Sam, 307, 334
Blue, Willie, 324
Bond, Julian, 231, 241, 280, 307, 343,
348
Boundaries of Blackness (Cohen), 405
(n. 63)
Braden, Anne, 190–91, 214–15, 238, 332,
374, 407 (n. 99); on Birmingham’s
racism, 111; on Black Freedom Move-
ment, 148; and anticommunism, 148,
161; and SCEF, 211, 231–36, 286;
Baker’s friendship with, 221, 233–34,
253, 254, 255, 347; background and
politics of, 231–32, 244; and Commu-
nist Party, 234–35, 236, 287, 406–7
(n. 92); and SNCC, 268, 286; and civil
liberties, 286–87; and SCLC, 289–90;
and SCEF tribute to Baker, 350–51;
and ‘‘Free Angela’’ campaign, 352;
and FBI surveillance of Baker, 403
(n. 2)
Braden, Carl, 161, 211, 214, 221, 347, 407
(n. 99); background and politics of,
231–32, 244; and SCEF, 231–37, 286;
and civil rights hearings, 277; and
civil liberties, 286–87; clemency peti-
tion of, 289–90
Branch, Taylor, 182, 188
Brandstein, Rae, 164
Branton, Wiley, 333
Brawley, Benjamin, 55–56, 64, 88
Brewster, Ann, 226
Briggs, Cyril V., 67
Britt, Travis, 306, 413 (n. 68)
Britton, John, 311, 348
Brockington, Henry, 253, 255
Brockington, Jackie, 151, 179, 195, 221,
227, 284; adoption by Baker of, 145;
marriage of, 253, 254–55
‘‘The Bronx Slave Market’’ (Baker and
Cooke), 76–77
Brooks, Paul, 214
Brookwood Labor College, 73–74
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, 80,
91, 134, 142, 166
Brown, Charlotte Hawkins, 231
Brown, Earl, 157
Brown, Elsa Barkley, 363
Brown, H. Rap (Jamil Al-Amin), 12
Brown v. Board of Education, 152, 153,
167, 176
Bryant, C. C., 304
Buhle, Paul, 97, 159
Bunche, Ralph, 108, 182
Burgland High School (Miss.), 293
Burlage, Dorothy. See Dawson (Burlage),
Dorothy
Burroughs, Nannie Helen, 4, 19, 236–37,
407 (n.102)
Burroughs, Williana J., 73
Business boycotts, 263
Cabral, Amilcar, 348
Caddo Parish Courthouse (Shreveport,
La.), 228–30
Cambridge, Md., 314
Campbell, Grace, 67, 73
Camus, Albert, 248, 250
Canton, Miss., 307
Capitalism, 86–89, 372
Carmichael, Stokely (Kwame Ture), 12,
355, 411–412 (n. 33), 420 (n. 13);
Baker’s association with, 4, 272, 323;
and sexism, 310, 311; and SNCC lead-
ership, 314, 346, 366; and black
power, 346, 348, 349; Baker tribute
speech by, 350–51
Carson, Clayborne, 278, 285–86
Carter, Wilmoth, 49, 57
Central High School (Little Rock, Ark.),
154
Chafe, Bill, 341
Chaffee, Lois, 327
Chaney, James, 185, 325, 335, 341
Chapel Hill conference, 287, 288–90
Cheatham, Henry P., 41
Cherry, Violet, 355
‘‘Children Apart’’ conference, 153


--- PAGE 478 ---
index 455
Chomsky, Noam, 354
CIO. See Congress of Industrial Organi-
zations
Citizenship Schools, 244, 357–58
Civil liberties, 286–90
Civil Rights Act of 1957, 177, 178, 183, 236
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 337
Civil Rights Commission, 177, 183, 222–
23, 228, 235
Civil rights movement (1960s), 10, 170–
95; community-based activism. See
Grassroots organizing; and SCLC. See
Southern Christian Leadership Con-
ference; internal rifts in, 108, 263–65,
282, 284–86, 345–46; Montgomery
bus boycott initiating, 127, 142, 161–
62; and labor organizing, 132; and
NAACP, 142, 150, 151, 285; legislative
initiatives, 150; violence against, 154,
174–76, 185–86, 212, 214, 220, 221,
224, 227, 237, 312–14; and anticom-
munism, 159, 175, 177, 210, 231, 234,
286–90; and northern-based fund re-
sources, 161–68; and activist chal-
lenges, 162–63, 195, 216, 223–24; and
southern economic reprisals, 164, 167,
176, 226, 276, 286, 301, 309, 410
(n. 2); church-based leaders, 170,
174–75; and leadership politics, 170,
172, 188–89, 245, 263–64; and non-
violence vs. self-protection debate,
193–94, 210–16, 224; and gender poli-
tics, 183–87, 291–98; and sit-ins, 195,
216, 237–38; and social class, 225–26,
279, 411 (n. 22); SNCC’s autonomy in,
239, 281–86; and Freedom Rides,
265–68, 294, 304, 422 (n. 58); and
poverty relief, 275–76; and civil liber-
ties drive, 286–89; in Mississippi,
299–329; and Mississippi Freedom
Democratic Party, 334; shift to black
nationalism in, 345–52. See also Vot-
ing rights
Clarendon County, S.C., 167
Clark, Kenneth and Mamie Phipps, 151,
152–53
Clark, Septima, 4, 244, 327, 357, 367, 374,
412 (n. 43)
Clark, Willa Bell, 226–27
Clarke, John Henrik, 91, 96, 98, 103, 104,
256
Clarksdale, Miss., 185–86, 307
Class. See Social class
Cleaver, Kathleen, 346–47
Cleveland, Miss., 186, 301, 303
Cobb, Charlie, 323, 326, 329, 377, 408
(n. 23), 410 (n. 2)
COFO. See Council of Federated Organi-
zations
Cohen, Cathy J., 405 (n. 63)
Cold War, 10; and FBI surveillance of
Baker, 129–30; effects on progressive
organizations, 148, 149, 159, 231;
NAACP efforts during, 150; SCLC’s
name choice in context of, 175, 177;
effects on civil rights organizations,
210. See also Anticommunism; Com-
munist Party
Cole, L. M., 79
Collins, Patricia Hill, 20, 422 (n. 60)
Colonialism, 3, 5, 10, 94; African de-
colonization movement, 57–58, 99,
100, 109
Colorblindness, 421 (n. 51)
Colored Merchants Association, 89
Color line. See Racial segregation
Colvin, Claudette, 292–93
‘‘Combative spirituality,’’ 218
Commission on Civil Rights. See Civil
Rights Commission
Committee of 100 against Lynching, 91,
103
Committee on Political Domination,
160
Committee to Defend Angela Davis, 353
Communism, 68, 78, 87; and Baker’s
views, 10, 95–96, 159, 234–35; anti-
racism linked with, 231. See also Anti-
communism; Communist Party
Communist Party, 71, 77–78, 93, 98, 412
(n. 40); and racial views, 96–97, 287;
CIO’s alleged ties with, 134; and
NAACP members, 150, 157; 1950s de-
fections from, 159; Bradens’ alleged
ties with, 234–35, 236, 287, 406–7
(n. 92); and Angela Davis, 352, 353,
372. See also House Un-American Ac-
tivities Committee; McCarthyism


--- PAGE 479 ---
456 index
Community-based schools, 151, 153, 154–
55
Community movements. See Grassroots
organizing
Community service, 18, 44, 50, 153
Congress of Industrial Organizations
(CIO), 80, 92, 132–35, 150
Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), 163,
265, 279, 306, 307
Connally, John, 338
Connor, Eugene (‘‘Bull’’), 111, 129, 217,
313
Consumer education, 91–98
Cooke, Marvel Jackson, 76–78, 79
Cooperative movement, 5, 13, 37–38, 82–
91, 99, 168, 347
CORE. See Congress of Racial Equality
Council of Federated Organizations
(COFO), 300, 306–7, 308, 313, 315,
318; and Freedom Summer, 320–25;
and Freedom Schools, 327; and Mis-
sissippi Freedom Democratic Party,
331, 334, 335
Council on African Affairs, 57
Cox, Courtland, 314
Crisis, 56, 72, 77, 109, 112, 276
Crosswaith, Frank, 73, 80, 159
Crump, Charlotte, 110, 120–21
Crusade for Citizenship, 179–83, 269
Crusader, 215
‘‘Culture of dissemblance,’’ 8
Current, Gloster, 141, 146, 149, 276, 343
Curry, Connie, 252–53, 264, 321, 409
(n. 49)
Dahmer, Vernon, 317
Danville, Va., 116, 117, 273, 313
Davis, Angela, 10, 235, 352–53, 372
Davis, Ben, Jr., 160
Davis, Sallye, 353
Dawson (Burlage), Dorothy, 214, 215,
258
Deacons for Defense, 346
Delany, Hubert, 54, 287
Delany, Sarah and Elizabeth, 54
Dellinger, David, 354
Democratic humanism, 356, 364
Democratic National Convention (1960),
261–62, 264
Democratic National Convention (1964),
330, 331, 332, 336–42, 343
Democratic Party, 159, 268–69
Democratic processes, 189; Baker’s com-
mitment to, 139, 310, 364; and local
autonomy, 280; and SNCC, 309–10;
Baker’s deﬁnition of, 368–69; and pa-
rameters of exclusion, 369
Dempsey, J. W., 41
Dennis, Dave, 318
Depression era. See Great Depression
Desegregation: as NAACP agenda, 107,
109; of public transportation, 171; of
interstate travel, 267. See also School
desegregation
Desegregation protests. See Freedom
Rides; Sit-in movement
Devine, Annie, 334
Diamond, Dion, 288
Diaspora, African, 99
Dittmer, John, 279, 305, 313–14, 420
(n. 5)
Dombrowski, Jim, 288, 291, 332
Domestic workers, 76–77, 171, 226, 365;
as conditional insiders, 422 (n. 60)
Domingo, W. A., 67
Donaldson, Ivanhoe, 257, 258, 296, 314,
347, 355
Douglass, Margaret, 71
Dubinsky, David, 158, 159
Du Bois, W. E. B., 3, 4, 77, 100, 109, 235,
371; on color line, 23; on Talented
Tenth, 51–52; on all-black coopera-
tives, 88; and pan-Africanism, 99;
and NAACP, 107–10, 139; background
and personality of, 109; and commu-
nism, 163, 392 (n. 7)
Durr, Virginia, 5, 259
Eastland, James, 343
Ebenezer Baptist Church (Atlanta, Ga.),
174, 181
Education: Baker’s approach to, 6, 151–
56, 328–29, 357–64; and New York
City reform movement, 10, 149, 151–
56, 178, 354; black Baptist women’s
fostering of, 15; Jim Crow limitations
on, 29–30; as Ross-Baker family
focus, 29–30, 32, 37, 44, 47; black


--- PAGE 480 ---
index 457
church sponsors of, 48–49; Workers
Education Project, 72, 75, 91–98, 132,
326, 359, 361; community-based
school models, 151, 153, 154; and Free-
dom Schools, 295, 299–300, 326–
29; and restrictions of traditional
teacher training, 359. See also School
desegregation
Eisenhower, Dwight, 153, 177
Elams, N.C., 24, 31, 37, 38
Elitism: and black Baptist women’s
movement, 19; and Shaw Academy,
56; and NAACP local members, 120;
and King family, 189–90; and ‘‘uplift
ideology,’’ 226, 297; and Baker’s view
of teaching profession, 358; intellec-
tual, 387 (n. 43). See also Social class
Ella Baker (Grant), 377
Ellington, Duke, 167, 373
Embery, Elroy, 413 (n. 68)
Emergency Civil Liberties Committee,
233
Escott, Paul, 40
Eskew, Glenn T., 187
Ethiopia, Italian invasion of, 98–99
Evans, Rowland, 344
Evers, Medgar, 185–86, 317; assassina-
tion of, 313, 319
Fairclough, Adam, 173, 183
Fair Employment Practices Commission,
150
Fanon, Franz, 348
Farmville, Va., 116, 117
Fascism, 3, 92, 94, 98, 105
Father Divine, 88–89
Faubus, Orval, 153
Fayette County, Tenn., 274–78, 279, 286,
291
Fayette County Civic and Welfare
League, 277
Fayette County Emergency Relief Com-
mittee, 275
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
156, 163, 233, 352; surveillance of
Baker by, 102, 129–30, 160, 177, 216,
353, 403 (n. 2), 404 (n. 23)
Fellowship of Reconciliation (FOR), 163,
240
Feminism, 4–5, 21, 66, 71, 77, 114, 366,
367
Feminist Theory from Margin to Center
(hooks), 421 (n. 49)
Field Foundation, 306
Fifth Amendment, 406 (n. 91)
First Amendment, 406 (n. 91)
Fleming, Cynthia Griggs, 294
Fleming, Glenda, 292
Forman, James (Jim), 214, 335, 407
(n. 97); appreciation of Baker by, 239,
271; and SNCC, 275, 278–79, 294, 308,
314, 342, 343, 366, 413 (n. 73); and
Puerto Rican independence, 354
Forrest County, Miss., 318
Fort-Whiteman, Lovett, 97
Fosl, Catherine, 407 (n. 92)
Frazier, E. Franklin, 23, 108, 380 (n. 47)
Frederickson, Elizabeth, 73
‘‘Free Angela’’ campaign, 10, 352–53, 372
Freedom Day (Hattiesburg, Miss.), 317–
20
Freedom Houses, 295
Freedom of association, 287–89
Freedom of speech, 288–89, 406 (n. 91)
Freedom Rides, 265–68, 294, 304, 325,
422 (n. 58)
Freedom Schools, 295, 299–300, 326–29,
420 (n. 13); Baker’s inﬂuence on, 327–
29, 357–58; goals of, 327
Freedom Summer (1964), 299, 301, 303,
320–25, 326, 422 (n. 58); and murder
of three volunteers, 299, 325, 335,
337, 341; inception of, 313–14; and
white student volunteers, 313–14, 321,
343; and Mississippi Freedom Demo-
cratic Party delegates, 331, 334
Freedom Tent City (Fayette County,
Tenn.), 275–78, 286
Freedom Vote campaign, 308, 311–12,
313–14, 321
Freire, Paulo, 328–29, 359, 362
Friendship Baptist Church (Harlem), 156,
164
Friends of Negro Freedom, 80
Fundi (Grant), 355, 419 (n. 1)
Gaines, Kevin, 358
Gaines, Shirley, 292


--- PAGE 481 ---
458 index
Galamison, Milton, 151, 152, 154
Gammon Seminary (Atlanta, Ga.) meet-
ing, 342
Gandhi, Mohandas, 211, 241
Gans, Curtis, 418 (n. 33)
Gardner, Rosetta, 260
Garvey, Marcus, 67, 73, 80, 99
Gender equality: and Young Negroes’ Co-
operative League, 83; World War II
promises of, 132; Baker’s belief in,
136, 311
Gender roles: Baker’s alternative model
of, 4, 34–35, 135–37, 173–74, 256–59,
296–97, 358, 364, 366–67, 370–72;
and black Baptist women, 13, 20; and
Baker’s family, 33; and Baker’s college
experiences, 56–57; and black politics
of respectability, 128, 184; and SCLC,
173–74, 175–76, 183–89; and organi-
zational hierarchies, 192, 297; and
Shreveport movement, 226; and
grassroots organizing, 291–98, 364;
and male reconsiderations of mas-
culinity, 295–96, 364; and SNCC out-
look, 309–11, 343, 365; and black
nationalist rhetoric, 310–11, 350. See
also Sexism
Ghana, 392 (n. 7)
Giddings, Paula, 13–14
Gilchrist, Helen (cousin), 131
Gilmore, Glenda, 15
Girard, Charles, 412 (n. 43)
Gober, Bertha, 292
Goldwater, Barry, 338
Goodgame, J. W., Jr., 111, 112
Goodman, Andrew, 185, 325, 335, 341
Graetz, Robert S., 175
Graff, Gerald, 359
Graham (DuBois), Shirley, 110
Gramsci, Antonio, 359, 361, 386–87
(n. 43), 417 (n. 102); and praxis phi-
losophy, 410 (n. 75)
Gramscian theory, 74, 359, 362
Granger, Lester, 91, 182, 235
Grant, Joanne, 161, 349, 355, 372, 377,
419 (n. 1)
Grassroots organizing: Baker’s belief in,
6, 10, 45, 74–75, 104, 105–37, 139, 154,
167–68, 170, 171, 176, 178, 182–83,
188–89, 194–95, 209–38, 273–74,
285, 300, 363, 364, 368, 370; and
black cooperative movement, 83, 91;
and SNCC, 91, 262, 270, 273–329;
and individual politicization process,
114; NAACP view of, 140–44; and
community-based school reform, 151,
153, 154; and electoral politics, 158;
and Montgomery civil rights move-
ment, 162–63; charismatic leadership
vs., 172; in Birmingham, 189, 209–13,
216–22, 252; and self-defense, 194,
322–25; in Shreveport, 222–30, 252;
and SCEF, 231; and sit-ins, 237–38; in
Fayette County, Tenn., 274; and gen-
der, 291–98, 364; in Mississippi, 300–
329; and self-determination, 300; and
Mississippi Freedom Democratic
Party, 331–34; liberals’ attacks on,
343; and participatory democracy,
368–69
Gray, Victoria, 318, 334
Great Depression, 14, 63, 67, 103–4, 107,
326; effects on Harlem, 75–77, 91; and
cooperative movement, 88, 89; and
New Deal programs, 91–92; and
black interracial coalitions, 99–100
Great Migration, 54, 66, 171
Green, George, 312
Green, Mr. and Mrs. J. J., 111
Greene, Edith, 337, 338
Greensboro lunch-counter sit-ins, 195,
216, 237–39, 407 (n. 99)
Greenville meeting (of COFO, 1963),
313–14, 315
Greenwich Village, 68, 327
Greenwood, Miss., 307, 312–13
Grinage, Martha (cousin), 65, 67, 144–
45
Guinier, Lani, 368, 422 (n. 59)
Gulfside Church (Waveland, Miss.) meet-
ing, 342–44
Guyot, Lawrence, 260, 296, 319, 335–36
Habermas, Jürgen, 387 (n. 58)
Hall, Prathia, 258, 345–46, 359–60, 362,
366
Hamer, Fannie Lou, 4, 307–8, 310, 318–
19, 365, 374, 422 (n. 56); and Mis-


--- PAGE 482 ---
index 459
sissippi Freedom Democratic Party,
331, 334, 337, 338
Hamilton, Grace, 141
Hansen, Bill, 321
Harding, Vincent, 261, 285–86, 407
(n. 97)
Hardy, John, 306
Harlem, 9, 13, 14, 64–104, 187; Baker’s
apartment in, 10, 101, 102, 103;
Baker’s funeral in, 11–12; cooperative
movement in, 56, 82–91; political
life of, 66–67, 97–99; riots in, 67,
121, 344; stepladder circuit in, 73;
vibrancy of public sphere in, 73; Great
Depression effects on, 75–77, 91;
NAACP branch headquarters, 148;
community-based school movement,
162
Harlem Adult Education Experiment,
69–70, 75
Harlem Branch Library, 69, 72
Harlem Branch YWCA, 69, 70–71, 72, 75
Harlem Hospital, 93
Harlem Labor Center, 73
Harlem Renaissance, 107
Harlem’s Own Cooperative, 91
Harmony, Miss., 307
Harrington, Michael, 288
Harris, Abram, 108
Harris, Don, 324
Harrison, Hubert, 73
Hastie, Bill, 138, 140
Hattiesburg Freedom Day, 317–20
Having Our Say (Delany), 54
Hayden, Casey, 268, 287, 321, 343, 366,
409 (n. 49)
Hayden, Tom, 288, 310, 366
Hayes, Curtis, 304, 317–18, 334
Haywood County, Tenn., 274, 276, 277
Hedgeman, Anna Arnold, 4, 71, 75
Height, Dorothy, 4, 71
Heirich, Max, 246
Henry, Aaron, 186, 236, 306, 307, 308,
309, 318, 319, 330, 341
‘‘Hidden transcript of opposition,’’ 194–
95, 411 (n. 17)
Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks, 13, 18, 49,
51, 128
Higgs, Bill, 333
Highlander Folk School (Monteagle,
Tenn., and later Knoxville, Tenn.),
215, 254, 267–70, 290, 306, 344, 349
High Point, N.C., 238
Hill, Herbert, 143, 235
Hine, Darlene Clark, 8, 371
Hines, Odetta Harper, 131, 230
Hitler-Stalin Pact, 159
Holly Springs, Miss., 307
Holmes Norton, Eleanor, 4, 360, 367, 420
(n. 17)
Holt, Len, 329
Homer, Dorothy, 141
Homosexuality, 163, 179, 264, 401
(n. 28), 405 (n. 63)
hooks, bell, 421 (n. 49)
Hoover Institute, 390 (n. 145)
Horton, Myles, 268, 286
House Un-American Activities Commit-
tee (HUAC), 159, 163, 232, 236, 288,
289, 290, 399 (n. 34), 406 (n. 91)
‘‘How Free Are the ‘Free’?’’ (Atlanta
workshop), 289
HUAC. See House Un-American Activities
Committee
Hubbard, Freeman, 101
Hughes, Langston, 69
Huiswood, Otto, 67
Humphrey, Hubert, 338, 340
Hurley, Ruby, 4, 110, 121–22, 284–85
Imes, William Lloyd, 99
Indianola, Miss., 308
Individual transformation, 90, 113–14,
239, 294–95, 369
In Friendship, 161–68, 170, 172, 173, 176,
177, 178, 195, 302
Institute of the Black World, 311, 352
Institute on Nonviolent Resistance to
Segregation, 403–4 (n. 4)
Intellectual: deﬁnition of, 363; radical,
363–64; deﬁnition of nonelite, 387
(n. 43). See also Organic intellectual
Intergroup Committee, 152–53
International Ladies Garment Workers
Union (ILGWU), 158
International Women’s Day, 355
Interracial relations: and Baker’s coali-
tion building, 5, 6, 99–101, 161–63,


--- PAGE 483 ---
460 index
354; and Baker’s friendships, 81, 148,
161, 211, 221, 231, 233–34, 347; and
labor organizing, 132; and SCEF,
211, 231, 350–51; and SNCC policy
changes, 247–48, 252–53, 306, 315–
16, 321, 347–48; and white northern
student volunteers, 308–9, 313–16,
321, 324–25; and Mississippi Freedom
Democratic Party, 338–41; and black
nationalist rhetoric, 348, 351; and
white liberals, 351–52
Interstate Commerce Commission, 267
Jackson, Elijah, 134
Jackson, Emory O., 213
Jackson, George, 352
Jackson, Jacob, 156, 157
Jackson, Jimmy Lee, 345
Jackson, Juanita, 122, 394 (n. 65)
Jackson, Lillie, 122–24
Jackson, Marvel. See Cooke, Marvel
Jackson
Jackson, Miss., 185–86, 307, 330, 343
James, C. L. R., 372
James, Joy, 367, 386–87 (n. 43)
Jansen, William, 154, 157
Jeffrey, Mildred, 333
Jemison, T. J., 172
Jenkins, Timothy, 373
Jet Magazine, 303
Jim Crow segregation. See Racial
segregation
John Birch Society, 387 (n. 61)
Johnson, Azalea, 214, 215
Johnson (Reagon), Bernice. See Reagon,
Bernice Johnson
Johnson, Jack, 25
Johnson, James Weldon, 107
Johnson, June, 307, 334
Johnson, Lyndon B., 313, 315, 337, 338
Jones (Omolade), Barbara, 305, 335, 336,
358, 366–67
Jones, Charles, 269–70, 278, 288
Jones, Claudia, 67
Jones, Donald, 141
Jones, Madison, 110
Jordan, Vernon, 284
Justice Department, U.S., 156, 265, 267,
276, 422 (n. 58)
Kaplan, Temma, 114
Kates, Susan, 74
Kelley, Robin, 218, 278, 364
Kennedy, John F., 265, 268, 313
Kennedy, Robert, 266, 267, 268
Kenyatta, Jomo, 27
Kilgore, Thomas, 157, 164, 168, 413
(n. 68)
King, Coretta Scott, 167, 257
King, Ed, 275, 309, 341
King, Lonnie, 241, 346, 348
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 235, 264, 289–
90, 407 (n. 97); and Baker, 4, 10, 13,
34–35, 171–74, 187, 188–95, 238, 243,
245, 253, 257, 371; on Birmingham’s
racism, 111; and Montgomery bus
boycott, 162, 171; and SCLC, 168, 176–
77, 180, 185, 222; leadership philoso-
phy of, 170, 188–89; charisma of, 171,
187–89, 191, 241, 245, 247, 283; inner
circle of, 173, 174; sexism of, 174; and
Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom, 176,
177; Wilkins’s resentment of, 178;
stabbing of, 186–87; privileged back-
ground of, 189–90; and black Baptist
church, 191, 192–93; and nonvio-
lence, 211, 403 (n. 3); and civil rights
radicals, 222; and Southwide Student
Leadership Conference, 241, 242, 243;
and student activists, 243–44, 283;
and Albany Movement, 283, 411–12
(n. 33); and SNCC leadership, 283;
and NAACP, 284; and Mississippi
Freedom Democratic Party, 337, 338,
341; critics of, 345–46; Mississippi
protest march by, 346; assassination
of, 350; and anticommunism, 401
(n. 16); as organic intellectual, 421
(n. 30)
King, Martin Luther, Sr., 174, 181, 192
King, Mary, 321, 323, 343, 360, 409
(n. 49), 420 (n. 17)
Kinoy, Arthur, 354
‘‘Kissing case,’’ 213, 214
Kochiyama, Yori and Billy, 11
Ku Klux Klan, 129, 212, 220, 319
Labor movement, 158–59, 166, 263, 333;
Baker’s work with, 5, 132–35, 344; and


--- PAGE 484 ---
index 461
organizer training, 73–74; and
Workers Education Project, 92–98
‘‘Lack of Thought Cripples the South’’
(Baker), 289
Ladner, Dorie, 256, 317, 334
Ladner, Joyce, 102, 314, 317, 334, 358–59,
361–62, 420 (n. 17)
Lampkin, Daisy, 110–11, 124
Lance, Emma, 101
Land ownership, 31–32, 36–37, 43, 44
Lawson, James, 241, 246, 263
Leadership: and ‘‘outsider within,’’ 4, 81,
107, 173–74, 367, 370–72; Baker’s phi-
losophy of, 167–68, 170–71, 188–89,
193, 195, 226, 244, 273–74, 280, 285,
347, 360, 366, 421 (n. 38); Baker’s vs.
King’s style of, 170, 172, 188–89, 191–
92, 283; civil rights movement poli-
tics of, 170–95; students’ ‘‘group-
centered,’’ 245, 259; SNCC’s approach
to, 273–74, 279, 365–66; and class,
279; by women in grassroots situa-
tions, 291–92, 297–98; male-centered
tradition of, 297; and black fears of
white volunteer takeovers in, 315,
324; and situational democracy, 368;
and conditional insider concept, 422
(n. 60)
Lee, Chana Kai, 114, 365, 422 (n. 56)
Lee, Herbert, 303–4
Lee, Oscar, 164
Leﬂore, John, 147
Left-wing politics: Baker’s introduction
to, 66, 68, 80, 87, 94–97, 104, 163–64;
and worker education schools, 73–74,
93–94; and CIO unions, 132–35; and
NAACP, 150–51; and third parties,
158–59; and anticommunism, 159,
163, 235; and civil rights activists,
221–22; and Bradens, 231–33; SCLC
distancing from, 250; Bob Moses’s
background in, 251; and Rustin, 264;
and SCEF civil liberties conference,
288–89; Baker’s ties with, 354, 355–
56, 372. See also Communism; Com-
munist Party; Socialism
Levison, Bea, 151, 398 (n. 4)
Levison, Stanley, 162–64, 168, 178, 179,
185, 234, 250; in King’s inner circle,
173, 174, 195, 401 (n. 16); and FBI sur-
veillance of Baker, 403 (n. 2)
Lewis, David Levering, 77
Lewis, Earl, 24, 277, 411 (n. 17)
Lewis, John, 265, 269, 275, 282, 314, 318,
346
Liberal Party, 72, 157–60, 164
‘‘Lift as we climb’’ motto, 18
‘‘Light on a Dark Continent’’ (Baker), 99
Lipsitz, George, 74–75
Literacy, 43, 44, 299, 327
Little Rock, Ark., 153–54, 220, 297
Littleton, N.C.: Baker’s youth in, 14, 19–
20, 30–45, 102; black electorate in,
38–39; Baker’s adult attachment to,
86, 131, 161
Louisiana, 224, 261. See also Shreveport,
La.
Love, Edgar, 287
Lovestone, Jay, 72, 94, 96–97, 158
Lowenstein, Allard, 308, 313, 315, 338,
340–41, 343
Lowndes County, Ala., 273
Lowndes County Freedom Organization,
345
Lunch-counter sit-ins, 195, 216, 237–38,
263
Lynching, 41, 107
Lynd, Staughton, 326
Lynd, Theron, 317
Lynn, Conrad, 92–94, 96, 98, 213
Malcolm X (El Haj Malik El Shabazz), 11,
210, 212, 235, 255, 387 (n. 61); as-
sassination of, 345
Malone, Orsey, 168
Manis, Andrew, 218
Marable, Manning, 88
March on Washington, 313
Marion, John, 413 (n. 68)
Marshall, Herbert, 111
Marshall, Thurgood, 4, 127, 138, 141, 157,
371
Martinsville, Va., 116
Martuoucci, Agnes, 94
Marxism, 74, 97, 372, 392 (n. 7)
Masculinity concepts, 295–96
Mass Party Organizing Committee
(MPOC), 10, 354, 372


--- PAGE 485 ---
462 index
McCarran Internal Security Act of 1950,
163, 234, 289
McCarran-Walter Immigration Act of
1952, 163
McCarthy, Joseph, 163
McCarthyism, 159, 161, 163, 231, 235, 289,
387 (n. 61)
McComb, Miss., 293, 298, 303–6; Non-
violent High School of, 326
McDew, Charles (Chuck), 262, 268, 269,
296, 306
McFerren, John, 236, 277, 288
McFerren, Viola, 277, 288
McGhee, Laura, 307
McGhee, Willie, 232
McLaurin, Charles, 295
Mencken, H. L., 80
Meredith, James, 267, 346
Messenger, 80
MFDP. See Mississippi Freedom Demo-
cratic Party
Middle class. See Social class
Militancy, 210, 211–16, 238; and Black
Panthers, 216, 345; as self-defense,
216, 302, 317, 322–25, 345, 403–4
(nn. 3, 4); and Alabama Christian
Movement for Human Rights, 218,
221; and SNCC, 239, 282, 284, 316,
317, 343, 346; NAACP’s legal strategy
vs., 285; by female activists, 292, 294–
95; and macho nationalist rhetoric,
310–22; and black power, 346
Miller, Dorothy. See Zellner, Dorothy Mil-
ler
The Miner’s Canary (Guinier and Torres),
368
Mississippi: grassroots movement in, 10,
11, 185–86, 189, 261, 267, 273, 276,
286, 298–329; violence in, 161–62,
185–86, 210, 212, 299, 303–4, 307,
311–13, 325, 335, 337, 341; and Free-
dom Rides, 267; and Freedom
Schools, 295, 299–300, 326–29; and
Freedom Summer, 299, 301, 303, 313–
14, 320–25; racist reputation of, 299,
300; and ‘‘Black Power’’ slogan, 346
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
(MFDP), 10, 238, 300, 303, 330–42, 344
Mitchell, Clarence, Jr., 394 (n. 65)
Mondale, Walter, 338
Monroe, N.C., 213, 214–15
Montgomery, Ala., 127, 142, 162–63, 174–
75
Montgomery bus boycott, 127, 142, 161–
62, 168, 172, 188, 195, 239; as grass-
roots activism, 170, 171; SCLC’s evolu-
tion from, 173; and women activists,
176, 297; Parks as instigator of, 195,
292–93; and black middle-class re-
spectability, 292–93. See also Nixon,
E. D.; Robinson, Joanne Gibson
Montgomery Improvement Association
(MIA), 167, 171, 297; Institute on Non-
violence, 187–88
Moore, Amzie, 176, 186, 269, 301–6, 307,
308, 323, 374
Moore, Audley (‘‘Queen Mother’’), 73
Moore, Doug, 240
Moore, Harriet, 129
Moore, Harry T., 129, 138
Moore, Irene, 253
Moore, Richard, 67, 98
Moore, Ruth, 155, 176, 186, 269, 301–6
Morehouse, Henry, 383 (n. 23)
Morris, Aldon, 175, 410 (n. 71)
Morris, Charles Sachel, Jr., 361
Morrow, E. Frederic (Fred), 111, 114, 124
Moses, Robert (Bob), 269, 288, 293, 374,
377, 401 (n. 16), 410 (n. 2), 419 (n. 1);
background of, 248–52; on Baker’s
presence, 257; outreach activities of,
261–62; and anticommunism, 290;
and Mississippi campaign, 301–3,
306, 308, 318, 330; and white volun-
teers, 313, 315, 321; and SNCC politics,
314–16, 342–43; on nonviolence vs.
self-defense, 323–24; and Freedom
Schools, 326, 327; and Mississippi
Freedom Democratic Party, 333, 335;
Baker’s inﬂuence on, 408 (n. 23)
Mueller, Carol, 310
Murray, Pauli, 4, 66, 73, 158, 214, 265–66,
296, 374; background of, 71, 72; and
friendship with Baker, 72, 96, 157–58;
and Workers Education Movement,
92, 93, 94; political views of, 96, 235;
and NAACP friendships, 121–22, 140–
41; on Baker’s inﬂuence, 272


--- PAGE 486 ---
index 463
Mutual aid tradition, 37–38, 43, 86, 88,
89
NAACP. See National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
Naison, Mark, 98
Nash, Diane, 4, 246–47, 248, 259, 265,
266, 269, 270, 288, 366
Nashville, Tenn., student activists, 241,
246–47, 269
Natchez, Miss., 307, 312
National Association for the Advance-
ment of Colored People (NAACP), 4,
9–10, 105–47, 306; and Baker as ﬁeld
organizer, 13, 72, 102–37, 171, 261,
347; and status of women staff mem-
bers, 106–7, 110, 121, 137, 297; ﬁrst
black head of, 107; founding and
growth of, 107–8; legal-political
agenda of, 107, 127, 280, 285; racial
equality agenda of, 107, 109; domi-
nant personalities of, 108–10; internal
conﬂicts of, 108, 110, 138, 143; Baker’s
grievances with, 110, 122–24, 142–47,
171; popular participation in, 116;
anticommunism of, 134, 150–51, 157,
160–61, 177, 234, 235, 287, 407
(n. 98); women’s contribution to,
135–37, 297; and Baker as director of
branches, 137–47, 180; and branches
vs. national ofﬁce, 139–40, 149–50,
171, 280, 285; leadership training con-
ferences, 140–42; and Baker as New
York City branch president, 148–69,
177–78, 235; and leftist politics, 150–
51; and National Emergency Civil
Rights Mobilization, 150, 151; moder-
ate stance of, 154; and New York City
police brutality charges, 156–57;
SCLC rivalry with, 174, 176–77, 182,
186, 263–64; and black militancy ad-
vocates, 213; and Robert Williams
case, 213–15; and SNCC, 264, 282,
343; and Fayette Freedom Tent City,
276; and social class, 279; and Albany
Movement, 282, 284; civil rights phi-
losophy of, 285; hierarchal structure
of, 297; male leadership of, 297, 311;
and Mississippi branch ofﬁce, 301,
302; and Mississippi Freedom Demo-
cratic Party, 337; Baker’s status with,
367, 370
National Association of Colored Women’s
Clubs, 18
National (Black Baptist) Women’s Con-
vention, 18
National Committee for Rural Schools,
164
National Council of Churches, 327
National Council of Negro Women, 71, 111
National Emergency Civil Rights Mobili-
zation, 150, 151
National Free Angela Coalition, 352
National Guardian, 344
National Lawyers Guild, 344, 413 (n. 58)
National Negro Business League, 89
National News, 56, 91, 92
National Puerto Rican Independence
rally, 354
National Sharecroppers Fund, 164, 165
National Student Association, 252
Nation of Islam, 210
‘‘The Negro Church, the Nucleus of the
Negroes’ Cultural Development’’
(Baker), 58–59
Negro History Club, 69
New Deal, 91–92, 231
Newell, Jenny, 32
New Pilgrim Baptist Church (Birming-
ham, Ala.), 211, 212, 216
Newport News, Va., 133–34, 137
New York, N.Y.: Baker’s reform activities
in, 10, 148–61, 178; Baker’s ﬁrst visit
to, 58; NAACP branch in, 141, 148–69,
177–78, 235; school reform move-
ment, 149, 151–56, 354; and Liberal
Party politics, 157–58. See also Harlem
New York Board of Education, 152–53
New York Cancer Committee, 147
New York City Council, 157–60
New York Herald Tribune, 344
New York Police Department, 156
New York Public Library, 69
New York Telegram and Sun, 156
New York Times, 104, 213, 263
New York Urban League, 91
Niagara Movement, 107
Nixon, E. D., 142, 162, 188


--- PAGE 487 ---
464 index
Nkrumah, Kwame, 348
Nonviolence, 175, 189; Baker’s question-
ing of, 193–94, 211–12, 216, 224, 295;
and Nashville student leaders, 241,
269; and SNCC direct action, 268,
270; self-defense vs., 294, 322–25,
345, 403–4 (nn. 3, 4); growing crit-
icism of, 345–46
Norfolk, Va., 14, 24–30, 39, 121
Norfolk Journal and Guide, 56
North Carolina, 24, 29, 35, 86, 192; Sec-
ond Congressional District, 38–39, 41.
See also speciﬁc place names
North Carolina State Baptist Convention,
48
Northside Center for Child Development
(Harlem), 152
Norton, Eleanor Holmes. See Holmes
Norton, Eleanor
‘‘Nothing Too Dear to Pay for Freedom’’
(Baker), 211–12
Nottaway County, Va., 116, 117
Novak, Robert, 344
Oakland, Calif., 216
O’Dell, Jack, 249
Omolade, Barbara Jones. See Jones,
Barbara
O’Neal, John, 327
135th Street Library (Harlem), 69, 72
137th Street YWCA (Harlem), 70–72, 75
Operation Freedom, 286
Oppressed people. See Poor and op-
pressed people
Organic intellectual, 6, 362–63, 421
(n. 30); deﬁnition of, 74–75
Orr, Catherine, 361
‘‘Outsider within’’: Baker as, 4, 81, 173–
74, 367, 370–72
Packinghouse Workers Union, 263
Padayachi, Lloyd, 355
Palmer, Bertha, 32
Pan-Africanism, 99, 109
Papa Tight, 224–25, 277
Parchman Prison (Miss.), 267, 294, 319
Parents in Action (against Educational
Discrimination), 152, 153, 154–55, 178
Parker, Mack Charles, 210, 212
Parks, Rosa, 127, 142, 162, 171, 175, 195,
292, 350
Participatory democracy, 309, 310, 364,
368–70
Payne, Bruce, 312
Payne, Charles, 38, 86, 96, 301, 311, 321,
334, 359, 410 (nn. 2, 71)
Peacock, Joseph Leishman, 50
Peacock, Willie, 334
People’s Voice, 77
Peplow, Michael, 89
Perry, Leslie, 141
Petersen, Walter, 164
Philadelphia, Miss., 335, 337
Pickens, William, 137
Pine Bluffs, Ark., 273
Pine County, Miss., 293
Pittsburgh Courier, 80, 82, 111
Plessy v. Ferguson, 23
Police brutality, 10, 67, 117, 120, 149, 156–
57, 225
Politics of respectability, 128, 223, 226,
250, 259, 394 (n. 57), 405 (n. 63). See
also Uplift ideology
Poll tax, 25
Polsgrove, Carol, 163
Ponder, Annelle, 318–19
Poor and oppressed people: Baker’s be-
lief in, 6, 15, 45, 194, 225, 226, 233,
272, 341, 363, 364; self-determination
of, 100, 167–68, 274, 285, 300, 305–6,
348, 362; and ‘‘hidden transcript of
opposition,’’ 194–95, 411 (n. 17); civil
rights of, 233, 273–98; ‘‘semi-public
transcript’’ of, 278; SNCC’s focus on,
279, 299–329, 343, 364, 365–66; and
female activists’ style, 291–93, 297; as
Freedom School students, 329; and
Mississippi Freedom Democratic
Party, 331–32, 333; collective wisdom
of, 363, 365; radical democratic em-
powerment of, 368–69
Poston, Ted, 77
Pouissant, Alvin, 251
Powell, Adam Clayton, Jr., 157, 182, 263–
64, 336
Praxis, 271; deﬁnition of, 410 (n. 75)
Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom, 176–77,
182


--- PAGE 488 ---
index 465
Profeminists, 367
Public schools. See Education; School de-
segregation
Public sphere concept, 387 (n. 58)
Public transportation: and Jim Crow sit-
uations, 124–27; Supreme Court de-
segregation ruling on, 171; and
segregation challenges, 220, 221, 223–
24, 263, 265–71, 292, 293; interstate
desegregation of, 267. See also
Montgomery bus boycott
Puerto Rican independence movement,
6, 10, 100, 156, 354–55, 356
Puerto Ricans, 149, 151–56, 354
Puerto Rican Solidarity Committee, 156
Puerto Rican Solidarity Organization
(PRSO), 354
Quarterman, Ola Mae, 292
Race riots, 25, 29, 30, 67, 121, 133, 340
Racial segregation: effects on black life,
16, 24–25, 40; and ‘‘separate but
equal’’ ruling, 23; and poor public
schools, 29–30; and black colleges,
49; and black accommodationism, 51,
107, 120; in armed forces, 53–54, 107;
in World War I era, 53–54; and black
cooperatives, 88; and all-black self-
help needs, 99; and Baker’s NAACP
organizing work, 106, 124–31; Bir-
mingham as apotheosis of, 111, 216–
17; and physical dangers, 124–29,
185–86, 194, 212; U.S. Supreme Court
rulings against, 152, 153, 167, 171; stu-
dent challenges to, 195, 216, 237–
38, 239; activist challenges to, 223–
24, 265–71. See also Civil rights
movement
Racism: historical signiﬁcance of, 3, 4; in
multiracial coalitions, 6, 324–25;
Baker’s childhood insulation from,
22–23, 39–40; post–World War I, 54;
and capitalism, 88; and Communist
Party, 97, 287; NAACP’s founding as
challenge to, 107; charges of against
AFL, 134; and Clarks’ doll studies, 152;
militant response to, 211–16; and red-
baiting, 287; Mississippi’s reputation
for, 298, 300; class analysis of, 364;
democratic process and, 369. See also
Racial segregation; Vigilante violence
Radical democracy, 368–69
Radical Equations (Moses and Cobb),
377, 408 (n. 23), 410 (n. 2)
Radical humanism, 194, 293, 369, 372
Radical intellectual, 363–64
Radicalism: and Baker, 63, 66, 68, 75,
216, 222, 244, 363–64; in 1930s
Harlem, 67, 71, 73, 84; spectrum of in
Workers Education Program, 93–94;
national NAACP dissociation from,
150; of SNCC activists, 244, 259, 265,
314, 333
Rainach, W. M., 229
Raleigh, N.C., 9, 14, 46, 244, 373; racial
climate of, 54
Rand, Carrie Sherfey, 94
Randolph, A. Philip, 4, 80, 96, 158, 176–
77, 235, 337, 371; and In Friendship,
164–65, 166, 167
Rand School for Social Science, 94
Rape, 8, 210
Rauh, Joseph, 333, 338, 339, 340, 341, 418
(n. 33)
Reagan, Ronald, 353
Reagon, Bernice Johnson, 8–9, 12, 102,
114, 194, 413 (n. 62)
Reagon, Cordell, 282
Reconstruction era, 48–49
Red-baiting. See Anticommunism
Regional Council for Negro Leadership,
301
Republican Party, 261–62, 338
Richards, Dona, 318
Richardson, Gloria, 314
Richardson, Judy, 294, 323, 328, 349
Richmond, Va., 114–16
Ricks, Willie, 346
Roberts (Robinson), T. J. (Bob) (Ella
Baker’s husband), 57, 66, 101–4, 118,
119, 145, 179, 195, 227
Robeson, Essie, 57, 77
Robeson, Paul, 57, 77, 163
Robinson, Cleveland, 164
Robinson, James, 157, 160
Robinson, Joanne Gibson, 127, 162, 171,
175, 176, 297


--- PAGE 489 ---
466 index
Robinson, Mrs. Virgie, 318
Robinson, Reggie, 306
Robinson, Ruby Doris Smith. See Smith,
Ruby Doris
Robnett, Belinda, 114, 422 (n. 56)
Rock Hill, S.C., 264, 270, 294
Rogers, J. A., 80
Rome, Ga., 140
Roosevelt, Eleanor, 146, 163, 231
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 91, 92, 146, 159
Rose, Ernestine, 69
Ross, Bet (grandmother), 14, 17, 21–22,
24, 30, 31, 36–37, 44
Ross, Everett, 31
Ross, Luke (uncle), 17
Ross, Matthew (uncle), 26
Ross, Mitchell (grandfather), 14, 17, 22,
24, 27, 29–32, 35–37, 40, 44, 58
Ross, Peter (uncle), 26
Ross, Plummer, 31
Ruleville, Miss., 295, 307–8
Rustin, Bayard, 162–64, 168, 178, 193,
249, 351; background and sexual ori-
entation of, 163–64, 179, 263, 264,
401 (n. 28); and SCLC, 170, 173, 174,
178, 179, 195, 250; and SNCC, 263,
339, 343; and Mississippi Freedom
Democratic Party, 338, 339, 341; and
FBI surveillance of Baker, 403 (n. 2)
Sacks, Karen Brodkin, 114, 422 (n. 56)
Said, Edward, 363–64
St. Mark’s Church (Harlem), 255
Salter, John, 291
Samstein, Mendy, 321
SCEF. See Southern Conference Educa-
tion Fund
Schomburg Center for Research in Black
Culture, 7, 69
School desegregation, 223, 297; and New
York City reform movement, 149, 151–
56; Supreme Court ruling on, 152, 153,
167, 176; resistance in South to, 153–
54, 167, 210, 220–21
Schools. See Education
Schuyler, George, 72–73, 77; Baker’s
friendship with, 4, 78–82, 91, 101,
190; anticommunism of, 78, 87, 387
(n. 61); background of, 79–80; and
Young Negroes’ Cooperative League,
83, 84, 86–87, 89, 347
Schuyler, Josephine, 77, 81, 101
Schuyler, Phillipa, 81
Schwerner, Michael, 185, 325, 335, 341
SCLC. See Southern Christian Leadership
Conference
Scott, James, 194–95, 278, 411 (n. 17)
SDS. See Students for a Democratic
Society
Seeger, Pete, 251
Segregation. See Racial segregation
Self-defense. See Militancy
Self-determination, 100, 167–68, 274,
300, 305–6, 347, 362; black power
linked with, 348, 351
Self-help philosophy, 167–68, 170, 188–
89; uplift philosophy vs., 226; indige-
nous leadership and, 280
Sellers, Cleveland, 317, 346, 348, 410
(n. 1)
Selma, Ala., 267, 345–46
‘‘Separate but equal’’ ruling, 23
Sexism: and Baker, 6, 34, 135, 189, 296,
352, 365, 367; of black male leaders,
81, 184, 189, 219, 295, 296, 371; and
SCLC, 174, 184; in black Baptist
church, 184, 219, 220; black gender
conﬂicts over, 309–11; and SNCC,
309, 310, 343, 365; and black na-
tionalism, 310–11, 350; and demo-
cratic process, 369
Sharecroppers, 32, 33, 176, 236, 305, 365;
and Freedom Tent City, 275–77; and
voting rights, 279
Shaw, Stephanie, 15
Shaw Academy and University, 9, 14, 32,
45, 46–63, 185, 240–47, 259, 363
Shaw University Journal, 55, 56
Sherrod, Charles, 269, 282, 284, 306,
309, 314, 321, 343
Shreveport, La., 10, 189, 209–10, 211,
222–30, 244, 252, 277, 291–92
Shuttlesworth, Fred, 211, 212, 217–22,
224, 231, 234, 238, 244, 286; and
Bradens, 287–88, 407 (n. 97)
Shuttlesworth, Ruby, 211, 218, 219–22,
244, 286
Simkins, Modjeska, 286, 412 (n. 40)


--- PAGE 490 ---
index 467
Simone, Nina, 299
Simpkins, C. O. and Dorothy, 194, 211,
222, 223, 224, 226, 227, 228, 229, 244
Sinette, Elinor Des Verney, 69–70
Sit-in movement, 195, 216, 237–40, 263,
264, 294; as basis for new move-
ments, 239–40, 242, 244; leaders of,
246–47
Situational democracy, 368, 422 (n. 59)
16th Street Baptist Church bombing (Bir-
mingham, Ala.), 313
Slavery, 5, 14, 21–23, 31, 36, 43, 48
Smiley, Glen, 240
Smith, Bernice, 226
Smith, Frank, 314, 316
Smith, Lillian, 248
Smith (Robinson), Ruby Doris, 267, 294–
95, 306, 311, 366, 413–14 (nn. 70, 73,
74)
Smith Act, 160
SNCC. See Student Nonviolent Coordi-
nating Committee
SNCC: The New Abolitionists (Zinn), 271
Social class: and Baker’s upbringing, 15–
17, 23–24, 35–36, 38, 41–44, 47, 191;
and black middle-class women’s
values, 15, 20, 21, 52, 62, 112, 128, 184,
256, 291, 292–93, 296, 309, 358; black
Baptist women’s view of, 17, 18–19;
and uplift ideology, 18–19, 66, 225–
26, 297, 358, 365, 405 (n. 63); and or-
ganizational hierarchies, 27, 192, 226,
274; Baker’s view of, 45, 95, 104, 119–
20, 132, 195, 219, 225, 226, 300–301,
305–6; and Shaw Academy and Uni-
versity values, 49–53; and accom-
modationism, 51, 107, 120; and
Harlem cross-class initiatives, 72; and
Marxist/socialist theory, 74; Du Bois’s
view of, 88; and NAACP, 107, 120,
122–24, 263; and black politics, 119–
20, 122–24, 279; and politics of re-
spectability, 128, 223, 225, 226, 250,
259, 394 (n. 57), 405 (n. 63); and
SCLC, 175–77, 279; and King’s leader-
ship, 189–90, 191; and black mili-
tancy, 218–19, 302; and black leader-
ship, 274; NAACP vs. SNCC emphasis,
276; and SNCC, 279, 305–6, 365, 369;
and voting rights, 279–80; and fe-
male civil rights protesters, 292–93;
and Montgomery bus boycott, 292–
93; and racism, 364; and democratic
process, 369. See also Elitism; Poor
and oppressed people; Working class
Socialism, 38, 57, 67, 68, 74, 89, 232;
Baker’s belief in, 38, 371–72; and
Lovestonites, 72, 96–97; and coopera-
tive leagues, 86, 87, 88; and Workers
Education Program, 93–95
Socialist Party, 71, 94, 164
Socialist Workers Party, 213
Soledad prison activists, 356
Solomon, Maude, 32, 42
South Africa, 6, 58, 355, 356
Southern black church. See Black Baptist
church
Southern Christian Leadership Con-
ference (SCLC), 168, 173–95, 275,
306; Baker’s roles with, 4, 10, 35, 139,
170–83, 186–89, 209–38, 261, 367,
370; Baker’s doubts about, 170–71,
195, 243; founding of, 170, 172–77,
178; NAACP disagreements with, 174,
176–77, 182, 186, 263–64; and anti-
communism, 175, 177, 250; main-
stream politics of, 175, 177; male
dominance of, 175–76, 183–89, 311;
nonviolence emphasis of, 175, 346;
and social class, 175, 176, 177, 279; ini-
tial aims of, 176, 345; voting rights
projects, 179–83, 236, 237; executive
director post, 185, 186, 238; internal
problems, 186; and King’s celebrity,
188, 241; Baker’s departure from, 189,
238, 253; and student activist move-
ment, 240, 242–43, 262; public image
concerns of, 250; and SNCC, 282, 283;
freedom and the First Amendment
conference, 287, 288–89
Southern Conference Education Fund
(SCEF), 221, 268, 277, 344; as inter-
racial, southern-based group, 211;
Baker’s role with, 231–38, 286–98,
304, 332, 344, 352; civil liberties cam-
paign of, 286–90; tribute to Baker,
350–51; and ‘‘Free Angela’’ campaign,
352–53


--- PAGE 491 ---
468 index
Southern Conference on Human Welfare
(SCHW), 231
Southern Exposure, 329
Southern Negro Youth Congress, 353, 412
(n. 40)
Southern Patriot, 245–46, 276, 289, 325
Southern Regional Council, 268, 306
Southwest Georgia Project, 321
Southwide Student Leadership Con-
ference on Nonviolent Resistance to
Segregation, 240, 241–47, 259
Spearman, Alice, 221–22
Spingarn, Joel, 108
Stein, Annie, 151, 152, 161, 354
Stembridge, Jane, 247–48, 249, 252, 263,
275, 321, 413 (n. 73), 420 (n. 13)
Steptoe, E. W., 323
Stoper, Emily, 416 (n. 80)
Strassner, William Russell, 242
Stride toward Freedom (King), 186–87,
253
Student activists. See Sit-in movement;
Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee
Student Friendship Fund (Shaw Univer-
sity), 58
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Com-
mittee (SNCC), 214, 239–72, 368;
Baker’s inﬂuence on, 4, 6, 10, 139,
166–67, 273–74, 278–79, 297–98,
304–5, 310, 315–18, 342, 357, 358–60,
362, 364–65, 368, 373; Baker’s found-
ing role with, 13, 243–45, 259, 260,
261, 269–72; Young Negroes’ Cooper-
ative League parallels with, 90–91;
grassroots organizing by, 91, 262, 270,
273–98; autonomy wishes of, 189,
239–43, 282; mobilization networks
of, 238, 268; founding of, 239–47,
262–63, 321; early organizers of, 247–
53; radical direction of, 259, 314, 333;
arrests and jailing of members, 263,
264, 267, 293, 294, 303–4, 320; refusal
of bail by, 264, 294; and Freedom
Rides, 265–68; as movement’s shock
troops, 267; political path meeting
(1961), 267–70; allies and afﬁliations
of, 268; SCEF relationship with, 268,
286, 304; tactics of, 268, 282, 284; in-
ternal politics of, 269, 306, 322, 346,
348; two wings of, 269–70; political
and cultural evolution of, 278–81; ten-
sions with other civil rights groups,
281–82; and Albany Movement, 282–
86; and civil liberties, 287, 289; and
gender politics, 291–98, 309–11, 365;
women’s prominence in, 294, 311; and
coming of age process, 295; Mis-
sissippi campaigns of, 299–329; and
white volunteers, 306, 313–14, 315–16,
321, 343, 347; and sexism, 309, 310,
343, 365; and participatory democ-
racy, 310; and black nationalism, 311;
core leadership of, 314; political path
meeting (1963), 314–17; increasing
militancy of, 316, 317, 343; and Mis-
sissippi Freedom Democratic Party,
331–39; informal vs. disciplined struc-
ture debate, 342–43; political path
meeting (1964), 342–44; liberal and
conservative attacks on, 343–44;
Baker’s continued loyalty to, 344–45,
355; and black power, 344–52; Baker’s
eroding relationship with, 346–47,
349–50; expulsion of white volunteers
from, 347, 348, 349; and revolutionary
movements, 348, 350, 355; demise of,
356; inverted social hierarchy in, 365–
66, 369; reunion eulogy for Baker, 373
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS),
6, 268, 288, 310, 366, 368
Student Voice, 262, 275–76
Sunﬂower County, Miss., 307
Supreme Court, U.S., 23, 107, 152, 171,
285
Sweet Honey in the Rock (singing
group), 12, 413 (n. 62)
Taconic Foundation, 268, 306
Taitt-Magubane, Lenora, 8, 253, 257, 360,
408 (n. 27), 409 (n. 49)
Talented Tenth, 51–52
Taylor, Isabel, 92
Tenant farming, 14, 38, 44, 167, 176, 274–
78
Tennessee. See Fayette County; Haywood
County; Nashville
Terrell County, Ga., 258, 345–46


--- PAGE 492 ---
index 469
Thelwell, Michael, 314, 335–36
There is a Fountain (Lynn), 98
Third World Women’s Alliance, 352
Thomas, Henry, 288
Thomas, Norman, 164, 165, 166
Till, Emmett, 162, 185
Tilley, John, 185, 186
Tillich, Paul, 250
Tillinghast, Muriel, 311
Tillow, Walter, 335, 336
Tinsley, John M., 114–17, 160
Tinsley, Ruth, 115
Torres, Gerald, 368
‘‘Toward a Mass Party of the People’’
(Kinoy), 354
Towles, Shepard, 275
Transportation. See Interstate travel;
Public transportation
Travis, Brenda, 292, 293, 304
Truman, Harry, 150, 231
Ture, Kwame. See Carmichael, Stokely
Turnbow, Hartman, and Sweets, 323
Tyson, Tim, 214
United Auto Workers (UAW), 133, 333,
337
United Christian Movement Inc. (UCMI),
209–10, 222, 224, 225, 227
United Electrical Workers, 344
United Nations Special Committee on
Decolonization, 354–55
Uplift ideology, 18–19, 66, 225–26, 297,
358, 365, 405 (n. 63); self-
determination vs., 305–6
Urban migration, 54, 66
Urban riots. See Race riots
Vann, Robert, 82, 88, 111
VEP. See Voter Education Project
Vietnam War, 6, 101, 268, 343, 344, 354,
355, 356
‘‘Views and Reviews’’ (Schuyler), 80
Vigilante violence, 24, 25, 30, 40, 41;
post-World War I increase in, 54; and
NAACP activists, 107, 124, 129; as
southern reprisal, 154, 174–75, 176,
185–86, 212, 214, 220, 221, 224, 227,
237, 312–14; and Till murder, 162;
nonviolence in face of, 183; Baker’s
grassroots work against, 210; black
militancy in face of, 210, 211–16; and
freedom riders, 265, 267; and women
activists, 291–92, 311–12; murder of
three Freedom Summer workers, 299,
325, 335, 341; in Mississippi, 303–4,
307–9, 311–12, 318–21, 335; and white
volunteers, 321, 325; and SNCC self-
defense measures, 322–25
Virginia, 25, 114–17. See also speciﬁc place
names
Vivien, C. T., 286
‘‘The Voteless Speak’’ (civil rights hear-
ings), 236–37
Voter Education Project (VEP), 268–69,
306, 315
Voting rights, 24, 25, 117, 236, 280; and
majority-black districts, 38–39, 41; for
women, 54, 111; NAACP legal victories
for, 107; national NAACP campaign
for, 150; as SCLC aim, 176, 177, 179–
83; and Civil Rights Commission, 177,
183, 222–23, 228, 235; and Shreve-
port registration campaign, 222, 227–
29; and obstructionist tactics, 229;
Braden and Baker mock hearings on,
236–37; SNCC campaigns for, 267,
269, 270, 299–300, 306–8, 313–14,
317–20; NAACP vs. SNCC approach
to, 276; and black class divisions,
279–80; and Albany Movement, 282–
86; and registration drives, 282–86,
315; and grassroots campaign, 299–
329; and Freedom Vote mock elec-
tion, 308–9, 311–12; and vigilante
violence, 320; Freedom School prepa-
ration for, 327; and radical democ-
racy, 368–69
Wade, Andrew and Charlotte, 232
Wagner, Robert, 153, 154, 155
Wahman, Tom, 327
Waiters, Viola Lewis, 71
Walker, Eugene, 189
Walker, Wyatt T., 238, 242, 249, 287–88,
289–90
Wallace, George, 313
Wallace, Mamie Love, 226
Ware, Bill, 349


--- PAGE 493 ---
470 index
Warren County, N.C., 35, 37, 38–40
Warren County Sunday School Associa-
tion, 17
Washington, Booker T., 51, 107
Watkins, Hollis, 304, 317–18, 324, 334
Watkins-Owens, Irma, 73
Weaver, Alonzo (Lonzie), 32
Wells (Barnett), Ida B., 127, 128
WEP. See Workers Education Project
West, Cornel, 218, 357, 421 (n. 30)
West Indian News, 56, 98
White, Deborah Gray, 71–72
White, Walter, 77, 107, 109–11, 114, 115,
140, 141, 149, 180, 271; and Baker, 4,
34, 118, 123, 124, 134–37, 142–45; per-
sonality of, 118, 138, 143; Crump’s
complaints about, 121
White Citizens Councils, 229, 277
Wilkins, Roy, 77, 112, 121, 123, 124, 149,
164, 176, 177; and NAACP, 140, 141,
150; and King, 178; and militancy ad-
vocates, 213; uplift ideology of, 225–
26; and black politics, 263–64; and
SNCC’s protest actions, 282; and Mis-
sissippi Freedom Democratic Party,
338, 341
Williams, Early B., 277
Williams, Mabel, 215
Williams, Robert, 210, 213, 214, 215, 216
Williams, Samuel, 181
Woman suffrage, 54, 111
Women. See Black women; Feminism;
Gender roles; Sexism
Women activists, 66, 71–73, 114; Baker’s
relationships with, 4, 294, 352; in
Harlem, 71–72, 73; NAACP’s underap-
preciation of, 106–7, 110; dangers
faced by, 114–15, 294–95, 311–12, 314,
318–19; SCLC’s undervaluation of,
175–76, 184–89; in Shreveport move-
ment, 226; Baker as role model for,
246, 247, 256–57, 293–94, 296–97,
317, 358, 366–67; in SNCC, 246–49,
252–53, 294–95, 311; in grassroots
organizing, 291–98; Hamer as central
to Mississippi movement, 307–8, 365;
and Mississippi Freedom Democratic
Party, 334; bridge organizers, 422
(n. 56)
Women’s Auxiliary Progressive Baptist
Missionary Association, 48
Women’s Emergency Committee, 352
Women’s Political Council, 162, 171
Workers (Communist) Party, 96, 97
Worker’s Defense League, 164
Workers Education Project (WEP), 72, 75,
91–98, 132, 326, 359, 361
Working class, 45, 74, 218, 219, 223; and
labor movement, 132–35; and bottom-
up leadership, 226; and restricted
gender roles, 297
Works Progress Administration (WPA),
13, 72, 91
World’s Fair Boosters and Friends of Af-
rica, 91
World War I, 53–54, 66
World War II, 9–10, 105, 107, 171; labor
organizing and, 132–35; social impact
of, 132
Wounded Knee struggle, 356
The Wretched of the Earth (Fanon), 348
Yancy, Bobby, 409 (n. 49)
Yergan, Efﬁe, 52–53, 56, 57, 62
Yergan, Max, 57–58
Young, Andrew, 300
Young, Iris Marion, 422 (n. 59)
Young Communist League, 94, 163
Younge, Sammy, 345
Young Negroes’ Cooperative League
(YNCL), 56, 82–91, 99, 102, 261, 347
Young People’s Forum, 70, 75
Youth Committee of 100 against Lynch-
ing. See Committee of 100 against
Lynching
YWCA, 58, 69, 70–71; and civil rights
movement, 252, 253, 409 (n. 49);
Baker’s Atlanta job with, 260–61, 286
Zedong, Mao, 215
Zellner, Bob, 12, 268, 321, 348, 349
Zellner, Dorothy Miller (Dottie), 270,
314, 348, 349
Zinn, Howard, 244, 257–58, 271, 319; on
Albany Movement, 283–84, 285–86;
and SNCC December 1963 meeting,
314–15, 316


--- PAGE 494 ---
gender and american culture
Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement: A Radical Democratic Vision
by Barbara Ransby (2003)
Signatures of Citizenship: Petitioning, Antislavery, and Women’s Political Identity
by Susan Zaeske (2003)
Love on the Rocks: Men, Women, and Alcohol in Post–World War II America
by Lori Rotskoff (2002)
The Veiled Garvey: The Life and Times of Amy Jacques Garvey
by Ula Yvette Taylor (2002)
Working Cures: Health, Healing, and Power on Southern Slave Plantations
by Sharla Fett (2002)
Southern History across the Color Line
by Nell Irvin Painter (2002)
The Artistry of Anger: Black and White Women’s Literature in America, 1820–1860
by Linda M. Grasso (2002)
Too Much to Ask: Black Women in the Era of Integration
by Elizabeth Higginbotham (2001)
Imagining Medea: Rhodessa Jones and Theater for Incarcerated Women
by Rena Fraden (2001)
Painting Professionals: Women Artists and the Development of Modern American Art,
1870–1920
by Kirsten Swinth (2001)
Remaking Respectability: African American Women in Interwar Detroit
by Victoria W. Wolcott (2001)
Ida B. Wells-Barnett and American Reform, 1880–1930
by Patricia A. Schechter (2001)
Taking Haiti: Military Occupation and the Culture of U.S. Imperialism, 1915–1940
by Mary A. Renda (2001)
Before Jim Crow: The Politics of Race in Postemancipation Virginia
by Jane Dailey (2000)
Captain Ahab Had a Wife: New England Women and the Whaleﬁshery, 1720–1870
by Lisa Norling (2000)
Civilizing Capitalism: The National Consumers’ League, Women’s Activism,
and Labor Standards in the New Deal Era
by Landon R. Y. Storrs (2000)


--- PAGE 495 ---
Rank Ladies: Gender and Cultural Hierarchy in American Vaudeville
by M. Alison Kibler (1999)
Strangers and Pilgrims: Female Preaching in America, 1740–1845
by Catherine A. Brekus (1998)
Sex and Citizenship in Antebellum America
by Nancy Isenberg (1998)
Yours in Sisterhood: Ms. Magazine and the Promise of Popular Feminism
by Amy Erdman Farrell (1998)
We Mean to Be Counted: White Women and Politics in Antebellum Virginia
by Elizabeth R. Varon (1998)
Women Against the Good War: Conscientious Objection and Gender on
the American Home Front, 1941–1947
by Rachel Waltner Goossen (1997)
Toward an Intellectual History of Women: Essays by Linda K. Kerber
(1997)
Gender and Jim Crow: Women and the Politics of White Supremacy in North Carolina,
1896–1920
by Glenda Elizabeth Gilmore (1996)
Delinquent Daughters: Protecting and Policing Adolescent Female Sexuality
in the United States, 1885–1920
by Mary E. Odem (1995)
U.S. History as Women’s History: New Feminist Essays
edited by Linda K. Kerber, Alice Kessler-Harris, and Kathryn Kish Sklar (1995)
Common Sense and a Little Fire: Women and Working-Class Politics in the United States,
1900–1965
by Annelise Orleck (1995)
How Am I to Be Heard?: Letters of Lillian Smith
edited by Margaret Rose Gladney (1993)
Entitled to Power: Farm Women and Technology, 1913–1963
by Katherine Jellison (1993)
Revising Life: Sylvia Plath’s Ariel Poems
by Susan R. Van Dyne (1993)
Made From This Earth: American Women and Nature
by Vera Norwood (1993)
Unruly Women: The Politics of Social and Sexual Control in the Old South
by Victoria E. Bynum (1992)
The Work of Self-Representation: Lyric Poetry in Colonial New England
by Ivy Schweitzer (1991)
Labor and Desire: Women’s Revolutionary Fiction in Depression America
by Paula Rabinowitz (1991)


--- PAGE 496 ---
Community of Suffering and Struggle: Women, Men, and the Labor Movement
in Minneapolis, 1915–1945
by Elizabeth Faue (1991)
All That Hollywood Allows: Re-reading Gender in 1950s Melodrama
by Jackie Byars (1991)
Doing Literary Business: American Women Writers in the Nineteenth Century
by Susan Coultrap-McQuin (1990)
Ladies, Women, and Wenches: Choice and Constraint in
Antebellum Charleston and Boston
by Jane H. Pease and William H. Pease (1990)
The Secret Eye: The Journal of Ella Gertrude Clanton Thomas, 1848–1889
edited by Virginia Ingraham Burr, with an introduction by Nell Irvin Painter (1990)
Second Stories: The Politics of Language, Form, and Gender in Early American Fictions
by Cynthia S. Jordan (1989)
Within the Plantation Household: Black and White Women of the Old South
by Elizabeth Fox-Genovese (1988)
The Limits of Sisterhood: The Beecher Sisters on Women’s Rights and Woman’s Sphere
by Jeanne Boydston, Mary Kelley, and Anne Margolis (1988)


--- PAGE 497 ---


