=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Behind the Mask of Chivalry The Making of the Second Ku Klux Klan.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 327
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:46:15.602336
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
BEHIND THE MASK
OF CHIVALRY


--- PAGE 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 4 ---
BEHIND THE MASK
OF CHIVALRY
The Making of the
Second Ku Klux Klan
NANCY MACLEAN
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
New York Oxford


--- PAGE 5 ---
Oxford University Press
Oxford New York
Athens Auckland Bangkok Bombay
Calcutta Cape Town Dar es Salaam Delhi
Florence Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madras Madrid Melbourne
Mexico City Nairobi Paris Singapore
Taipei Tokyo Toronto
and associated companies in
Berlin Ibadan
Copyright © 1994 by Nancy MacLean
First published in 1994 by Oxford University Press, Inc.,
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016-4314
First issued as an Oxford University Press paperback, 1995
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
MacLean, Nancy.
Behind the mask of chivalry :
the making of the second Ku Klux Klan /
Nancy MacLean.
p. cm.
Revision of thesis (doctoral)—University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-19-507234-0
ISBN 0-19-509836-6 (Pbk.)
1. Ku Klux Klan (1915)—Georgia—Athens. 2. Athens (Ga.)—Race relations.
3. Athens (Ga.)—Social conditions. I. Title.
HS2330.K63M225 1994 322.4'2'0975818—dc20 93-27548
8 10 9
Printed in the United States of America


--- PAGE 6 ---
To my sister, Mary Anne,
my parents, Jack and Ann,
and the memory of my mother, Jeanne


--- PAGE 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 8 ---
Acknowledgments
Sex has shielded me from some of the illusions and compulsions
of my subjects. The fantasy of the "self-made man," for one, was
never an option. So many people and institutions helped with the
writing of this book in so many different ways that a full enumera-
tion of their contributions would itself fill a book. But some de-
serve special mention.
Institutional support came from several sources. An Alice Free-
man Palmer Fellowship, a Dissertation Fellowship from the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin-Madison Graduate School, and a Charlotte
Newcombe Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship gave me the time for
research and writing. Archivists and staff members at many places
aided the research process, particularly those at Special Collec-
tions, the Russell Library, and the University Archives at the Uni-
versity of Georgia Libraries in Athens; the Georgia Department of
Archives and History in Atlanta,- the Atlanta Historical Society;
the Library of Congress; the Robert W. Woodruff Library at Emory
University; the Southern Historical Collection in Chapel Hill; and
the William R. Perkins Library at Duke University. I owe special
thanks to Dale Couch and Virginia Shadron for sharing with me
their vast knowledge of the resources at the Georgia Department
of Archives and History in Atlanta and their expertise in Southern
history. Their generosity and good humor made research a
pleasure.
Other debts are more difficult to describe, since the more I re-
flect on them the larger they loom. Singular thanks are due to
Gerda Lerner. Her commitment to promoting women's history and


--- PAGE 9 ---
viii Acknowledgments
developing women's minds helped bring together and sustain a re-
markable group of women in the Graduate Program in American
Women's History at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. As a
forum for thinking and learning about gender in history, it was
exceptional—and hindsight teaches, precious. My greatest intellec-
tual debt is to Linda Gordon, who was the advisor for my disserta-
tion, which this book comes from. Her formidable intellect, politi-
cal good sense, personal warmth, and devotion to her students
enriched this book and its author in immeasurable ways. Gerda
Lerner, Florencia Mallon, Tom McCormick, and Steve Stern taught
me much and gave me invaluable advice at various stages of this
work. For their incisive comments on parts of this work and for
years of challenge, engagement, and solidarity—spiced with ample
doses of much-needed diversion—Bob Buchanan, Maureen Fitzger-
ald, Joyce Follet, and Leisa Meyer also deserve thanks. At North-
western University, Jim Campbell, Jim Oakes, and Bob Wiebe gave
me the benefit of their careful readings and thoughtful criticisms.
Thanks also to Steve Hahn for encouragement and very helpful
suggestions at two critical stages of this project.
Others, outside the field of history, contributed in their own
distinctive ways. Over the last decade, I have learned as much
about the issues at stake in this work from activists and organizing
as from scholars and research; political work schools an awareness
of connections and a kind of rigor hard to acquire elsewhere. I owe
a special debt to the people involved in the International Socialist
tendency, whose ideas and activism taught me a great deal and
whose commitment to a better world continues to inspire, even,
where particular arguments no longer persuade. Finally, there are
the family members to whom this book is dedicated. Their years
of faithful support, their belief in me, and their love made it possi-
ble for me to do this work. For this, and much more, I am deeply
grateful.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Contents
Introduction xi
PART I: CONTEXT AND MOTIVE
1 Mobilizing the Invisible Army 3
2 "Where Money Rules and Morals Rot":
The Vise of Modernity 23
3 Men in the Middle: The Class Composition of
the Klan 52
PART II: CONTENT AND PURPOSE
4 Reactionary Populism: The Politics of Class 77
5 "Cleaning Up" Morality: The Politics of Sex and Age 98
6 The Approaching Apocalypse: The Politics of Race 125
7 Paramilitary Paternalism: The Politics of Terror 149
PART III: MEANINGS
8 Conclusion: The Second Klan in Larger Perspective 177
Appendices 189
Abbreviations Used in Notes 193
Notes 197
Bibliography 255
Index 283


--- PAGE 11 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 12 ---
Introduction
Back of the writhing, yelling, cruel-eyed demons who break,
destroy, maim and lynch and burn at the stake is a knot, large
or small, of normal human beings and these human beings at
heart are desperately afraid of something.
—W. E. B. DuBois1
This book is about the most powerful movement of the far right
that America has yet produced: the Ku Klux Klan of the 1920s. The
story it tells is disturbing. For it has to explain, among other
things, how it was that sane, ordinary men came to believe that
Catholics were stockpiling weapons to take over the country, that
a cabal of Jewish bankers controlled world affairs, and that white
people must ready themselves for an imminent race war with peo-
ple of color. This study also has to explain how men who believed
such things were able to persuade others. For, by mid-decade, well
over a million—perhaps as many as five million—white, native-
born, Protestant men had paid their dues and pledged their loyalty
to the order's leaders and its program.2 The Ku Klux Klan of that
decade recruited more members and amassed more power in com-
munities throughout the United States than any Klan before or
since.
Yet it was neither the first nor the last movement of its kind,
as former Grand Wizard David Duke's recent success in using elec-
tions to build a mass following for his ideas attests. On the con-
trary, since its first incarnation after the Civil War, the Ku Klux
Klan has occupied an enduring place in American politics. Like the


--- PAGE 13 ---
xii Introduction
proverbial phoenix, the Klan has died in one setting, only to be
reborn in another.3 The key themes of Duke's recent campaigns in
fact echoed the appeals of the second Klan: a form of populism that
combined hostility to established elites with dedication to white
supremacy, support for conservative family values, enthusiasm for
"old-time religion," and antipathy to welfare recipients, trade
unionists, immigrants, liberals, and leftists. This book is written
in the hope that understanding the drawing power of such themes
in the past can help us see why they still pull in our own time.
To make sense of the Klan, however, one must first surrender
some comforting illusions. Above all, one has to give up the notion
of the essential otherness of the kind of men attracted to it. In the
1920s at least, Klan members were not the deranged outcasts of
popular imagination. A score of historians have now painstakingly
researched the membership and activities of Klan chapters in local-
ities across the nation. And they have found that most often the
men who donned the order's robes and assembled beneath its
flaming crosses were, as one contemporary put it, "if not the 'best
people/ at least the next best. . . the good, solid middle-class citi-
zens." Not only did the Klan draw from the broad middle of the
nation's class structure, but it most commonly mobilized support
through campaigns waged on the prosaic theme of upholding com-
munity moral standards.4
These campaigns illustrate how concerns about gender and sex-
uality animated this movement, as they would David Duke's ef-
forts. The involvement of local Klans in Prohibition enforcement,
for example, grew directly out of fears that alcohol consumption
endangered conventional family life. Without attention to how no-
tions of proper manhood, womanhood, and parenting infused Klan
thought and action, no analysis would be complete. For the Klan's
conservative ideology was a deeply gendered phenomenon. Klans-
men could not discuss issues of race, class, or state power apart
from their understanding of manhood, womanhood, and sexual de-
corum. This fusion of private and public imparted to Klan preju-
dices much of their peculiar force. Yet, as the classic example of
the plantation mistress and the female slave illustrates, and as
black feminists have argued most eloquently, it is impossible to
understand ideas about gender or the sexual politics they inform
without attention to their class and race moorings.5 Guided by that
principle, this study will show how the Klan's hostility to such
things as teenage sexuality and birth control both emerged from
and contributed to the racism, anti-Catholicism, and opposition to
labor struggle it is conventionally and rightly known for.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Introduction xiii
That sense of connection between the Klan's respectability and
its malice—of "the banality of evil" as Hannah Arendt once put
it—leads this study to part company with the trend in recent his-
torical writing about the Klan to de-emphasize the racial hatred of
its politics and the violence of its practice. Just as many reporters
assumed that David Duke's stylish suits and born-again Christian-
ity somehow nullified his neo-Nazi convictions, so many scholars
of the second Klan seem to assume that church-going, civic-
minded, middle-class men would never have espoused the views or
conducted the deeds the Klan is commonly associated with. Focus-
sing on the organization's activities to the neglect of its ideas, and
generally studying it in Northern settings where its members were
more constrained, many of these studies concur that the Klan, as
one recent synthesis put it, addressed "real social problems, not
symbolic or imaginary fears." According to this interpretation,
"the Klan was a popular social movement, not an extremist organi-
zation."6
This study seeks to move beyond such false polarities, which
have dominated thinking about the Klan for too long. Scholars
have dug in their heels over whether the movement was rural or
urban, whether its causes were local or national, whether its mem-
bers were civic crusaders or vigilantes, populists or racists, and
whether its grievances were "real" or chimerical. As the blatant
race-coding of ostensibly neutral public policy issues like welfare,
crime, and teenage pregnancy in recent years indicates, this style
of thought acts as a barrier to understanding.7 The pitched battles
over specious dichotomies have distracted attention from the real
challenge: that of recognizing and accounting for how the Klan was
all of these things. It was at once mainstream and extreme, hostile
to big business and antagonistic to industrial unions, anti-elitist
and hateful of blacks and immigrants, pro-law and order and prone
to extralegal violence. If scholars have viewed these attributes as
incompatible, Klansmen themselves did not.
This study aims to demonstrate the basic consistency of their
motives and positions. The source of that consistency was a world
view and politics best characterized, in my view, as reactionary
populism. In it, the anti-elitism characteristic of populism joined
with the commitment to enforce the subordination of whole
groups of people.8 The appeal of this politics was rooted deep
within American society and culture: in the legions of middle-class
white men who felt trapped between capital and labor and in the
political culture they inherited from their forebears. Fearful for the
future, Klan leaders drew from the wellsprings of American politics


--- PAGE 15 ---
xiv Introduction
to fashion an ideology that would enable them to hold on to their
basic values, make sense of rapidly changing social relations, and
fend off challenges to their power. They drew from classical liberal-
ism their ideas about economics, and from republicanism their no-
tions of citizenship and the commonweal, in particular its long ex-
clusion from the right to participate in political affairs of economic
dependents—whether slaves, free women and children, or property-
less men.9 The synthesis Klan leaders fashioned extended and mod-
ified, but by no means contradicted, values widely held in Ameri-
can society. It proved compelling enough to attract millions.
This book describes that synthesis and explains its appeal. My
concerns are more cultural than chronological, more analytic than
narrative. The emphasis is on how Klansmen understood their
world, why they thought the way they did, and what moved them
to action. Such an understanding can only be developed through a
sustained examination of Klan ideology. Yet, when studying a so-
cial movement like the Klan, seeing the interaction between ideas
and lived experience is crucial to understanding their sources and
import. Hence this work employs a local case study to anchor its
analysis of the Klan's ideology and practice nationwide.
The site of the study is Clarke County, Georgia, home of the
University of Georgia and, in the 1920s, of Athens Klan Number
5. Once described by W. E. B. Du Bois as the "Invisible Empire
State," Georgia was the birthplace and national headquarters of the
second Klan.10 A Georgia case study can thus illuminate the move-
ment at its source. By and large, however, the reader will find no
brief here for the special nature of either Athens or its Klan. On
the contrary, it is their very ordinariness that attracts attention: a
middling city and an average Klan chapter.
Yet in one respect the Athens Klan was unique in the South,
and rare in the nation. Unlike most of their peers, its leaders failed
to hide or destroy their chapter records. They left behind a rich
cache of materials that found their way into the archives. The col-
lection includes membership rosters, minutes, propaganda tracts,
and correspondence—some of it from local women and men who
asked the Klan to discipline relatives and neighbors whose conduct
they disapproved of. Used in conjunction with other kinds of local,
regional, and national sources—published materials, manuscript
collections, public records, oral histories, and so forth—these Ath-
ens chapter records make possible a fine-grained portrait of the
Klan world.
Readers will no doubt question whether conclusions drawn


--- PAGE 16 ---
Introduction xv
from the study of a Southern Klan chapter can illuminate the
movement in other areas of the United States. The South, after all,
possessed a singular regional heritage. Slavery shaped its political
economy and culture in ways that survived the war that buried the
"peculiar institution." If white Southerners' racism was less un-
usual than most white Northerners like to admit, other aspects of
Southern life at the turn of the century were distinctive: the preva-
lence of sharecropping, tenant farming, disfranchisement, and
lynching, to name but the most obvious. These regional traditions
influenced the Klan's development in the. South. Their sway was
most obvious in Southern Klansmen's more frequent indulgence in
vigilante violence and in the tacit consent, if not outright support,
that violence gained from regional elites. Ironically, Southern up-
bringing also probably steeled commitment to shared national Klan
goals, such as curbing the power of the federal government, pro-
tecting "the purity of [white] womanhood," and, more generally,
fortifying white supremacy.11
Yet, in the end, what proved most striking in the research for
this study was less the differences between Southern Klansmen
and their counterparts elsewhere than how much they all shared.
The assumption of Southern distinctiveness with which the author
embarked on this project gradually had to be shed in the face of
compelling evidence to the contrary. In their basic values, as in
their targets, the area of agreement between Klansmen in different
parts of the country proved wide. Where they diverged, the differ-
ences tended to be of degree, not character, or in focus or tactics,
not principles. In key ways, in fact, like the election of the South-
erner Woodrow Wilson to the presidency not long before, the Klan
of this era was both effect and cause of the reconciliation of North
and South. Its very spread promoted a peculiar kind of national
integration as Klan leaders worked to bury divisions among the
nation's Anglo-Saxon men. The reasons for the convergence are not
so hard to identify.
Local variations notwithstanding, the developments that agi-
tated Klan members were not confined to any single locality. The
labor unrest of 1919, for example, expressed class conflicts that re-
spected no geographical boundaries. The expanding powers of the
federal government and the changes in the structure of power at
all levels of the state affected citizens in every area. The plight of
agriculture in the 1920s ruined farmers in the Midwest and West
as well as the South. The powerful image of the "New Negro" reso-
nated among racists nationwide as Southern blacks moved north


--- PAGE 17 ---
xvi Introduction
in record numbers, while Harlem's radicalism filtered outward.
And the youthful pioneers of modern morality drank, danced,
drove, and necked from one end of the country to the other. So it
is not surprising that white men around the country rallied to Klan
appeals with common core elements. Although the setting of this
study is both local and Southern, then, the core of the argument
has wider applicability.
To emphasize common purpose is not to deny that local expe-
riences diverged. The history of each Klan chapter, in the South as
elsewhere in the country, was in some respects unique. The con-
figuration of an area's economy, the character of local politics, the
talents or shortcomings of individual leaders, accidents of timing,
and so forth, all worked to shape local Klans and to help or hinder
their prospects. Yet these particularities, so important to the tex-
ture and excitement of history, should not blind us to larger pat-
terns suggested by the remarkable synchronicity of the Klan's rise
and decline in all corners of the nation. The method of this study
should make it possible to have both: an understanding of larger
patterns enriched by the drama of the particular.
After describing how the Klan was built, the soil it took root
in, and the kind of men it attracted, the chapters that follow seek
to re-create Klansmen's world view through thematic analysis of
its core elements. Focussing on the acutely contested relations be-
tween classes, between sexes and generations, and between
"races," respectively, the chapters open with cases of local Klan
practice. They then go on to tease out the core ideas animating
these efforts and analogous ones in other parts of the country.
Chapter 7 shows how all of these ideas came together to make
vigilantism the emblematic expression of Klansmen's way of
thinking. The conclusion then steps back from the particulars of
the story to explore some of the national and international con-
texts that give it added meaning.
I have assumed throughout this work that it is a mistake to
take for granted, as so many observers do, the prejudices of Klan
members. To say, for example, that the Klan harassed blacks or
hated Jews because its members were racists is to confuse tautol-
ogy with explanation. Another common fallacy is the attempt to
deduce members' motives from readings of the census—to assume,
say, that if few Catholics lived in a particular area, then anti-
Catholicism must have ranked low among the local Klan's pur-
poses. Such reasoning misconstrues the dynamics of prejudice—
which often runs deepest where contacts are fewest—and also has


--- PAGE 18 ---
Introduction xvii
the effect of naturalizing it, of making conflict appear to flow inevi-
tably from difference.12 The historian's task is more demanding: to
interrogate even odious and seemingly irrational thought so as to
grasp its inner logic and understand its sources and role in a spe-
cific time and place.13
The goal of this study, then, is to situate Klan members in the
world of their day, to take seriously what they did, and to listen
carefully to what they said. In this way, we can learn a great deal
about what made them tick. Part of taking people seriously in-
volves letting them speak in their own words and their own way.
In quoting, therefore, I avoid using the intrusive and condescending
sic to flag errors. Where the original grammar and spelling do not
obscure meaning, they have been retained; where they distort, cor-
rections are rendered in brackets.


--- PAGE 19 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 20 ---
I
CONTEXT AND
MOTIVE


--- PAGE 21 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 22 ---
1
Mobilizing the
Invisible Army
If there were such a thing as a typical Klan meeting, the klonklave
held by the Athens Klan on the night of September 15, 1925, would
qualify. Exalted Cyclops ].P. Mangum,* a fifty-two-year-old police-
man, called the meeting to order at 8:30 in the Klan's klavern
(meeting hall). Presiding over the evening's events with Mangum
was a full complement of twelve "terrors" (officers). In many re-
gards, the meeting resembled one any other organization might
hold: minutes read and approved, new members voted in, dues col-
lected, plans laid for a recruitment campaign, an educational dis-
cussion, and even niceties: members received thanks from Man-
gum for having visited him when he was sick and from the board
of stewards of a local church for having attended its recent revival
meeting with a contribution.1
Yet, mundane as the proceedings were, a few signs indicated
that this club differed from others—notwithstanding the order's
policy of not allowing discussions in meetings of "any subject,
which, if published, would reflect discredit upon our great move-
ment." Among the humdrum bills paid, for example, was one for
labor and materials for a "fiery cross." Then there were the applica-
tions to join, some from previous members, that the Klansmen in
attendance voted to reject. The chapter had recently reorganized
* Names in italics have been changed. See Appendix for explanation.
3


--- PAGE 23 ---
4 Context and Motive
due to a public scandal over the use of extralegal methods to com-
bat vice, and it seems these men were viewed as possibly disloyal—
"loose-mouth/' "weak-kneed," or "traitors," in Klan parlance. Fi-
nally, one brief item in the minutes hinted at why absolute loyalty
was so necessary. L. S. Fleming, the chapter Klokan (investigator),
reported the case of a man who had been brought to the Klan's
attention for failing to support his family. Not a few such delin-
quents found themselves kidnapped and flogged by crews of
masked men in the 1920s.2
Such blending of the ordinary and the extreme was common in
the Klan of the 1920s; indeed, the blurring proved a source of
strength. The order's overlap with the mainstream made it possible
to win the enthusiasm of men like Chester D. Morton, a local Ma-
son, Shriner, Boy Scout leader, and member of the Booster Club
and the board of stewards of the First Methodist Church. An ambi-
tious young mortician who would soon become president of the
Athens Lions Club and vice-president of the Georgia Funeral Direc-
tors' Association, Morton was not the type to belong to a fringe
group. But then again, neither was he likely to pay monthly dues
to an organization that merely replicated what he enjoyed through
his other affiliations. In Morton's case, a clue to the Klan's special
attraction comes from his rivalry with Jake and Mose Bernstein,
first his employers, and later his competitors for trade and for posi-
tion on the State Board of Embalmers.3 Since the Klan admitted
only white, native-born, gentile, adult men who believed in Chris-
tianity, white supremacy, and "pure Americanism," at the least it
would keep out Jews such as the Bernstein brothers—unlike the
Athens Elks, for example, who three times had elected business-
man and civic leader Moses Gerson Michael to their highest of-
fice.4 But the Klan might even manage to drive the Bernsteins and
other Jews out of business altogether.
The second Klan's founder, William Joseph Simmons, had not ex-
plicitly included such things among the Klan's goals when he es-
tablished the order in 1915. The son of a poor Alabama country
physician, Simmons was a man chronically on the make. Having
tried his hand at farming, circuit-riding as a Southern Methodist
Episcopal Church preacher, and lecturing in Southern history at
Lanier University, by 1915 he had settled into a mildly lucrative
position as the Atlanta-area organizer for the Woodmen of the
World, a fraternal benefit society. Unsatisfied, Simmons dreamed


--- PAGE 24 ---
Mobilizing the Invisible Army 5
of reviving the hooded order his father had served in as an officer
after the Civil War.
For years, he thought about creating a new Ku Klux Klan. By
October of 1915, he was ready to unveil the plans to a group of
like-minded friends. Together, the group petitioned for a charter
from the state. Then, on Thanksgiving night, they met atop Stone
Mountain, an imposing several-hundred-foot-high granite butte
just outside Atlanta. With a flag fluttering in the wind beside them,
a Bible open to the twelfth chapter of Romans, and a flaming cross
to light the night sky above, Simmons and his disciples proclaimed
the new Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. Their passion for ceremony
was not matched by a talent for organizing, however. Unclear
about exactly what their message was, Simmons and his partners
floundered over how to spread it. By early 1920, they had only en-
rolled a few thousand men.5
That would soon change. In June of that year, Simmons signed
a contract with Mary Elizabeth Tyler and Edward Young Clarke,
partners in the Southern Publicity Association. Having organized
support for the Red Cross, the Anti-Saloon League, the Salvation
Army, and the War Work Council, the two had mastered the art of
modern propaganda. Hiring a staff of seasoned organizers, they set
to work to amass a following for the Klan and a small fortune for
themselves. Within a few months, membership jumped to an esti-
mated 100,000. A wife at age fourteen and a widowed mother at
fifteen who went on to make a career as a businesswoman, Tyler
had a knack for turning adversity to advantage. When in 1921 the
New York World set out to destroy the Klan by documenting over
one hundred and fifty separate cases of vigilante violence charged
to it—an exposure so damning that it prompted a congressional
investigation of the order—Tyler turned both into recruiting oppor-
tunities. In the four months after the World's expose, the Klan
chartered two hundred new chapters; overall membership leapt to
some one million.6
Seasoned promoters, Tyler and Clarke knew not only how to
sell, but what would sell. To Simmons' initial blend of white su-
premacy, Christianity, and the male-bonding rituals of fraternal-
ism, they added elements geared to tap the fears of many white
contemporaries in the anxious years after the Great War. De-
claiming against organized blacks, Catholics, and Jews, along with
the insidious encroachments of Bolshevism, the order put itself for-
ward as the country's most militant defender of "pure American-
ism." It stood for patriotism, "old-time religion," and conventional


--- PAGE 25 ---
6 Context and Motive
morality, and pledged to fend off challenges from any quarter to
the rights and privileges of men from the stock of the nation's
founders. The message took. Although Tyler and Clarke had ex-
pected only Southerners to respond, men from all over the country
did. "In all my years of experience in organization work," Clarke
told Simmons, "I have never seen anything equal to the clamor
throughout the nation for the Klan."7
One month after the Klan's founding in Atlanta, Imperial Wiz-
ard Simmons spoke at a meeting called to promote the new order
in Athens. Yet, for several years, no more was heard of it in Clarke
County. No doubt it was outflanked by the officially sponsored
hysteria of the war years. With the state government enacting
"work or fight" laws, Athens schoolchildren compelled to sing pa-
triotic songs and buy thrift stamps to avoid ostracism, "slackers"
and government critics branded as "traitors," and civic leaders
preaching that only the United States Army stood between local
residents and the "German Horror" of rape, pillage, and slavery—
and with cotton prices high all the while—the Klan lacked a dis-
tinctive appeal. At any rate, not until well after the Armistice did
the Klan reappear in Athens. Then, following a much-touted return
engagement of Birth of a Nation in January of 1921, the Klan re-
newed its efforts to win local men.8
Following a strategy devised by the Atlanta-based national of-
fice, Athens Klan promoters worked existing networks in the com-
munity to accumulate members. They looked to two areas in par-
ticular where it seemed their message might be well-received:
fraternal orders and Protestant churches. The Klan presented itself
to prospective members as the active embodiment of "the princi-
ples of the better class of lodges." Simmons, a member of fifteen
other fraternal organizations himself, rallied men with odes to "the
united powers of our regal manhood." To enhance the Klan's mys-
tique, he designed a special alliterative lexicon for the movement.
And he painstakingly worked out the details of elaborate rituals
whereby members advanced in the order by obtaining "degrees" as
they did in other fraternal orders. When he first came to Athens to
advertise the new order in 1915, Simmons in fact emphasized "its
unrivaled degree work." Many local Klansmen took the bait; they
delighted in impressing their fellows with their mastery of Klan
ritual.9
In presenting their order thus, Klan organizers staked a bid for
the loyalties of participants in the long tradition of fraternal associ-
ation. The country had over six hundred secret societies by the


--- PAGE 26 ---
Mobilizing the Invisible Army 7
mid-1920s; together, they enlisted over thirty million people. The
Klan curried support from a number of these groups, especially
those of common mind. It endorsed the Fellowship Forum, an anti-
Catholic publication that claimed a readership of one million
white, Protestant fraternalists. The Junior Order of United Ameri-
can Mechanics (JOUAM), an anti-Catholic, nativist fraternity
whose better-known members included populist leader Tom Wat-
son and President Warren Harding, was also known as "a close
ally" of the Klan. Indeed, the Georgia JOUAM shared its weekly
Atlanta-based publication, The Searchlight, with the Klan until the
Klan formally took it over in October of 1923. The distinction be-
tween the two was moot in any case, since Klan leader J. O. Wood
edited the newspaper.10
Klan leaders cultivated their common ground with fraternal or-
ders to reap a bumper crop of recruits. Almost all the traveling
organizers (kleagles) hired by the Imperial Palace were Masons, an
affiliation they used to meet prospective Klansmen in new commu-
nities. Soon after arriving, they approached leaders of societies such
as the Masons, Elks, Odd Fellows, and Orangemen. Often these
officials would allow the Klan to meet in their lodge halls, as the
Masons did in Clarke County. Indeed; the Athens experience con-
formed to the larger pattern. When Simmons arrived to advance
the new order in 1915, he came as the guest of C. A. Vonderleith,
an organizer for the Woodmen of the World, whom Simmons al-
ready knew from his work with the Athens Woodmen. /. A. Hogg,
an officer of the local womens' auxiliary of the Woodmen, would
soon add the Klan to his roster of associations.11
The strategy worked. Even the meager records available for lo-
cal fraternal orders reveal that a minimum of 120 Athens Klans-
men, or twenty-nine percent, belonged to at least one. Among
those that shared members with the Klan were the Woodmen of
the World, the Elks, the Masons, the Odd Fellows, the Knights of
Pythias, and the Shriners. Several Clarke County Klansmen also
held office in these groups. Local Kligrapp (secretary) Roy P. Yar-
borough, for example, was a twenty-five-year, veteran of the Odd
Fellows and reportedly its most popular member ever. Known to
his fellows as "Uncle Roy," Yarborough also served as clerk of the
Woodmen of the World, and belonged to the Knights of Pythias.12
But the most ardent fraternalist in the chapter was Wiley Frank
Doolittle, a Mason, Shriner, and Woodman. Enchanted by the
magic of organized manhood, Doolittle had accumulated over the
years an unrivalled library on fraternalism. "No one in Athens,"


--- PAGE 27 ---
8 Context and Motive
the press eulogized upon his death in 1930, "possessed such knowl-
edge of Masonry"; members of a half dozen local fraternal orders
paid him tribute as honorary pallbearers. Nationwide, the Klan
boasted that 500,000 Masons had joined by 1923. Along with mem-
bers of other fraternal organizations, they often formed the back-
bone of local chapters.13
As fertile a harvest, organizers found, could be gleaned from
Protestant churches. Imperial Wizard Hiram Wesley Evans, who
assumed the helm from Simmons in 1922, described his organiza-
tion as "a recruiting agency" for Protestant churches. Whether or
not this was true, the reverse was. Throughout the country, evan-
gelical Protestants in particular flocked to the Klan, primarily Bap-
tists, Methodists, and members of the Church of Christ, the Disci-
ples of Christ, and the United Brethren. Men in more elite or
liberal denominations, in contrast, such as Unitarians, Congrega-
tionalists, Lutherans, or Episcopalians, appeared less likely to join.
In Clarke County, Klansmen also tended to be religious enthusi-
asts. Even the patchy church records available showed that at least
forty-three percent of Athens Klansmen belonged to a church—
about the same proportion as that of all white county residents. Of
these, thirty-seven percent were Baptists; thirty percent, Method-
ists ; and smaller proportions scattered among other denomina-
tions.14
Many Athens Klan laymen helped lead their churches. At least
forty-six held positions such as deacon, elder, steward, committee
member, usher, or Sunday School participant. Twelve Klansmen
took part in the Men's Sunday School class at First Methodist
Church alone. Some members advanced the cause in other ways.
Klansrnan L. T. Curry served as Treasurer of the Businessmen's
Evangelistic Club, while N. O. Bowers championed "personal
evangelism" among young people through the Christian Endeavor
Society.15 The wives and mothers of many local Klansmen, for
their part, participated in the women's missionary societies of
their churches.
Like laymen, many clergymen cooperated with the Klan. Of
the thirty-nine national lecturers working for the Klan at one
point, two-thirds were said to be Protestant ministers. Each Klan
chapter, meanwhile, had its own kludd (chaplain). By 1924, the
Klan boasted that it had enrolled 30,000 ministers. In that year, the
Klan also claimed as members three-quarters of the 6,000 delegates
to the Southeastern Baptist Convention.16 In Clarke County, most
of the white Protestant churches had some connection to the Klan.


--- PAGE 28 ---
Mobilizing the Invisible Army 9
Either their pastors belonged, or they allowed announcements of
Klan meetings or robed visits of Klansmen during services, or they
accepted Klan aid in evangelistic efforts.
At least ten ministers belonged to the Athens Klan; several
helped lead it. The Reverend M. B. Miller of First Christian
Church, for example, served in the mid-'twenties as the Exalted
Cyclops (chapter president) of the local Klan; his assistant, the Rev-
erend Jerry Johnson, acted as Kligrapp (secretary). The Klan so val-
ued the work of their member the Reverend B. Postell Read of
Young Harris Memorial Methodist Church that, when he left his
Athens congregation, Klansmen and women attended his last ser-
vice in a body to express appreciation for his "service" to the com-
munity. The Reverend B. B. Couch of West End Baptist Church,
also a Klansman, likewise won fulsome praise from his entire con-
gregation upon his departure.17
Through such channels, the Klan built up its numbers. By
1923, its ranks included "three hundred of the finest men in Clarke
County." Confident of their future, they began building a new
klavern to hold their meetings. Members proudly announced that
the hall would sport a forty-foot-tall electric cross. With its mem-
bership hovering around three hundred the next few years, the lo-
cal chapter was a "baby Klan," as The Searchlight put it. The chap-
ter drew in approximately one in ten of the native-born, Protestant
white men eligible for membership—a considerable proportion, but
small relative to some of its counterparts.18
Statewide, the Klan also thrived in the first half of the decade.
Since Atlanta hosted the Klan's national office, or Imperial Palace,
Georgia always played a significant role in Klan affairs. The At-
lanta Klan enrolled upwards of fifteen thousand members and
boasted the largest fraternal hall in the city. By the mid-'twenties,
chapters blanketed the state. Cities like Macon, Augusta, and Co-
lumbus yielded larger absolute numbers, but towns like Pelham
and La Grange, and hamlets like Dewy Rose and Tallulah Falls,
held their own in ardor. Large and small, urban and rural, Klan
chapters cooperated to achieve their common goals and to build
numbers at each other's parades and rallies. A 1926 internal report
maintained that Georgia was now second in membership in the
South.19
In the nation as a whole, Georgia ranked eighth among states
in estimated membership. Among regions, the North Central and
Southwestern states enrolled the most members, followed by the
Southeast, the Midwest and Far West, and, finally, the North At-


--- PAGE 29 ---
10  Context and Motive
lantic states. By mid-decade, the total reached perhaps as high as
five million, distributed through nearly four thousand local chap-
ters. Yet the numbers barely suggest the reach of the Klan's tenta-
cles. If its membership claims were true, the order enrolled as
many members as the American Federation of Labor at the peak of
its strength.20 "Outside business," reported one sympathetic con-
temporary journalist, "the Ku Klux Klan has become the most vig-
orous, active and effective organization in American life." Indeed,
in the five months after the order established a formal national
lecture bureau, its speakers addressed audiences of well over
200,000 people. Those who missed the lectures could stay abreast
of issues through the order's press. Supplementing the publications
issued by the national office, state and local Klans published some
forty weekly newspapers.21 Numbers like these created a legiti-
macy of their own.
But their effect was enhanced by the kind of men the Klan was
able to attract. The typical member, in Athens as elsewhere, was
not the uprooted angry young man one might expect; he was
middle-aged, married, and probably a father as well.22 Ninety-two
percent of Athens Klan members were married men; more than
two-thirds were fathers, with an average of between three and four
children. While most local Klansmen were family men, not a few
were civic leaders. Klansman G. M. Harris, the county tax receiver,
had served two terms as mayor in the 1880s. The wealthy Wiley
Doolittle was described by the Athens press as among the "most
influential citizens." The roster of offices he had held included
mayor (three terms), president of the Chamber of Commerce, presi-
dent of the Booster Club, president of the Kiwanis Club, and chair-
man of the Clarke County Democratic Executive Committee,
which four other Klansmen also served on. One of them, local Kli-
grapp (secretary) Roy Yarborough was also a county commissioner,
a notary public, and a justice of the peace. Joseph Kenneth Patrick,
for his part, was a charter member and later president of the Ath-
ens Lions Club, a member of the Board of Directors and the Rural
Committee of the Chamber of Commerce, and a future state
senator.
Just as the Klan recruited men from the mainstream, so it
boosted members' morale with the kinds of family and community
activities that clubs and churches also sponsored. Although ex-
cluded from the Klan itself, Klansmen's wives and sons could join
parallel orders: the Women of the Ku Klux Klan, created in 1923,
and the Junior Klan, created in 1924. Here, without distracting at-


--- PAGE 30 ---
Mobilizing the Invisible Army 11
tention from the leading roles of their menfolk, family members
might work for shared ends. Athens Klanswomen and men thus
cooperated to reward a visiting minister with an automobile for his
leadership of a successful revival at East Athens Baptist Church in
1926, winning themselves the gratitude of the church's chairmen
and deacons. The following year, they collaborated on a fund-raiser
whose end was "to place a Flag and Bible" in the city high school.23
Klan chapters promoted sociability and mutual aid as well. At
Klan picnics such as the "Great Klan Barbecue" hosted by Athens
Klansmen in 1928, members gathered with their families and
friends for afternoons of music, sports, and swimming, along with
speeches. Sometimes, Klan rallies featured weddings of members,
public rituals that interwove personal and political commitments.
More important, fellow Klansmen were on hand in times of trou-
ble. When a member fell sick, his brothers came to visit. When his
family lost a loved one, they sent flowers and expressions of sym-
pathy. And when he died, they stood ready to conduct a stately
funeral. When crisis struck, Klansmen dug into their pockets for
one another. When the bicycle of a local minister's son was stolen,
for example, his fellow Klansmen voted to buy the boy a new one.
After £. D. Todd lost his home in a fire, the chapter established
a committee to inform his fellows of his needs. How much such
courtesies meant was evident when the mother of two local Klans-
men and grandmother of another passed away. Her six children and
their spouses, "representing forty grandchildren and twenty great-
grandchildren," joined to thank the Athens Klan and ask "God's
richest blessings" for each of its members.24
And yet Klansmen were not just Odd Fellows in robes and hoods.
For all the ties that bound Klansmen to commonplace community
networks and habits, the Klan was different. Leaders reminded
members that their organization was "not a lodge," but "an army
of Protestant Americans." As a "mass movement" to secure the
alleged birthright of Anglo-Saxon Americans, it could achieve that
goal only through "an aggressive application of the art of Klan-
craft." That required winning the confidence of the community
by recruiting respected local men and making the Klan a "civic
asset."25 In short, breaking into church and fraternal networks was
part of a larger strategy to accrue power. And that power would be
used toward ends some people in these networks might balk at.
Signs that the second Klan would be more than just another


--- PAGE 31 ---
12 Context and Motive
community organization were there from the beginning, not least
in its name. The first call to re-establish the Klan came, not from
William Joseph Simmons, but from Tom Watson. The foremost
leader of Georgia's Populist movement in the 1890s, Watson had
long since given up the struggle for interracial economic justice.
Recently, he had turned his attention to Catholic and Jewish sub-
version. In August of 1915, he informed readers of his Georgia-
based Jeffersonian magazine that "another Ku Klux Klan may have
to be organized to restore Home Rule." Georgia's governor had just
commuted the death sentence of Leo Frank, a Jewish factory super-
visor convicted of the murder of Mary Phagan, a young white
woman in his employ. The governor's mercy enraged those who
believed Frank guilty, Watson among them. Four days after he is-
sued his incitement, a body of men calling themselves the Knights
of Mary Phagan kidnapped Frank from the state prison farm, took
him to her home town, and hanged him from a tree.26
Three months later, Simmons resurrected the Knights of the
Ku Klux Klan in Atlanta, where Frank's alleged crime and his trial
had taken place. The Frank case has often been cited as a catalyst
for the creation of the second Klan, whose founding members, ac-
cording to popular myth, included some of the Knights of Mary
Phagan.27 In fact, no one has ever documented a direct connection
between the two. The "truth" of the link lay less in personnel than
in a common vigilante spirit. An appeal to that spirit would always
be part of the Klan. Its promise of swift and secret vengeance, more
than anything else, distinguished it from contemporary organiza-
tions with whom it shared ideas, rituals, and members.
Nothing in the early years helped more to make that promise
come to life than D. W. Griffith's film extravaganza, Birth of a
Nation, released in the same year as the second Klan's creation. In
this racist epic of the Civil War, Reconstruction, and the restora-
tion of white rule, Griffith harnessed all the emotive power of
modern film-making technique to convince viewers that black
men were beasts and white vigilantes were the saviors of American
civilization. Given the right to vote and hold office, the film
averred, African-American men dragged society into chaos; worse,
they used such power to stalk white women. Griffith left no doubt
about how this fate had been averted. In the final, climactic scene,
the hooded and robed members of the Ku Klux Klan rode in to save
his young white heroine from rape—by castrating and lynching her
black would-be assailant. Their act ended sectional fratricide
among white men and gave' birth to a reunited America.28


--- PAGE 32 ---
Mobilizing the Invisible Army 13
For the Klan, the film proved a boon. When it came to Atlanta
for a three-week showing, record-breaking white crowds packed the
theaters to cheer on the white-robed crusaders/Recognizing an op-
portunity, Simmons ran newspaper advertisements for the revived
order next to those for the film. Thereafter, the Klan routinely ex-
ploited showings of Birth of a Nation to enlist new members, for
it sent the message the Klan wanted delivered. "No one who has
seen the film," commented journalist Walter Lippmann in 1922,
"will ever hear the name [Ku Klux Klan] again without seeing
those white horsemen." Not surprisingly, the NAACP sought—in
vain—to have the film removed from circulation.29
Black Americans in fact understood from the beginning that
the second Klan was different, even from other racist organizations.
In the view of many, it was an immediate threat. One month after
the second Klan's founding ceremony, Georgia Republican leader
Henry Lincoln Johnson begged the governor to make the order
change its name, on the grounds that the Klan's re-establishment
would encourage "mob outlawry." "My people (the colored peo-
ple)," Johnson predicted, "will be the helpless, and often vicarious,
victims." He was right. "Nobody knows," complained a Black At-
lanta lodge officer to the NAACP in 1921, "the great destress" that
this "great evil" had brought upon the black people of Georgia. The
state's leading African-American newspaper, The Atlanta Indepen-
dent, for its part, said of the second Klan that, like the first, its
"aim and purpose is to terrorize helpless black men and women."
"The epitome of race hatred and religious intolerance," it consti-
tuted "the most dangerous menace that ever threatened popular
government."30
Outside Georgia, members of other groups the Klan pitted it-
self against made it clear that they, too, saw the order as outside
the framework of ordinary politics. The editor of the Catholic
World, for example, warned in 1923 that if the Klan were allowed
to persist and the state failed to protect Catholic citizens from its
provocations, they would employ "self-defense, even to the extent
of bloodshed." In that year, in fact, Catholics were the leading force
in organizing a militant anti-Klan group called the "Red Knights,"
or "Knights of the Flaming Circle." The group welcomed anyone
opposed to the Klan and not a Protestant, and was said to be re-
cruiting well in Pennsylvania and West Virginia, and later in the
industrial cities of Ohio as well. In several parts of the country,
often under the auspices of the Red Knights, Catholics responded
to the Klan's provocations with mass, armed counterattacks so de-


--- PAGE 33 ---
14 Context and Motive
termined that the National Guard was called out on at least one
occasion.31
Some radical farmers and unionists shared the Red Knights' as-
sessment of the novel danger posed by the Klan. Iowa farmers
charged a Klan meeting with pitchforks; their counterparts in the
Arkansas mountains turned shotguns on Klan intruders, killing
one and wounding several. The United Mine Workers of America
(UMWA), a renegade in the contemporary craft-dominated labor
movement because of its commitment to interracial industrial
unionism, tried to close ranks against the Klan. In 1921, while
leaders of the American Federation of Labor equivocated, refusing
a black delegation to its national convention the right to introduce
a resolution calling for the suppression of the Klan, the UMWA
barred from its ranks miners who joined the Klan. Although unable
to rid the union of Klan influence, many militants tried. Oklahoma
UMWA members spied on a Klan meeting and expelled the miners
who attended, while their Pennsylvania counterparts put union
members suspected of Klan membership on trial.32
The imminent dangers perceived by the Klan's targets offer a
clue to why the order did not take off until 1921. For one thing, an
organized national vigilante movement would probably have
seemed superfluous before that. The suppression of challenges to
prevailing relations of power was official federal policy in the war
years. When Wiley Doolittle, former mayor of Athens and future
Klansman, proclaimed at a flag-kissing ceremony in June of 1918
that "hereafter disloyalists might expect to be branded on the fore-
head and on either cheek, and the rope would be the end of traitors,
in legal process of law or otherwise," other civic leaders were not
scandalized. On the contrary, Atlanta's leading newspaper quoted
him approvingly. Similarly, an Alabama-based Justice Department
official writing in the same year made clear his assumption that
vigilante activity was legitimate. Having found that, so far, the
mobs had confined themselves to attacks on black people, workers,
and wartime dissenters, he described the night-riders as merely
"potential sources of lawlessness and disorder."33
The Espionage and Sedition Acts of 1917 and 1918 backed com-
munity pressures for "one hundred percent Americanism" with
censorship and possible prison terms for dissenters. Insulating the
war effort from criticism was only part of their purpose; sup-
pressing domestic labor struggle and left-wing radicalism was as
important. These strictures had barely been lifted before the post-
war Red Scare, the most extensive peacetime violation of civil lib-


--- PAGE 34 ---
Mobilizing the Invisible Army 15
erties in United States history, began. Its climax was the Palmer
Raids of January 1920, a nationwide dragnet against radicals named
for the Attorney General under whose direction they proceeded.34
As national leaders gradually began to breathe more freely after
1920 and favor a return to normal methods of rule, so did many
local elites. Then the kind of methods they had recently endorsed
came to seem excessive, even illegitimate.
In Athens, some became nervous when the Klan sought to keep
the wartime spirit alive for its own purposes. When the Klan re-
turned to Athens in 1921 and promoted itself as a force for "law
and order," the implicit promise was that it would enforce its con-
cept of order in a manner similar to its namesake's. Recoiling,
some one hundred "good citizens" signed a petition against it.
Their numbers included many prominent civic and business lead-
ers. The signers declared that the "announced purposes of the Ku
Klux Klan . . . have the approval of all good citizens." They took
issue with the order on only one point: its usurpation of the powers
of lawfully "constituted authorities." The Klan may have per-
formed a necessary service during Reconstruction, they argued, but
"no such necessity exists now." Hence its re-establishment was
"ill advised," and its "self-constituted guardians of the peace,
working at night and in disguise" were mistaken in their zeal.35
However timid their criticism of the Klan, the signers did under-
stand its penchant for violence. To silence them, Klan leaders
rounded up more imposing voices.
Just as the Klan used burning crosses to sanctify its message,
so it used ministers to sanctify its methods. So valued was their
function that the Klan chased after them systematically and al-
lowed them to belong without paying dues. The harvest such poli-
cies reaped distressed Klan opponents beyond measure. The
Atlanta-based Committee for Interracial Cooperation (CIC) re-
ported in 1923 that Southern ministers "who approve the Ku Klux
Klan methods" far outnumbered those who objected to them; "this
type of minister," the CIC concluded, "has made the Ku Klux Klan
possible."36
Indeed, as the community leaders thought most capable of in-
terpreting God's will, Klan clergymen seemed to give his blessing
to the order's activities. By 1926, CIC director Will Alexander, a
former minister himself, confessed privately that "the large num-
ber of [Methodist and Baptist] ministers who are in the Ku Klux
Klan . . . renders me hopeless as far as the masses of ministers are
concerned." Such despair was more than justified in Athens, where


--- PAGE 35 ---
16 Context and Motive
only one minister ever publicly condemned the Klan—and then
quite late in the day and not by name. In 1927, the Reverend }. D.
Mell, president of the Georgia Baptist Convention, condemned the
vigilante activities of "masked mobs." Even then, he was careful
to qualify his remarks by stating that "good men" participated.37
For their part, the men charged with responsibility for training
the minds of Georgia's youth maintained a stance of benign neu-
trality toward the Klan. Asked by the New York World to take a
stand in a campaign to push the 1924 Republican and Democratic
national conventions to adopt anti-Klan planks, the chancellor of
the University of Georgia had only this to say: "Organizations with
secret membership have a tendency to produce reliance on group
action which is not in accord with the American spirit of personal
responsibility and independence." The university's community
governing board, a Prudential Committee composed of leading
businessmen, became more agitated over liberal dissent. It acted to
censor student journalists who criticized some of the state's cities,
and one of its members, newspaper editor Hugh Rowe, called for
the expulsion of a campus YMCA staff member who organized in-
terracial student discussion groups on the grounds that he was
probably a paid Russian agent. Prudential Committee members in-
sisted, calling upon university rules for support, "that there be no
political criticism at the University of our government."38
Thus intimidated, even the few faculty members who despised
the Klan hesitated to speak out. "The trouble with us," reflected
English professor John Wade, "is that we have as little courage as
we have voice. But with things as they are now in Georgia, more
courage would likely mean martyrdom, not of the effective vari-
ety." In such a climate, it is perhaps unsurprising that more than a
third of the freshmen trying out for the university's debating soci-
ety in 1923 defended the proposition that "the activities of the Ku
Klux Klan as now practiced are of the best interests to the United
States."39
Just as the endorsement of clergymen and the equivocation of
educators could shield the Klan from criticism, so could the back-
ing of politicians protect it from hostile legislation or prosecution.
The Klan, of course, needed the help of public officials to realize
such elements of its program as immigration restriction, Prohibi-
tion enforcement, opposition to American participation in the
League of Nations and the World Court, tax relief, prohibition of
interracial marriage, exclusion of Catholic teachers from the public


--- PAGE 36 ---
Mobilizing the Invisible Army 17
schools, the closing of parochial schools, and prohibition of prop-
erty ownership by non-citizens.40
Yet the order went about electoral politics with a zeal beyond
that of other contemporary organizations. It pushed members, not
only to go to the polls themselves, but also to turn out family
members, friends, and neighbors. Such prodding paid off. As Ex-
alted Cyclops /. P. Mangum boasted to the Grand Dragon in No-
vember of 1925: "We have just had an election in the city and
[won] out[;] they dont know how we did it but we did our stuff and
sed nothing." "Our stuff" most likely referred to such Klan tactics
as the mass distribution of model ballots; the "decade system" in
which, after the order had decided on a candidate, each member
would then go out and talk up him up with ten non-members;
or the "poison squads" of Klanswomen who used ordinary gossip
networks to spread malicious rumors about those opposed by the
Klan.41 The Klan also organized public shows of strength to sway
wavering non-members and frighten opponents at key times. More
importantly, the Realm office warned recalcitrant public officials
to beware "the invisible eye." The threats were not idle. The Klan
kept extensive files on public figures to blackmail them if need
arose. Where evidence of impropriety was lacking, the order some-
times tried to manufacture it. Imperial officers thus deployed pros-
titutes and bootleggers in vain hopes of entrapping racial liberals
like Will Alexander, and the ministers C. B. Wilmer, Plato Dur-
ham, and M. Ashby Jones.42
Through such varied means, the Klan steamrollered opposition
and gained influence in Georgia. Broker of the votes of an esti-
mated 100,000 of the state's 300,000 Democrats by 1923, the Klan
held "the balance of power" in state politics, as even a reporter
who sought to play down its domination had to admit. The order
enrolled such well-placed officials as Governor Clifford Walker,
Chief Justice of the State Supreme Court Richard B. Russell, Sr.,
State Attorney General George M. Napier, Atlanta Mayor Walter
A. Sims, Solicitor General (district attorney) of Fulton County John
M. Boykin, and Fulton Superior Court Judge Gus H. Howard, in
addition to many less strategically placed men. Some evidence sug-
gests that the roster also included Georgia's United States senators
Tom Watson, Walter George, and William J. Harris; United States
congressman and past president of the Anti-Saloon League W. D.
Upshaw, and President of the Georgia State Senate Herbert Clay.43
Similar patterns prevailed elsewhere. In 1923, for example, at


--- PAGE 37 ---
18 Context and Motive
least seventy-five congressional representatives were said to owe
their seats to the Klan; at the annual conference of state governors
the year before, only one was willing to discuss, let alone condemn,
the Klan. The reason was not hard to find. The Klan held sway in
the political life of many states; it dominated some outright, such
as Indiana and Colorado; and it swept anti-Klan governors from
office in a number of others, most spectacularly in Oregon and
Kansas.44
The ability to dispose of opponents so handily where it had the
requisite numbers gives an indication of why Klan leaders put such
a high premium on electoral politics. "It is of vital importance that
our friends be placed in office/' Georgia's Grand Dragon explained;
"the life of our organization" might hinge upon the outcome of
elections. The election of Klan enemies to the legislature, such as
Athens resident Andrew Erwin, could not be tolerated and should
be reversed. The Grand Dragon's own command of the votes of at
least half the state's delegates to the 1924 Democratic Party na-
tional convention helped ensure that the convention would vote
down a platform plank against the Klan; of Georgia's fifty-six dele-
gates, only one—that same Athens resident—supported the plank.
Indeed, wielding its power in the nonpartisan style of the Anti-
Saloon League, the Klan managed to prevent either major party and
all the nation's presidents in the decade from condemning it pub-
licly.45
But it was back at home that the insulation mattered most.
With it, the Klan could fend off measures that might have made its
night-riding operations more difficult, such as a 1922 bill—aimed
at the Klan—to prevent the wearing of masks on Georgia's public
highways. The order went on to deliver one of the biggest electoral
defeats in state history to the governor who proposed it, Thomas
W. Hardwick. His successor, Clifford Walker, a Klansman himself,
learned the lesson. As governor, he consulted Klan leaders before
introducing new initiatives to the state assembly.46 On the local
level, prosecution of Klan violence was hardly likely when munici-
pal governments, police departments, and courts were rife with
Klan members and sympathizers. "Everybody in the courthouse be-
longed to the Klan" in Atlanta, recalled a local city attorney; "vir-
tually every judge, the prosecuting officers ... all the police and
the mayor and the councilmen." If he exaggerated, it was not by
much. With the cards thus stacked in its favor, the Klan could act
with impunity.47
Indeed, newspaper editors in the South, like politicians, tended


--- PAGE 38 ---
Mobilizing the Invisible Army 19
to quaver in the face of Klan's power. Clearly, they did not view
the order as an innocent analogue of other fraternal lodges. While
local papers boosted these, most maintained an eerie silence re-
garding the Klan's activities. Few offered outright support, yet nei-
ther would they investigate or expose it. With the notable excep-
tions of the Columbus Enquirer-Sun and eventually the Macon
Telegraph, no Georgia newspapers condemned the Klan until the
second half of the decade, when its power had begun to wane. The
Athens press was no exception. On the contrary, its editor de-
nounced Julian Harris, the anti-Klan editor of the Enquirer-Sun,
for giving comfort to "the South-haters" with his coverage of the
movement. "Nothing unpleasant must ever be printed" seemed to
be the operating principle of most newspapers, observed one Ath-
ens educator and resident; another later recalled, "they put only
nice things in the Banner-Herald."48
Night-riding and inciting hatred were not nice; neither were
they "newsworthy" if their targets were blacks or poor whites. The
topic was just too ticklish to touch. Coverage of the Klan's activi-
ties, after all, might deter outside investors, agitate blacks, and
stimulate discord among whites—to say nothing of losing subscrip-
tions. Yet, uneasiness about the Klan's methods remained. The
Athens press thus gave editorial support to two area judges who
came out against the Klan in 1926 for its "lawlessness," its efforts
"to intimidate men and . . . dominate who shall run for office,"
and its habit of "trying men in secret." Throughout the South, in
fact, the most commonly stated rationale for elite opposition to
the Klan was, in the words of one Texas judge, that society could
not abide "two systems of government for punishing crime," one
"working at night with a bucket of tar and a sack of feathers."49
The Klan's internal structure and methods of operation were well
suited to such activities. All power ultimately resided in the hands
of the Imperial Wizard, whose reign, in the words of one observer,
was a "virtual dictatorship." Indeed, short of overthrow, no real
checks on his power existed. All Klan officials at the national and
state levels received their positions by appointment from above,
not election from below. Local klaverns, once chartered, could de-
cide whom to admit as members, participate in the selection of
local officials, and plan their own activities. But their sovereignty
was more apparent than real. Chapter decisions were always sub-
ject to the veto of the state Grand Dragon, who also had the power


--- PAGE 39 ---
20 Context and Motive
to withdraw charters and thus self-government.50 Klan officials no
doubt saw in this organizational structure a safeguard for the lucre
of office.
Yet the command structure also matched the organization's ul-
timate mission: combat. Klansmen regularly described their orga-
nization as "an army" and "a fighting machine" and their projects
as "battles." "Ours is a military system, requiring performance of
duty and honor above all else," explained a manual for building
local chapters. Describing the Exalted Cyclops as "the Commander-
in-chief," it went on to elaborate the duties of the rest of the "mili-
tary machinery" in like vocabulary.51 Democratic debate and
decision-making might undermine the Klan's larger program for
the imposition of social order. One Klan leader admitted as much
in an apologia for its "complete dictatorship." "The only way in
which the Klan can be protected," he said, from "demagogues who
might be able to sway a portion of the membership . . . is to have
a government strong enough to suppress all such attacks." Such
discussion and voting as occurred within the national Klan, in fact,
bore more resemblance to plebiscites than to democratic processes.
In 1926, for example, the order boasted that Imperial Wizard Evans
had been re-elected and changes made in the Constitution "with-
out a single dissenting vote."52 What national leaders proposed, the
ranks disposed.
The Klan was not alone among voluntary organizations in its
lack of democratic process; yet the commitment to secrecy that
accompanied these procedures did appear singular. And it made
sense for a movement that had so much to conceal. The order's
internal publications often stressed confidentiality, particularly
about "Secret Work." One advised chapters with members who
"cannot keep their mouths shut" to expel them. Keeping one's
mouth shut included telling lies under oath in court if necessary,
something Klansmen routinely did on the rare occasions when
members of their movement faced indictment.53 Secrecy also
served to intimidate potential opponents and stifle public discus-
sion, since no non-members could be sure of whether or not their
white acquaintances belonged to the Klan.54
Public silence was but one element of the absolute fidelity the
order demanded. Prospective members had to pledge their loyalty
to the Klan and promise to willingly endure any penalty devised by
their brethren if they proved "untrue" to this vow, among them
"disgrace, dishonor and death." Members who might consider vio-
lating this pledge were forewarned of the danger. "The Klan is cruel


--- PAGE 40 ---
Mobilizing the Invisible Army 21
to those who betray it," an internal document reminded the faint-
hearted; "pause to consider the status of those who have betrayed
it." The Klan punished, sometimes brutally, men who betrayed
their oaths. W. S. Coburn, an aide to then-deposed Imperial Wizard
Simmons, lost his life for indiscretion in 1922; Philip Fox, a mem-
ber of Imperial Wizard Evans' staff, confessed to the assassi-
nation.55
The stress the Klan placed on internal hierarchy and obedience
was part of a more general militarism. Militarism, as historian Al-
fred Vagts has shown, is associated with war and armies, yet it
goes beyond military purposes and may even interfere with them.
Historically, the term has connoted "a domination of the military
man over the civilian." Enthralled with martial rank, prestige, and
custom, militarists exalt "caste and cult, authority and belief." The
principal exponents of modern militarism have not been military
men, but civilians disenchanted with the banalities of bourgeois
politics and the quest for material gain, yet also inimical to liberal-
ism, labor, and the Left. For inspiration, they have looked to the
ceremony, discipline, and mystical nationalism of militarism,
through which they expressed their desires for a society organized
along corresponding lines.56
Klansmen demonstrated their fealty to martial values in nu-
merous ways. Most visibly, they chose to present themselves to
the public in elaborate ceremonies, hidden beneath masks and uni-
forms that wiped out their individual identities. These outfits, in
turn, varied according to members' places in the internal hierarchy.
Rank-and-file Klansmen donned simple white robes and hoods; Ex-
alted Cyclopses and Grand Dragons, more ornate ones,- and the Im-
perial Wizard the most ostentatious and colorful regalia of all. The
salutations required for the Imperial Wizard likewise showed infat-
uation with castelike warrior traditions: "His Majesty," "His Ex-
cellency," even "Emperor of the Invisible Empire." Expressing its
aspirations to the powers nationhood conferred, the Klan referred
to the society outside itself as "the alien world." To be admitted
to the Klan, an "alien" had to undergo an initiation ceremony de-
scribed as "naturalization." Not surprisingly, the movement be-
came a magnet for men imbued with martial values. Around the
country, law enforcement personnel and military men joined the
Klan in large numbers.57
Klansmen's discomfort with civilian values and their embrace
of a lock-step hierarchy within their own movement suggested a
profound uneasiness with the direction they saw their society


--- PAGE 41 ---
22 Context and Motive
heading. What they meant when they pledged to defend "pure
Americanism" will become clearer through an examination of the
time and place that produced the movement. For the bonds solidi-
fied by fraternalism, by common religious feeling, and by family
involvement and mutual aid did not simply enhance members' loy-
alty to one another. These bonds also steeled them for battle
against "alien forces."


--- PAGE 42 ---
2
"Where Money Rules and
Morals Rot": The Vise
of Modernity
Soon after he reached the Paris Peace Conference, Woodrow Wilson
received a communication from his secretary in Washington. "If
America fails now," Joseph Tumulty warned, "socialism rules the
world."1 That sense of a world poised on the brink of a precipice
reached well beyond the halls of Versailles. Back home, the events
of 1919 defied assumptions that millions of small-holding white
men had constructed their lives on. As black Americans stood their
ground and fought back, undaunted, against their white assailants
in the nationwide race riots of that year, white supremacy appeared
vulnerable. As the woman suffrage movement won its seventy-
year-long battle for the right to vote, male prerogative no longer
seemed assured. As one in every five American workers walked off
their jobs to go on strike, the rights of property seemed less clear.
And, finally, as Wilson set out to build a global League of Nations,
the levers of power moved farther from the hands of non-elite
white men than ever before. A middle-class man inclined to fear, in
fact, could see in the events of 1919 the nightmare of the republic's
founders come true: growing economic inequality had bred concen-
trated power above and below a great mass with little stake in so-
ciety.
Some of the men in between, like Athens barber A. ]. Boyd,
would soon enlist in the Klan in order to reimpose their notions of
23


--- PAGE 43 ---
24 Context and Motive
order on this topsy-turvy world. Boyd was no novice in encounters
with change. Born soon after the end of Reconstruction, he had
lived though a profound transformation in local, regional, and na-
tional life. But that is precisely what made the immediate postwar
years so ominous: the concatenation of challenges made new sense
of alterations long under way in the economy and society. The
message was both clear and shrill. The nineteenth-century world,
a world in which a white man could still reasonably hope to be-
come his own boss if he harnessed himself to the task, was fast
passing. Without the self-sovereignty that small-holding promised,
maintaining his authority over African Americans and immi-
grants—let alone over his own wife and children—would be more
difficult than ever before. So, too, would be making himself heard
by the most powerful men in society. For as their enterprises and
interests grew to national and international proportions, the input
of men like Boyd came to seem irksome to them.2
Athens had a different look and feel to it now than when Boyd
grew up back in the 1880s. Founded astride the Oconee River in
1801 to host the state university, the town in time spilled out over
the red clay hills undulating away from the river's east and the
west banks. By the early twentieth century, several rail lines and
major highways linked Athens to markets elsewhere in the country
and helped it become an important hub of cotton trade and manu-
facture. By 1920, its varied enterprises had attracted nearly seven-
teen thousand residents. Automobiles and streetcars now vied with
horses and buggies for its city streets.3
As Athens grew after 1880, its internal divisions also became
plainer. The wealthiest residents congregated along Milledge and
Prince Avenues in the white-columned antebellum mansions that
earned Athens the name "Classic City." To their immediate west
was one of many black neighborhoods dispersed through the city.
Almost twenty percent of the city's African Americans lived in
its congested, ramshackle, usually unpainted houses, considered by
white landlords to be "one of the best investments for small
amounts of money," Denied the municipal services that white resi-
dents enjoyed, their yards held, alongside their chicken coops, out-
door privies and wells and piles of trash that the city failed to
collect.4
East of this community was the city center. Anchored on the
south by the university campus, it hummed with customers and
the residents who owned and staffed its shops and offices. Here,
too, could be found the nascent commercial leisure industry of


--- PAGE 44 ---
The Vise of Modernity 25
movie houses, poolrooms and soft-drink parlors that superseded
older forms of recreation like the cock-fighting Boyd had once prac-
ticed. Among the main patrons of these pool halls and picture
shows were white youth from the largely working-class neighbor-
hoods of East Athens and West Athens. Those who lived in these
communities and labored in the area textile mills knew they were
looked down upon by the better-off inhabitants of the city as
"more or less poor white trash."5 In short, Athens's placid appear-
ance masked antagonisms no less potent for being largely mute.
Perhaps, if the turbulence of the late 1910s had remained confined
to distant places like Harlem, Versailles, and Petrograd, it might
not have so upset men like Boyd. But the tumult could not be
contained. Dramatic national and international events found ech-
oes in communities like Athens. Klansmen were hardly alone in
seeing such connections. "The world is seething in social unrest
and disquietude," lamented a group of Athens ministers in 1921;
"anarchy overwhelms whole sections." The local press, for its part,
asserted connections between the Bolshevik revolution in Russia,
the postwar upsurge of rebellion in the United States, and lenient
parenting and crime in Athens. The "world," said editor Hugh
Rowe, was "reaping just about what it sowed."6
Workers' newfound strength attracted some of the most anx-
ious attention, at least from those in a position to employ. The
insatiable demand for labor during the war enabled Southern man-
ufacturing workers to more than double their average yearly wages
between 1914 and 1919, in the process narrowing the North-South
wage gap. By 1920, wages in Georgia hit an all-time high, inflation
notwithstanding. Athens' black workers made particularly spectac-
ular gains; wages in the main occupations open to them generally
doubled and in some cases tripled. Employers felt keenly the slip-
page of their power in this labor-scarce market. Where only a few
years before they had sat firmly in the saddle, now they had to
tolerate insubordination for fear of losing the workers they did
have if they tried to discipline them as they would have in former
days. Unable to control the situation themselves, planters and
businessmen looked to the state legislature to pass compulsory
work laws and punitive measures against vagrants and labor emi-
gration agents.7
Among white workers, the most obvious sign of newfound con-
fidence was a spate of strikes and union-organizing efforts in the


--- PAGE 45 ---
26 Context and Motive
southern Piedmont from 1918 to 1921. In Georgia, textile workers
built unions in Columbus, Macon, Griffin, and Atlanta. Other, tra-
ditionally organized, groups also caught the strike fever: machin-
ists, railway workers, streetcar workers, and building trades work-
ers. In four cities, the strikers proved so determined that the
governor had to deploy the state militia to overpower them. Mean-
while, the number of union members and locals, in Georgia
mounted continuously from 1915 to 1920.8
In Athens, skilled workers established or reactivated several lo-
cals in the 'teens: painters, barbers, typographers, and carpenters
among them. These locals then formed a city central federation in
1914. Although no evidence survives of union organizing among
local textile workers, operatives at the Southern Mills conducted
an impromptu work stoppage when management tried to introduce
piecework. "They would starve first," they said. Giving larger im-
port to these local events, the-Athens press bombarded readers
with sensational, front-page accounts of battles between labor and
capital elsewhere in the South and the nation.9
The insurgence of white labor could scarcely be separated from
the disgruntlemerit spreading among African Americans, even be-
fore the war. Young people especially resented the curbs on their
freedom. Many white planters in the Clarke County area thus com-
plained in 1911 that "the younger generation is rapidly becoming
unmanageable," attributing their recalcitrance to "a deep-seated
dislike of control and discontent with farming life and conditions."
An expert in agricultural economics concurred, pointing to "the
growing aversion on the part of the negro to supervision. He desires
his movements to be absolutely unrestricted," even if it meant less
income. That desire was palpable in black families' growing rejec-
tion of wage labor in favor of rental arrangements that allowed
more autonomy. In town, black women wrested more freedom for
themselves and more time for their own families by choosing laun-
dry work over domestic service where possible.10 Such efforts, ur-
ban and rural, led many white employers to suspect that black
workers were secretly organized. One planter thus cautioned Gov-
ernor Joseph Mackey Brown in 1913 that they "must be crowded
back by some means."11
The war brought these antagonisms into the open. Finding Jim
Crow in Georgia unions, black workers expressed their aspirations
in other ways. Some moved to escape the South's caste system,
undaunted by the knowledge that they would face new ordeals in
the North. "Negroes are leaving here by the hundreds," marvelled


--- PAGE 46 ---
The Vise of Modernity 27
an Augusta resident in 1917. "They know where they are going;
they know what they are up against."12 Those who stayed behind
were hardly the docile folk of New South propaganda. Clarke
County white employers, both urban and rural, fumed over the
boldness of their black employees in 1919. One hotel manager de-
scribed "such gross indifference ... [as he] had never encountered
before." A fertilizer plant manager maintained that his black work-
ers "were absolutely uncontrollable." Before long, he and other lo-
cal white employers believed, such black workers would "begin to
organize." White nerves became so sensitive that they registered
changes in blacks' spending habits as political statements. High
wartime wages enabled even some poor people to buy such things
as silk shirts or automobiles. This "unusually extravagant buying"
irked establishment whites. Some griped that blacks spent twice as
much on cars as they did on war bonds.13
But the bravest statement of black aspirations came in politics,
as some pushed to open a second front in President Wilson's "war
for democracy": below the Mason-Dixon line. In March of 1918,
for example, over a hundred African-American Atlantans signed
and put into mass circulation a letter vigorously demanding the
rights they declared due them as "sovereign American citizens."
They denounced lynching as "worse than Prussianism" and con-
demned the "discrimination," "humiliation," and "segregation"
their people were daily subjected to as "a violation of the funda-
mental rights of citizens of the United States." Most dramatically,
they attributed these "brutalities and indignities" to the way
Southern whites had "filchfed]" the votes of black men in an "ef-
fort to re-enslave us." Finally, the signers vowed to continue to
"exert our righteous efforts until not only every eligible black man
but every eligible black woman shall be wielding the ballot proudly
in defense of our liberties and our homes."14
In their focus on the Great Migration and the Harlem Renais-
sance, in fact, historians of African-American life in these years
have slighted the surge of resistance to white supremacy by South-
ern blacks.15 Contemporaries did not. "Did you ever know a race
to awake as our race has awakened in the last year or so?" ex-
claimed a member of the Augusta NAACP. "Augusta is almost a
different town. The old spirit of humble satisfaction, of let-well-
enough-alone is fast dying out." In the three years after 1916, the
number of NAACP branches in the South jumped from six to 155.
Together, they amassed a dues-paying membership of over 42,000.
For the first time, Southerners now dominated the organization's


--- PAGE 47 ---
28 Context and Motive
rank and file. Georgia blacks organized scores of these chapters,
not only in cities like Atlanta and Augusta, but also in tiny towns
and hamlets around the state.16
In 1917, the same year the NAACP came to Georgia, thirty-
one Athens residents chartered a branch in their community. The
following year, they brought NAACP leader Walter White to town
to speak. G. C. Callaway, a member of the local executive commit-
tee, gave voice to his co-workers' aspirations. He informed the na-
tional office that Athens had a reputation as "the best town" in the
state for blacks. But that relative comfort was no longer enough.
Callaway looked to the NAACP "to force in to the nation liberty
fre[e]dom [and] equality." Everyone, he hoped, would "orginice and
join the fight."17
Branches in cities took up the cudgels for their rural brethren.
The Atlanta NAACP, whose membership reached 1,700 in 1919,
prosecuted cases of debt peonage and defended two blacks who had
killed whites in self-defense. Harking back to the abolition crusade,
Atlanta members constructed "a system of underground railroads
for . . . persons fleeing from the cruelty and oppression of the rural
communities and small towns." The chapter also undertook a mas-
sive, successful voter-registration drive in 1919. In one month, they
bought over a thousand new black voters to the polls in Atlanta—
more than double the number who had taken part in some past
elections. This campaign caused panic among leading whites, who
hauled out their white employees to offset black votes. The "solid-
ity" of the African-American vote in the election, as much as the
NAACP's forthright insistence that it expressed "definite and long
standing grievances," was perhaps behind the legislation proposed
in the state assembly the following year to prohibit blacks' voting
or holding office at all.18 The proportion of blacks involved in such
outspoken protest was tiny; the challenge their undertakings posed
to the status quo was great.
Even more fearsome to racist whites than the NAACP were
black veterans of the Great War. The mere vision of an African-
American man in a uniform, a symbol commanding respect, could
arouse white fire-eaters to violence. But the threat posed by black
soldiers was not merely symbolic. Once having experienced an al-
ternative to Southern life, most would never be the same—nor
would the communities they returned to. Seventy percent of the
Clarke County planters with black employees in the Army re-
ported in one study that the veterans left the farm soon after re-


--- PAGE 48 ---
The Vise of Modernity 29
turning from the service. A majority said that the remaining work-
ers then became dissatisfied as well.19
Even federal officials became disturbed about black veterans
moving north. "They are inclined to put what they understand to
be their rights as American citizens above every other consider-
ation," observed one official in the War Department. Others were
not so circumspect. A 1918 military intelligence report described
as "a potential danger," not white vigilantes, but the black soldier
"strutting around in his uniform/' particularly if he was "inclined
to impudence or arrogance." If these men tried to act on "the new
ideas and social aspirations" they had acquired in France, the au-
thor declared (in allusion to rumors of romantic liaisons with
white women), "an era of bloodshed will follow as compared with
which the history of reconstruction will be a mild reading, indeed."
So alarmed was the Division of Military Intelligence over "Negro
subversion"—defined as black veterans' fighting "any white effort,
especially in the South, to reestablish white ascendancy"—that it
undertook a secret investigation to find out whether they had a
collective organization to promote their goals.20
Here, it seemed, was brewing the black rebellion whose specter
haunted the white establishment. Not only were black soldiers
trained in combat, but it appeared their civilian peers might no
longer turn the other cheek, either. This, at any rate, was the mes-
sage of the race riots of 1919. In them, African Americans fought
back en masse, for the first time, against white assailants. Cer-
tainly local racists noticed that, according to Athens merchants,
black purchases of firearms skyrocketed in these years, restrained
only by limited supply. The newly formed Federal Bureau of Inves-
tigation became so worried that in 1920 it initiated investigations
throughout the South into the extent of gun purchasing by blacks.
The reports that came back often indicated either a noticeable in-
crease or that they were already almost universally armed with
good weapons—hardly a comforting prospect to panic-ridden white
supremacists.21
The unrest among blacks was serious enough to prompt a
small group of liberal whites to action. Several met in January of
1919 in Atlanta to form what would come to be known as the
Commission on Interracial Cooperation (CIC). World War I had
"changed the whole status of race relationships," an internal ac-
count of the CIC's origins later explained; blacks became deter-
mined to obtain "things hitherto not hoped for." The CIC identi-


--- PAGE 49 ---
30 Context and Motive
fied three different groups among Southern blacks: the "openly
rebellious, defiant and contemptuous" leaders to whom "one talks
... in vain as to the need for patience"; "below . . . the great
mass of uneducated Negroes" who gravitated more and more to-
ward the radicals' positions; and finally, those "thoughtful, edu-
cated Negro leaders" who counseled a need for "patience" yet had
a "tendency to despair" at its failure to produce results. White CIC
founders sought to isolate radical leaders and raise the credibility
of more conservative ones with the mass of skeptical poor blacks
by alleviating some of the most onerous aspects of white suprem-
acy. Limited as the goals of the CIC were, its very existence
marked a sea change in sortie quarters of Southern white society.
In a culture in which, as CIC director Will Alexander rued, many
whites still found "killing a Negro less reprehensible than eating
with him," CIC committees in hundreds of local communities in-
volved leading blacks and whites in ongoing discussions on how to
stop mob violence and improve race relations.22
Indicative of the indivisibility of the challenges to prevailing
relations of power in these years, adult women and college stu-
dents proved among the most avid of the CIC's white supporters.
Thus, some intrepid young men and women from the YMCA at the
University of Georgia met with students from the Knox Institute, a
local black private school, in an interracial discussion group—until
their leader was driven from the university.23 From the first meet-
ing of leaders of women's organizations to discuss the war's impact
on race relations in 1920, according to Alexander, "the most effec-
tive force in changing southern racial patterns has been the white
women." Their efficacy came from the way their very participation
in interracial work challenged the myth of the "Southern lady" so
central to policing the lines between black and white in the
South.24
Involvement in interracial work after the war betokened a
metamorphosis among Southern white women. Among its other
markers was a growth in feminist agitation by middle- and upper-
class women in the 1910s. The Athens Women's Club joined with
society women's groups across the state to demand the admission
of women to the University of Georgia in Athens. The Clarke
County Equal Suffrage Association, established in 1912, held pub-
lic rallies and debates to promote woman's rights.25 Some men,
such as local newspaper editor Hugh Rowe, feared that the suffrage
movement was breeding "sex antagonism and prejudice." Anti-
suffragists went further: votes for women would overturn the so-


--- PAGE 50 ---
The Vise of Modernity 31
cial order. Still, the "world-wide pull of the feminist movement"
seemed irresistible,- "neither race, nationality, nor the hostility of
man," it seemed to Rowe, "[could] stop it."26
Feminism's spread both reflected and fueled changes in the ev-
eryday lives of young, middle-class white women. Despite the op-
position of a majority of the male faculty and the "skepticism" of
male civic organizations, the University of Georgia finally admit-
ted women as full-time, regular students in September of 1918.
Many male students resisted the change. "Boys did everything to
embarrass the co-eds," one contemporary recalled, from boycotting
them socially, to swearing in front of them, to denouncing "the
evils of women" in public meetings. Yet their tantrums failed. Fe-
male students stood their ground. One even publicly defended the
recent gains of her sex. She insisted that college training was
women's "just right rather than a high privilege bestowed upon
them." She pointed out that "most twentieth century girls do
choose to enter a profession or industry." They did so in part be-
cause they were "unwilling to become economic burdens or social
parasites" now that so much work had moved outside the home.
"The modern girl," she warned, "will not submit" to the desires of
men "who insist on girls being dolls to be flattered arid enter-
tained. . . . She demands recognition and opportunities for her
capabilities."27 That the writer chose to remain anonymous indi-
cates the opposition such ideas still confronted; that she wrote it at
all indicates the willingness of some women to challenge a gender
ideology inherited from an older social order.
In this context of redefinition, simple gestures came to denote
larger agendas for both sides. Perhaps because new standards of fe-
male dress were the most visible marker of change, they served as
a potent symbol in the renegotiation of female roles. Casting off
the long skirts and high-necked blouses of their mothers' genera-
tion, "business girls" adopted styles at once more relaxed and more
flamboyant. Impatient with polite conventions about female mod-
esty, girls from the posh Lucy Cobb Institute in Athens followed
their lead. They endured the ritual inspection of their dress length
each Saturday morning before they could go to town—only to hike
their skirts above their knees once they were out of the matron's
sight.28 The significance of young women's determination to shed
Victorian attire, denoting as it did also aspirations toward sexual
self-determination, was not lost on defenders of female domestic-
ity. Reports circulated in 1921 of a bill pending in the state legisla-
ture to fine or imprison women whose skirts ended more than


--- PAGE 51 ---
32 Context and Motive
three inches above their ankles. Even the press joined in the out-
cry. The failure of all such efforts to dissuade young women from
baring their knees and bobbing their hair merely confirmed their
unruliness in the eyes of those who believed that the "new
woman" jeopardized the social order.29
Like rising skirts, the rise of smoking among young white
women became a controversial issue. Whereas the new dress styles
indicated a decline in female sexual modesty, female smoking
threatened to dissolve gender distinctions altogether. "French
Women," a banner headline in the local press thus proclaimed,
"Get Mustaches from Smoking." Although only about thirty fe-
male students at the University of Georgia smoked in these years,
they were also the first generation of co-eds. As such, they ap-
peared to many to be the wave of the future. Their insistence on
their right to smoke and their defiance of university rules forbid-
ding it no doubt made that future appear ominous to those inter-
ested in preserving clearly demarcated gender roles and unques-
tioned submission to authority.30
The very newness of such behavior, adopted as it was in an
already turbulent social context, made it seem seditious. Many
contemporaries could not believe that a woman who smoked could
be a reliable mother, or that a girl who wore short skirts would
ever heed a husband's wishes. Only experience could calm their
fears. And, in fact, it would be a decade before the fearful realized
that these changes did not have the apocalyptic potential they had
imagined. In the 'twenties, "girls was shipped off for just any of-
fense," recalled a maid at the State Teachers' College in Athens in
the 1930s. "Now they does pretty much as they pleases. [The
school] even provides smokin' rooms for 'em."31 Until then, smok-
ing, like so much other new female behavior, seemed to pose a
grave threat to the social order.
Continuities notwithstanding, young women did expect more
from men than their mothers had. When disappointed, they proved
more willing to buck the Victorian middle-class convention of
marriage as a permanent union devoted to child-rearing. Nation-
wide, the divorce rate increased by two thousand percent between
the Civil War and the Great Depression, when one in six marriages
ended in divorce. While the total number qf divorces per capita in
Georgia was about half the number nationally in 1916, the rate of
increase after the turn of the century was more rapid than in the
United States as a whole—notwithstanding the fact that state's
courts granted alimony to fewer than one in ten women. In Clarke


--- PAGE 52 ---
The Vise of Modernity 33
County, the number of divorces leapt from fifteen in 1916 to forty
in 1922.32 Faced with this surge, the local press recoiled from its
earlier liberalism. Having defended "the divorce blessing" in 1914
as many women's only means of "escape" from "oppression," after
the war the Athens Banner-Herald deplored the "divorce evil,"
called Athens "a little Reno," and referred to its court as "the Di-
vorce mill."33
Its turnaround issued from an astute intuition. Such things as
the rise of divorce, feminism, black radicalism, white racial liberal-
ism, and the postwar strike wave were not isolated, random occur-
rences. These instances of insubordination to old masters were the
birth pangs of a new kind of social order, one whose relations of
power and culture differed from those of the nineteenth-century
world men like Boyd and Rowe had been born into. In their eyes,
it appeared to eviscerate discipline, stability, and predictability—
in short, to undercut the kind of hierarchy from which men like
themselves had derived security.34
As disturbing as the many challenges to authority was the aware-
ness that they had not emerged from thin air. Rather, they realized
potentials created by long-term changes that together weakened
the foundations of the nineteenth-century world. By altering the
ground families constructed their lives upon, for example, eco-
nomic development after 1880 began to open up to question previ-
ous relations between men and women. On one side, employment
apart from the family, more control over their fertility, and easier
access to divorce offered women the prospect of greater autonomy.
On the other side, economic insecurity, geographical mobility, and
the market's takeover of much domestic labor made men more
willing to desert wives and children. Taken together, such develop-
ments made families less permanent, more contested, and in many
ways, different institutions.
Of course, the changes should not be overstated. In hindsight,
some of the continuities seem as impressive. Cotton continued to
dominate the economy, for example. Although agriculture now oc-
cupied a minority of the local labor force, it was still the leading
occupation of Clarke County men, as of most Southern men, just
as cotton manufacture was the area's leading industry. Most rural
people, moreover, still strained to make ends meet. The average
annual income for a farm family in a typical Georgia Piedmont
county in 1924 was $591, from which expenses for farm operations


--- PAGE 53 ---
34 Context and Motive
had to be paid. As late as 1930, fewer than one in ten Clarke
County farm households enjoyed electricity, telephones, or run-
ning water. Like their grandparents, most rural people still lived in
unpainted houses on dirt roads, drew their water by hand, and trav-
elled by wagon or buggy when need arose.35
Whether they lived in the countryside or in town, nearly every
group in Georgia still relied on kinship networks for economic sur-
vival. Among the wealthy, endogamous marriage practices concen-
trated economic resources so that they could be mobilized to great-
est effect. Among the less well-off, children still counted as net
assets rather than debits. Small-farm owners and tenants alike
counted on the labor of all family members. The more the hands
to tend it, the better the crop—or the bigger the plot, for a tenant
household.36 Like rural landlords, mill managers favored large fam-
ilies and penalized small in their employment and housing poli-
cies. "The size of your house," as an Athens mill villager recalled,
"depended on the size of your family." From the children who
earned wages, to the grandparents who looked after toddlers whose
parents worked in the mills, household maintenance required col-
lective effort.37 Kin also furnished aid no one else would in times of
unemployment, illness, or incapacity. Indeed, the support of one's
children made it possible to avert what a Savannah unionist de-
scribed in 1922 as "the terror of Old Age": "POVERTY, and the
POOR HOUSE."38
Nearly all social relations, in fact, still bore the stamp of an
older patriarchal model that subordinated individual needs and
rights to the welfare of hierarchical collectivities. That model sanc-
tioned private violence in the service of public order. Most im-
portant, in the South, was the force used to bolster white suprem-
acy. Lynching illustrated the legitimacy of such force among
whites. Between 1882 and 1934, lynch mobs murdered more than
five thousand people, the vast majority of them Southern black
men. In Georgia, at least 549 people, 510 of them black, were
lynched over roughly the same period. Yet, between 1885 and 1922,
the state prosecuted only one person for lynching.39
Violence against African Americans short of killing was still a
routine feature of Southern life. The whipping of workers common
in slavery persisted into the twentieth century, particularly in rural
areas, where physical compulsion remained an accepted tool of la-
bor control. The NAACP received numerous complaints in the
1920s about the killing of black farm hands by white employers or
overseers. One Albany, Georgia, minister, in reporting the murder


--- PAGE 54 ---
The Vise of Modernity 35
of a black man whose only offense was to have "cursed" his cheat-
ing boss, concluded forlornly, "often things like this hapen in this
county."40
Labor relations in the countryside influenced state penal prac-
tice. A few complaints notwithstanding, Georgia prison camps still
used whips to discipline their charges in the 'twenties. Some con-
temporaries—including the editor of the Athens Banner-Herald
and the American Bar Association's Committee on Law Enforce-
ment—even called for the re-establishment of the public whipping
post. A speaker at an annual convention of Georgia sheriffs and
peace officers advocated it for "petty criminals," in particular for
"men who neglect their families."41
The paternalistic power wielded by planters was also copied by
industrialists. Since many mill villages were unincorporated, they
had no democratically constituted public authority. Mill officials
owned them and ran them, and hired, paid, and controlled their
police forces. Workers who violated the employers' codes of moral
conduct, even during their off-hours, stood to lose their jobs and
homes. "You didn't have no private life at all," one mill worker
later complained. "You could come home and take your pants off
and leave one leg on, and they'd tell you about it at the mill."42 Of
even more concern to mill owners and their political supporters
than illicit sex, drinking, or gambling were strikes and union activ-
ity. Especially in the turn-of-the-century South, employer-
sponsored vigilantism against labor organizers was extensive and
unabashed. It included warnings out of town, beatings, floggings,
tar-and-featherings, and occasionally, outright murder.43
Public social control, in turn, derived legitimacy from the
power relations of family life. Most whites accepted male domi-
nance as necessary to maintain family order. Wife-beating, al-
though publicly frowned upon in the 'twenties, nonetheless ap-
peared common. Courts treated it lightly when it came before
them. Similarly, parents took for granted their right to whip their
children. Most also continued to back corporal punishment in
Georgia schools, especially in rural areas and small towns.44
Yet, for all the continuities, as productive property became
more concentrated and the number of people engaged in wage labor
grew, Southern society changed in fundamental ways. Where once
the class structure of Southern white men had bulged in the mid-
dle, now it looked more like the pyramid that its Northern coun-
terpart had become. At the pinnacle of the emerging order stood
the economic moguls of the nation, distant figures such as Henry


--- PAGE 55 ---
36 Context and Motive
Ford and John D. Rockefeller. Their imitators in Piedmont cities
and towns like Athens were industrialists (generally textile manu-
facturers), bankers, and large-scale merchants. Often travelling in
the same circles as this regional elite, if not with the same re-
sources, were college-educated white professionals. At a lower, al-
beit still respected, rung stood small business owners, managers,
salaried clerks, and skilled tradesmen. Finally, near the bottom of
the pyramid were unskilled white operatives. Their paltry wages
nearly matched those of the black laborers and service workers
who filled the very bottom tier. Although far over-represented at
the bottom of the heap, African Americans existed in smaller num-
bers in the middling ranks as well.45
The countryside featured a comparable hierarchy. Here, too,
prospective white smallholders found old avenues to independence
impeded by economic concentration, even in the once yeoman-
dominated Piedmont. A landlord-merchant class stood atop the ru-
ral class structure, presiding over a mass of propertyless blacks and
whites. Yet the forms in which the landless sold their labor varied
in ways that corresponded to class fractions in town. Racism en-
sured that the lowliest positions—sharecroppers and wage labor-
ers—would be occupied almost exclusively by African Americans.
Lacking farm animals and equipment, sharecroppers constituted,
in both fact and law, a rural proletariat akin to the unskilled wage
laborers in the region's mills. Renting tenants, in contrast, shared
some of the attributes of skilled craftsmen, such as ownership of
their own tools, greater freedom from supervision, and better, if
diminishing, prospects for acquiring land of their own. More likely
to be white, renters were also more likely to identify their interests
with those of small farmers.46
Southern society had not always divided on such lines. Farm
ownership had remained widespread among whites throughout the
nineteenth century. Yet a series of circumstances led the rate of
independent ownership to plummet between the Civil War and the
World War. Credit being scarce in the South, farmers in need of
cash turned—or were pushed by furnishing merchants to turn—
more and more to commercial crop production. Reflecting that
growing orientation to the market, an orientation made possible by
railroads that began to connect non-plantation areas to Northern
markets, Clarke County farmers in 1920 planted three times as
many acres in cotton as they had in 1880, at the expense of food
and other crops. In Georgia as a whole, cotton came to account for
two-thirds of the value of all crops by 1920.47


--- PAGE 56 ---
The Vise of Modernity  37
Meanwhile, acquiring a farm of one's own became a more mon-
umental task for young white men. As descendants multiplied
while the land supply held constant, a trend to smaller and less
viable farms developed. Young men, in particular, now had to hire
themselves out in growing numbers as tenants in hopes of acquir-
ing the wherewithal to purchase farms of their own. Many never
would. The proportion of Georgia farm operators who were tenants
thus grew from forty-five percent in 1880 to sixty-seven percent in
1920. In Clarke County, the ratio was starker: almost three of ev-
ery four farm operators in 1920 worked someone else's land.48
Developments in town and country were closely connected,
since, as one study put it, "the impoverishment of farmers was
industrialization's driving force." Manufacturing acted as a magnet
for refugees from hardscrabble farms. Athens' population practi-
cally doubled between 1890 and 1920, making it one of Georgia's
leading mid-sized cities. By then, two-thirds of the county's resi-
dents lived in the city proper or in smaller satellite towns. The
number of wage-earners and of manufacturing establishments in
the county had also more than doubled since 1880. Among the,
largest firms were the Climax Hosiery Mill, the Athens Manufac-
turing Company, and the Union City Thread Mill in East Athens,
and in the outlying areas of Princeton and Whitehall, the Southern
Manufacturing Company and the Mallison Braid and Cord Mill. As
the manufacturing labor force grew to more than one and a half
thousand people, the aggregate value of the products they produced
grew over fifteen times, to reach over ten million dollars in 1919.49
While country life had its drawbacks, mill villages left more to
be desired in the view of many whites, especially older men. In
place of the self-paced and seasonal if hard work of farming, manu-
facturing workers endured monotonous workdays and grave risks.
Every three to four working days in Georgia in 1921 a worker died
in an industrial accident. In Athens, only one in twenty manufac-
turing workers worked fewer than fifty-four hours a week in 1919;
three in four put in sixty or more hours. "In my young days," an
Athens mill worker later recalled, "the life of a mill worker wasn't
very long. The close confinement, long hours, lint and dust that
they had to breathe, all worked together to shorten their lives."50
Whether one lived in town or country, in any case, was becom-
ing less important than what one did. A widening chasm separated
mill villagers from their "uptown" contemporaries. The latter in-
cluded not only the self-styled "better people" as one might ex-
pect—the mill owners, bankers, large merchants, and professionals


--- PAGE 57 ---
38 Context and Motive
who dominated public life—but also small business people, white-
collar employees, and supervisory personnel. Even craftsmen took
care to distance themselves from unskilled workers. Having them-
selves usually hailed from landowning families, large or small, up-
town whites joined planters and independent farmers in disdain for
mill operatives. Scorned as "lintheads" and "white trash," their
failure to succeed in farm life, according to uptown people,
stemmed from laziness, immorality, even genetic inferiority.51
Mill villagers tended to reciprocate the dislike of uptown
whites and express a strong "them and us" consciousness and val-
ues of their own. A man born in a mill section of Athens later
recalled what it was like to grow up "on the wrong side of the
tracks." "The people who had money" in the city were "kow-
towed to as if they were kings," while the people in his neighbor-
hood incurred disdain from other townspeople. To reclaim their
dignity, he and his friends mocked rich boys, whom parents
warned them not to play with, as "sissies." According to one study,
mill workers also spurned as virtual traitors those who moved up
the ladder to become foremen. Some mill operatives (almost half
in one 1930 study) were in fact favorable to unions, although con-
vinced by the disastrous results of earlier efforts that their employ-
ers would never tolerate them. Others resented company housing
and "welfare" programs, which used money they believed theirs by
right. Still others consistently voted against the wishes of town
elites in politics.52
The segregation between mill and uptown people was extreme,
in some ways more unremitting than that between blacks and
whites. Mill and town rarely associated at all. They almost never
intermarried, they belonged to mutually exclusive clubs and orga-
nizations, and they avoided social encounters. The friction be-
tween the two groups was so great that the few institutions involv-
ing people from both, such as churches or schools in mixed
communities, often could not hold social events. In Athens, ac-
cording to one contemporary teacher, the split between mill chil-
dren and other children was already unbridgeable by the fifth
grade.53
More than any other group of white wage-earners in the local
population, in fact, mill workers most resembled the bogey of Jef-
fersonian republicans: the Old World proletariat. Their pitiful in-
comes ranked among the lowest of all manufacturing workers in
the United States in the 1920s. Most mill households had to rely


--- PAGE 58 ---
The Vise of Modernity 39
on employers for their roofs as well as their wages. Even their
churches were usually not their own, but were built and backed by
management to mold and subdue them. Moreover, unlike white
farm tenants who might acquire land, or craftsmen who might
start their own businesses later in life, mill operatives' station was
usually permanent. Although many parents desired better lives for
their children, escape from the industry was rare. Paltry education
and intensive labor ensured that most would lack the resources for
mobility. In the elementary school attended by mill workers' chil-
dren in west Athens in the late 1910s, for example, sixty-five to
seventy pupils competed for the attention of the first-grade teacher.
Were the overcrowding not enough to discourage learning, the lack
of a fifth grade in their school barred these mill children from sec-
ondary education even if their families could have afforded the loss
of their wages. There was thus much truth to the common saying
of mill parents that "there is no chance for the children of such as
us."54
Yet, as economic development closed off some old options for
white men, it opened some new ones for African Americans. A
step down from landowning, tenancy marked a step up from share-
cropping. As whites moved down and blacks moved up, race and
class ceased to converge as neatly as they had in the nineteenth
century. "The Negroes in Georgia," as one Athens contemporary
put it, "can no longer be divided from white people by a sharp line
of economic cleavage." While tenants now outnumbered owners
among whites, more African Americans owned their farms in
Clarke County in 1920 than ever before. For the first time, the
number of white and black owners was almost equal: 180 to 163.55
Another sign of the old system's unravelling was- the mounting
numbers of blacks who left the country for the city, where they
felt less pressure to defer to whites. By 1920, a quarter of a million
black Georgians lived in urban areas. Like other Georgia cities in
the decade, Athens became a magnet for blacks fleeing rural areas.
And here also, black property-holding grew after 1875. By 1913,
sixty-three black households owned over one thousand dollars of
taxable property. Mary Wright Hill was an emblem of their
achievements. The principal of an East Athens school, Hill lived in
a ten-room house, married in a posh church ceremony, put all her
children through college, and treated her daughter to a tour of Eu-
rope. Some of Hill's peers rejected the servility demanded by
Southern whites more overtly. At the 1914 Atlanta convention of


--- PAGE 59 ---
40 Context and Motive
the Woman's Christian Temperance Union, Athens black women
refused to sit in the segregated area the organization's white leaders
had designated for them.56
The growing self-assertion of the black middle class in fact lay
behind the emergence of top-down racial reform efforts such as the
CIC. On one hand, the pool of educated and relatively privileged
black leaders that now existed in most sizable communities in the
South shared many of the values held by their white counterparts,
a convergence that made cooperation possible. On the other hand,
the very economic restructuring that aided some African Ameri-
cans in their efforts to move up the ladder also decreased the re-
gion's reliance on plantation labor. In this setting, some middle-
and upper-middle-class whites began to imagine, for the first time,
a racial order based less on coercion and more on consent. Corning
from universities, churches, newspapers, and some large enter-
prises in the region's cities and towns, these men and women rec-
ognized that without reform blacks would quit the region, which
itself could become a backwater. "The danger," explained M.
Ashby Jones in one CIC missive, came "from the loss of labor on
our farms and from the condemnation of the outside world." Thus,
both sides could agree on a strategy that brought together the self-
styled "best elements" of each race to achieve greater harmony
through a process of gradual reform.57
Economic change altered the foundations, not only of relations
between blacks and whites, but also of men and women and par-
ents and children within white society. Although families re-
mained important economic units, their character changed. Where
the quintessential nineteenth-century white family labored under
the direction of its male head, now sons and daughters, sometimes
wives as well, earned wages in their own right. White women and
children had in fact pioneered the movement into the mills in the
1880s, with adult men following only as the farm economy con-
stricted. By 1919, adult women accounted for almost one in five
manufacturing workers in the state. In addition to manufacturing,
which usually involved them as contributors to family coffers,
more and more young white women took clerical jobs and moved
out of their parents' homes. By the end of the decade, white women
in professional and semiprofessional service in Athens in fact out-
numbered those employed in cotton mills. The number of "busi-
ness girls" living on their own so multiplied by 1909 that the Ath-
ens YWCA established a boarding house for them.58
More generally, the decline of independent proprietorship un-


--- PAGE 60 ---
The Vise of Modernity 41
dermined fathers' ability to control their children through the pros-
pect of inheritance. Save the minority of farmers who still owned
land and the small-business owners and craftsmen with a shop or
trade to pass on, by 1920 most non-elite parents in Georgia lacked
resources with which to win their children's obedience. Even their
houses were rarely their own. Freed from agriculture by the shrink-
ing pool of available land and eager to achieve independence, young
people proved the likeliest to leave the countryside for the city. As
child-labor and compulsory-schooling laws began to take effect
after 1914, moreover, urban adolescents enjoyed unprecedented
leisure.59
Young women and men in these years in fact helped fashion a
new cultural constellation aptly depicted by one historian as "fili-
archy." As industry eclipsed agriculture and technological innova-
tion more and more drove the nation's economy, deference to
youth increasingly supplanted the veneration of age that had de-
scribed classic patriarchy. Willingly or not, parents and churches
ceded cultural authority to their children's peers and a commercial
mass culture. The new pattern, described by some as the displace-
ment of Victorianism by modernism, became plain by war's end.60
As it did elsewhere in the country, a heterosocial youth culture
began to take form in Athens in these years. Like their peers in
New York and Chicago had before them, Clarke County adults
witnessed its advent with apprehension. Movie-mania, "dance
madness," "joy-riding," and even the newly discovered phenome-
non of juvenile delinquency all seemed to express disregard for the
authority of parents and disdain for their gender roles.61 Students
at the University of Georgia, once quiescent, also became more
defiant in the 1920s. Several petitioned the administration to abol-
ish mandatory chapel attendance—on the grounds that it was "bor-
ing." Others started a newspaper, The Iconoclast, whose contents
lived up to its name. Like adults, students began to polarize over
issues of gender, sex, and culture. One student leader thus com-
plained to his friends and his diary about how his male peers were
"unable to think above their belts." Disgusted by their obsessive
talk of women and their "obscene jokes," he was also perplexed by
his own fantasies.62
White men's loss of power over their own children and wives
was accompanied by a loss of leverage in public life. In early
nineteenth-century Georgia, as elsewhere in the country, politics
was notable for the breadth of participation of white men. Even
after the defeat of Reconstruction and the restoration of white rule,


--- PAGE 61 ---
42 Context and Motive
non-elite white men—and black men—continued to turn out to
the polls in large numbers. If a Republican sweep was ruled out,
the Democratic Party was nonetheless far from united. Under its
auspices a planter-dominated old guard struggled against challenges
from both small farmers and city-based proponents of an industrial-
ized New South. In the late 1870s and early 1880s, these rivalries
erupted in the so-called Independent revolt against Bourbon Demo-
cratic "machine rule." Later in the decade, the region's rulers faced
a challenge from a different quarter, as the Knights of Labor, with
its vision of an end to "wage slavery" and a "cooperative common-
wealth," made a pitch for the loyalties of America's direct produc-
ers. In Georgia, the Knights signed up some nine thousand mem-
bers in thirty-one assemblies, three of them in Athens.63
By far the most momentous struggle, however, was that waged
in the 1890s by the People's Party. Prompted by a catastrophic de-
cline in cotton prices and the devastation wrought by the Long
Depression, Southern farmers began to question the direction of
American society and politics. When their attempts to organize
producers' cooperatives through the Farmers' Alliance ran aground,
large numbers turned to politics. Convinced by talented organizers
like Tom Watson and by their own experience in state politics that
the Democratic Party was beyond repair, they joined the national
third-party movement on a wide-ranging anti-monopoly platform.
Worship of the almighty dollar, said the Populists, had corrupted
politics and dehumanized society. But their most radical position
was an insistence that black and white small farmers shared a com-
mon interest in reform.64
Within a few years, the People's Party mounted the most sig-
nificant electoral challenge ever faced by the region's rulers. At
least one in three Georgia voters resisted bribes, intimidation, and
violence to vote Populist in 1892, an act that cost fifteen men their
lives. Two years later, the third party took more than forty-four
percent of the state's votes and one-third of its counties. Nearly
half of all Clarke County voters went Populist in 1894; some of
the faithful even established a Farmers' Alliance Warehouse and
Commission Company and a Workingmen's Cooperative Store. But
enthusiasm was not enough; by 1896, the People's Party was on
the wane. Bribery, fraud, threats, violence, and cooptative reforms
by Democratic elites had combined with internal divisions among
"the people" themselves to seal the third party's fate.65
The defeat of Populism shaped the future of politics in decisive
ways. As pragmatic as its white leaders' proposal for alliance with


--- PAGE 62 ---
The Vise of Modernity 43
black farmers had been, their willingness to extend it marked a
watershed in Southern politics. Bourbon Democrats' understanding
of the profundity of this challenge to the building blocks of their
political economy was evident in the lengths they went to to defeat
the Populists and to prevent such a challenge from occurring again.
Across the South, the resurgent Bourbons pushed through legisla-
tion to so separate whites and blacks that they might never again
recognize common experiences and needs. Over the next two de-
cades, Southern states and localities issued a veritable avalanche of
Jim Crow laws and ordinances. Some went as far as to segregate
the dead in cemeteries. Even more devastating to black communi-
ties and to the prospects for interracial social movements was the
related campaign to disfranchise black men—to guarantee the po-
litical quiescence that other forms of intimidation had failed to.66
Yet, in Georgia at least, planters and Democratic party bosses
bent on suppressing challenges from below were not the only pro-
ponents of disfranchisement; former Populist standard-bearer Tom
Watson also clamored to exclude black men from the electorate.
Watson's reasoning presaged the kind of convoluted thinking about
class and race that would later characterize the Klan. On the
grounds that the Democratic elite used black votes to deter chal-
lenges from a disaffected white majority, Watson promised in 1904
to deliver his following to any Democrat who would support a con-
stitutional amendment to disfranchise blacks. Hoke Smith did;
with Watson's backing he trounced his competitor by a four-to-one
margin in 1906. Two years later, an amendment that took suffrage
away from most of the remaining black voters became law. While
Watson's campaign to deprive black men of voting rights marked
an about-face from his interracial appeal for economic justice in
the 1890s the different stages of his career were unified by a com-
mon core: his devotion to the interests of middling whites as he
understood them. Whereas in the 1890s, the primary threat to
them appeared to come from above—from robber barons and con-
servative planters—as time went on, the challenge from below—
from propertyless labor in town and country, especially blacks and
immigrants—grew, and Watson turned more and more attention
to it.67
Yet things did not work out the way he had planned. With
black voters pushed to the margins, white politics became less, not
more, democratic. Even drastic restrictions on who could vote
failed to satisfy the South's governing class. On the contrary,
throughout the region a commercial civic elite, led by organiza-


--- PAGE 63 ---
44 Context and Motive
tions such as the Chamber of Commerce and made up of substan-
tial proprietors and their allies in the press and professions, sought
to limit the range of issues to be decided by the remaining voters.
In Athens, beginning in 1913, an elite reform coalition involving
upper-class residents and members of the university faculty repeat-
edly sought to shift the city government away from the mayor-
council form inherited from the 1870s to a city commission or
city-manager system. Proclaiming the latter "more efficient," they
also looked to it to dilute the voting power of working-class and
lower-middle-class wards and to ease out politicians without col-
lege educations.68
By the 1910s, Southern white men outside the seats of power
in the economy and government were understandably skeptical
about their ability to influence the occupants through the old chan-
nels. Regular elections notwithstanding, politics could hardly be
called democratic. Rather, planters, industrialists, and their urban
commercial and professional allies together rode herd on the ex-
cluded majority, black and white, and the less powerful voters who
remained.69 One resident of Athens, a shoe salesman, thus ex-
plained later that he never bothered to vote because "the little
man's vote don't count for nothing nohow." In the county as a
whole, the proportion of the population who went to the polls
dropped'from nineteen percent in 1868 to eight percent in 1920-
the passage of woman suffrage notwithstanding.70
Growing constraints on popular control of public affairs were
not unique to the South, of course. On the contrary, the accession
of Woodrow Wilson to the presidency in 1912 culminated a process
of sectional reconciliation under way since the Compromise of
1877. Like their Southern brethren, Northern elites were also
working to insulate governance from the unpredictability associ-
ated with popular participation. Indeed, they invented the new
forms of city government that soon spread across the country, and
they acquiesced when Wilson imported Jim Crow into federal gov-
ernment offices. Throughout the country, in fact, the central attri-
bute of American politics in the first two decades of the twentieth
century was a mounting elitism: the two main parties atrophied,
voter participation dropped precipitously, and a rising national ad-
ministrative bureaucracy filled the vacuum in political decision-
making. The "chief function" of the party system inaugurated by
the election of 1896, in the words of political scientist Walter Dean
Burnham, was "the substantially complete insulation of elites from


--- PAGE 64 ---
The Vise of Modernity 45
attacks by the victims of the industrializing process."71 As the vic-
tims lacked means of redress, their frustrations festered.
Yet, by and large, these frustrations rarely erupted in Georgia in
the years between the demise of the People's Party and the Great
War. If the economic upturn after the turn of the century did not
eliminate anxieties, it did assuage tempers. Such flare-ups as oc-
curred could be put out before they ignited the combustible mix-
tures at hand. But then wartime economic boom gave way to seri-
ous recession in the summer of 1920. Cotton farmers encountered
the steepest price dive in cotton history: from 40 cents a pound in
July to 13.5 cents in December. Other problems exacerbated the
strain. The boll weevil, in the words of Athenian Harry Hodgson,
"played havoc with all of Georgia." Over the years from 1920 to
1925, cotton production in Clarke County and its northern neigh-
bors dropped by half to three-quarters; the counties to its south
sometimes lost their entire crop. Not for a decade would produc-
tion recover its former level. In the meantime, the human toll was
steep. The county suffered a net loss of over three hundred farms
during the 1920s; every fourth farm went under.72
Cotton being the centerpiece of the state economy, the crisis
soon infested other areas. "The truth is/' one Georgian concluded
a treatise on the spin-off effects of the farm disaster, "we are all as
good as busted." "The last three years have been tough ones," his
Athens counterpart confided in 1922. "Our businessmen are in a
bad plight[,] with the farmers discouraged and in many cases labor
leaving the farms." "The South is in great distress," wrote another
man; "where the farmer cannot function the merchants, banks, ho-
tels, etc. all go down."73
Without cotton, the mills could not run full time. In any case,
they had their own problems in the 'twenties, as the introduction
of synthetic fabrics compounded the industry's surfeit of national
and international competition. Managers responded by cutting pro-
duction, laying off workers, and demanding more from those who
remained. Never again would Athens mill operatives enjoy the
wages they had during the war. On the contrary, throughout the
Piedmont, anxiety became chronic about what "these hard times"
would do to families.74
Governor Thomas Hardwick in 1922 described the preceding
few years as "one of the periods of most profound depression" in


--- PAGE 65 ---
46 Context and Motive
all of Georgia's history. It cut a wide swath, as a hardware mer-
chant from Winder observed. "The world is [ajffected by this
panic," he said. "The rich and strong are losing fortunes daily and
the poor is hungry and homeless." Never before in his three de-
cades of work with farmers, Georgia's Commissioner of Agricul-
ture maintained, had they appeared "so depressed and in such an
alarming financial condition" as they were by the summer of 1921.
"It is pitiful," bemoaned a South Carolinian; even returning white
veterans were "glad to work for 10 cents per hour." In Athens, men
who had once had jobs, particularly in the building trades, were by
1922 spending their days roaming the streets "begging and pleading
for work."75
Some kind of retrenchment was perhaps to be expected in the
circumstances, but there was no consensus about who should bear
the brunt. For a time it seemed that, South as well as North, labor
might win a larger say than ever before. Or so the tens of thousands
who walked the picket lines had hoped. But that possibility was
foreclosed in short order by the combination of. government perse-
cution of the Left and a robust open-shop drive. Southern employ-
ers, particularly in the textile industry, had a reputation for violent
suppression of labor unrest, one borne out by their response to the
strikes and organizing drives of these years. From 1920 to 1922,
they fought hard to roll back the gains organized workers had
made, as did their counterparts in the nationwide effort to impose
the "American Plan."76 The number of union members in Georgia
plummeted, and most of the smaller city central labor bodies col-
lapsed. Nationwide, union membership dropped from its 1920 high
of over five million to just over three and a half million in 1923; by
1930, the proportion of nonagricultural workers in unions would be
about half what it had been in 1920. With labor defeated, radicals
driven underground, and liberals demoralized, the government was
free to pursue policies supportive of big business, often at the ex-
pense of small.77
Even the New York Times acknowledged in 1920 that the re-
strictive monetary policies of the Wilson administration and the
Federal Reserve Banks had "created a bitter feeling" across the
South. "The hand that is feeding the world," one Georgia farmer
complained, "is being spit upon." "The people of the whole coun-
try are distressed beyond measure with the present situation,"
complained an Augusta insurance agent. "In a land of plenty . . .
yet the people are almost starving for a lack of money and credit
to keep business and trade moving . . . [while] J. P. Morgan and


--- PAGE 66 ---
The Vise of Modernity 47
the International Bankers are governing the country in the interests
of big business." A state envoy of the Farmers' Union reported by
1923 "unrest among the farmers ... as wide as Georgia's bound-
aries"; it was so profound as to pose "a menace to Georgia's secu-
rity."78
By late 1920, the confidence of non-elite Southern whites in
the government was at a low ebb. An Athens lawyer hoped for
some measure that would "restore the confidence of the people in
Congress, and give them more courage for the future." "Since the
propaganda of the war," an elderly minister from Virginia observed,
"the folks have lost faith in the 'Powers [that] Be' until their is a
state of unrest that is close to the danger line." Even some of those
who might be expected to be most loyal to the government grew
mutinous. "Tell them to try another war and see where they will
land," warned the Commander of the Huntsville, Alabama, post of
the American Legion after the defeat of the Soldiers' Bonus Bill.
"The flagwaving patriots . . . can go where it is hotter than it is
in Alabama before we will lift a hand again for J. P. Morgan, Stan-
dard Oil, and other big interests."79
The trouble went deeper than the recession or big business's
political influence. The government itself seemed out of control.
In so enlarging the power of the executive, Woodrow Wilson had
excited time-honored republican fears of concentrated power. One
Georgia farmer complained that the people had endured sufficient
"autocratic encroachments o[n] our liberties ... to nauseate to
extreems during the late war." Thomas Hardwick, one of Georgia's
United States senators, likewise condemned the "Beauracracy
which has grasped this government by the throat under Mr. Wil-
son." "I am deeply alarmed," he told an ally, "at the tendency to
centralize this government, to enthrone an autocrat, to abandon,
one by one, the great fundamentals that underlie and protect our
liberties." "It is high time," warned a Single Tax advocate whose
ideas would later be appreciated by Atlanta Klansmen, "to stop this
temporizing with Wilson or we will be in far worse [shape] than if
we had a hereditary 'ruler.' "80 Even after Wilson's death, Washing-
ton, D.C., presented to Tom Watson a "loathsome" specter of Old
World corruption. Evoking "Paris at its worst" in the days of Louis
XV, Watson voiced disgust at "the waste, greed, graft, thievery
[and] harlotage" in the nation's capital. A Georgia editor of the Na-
tional Farmers Magazine spelled out the logic: "no people may re-
main free where money rules and morals rot."81
Feeling afraid and excluded, tens of thousands of white Geor-


--- PAGE 67 ---
48 Context and Motive
gians turned for leadership to the old Populist standard-bearer,
Tom Watson. Himself a rich planter and lawyer, Watson still had
a knack for addressing the concerns of middling men. Persecuted
by the Wilson administration for his opposition to the government
during the war, Watson now appeared a martyred hero to many
non-elite whites. In his race for a United States Senate seat in 1920,
he thrashed his establishment rivals at the polls. Once in Washing-
ton, Watson acted as a faithful outsider. He thundered against the
executive office's usurpation of power, against the imperial designs
of American foreign-policy makers, against the tight-fisted Federal
Reserve Bank, against the machinations of monopolies—even
against the imprisonment of socialists for antiwar activity and
against American intervention against the Soviet government in
Russia. At the same time, he fulminated against the Catholic men-
ace and fought the appointment of blacks to federal jobs.82
Watson was hardly alone in his understanding of the problems
facing the country. Indeed, it is impossible to understand the
Klan's rise without recognizing that vast numbers of people, all
over the United States, embraced views like his. White farmers,
small merchants, and others wrote to Watson to express gratitude
for his efforts and to denounce those they held accountable for
their plight. Their primary grievances with the economy, like Wat-
son's, centered on monopolies and high finance. "The farmers are
being imposed upon by every class of speculative enterest/' com-
plained a representative of the Brooks County Farmers' Union;
"this must be curbed if we expect this republic to live." Grocers
from Valdosta sought Watson's help against the "meat trust,"
which they blamed for farmers' problems and their own. Others
voiced more directly the old Populist theory of economic crisis;
their target was the government and the banks. J. S. Dean of Bu-
chanan, Georgia, thus agreed with Watson's attacks on the Federal
Reserve. Dean, too, believed that "the money questian . . . was
the most vital questian." Like the old People's Party, he found the
root of the problem not in the economy itself but in "law making
since . . . the laws [are] being made by those who are to be bene-
fited by said laws." Dean complained that "this set of robbers" was
using the Federal Reserve to make farmers "poorer year by year and
. . . more & more dependent on those whom the laws protect."83
Even some outside Watson's ranks shared these convictions.
}. S. Hale of Barnesville, Georgia, made the same complaints to
Watson rival Hoke Smith. Capitalism per se was not the problem;
like Watson, Hale believed that "money is a blessing when prop-


--- PAGE 68 ---
The Vise of Modernity 49
erly used." But "the hoarding" practiced by the "big interests]"
was something else. It was "causing wreck and ruin throughout
this whole country" and making a mockery of democratic govern-
ment. The rule of "the money power" had become "more cruel"
than that of "the German K[a]iser." Hale hoped for "a Moses to
lead the people from under the yoke of bondage." "By the help of
God," he concluded, "the people will not crouch and cower to the
will of the money kings."84
This kind of malaise would find an outlet in the second Klan,
whose leaders seized on the old Populist analysis and remolded it
to their own ends. In Georgia, the connections were not merely
ideological; they were personified in Watson.85 Whether he actu-
ally joined the Klan cannot be determined from the evidence avail-
able,- he did endorse it as "a worthy organization."86 But that the
Klan embraced Watson's vision and he theirs, albeit a more pro-
labor and civil liberties version (he had, after all, denounced "the
'100 percent' idiots"), there can be no doubt. Watson did not
merely promote reactionary causes—couched in populist lan-
guage—that the Klan would later take up, including the disfran-
chisement of African Americans, attacks on the Roman Catholic
Church, tirades against socialism, and campaigns against finance
capital tinged with anti-Semitism. He also maintained close and
amicable relations with the Klan. He defended the order from con-
gressional investigators in 1921, he helped Klan candidates for pub-
lic office, he shared his subscription lists with the organization,
and he supplied the Klan's official national lecturer with material
on how Jews and Catholics endangered the country.87
The Klan, in turn, worshipped Watson as a hero of "the com-
mon man." One national Klan representative and past ally of
Watson described him as "the political genius of our age." Rank-
and-file Mississippi Klansmen praised Watson "as the most active
proponent of true Americanism" for his defense of "liberty and
freedom" and his fight against the "papists." After Watson's death,
Klan leader E. Y. Clarke offered the organization's sympathies
to Watson's widow for the loss of this "champion of right and cou-
rageous defender of the downtroddenf,] suffering and oppressed."
At least one Klavern of the Georgia Klan was named in his honor,
while the state's Grand Dragon described Watson as "beloved" by
the members. Perhaps most indicative of the connection, however,
were popular perceptions among Klan sympathizers that Watson
was a representative of it.88
Also indicative of the way the nascent Klan movement would


--- PAGE 69 ---
50 Context and Motive
perpetuate and deepen earlier cleavages was the way previous ene-
mies of Watson went on to oppose the Klan. The CIC thus counted
among its leaders several men who had fought against Tom Watson
in the Leo Frank affair of 1915, such as the ministers M. Ashby
Jones, C. B. Wilmer, and Plato Durham. Some representatives of
the Democratic political establishment also worked against first
Watson, then the Klan. In Athens, Mayor Andrew Erwin urged
party loyalists in 1920 to "fight against Watsonism" in the sur-
rounding counties, in the 1924 Democratic Party national conven-
tion, he was the only Georgia delegate to support an anti-Klan plat-
form. Less courageously, a few other prominent local figures
followed the same trajectory.89
Such opponents of Watson and the Klan tended to have more
cosmopolitan economic interests than their peers, particularly in
attracting outside investors to Georgia. University of Georgia presi-
dent David Crenshaw Barrow, for example, the first to sign a 1921
Athens anti-Klan petition, was also a supporter of Woodrow Wil-
son, the Federal Reserve, and the League of Nations. "A liberal atti-
tude is required to attract new residents," explained Atlantan Wal-
ter Taylor, one of the components of which was "a willingness to
stop trying to regulate others' lives."90 These frictions were not
only longstanding, but political in the most basic sense of the
term: conflict over who should wield power and how. When some
of those who felt they had a right to power found themselves ig-
nored, they resorted to more Machiavellian tactics of getting their
way, violence among them.
That in the circumstances of the late 1910s and 1920s some
men would turn to force should not surprise us. European histori-
ans and sociologists have long recognized the use of collective vio-
lence as a tool to readjust relations of power. "Violence flows from
politics," writes Charles Tilly; "more precisely from political
change." One can expect outbreaks, he suggests, at "those his-
torical moments when the structure of power is changing deci-
sively."91 Clearly, the postwar years constituted such a moment.
In adopting collective violence to achieve their ends, Klansmen
could draw support from indigenous American vigilante traditions
that began even before the Revolution. Foremost among these
models were the White Cap bands who periodically came forward
to police social relations in the nineteenth-century Southern up-
country, in the Midwest, and in frontier communities. Named for
the hoods they wore on their night-riding raids, these bands of up-
standing white community residents terrorized deviants from their


--- PAGE 70 ---
The Vise of Modernity 51
collective sense of right and wrong. Whether the victim of their
masked floggings was an adulterous wife, a hard-drinking father, a
rapacious businessman, or an ambitious black sharecropper, the ob-
ject of the White Caps' visit was the same: to enforce the private
and public conduct the world of white proprietors like themselves
depended on. Rarely were they prosecuted.92
The night-riding members of the second Klan would operate
with a similarly holistic world view, against a similarly broad
range of perceived threats, and with similar indemnity. Yet their
movement differed from its predecessors in a fundamental way. It
was the first national, sustained, and self-consciously ideological
vigilante movement in American history. No other White Caps op-
erated on such a scale, for so long, or with such a propaganda appa-
ratus. Such novel coordination and promotion appeared necessary
to participants because the paternalistic social relations earlier vig-
ilantism was associated with had so weakened. As individual wage-
earning supplanted the petty production of households organized
by their male heads, and as class differences grew among both
whites and blacks, it became more difficult to present the ascribed
hierarchies of race, gender, and age as natural and inevitable. In-
deed, many African-American women and men, white women, and
youth of both races took advantage of this uncertainty and the re-
sources now available to them to claim new rights. The Klan's
scope and frenzy were thus the measure, less of members' power,
than of the distance separating them from the provincial, patriar-
chal world of their dreams.


--- PAGE 71 ---
3
Men in the Middle:
The Class Composition
of the Klan
"It has worried me to think," Klansman S. B. Yarborough would
muse in the 1930s, "that I've worked hard all my life and just can't
seem to make no headway." Surveying his years of effort, Yarbor-
ough concluded forlornly, "It's right down disheartening to try so
hard and never git nowhare." Like his older brother, Roy, Kligrapp
of the Athens Klan, Scott Yarborough had ample reason for frustra-
tion with his life. The Yarborough brothers had grown up in a mill
community outside Athens in a family with ten children. Only six
survived infancy. Their father, B. F. Yarborough, had lost an arm
in the Civil War. Relegated to teaching in a rural public school, he
developed a reputation for bitterness and cruelty toward his stu-
dents and his own children. The pay from school-teaching being
too paltry even to buy shoes for all of his family, Ben Yarborough
sent his sons and daughters to work early "doing everything that
come to hand," from hired labor in the fields to mill work.1
Roy and Scott dreamed of escaping from the mills—and no
doubt from their father as well. In time, both managed to. Begin-
ning on a few dollars of borrowed money, Roy acquired his own
farm and established a small grocery business. Over the years, he
accumulated some $10,000 worth of personal assets and was able
to provide jobs for some of his seven children. Yet industriousness
proved a feeble shield against the vagaries of the economy and un-
52


--- PAGE 72 ---
The Class Composition of the Klan 53
expected family illness. By 1910, Roy had to mortgage his farm; by
1927, he had lost almost three-quarters of his 1910 assets. For his
part, immobilized by personal tragedy, Scott remained in the
Princeton mill long after his brother had struck out on his own.
When his first wife died in childbirth a year after their marriage, it
'"most nigh killed" the seventeen-year-old husband she left be-
hind. The loss so depressed him that he quit work for a time and
did not remarry for six years. Once back in the mills, however, he
moonlighted in the evenings and on weekends as a barber in his
home. Ultimately, he put away enough from haircuts to open his
own "Red, White and Blue Barber Shop." "We eat three meals a
day, all my taxes are paid, and I don't own a cent to nobody," Scott
said. "I don't have to call on'nobody for nothing. That's what the
barber business has meant to me."2
The Yarborough brothers' dream of independence—and the
modesty of its fruition—bound them to fellow Klan members. Like
their occupations and living conditions, the social standing of local
Klansmen varied considerably. Yet, in general, these were middling
men: neither elite employers and brokers nor, as today's popular
conceptions of the Klan would have it, "poor white trash." While
few had the resources to hire others, most exercised more control
over their labor than their working-class contemporaries: the oper-
atives who tended the cotton looms and the sharecroppers who
tilled the fields of luckier men. "If not the 'best people,'" as one
observer put it at the time, Klan members were "at least the next
best . . . the good, solid, middle-class citizens." Some sixty-three
percent of Athens Klansmen, for example, lived in homes or on
farms that they or their parents owned. Perhaps simple, these
homes were nonetheless public badges of relative economic inde-
pendence; only thirty-two percent of Clarke County families could
claim this distinction.3
Yet, what attracted men to the Klan was not simply their rela-
tive standing. It was the changes they experienced in that standing
over the years leading up to and following 1920, as their expecta-
tions were first raised, then abruptly dashed. By and large, these
were men who had climbed the economic ladder, if only by a rung
or two. The Protestant work ethic had paid off for them, most dra-
matically during the wartime bonanza. Then, suddenly, just when
their prospects had appeared most promising, they confronted un-
foreseen obstacles—if not disaster. Being on the edge to begin with,
they reeled under the wave of the hard times that washed across
the land. Already feeling vulnerable, Klansmen-to-be then looked


--- PAGE 73 ---
54 Context and Motive
Figure 1 Occupational Distribution of Athens Klan Members (See Table
1 for occupations within categories, precise numbers, and definitions)
on as labor and capital locked heads. Whether unskilled workers
pushed up wages or capital beat them back and expanded on the
proceeds, middling men feared being crowded out. Large numbers
joined the Klan in hopes of warding off that fate and reclaiming
their cherished independence.
The portrait that emerges from Klan membership rosters at mid-
decade indicates that the vast majority of men in the Athens Klan
stood between capital and unskilled labor. In their occupations, as
in their assets, local Klansmen hovered at the midpoint of the spec-
trum. The greatest proportions clustered in the three categories of
lower white-collar employees; petty proprietors, managers, and of-
ficials; and skilled tradesmen (see Figure 1). Klansmen's patterns
of affiliation also indicated their relative status: middle-class, not
"society." Large numbers of Klan members and their families be-
longed to the Baptist and Methodist churches, yet only a few to the
more elite Presbyterian or Episcopal churches.4 Similarly, scores of
Klansmen participated in fraternal organizations, generally domi-
nated by the lower middle class, and they counted heavily among
the activists and leaders in the Chamber of Commerce and Lions
Club. Few, if any, however, belonged to the more select Rotary
Club, and only one Klan wife was included among the leaders of
the Athens Women's Club or the League of Women Voters.
The single most common occupation among local Klansmen


--- PAGE 74 ---
The Class Composition of the Klan 55
was owner or manager of a small business. It accounted for double
the number of its nearest rivals (see Table 1) and contributed many
local leaders such as Roy Yarborough. The rural counterparts of
these small businessmen were the small farmers who made up six
percent of the chapter's membership, a figure that no doubt under-
states their actual participation.5 Nonetheless, even in a data base
that underestimates rural participation, at least 136 local members
either grew up on farms, lived on them in the 'twenties, or derived
some income from them. Of the farmers whose tenure could be
determined, just over one-fifth were tenants, as compared to three-
fifths of the Clarke County white farm population at large. The
other four-fifths of Klan farmers owned the land they worked;
about one-third of them, enough to hire a tenant or two. Numerous
white-collar workers, members of the "new middle class" in this
period, also joined the Klan.6 Lower-level white-collar employees—
Table 1 Dominant Occupations of Athens
Dominant Occupation
Broker
Manufacturer
Major merchant
Major planter
Combined major proprietor (e.g., planter
and merchant)
Total major proprietora
Teacher
Lawyer
Minister
Physician
Pharmacist
Total professional
Chiropractor
Embalmer/mortician
Optician/optometrist
College student
Total semi-professional
Superintendent, foreman, or overseer
Owner or manager of small business
Minor government official
Farmer, tenure unknown
Farm ownerb
Farm tenant
Klan Members
Number
1
1
4
1
3
10
2
2
10
2
3
19
1
2
1
2
6
13
57
2
4
14
4
Percentage
(3%)
(5%)
(2%)


--- PAGE 75 ---
56 Context and Motive
Table 1 (Continued)
Dominant Occupation
Combined working farmer and merchant
Total petty-proprietor & managerial
Public employees (post, police, fire, etc.)
Salespeople
Agent (real estate, insurance, etc.)
Clerk
Bookkeeper, accountant
Cashier, bank teller
Collector
Railroad conductor
Other low white-colar
Total low white-collar
Carpenter/woodworker
Blacksmith
Barber
Plumber
Electrician
Baker
Mechanic
Machinist
Other skilled trades
Total skilled trades
Non-mill factory worker
Blue-collar transportation
Presser
Other semi-skilled
Total semi-skilled
Skilled mill workers
Unskilled mill workers
Mill workers, unspecified
Total mill workers
Laborer
Drayman
Sawyer, lumberman
Total unskilled, non-mill
Total members in list
Number
1
95
31
29
12
23
7
1
1
1
5
110
22
4
5
2
7
5
9
4
10
68
3
15
1
3
22
4
16
10
30
1
1
2
4
364
Percentage
(26%)
(30%)
(19%)
< (6%)
(8%)
(1%)
(100%)
Note: "Dominant occupation" refers to the one the member remained in for most
of the period under consideration, or he held at the end of the period under consid-
eration (1900-1927).
""Major proprietors" were defined as those with over $7,000 in assets, hence with
the resources to employ extrafamilial labor.
bTwo sons living with landowning fathers were included in this category.


--- PAGE 76 ---
The Class Composition of the Klan 57
public employees, salesmen, clerks, and agents—in fact made up
the largest general occupational category in the Klan. They in-
cluded 110 men, or 30 percent of the chapter.
Interestingly, even at mid-decade when the Klan's status was
declining, unskilled men did not join in the same kinds of num-
bers. Although several hundred local white men earned their liv-
ings as mill operatives, only eight percent of chapter members—
thirty individuals in all—had mill work as their dominant occupa-
tion.7 The work experience, living conditions, and life opportuni-
ties of these men differed in significant ways from their better-off
fellow members. The five Hess brothers, for example, all Klans-
men, were sons of an immigrant German baker who died in 1908,
leaving behind a widow and eleven children. The brothers began
working in cotton mills before they had reached adolescence. Two
of the five eventually made it into the skilled trades, but neither
acquired much in the way of worldly goods. Similarly, the brothers
Stephen and Tom Gilmer went into the mills as adolescents. While
Stephen remained in the mills, Tom found employment as a clerk
for the Athens Coffee Company in the 'twenties, acquiring more
status and a home, but few other tangible assets. The humble con-
dition of most other poor Klansmen meant that they usually left
no paper trail for historians to follow; nor did they tend to play the
leading roles in the movement that small-business and white-collar
members often did. Craftsmen, in contrast, joined in larger num-
bers than mill operatives and won more recognition from their fel-
low members as leaders. Skilled workers in fact made up eighteen
percent of the Athens Klan, the largest general category after lower
white-collar workers and petty-proprietors and managers.
Men of substantial property and social power—the manufactur-
ers, planters, large merchants, bankers, and leading attorneys who
made up the local economic elite—were even less likely than un-
skilled workers to join. Only ten such men belonged to the Athens
Klan at mid-decade, and none was among those recalled by con-
temporaries as the richest and most powerful in town. Nor did
their assets qualify them as such.8 Among the few from "blue-
blood" backgrounds who did belong was R. D. Moore. In 1914, his
ownership of a 647-acre plantation in neighboring Morgan County
and two other farms put him near the very top tier of the rural
population. Described by the press as "one of the most progressive
farmers in Georgia" and a man "prominent in all business and fi-
nancial circles," Moore also served as president of the Athens
Foundry and Machine Works, vice-president of both the Athens


--- PAGE 77 ---
58 Context and Motive
Mattress and Spring Bed Company and the Citizen's Pharmacy, and
director of various Georgia banks. He was among the handful of
local Klansmen with a live-in servant. Another member, R. R. Ran-
som, grew up with three servants. His father, a planter and mer-
chant, had accumulated over $40,000 in assets by 1921. Klansman
Wiley Doolittle, for his part, owned one of the largest furniture
companies in the state, directed the Athens Mattress Company,
and served as chair of the board of directors of the Athens Gas
Light and Fuel Company, among other business laurels. Yet such
moguls were the exceptions rather than the rule. Wealthy Clarke
County residents were more likely to sign up with the opposition.
The names of premier businessmen thus studded a 1921 petition
to discourage revival of the Klan—although most of the signatories
fell silent as the breadth of its appeal became clear.9
To explain the order's appeal, however, the profile of Klan
members needs refinement. The typical Klansman was not simply
petit-bourgeois; he appeared less economically secure than the
norm for his class. When a proprietor, he was often a newcomer,
and the value of his holdings was less than the average among own-
ers at large. Such small farmers and lower-middle-class townspeo-
ple, according to contemporaries, were the most "acutely con-
scious of the Town-Mill distinction." They were especially anxious
to distinguish themselves—particularly through their moral
codes—from the ordinary workers they viewed as beneath them.10
Although local members' assets varied widely, the modal fig-
ures are significant (see Figure 2). In 1921, members' mean assets
were valued at $2,031, in the range of comfortable landowning,
working farmers. Yet the presence of some wealthy men biased the
figures upwards. Klansmen's median assets were significantly less.
At $540, they were on a par with renting farm tenants, more inde-
pendent than croppers or mill workers, but hardly secure. Indeed,
they just squeezed past the $500 minimum qualification for voting
rights.11 Sixty percent of local Klansmen never amassed more than
$1,000 in holdings over the years 1900 to 1927.
To some degree, the low mean assets reflected the youth of
the Klansmen still dependent on their parents. When the mean is
adjusted to include only those over thirty years of age in 1920, 53
percent had over $1,000, the baseline for landowners; thirty per-
cent enough to be renting farm tenants; and only eighteen percent
as little as sharecroppers. Still, only nineteen percent of the older
men had enough assets to hire tenants, so the age-adjusted figures
do not signify a different position in the class structure.12 In short,


--- PAGE 78 ---
The Class Composition of the Klan 59
Figure 2 Value of Taxable Assets Owned by Athens Klan Members
while the typical Klansmen was better off than the vast majority
of blacks and a large proportion of whites, he was vulnerable. His
standing was unstable, and he knew it. Indeed, since numerous
Klansmen lived in or near the largely working-class communities
of East Athens and West Athens, they were daily reminded of the
precariousness of their own positions.
Such success as Klan proprietors and white-collar workers had,
moreover, was often recently acquired. Almost half of Athens
Klansmen moved up the occupational ladder after 1900 (see Figure
3). Klansmen's improvement of their condition was also evident in
their acquisition of assets. Both the mean and the median assets of
members grew substantially between 1900 and 1921. Their mean
assets jumped from $875 in 1900 to $2,031 in 1921; median assets
from $50 to $540 over the same period. Like the Yarborough broth-
ers, numerous other Klansmen had accomplished the unusual feat
of moving up in or out of the mills. Whereas in 1900, thirty-eight
percent had been mill workers, by 1926-27, that proportion had
dropped to six percent.13 The parents of Klansman F. S. Gray, for
example, were illiterate mill workers, yet he eventually became a
policeman. The Carlton brothers, P. S. and Claude, also came from
unlettered parents and entered the mills at early ages. Yet Paul
managed to become a salesman and Henry a superintendent. Klans-
man H. G. Walker's rise came late in life; at age thirty-one, he still


--- PAGE 79 ---
60 Context and Motive
Figure 3 Mobility of Athens Klansmen, 1900-1927 (Total number on
whom data are available = 229)
worked as a common mill operative. But by age forty, he became
a mill superintendent, and by fifty-seven, a partner in a loan
company with leading local citizens, including fellow Klan member
G. M. Harris.
Examination of the life histories of members in particular oc-
cupational groups further illuminates the often hard-won character
of their standing. Among the owners and managers of small busi-
nesses, a few prospered, like /. W. Sheats, who managed to acquire
over $19,000 in assets by 1921 from his musical instruments busi-
ness. Yet most Klan proprietors ran "mom and pop" operations.
The frailty of their enterprises is suggested by the owners' mean
assets. They rivaled those of the lower ranks of working farm own-
ers with no tenants.14
The modest successes of these proprietors, moreover, usually
required years of exertion. K. L. Nash joined his siblings in the
mills as a boy to support the family after his father died. In time,
Nash was able to get a job as a policeman, and later to open a
family-run cafe, increasing his personal assets from $75 in 1918 to
$1,145 in 1927. Like Scott Yarborough, A. ]. Boyd moonlighted his
way out of the mills. Having begun work at age eight as a water
boy, he later joined with partners to acquire the first white barber-
shop in Athens. Through frugal living, Davis later obtained his
own shop. The tenuous standing of many Klansmen is further un-
derscored by the way, like Boyd, some had to push blacks out of


--- PAGE 80 ---
The Class Composition of the Klan 61
the way to get where they were. By 1913 whites held six of Athens'
eight barbershops, formerly a black trade; five of these white busi-
nesses belonged to Klansmen. Similar racial skirmishes took place
in the pressing trade and the postal service; these occupations/ too,
yielded several Klan recruits.15
Not all the Klansmen who had experienced mobility came
from mill backgrounds, of course. P. W. Spurling, for example, grew
up on a dirt farm in a nearby county. After leaving home, he drifted
from one occupation to another until a stint in the Mallison Braid
and Cord Mill persuaded him to save up for a business of his own.
It was a plain grocery store serving a poor black clientele, but it
was his, and he could "make a living" from it. H. B. Bailey went
from being a railroad ticket agent to managing a bus station with
his wife. Although they worked fifteen-hour days, Bailey said he
vastly preferred this to his former employment because "we are
our own bosses." Most Klan farmers would make the same boast,
but they had to scramble to hold on to their prized positions. In all
the years surveyed except the boom year of 1921, their mean assets
hovered below the mean in the general farm population for owners
with no tenants.16
The professionals and semi-professionals in the Athens Klan
were in a position analogous to that of small businessmen and
farmers. Although masters of their own labor, few had extensive
education, and none commanded enough wealth to employ. Their
mean assets were $3,751 in 1921, dropping to $1,559 by 1927,
which ranked them with the lower echelons of the rural petite
bourgeoisie." The individual stories of some of these men are sug-
gestive. Klansman Chester Morton's father was a furniture sales-
man; Chester trained for a license as an undertaker. For some fif-
teen years, he worked for other men until, in 1927, he was able to
set out on his own with a partner. James Willie Arnold, one of only
two lawyers in the Athens chapter at mid-decade, began as a cotton
trader, but entered law school at the age of thirty-six. By 1927 he
had $2,850 in assets—less than when he was admitted to the bar
in 1921.
None of the ten ministers who joined the Klan was even as
secure as Morton or Arnold. The Reverend C. G. Wilson, pastor of
East Athens Baptist Church, had served his congregation for de-
cades by 1927, yet his assets amounted to a mere $250. Rather than
attending college as the children of more prominent professionals
did, Wilson's daughters and sons helped support the household
through such jobs as telephone operator and travelling salesman


--- PAGE 81 ---
62 Context and Motive
for an overalls company. Among University of Georgia professors,
in contrast, a more elite lot culturally if not economically, the Klan
could claim only two members.17
Of the members who were fairly wealthy by contemporary
standards, few gained their comforts from inheritance. Joseph K.
Patrick moved to Athens in 1908 with few assets and little cash to
his name. He worked as a carpenter to finance his pharmaceutical
education at the University of Georgia. In 1913, he opened the
Citizen's Pharmacy along with two partners, one pf them his fu-
ture co-member R. D. Moore. Working fourteen hours a day, or so
he reminisced, Patrick raised his assets from $1,300 in 1918 to
$16,140 in 1927. N. S. Rich also amassed his wealth via indepen-
dent entrepreneurship. Rich moved to Athens in 1919 and used his
modest savings to buy out a small bakery with only seven employ-
ees. By 1925, the payroll of Rich's Bakery was over $44,000, more
than six times its original amount, and Rich was operating plants
in four different towns, all financed through earnings.18
Athens Klans members were thus, by and large, men whose
own experience prepared them to accept economic individualism.
They found in the Klan an organization that upheld their beliefs
and applauded their efforts. Indeed, the order showed special regard
for those who profited from the application of the Protestant work
ethic. Klan leaders trumpeted the rewards that accrued to self-
made men, and again and again emphasized "self-control" and the
forgoing of "immediate gratification" in favor of long-term eco-
nomic security.19 "Man is made or unmade by himself," as one
Klan leader put the prevailing faith. Many national Klan leaders,
Simmons and Evans included, were themselves "self-made men"
and self-consciously so. They had risen with much effort from
humble beginnings—some from large, hardscrabble farm families—
to positions of relative wealth and comfort, and they sympathized
with other humble men on the make. The organization clearly
aimed at upward-striving men, moreover. The Searchlight implied
this when it asserted that "only men who amount to something or
who want to amount to something" were admitted to the Klan.20
But perhaps most important, the Klan offered explanations when
things went awry.
Indeed, a third, and crucial, factor in the Klan's appeal was the
economic crisis of the early 'twenties. It cut short the climb of
men on the make and defied their dreams of being their own
bosses. Whether Klansmen suffered losses severer than their non-
Klan counterparts' is impossible to say with the data available. The


--- PAGE 82 ---
The Class Composition of the Klan 63
argument here does not posit members' atypicality in any case, or
assume a mechanical relationship between economic condition
and Klan membership. Joining the Klan marked but one possible
response to the crisis, albeit a common one. Just as not all petit-
bourgeois white men gravitated to the Klan, neither did all those
hard hit by the depression. Class standing and economic insecurity
created a potential among white men for openness to the Klan's
message. Whether a man responded positively to it depended on
other factors.21
However they came to terms with the experience, most Geor-
gians got a rude shock when the biggest sustained boom in the
state's history abruptly gave way to its worst depression. Property
assessments and tax returns in Clarke County as elsewhere regis-
tered losses for several years running. The most devastating was
1921, when the Klan's meteoric rise began. The State Tax Receiver,
whose task of organizing collections from begrudging citizens had
become a nightmare, was moved to comment that Georgians were
"in the worst,condition financially that they had been in for many
years." "This financial depression," he continued, "was accompa-
nied by the most deep-seated, far-reaching feeling of dissatisfaction
that possibly had ever existed."22
That malaise was aggravated by the unevenness of the losses.
As hundreds lost the fruits of years' effort, a few managed to ex-
pand their holdings. While Georgia's small-town and country mer-
chants suffered, for example, "department stores and other large
mercantile establishments in the cities" held their own, even pros-
pered. In Clarke County, where hitherto almost all stores and ser-
vices were operated by their owners, the 'twenties proved a critical
turning point. Local and state merchants complained of inability
to compete with newly arrived national outlets and chain stores.
Their volume of sales and refusal to extend credit or make deliver-
ies enabled them to undersell local shops. In time, they priced
many out of business.23 Others, such as barbers and filling-station
proprietors, suffered a surfeit of local competition, customers who
could not pay their debts, and, sometimes, government regulations
that hit small business hardest. "We are all tied up with red tape
now," Klansman A. J. Boyd thus complained, after costly new state
hygiene and licensing requirements drove his brother out of the
barbershop business in 1924.24
The records of members' assets offer grim testimony to the toll
that postwar recession and economic reorganization took of them:
nearly half suffered economic losses between 1918 and 1927 (see


--- PAGE 83 ---
64 Context and Motive
Figure 2).25 The better their starting position was, it seemed, the
worse their losses. Thus, Klan leader Bela Dunaway had acquired
$30,100 in assets in 1921; by 1927, the family assets had plunged
to $2,700. In effect, he fell from the local capitalist class to the
petite bourgeoisie. For Dr. S. M. Turner, the fall was even more
painful. Turner had made himself a relatively rich man between
1918 and 1921—only to see his holdings plummet from $13,920 to
$505 by 1927. Several other wealthy members incurred less spec-
tacular but substantial blows, ranging as high as a third of their
1921 holdings. These men lost between a few and several thousand
dollars, yet they did not hit bottom. Among the humbler, such
losses hurt more. The Reverend B. B. Couch's assets dove from
$3,500 in 1921 to $850 in 1927; S. S. Aycock's, from $1,200 to 100;
Llewellyn Daw's, from $200 to $25, and so on.
To say that almost half suffered losses, however, is to under-
state the damage. Some Klansmen too young to own much them-
selves witnessed their parents' living standards plunge. From the
time A. B, Page was ten, his widowed mother rode an economic
roller coaster. She lost $2,375, or thirty-four percent of her assets,
between 1910 and 1918; and regained approximately half by 1921,
only to lose again thereafter. Hiram Brantley and his two sons,
R. N. and G. K., all joined the Klan after a distressing decade. The
elder Brantley had climbed from tenant farmer to merchant over
the years 1910 to 1918, and built his assets up from $45 to $2,085
as he went. In the next three years, however, he lost almost half of
this hard-won bundle. Kyle and Robert Odell saw their father en-
dure a similarly dramatic rise-then-fall, while the brothers B. C.
and H. O. Thorndale, whose father, Dirk, was also a member, saw
him lose thirty-six percent of his 1921 assets by 1927. For Grady
Thrasher, the impact was perhaps especially personal. His father's
hardware business, "Thrasher &) Sons," the would-be inheritance
of his six sons, experienced a steady fall in assets, from $50,000 in
1900 to $925 in 1918; the family's personal assets dropped from
$22,415 to $3,825 over the same period.
For young men such as the Brantleys and Thrasher, downward
mobility was hardly an abstract threat. Indeed, eleven percent of
Athens Klansmen had already experienced it; by and large, they
were wage-earning sons of farm owners or other small proprietors,
or men who lost their own land or position. One such member was
P. F. Nelms. After years of work as a boss spinner and then foreman
in a local cotton mill, Nelms was laid off in 1911 at age forty-nine.


--- PAGE 84 ---
The Class Composition of the Klan 65
He was soon so broke that he had to file for tax exemption. By the
1920s, he was making a bare living as an ordinary operative.
It might appear that the Athens Klan simply attracted a cross-
section of the white male population. To some extent, this is true.
In Piedmont communities such as Clarke County, the petite bour-
geoisie made up a large proportion of the economically active
white male population. Hence its dominance in the Klan is not
remarkable. Still, as noted earlier, one is struck by the relatively
small number and proportion of chapter members contributed by
those highest and lowest in the class structure. Moreover, a similar
clustering of members in middling occupations within a profile
that was otherwise a cross-section of the population eligible for
membership occurred in other parts of the country as well, in large
manufacturing cities as well as in smaller towns. Although the ex-
act proportions varied, those most likely to belong to the order in-
cluded white-collar employees, small-business owners, indepen-
dent professionals, skilled workers, and farmers. In contrast,
unskilled workers, landless rural people, and the very wealthiest
residents were almost everywhere under-represented.26
The significance of the clustering of Klan membership in the
middle ranks of society emerges more clearly when it is viewed in
transnational perspective. As some historians and social critics
have pointed out, the common tendency to confine class analysis
to labor and capital has tended to obscure the very existence of the
petite bourgeoisie as a class with its own distinctive relationship
to capital and labor, its own internal dynamics, and its own modes
of thought. This difficulty is compounded by the diffuse character
of the petite bourgeoisie, or, in more colloquial usage, lower middle
class. Its members run the gamut from owners of small businesses
to artisans and salaried clerks. Most petit-bourgeois occupations
also shade off at the bottom into the upper ranks of the working
class and at the top into the lower ranks of the capitalist class.
These varied occupations and the internal pecking orders within
them result in differences, sometimes striking, in living standards,
social status, and perspectives.27
Significant as they are in the experience of everyday life, these
differences mask underlying commonalities that justify treating
the petite bourgeoisie as a class. Foremost among these commonal-
ities is its members' relationship to the means of production and


--- PAGE 85 ---
66 Context and Motive
to other classes. These are clearest in the case of the "old middle
class": landholding farmers, shopkeepers, and artisans. All own the
means by which they earn their livelihoods and rely on their own
labor—often on that of other family members as well—to survive.
Rarely do they employ extrafamilial help, and if so, only for short
duration or in small numbers. In contrast, members of the "new
middle class"—managers, paraprofessionals, and salaried white-
collar employees—lack the economic independence that character-
ized the old. Yet they, too, exercise more autonomy in their own
labor than members of the working class proper, whom they some-
times direct.28
This structural position helps account for the characteristic
ambivalence of the lower middle class vis-a-vis the capitalists
above them and the unskilled workers beneath them in the social
order. Like capitalists, small proprietors have a vested interest in
private ownership. Yet, unlike the actual bourgeoisie, members of
the petite bourgeoisie live for the most part off their own and per-
haps family members' labor, and often harbor suspicion of those
who live off the work of non-kin and can out-compete small rivals.
Indeed, the small-holder is vulnerable to being crowded out by
larger, more resourceful units of capital. These latter features make
the petite bourgeoisie, like the working class proper, potentially
anti-capitalist. Yet, here again, full identification is often compli-
cated by fear that gains for workers will come at the expense of
small-holders less able to pass on the cost of higher wage bills or
taxes. In short, the very placement of the petite bourgeoisie means
that it is perennially pulled and pushed in two directions: towards
capital and against labor, towards labor and against capital.29
In trying times, this buffeting tends to become particularly pro-
nounced. Economic crisis and intense struggle between labor and
capital aggravate the ambivalence imbedded in the structural posi-
tion of petit-bourgeois people. Faced with the prospect of disaster,
they can feel pushed first from one direction, then the next, shuf-
fled back and forth by forces beyond their control. "It is in such
moments of extreme crisis," observed historian Arno Mayer, "that
the vague sense of negative commonality—of being neither bour-
geois nor worker—is transformed into a politicized awareness or
consciousness of economic, social, and cultural identity." In these
circumstances, the petite bourgeoisie "loses self-confidence and be-
comes prey to anxieties and fears which," Mayer notes, "may well
predispose it to rally to a politics of anger, scapegoating, and atavis-
tic millenarianism." This volatility has repeatedly found expres-


--- PAGE 86 ---
The Class Composition of the Klan 67
sion in mass anti-Semitism, whose foremost proponents and front-
line troops have come from the petite bourgeoisie.30
How this Janus-faced perspective will be resolved in any partic-
ular case cannot be ascertained in advance. Which way particular
sections of the class incline depends, not simply on the economic
situation, but on culture and politics as well. Some analyses sug-
gest that where a labor movement actively fights for a universal-
istic agenda, it can rally much of the lower middle class behind its
banners. Conversely, a labor movement with merely sectoral or ill-
formed goals, or one that has suffered critical defeats, may forfeit
that magnetic power.31 Whether this holds true as a general propo-
sition is not clear, but the latter situation undoubtedly character-
ized American labor in 1921. Thinly based, internally divided, and
sorely defeated in the postwar contest with employers, it had lost
the momentum that might have enabled it to attract those waver-
ing in the middle.
These general considerations make possible a deeper under-
standing of the class composition of the Athens Klan. The struc-
tural position of the petite bourgeoisie, first of all, helps explain the
otherwise curious lines of demarcation that struck contemporary
observers of Piedmont communities like Athens. Both white-collar
employees and craftsmen tended to identify with the "uptown" ur-
ban population and with landowning farmers in the countryside. In
effect, middling men lined up against mill operatives and landless
farmers—even though they distrusted the planters, manufacturers,
and leading merchants and professionals who made up the elite
proper.32 This tradition, in turn, affected the way lower-middle-
class men responded to the trials of the postwar years.
Faced with a shrinking pie, many small businessmen joined
large employers in rage over what they saw as the impudence of
workers, who by early 1920 had pushed wages in Georgia to an all-
time high. So concerned were propertied Clarke County residents,
some future Klansmen among them, that in 1918, they formed the
Athens State Guard. For over two years, the sixty-odd citizens in
this "local vigilance corps" conducted military training several
times a week in case Athens should "have occasion to suppress
outbreaks . . . [or] disturbances." Similarly, the local chapter of
the Elks, which many Klansmen belonged to, boasted of their or-
der's "aid in stamping out . . . the multiple-headed Red menace,"
including "exercising vigorous censorship over shop and office con-
version" to catch any "Red utterances." Even after the onset of
economic trouble in late 1920 helped employers cut wages, fear


--- PAGE 87 ---
68 Context and Motive
remained prominent through 1925 that the "exodus" of labor
would strengthen workers' bargaining power and cut employers'
profit margins. Despite the magnitude of the crisis, in fact, non-
farm employers found themselves unable to drive real wages back
to pre-war levels.33
Farm owners and ambitious renters, for their part, bristled
against the bankers and creditors whose maneuvers boded ill for
simple "dirt farmers." Yet many of these same rural people looked
askance at labor demands that might raise the prices of manufac-
tured goods. "Union labor must not get it all," one man from
Blakely, Georgia, thus complained in 1920; "the labor &. capital
used in growing cotton ought to be respected & paid as much as
the labor tha[t] spins & weaves. There is a wide difference now."
In fact, unions or not, manufacturing prices and wages had proved
"stickier" than farm prices and wages.34
The numerous white-collar workers who joined the Klan
lacked even the nominal economic independence of small farmers
and petty shopkeepers. Still, by tradition, they had enjoyed greater
independence on the job and more income and opportunities for
advancement than manual workers. Those advantages, however,
now appeared less secure. As blue-collar workers improved their
incomes, they narrowed the wage gap salaried employees had
prided themselves on. By 1919, one historian reported, "the profes-
sional classes, salaried clerks, civic officials, police, and others in a
similar category were worse off economically than at any time
since the Civil War." Among white-collar workers in the country
at large, signs of resentment against manual workers and feelings
of relative deprivation began to appear. Such feelings also surfaced
in the Klan, whose leaders often assumed an audience of non-
manual workers. "When we pay such high prices, it is time," com-
plained one Klansman with spiteful exaggeration, that "the laborer
be satisfied with a mere Ford."35
White-collar workers saw their prospects jeopardized from
above as well as below. By the 1920s, the rationalization and degra-
dation of office work had become a topic of national discussion. A
surviving copy of contemporary "Office Rules" for the Athens Rail-
way and Electric Company shows how the de-skilling of white-
collar work affected Athens men. The rules prescribed the minutia
of office conduct, going as far as to warn clerks not to leave their
posts "to run out and see a dog fight or hear a band play." More
seriously, the new rules informed subordinates that they "should
never enter a private office" without permission, that they should
not "offer any suggestion unless asked for," and that "your direct-


--- PAGE 88 ---
The Class Composition of the Klan 69
ing officer is your Superior and not your friend." Such rules could
not but insult those expected to obey them. Perhaps it was not
coincidental that the author of the rules, the firm's president, was
among the first to sign an elite anti-Klan petition, while several of
his employees joined the Klan.36
Like low-level white-collar workers, craftsmen had to answer
to someone else in order to pay their bills. Yet skilled workers'
ownership of tools and relative freedom from direct supervision al-
lowed them a kind of independence that neither unskilled workers
nor sharecroppers enjoyed. "The key to the carpenter's outlook,"
as labor historian Irving Bernstein put it, "was his chest of tools.
He owned them and he alone had the skill to use them."37 The
artisanal heritage was, after all, not proletarian, but petit-
bourgeois: as small producers, craftsmen owned their means of pro-
duction and jealously guarded their independence. The fitful spread
of mechanization in the South likely gave artisanal traditions,
weak though they were, greater viability.
Certainly this was the case in Athens. Even the local craftsmen
not self-employed seldom worked in the kind of large plants whose
sheer scale and anonymity helped break down proprietorial con-
sciousness. Most manufacturing concerns in Athens in 1919 em-
ployed between one and twenty wage-earners. Even when the mills
are included in the calculations, the average number employed by
any given concern was only twenty-eight. Face-to-face relations be-
tween workers and employers were still common in such facilities,
as were owners who worked on the shop floor. Both patterns
blunted class divisions. Klansman N. S. Rich, for example, labored
alongside the men in his employ. At least some of these workers
joined the Klan; the same was true of Hammond's Bakery and
L. T. Curry's Garage. Similarly, the skilled craftsmen at the Athens
Foundry and Machine Works, where a few Klansmen worked in
the 'twenties, maintained friendly relations with the boss. He took
"the boys" on fishing trips in summer and put his own sons to
work in the foundry to "make men" of them. Economic concentra-
tion and mechanization would in time erode the privileges of craft
workers and widen the gap between them and their bosses. But in
the 1920s, these developments were only beginning in Athens.38
Craft workers, moreover, still tended to think of themselves in
petit-bourgeois terms. Even those in labor organizations, presum-
ably the most class-conscious, often brought the individualism of
small proprietors to their collective struggles. Most unions at the
time—with important exceptions like the United Mine Workers
and the Industrial Workers of the World—were craft unions peo-


--- PAGE 89 ---
70 Context and Motive
pled largely by native-born white men. They had their own version
of the ideology of a commonwealth of self-made men. AFL unions'
proprietorial approach to their members' skills and jobs often led
them to collaborate with employers out of fear of unskilled labor.
This was particularly true in the South, where the bogey of black
competition served to discipline the unruly. Railroad work, among
the best organized trades in Georgia, was a case in point: the rail-
way unions fought nearly as hard against black competitors as
against their employers.39
The dead hand of the artisanal past weighed on the Georgia
Federation of Labor (GFL) as well. Notwithstanding its noteworthy
left-wing positions on scores of issues, the GFL in the first decades
of the twentieth century also demonstrated condescension toward
unskilled workers, racism toward African Americans and immi-
grants, strong patriotism, and sexual conservatism.40 The state la-
bor federation had supported immigration restriction in 1907 in
terms that would have suited Thomas Jefferson. It denounced the
"flooding of the South and Georgia with . . . the scum of Europe,
a people nowise in sympathy with the spirit of our institutions and
form of government, and whose presence . . . [will put] us on a
plane with the Northeast, with its tenements crowded with unas-
similative pauper labor." One Atlanta railroad unionist exhibited a
similar contradictory consciousness in 1922. He maintained that
the great rail strike of that year was a fight "for the same freedom
. . . our fore Fathers fought for 60 years ago"—the Confederacy.41
Unions were few and weak in Athens relative to those in larger
cities, South and North. A lack of records makes it impossible to
determine whether any Klansmen belonged, but several did work
in trades where racially exclusive craft locals operated, including
carpenters, painters, and barbers. For its part, the Atlanta Barbers'
Union, which campaigned to drive black barbers from the trade,
was praised by the Klan as a model of cooperation between "capital
and labor." Earlier, Atlanta barbers had opposed "the tipping evil,"
stating that it might be acceptable for Northerners or blacks, but
for them it was humiliating. Presumably, as freeborn white sons of
the South, they thought themselves above the fawning behavior
tipping might foster.42 Craftsmen could also still approximate the
"respectability" of the town middle class. Rare was the skilled
worker in the Athens Klan whose wife worked outside the home,
or whose daughters worked in other than white-collar occupations
where they could still be considered "ladies."43
Yet, unskilled laborers, urban and rural, enjoyed no such ad-


--- PAGE 90 ---
The Class Composition of the Klan 71
vantages. In class terms, their membership seems difficult to ex-
plain. One might simply attribute it to the pull of the Klan's posi-
tions on other issues and move on, since these groups made up a
relatively small part of the chapter's membership. But closer scru-
tiny of their situation bears out the emphasis here on the ambigu-
ities in the social position and life experience of the petite bour-
geoisie. An exploration of how these affected property less wage
laborers can offer added insights into the social and cultural roots
of the second Klan's rise.
In the white farm population, relations between different ten-
ure groups were so complex as to undercut the emergence of
clearly differentiated, much less actively opposed, classes. For
many rural white men in the 1920s, propertylessness was but a
phase in the life cycle. Beginning as croppers, they might work
their way up to being renters, and perhaps even buy their own
farms in mid-life. A detailed 1924 study of conditions in a nearby
typical Piedmont farming county, for example, revealed that most
farm landlords had purchased their acreage with earnings from
years of farming on their own. Of the owners, two-thirds had
worked as renters, and just under a fourth as croppers. The age
hierarchy of the agrarian ladder was further evident in that only
nine percent of men under thirty-five owned their farms, while
more than half of men over fifty-five did. Agrarian class relations
baffled even the trained investigators: twenty-three percent of
white renting farmers were related by kinship to their landlords,
and seven percent of tenants had tenants of their own, some more
than one.44 No doubt family ties bound a still larger number to
other owners and planters. Under such circumstances, petit-
bourgeois ways of seeing could thrive for reasons as much struc-
tural as cultural.
The membership of mill operatives is more puzzling; they had
little chance of acquiring economic independence or even moving
up the occupational ladder. Their communities would seem barren
ground for the Klan's message of economic individualism. Given
the history of mutual antagonism between unskilled people and
the "uptown" types who dominated the Klan, moreover, one might
expect mill men to shy from the order. Most did, but some did not.
The decision of these mill workers to join the Klan was condi-
tioned by the way the mill labor force in the South of the 1920s
was still a class in formation. Innumerable ties linked its members
to the petite bourgeoisie of the countryside. Most adult mill work-
ers hailed from farm backgrounds; some combined mill work with


--- PAGE 91 ---
72 Context and Motive
farming. Others maintained connections to their rural roots
through kin and friendship networks or membership in country
churches. The very geography of most mill villages—decentralized,
quasi-rural operations—encouraged ongoing identification with
farm life.45
The Princeton and White Hall mill villages, situated in the
countryside beyond Athens city limits, yielded many former and
current residents to the Klan, mill workers along with neighboring
farmers, merchants, and craftsmen. "It was just like living in the
country," recalled Scott Yarborough's second wife of her childhood
in the Princeton Factory district, where her father ran a picker ma-
chine in the mill while her mother raised "her own cow, chickens,
and garden." Movement between farm and town characterized the
lives of many non-mill blue-collar and lower-level white-collar
workers as well. Oral histories revealed a great deal of shifting back
and forth between farming, factory work, and marginal small busi-
nesses.46
The rural heritage of mill workers helped old Populist ideas,
such as the critique of finance capital, retain a resonance for them.
The tenant farming father of Klansmen Earl and Travis Nunnally,
for example, had subscribed to Tom Watson's publications. As for-
mer yeomen or tenants themselves, many older mill workers had
suffered from restrictive monetary policies and usurious creditors.
Indeed, many harbored deep suspicions of banks. Some viewed as
allies populist demagogues such as the latter-day Watson and Cole
Blease, notwithstanding their often deeply anti-labor attitudes.
Blease attracted support from mill workers, according to historian
David Carlton, because his obstruction of "Progressive" reform ap-
pealed to a community that "regarded the government as its en-
emy, as an engine of oppression controlled by a hostile class."47
Also suggestive of the Klan's appeal to adult male mill workers
was the way gender and age shaped class perspectives. In the 1920s,
older mill men waxed nostalgic about agrarian living and the rela-
tive autonomy it had provided them; of all groups, they were the
likeliest to want to return to farming. Older men were also likelier
than young men to join the Klan. Most younger men who had
grown up in mill villages, in contrast, had no desire to farm; they
enjoyed the sociability that wage-earning made possible. They
were, in a sense, the first large cohort of lifelong white working-
class people in the Piedmont. Indicative of the generational differ-
ences in class identity was the way that younger workers—women
and men—pioneered both the labor struggles of the period and the


--- PAGE 92 ---
The Class Composition of the Klan 73
revolution in morals that so disturbed, not only uptown residents,
but many of their farm-born parents as well.48
Like age, sex made for distinctive experiences of class. Mill fa-
thers who lacked control over any productive property could still
deploy the labor of other family members. Notwithstanding the
advantages mill wives and daughters may have gained from their
employment, husbands and fathers wielded ultimate authority over
their earnings and behavior. Such control enabled the men to main-
tain a sense of themselves as masters of their households in the
way that farmers or family businessmen might. Popular mill ex-
pressions caught the dynamics well. "If you've got sense," one op-
erative's wife warned a single woman, "you'll stay your own boss."
Likewise, many mill fathers disapproved of child labor, but be-
lieved that "you can't have the law tellin' a man what to do with
his children."49
Like the vision of independent male proprietorship the Klan
offered, its commitment to white supremacy was also attractive to
many mill workers. The deep roots of racism in the yeoman heri-
tage of mill workers were replanted by mill owners' strategy of
employing an overwhelmingly white labor force, whose fear of dis-
placement by blacks then made them more tractable. Whereas the
ethnic bonds of immigrant workers in the mass production indus-
tries of the North often enhanced their sense of class identity, the
ethnic identity of Southern mill workers—overwhelmingly Anglo-
Saxon and Protestant—cut against class consciousness. If anything,
it lined them up with the South's ruling elite against blacks and
Catholics. Kate Yarborough, the second wife of Scott Yarborough
and a longtime mill worker in her own right, articulated the logic
behind this tense alliance when she said, in reference to the expul-
sion of African Americans from the mills after Emancipation, "I'm
sure glad niggers are free, for if they warn't this mill down here
would be filled up with 'em."50 In these circumstances, the mem-
bership of some tenant farmers and mill workers in the Klan is not
surprising; the wonder is that so few joined.
The clustering of Klan members in middle-rank occupations was
thus not coincidental. Embattled as they were, petit-bourgeois
white men saw ample reason to organize. Yet, while class can be
isolated as a category with which to analyze data on membership,
in lived experience it was enmeshed with other social ties. Petit-
bourgeois white men's fear of losing class position was no abstrac-


--- PAGE 93 ---
74 Context and Motive
tion. In concrete terms, it meant losing control not only over their
own labor, but also over African Americans, male and female, and
the women and children in their own households.
The fraternal tradition Klansmen laid claim to illustrates this
complex interweaving of class with race, gender, and age. Like
Klansmen, most were married, middle-aged white men. The class
composition of fraternal orders varied somewhat: white-collar
workers and independent proprietors dominated Masonic lodges,
while less prestigious orders geared to mutual aid also enlisted sig-
nificant proportions of skilled workers and smaller numbers of
semi-skilled workers. Still, like the Klan, fraternal orders included
few unskilled workers. In general, their me'mbers had some claim,
however modest, to economic independence.51
Deeper ideological affinities underlay the. common member-
ship profile. Fraternal orders, as sociologist Mary Ann Clawson has
shown, gave ritual affirmation to an historically specific and exclu-
sive male identity. The values celebrated by fraternalists were
those of early-modern artisanal culture, in which male producer-
proprietors prided themselves both on their own economic inde-
pendence and relative equality and on their difference from and
patriarchal dominion over the women, youth, servants, and appren-
tices who lacked such independence, therefore the right to full citi-
zenship. Membership in such organizations skyrocketed in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries—just as the take-off of
industrial capitalism, with its growing economic inequalities and
unprecedented class conflict, was undercutting the foundations of
artisanal culture. Even as fraternal orders embraced the market and
male individualism, they protested the passage of artisanal brother-
hood and hungered for a social order in which individuals subordi-
nated their desires to the well-being of the community.52
"Through its construction of ties based on images of masculin-
ity and craftsmanship," Clawson concluded, "the mixed-class, all-
male American fraternal order worked to deny the significance of
class difference and to offer gender and race as appropriate catego-
ries for the organization of collective identity." The Klan shared
this project, albeit a shriller, more menacing version. It, too, sought
to banish class from white men's consciousness and to redivide the
world along the imagined "natural" lines of race, sex, and age.53
Still committed to economic individualism, Klan members looked
elsewhere to explain what had gone wrong with their world.


--- PAGE 94 ---
II
CONTENT AND
PURPOSE


--- PAGE 95 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 96 ---
4
Reactionary Populism:
The Politics of Class
"For the first time in the history of our country/' E. D. Rivers, a
Great Titan of the Klan, state senator, and now candidate for gover-
nor, warned in 1930, "we are faced with being ruled by an oligarchy
[of] centralized wealth." Rivers joined other Klansmen as spoke-
speople in a campaign being waged in Clarke County against "the
invasion of these minions of monopoly—the alien chain stores."
Employing a traditional idiom of popular protest, Rivers identified
chain stores with "the taking away of the freedom of government
from the masses." "The Little Group of Kings in Wall Street," one
campaign advertisement admonished, is "very deliberately wiping
out your independence." Another prominent Klan speaker ex-
pressed concern for the "young men of the country who will be-
come 'automatons' " with no choice but to work for such monopo-
lies. "Are your Sons and Daughters for sale?" the Citizens'
Protective League demanded of local parents. "Do you realize you
are gradually selling them into slavery?" The League implored resi-
dents not to let "Wall Street [continue] . . . destroying the com-
munity life of America." It was vital, an Athens Klan lecturer
had earlier warned, to "break up [the] MONOPOLY that is now
RUIN[IN]G and CRUSHING DOWN ON THE ENTIRE POPULA-
TION of the world."1
In the fight against chain stores, radical rhetoric roused popular
support for restorationist ends. The critique of economic concen-
tration aimed, not to promote radical democratic change, but to
77


--- PAGE 97 ---
78 Content and Purpose
avert it. The Speaker of the Georgia House, Richard B. Russell, Jr.,
warned that "if the monopolistic tendency is allowed to continue
unchecked, it will result in socialism or communism." The Citi-
zens' Protective League agreed. If the mergers weren't stopped, "we
are going to face exactly the situation that has been gone through
with Russia." River's claim that this was the "first time" that con-
centrated capital endangered the welfare of the people made a
mockery of the very populism it evoked. When he said the trusts
aimed to take away popular sovereignty, he clearly had in mind
the middling groups the Klan represented, since blacks and many
poor whites had lost long ago what little sovereignty they had.
Most telling, perhaps, of the Klan's reactionary motives in the
anti-chain store campaign were its associations. Rivers attacked
"atheism, communism, chain stores and companionate marriage"
as though they were of a piece.2
Local Klan lecturers on "Americanism," for their part, blamed
Jews and Catholics for the chain-store peril. One speaker dared his
listeners to "find out who owns stock" in companies like the "A
& P Grocery stores." Jews and Catholics, it seems, hid behind the
initials. He further complained that "department stores, all of
which are principally owned by Jews or foreigners," were pushing
out "American" businesses. He raved against the inroads made
into Georgia by Sears & Roebuck, which he insisted was owned by
"JEWS. JEWS. JEWS." Its entrenchment would "spell ruination" for
the state's independent merchants. He told listeners to find out
whether their druggists, undertakers, grocers, butchers, and cloth-
ing and shoe merchants were "JEWS OR CATHOLICS," and if so,
to boycott them and organize others to do the same. National Klan
leaders concurred. If present trends continued, Imperial Wizard
Simmons warned, immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe
and their children would soon crowd native-born whites out of
"the business class."3 Such charges struck a chord with local mem-
bers, several of whom operated in competition with Jews and im-
migrants from Italy and Greece. The Bernstein Brothers, for exam-
ple, prospered in undertaking and furniture sales, where Klansmen
Chester Morton and Bela Dunaway and his sons struggled to ac-
quire a footing; the Michael Brothers owned the local department
store, and Joseph Costa and family ran a flourishing ice cream and
soda business.4
The campaign against chain stores illustrates how impossible
it is to understand the Klan if one conceives of it as a simple con-
servative force. The Klan was indeed conservative, fiercely so, as


--- PAGE 98 ---
The Politics of Class 79
the anti-Semitism and nativism of the chain-store struggle make
clear. Yet the order's politics were different from those of the usual
standard-bearers of conservatism, "the better people" in Clarke
County as elsewhere. The Klan put forward a populist critique of
American society suited to the middling men who made up the
core of its following. They resented, sometimes vociferously, "the
silk hat crowd" and the social transformation their reign had
wrought.5 Yet the Klan's was no ordinary populism. While it gave
voice to middle-class fears of economic concentration and political
disempowerment, it also put up ferocious opposition to social re-
construction from the left.
In this dualism lay the appeal of the Klan's class politics to the
lower-middle-class men who flocked to the order in such numbers.
It articulated the animosity petit-bourgeois whites felt toward both
capital and labor—and it spoke in idioms at the core of American
culture. From classical liberalism, the Klan drew its anti-statist
economics. From republicanism, the Klan drew many of its as-
sumptions about the good society and the prerequisites of citizen-
ship. From evangelical Protestantism, it drew a structure of feeling
that expressed its members' feelings of being embattled from above
and below and that sanctified aggressive self-defense.6 The compos-
ite is best described as reactionary populism.
Klan leaders prided themselves on their fidelity to the vision of the
founding fathers. On one hand, they exalted the old liberal tradi-
tion of possessive individualism. That property was the basis of
freedom was the grounding assumption of the Klan's political the-
ory. In this line of reasoning, as C. B. MacPherson observed, the
individual could only be "free inasmuch as he was proprietor of his
person and capacities." Politics thus became "a calculated device
for the protection of this property and for the maintenance of an
orderly relation of exchange." Klan propaganda often manifested
such assumptions. "The function of the government," wrote a
Klan-recommended writer, "is to protect individuals in their right
of person and right of property." The great merit of the United
States Constitution was that it had "established individual prop-
erty rights more securely" than any other form of government,
guarding against the twin dangers of "feudalism" and "all forms of
socialism or communism."7
But Klansmen also looked to the republican tradition for back-
ing about who had the right to participate in politics and about


--- PAGE 99 ---
80 Content and Purpose
what ends it should promote. Each of the requirements the order
thought necessary for individuals to function in a democracy, Sim-
mons explained, "necessitates a large degree of economic freedom;
for without this, the individual is enslaved and driven in things
political." The conviction that disinterested devotion to the com-
monweal required economic independence provided the Klan with
a way to oppose the substance of contemporary democracy while
paying obeisance to it in name. Republican thinkers, after all, his-
torically had excluded from the polity all economic dependents,
whether slaves, servants, married women, or youth. Now, Evans
insisted that in the American political tradition "equality" denoted
neither political nor social rights, but simply the chance to enjoy
the fruits of one's labor. As evidence, he adduced the suffrage re-
strictions advocated by a long line of leading American statesmen.
Charles Gould, whose work the Klan recommended to its mem-
bers, informed readers that universal suffrage amounted to "mob
rule." Gould applauded the restrictions the writers of the Constitu-
tion had instituted "to protect authority from the populace." As
had some of the nation's founders, Klansmen took pains to distin-
guish the United States as a "republic" from both monarchy and
democracy. The United States' Constitution, as one writer put it,
"provided a middle ground between the two extremes of autocracy
. . . and democracy, the golden mean between heredity and direct
government."8
Klansmen committed themselves to what they understood as
the social vision of Thomas Jefferson: a republic of small proprie-
tors. According to Simmons, the "real America has always been a
country America." "The farmer is the wealth producer of the na-
tion," concurred the Imperial Night Hawk, "the backbone of all
industry." Simmons saw urgent danger in contemporary popula-
tion trends. In 1920, for the first time, most Americans lived in
urban areas, and city residents cast the majority of votes. "Ignore
the problem of the white small farming class yet a little longer,"
Simmons warned, "and we shall be driven into farming on a great
scale, with armies of stolid peasants doing the work." Simmons
found the prospect of the day "when the countryside, like the city,
shall have lost its free independent population" horrible to contem-
plate.9
Although Klansmen shared Jefferson's adulation of indepen-
dent farmers, they modified his vision to suit a modern class struc-
ture. They extended their loyalties to "the middle class" as a
whole, among whom Klansmen also included small businessmen,


--- PAGE 100 ---
The Politics of Class 81
white-collar workers, independent professionals, and skilled crafts-
men. Common to both the yeoman ideal and its broad petit-
bourgeois variant was the belief that the future of the republic de-
pended on those with a stake in society. Simmons asserted that
the success of early American democracy was attributable to the
homogenous interests of "the small property-holders and skilled
workers" who made up the citizenry. "The importance of the mid-
dle class in history," declared Charles Gould, "cannot be overesti-
mated." As a mediating force between ruling and exploited classes,
the middle class had provided stability to hierarchical social orders,
from the ancient slave states forward. When the middle class was
"depressed" or "destroyed," the ruin of whole societies ensued. An-
other Klan author cited "the failure of the middle class" as the pre-
eminent reason for the problems of all nations—most immediately,
his own.10
Now, it seemed, sinister forces imperiled the fragile balance a
republic depended on. Far more than their contemporaries, Klan
representatives gloomily foresaw the end of the republic. The rhet-
oric of republican alarm and despair—"luxury," "corruption," and
"decay"—and morbid analogies between the contemporary United
States and the declines of ancient Greece, Rome, and Old World
Europe regularly peppered Klan propaganda.11 Simmons predicted
"a steady drift toward monarchy," a "natural outgrowth" for "a
decadent republic" that had spawned "a great class of the rich on
the one hand and a great class of the poor on the other." Both of
these classes tended "toward corruption"; neither could be trusted
to serve the commonweal. "As a people and as a nation," he
warned, "we are face to face with dissolution." "Democracy [was]
threatened from every side" in the contemporary United States,
"by greedy and designing powers above, as by a great mass of in-
competent, unprincipled and undemocratic voters from below."
"Both plutocracy and Bolshevism," announced Simmons, "are new
forms of tyranny" the Klan would combat. The Klan, said Sim-
mons' successor, Hiram Evans, was a tool for "the common people
... to resume control of their country," implying they had already
lost it.12
The foremost threat to the republic, in the Klan's view, came
from below. The order's press and many of its leaders, North and
South, saw the "labor question" as the critical one in their society
in the early 1920s. They were terrified about how it would be an-
swered. According to an Arkansas Klan leader, the "grave indus-
trial unrest" of the era had driven men into the Klan. "Look at the


--- PAGE 101 ---
82 Content and Purpose
list of our strikes," explained Klan propagandist and preacher
Charles Jefferson. "In no other country is the conflict between la-
bor and capital so implacable and so bitter." "Everybody who reads
the newspapers or talks with his neighbors/' agreed Imperial Wiz-
ard Simmons, "knows that the conflict between labor and capital
is drifting us into another civil war. . . . And how much more
deadly is disunity between classes than between sections." Creat-
ing "a closer relationship between capital and labor" was one of
the Klan's oft-stated goals.13
So, too, was fighting the left. Indeed, nothing else elicited from
Klan members quite the same distemper. Socialism was "without
a possible exception . . . the most destructive philosophy preached
by thinking men." "The 'Red' is the most dastardly creature in-
festing the earth," intoned the Searchlight in 1923, "the worst
menace to civilization." The activities of the Industrial Workers of
the World and the Communist Party proved that "America Needs
the Klan." In later years, Klan leaders would boast that it was their
organization that had first "discovered Communism in the United
States and which first assailed it."14
Despite the lack of a serious radical presence in the state, anti-
communism in fact animated the Georgia Klan throughout the de-
cade. Clifford Walker campaigned on it in 1920, charging his oppo-
nent in the race for the governorship with helping the "Bolshe-
vists" "interfere with our business and invade our states' rights."
Once in office in 1922, Walker proclaimed the need to suppress
"the Demagogue" who pitted "class against class." If his measures
were enacted, "the voice of the radical ... of the bolshevist"
would be ignored. Ed Rivers likewise made an attack on commu-
nism a central feature of his 1930 campaign speech in Athens as
the Klan's candidate for governor. Throughout the 'twenties, the
Georgia Klan proclaimed the severity of the "Red Menace" and
heralded the Klan as "the only organization that is endeavoring to
combat same."15
Such vehement anti-communism seems odd in light of the
weakness of the American left relative to its European counter-
parts, particularly after the Red Scare, and its virtual absence in
the Southeast. But the paradox is more apparent than real. Com-
munism condensed into a single entity all the leveling influences
Klansmen perceived in the contemporary world—from economic
concentration to the organization of African Americans, immi-
grants, women, and youth. Hence the depiction of it as "the ex-
treme of Democracy." Anti-communism became a sign expressing


--- PAGE 102 ---
The Politics of Class 83
Klansmen's belief that all these hierarchies were linked: tampering
with one would unloose all the others. In order to rouse mass popu-
lar opposition to changes in any one area, Klan leaders situated
them in a worldwide conspiracy. The threat of "anarchy" from Bol-
shevism was thus discovered "even in villages and hamlets where
it would be least expected."16
Not surprisingly, then, combatting- communism—in all its
faces—appeared an urgent task to Klansmen, particularly in the
early 1920s, but even thereafter. "Klan Declares War on Radical
Forces in U. S.," one headline thus proclaimed, while the Klan
press published a whole series on the theme "Bolshevism—Menace
to America." After the first World War, socialism ceased to be only
"a remote threat" in the United States,- "Never was the Red Peril
so real." "Labor strikes take on the nature of social revolutions,"
complained Simmons. "The advocacy of Bolshevism arouses
mighty crowds to wild enthusiasm." If such subversion continued,
he .predicted, native-born Americans would "probably divide and
civil war will result."17
Above all, the Klan responded to the ripple effects of the Octo-
ber revolution in Russia. "Not only has bolshevism been the terror
of Russia," declared Alma White, a female Klan propagandist; "it
is now threatening the whole civilized world." It was "scattering
its political ruin, industrial desolation and governmental diseases
among all the nations of the earth." Simmons pointed with despair
to the revolutionary stirrings .of workers in Germany, Italy, and
France, and to the budding rebellions of colonized peoples in Tur-
key, China, India, and Egypt as omens of the worldwide collapse of
capitalism. "We must at least keep the hydrophobia out of this
country," argued another Klan author, "while the political revolu-
tion lasts in Europe."18
Klansmen viewed that revolution as the antithesis of the phi-
losophy the United States was founded on. Bolshevik success con-
firmed time-worn republican fears that a class of propertyless labor
would disregard private property and upend social order. Simmons
cited Jefferson's fear of cities as justification for his own belief that
New York's "Bolshevism" showed cities were "a menace to de-
mocracy." Advocacy of "mass action and the General Strike" as
more efficacious than voting by the IWW and the Communist
Party was adduced as evidence of their menace to American insti-
tutions. The industrial unions the left championed amounted to a
new form of "despotism"; their spread would imperil the "personal
liberty of [the] capitalist." "The Bolshevist platform," as parodied


--- PAGE 103 ---
84 Content and Purpose
by Imperial Wizard Evans, was "produce as little as you can, beg or
steal from those who do produce, and kill the producer for thinking
that he is better than you." The "canker of bolshevism" meant the
"overthrow of all authority."19
In interpreting the threat from below, Klansmen reminded
their compatriots of Jefferson's fear of the unskilled wage-earners.
"Jefferson was right," affirmed Simmons. "Unless" the cities were
"reformed they will destroy both democracy and civilization."
Simmons believed that "real Americans" simply could not survive
factory discipline or urban life; farm life was an essential compo-
nent of American manhood. "Factory work," he said, calling on
Social Darwinism to brand the unskilled as biologically inferior,
"progressively selects those who are more and more unfit to be
Americans." Like the "idle rich," they were "physical weaklings,"
"fit only to be the subject of a more or less absolute monarch."
Indeed, in the view of the Imperial Commander of the Women's
Klan, workers were "those least fitted by blood and training to
rule."20
Such open hostility toward workers was rare, however; more
commonly it was packaged in racism. Klansmen blamed virtually
all labor trouble on immigrants and "foreign agitators":—those its
publications depicted as "the riff-raff and outcasts of Europe." Sim-
mons maintained that already, in the cities of the North and East,
ethnic lines had become class lines. The urban working class was
split between skilled tradesmen from Britain, Germany and Scandi-
navia, whom he respected as the modern heirs of artisans, and un-
skilled workers from Southern and Eastern Europe, whom he de-
tested. The new immigrants lacked the capacity to appreciate
republican institutions. "Rebellion against tyrants to them," said
Simmons, "means acceptance of Anarchism or Bolshevism, or at
least German state Socialism." "Just as long as there is a tendency
of foreign domination in any industrial section of this country,"
concluded Leroy Curry, "there will be war—eternal warfare."21
Klan leaders' barely hidden disdain for industrial laborers was
indicative of yet another way they turned old political traditions to
new ends. One of these was producerism, the nineteenth-century
popular ideology that asserted the dignity of labor and scorned
wealthy "parasites" who prospered off the honest toil of others. In
the Klan's hands, producerist language was used to attack, not the
idle rich, but men out of work, unions who challenged employers'
prerogatives, and those who wanted to get "something for nothing"
from the state. Local Klan chapters thus sometimes showered their


--- PAGE 104 ---
The Politics of Class 85
towns with leaflets that proclaimed that no man "has a right to
consume without producing" and warned the unemployed and va-
grants to "find work." In 1922, the Athens Klan applauded the
Mayor's "War on Idlers," in which police combed the city to arrest
those without jobs. Among the supposed idlers were many whose
only crime was their inability to find work in a depressed econ-
omy. Just as the Klan censured the unemployed, so it urged on
workers a return to "the gospel of industry," as if sloth were the
source of the economy's troubles.22
The Klan also called on time-honored American values to op-
pose public provision for social welfare. Evans asserted that the
hallmark of Americanism was "individual liberty." This necessi-
tated "individual responsibility," which "automatically puts us in
opposition to paternalism, socialism, and all other schemes for re-
moving such responsibility." When Athens Klansman R. P. Yarbor-
ough ran for county commissioner, the only concrete position on
his platform was thus "the lowest possible tax rate." "When the
government takes a too personal interest in the people," E. Y.
Clarke explained, "the people lose their will, their sense of respon-
sibility." Klan publications and speakers asserted that no citizen
should be a "sponge on society." They bemoaned increasing reli-
ance on state aid and the "marked tendency toward paternalism in
government."23
Klansmen much preferred the older tradition of charity, in
which only the "worthy" poor received aid, and the act of giving
boosted the status of the providers. One Klan propagandist thus
asserted that "Charity" was the greatest virtue of Klansmen's God.
Klaverns around the country made private giving a staple element
of their practice. To be "unselfish" was one of the Klan's princi-
ples, according to an Athens Klan lecturer, "not for self but for
others." The members of his chapter implemented this dictum by
going in their robes to do "charity work," among poor widows and
children in particular. Klan chapters also collected alms in meet-
ings for the "deserving poor." This practice became so institution-
alized that many whites in need would ask the Klan for material
aid.24
That charity was more than a public relations gambit was evi-
dent in the prior commitments of some Athens Klansmen and
their wives. Local fraternal orders, which shared many ideals and
members with the Klan, had long engaged in charity work. Some
leading Klansmen, along with the wives of a number of others, for
years had assisted a local Industrial Home that aimed to train the


--- PAGE 105 ---
86 Content and Purpose
poor woman "to earn an honest living by the 'sweat of her brow.' "
It found work for "the reliable poor," spoke of the need to "aid,
without pauperizing" the "worthy," and explicitly excluded any
"tenant with any objectionable feature." Such aid was thus hardly
innocent of politics: it emerged from and gave legitimacy to a form
of government based on private paternalism in an organic, hierar-
chical social order. In charitable giving, the Klan acted out its oppo-
sition to both reformist and radical approaches to the problem of
poverty and the question of entitlement.25
Yet, as their fears of changes in the federal government sug-
gested, the threats Klansmen discerned came from above as well as
below. "Increasing economic inequalities," Evans warned,
"threaten the very stability of society." The Klan's involvement in
the Athens anti-chain store campaign drew on a critique of eco-
nomic concentration the national organization had developed over
the decade. Just as Rivers charged chain stores with failure to con-
tribute to the churches like local businesses did, so another Klan
lecturer told his audience that "THE WALL ST[.] CRACKER
TRUST . . . [was] encorach[ing] on your city without paying
TAXES." The allegation that trusts lacked civic commitment
flowed from a more general condemnation of "materialism" or
"Mammon" worship in American culture, which the Klan adapted
from nineteenth-century popular protest movements. Klansmen
complained that contemporary society, as Imperial Wizard Sim-
mons put it, valued "money above manhood." This "love of
money," asserted E. F. Stanton, was "the root of all evil." "Who
loves Mammon, hates God." "In the strenuous rush of big busi-
ness," Klan leader Edward Young Clarke mourned, "we have for-
gotten the spirit from which came . . . this great nation."26
The order held the unbridled quest for wealth responsible for
the decay of communal ethos. Klan propagandist Leroy Curry thus
accused "materialism" of "poisoning the minds and shriveling the
hearts" of America's young men, who looked out only for them-
selves now with no thought for "the advancement of the common
weal." Such criticisms suggest Klansmen's nostalgia for the
nineteenth-century petty-producer ideal, in which communal obli-
gations and a sense of fair practice tempered the voracious self-
seeking that private enterprise might otherwise promote. Looking
back to the turn of the century from the 1930s, the wife of a local
Klansman gave voice to that yearning. "Everybody used to be
neighborly," she reminisced, "helping them that couldn't help
themselves. Now unless you are organized or belong to some club,


--- PAGE 106 ---
The Politics of Class 87
nobody pays any attention to whether you're starving, half-clothed,
or sick." "Times sure have changed something terrible," she con-
cluded.27 In short, in the scramble for progress, society had lost its
humane features.
Klansmen sought to compensate for that loss by practicing
what they called "vocational Klannishness." It entailed "trading,
dealing with and patronizing Klansmen in preference to all others,"
even if that meant sacrifice of time, money, or former friendships.
At least ninety-one local Klansmen had co-workers in the order, a
number in businesses owned or supervised by Klansmen. Some per-
haps hoped that membership would secure their employment or
promotion. Combining commitment to the order with a bid for the
trade of members, many Klan employers instituted—and adver-
tised—"100% American" employment policies: they would only
hire Klan members. Others made their sympathies clear with firm
names such as Kwik Kar Wash, Kountry Kitchen, or Kars, Kars,
Kars. Athens Klansmen, for their part, contracted work out to
chapter members, backed fellow Klansmen for appointive jobs, em-
ployed Klan members, and urged residents to boycott "alien"
capital.28
The Klan also gave voice to apprehension that middling folks
would lose power in the emerging political order. On the local
level, Klansmen often pitted themselves against the elite sponsors
of municipal "reform." Klansmen saw in so-called Progressive pro-
posals for appointed city managers and commission governments
attempts to constrict popular control over the state so that it could
better serve business interests. In Georgia, Klansmen in several
cities butted heads with wealthy elites over such "reform" propos-
als. The Atlanta-based Searchlight denounced those in its city as
"imperialistic" maneuvers for the benefit of "the big interests
through their well-organized commercial clubs and autocratic
Chamber of Commerce." To thwart the Columbus plan, Klansmen
beat up the new city manager and bombed the mayor's home.29
In Athens, the commission issue provoked conflict well before
the establishment of the Klan. Elite civic and business leaders,
many future Klan opponents among them, continued to push mu-
nicipal reform proposals in the face of a stiff popular resistance.
Some future Klansmen, for their part, rallied opposition to the
measures. Thus, while mayor in 1914, Wiley Doolittle spoke out
against a plan for commission government. Klan alderman W. R.
Tindall took the offensive in 1924, putting forward a proposal to
make the Civil Service Commission elective rather than appoint-


--- PAGE 107 ---
88 Content and Purpose
ive so that the body would "belong to the people." O. M. Martin,
an elected official and Klan leader, likewise condemned a city man-
ager plan to the Athens League of Women Voters in 1926, knowing
it would cost him their votes in his campaign for state represen-
tative.30
Since the Banner Herald curried favor with the elite and gener-
ally ignored other points of view, little record survives of the argu-
ments made by opponents of Progressive reform, Klan or otherwise.
Still, once in a while they got to air their views. One such occasion
occurred in 1926, when the Clarke County Democratic Executive
Committee ruled Klansman James Willie Arnold, a local lawyer,
off the primary ticket as a candidate for a judgeship. In addition to
having served as the Great Titan of the regional Klan in Georgia,
Arnold belonged to the Elks and the Woodmen of the World, and
had served as treasurer of the Century Club. He took part in the
men's Sunday school at First Methodist Church, where his wife
belonged to the women's Bible class and the Women's Society for
Christian Service. Nevertheless, Arnold was not good enough for
Democratic Party leaders; or so he interpreted their challenge to
his candidacy.
In a populist appeal to local voters, Arnold traced his roots in
the district back to its frontier days. "My people," he maintained,
"are all plowmen," "sturdy farmers and therefore common peo-
ple," God-fearing men who had tilled Georgia's soil, voted for its
party, and enlisted in its wars. As a judge, he had hoped to protect
the rights of such common people from "the special privileged
apostles" who sought to deprive them of their sovereignty. Arnold
implored his supporters to fight efforts to substitute appointment
for election of public officials. Specifically, he condemned "a cer-
tain element here, who claims by some sort of divine right, to be
the Crown Prince of all the Political power in this section." These
elites, among whom he included Democratic Party leaders and the
League of Women Voters, were "afraid of the voice of the people."
They had "inherited" this "bigotry" from their forebears, who had
crushed the Independent revolt of the 1870s and later popular dis-
sent in the Democratic Party. "I believe with all my soul," Arnold
concluded, that "sovereignty rests in the people"; he had "dedi-
cated [his] life along those lines" and would not stop now.31
But the question of what ends "the people" should serve and
who, exactly, "the people" were elicited different kinds of answers.
The purpose of charges that the local elite operated undemocrati-
cally was to rally support behind an agenda that was itself anti-


--- PAGE 108 ---
The Politics of Class 89
democratic. The Klan thus pitted popular sovereignty for WASPs
against the right of Catholics and Jews—to say nothing of African
Americans—to hold office. A few years before Arnold's missive,
another local Klan campaign had thus criticized the town's "exclu-
sive patrician aristocracy" and called upon "the good citizens of
Athens" to overthrow the regnant "corrupt political ring" and
"take over the reins of power that are justly theirs." Yet, thus used,
the "ring" seemed to refer to the modicum of electoral influence
wielded by Catholics and Jews. One of the main problems restora-
tion of so-called popular control was designed to solve, moreover,
was "the Semitic influence in Athens"—in particular, the "unfor-
tunate" fact that three Jews sat on the Board of Education. One
suspects, too, that these individuals were singled out for attack,
not for their ethnicity and wealth alone, but also for their liberal
records. One of the three, at any rate, Moses G. Michael, had led
the fight to abolish corporal punishment in local schools—in so
doing winning unmatched affection from the city's children—and
had worked to promote tolerance and cooperation among residents
of different faiths.32
A similar spirit of reactionary populist dissent infused the
Klan's hostility to the League of Nations and the World Court. In
Athens, as elsewhere in the United States, Klan chapters fought
against these initiatives. Such efforts, in the view of the Kourier,
aimed at establishing a "Super State," a "gigantic trust" that would
"rule the world ... in the interest of a few." As the self-appointed
representatives of small, local business, Klansmen perceived that
they would lose out if large capital in the United States cooperated
with its counterparts in Europe and Japan for a less contested divi-
sion of the world's spoils. Klansmen felt keenly their "inability to
compete . . . with great corporations . . . who do not hold their
allegiance to one flag and government." They believed the World
Court and like efforts at international cooperation were plots by
"the international bankers."33
As had the Populists, Klansmen thus charged finance capital
and its political allies with responsibility for public policies inimi-
cal to the interests of petit-bourgeois Americans. Hence a Grand
Klokard (lecturer) wrote to Tom Watson in 1922 to hone his own
arguments about how "the Wall St. Bankers" and Federal Reserve
policy had "brought hard times upon us." Watson's protege, Klans-
man and state secretary of agriculture J. J. Brown, blamed the ag-
ricultural disaster in 1920 on the Federal Reserve's refusal to ease
credit for farmers. Other Klan politicians earned accolades from


--- PAGE 109 ---
90 Content and Purpose
their fellows for continuing Watson's attacks on President Harding
and his alleged Wall Street paymasters for having produced the
"wrecked farmers, banks, [and] small merchants of the South and
West." More generally, the Klan accused "big financiers" of "rob-
bing the people." The damage caused by the boll weevil was said
to pale compared to that inflicted by "gamblers and speculators in
manipulating the market."34
Klansmen inherited hatred of Wall Street from nineteenth-
century petit-bourgeois radicals who located the sources of inequal-
ity not in the economic system itself, but in relations of exchange
and unjust laws. The analysis they held in common maintained, as
Watson put it in 1921, that "the money question ... is the great-
est of all economic questions." "In all ages," The Searchlight's edi-
tor explained, "the financiers have been able to completely rule
and ruin the nations." The source of the current troubles in the
economy was that the United States had been "turned . . . over to
the great financiers and the transportation companies." "And when
the government loses control of those two things," the editor ex-
plained, "the citizens have but little to hope for."35
Like the resentments against Democratic Party elites, the cri-
tique of finance capital had deep roots in the South. Farmers en-
snared by crop liens, mortgages, and monopoly control of the mar-
keting and transportation of their crops had good cause to hate
financiers and trusts. The economic crisis of the 1920s helped re-
vive this antipathy as the banks' tight-fisted credit policies exacer-
bated the plight of hard-pressed residents. Local Klan leaders gave
voice to the resulting popular hostility. Klansman George D. Ben-
nett, for example, campaigned in 1926 on a platform that included
"better banking laws." "I feel sure," Bennett intoned, that "the
people of Georgia have suffered enough from high finance and ras-
cality in high places."36
Klan leaders employed these complaints to their own ends.
They made finance capital the scapegoat for a corporate order in
which it was inseparable from industrial capital. Klansman E. D.
Rivers thus implicitly exonerated industry when he told an Athens
audience that unemployment and hard times resulted from merg-
ers of big banking institutions. Over and over again, the Klan
counterposed "the genuine Americanism of Henry Ford"—not co-
incidentally a virulent anti-Semite—to the alleged cupidity of John
D. Rockefeller and his fellow "international money sharks."37
On the rare occasions when the Klan criticized not just monop-
olists or financiers but capitalists as a group, the charge was usu-


--- PAGE 110 ---
The Politics of Class 91
ally that they were insufficiently patriotic and racist. Capital's
"love of money," the Klan alleged, had led it to import people of
"inferior races" to the United States. A meeting of Grand Dragons
denounced opposition to immigration restriction by "the big em-
ployers of pauper labor" reliant on this "European 'riff-raff' . . .
the very scum of the earth." Employers used this imported "cheap
labor," according to the Klan, to lower the living standards of
white, Protestant Americans.38 Klansmen's criticisms of large em-
ployers thus centered, not on their exploitation of workers, but
their infidelity to their "race" and nation.
The communalist spirit of "vocational Klannishness" was sim-
ilarly double-edged. While its advocates condemned the dominance
of market values, they did so in a calculated effort to drive out
Catholic, Jewish, and African-American entrepreneurs whom
Klansmen otherwise had to weigh in against in an impersonal mar-
ketplace.39 Klansmen's criticisms of Mammon had the same qual-
ity: insubstantial at best, reactionary at worst. Like "selfishness,"
"materialism" was a moral failing. Combatting it required, not sys-
temic change in the economy, but rather a spiritual awakening.40
For that change of heart, Klansmen looked to evangelical Protes-
tantism in general, and to fundamentalism in particular. The Klan
overlapped with, and helped feed the larger upsurge of, fundamen-
talism in the 'twenties; indeed, the very term "fundamentalist"
only came into use in 1920. The 1920s "marked a crucial transition
in American religious history," according to one of its leading in-
terpreters. The evangelical Protestant establishment found itself on
the defensive in the face of unprecedented competition from Juda-
ism and Catholicism, as well as from advocates of the social gospel
and higher biblical criticism. Belief in the inerrancy of the Bible,
the truth of the creationist account of human origins, and an other-
worldliness that justified the status quo on earth became defining
features of the fundamentalist world view.41 In it, Klan leaders
found the spiritual anchor for their ideology. To combat the rival
extremes of "democracy" and "monarchy," the Klan advocated
fundamentalism as a parallel, all-encompassing explanation of and
prescription for social order: a reactionary populist vision backed
by the authority of the Almighty. In the Klan's hands, Protestant-
ism was thus very much a political creed: it provided answers to
the basic questions about who should wield power over whom, and
how and why.42


--- PAGE 111 ---
92 Content and Purpose
Above all, "Christianity" was the natural "foe of Bolshevism."
A revival of old-time Christianity, said the national leader of the
Women of the Ku Klux Klan (WKKK), was "the only thing that will
save our nation in these days of unrest and disturbance." "Radical-
ism can be combatted through religious education," the Klan press
explained, for "it brings a contentment of mind that does not hear-
ken easily to disruptive theories." As one internal Klan publication
put it, "a revival of the old style religion" was "the most essential
program throughout the Invisible Empire." "This will lead to vic-
tory in other aims."43
The last fortress of hierarchy and discipline, "old-time reli-
gion" was also the sanctuary of nationalism in a dangerously cos-
mopolitan world. The Klan considered Protestantism "the very
foundation of our peerless civilization." As proof, the Klan press
noted the Bible's importance to the nation's founders and to a
string of Presidents, including Woodrow Wilson. Georgia's Grand
Dragon described contemporary challenges to Protestantism as
having created the "most dangerous situation . . . since the Revo-
lutionary War." "The Constitution of the United States is based
upon the Holy Bible and the Christian religion," he wrote, italiciz-
ing the words lest his readers fail to appreciate the connection,
"and an attack upon one is an attack upon the other. If Christian-
ity is destroyed in America," he asked, "how long would our Gov-
ernment endure?" The answer put forward by another Klan leader,
himself a minister, was unequivocal: it "would in short order be a
heap of ruins. In the present order of civilization, a nation without
churches cannot exist."44
Yet the Klan's religion was not conservative in a conventional
way. Rather, Klan fundamentalism had the same anti-elitist thrust
as the reactionary populism it served to sanctify. Protestantism,
explained Imperial Wizard Evans, was "more than religion." It was
an expression of the "spirit of independence, self-reliance and free-
dom" of northern Europeans that promoted the rise of capitalism
hundreds of years ago. America's triumph in the world of nations
came from its founding faith, for "only men and women who dared
to speak to their God face to face could have had the courage and
self-reliance necessary to the mighty work of the pioneer." Evans
thus interpreted Protestantism as, at root, a "protest against hu-
man authority over the souls, the bodies, the rights and the earn-
ings of men."45 In other words, Protestants' historic rejection of
papal authority and belief in God's direct relationship with believ-
ers was of a piece with their rejection of feudalism.


--- PAGE 112 ---
The Politics of Class 93
Through Protestant fundamentalism, the Klan consolidated
middling men against the impious classes beneath and above them.
"The rabble" and "the mob," explained the Klan's Imperial chap-
lain, were to blame for the death of Christ. Just as the rabble did
the work of the money changers in the Temple, so did the "riff-
raff" and "the 'Upper Tenth'" share a taste for ridiculing men of
the cloth. Indignant at the "burlesquing of the Protestant clergy,"
many Klan chapters led campaigns against offending movie the-
aters and literature. The Colonial Theatre in Athens thus cancelled
a showing of Simon, Called Peter after protests that the film belit-
tled the Protestant faithful.46
The promotion of Protestant fundamentalism also aided the
Klan's mission in less direct ways. By mystifying relations of power
and promoting uncritical awe of "higher authority," fundamental-
ism performed a vital service for the Klan. Klan leaders consciously
employed the power of "ritual and formalism," in the conviction
that "the people want and need faith and symbolism." "I wish to
believe, and I do believe," was how one Klan tract described the
order's rejection of critical readings of the Bible. The appeal of "the
old-time, old-fashioned Gospel" to Klansmen, according to one,
was precisely its otherworldliness, its "sermons . . . full of spiri-
tual pathos and the power of the Holy Spirit."47
Central to the old-time religion the Klan was so enamored of
was belief in the literal truth of the Bible. "The Klansman," ex-
plained one manual, "pins his faith to the Bible as the revealed will
of God." "Human reason bows" before this "Impregnable Rock,"
"afraid to doubt." Such magical thinking helped Klan leaders sub-
due reason and elicit unquestioning loyalty to the status quo. Ra-
tional thought derived from philosophical materialism, in contrast,
was deeply threatening. Darwin's theory of evolution was thus said
to be part of the larger threat of "materialism" to "moral integ-
rity." Indeed, Georgia legislators found the teaching of evolution to
be not simply "improper" but "subversive."48
The Klan's opposition to religious liberalism was thus emi-
nently sensible. Once the right to interpret the Bible was conceded,
much less the right to enlist it in the cause of social reform, the
whole structure of feeling that made fundamentalism such a formi-
dable buttress of social order would collapse. Seen through Klan
eyes, the social gospel acted as the entering wedge of communism.
The "wider ramifications" of the social gospel, according to the
Klan, included "pacifism, Bolshevism, attacks on the government,
bitter arraignments of the churches, anti-capitalism, [and] sympa-


--- PAGE 113 ---
94 Content and Purpose
thy with Russia." Klansmen's feelings of imminent disaster led
them to renounce not only reason but tolerance as well. No "man
or woman who opposes the government," proclaimed Klan lumi-
naries, "has any right to protection." They "should be deported or
placed behind prison bars." The national office instructed local
Klans to fight "any. kind of propaganda that belittles this govern-
ment ... or that calls into question constituted authority from
any source." Critics "must either shut up or get out."49
To bring the Bible's missives to the public, Klansmen actively
promoted religious revivals. Baptist and Methodist pastors of the
Athens Klan worked together to organize one in 1925. Afterwards,
V. D. Scroggins wrote on behalf of his church committee to thank
his fellow Klan members for their "interest in the services and . . .
liberal contribution," delivered in a robed appearance with the per-
mission of the presiding minister. The "greatest Revival in many
years," it won new members for the church and "brought back to
the Master" many lapsed Christians as well. Local Klansmen also
paid tribute to the individual apostles of "old time religion." They
attended a service of the Young Harris Memorial Church en masse
and in full regalia to make a donation in praise of the minister's
work "in winning souls for Jesus Christ."50
Revivals were much more than religious events. They provided
arenas in which believers worked out their social fears and aspira-
tions through potent, visceral experiences. "Like political dema-
gogues, the evangelists," as Lillian Smith once observed, "won alle-
giance by bruising and then healing a deep fear within men's
minds." Just as the emotional character of revivalism served the
Klan's purposes, so, too, did the interpretation of the Bible at these
gatherings by fundamentalist preachers. Their jeremiads invested
conservative political messages with divine sanction. In one of the
revivals supported by the Athens Klan, for example, the evangelist
"flay[ed] modern day youth." Girls, he said, spurned femininity,
boys acted "sissy," and their nighttime joyrides were taking them
down "the surest road to hell." For his part, leading contemporary
evangelist and Klan fellow-traveler Billy Sunday claimed God's
benediction for racial segregation, nativism, anti-communism, free
enterprise, anti-Catholicism, anti-Semitism, Prohibition, and law
and order.51 By tapping participants' fears of damnation and hopes
for salvation, clergymen like Sunday infused right-wing political
commitments with an emotional force that made them impervious
to rational disputation. There was thus little contradiction be-


--- PAGE 114 ---
The Politics of Class 95
tween the Klan's religious enthusiasm and its larger political
program.
Like its religious enthusiasms, the Klan's religious antipathies
were shot through with political content. In Klansmen's vociferous
and oft-repeated complaints against Catholicism, the movement's
dual animus of anti-radicalism and anti-elitism was much in evi-
dence. And here, too, the order drew from an older republican tradi-
tion. That tradition had a long history of antipathy to the Catholic
Church for its alleged monarchical ambitions; hence, it is not sur-
prising that the Klan referred to Roman Catholicism as "the ex-
treme of monarchy."52 To a population schooled in the notion that
individual conscience and reason were the proper basis for political
action, Rome's authority over its parishioners appeared threatening
indeed, particularly when wielded over hotly contested public is-
sues such as Prohibition.
Yet the Klan did not simply reassert a static cultural tradition
of anti-Catholicism. Klansmen adapted anti-Catholicism, as they
did republicanism itself, to the concerns of their era.53 Most com-
monly, the Klan charged Catholics with political offenses that
echoed time-worn themes of anti-papal agitation. "The trouble
with the Roman Catholic Church," explained an article in the Klan
press by Warren Akin Candler, bishop of the Southern Methodist
Episcopal Church, was "that it seeks to be both a church and a
political party." An Athens Klan lecturer likewise characterized
the Catholic Church as "a great political machiene," referring to
its mobilization of Catholic voting power. Echoing the arguments
made for disfranchising black men, Imperial Wizard Evans pointed
out that eight million Catholic voters could now determine the
outcome of elections in which Protestants divided.54
The Klan's diatribes centered on the implications of Catholic
power for the future of the republic. The Georgia Klan thus prided
itself on its fight "to maintain a free republican form of govern-
ment against the subtle political encroachments of the self-
arrogated, infallible, universal autocracy known as the Roman
Catholic hierarchy." Such charges had a long history in America,
dating back to the fear of Catholicism as a worldwide "conspiracy
against liberty" in the age of the American Revolution, a history
the Klan used to defend its positions. The Kourier thus quoted
Thomas Jefferson to the effect that the United States would inter-
pret an influx of priests "as a National aggression on our peace and
faith."55


--- PAGE 115 ---
96 Content and Purpose
The crux of the problem, so Klansmen said, was the authority
of the pope over the laity. Evans charged that Catholicism was im-
bued with "the monarchical idea of the individual as subject in-
stead of citizen" in contrast with the republican idea, which "ex-
alts the individual, clothing him and her with all the attributes of
sovereignty." The pope's intervention in politics thus posed a
choice for Americans, said George Estes: "the rule of the people or
the rule of a monarch?" Klansmen believed that the church aspired
to a theocratic state, and read in the activities of the church in
America and the Catholic political parties of Europe evidence of
this aim. Indeed, they charged the Knights of Columbus with being
a "trained and equipped army" bent on conquest for Rome: Klav-
erns around the country, Athens included, used fraudulent "oaths"
from Catholic lay organizations to "prove" a conspiracy to vio-
lently overthrow American institutions.56
Yet, if populist themes animated the Klan's case against the
Catholic church, its core was preservationist. This urge makes
sense of the otherwise ludicrous charges that the Catholic hierar-
chy fomented revolution, even that it collaborated with Commu-
nist parties. The logic of the accusations came from the republican
conviction that tyranny bred rebellion. Klan writers thus blamed
the Russian Orthodox Church (equivalent, in their minds, to the
Roman Catholic Church) for the Russian revolution; they implied
that the expansion of Catholic political power in the United States
would ultimately produce a similar upheaval. Indeed, the combina-
tion of "commercialism" and Catholicism in America was paving
the way for communism.57
In fact, the Klan's complaints against the church followed the
pattern of its criticisms of elites more generally. Insofar as the Klan
reproached the Catholic hierarchy, it was, at the end of the day,
less for its conservatism than for the way its collaboration in injus-
tice furthered tendencies toward socialism. The Klan's denuncia-
tions of the church hierarchy's parasitism on its parishioners
should be read in this light. "My God," George Estes thus pro-
claimed, "does not build cathedrals and temples . . . from treasure
wrung like blood . . . from the wearied frames of millions he has
impoverished." Yet Klan empathy was selective. The hardships im-
posed on employees of miserly Protestants did not arouse it. More
importantly, the Klan used the rhetoric of protest against Old
World despotism to attack, not an elite, but an already beleaguered,
subordinate people. When ethnic Catholics made up so large a part
of the wage-earning population, attacks on Rome but thinly veiled


--- PAGE 116 ---
The Politics of Class 97
anti-working class sentiments. The Klan thus assailed parochial
schools for encouraging "class-consciousness, bitterness, and defi-
ance."58
All the talk of rights and freedom notwithstanding, in fact, the
Klan's populist assault on Catholicism was hardly democratic. De-
nunciations of Catholic "block-voting" implied that all cohesive
voting, notably by trade unions and immigrant working-class com-
munities, was wrong. Earnest backers of the Protestant minority in
Ireland, Klansmen repudiated democracy when it meant Catholic
self-rule. At the most basic level, then, anti-Catholicism offered a
way to repudiate the consequences of democracy without ap-
pearing to reject democracy per se. The indispensable ideological
load carried by anti-Catholicism helps explain its otherwise para-
doxical prominence in a town such as Athens, which counted only
two hundred Catholic residents in 1916, and a state such as Geor-
gia, which had fewer than fourteen thousand—equivalent to less
than two percent of its total population.59
Nevertheless, as the case of anti-Catholicism illustrates, the
Klan rarely expressed its class politics directly. It could not. For to
do so would have undermined the movement's attempt to defuse
class conflict by denying the existence of class as a meaningful
division in society, and offering in its stead religion, race, and sex
as proper poles of identification. Its mission here would be aided
by the way that, in the white petit-bourgeois world most Klan
members came from, the very meaning of class was constituted
through relations of race, sex, and generations—most commonly,
through an obsession with respectability.


--- PAGE 117 ---
5
"Cleaning Up" Morality:
The Politics of Sex and Age
As a site of debauchery, the Imperial Palace of the Klan rivaled
some of the motion picture sets its representatives so habitually
rebuked. The national chaplain of the Klan, Caleb Ridley, a well-
known Atlanta minister and Prohibitionist, was arrested in 1923
for driving while intoxicated. Imperial Wizard Simmons, according
to numerous people in a position to know, drank heavily, relished
pornography, and regularly patronized prostitutes. His assistants
E. Y. Clarke and Mary Elizabeth Tyler, the masterminds of the
Klan's growth after 1920, were once arrested together, inebriated
and in the flesh, during a tryst in a hotel. The list could go on.
The unsavory conduct of the highest leadership helped cause its
overthrow and replacement in 1922—and cost their movement
much of its following over the decade.1 The hypocrisy of the or-
der's national officials is more than ironic, however. It underscores,
in a circuitous way, their Machiavellian appreciation of the appeal
of morality campaigns for the people they hoped to attract. And,
indeed, rarely did local chapters suffer such scandals. To rank-and-
file members, the Klan's professed commitment to purity meant a
great deal.
The Klan in fact staked its bid for power on its value as a tool
for restoring "traditional" values. Purity campaigns became the
core of recruitment drives in localities around the country. A for-
mer Klan organizer reported in 1924 that officers from the Imperial
Palace instructed local Klans, once organized, to "clean up their
98


--- PAGE 118 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 99
towns." One of the Klan's oaths of citizenship thus bound the
member "to correct evils in my community, particularly vices
tending to the destruction of the home, family, childhood and
womanhood." Klaverns around the country boasted that their ef-
forts had arrested the drift toward immorality: "whole communi-
ties that seemed travelling fast on the road to hell suddenly have
turned toward Heaven." Clearly, national officials thought these
clean-ups an excellent way to prove the value of the Klan to its
constituency. They were right. Across the country, the Klan ingra-
tiated itself with solid middle-class white citizens on the basis of
its unrivaled commitment to community moral "clean-ups."2
The demand for purity served several ends. Its immediate ob-
ject was to subdue internal threats to family discipline: from men
who failed to act their parts, from children who repudiated the
Spartan tastes of their parents, and from wives who sought to rene-
gotiate the marital compact. Yet the movement's emphasis on
moral purity was more than a strategy to boost enrollments and
bolster parental authority and male dominance. Respectability was
also a prime marker of status for the lower-middle-class men who
joined the Klan in such numbers. Their moral standards were the
visible sign of their difference from, and purported superiority to,
both the working class and the elite.3 Taking a stand for the old-
time virtues was thus also a means of building internal cohesion
and collective confidence among the white Protestant petite bour-
geoisie the Klan hoped to mobilize.
A postwar moral panic paved the way for the growth of the Klan
in Clarke County. It was not the first time local residents had wor-
ried about alcohol, gambling, and prostitution; agitation over such
issues had a long history in Athens as elsewhere in the nation. But
when such affronts accompanied economic disaster and social
strife, and when premarital sex joined the list of transgressions, the
mixture proved volatile. Experimentation in marriage or morals,
explained one Klan-recommended writer on the family, was partic-
ularly risky "in this age of unrest and discontent and instability."
The editor of the Athens Daily Banner summarized the common
diagnosis in 1921: "The tendency of the times toward disorder and
crime and revolution and unrest" had a taproot: "disregard for au-
thority both parental and governmental." "Bolshevism and social-
ism and all the radical isms rampant" were the harvest of lenient


--- PAGE 119 ---
100 Content and Purpose
parenting. The return of the state's authority would "have to start
in the home"; parents must "compel obedience and respect."4
What both writers, one a mainstream journalist and the other
an ardent anti-democratic theorist, had in common was a convic-
tion that ordered, hierarchical families undergirded ordered, hierar-
chical society, and a perception that the behavior of contemporary
young people, women in particular, endangered both. Unnerved by
postwar unrest, they looked to the family to provide a model of
stability and authority for the rest of society. In "purifying" domes-
tic life, they would rid the wider world of its evils.
Evangelical ministers first sounded the alarm in Athens. In a
1920 sermon, the Reverend W. F. Dick of the Athens Free Method-
ist Church denounced "the evils of our day" abundant in Clarke
County. Dick flayed "the public dance hall. . . the pool room, the
card table and other kinds of sin practiced in Athens." Many
adults, locally and nationwide, shared his anxiety about the impli-
cations of the "dance mania" for the sexual mores of youth, partic-
ularly girls.5 The coupling of dances with other alleged sins illus-
trated how hostility toward youthful sexuality merged with a more
sweeping urge to control subordinates.
Pool halls, for example, affronted the very premises of the Prot-
estant work ethic. "The pool room," explained a representative of
the Georgia Anti-Poolroom League in 1922, "diverts man power"
from economic development and family support. It encouraged
general moral laxity, particularly in young men: "idleness . . . dis-
sipation . . . intoxicants . . . profanity . . . lascivious stories . . .
[and] the love of chance." Woodruff and his associates sought a ban
on pool rooms, a topic the Georgia legislature debated throughout
the 1920s. These efforts evinced the belief widespread among
middle-class Southern whites that pool rooms were the hang-out
of "trashy" mill people, and a disgrace to their communities.6 They
were also tangible symbols of their patrons' defiance of the mores,
hence the authority, of town leaders.
The Klan first sallied into public view in Athens in 1921 as the
war on vice gained momentum. In that year, bootleggers mocked
the elitist pretensions of the local guardians of morality and in so
doing, confirmed their fears about the correlation between alcohol
and rebellion. When the mayor warned bootleggers to quit their
trade or leave town, they responded with a "defiant letter" of their
own. In it could be heard echoes of the labor revolt that had re-
cently swept the nation. Banding together as "Bootlegger's Union
Local No. 13," the writers defended the "small pint man." They


--- PAGE 120 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 101
served notice to the Athens press that "a bootlegger is making his
money as honest as some of these nice honest-to-goodness people,
who are always kicking about what the other fellow is doing." And
they vowed to continue selling to anyone who wanted to buy
their wares.7
Their humor exposed the class tensions over Prohibition rife in
the Piedmont. Many poor farmers found that their produce brought
in more money when converted to bootleg, and ready cash was a
scarce commodity in the farm depression of the 1920s. These peo-
ple and many of their mill-working counterparts also accepted spir-
its as a natural part of social life, at least as a personal choice. They
had little enthusiasm for the stringent mores of the town middle
class. Southern mill owners, after all, often built the churches and
paid the preachers who promulgated these values, along with the
notion that workers' poverty was the fruit of their own vices.
Hence it is not surprising that the Georgia Federation of Labor, like
the labor movement at large, distrusted the prohibition movement.
Indeed, the GFL voted down every resolution for prohibition that
came before it in the first few decades of the twentieth century.8
The insurrectionary spirit of the bootleggers was more than
many upstanding Athens residents, no doubt conscious of these
class tensions, could bear. Charges mounted through the next few
months that the police refused to stop the open traffic in liquor
and gambling. Finally the respectable lost their patience with
equivocation. The Ministers' Association of Athens and Clarke
County issued a statement in September proclaiming that "the
fearful disregard of law now rampant," if allowed to continue,
would "bring us a harvest of revolution and an orgy of anarchism."
Hyperbole notwithstanding, these concerns were deep-rooted. Ear-
lier that year the same organization had warned that "at a time
when the world [was] seething in social unrest and disquietude,
when anarchy overwhelms whole sections of the world," no law-
breaking could be tolerated.9
The ministers' warning roused others to the assault on sin,
which it seemed not only the defiant bootleggers but also the sons
and daughters of upstanding families now indulged in. A few days
later, the Athens press issued a call for the re-establishment of the
"old family altar," a condemnation of youthful nighttime automo-
bile riding, and a demand for mothers to keep a better watch on
their daughters. Judge Blanton Fortson asked the grand jury con-
vened the next month to go on record against "loose morals" in
the county, in particular the "lax moral" state of young people.10


--- PAGE 121 ---
102 Content and Purpose
The jury complied. It, too, registered disapproval of the "ex-
cesses" of "the younger generation." The jurors amplified Fortson's
charges, however, as to gender, social disorder, and the need for
rigorous state intervention. Ignoring young men's part, they cau-
tioned parents not to allow their daughters out for nighttime "joy-
riding." They expressed concern that "a reckless abandon" had de-
veloped among youth in recent years. And they charged authorities
with either "absolute inefficiency . . . or a wilful neglect of their
duty" in regard to Prohibition enforcement. Their recommenda-
tions included replacement of these officials if necessary, chain-
gang sentences for bootleggers, and the placing of all "places where
people are liable to congregate . . . under the most rigid scrutiny."
In effect, they declared a moral state of siege. A local revivalist
then took up the campaign in his sermons. These combined efforts
prompted city officials to a new crackdown on prostitution and
Prohibition violators.11
Still, local purity advocates remained unsatisfied. Several es-
tablished local men, including Klansman Wiley Doolittle, incorpo-
rated a new newspaper over the summer, the Athens Daily News.
It began publishing sensational exposes of local vice and chastising
public officials for inaction. Some candidates for local office
charged the city administration with having allowed "immoral
houses" to remain.12 In the resulting furor, voters turned Mayor
Andrew C. Erwin, a liberal and later outspoken Klan opponent, out
of office and replaced him with purity advocate George C. Thomas.
As the community divided, local Klansmen moved into the
breach. In March of 1922, they passed and published resolutions
applauding the new mayor for "making our city a better, cleaner
and safer place to live in" by upholding his pre-election pledges.
They commended as well the Athens Daily News editorials "call-
ing for better ideals and morals." The Klansmen explained that
since their organization "consists of 100% Americans and stands
for law and order and for a cleaner and better government," they
would always be ready to assist the authorities "in matters of this
nature." Indeed, a few took part in a liquor raid that resulted in a
brawl as one of the targets defended himself against the intruders.
Local evangelical ministers, for their part, kept up the squall. The
Reverend Morgan a few weeks later mounted a "virile attack" on
the "lust" he found "rampant" in Athens, stoking suspicions about
what young people did at their dances after their chaperons left.13
Shortly thereafter, two special committees were set up to in-
quire into the extent of local vice. The grand jury committee,


--- PAGE 122 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 103
which included two prominent Klansmen, issued a stinging report
indicting the moral caliber of the community. The report encapsu-
lated the spirit of the era's anti-vice activity. It explicitly connected
the decline in moral standards with the worldwide "vicious after-
math of the world war" that had taken its toll of the economy and
other social relations as well. The jurors vented frustration at their
inability to make their authority felt; their efforts to investigate
had "been met by perjury, evasion and intimidation of witnesses."
They complained of "the thorough organization of the criminal
classes," who "are so banded together" as to make effective prose-
cution nearly impossible. They alluded resentfully to the complic-
ity of members of the upper classes in vice and consumption of
liquor. And they called for harsh penalties "to stem the tide of
lawlessness."14
The jurors reserved their most animated comments, however,
for their discovery of widespread illicit sex. Various wooded areas
around the county were being used "as places of assignation" by
local men and women, "many of them young and unmarried—from
all sections of the city." In other words, not only mill youth and
others of less concern to the establishment, but also middle- and
upper-class white young people now engaged in forbidden sexual
activity. "The evidence as to the objects of these visits are so con-
clusive and so appalling," the grand jury reported, that Athens par-
ents would be horrified "beyond expression" if they investigated
for themselves. In assigning blame, the committee specifically ac-
cused local mothers of "proving derelict in their duty toward their
daughters." The report called for a series of draconian measures:
hiring extra officers to conduct round-the-clock patrols of the
woods, arresting those caught, and shaming them through the pub-
lication of their names. It also called for more rigid restrictions on
dances, out of the conviction that the sexual suggestiveness of
young people's dance styles "open[ed] the door toward excesses
which we find it horrible to contemplate." That a newborn infant
had been found dead recently in a sanitation truck hardly helped
allay their fears.15
Yet the politics of morality in Athens was never separate from
the racism, nativism, and class prejudice earlier campaigns had
first infused it with. For the grand jurors, as for many of their peers
in and out of the Klan, hostility to sexuality fused with concern
about the security of the larger social order. The jury now insisted
that since sexual control was "of such fundamental importance to
the very integrity of our social structure," community leaders must


--- PAGE 123 ---
104 Content and Purpose
overcome their reticence and promote "public discussion" of the
danger. Their own recommendations to combat sexual indulgence
among local youth were "concerned with the preservation of the
social structure and racial purity."16 These frank comments indi-
cate the conviction among white civic leaders that the hierarchies
of private life served public order, that regulation of women's sexu-
ality buttressed white supremacy. Tolerance of sexual autonomy
for women might erode the social order.
The Clarke County Klan organized a large rally, its first re-
ported one, soon after the jury announced its findings. As signifi-
cant as the timing was the way the rally bolstered the Klan's image
as an ardent defender of public morality, with all the broad conno-
tations this morality had. Shortly afterwards, a local nonmember
announced publicly his admiration for the order's stand "for good
citizenship." He maintained that, whatever might be said against
the Klan elsewhere, in Athens, people viewed it as an asset to the
moral health of their community.17
By this time, some members of the local governing class real-
ized that all their talk of moral declension had helped create a
monster. They now tried, in vain, to put the genie back in the
bottle. "It is no exaggeration," bemoaned the Banner in late April,
"to say that the Athens public is fast drifting into hostile camps."
Its editor, who had earlier insisted that only the reassertion of pa-
rental authority could save ordered society, now accused purity ad-
vocates of inciting hysteria. "No town can exist," he warned, "if
half the population is spying and reporting . . . against their fellow
citizens." He urged residents not to allow "politicians to make po-
litical capital out of" local morals, but to leave them to the moth-
ers, churches, and social institutions that had long controlled
them. And he begged "some of the older, more conservative citi-
zens" to step in and avert Armageddon.18
The fears of some prominent citizens about the campaign went
deeper than they cared to detail in print. For, by this time, the
Athens Klan had begun terrorizing area residents through vigilante
forays, which the Banner alluded to in oblique terms. Joined by the
police chief and the majority of the city council, the editor insisted
that, the moral decay had been "greatly exaggerated." In an effort
to reason with the purity forces, they pointed out that Athens was
"no worse than other cities." The whole nation, after all, was
"morally suffering" since the war.19
Local purity ultras found scant comfort in the idea that Athens
had company on the road to hell. They refused to relent. The rene-


--- PAGE 124 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 105
gade Athens News, backed by the Klan, kept the controversy alive
with "screaming headlines . . . insisting that vice was rampant
. . . and that sinister influences were in control in the city," or so
the Banner charged. In the name of home protection, the Athens
League of Women Voters demanded to know the positions of alder-
manic candidates in the upcoming election on Prohibition enforce-
ment; prominent individual women complained about public vul-
garity. The vigorous campaign of the new mayor and the courts
yielded results, though, and activity died down for a time.20 After
a year-long hiatus, the uproar resurged in early 1924. This time,
the Klan emerged as the leader of the purity forces; its participation
would have explosive consequences for all concerned.
In late March of 1924, in the midst of a statewide recruitment
drive, the Klan renewed agitation over the "exceedingly deplor-
able" state of local morality. As evidence, it cited bootleggers who
sold their wares on the courthouse square and "a corps of [prosti-
tutes] who prey constantly on the young college students." In order
to put its own stamp on the issues, the Klan pointed in particular
to the operation of two pool rooms a stone's throw from the uni-
versity. Patronized by "the vermin and dregs of society," they were
"harbors of vice and corruption." They also had Italian owners, as
the Klan was at pains to point out. The order's publicist and his
colleagues argued that in order to right the moral climate, "the
Semitic influence in Athens must be checked," and the leverage of
Catholic and Jewish voters—the alleged "ring" to which the Klan
attributed all ideas or values contrary to its own—"broken by an
organization just as powerful." In speeches and private discussions,
the anti-Semitism was apparently even more blatant; when a group
of university students lampooned the Klan in their yearbook, they
all added Eastern European suffixes to their names, associated
themselves with moonshine, gambling, and flappers, and changed
the school's name to "Solomon University."21
The grand jury soon picked up the ball, if not with the precise
spin the Klan had put on it. The grand jurors' April report mingled
grudging awareness of their inability to control the population, fear
of youthful sexuality, and anger at the boldness of lawbreakers.
The jurors realized that Prohibition was floundering for lack of ade-
quate "public sentiment" behind it. They reported that their dis-
coveries had convinced them of "the necessity of having police of-
ficers attend" the dances of local youth "to maintain order." And
finally, they expressed rage at "the audacity and effrontery" of the
Prohibition violators who had appeared before the jury "openly


--- PAGE 125 ---
106 Content and Purpose
flaunting their opinions."22 The report encapsulated the plight of
even moderate local purity advocates. They commanded the jury,
the courts, and the press, yet they lacked real authority. A signifi-
cant portion of their fellow citizens ignored them. Law-breakers
mocked them. They needed police to monitor their own children.
From their perspective, the signs hardly boded well for the future.
Mature female purity advocates, for their part, may well have
felt shamed in their maternal roles. After all, the press and the jury
had repeatedly blamed them for the going astray of the daughters
they were charged with protecting. But they also had reasons of
their own for interest in Prohibition, as a request for help to the
state Women's Christian Temperance Union in that year from a
North Georgia woman illustrated. The woman complained that in
her community, whiskey production and fights stemming from it
were rife, yet local authorities did nothing. "Many a poor womon
and little childern . . . [were] all most starving on the acount of
it." The "fighting and cussin" had gotten so bad that mothers felt
"it isn't safe to let our childern out of the [yard]." The situation in
Clarke County was less dramatic, but many women there shared
the author's views on the dangers of intoxicants to their families'
well-being and her conviction that not enough was being done.
With representation from the allied League of Women Voters, the
Women's Christian Temperance Union held a rally in May to de-
vise strategies for Prohibition enforcement. They met at First
Christian Church, whose two ministers led the Athens Klan and
its anti-vice efforts.23
Meanwhile, the Klan continued to circulate the Searchlight ar-
ticle about the putrescent moral state of Athens. Promising future
sermons on "the International Jew," the "Roman Catholic Hierar-
chy," the "Ku Klux Klan and some other things," the Reverend
S. E. Wasson applauded the piece from his pulpit in the First Meth-
odist Church. Wasson further charged that county officials failed
to enforce the law because they were all beholden to "a certain
power in a pool room on Broad Street." Over 150 members of his
congregation shared his sentiments, Wasson said, a consensus not
surprising since at least twelve Klansmen participated in his men's
Sunday school class. The following week, the League of Women
Voters chimed in, "bombard[ing]" the civil service commissioner
with questions about why Prohibition violators were tolerated in
Athens. Local League members had earlier resolved that the Eigh-
teenth Amendment "can be enforced," but not by "men who are
addicted to the habit of drink." The state office of the Klan, for its


--- PAGE 126 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 107
part, now trumpeted Prohibition enforcement as "the real issue"
in the upcoming Democratic presidential primaries.24
In the midst of the uproar, the Athens Klan organized a mas-
sive outdoor recruitment rally on June 19; thousands of Klansmen
from all over North Georgia attended to parade through town be-
hind the Imperial Drum and Bugle Corps and then watch the initia-
tion of "hundreds" of new members "in the glare of a giant fiery
cross." These social purity efforts helped win the Athens Klan the
state record for percentage increases in membership. Yet, if they
won members for the Klan, they failed to discourage the practices
they aimed to end. In October, "flagrant violation" still absorbed
the grand jurors. They concluded, prophetically, with recommenda-
tions for "the employment of a special detective" and "renewed
vigilance."25
Vigilance being its stock in trade, the Klan took matters into
its own hands. Its Law Enforcement Committee concocted a plan
over the summer to bring to town a private detective. With his
help, Klansmen collected evidence that resulted in a host of indict-
ments. They obtained it illegally, through deliberate entrapment of
whiskey sellers, drinkers, and gamblers. Public exposure of these
underhanded methods led ultimately to a scandal, a split among
purity advocates, the abandoning of the indictments, two threat-
ened lawsuits, and the temporary abrogation of the local Klan's
charter by the national office. Yet, in the final analysis, these side-
effects did not really matter. Through the entrapment scheme and
the exposure, the Klan had polarized the community. It had proved
itself the most determined anti-vice force in the county, the pre-
mier voice for local people who feared changing family relations
and sought to compel obedience to older norms. That fall, the
Klan's candidates swept the local elections.26
The incident itself offers an unusual window on the inner
workings of the Klan. In the first place, the members of the Klan's
Law Enforcement Committee were not ordinary rank-and-filers,
but established civic leaders. The Reverend M. B. Miller, in addi-
tion to serving as the Klan's Exalted Cyclops, was also the minister
of the First Christian Church. He was described by the police com-
missioner as "the highest type of Christian manhood." Miller's as-
sistant in his church and in the Klan was the Reverend Jerry John-
son. While acting as Kligrapp (secretary) for the Athens Klan,
Johnson served as director of Young People's Work at the First Chris-
tian Church and field secretary of the Christian Endeavor Union.
He spent his days, by his own account, "fighting for victory in bring-


--- PAGE 127 ---
108 Content and Purpose
ing our young men and women to the feet of Jesus Christ."27
Dr. Henry Birdsong, a surgeon, was a charter member and future
president of the Athens Lions Club, a leader in the Chamber of
Commerce, and a member of the Prince Avenue Baptist Church.
His wife taught in the church's adult Sunday school and presided
over a circle of its Ladies' Missionary Society. Bela Dunaway, a
leading local businessman, was a longtime prohibitionist, a Grand
Noble of the Odd Fellows, a member of the men's Sunday school
class at the First Methodist Church and of the Woodmen of the
World, a founder of the local Law Enforcement League, and father
of two veterans of the Great War.
Klansman Wiley Doolittle, who served on the grand jury that
issued the inflammatory 1922 report and founded the newspaper
that broadcast the moral crusade, had a long and distinguished re-
cord of civic activism. Described by Klan opponent Lamar Rucker,
an Athens attorney, as "the top-most bird on the top-most twig"
in Athens, Doolittle was a local economic mogul who had served
three terms as mayor of Athens in past years. One of the city's
"most influential citizens," in the view of the Banner, he was a
past president of the Chamber of Commerce, an organizer and pres-
ident of the Athens Kiwanis Club, chairman of the Clarke County
Democratic Party Executive Committee, a leading Mason, an avid
churchgoer, and a man known as being among the city's most "be-
nevolent" in giving to the poor.28
The fact that the Law Enforcement Committee included none
of the Klan's poorer, less prominent members is significant. The
order seems to have purposely staffed the committee with men
whose claim to authority would be difficult for their non-Klan
peers to question. In so doing, Klan leaders most likely aspired to
attract others of the same class. Whether intentional or not, the
composition suggests a clear hierarchy within the Klan. It repli-
cated internally the chain of command it prescribed for the rest of
society. Indeed, internal Klan documents indicated that only
better-off members were trusted to plan activities and speak pub-
licly. These practices illustrated how intimately the quest for re-
spectability was tied to class differentiation. The episode also ex-
posed the roots the Klan had sunk among leading citizens. The
most telling revelation of these roots occurred when the grand jury,
a body said to be "as a rule largely composed of representative busi-
ness men and merchants," ultimately had to throw out all the in-
dictments stemming from the Klan's investigation. Repeated ef-


--- PAGE 128 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 109
forts had proved it impossible to assemble a jury without Klan
members or those tied to them by kinship.29
The subsequent confessions of participants in the entrapment
scandal further exposed the usually concealed operations of the
Klan in such "moral clean-ups." When censured for using illegally
obtained evidence, Miller claimed legitimacy for the plan on the
grounds that Governor Clifford Walker had worked with the Klan's
state office to devise the scheme at the outset. The Grand Dragon
and the governor both denied the allegations, of course. More disin-
terested witnesses confirmed Miller's account. The Realm office
even suspended the local Klan leaders involved in order to substan-
tiate its claim that the order did not condone their methods. This
dissembling was strictly for public consumption: to avoid harmful
publicity and ward off investigation or prosecution of the Klan. The
latter seemed imminent since the lawyer of one of the alleged
whiskey sellers, Mrs. Mae Eppes, the wife of a local contractor, had
obtained a list of Klan members and threatened to sue them for
defamation of character. The Atlanta office's fear of exposure was
in fact so great that it attempted a burglary to remove local office
records.30
More interesting than the duplicity of Klan officials were the
reactions of local Klansmen to the hypocritical censure. These
made clear the rank-and-filers' unshaken faith in the legitimacy
of their efforts. Miller, who had lectured for the Klan in several
neighboring towns, was shocked by the Klan officials' denial of
their complicity. Breaking his vow of loyalty, he declared his out-
rage publicly. Miller's youthful assistant, the Reverend Jerry John-
son, went further. He issued a statement repudiating Klan official-
dom to the "young people of Athens" whom he served in his
ministry. No one, Johnson intoned, should be allowed to question
the word of a "Man of God" like Dr. Miller the way Georgia's
Grand Dragon had. Johnson said that he still believed in the Klan
"heart and soul," but its deceit and its shameful abandonment of
Dr. Miller had convinced him he should resign.31
Then, when state officers continued stonewalling, Miller lost
his patience and spilled everything. Accusing them of having "be-
trayed" local members, he explained that, not only had Governor
Walker known of and the Atlanta office designed and paid for the
investigation, but Mayor R. D. Moore (also a Klansman), the chair-
man of the Athens Civil Service Commission, a member of the
police commission; police captain Vance Anderson (a Klansman);


--- PAGE 129 ---
110 Content and Purpose
and several local policemen had all assented to the methods em-
ployed in the investigation. In Miller's view, moreover, the Klan
had merely implemented the grand jury's own October recommen-
dation for use of a private detective, after the police had claimed
their hands were bound by the need to respect the rights of sus-
pects.32 He was, in short, wholly unapologetic.
In his conviction that the pious end fully justified the illegal
means, Miller gave voice to a staple of Klan thought. Indeed, he
impugned the honor of the leaders who now shrank from public
affirmation of this principle. Miller charged that in the scramble
to protect their organization, they had "dodge[d] the real issue."
Gambling and bootlegging were undermining local morals, and the
Klan had taken action to remedy the situation when no other force
would. Miller's indignation made it clear how potent these issues
were for ordinary Klansmen. He defended the project as "a sincere
effort to improve moral conditions . . .for the benefit of the young
people being educated in our town," a concern other Klansmen
echoed. Above all, he invoked the appeals of women to vindicate
the Klan and silence its critics, appeals that the association of the
WCTU and the League of Women Voters with his church make
plausible. "Sisters have called me," Miller chastised the faint-
hearted, "with tears in their eyes because of brothers who have
been led into lives of dis[s]ipation by Athens associations, mothers
weep over wayward sons and daughters, while 'Peaceful Athens'
sleeps on." The mayor shared Miller's vexation with the critics,
although he distanced himself from the investigation's methods
and affirmed his willingness to retire if "the better class of citi-
zens" thought he was wrong. But Moore agreed with Miller on the
key point: "there can be no middle ground." "If you stand for mor-
als," he chided, "put your shoulder to the wheel and help enforce
the laws."33
Local rank-and-filers, for their part, had no desire to disassoci-
ate themselves from the methods of their organization. On the con-
trary, they backed the deposed officers of their chapter against the
chicanery of their superiors. Guileless, they called a mass meeting
in late January to decide what to do. After voting confidence in
their local leaders, they severed ties to the national order and re-
turned their regalia to state headquarters. Confused and dispirited
by the whole affair, they passed a resolution stating that they
would forever remain faithful to "the spirit of Klancraft," though
they groped for other organizational means of expressing their de-
votion. They briefly courted dethroned Imperial Wizard William J.


--- PAGE 130 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 111
Simmons, for example. When ex-Klansmen brought him to speak
about his new organization, the respectable were again prominent:
two ministers and a city alderman sponsored the lecture, while an-
other reverend shared the stage with Simmons.34
In the end, it took only a few months for the wounded pride of
these disaffected members to heal. Just as earlier they had viewed
illegal entrapment as a legitimate way to fight immorality, so now
they came to accept the deceit of Klan officials and their own pub-
lic humiliation as vindicated by the ends it had served. A majority
of the old members joined to petition for the readmission of their
chapter. Having had time to reflect, they now pledged full confi-
dence in all levels of the Ku Klux Klan's leadership. Indeed, they
commended Georgia's Grand Dragon for "preserving the integrity
of the members" through the lies with which he had averted inves-
tigation, and celebrated the fact that they were now stronger in
Athens than ever before.35
All was forgiven. By December, even the Reverend Miller,
since transferred to an Indiana parish, sought to mend bridges.
Sending Christmas greetings to his old associates, he notified them
that "I still wish to hold my membership in Athens." Miller hav-
ing admitted his "mistake" and promised to "prove his loyalty" if
readmitted, the Grand Dragon believed that the "lesson" had sunk
in and "we will never have any further trouble with him." He ad-
vised the Athens Klavern to take Miller back, with the stipulation
that he "never again be allowed to be elected to Klan office." With
his mentor now back in the order, the Reverend Johnson, for his
part, quietly dropped the suit he had initiated against the Klan to
collect damages for his tarnished reputation.36
The Athens purity crusade may have been unique in its particulars,
yet it emerged from ideas and fears that local members shared with
their counterparts elsewhere in the United States. The Klan pro-
moted moral "clean ups" to exorcise dangers to the ordered homes
it believed a stable and powerful nation depended on. Unless the
country realized that its "life depends upon a moral 'clean up,' " as
one official put it, it was "doomed to inevitable destruction."37
The rationale for these endeavors came from the conviction,
common to both evangelical Protestantism and republicanism, that
immorality would erode family commitments, demoralize the citi-
zenry, and undermine the state. Imperial Wizard Evans associated
the idea of freedom as license with the Old World: such libertinism


--- PAGE 131 ---
112 Content and Purpose
endangered not only its practitioners "but the social structure."
Since the United States government was of, by, and for the people,
he reasoned, the state had the right—indeed, the obligation—to pa-
trol the "moral standards" of the populace. The reason it had to do
so was straightforward. "Our young," Samuel Saloman explained,
"are apt pupils." "Moral teachings they may receive in well-
regulated homes will avail but little if they see such teachings con-
stantly set at naught" in the outside world.38
Klansmen feared the waning of parental power. Modern "chil-
dren rule the roost," deplored Klan author E. F. Stanton. "Lack of
control of parents over their children," another writer alleged, had
led to the "most deplorable results," prostitution among them.
Some Klansmen worried about how the unprecedented leisure en-
joyed by young people would affect their characters. Others found
the values of youth scandalous. "Pleasure has become the god of
the young people of America," remarked one Georgia Klansman,
"and a very unwholesome and lascivious pleasure it is." Still oth-
ers found the peer culture of youth impertinent. Kate Yarborough,
the wife of Athens Klansman Scott Yarborough, later complained
that "my children calls me old-fashioned, cause I don't try to dress
like they do, and talk proper."39
Young people's default on time-honored obligations to parents
made Klansmen angry. One Athens member complained that his
nephew "don't give his mammy" but a third of his wages; "the
rest he blows on himself." Another griped that although he needed
good help in his barber shop, and his son was "as good a barber as
ever stepped in shoe leather," the city-bred boy refused to work for
him. Klansman A. J. Boyd, for his part, criticized emergent dating
practices. "Now, a boy will drive up in his car, blow his horn and
the girl will come running out ... if her parents . . . ask where
she's going, this is what they get, 'None of your business,' and
away they go." That Boyd did not even have children of his own
indicates how such complaints resonated as symbols of the more
general abatement of adult authority. Indeed, across the country,
others shared the complaint: the Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin,
Women of the Ku Klux Klan, for example, scheduled discussions
on "obedience of children."40
The Klan proposed to elicit filial obedience in good part
through simple compulsion. While the professional middle class
was turning toward consensual models of child-rearing, Klansmen
defended physical punishment. "The reason the old-fashioned boy
worked more than the modern boy," the Searchlight quipped, "was


--- PAGE 132 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 113
because of the hickory stick that lay in state above the kitchen
door." In Athens, when liberal school board member M. G. Mi-
chael proposed to abolish corporal punishment as a "barbarous . . .
relic of the dark ages," Klansman I. A. Hogg, a fellow board mem-
ber, protested. "King Solomon says beat the devil out of them,"
Hogg argued, "and save their souls from hell." Hogg maintained
that only the threat of force could stop children from taking "ad-
vantage." His argument carried the vote.41
While young people's attitudes and work habits caused con-
cern, their sexuality appeared by far the greatest threat. Imperial
Wizard Evans adduced as one of the Klan's primary motives "the
moral breakdown that has been going on for two decades." It had
gone so far, he said, that "those who maintained the old standards
did so only in the face of constant ridicule." The order excoriated
a range of expressions of youthful sexuality: suggestive fashions
for girls, "petting parties," and "parking" in cars. More generally,
Klansmen declared that they were "implacably opposed ... to all
the amatory and erotic tendencies of modern degeneracy." The
Klan pitted itself against those who would follow "the fleshly pro-
pensities which are all selfish and sensual and which produce anar-
chy."42
Klansmen found particularly insidious the commercial enter-
tainments contemporary youth flocked to. "Degrading, depraving
or disgusting" movies, the Kourier charged, were "undermining
morals." Not only films, Imperial Wizard Simmons maintained,
but also jazz music and "filthy fiction" were "polluting" society.
Contemporary young people were being "submerge[d]," according
to another leader, "in a sea of sensuality and sewage." The profu-
sion of such pollution metaphors was an index of the intensity of
Klansmen's desire to buttress the older chain of command in rela-
tions between parents and children.43
Indeed, the Klan expected family members, especially women
and children, to subordinate their individual aspirations to the
needs of the corporate unit. The hierarchy of power in the home
was offered as a model for other institutions in society. One Klan-
recommended author used the untrammeled sway of the head of
the family as an example business firms should replicate. Another
explained that the merit of the ancient Roman citizen was that "in
obeying his father he learned to obey the state."44
The order's discussions of divorce made evident some of the
threats to such obedience. The Searchlight attributed the soaring
divorce rate to the selfishness of modern partners. It condemned


--- PAGE 133 ---
114 Content and Purpose,
those who approached marriage not with a sense of the "duty they
owe to their children and society," but instead with an eye to their
own fulfillment. Such individualism threatened the foundations of
the home and with it "the social and economic structure of the
nation." In a 1930 speech in Athens, Klansman E. D. Rivers blamed
the popularity of divorce on the emerging notion of "companionate
marriage." Presumably, it imperiled the traditional family by mak-
ing partners' loyalty conditional upon the meeting of both of their
emotional and sexual needs.45 To combat this dangerous individu-
alism, the Klan prescribed clearly demarcated roles that would in-
sure the mutual dependence of men and women.
Klan tracts and speakers dwelt far less on men's behavior than
on women's. This was in part because male roles were changing
less than female roles, and in part because Klansmen were more
interested in controlling others than in self-scrutiny. Nevertheless,
they expounded a particular model of masculinity. Klansmen ex-
pected men to marry, to provide for their families, and to exercise
control over their wives and children. "God intended," affirmed
one Klan minister, "that every man should possess insofar as possi-
ble, his own home and rule his own household."46
Rule over one's women was mandated by another staple of the
Klan's conception of masculinity: "honor"; or, as it was sometimes
called, "chivalry." Honor dictated a commitment to protect the
virtue of "American" women. Historically, honor in fact rested on
a man's ability to control the sexuality of his female relations.
Their "purity" was the complement of his "honor"; hence Klans-
men's insistence on "the chastity of woman." Yet it seemed that
young women no longer shared these "high ideals." The job of
Klansmen, then, said Imperial Kludd (chaplain) Caleb Ridley of At-
lanta, was "to make it easier for woman to be right and do right."
Similarly, an Athens Klan lecturer spoke of "fathers' duties to their
daughters" as an essential aspect of the order's commitment to
"protection of the home and the chastity of our womanhood."47
Klansmen's patriarchal insistence on the need to "protect"
young women gained credibility from the reality that they were
vulnerable, as those who knew unmarried or deserted mothers
could see. Throughout these years, the Athens press reported cases
of abandoned children and infanticide. Whether buried in shallow
graves or left in satchels on the roadside, they offered grim testi-
mony to the dire straits of their mothers. Athens Klansman P. F.
Vick's daughter was one such victim of male inconstancy. When a
poor young man impregnated her in 1912, only a court order per-


--- PAGE 134 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 115
suaded him to live with and provide for her as the law required.
Other local young women lost their lives from botched abortions.
Similarly, hard-drinking husbands and fathers often mistreated the
women and children in their lives, a fact Klan propaganda regularly
emphasized. Citing pitiful examples to support its case, the Kourier
thus argued for the retention of the Eighteenth Amendment on the
grounds of "the wife's right to the home and protection that was
promised her and the little children."48
Yet, women's troubles notwithstanding, the Klan's rhetoric of
chivalry scarcely concealed the urge for command. Indeed, on occa-
sion it became clear that young women's defiance of their parents'
mores agitated Klansmen at least as much as their vulnerability.
"Girls have lost their timidity," E. F. Stanton asserted, "and are
[now] more brazen than boys." Girls were cautioned that they
should return to chaperons. "Any privilege given invites further
encroachment," the writer intoned; "things that are easy to get are
seldom much valued." The Searchlight urged modern girls to con-
fide in their mothers as their forebears had; if they did, "fewer
would go wrong."49
The focus on young women illustrated how parents' authority
over children was of a piece with that of men over women in the
world the Klan sought to defend. Many of Klansmen's less self-
conscious pronouncements expressed resentment of female self-
assertion. "We pity the man," taunted the Klan press, "who
permits the loss of manhood through fear of wife." Similarly, the
author of Christ and Other Klansmen censured "women [who]
blaspheme God by disobeying their husbands." Other writers up-
braided "the gadabout mother" and the wife "who care[s] more for
the unhealthy activities of social duties" than for her obligations
to her husband. As the reference to health suggests, Klansmen tried
to naturalize gender hierarchy. American women already were
emancipated; change should go no further. Feminists should cease
complaining about such "pretended wrongs" as the burdens of
housework. "God or nature" dictated women's roles, not men and
society, so nothing could change them.50
Having options outside the household might lead women to
deviate from their cardinal function. That, according to the Klan,
was childbearing and childrearing. The entry of women into the
labor force and politics, Klan leader E. Y. Clarke stated, could thus
pose "a real danger unless there is some strong organization con-
stantly preaching that women's place is in the home." "Citizen-
ship for our young American women," explained Imperial Wizard


--- PAGE 135 ---
116 Content and Purpose
Simmons, "includes the essential duty of motherhood," just as for
men it included breadwinning. Only one or two children would not
do, moreover. The Klan felt it necessary, said the Imperial Wizard,
to "insist upon . . . 2, 3, 4, and sometimes . . . 5 or 6 children."
Women who rejected childbearing "as a burden" needed a "social-
izing education." "If society is to live," Saloman explained, women
must "cheerfully" accept their familial duties. The Klan was there-
fore, as one speaker put it, "violently opposed to birth control."51
Although hostile to sexual emancipation, the Klan was not an
outright foe of all women's equality. The order's commitment to
moral uplift in fact led it to support rights for white Protestant
women. "Subjugated women," the Searchlight explained, "means
subjugated morals." Hence "the Klan believes," as one of its state-
ments of principle read, "in the EQUALITY of the sexes without
hesitation." Klan members recognized that women could no longer
be confined to the household; rather, they must work with their
menfolk to achieve common political and social goals. The order
even asserted on occasion that some of the world's problems re-
sulted from the exclusion of women from power.52 In short, Klans-
men were not hidebound conservatives; grudgingly or not, they ac-
commodated the desires of their female counterparts for expanded
roles.
Indeed, the Klan championed suffrage for Protestant white
women. As did many others, Klansmen viewed female suffrage as
the best defense for Prohibition. Two Klan-associated politicians in
Georgia, W. D. Upshaw and W. J. Harris, the former a past presi-
dent of the Anti-Saloon League, became the first men in that state
to vote for the Nineteenth Amendment.53 An Athens Klan leader
and city alderman, W. R. Tindall, beat even the League of Women
Voters to the fray when he attacked a 1924 plan to levy a special
tax on women voters as "unfair, unjust and contrary to our princi-
ples of government." The Klan also counted on women's votes to
thwart Al Smith's bid for the presidency in 1928; after his defeat,
the order paid tribute to "the Protestant Women of America."54
Just as it endorsed women's votes, so the Klan respected the
activism of like-minded women. Throughout the United States, it
frequently praised the work of the WCTU and helped its chapters
with particular projects.55 The Klan even adopted a take-off on the
female temperance motto "For God, Home, and Native Land." In
turn, the WCTU in many places backed the Klan's moral reform
work.56 In Clarke County and Georgia generally, the efforts of the
two organizations were mutually reinforcing. In some cases, local


--- PAGE 136 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 117
affiliates of the General Federation of Women's Clubs also sup-
ported the Klan's efforts, with which the Georgia division at least
had an ideological affinity.57
Nonetheless, recognition of women by Klansmen was always
shot through with ambivalence. Klansmen's ideal, after all, was the
nineteenth-century petty proprietor—whether farmer, artisan, or
merchant. His vaunted independence as a citizen presumed his
control over the labor and behavior of the dependents in his house-
hold.58 However much Klansmen might try to cooperate with
women who shared their social goals, female initiative set them on
edge; the undertow of patriarchal prerogative impeded full solidar-
ity. This undertow was most obvious in Klansmen's relations with
the Women of the Ku Klux Klan (WKKK).
Established by the Imperial Palace in June of 1923, the WKKK
was announced as "a Protestant Women's Organization which is
for, by, and of women." Yet the reality was murkier. Leaders of the
men's Klan maintained ultimate control over the women's Klan, a
control symbolized by their ability to appoint their wives to office
in the WKKK. Male Klan propagandists also tended to describe
Klanswomen as the "mothers, wives and daughters" of Klansmen,
despite the fact that many were not related to male Klansmen, and
to portray the WKKK as "auxiliary" despite its claims to indepen-
dence. These ambiguities hint at the tensions in gender relations
that the Klan hoped to submerge: both the women's desire for con-
trol over their own affairs and the men's reluctance to surrender
any real power.59
Similar troubles surfaced when Klansmen attacked other
groups in women's names. As in local practice, so in ideology: the
Klan used respectability as a weapon, a tool to differentiate its own
constituents from those it would direct their passions against.
Sexual politics figured prominently in the Klan's efforts to stir
anti-communism and anti-Catholicism, for example. Klansmen's
recitations of the sexual subversion practiced by Communists and
Catholics aimed to convince their audiences of the essential "oth-
erness" of the groups at issue, to dehumanize them so as to loosen
inhibitions against aggression. Yet these disquisitions revealed
more of the speakers' own attitudes toward women than they re-
alized.
Communists came in for the lion's share of attack. Klansmen
warned that communism would destroy the family as their constit-
uency understood it. The argument was most amply developed in
Samuel Saloman's Red War on the Family. Saloman's work was


--- PAGE 137 ---
118 Content and Purpose
typical of the Klan's anti-communism: rife with exaggerated and
absurd charges, it nonetheless had a rational core. That core was
an assumption the Klan wholeheartedly agreed with: that the hier-
archical family was the basis and guarantor of ordered society. Sa-
loman's central charge against socialism flowed from this. In re-
casting marriage and morality, it would destroy civilization, as had
similar experiments in ancient Greece and Rome. "Monogamic
marriage" without easy recourse to divorce, Saloman insisted, was
"the sheet anchor of our civilization"; whoever opposed it "must
be regarded as a foe." If conventional marriage and its safeguards
weakened, gender roles would also erode as "men became more
effeminate and women more masculine." The blurring of these
boundaries would result in chaos and social decay.60
Like the Klan, Saloman couched his argument in the chivalric
tradition. He reminded men of their obligation to shelter women
from danger. Yet, behind the pretense of care, lurked a sense of
personal loss for the men who posed as women's Galahads. To
shock male readers resentful at the loss of their gender privileges,
Saloman quoted a tract asserting that, in socialist society, women
"will be entirely independent" economically, socially, and in inti-
mate relationships. Horrified, he cited communists' commitment
to making housework and child-care no longer the responsibility of
individual women but of the whole society. This theme of the loss
of women's private services was echoed in the Klan press; in Rus-
sia, complained another writer, "the young and old are cared for by
all the people impersonally."61
The Klan's anti-radicalism, in fact, exposed how the mask of
chivalry concealed an unwillingness to surrender proprietary rights
to women. Saloman's primary charge against socialists was that
they advocated the "muck of free love." One clue to the nature of
the threat is that virtually all such passages focussed on the libera-
tion of women's sexuality. Indeed, Saloman complained that the
philosophy of free love was "running wild among the enlightened
and emancipated and sex-conscious women of America and Eu-
rope." He could see no goal in the emancipation of woman but
allowing her "to devote herself to free and unrestrained love." Salo-
man simply could not imagine women as autonomous individuals
making their own choices. Rather, their release from being the
"property" of one man could only result in their becoming the
property of all. Unions based on mutual attraction and commit-
ment, free from state sponsorship, could mean only "the morality
of the brothel." The liberation of woman would thus reduce her to


--- PAGE 138 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 119
a "harlot," a "clandestine prostitute." Why? The "community of
property necessarily and logically involves the community of
women."62
This equation exhibited starkly the way gender infused class
and class, gender in Klan thought. As Marx and Engels once
pointed out, the specter of the "community of women" could only
make sense to men who saw women as property. In other words,
it only had meaning for those who understood their control over
their wives and daughters to be integral to their own class status,
as it was in the republican tradition adapted by the Klan. Denying
men of other classes access to Klansmen's "own" women was
therefore necessary to police class borders. Klansmen thus interpre-
ted workers' revolution as a challenge to their dominion over the
women of their group. "Under dogs . . . [would now] satisfy their
cravings of centuries," Saloman warned, in their effort to break the
bourgeois male's monopoly on "luscious womanhood."63
If communism held the worst dangers to domestic order, Ca-
tholicism came in a close second. Here, too, the purported deviants
were charged with violating the natural order of relations between
the sexes. But here the immediate targets were priests and nuns.
The core of the Klan's case against them was that their abstention
from heterosexual marriage and reproduction necessarily led to un-
natural, antisocial perversions. Tom Watson encapsulated the logic
in the title of a 1917 anti-Catholic tract: The Inevitable Crimes of
Celibacy: The Vices of Convents and Monasteries, Priests and
Nuns.64
Whereas Klansmen criticized socialist society for giving men
too little authority over women, they accused priests of having too
much. Priests usurped powers that rightfully belonged to male
household heads. Associated as it was with folk memories of aris-
tocratic men sexually exploiting the female relatives of their male
subordinates, this allegation resonated with the general case made
against the Catholic church for monarchical pretensions. Evans ab-
horred the "galling subjection" of the Catholic feudal societies of
Europe wherein "no man save the king truly owned anything; no
property nor children, nor wife, nor life that could not be taken
from him at the whim of every superior." A wife and children were
thus among the pieces of property a man had a right to control; the
horror of Catholicism was its alleged interference with this con-
trol. Klansmen's principal complaints centered on two phenomena:
in the shorthand of an Athens Klan lecturer, "the confesional" and
"the coruption of the priesthood."65


--- PAGE 139 ---
120 Content and Purpose
Attacks on the practice of confession were virtually transpar-
ent defenses of male dominance in domestic life. The Klan's case
had been laid out clearly by Tom Watson in the 1910s. He charged
that confession allowed a priest to act as the "confidante of another
man's wife," to whom she divulged the couple's "inmost secrets
. . .all that is sacred between her husband and herself." The infor-
mation priests would obtain included "sexual procedures and tech-
niques with her husband, extra-marital activities, masturbation,
homosexuality, and unnatural fornication." This violation of the
husband's privacy, Watson warned, would "rot out the heart" of
the nation. That it was the husband's privacy, not the couple's,
that was at issue was evident in the subtitle borne by another anti-
confessional tract in the Klan's arsenal: An Eye-Opener for Hus-
bands, Fathers, and Brothers.66
The sexual power attributed implicitly to priests in the critique
of the confessional was made explicit in discussions of nuns. In
What Goes on in Nunneries, Tom Watson had defined convents as
places where "bachelor priests keep unmarried women under lock
and key, and whose children are killed." Elsewhere Watson de-
scribed the nun's obligations as those of "the temple girl." Por-
traying the convent as "a securely locked seraglio," he invoked the
sexual exploitation of lower-class women in the harems of the
East. The Klan took up this theme. Georgia Klan leader and Search-
light editor J. O. Wood won election to the General Assembly on a
platform calling for more rigid inspection of convents.67
Klansmen were more ambivalent about nuns than about
priests. They generally imputed to nuns a perverse hypersexuality.
Yet, as in the complaints about the confessional, the charges as-
sumed nuns to be the passive victims of priests, who exploited
their social power to gain sexual access. Alma White, for example,
condemned priests for exercising "tyranny over helpless victims
behind convent walls." Houses of the Good Shepherd, according to
the Searchlight, were no more than "slave pens" that promoted
"the debauchery of Southern orphan girls." The common denomi-
nator in such allegations was an inability to come to terms with
women who removed themselves from the institution of marriage.
Klansmen simply refused to believe that women might choose to
be free from husbands and children; hence their insistence that
women in Catholic institutions were held against their will.68
This bewilderment in the face of women's efforts to achieve more
independence was not confined to Klan ideology. On the contrary,


--- PAGE 140 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 121
Klan propaganda persuaded because, in however serpentine a man-
ner, it connected with feelings that emerged from troubling en-
counters between men and women in everyday life. In prescribing
the roles it did for women, the Klan sought to buttress a paternal-
ism being threatened on many fronts. One of the most intimately
challenging was women's agency in redefining the norms of rela-
tions between the sexes.
The wives of several local members, after all, filed for divorce
in these years. The resulting proceedings made clear some of the
conflicts between their own ideas about fairness and those of their
estranged husbands. Ilene Anderson kept her husband from fleeing
the state after their breakup. Mollie Braxton got a restraining order
to deter hers from "visiting or interfering" with her; as did Nell
Henson, who also prevented her husband from trying to sell their
house or cause trouble with the children about her custody. Other
Klan husbands found themselves having to explain to judges and
juries why they should not pay alimony and court fees. No wonder
the Athens Klan included divorce courts among the evils their
movement would combat.69
A more intriguing illustration of the erosion of paternalism
was the way white women in distress began to appeal to the Klan
for aid against their male relatives or neighbors. Like Athens Klans-
men, they saw value in the methods the Imperial Palace feigned to
disavow and sought to deploy them to their own ends. In verbal
and written requests, they asked the Klan for help. In effect, they
drew it in to offset the power imbalance placing them at a disad-
vantage vis-a-vis the men in their lives. Clarke County women
were not alone in this effort; their peers in other parts of the coun-
try had the same idea. The Georgia Realm office, for its part, re-
ported receiving an average of twenty letters each week from
women inviting the order to threaten or use violence against peo-
ple whose conduct they disapproved of. One former Klansman who
worked in the Atlanta headquarters of the order maintained that
the Klan "gets hundreds of letters from women asking that some
man they don't like be whipped."70
One of the best surviving examples of the genre is the appeal
written by Betty Thomas Perduto in July of 1928. The story she
told was a saga of psychological torture and physical abuse at the
hands of her gambling, alcoholic husband. When she left him for
the second time, taking their two children with her, he challenged
her petition for divorce with malicious allegations of adultery. The
result was a mistrial. With no divorce, no alimony, and no funds
to fight the suit further, Perduto now faced the prospect of losing


--- PAGE 141 ---
122 Content and Purpose
her "two poor innocent children" because of his widely broadcast
slanders. She implored the Klan to force her husband to withdraw
his case and give her a divorce on the grounds she stipulated.71
Perduto may have had a weak hand, but she played it well.
With a curious mixture of cunning and sincerity, she connected
her struggle for an equitable divorce to the larger issues in the
Klan's program. Not only did she emphasize her history of devo-
tion as a mother and perseverance as a wife, but she also drew
attention to other strikes her husband had against him. If they had
failed to sway the jury, they might still convince the Klan. While
she was "an American woman," as she pointed out over and over
again, her estranged husband was an Italian, and a "devote Roman
Catholic" at that. Indeed, she expressed stupefaction that the jury
would "deal so hard with an American woman and be so lenient
[with] a devote Catholic." Further hoping to strengthen her case,
she reported that Mr. Perduto had once gotten "very intimate with
a colored nurse" hired for the children. "It [was] impossible," she
said, "to keep any help on account of his conduct." Her conclusion
made it very hard for the order to refuse her request. "Being an
American woman," she implored, "I feel that I ought to have Jus-
tice. If I can't have it from the Courts I know of no other one to go
to except your organization, who has it in your power to deal with
such cases."72 In effect, she issued Klansmen an ultimatum: do her
bidding or forfeit their honor, the sine qua non of Klan manhood.
Like Mrs. Perduto, other female petitioners sought to deploy
the Klan's force in order to enhance their bargaining power in do-
mestic disputes or press their notions of propriety upon their com-
munities. If established channels failed to satisfy their notions of
right and duty, they felt justified in going outside the law to
achieve their ends. They felt their cases further strengthened when
those whom they accused were also the targets of Klan hostility.
Hence Perduto's emphasis on her estranged husband's Italian birth
and Catholic faith. These white women goaded their self-styled
protectors into vigilantism by manipulating the contradictions of
Klan ideology to compel its adherents to help them achieve their
ends. "If you all are for the protection of a community," one rural
woman thus admonished the Klan, it should drive out two prosti-
tutes patronized by her husband, sisters whose parents tolerated
their trade "because they are bringing in plenty of money, money
that poor wives and children really need."73
Her use of a conditional sentence structure ("if . . . then") il-
lustrated how women used the Klan's stated goals as leverage for


--- PAGE 142 ---
The Politics of Sex and Age 123
their own demands. In light of Klansmen's commitment to shoring
up male authority in the home, it seems unlikely that they would
have taken the initiative against wife-beaters. More than a few
Klan members, after all, harassed their own estranged wives, and
the record fails to reveal any complaints to the Klan from men
about wife-beating.74 It appears likely, then, that it was the female
victims themselves, pressing from behind the scenes, who charted
for the Klan the dividing line between legitimate authority and un-
acceptable abuse—and compelled its members to patrol that border
or lose face. The police even alleged that women who lived in the
area of the Southern Mill, an area in which the Athens Klan en-
rolled many people, had "formed a league designed to oust undesir-
ables from the neighborhood." Police officials maintained that
these women had instigated at least one flogging attributed to the
Klan, of a mill worker who spent his wages on another man's wife
and beat his sister when she complained.75
Whether or not such a "league" existed, the women who called
on the Klan were hardly the passive creatures of chivalrous my-
thology. On the contrary, their appeals constitute tangible proof of
their attempts to contest their spouses' unilateral control. By
claiming rights for themselves and duties incumbent on their part-
ners, these women sought to modify their subordination. In their
requests, they articulated a "moral economy" of domestic life, us-
ing the prescriptive ideology of male supremacy to achieve their
ends.76
If they had performed their marital obligations, then they in-
sisted that they deserved protection when their mates failed to
honor their part of the marital bargain. The women thus made evi-
dent their conviction that they had a right to relief and to what
they perceived as justice. They expressed a sense of outrage and
violation: a feeling that they, or the women on whose behalf they
wrote, had fulfilled their obligations only to be betrayed by their
partners. Perduto thus expressed anger at having "tried very hard
to make the best of a bad bargain" in her marriage—to no avail. If
the Klan wanted a system of private patriarchy, these women im-
plied, then its "Knights" owed protection to women wronged by
their spouses. Indeed, another woman called on the Klan "in God's
name for help." "If ever a woman needed your protection"—the
protection Klansmen's creed after all promised—it was her neigh-
bor, starved and beaten mercilessly by an unrepentant husband.
The writer wanted the Klan to administer to this man "the last
resort in full." Female petitioners thus manipulated the Klan's ide-


--- PAGE 143 ---
124 Content and Purpose
ology of chivalry to gain the redress that they could no longer hope
for in civil society and could not yet expect from the state. Their
entreaties no doubt flattered male Klan members, who enjoyed not
only the gratitude but also the legitimacy thus conferred upon
them.77
At the same time, women's goading must have caused Klans-
men no little discomfort. For, while these women looked to the
Klan for help, their appeals probably added to its members' alarm
over flagging domestic discipline. Klansmen, after all, were wont
to portray the menaces to family well-being as external. Yet many
such white women located the primary danger within—in their
own husbands. Grasping the ambiguity of the Klan's rhetoric of
"home defense," these women pulled the tail to wag the dog. For
their part, Klan leaders worked to channel the anxiety thus excited
into directions that might aid their overall project. One such
spokesman thus described deteriorating moral standards as "sec-
ondary" symptoms of a "deeper" malady: the "strangle hold" of
Jews and Catholics on the nation's property and industry. Their
self-aggrandizement undermined households of small property, and
thereby the male authority that previous moral standards depended
on.78 Race, it seemed, would serve as the lightning rod for the
charged relations of class and gender.


--- PAGE 144 ---
6
The Approaching Apocalypse:
The Politics of Race
The year 1921 was a pivotal one in Georgia. The trough of the
postwar depression, it was the year the Klan enjoyed its most spec-
tacular gains. Not coincidentally, it also saw an unprecedented
cleavage among the forces committed to white supremacy. In late
April of that year, outgoing governor Hugh Manson Dorsey issued
a public statement on the plight of black Georgians. The fruit of
much prodding from African-American activists and white liberals,
Dorsey's booklet detailed 135 instances of documented violence
against the state's black residents in the years 1919 to 1921 alone,
including cases of forced flight, peonage, individual acts of cruelty,
and lynching. The statement appeared in an already charged cli-
mate. The month before, pushed by the Commission on Interracial
Cooperation (CIC), Dorsey had publicly refuted inflammatory lies
told by Klan lecturers. In speeches in North and South Georgia,
they claimed that Atlanta blacks had threatened a riot unless their
demands were met; the city and state governments being unable to
meet the challenge, only the Klan had proved able to suppress the
incipient rebellion. Now, the CIC broadcast Dorsey's statement
widely, mailing copies to every minister in the state to try to enlist
support for reform.1
By today's standards, Dorsey's statement seems timid. If any-
thing, his catalogue understated the violence visited on black Geor-
gians. Not "a tithe of the terrors" had reached print, according to
M. Ashby Jones, the Atlanta minister who served as chair of the
125


--- PAGE 145 ---
126 Content and Purpose
CIC. "In many of the rural sections of Georgia," Jones said, a black
person led a "a life of constant fear." "To him, the beat of horses'
hoofs on the road at night, the rushing sound of a motor car, or the
sudden call of a human voice, may be his death summons." Set
against this inferno, the governor's call for such measures as "pub-
licity," repeal of the laws sustaining peonage, and changes in the
state court system to make lynching easier to prosecute, seems
woefully mild. Like the CIC, in fact, Dorsey remained committed
to segregation, racially restricted suffrage, and "racial purity."2 But,
limited as the proposed reforms were, never before had a chief ex-
ecutive in Georgia so openly sympathized with African Americans
and affirmed that they had rights deserving of protection. In the
view of many white citizens, this stand was little short of treason.
Hard-core white supremacists, Klansmen among them, struck
back fast and hard. Georgia politicians, from governor-elect
Thomas Hardwick to the president of the state senate, charged
Dorsey with "infamous slander" against his state. In short order,
Dorsey opponents assembled a coalition called the Dixie Defense
Committee. It mounted a propaganda blitz against the governor's
statement and called for his impeachment. Among the key organiz-
ers of the mobilization were several up-and-coming Klan luminar-
ies. They included the Atlanta Baptist minister Caleb Ridley (na-
tional chaplain of the Klan); Imperial Klaliff Edward Young Clarke;
the Guardians of Liberty (a Macon-based anti-Catholic group
whose head would become the whipping boss of the Klan there);
and the Patriotic Societies of Macon (whose secretary was also a
Klan sympathizer). Indeed, the Imperial Palace of the Klan acted as
the nerve center of the Dixie Defense Committee. Clarke set up
its public mass meetings, coordinated the attendance of area Klav-
erns, and gathered support from politicians. Ridley wrote the Com-
mittee's leading tract and served as its featured speaker, a platform
he could also use to promote the Klan.3
Many Klan issues congealed in the campaign to ward off any
reform of race relations in Georgia: racism, right-wing populism,
opposition to labor, sexual conservatism, antipathy to the social
gospel, even anti-Catholicism. "The Damnable Dorsey Pamphlet,"
campaign activist and Klan supporter Miss A. Benton alleged, was
an "insidious Jesuit scheme to destroy Anglo-Saxon Morale" and
enlist the nation in "the Cause of the Negro." "Our pulpits," she
claimed, in reference to ministerial leadership of the CIC, "are
turned into 'converting' agencies; our Women's Missionary Socie-
ties have become Inter-Racial Committees." Worse, it was having
some effect. Benton could see but one outcome if these activities


--- PAGE 146 ---
The Politics of Race 127
were not stopped, and quickly. "Our PRICELESS white girls," she
warned, would in no time be bearing the children of black men.4
Benton's tirade illustrates how race was, at one and the same
time, at the core of the Klan's politics and a medium through
which to fight other causes. In the immediate term, Klansmen
wanted to put down challenges to white supremacy and WASP
dominance, whether they came from below or above, using what-
ever means it took. Indeed, the Klan's approach to race relations
was nothing short of apocalyptic. The order held that even the
slightest concession would embolden African Americans to make
further demands, which would in time undermine the whole appa-
ratus of racial hierarchy. Access to better education, for example,
would only increase the yearning blacks felt for racial equity;
worse, it would equip them with some of the tools needed to win
it. And without resort to extralegal terror, how could whites in-
spire the fear needed to keep blacks from fighting for things they
believed to be rightfully theirs? As Jo Ann Gibson Robinson, a
leader of the Montgomery bus boycott, observed of the thinking
that led a later generation to obdurate resistance: "They feared that
anything they gave would probably be viewed by us as just a start."
"And you know, they were probably right."5 Viewing gains for
blacks as losses for themselves, Klansmen readied themselves for
Armageddon.
Yet "race" worked overtime for the Klan. In addition to its use
in stifling competition from African Americans, it performed other
services. Beleaguered by conflicts of class and gender that their sen-
sibilities left them ill-equipped to explain, Klansmen displaced
these conflicts onto imagined racial Others—whether African
Americans, Jews, or immigrants, all of whom were conceived as
biologically distinct from and inferior to "real" Americans, mem-
bers of the "Anglo-Saxon race." Individual psychological conflicts
undoubtedly contributed to this displacement—one simply cannot
read Klan propaganda without sensing this. But the critical point
here is that this displacement was also socially and ideologically
necessary for the success of the Klan's overall project. Race was
the Klan's answer to the class division its members so feared; race
moved to center stage to push class into the wings as a way of
understanding and organizing social life.6
This double mission was much in evidence in the agitation
against Dorsey. On one hand, Klan leaders charged the governor
with giving aid and comfort to black radicals at the "worst" time,
just when the farm crisis permitted ho leeway in dealing with hired
labor. Dorsey and the CIC ministers might say that they opposed


--- PAGE 147 ---
128 Content and Purpose
racial amalgamation, Ridley charged, but in practice they served
the NAACP and gave "courage" to ordinary blacks in ways that
could prove perilous. Ridley even suggested that Dorsey might be
"bidding for the colored vote," which, he warned, "the National
Government is about to again make" a factor in state politics. The
result, he implied, could only be a race war.7 Clearly, holding down
African Americans was Ridley's foremost intent.
Yet his discussion of the nature of the danger intimated other
preoccupations. Thus, he summoned up images of "white women
ravished" by black men of "uncontrollable passion." He hinted at
the influence of New York Jews, and he drew attention to the back-
ing Dorsey received from "ministers, lawyers, and capitalists,"
who failed to see the danger their "misguided schemes" held for
"the great majority of Georgians." In short, the clash over the Dor-
sey statement replicated the kinds of frictions among elite and
petit-bourgeois whites that came into play over chain stores, mu-
nicipal reform, and the World Court.8 Similarly, the evocation of
interracial sex indicated that anxieties about changing relations be-
tween men and women and even parents and children helped drive
Klansmen and their sympathizers to action.
In many ways, the conflict over Dorsey's statement was dis-
tinctively Southern, not least in the pervasive extralegal coercion
and violence the governor raised his voice against. Openly or tac-
itly, the region's political economy sanctioned this state of affairs.
Dorsey's criticism was noteworthy because it was so singular; in
the North—at least in districts where politicians had to face black
voters—he would not have seemed such a renegade. Claiming that
Dorsey had exposed Georgians "to the contempt and scorn of the
outside world," his opponents also exhibited—and played to—
white Southerners' acute sensitivity to Northern criticism. By call-
ing themselves the Dixie Defense Committee and the Guardians
of Liberty, Dorsey opponents laid claim to a tradition of states'
rights advocacy in defense of white supremacy going back a hun-
dred years. Similarly, the insurrection panic the Ridley manifesto
expressed had a history as old as Southern slavery. Even the rhetor-
ical mode had a regional flavor, with its emphasis on threats to
the purity of white womanhood and offenses to the honor of "red-
blooded" white men.9
And yet, for all that, the basic concerns and commitments animat-
ing the campaign against Dorsey were hardly unique to the South.


--- PAGE 148 ---
The Politics of Race 129
If not so obsessed with these issues as many of their peers in the
South were, whites in the North were not oblivious, either. Shared
fears and common values made it possible for Southern-bred Klan
officials to round up defenders of white supremacy on both sides of
the Mason-Dixon line. Around the country, in fact, Klan members
and leaders complained of black ambition. The new confidence Af-
rican Americans showed in resisting white racism in the wartime
and immediate postwar years appeared to Klansmen as perhaps the
greatest challenge of the day. "The real arraignment of the Negro"
by the Klan, W. E. B. Du Bois perceived, "is that white America
with its present machinery is not going to be able to keep black
folk down." That is, while the pervasiveness of racism made a
movement like the Klan possible, it was the resilience of blacks in
the face of this antagonism that led die-hard racists to believe the
Klan necessary. "It is a new Negro who inhabits the South today,"
the NAACP explained in a discussion of the Klan's purposes and
prospects: above all, "a new Negro youth . . . that will not be
cowed by silly superstition or fear."10
Dumbstruck, Klansmen shared in the assessment if not the ap-
plause. One internal publication thus complained of "the haughty
ambitions and arrogant aggressiveness" of contemporary African
Americans. Others used words such as "brazen" and "flaunt[ing]"
to describe the attitudes of black activists. This language showed
how the confidence of the "New Negro" took Klan members
aback. Indeed, the Kourier complained that "black and pro-black
agitators [sought] to make capital out of every possible incident."
In these circumstances, Evans once informed members, main-
taining white unity and supremacy at all costs was "our most im-
portant work." Georgia's Grand Dragon elaborated. The black man,
he warned, "must be brought again to realize that he is of an infe-
rior race and of a lower standard."11
As Klan leaders were painfully aware, the explosion of discon-
tent among oppressed "races" was not confined to the United
States. Following Lothrop Stoddard, contemporary racialism's guid-
ing light, Simmons maintained that the central fact of the contem-
porary world was "the 'rising tide' of the colored peoples and the
backward white peoples, [and] their ultimate domination of the hu-
man process." In other words, whites of Northern European de-
scent made up a small minority of the world's population; the days
of their supremacy appeared numbered. The phenomenon Sim-
mons referred to was the surge of nationalist feeling among colo-
nized peoples in the wake of the war and the Russian revolution.


--- PAGE 149 ---
130 Content and Purpose
"White Men, Beware," intoned an editorial in the Klan press: "The
prestige and security of the White Race received a terrific setback
in the World War." Recently, affirmed one Klan leader in 1922,
"white men" had suffered the "most humiliating" experiences,
such as near-expulsion from India and being "bullied by a far infe-
rior people" in Turkey. Later in the decade, after the postwar rebel-
lions had subsided, the Kourier still saw reasons to fear. It warned,
for example, of "the menace of Moslem unity" to America and its
European allies.12
Members shared their leaders' anxiety and their resolve. When
Simmons spoke at the Decatur, Georgia, court house in 1921, the
audience interrupted him with vigorous applause when he pro-
claimed that the Klan "makes niggers get in their place and stay in
place!" Indeed, the Klan became the foremost advocate of resis-
tance to any modification in race relations. "The Klan believes in
white supremacy," as one West Virginia Klan leader put it, "and
will not compromise on this issue." Throughout the decade, the
Klan used instances where blacks claimed equal rights—whether
through voting, NAACP activity, trade union organization, mem-
bership in the Communist Party, or intermarriage with whites—as
reasons for whites to join the Klan, and for delinquent members to
renew their commitment. As the attack on Dorsey and the CIC
showed, whites who aided blacks especially enraged Klansmen, for
their cooperation destroyed the fiction of cross-class racial loyalty.
With "nigger lover" as their battle cry, Klan-led forces more than
once routed reform-minded politicians.13
The Klan made it clear from the first that fending off chal-
lenges to white supremacy—whether they came from blacks or
whites—was central to its mission. The most potent symbol of
such thoroughgoing absolutism was the Reconstruction-era Ku
Klux Klan; Klansmen in the 1920s appropriated its mantle and ro-
manticized its methods. They consistently exalted their forebears
for having "saved" white civilization. Indeed, the men of the first
Klan were praised as "the greatest heroes of all history." Simmons
maintained that his order was "the reincarnation among the sons
of the spirit of the fathers" who took part in the original Klan.
To demonstrate this filial devotion, the Imperial Palace absolved
members of the "original" order of admission fees and dues obliga-
tions. Chapter secretaries kept tallies of the number who en-
rolled—presumably for advertising purposes. The Athens Klan
boasted two such veteran white supremacists.14
Many Klan chapters in the South also adopted the names of


--- PAGE 150 ---
The Politics of Race 131
leaders of the original Ku Klux Klan, calling themselves, for exam-
ple, the John B. Gordon Klan. The grandson and namesake of the
Reconstruction-era Klan leader Nathan Bedford Forrest was ap-
pointed Grand Dragon of Georgia by shrewd promoters who knew
the drawing power of his name for their intended audience. Athens
Klansman O. M. Martin, for his part, defended his own organiza-
tion from critics by portraying the Reconstruction Klan as the sav-
ior of Southern society.15 Such practices expressed an identification
with Southern traditions that the Klan ordinarily downplayed in
the name of common white, Protestant Americanism. Yet, with
the Dunning school of Reconstruction history at the height of its
popularity in the United States, sympathy with Confederates was
not as divisive among whites as it once was or would become.16
So panicked were Klansmen over adjustments in race relations
that they repudiated reason as a method for understanding and im-
proving human life. The Klan, Evans thus boasted, was "emotional
and instinctive." Primal drives antedated reason in human history,
he said; they still moved the common people, if not intellectuals
who had lost touch. In place of rationality, Evans advocated "race
pride and loyalty" as "fundamental instinct[s]" whites should rely
on in these troubled times. Local Klan spokespeople applied Evans'
abstract injunctions in visceral racist agitation. Thus, to discredit
Andrew Erwin, a liberal Al Smith supporter, Athens Klansman
J. H. Wilkins urged his listeners to "imagine Andrew Erwin's living
room." "On his right sits a chinaman. On his left sits a wop and a
nigger. Think of all those smells together. That's the Smith
crowd."17
The overthrow of reason was less an end in itself than a means
of short-circuiting related claims of fundamental human equality.
The Enlightenment tradition of rational inquiry, it seems, was too
intimately tied to liberalism and the left. Evans explained that in
order to put their own children and race above "aliens," WASP
Americans "had to reject completely the whole body of 'Liberal'
ideas." To combat the subversive implications of liberal thought,
Evans ridiculed the idea of fundamental human equality. By re-
moving it from serious discussion, he would naturalize hierarchy.
It was unnecessary even to argue about racial equality, he said, as
"the average [white] American does not believe it." In any event,
he added, prescribing as much as predicting, the question would
never be settled by logic, but rather "by race instinct, personal prej-
udices, and sentiment."18
In place of the dangerously leveling ideas of liberalism, Klan


--- PAGE 151 ---
132 Content and Purpose
leaders put forward a racialist theory of human society and history.
Having rejected Darwin's theory of evolution in biology, the Klan
embraced the crudest Social Darwinism to explain their world.
"We believe," explained Imperial Wizard Evans, "that the races of
men are as distinct as breeds of animals." Klan leaders posited ra-
cial difference as the unrelenting determinant of human affairs.
Not environment, not economics, not intergroup relations, nor
even culture shaped the evolution of society. Rather, as the Search-
light summarized the Klan's position, "race forms the basis for all
human actions and reactions." "The unchangeable differentiation
of race," distinction that presumed immutable hierarchy, was thus
the critical variable in social development. Since it was "decreed
by the Creator," it could not be undone; to tamper with divine law
was to invite disaster.19
Klansmen employed this racial theory to explain their world.
They explicitly denied, for example, that past enslavement and on-
going discrimination accounted for the poverty that plagued so
many African Americans; the cause was, rather, "racial degenera-
tion." Klan propagandists likewise charged that the decay of partic-
ular societies resulted from their members' having disobeyed an
alleged law of nature forbidding miscegenation. "Hybrid" breeding
led to "race suicide." According to the Klan and like-minded think-
ers, such mixing accounted for the ruin of the civilizations of clas-
sical antiquity; "a mongrel civilization" could not survive. Here
was a lesson that Anglo-Saxon Americans ignored at their peril.
Similarly, Klansmen attributed different forms of government to
divergent racial proclivities. According to Simmons and his co-
thinkers, for example, the failure of parliamentary democracy in
Russia resulted from the "inferior" stock of its inhabitants. Evans,
for his part, claimed that an inborn submissive "mental nature" in
Celtic, Southern European, and South American peoples accounted
for both their Catholicism and their poverty.20
Of course, a tendency toward racial exclusivity had long been
part of the republican tradition the Klan drew from to oppose
threatening developments. In the Klan's hands, however, republi-
canism's implicit exclusion and suspicion of African Americans as
slaves or propertyless free people became a fully worked out ideol-
ogy in which "race" was used to indicate "otherness" and with it
inevitable deviance and danger. "We know," one Klan-endorsed
tract reminded readers, "that a republic is possible only to men of
homogenous race," Simmons, for his part, recalled for his readers a


--- PAGE 152 ---
The Politics of Race 133
longstanding consensus among propertied Anglo-Saxons that, in or-
der to function properly, their brand of democracy required great
commonality among the enfranchised. Racial, ethnic, and religious
differences, like class cleavages, impeded such unity of purpose.
Disunity, Evans explained, made nations prey to stagnation or con-
quest. "Alien ideas and excessive liberalism toward them," he as-
serted, had put the United States in a vulnerable position.21
To demonstrate their fidelity to American traditions, Klans-
men pointed out a history of chauvinism in American leaders. In-
deed, the Klan claimed for its positions the authority of the found-
ing fathers and the widespread belief that American expansion was
divinely ordained, a "manifest destiny." Evans insisted that the au-
thors of the Declaration of Independence claimed equality only for
"white men." Their unrepentant ownership of slaves and denial to
Native Americans of "all political rights," he asserted, made this
clear. Klansmen also repeatedly noted that Abraham Lincoln be-
lieved African Americans inferior and opposed granting equal
rights to them. Similarly, the Kourier quoted Henry Grady, premier
spokesperson of the New South, on the innate superiority and le-
gitimate dominance of "Anglo-Saxon blood." Klansmen also
looked to political leaders of their own day for ideological support.
Among these were President Calvin Coolidge, who asserted that
"Nordics deteriorate when mixed with other races," and his suc-
cessor, Herbert Hoover, who warned that immigrants "would be
tolerated only if they behaved."22
In articulating its vehement racism, the Klan also drew
strength from recent cultural developments. The first three decades
of the twentieth century marked, in the words of historian I. A.
Newby, the "zenith" of racialist thought in history, science, social
science, and popular culture: "the years which produced the great-
est proliferation of anti-Negro literature, and the years in which
that literature enjoyed its broadest appeal." Eugenic thought also
flourished in this period; it drew support not only from conserva-
tives, but also from liberals, and many socialists and feminists. Fi-
nally, the 'twenties saw the emergence on a mass scale of political
anti-Semitism. In widely published and repeatedly reissued works,
old-stock American, Ivy League-educated authors like Madison
Grant and Lothrop Stoddard informed millions of contemporaries
that race was the primary force in history and the taproot of Amer-
ica's troubles. The Klan's gratitude to such respectable racist ideo-
logues was great. Drawing confidence from their arguments, Evans


--- PAGE 153 ---
134 Content and Purpose
maintained that it was "hardly necessary" to argue for inborn dis-
parities since the notion of basic human equality had "been aban-
doned by all thoughtful men."23
Carrying common strains of racist thought to extreme conclu-
sions, Klan leaders made up in fervor what they lacked in original-
ity. In order to release inhibitions against aggression, they first had
to dehumanize their targets. Internal Klan documents thus con-
demned "trash immigration," while a Klan-recommended writer
referred to African Americans as "ten million malignant cancers
gnaw[ing] on the vitals of our body politic." The first degree in the
order's ladder of fraternal rituals, a paean to the Reconstruction-era
Klan, for its part, alluded to black men as "lust-crazed beasts in
human form." Having made their intended victims appear both
subhuman and life-threatening, Klan leaders could then whip up
enthusiasm in their own followers for combat in "self-defense."
Indeed, one author warned readers that "the day of reckoning is
upon us." Klan members readied themselves for this reckoning.
They pledged to "preserve unto death the peculiar distinctiveness
of the white race from the foul touch of a lower stock." In a ritual
enactment of this commitment, Simmons used to open the Atlanta
Klan's internal meetings by thrusting two guns on the table and
calling out, "Bring on your niggers." "The inevitable conflict
towards which all events tend," he explained elsewhere, "is
the white man against the colored man," fought out on a world
scale.24
Such bellicosity helped distinguish the Klan's brand of white
supremacy. Members saw themselves as an army in training for a
war between races, should that prove necessary to perpetuate the
United States as "a white man's nation." Klansmen boasted that
they had bonded into "an invisible phalanx ... to stand as impreg-
nable as a tower against every encroachment upon the white man's
liberty, the white man's institutions, the white man's ideals, in the
white man's country, under the white man's flag." If other white
Americans failed to heed the call to suppress African Americans
and exclude immigrants, Simmons predicted a United States
"blood-soaked by one of the most desperate of interracial wars—a
war at once civil and international." Georgia's Grand Dragon con-
curred with the prognosis. Evans also agreed that different races
could never share the earth in peace. He insisted that world history
was nothing more than "race conflicts, wars, subjugation or extinc-
tion." The law of nature dictated that "each race must fight for its
life, must conquer, accept slavery or die. The Klansman believes,"


--- PAGE 154 ---
The Politics of Race 135
Evans concluded, "that the whites will not become slaves, and he
does not intend to die before his time."25
These violent intimations extended to Jews as well. Indeed, the
inclusion of Jews among the ranks of racial enemies helped differ-
entiate Klansmen from more mainstream white supremacists. The
malignancy of Klan leaders' anti-Semitism was illustrated by their
filial regard for its German masters. In 1925, for example, the Kour-
ier proudly reported that the German Hammer Magazine had wel-
comed the Klan as a fraternal ally, noting their common goal of
"shattering] the bonds in which the Jewish offender has smitten
all honorable nations." Later that year, the Kouriei reprinted an
article from the press of the extreme right in Germany about the
"terrible misdeeds" of "the Jew." "The people's Germany," the au-
thor ended, "knows only one task—the warding off and the annihi-
lation of the blood-enemy of the Aryan peoples—the Jew." The
murderous impulse of this author's disciples in the Klan was fur-
ther illustrated by their references to Jews in such terms as "one of
the greatest menaces" to society, as a treacherous group plotting
"world dominion"—or simply, as "vermin" and "scum."26
To the extent that it makes any at all, this fury only makes sense
in its larger setting. The upsurge of anti-Semitism in the 1920s—re-
flected in the mass readership of Henry Ford's rabid Dearborn Inde-
pendent as well as in the growth of the Klan—was no mere quirk.
Outbursts of mass Jew-hatred are almost always symptomatic of
profound social crisis or malaise.27 In modern times, this hatred has
typically accompanied anti-radical ideologies, which use Jews as
scapegoats for the evils of capitalism. "As a political ideology," com-
mented a leading scholar of American anti-Jewish organizations,
"anti-semitism without an anti-revolutionary aspect is so rare as to
be almost unknown." Or, as Jean-Paul Sartre put it: "anti-Semitism
is a passionate effort to realize a national union against the division
of society into classes. It is an attempt to suppress the fragmentation
of the community into groups hostile to one another by carrying
common passions to such a temperature that they cause barriers to
dissolve."28 Racial exclusion and victimization thus became the
strategy for a class revanchism.
The Klan's harangues against Jews in fact revealed the class drives
of its racialism more clearly than those against any other group.
Although the more avid evangelicals in the Klan's ranks blamed
Jews for the crucifixion of Christ and condemned them for


--- PAGE 155 ---
136 Content and Purpose
blocking such fundamentalist initiatives as mandatory school
prayer, most Klansmen said little at all about religion in their
charges against Jews. More commonly, Klansmen, like Henry Ford
and other leading anti-Semitic contemporaries, dwelt on economic
and social themes. They accused Jews, first and foremost, of domi-
nating international capitalism, particularly the world's finances.
"The Jew has a monopoly on the monetary system of the commer-
cial world," as Leroy Curry put the Klan's principal allegation. In
his view, Jews were the cause of the "fact that during the last one
hundred years we have witnessed the building of a gigantic money
monopoly that is without parallel in a thousand years of human
history." Curry, like other Klan writers, located the source of this
alleged power in Jews' supposed lack of business scruples.29
In such allegations, Jews stood surrogate for capitalist behavior
that disturbed Klansmen. Against a backdrop of revelations of en-
demic profiteering by American corporations during the war, Curry
asserted that Jews' economic behavior was guided by the "degrad-
ing" and un-American "doctrine that money is more powerful than
the character of the nation." Similarly, in a decade that saw spiral-
ing inequalities in the distribution of wealth, Evans accused Jewish
creditors of benefitting from the miseries of "the poor," as if this
were unusual. Or, as an Athens Klan lecturer put it more agitation-
ally, Jews "get rich and prosper off of what they make by cheating
and swindling the Americans." Finally, at a time when the employ-
ment of young women alarmed many adults about the future of
family life, another Klan propagandist accused Jewish bosses of
having "procured" gentile female employees, as if hiring women
were itself a sin.30
In this way, Jews served as the symbol of "bad," or big, capital,
which Klansmen distrusted. By portraying exploitation, destructive
competition, and economic concentration as unnatural anomalies
caused by the perfidy of a small minority, the Klan's anti-Semitism
implicitly defended the "good" or small-scale capitalism of the lo-
cal commonwealth vision. Not the organic development of indus-
trial capitalism from the world of small property-holders, but the
malicious designs of racial "others," explained why the nineteenth-
century dream had failed.31
The Klan gained confidence to attack Jews from longstanding
American political traditions. Thus, when maligning Jewish immi-
grants (overwhelmingly urban), Klansmen sometimes invoked the
hostility to cities and their labor forces characteristic of Jeffer-
sonian republicanism. Similarly, anti-Semitism fed off the legacy


--- PAGE 156 ---
The Politics of Race 137
of antagonism between direct producers, whether farmers or arti-
sans, and merchants and creditors enshrined in the critique of
"Mammon" developed by nineteenth-century American protest
movements. The Klan's central allegation against Jews—that they
had a "stranglehold" on finance and thereby the whole econ-
omy32—harked back to the People's Party in particular. Commit-
ted themselves to private property and production for profit, the
Populists had criticized subsidiary features of capitalism; namely,
the machinations of financiers and the monetary policies of the
federal government.
Turning, that latent potential into overt, malicious anti-
Semitism, the Klan fused raw material from these popular protest
traditions with the longstanding stereotype of "Shylock." The eco-
nomic parasitism ascribed by the Populists of the 1890s to finance
and monopoly capital in general became, in the Klan's hands, a
characteristic of the "Jewish race." Thus, Samuel Campbell, Grand
Klokard (lecturer) of the Klan, asked Populist stalwart Tom Watson
in 1922 for more information about how "the Wall St. Bankers—
mostly Jews" had "brought hard times on us" after the Great War.
The following year, Campbell wrote an article insisting that Jews
had become "a national danger." As evidence, he cited the efforts
of "the International Banker" to dominate national governments
and international relations.33
Yet, paradoxically, the Klan, along with other anti-Semites in
the postwar era, also maintained that Jews dominated the para-
mount force opposed to international capital: communism. This
notion found support in the so-called Protocols of the Elders of
Zion, a forged document put into mass circulation by foes of the
October Revolution to "prove" that the Bolsheviks' victory re-
sulted from a Jewish conspiracy. "Jew" and "Bolshevik" in fact fre-
quently served as synonyms in Klan vocabulary. "Bolshevism," as
the Imperial Night Hawk expressed the oft-made allegation, "is a
Jewish-controlled and Jewish-financed movement in its entirety."
The paper went on to declare that Lenin, Trotsky, and all the other
Bolshevik leaders were Jews. Internal Georgia Klan circulars alerted
members to the danger America faced from "the radical Bolshevic
forces, aided and led by the International Jew."34
The apparent inconsistency of the allegations made against
Jews, their "magical" character, makes more sense when consid-
ered in light of the predominance of the petite bourgeoisie in the
Klan and other anti-Semitic organizations. As petty proprietors
caught between capital and labor in what appeared to them to be a


--- PAGE 157 ---
138 Content and Purpose
zero-sum game, Klansmen harbored grievances against both sides,
a Janus-like position conducive to the dual antipathies that charac-
terize political anti-Semitism.35 The economic place of the petite
bourgeoisie, moreover, made it, at least potentially, the most na-
tionalistic class. Whereas both large capital and labor had some
incentives for cooperation with their counterparts abroad, petty
capitalists could anticipate no such rewards.
Their rootedness in, and dependence on, local economies and
tangible .property helps explain the charge of "cosmopolitanism"
levied with regularity against Jews and at the root of the oft-used
term "the International Jew." One author thus complained, in the
same breath, of "international unionism" and "international bank-
ing." The Klan accused Jews of being the secret force behind such
proposals as the League of Nations, and explained their alleged mo-
tives thus: "having no national government of their own they seek
to.attain them all." Georgia's Grand Dragon, for his part, insisted
on the need for education in "American Nationalism" to combat
the "Cosmopolitanism advocated by International Jewry."36
The second of the principal charges made against Jews—their
alleged radicalism—was also levied by the Klan against immigrants
more generally.37 Simmons thus warned his followers that they
were being crowded out by a "mongrel population . . . organized
into Ghettos and Communistic groups ... and uplifting a red flag
as their insignia of war." Indeed, the new immigrants "threatened
to smother our working people with the noxious poison of Bolshe-
vism." The numbers of native-born whites among the communists
were "so few . . . that it is comparatively easy to eliminate them
as a revolutionary strength," explained the Searchlight, "but the
working masses of aliens or foreign-born and negroes are a strength
to be reckoned with."38
Klansmen identified immigrants, like Jews and African Ameri-
cans, as racial groups distinct from themselves. Tapping racism to
subdue labor struggle, the Searchlight thus described the unrest
among foreign-born industrial workers as "the present racial men-
ace." Similarly, the Klan frequently proclaimed as one of the key
points in its program "the prevention of unwarranted strikes by
foreign agitators." In light of the Klan's antipathy to labor mili-
tancy, its complaints that immigrants undercut the living stan-
dards of "American" workers appear self-serving. But the obvious-
ness of the contradiction suggests that more was at work. Agitation
against "cheap labor" from abroad served the ideological end of
bonding native-born white workers and their employers in the kind


--- PAGE 158 ---
The Politics of Race 139
of intraracial unity the Klan counterposed to class struggle. The
cheap-labor charge also provided immediate benefits to the Klan,
which otherwise had no economic program to attract native-born
white workers disturbed about their wages and job security.39 As it
was, by setting the Klan apart from elite conservatives who shared
its other complaints about immigrants, this populist theme gave
Klan nativism a mass appeal.
Class and gender themes were entangled at the roots of a third
common allegation the Klan levied against immigrants, that they
lowered the nation's moral standards. Republican thinkers had
feared the Old World proletariat in part for the deviant family
structures, gender roles, and sexual conduct assumed to flow from
its propertylessness. Klansmen brought these assumptions to their
discussions of immigrants, hence their use of such phrases as "Eu-
ropean riff-raff" and "slaves of ignorance and vice" to describe
them. This framework helped make sense of the new forms of
commercial, urban-based mass culture, which Evans complained
sought "to degrade us to the level of European morality ... to the
slums, ghettos and cesspools from which most recent immigration
has come." Similarly, the Klan often asserted that the opponents
of Prohibition were "mainly alien," and targeted the foreign-born
in its raids on bootleggers.40
The battery of allegations. Klansmen made against African
Americans contrasted with the limited range levied against Jews
and immigrants. Thus, the Klan charged that blacks were biologi-
cally inferior, unfit for democratic participation, criminal and im-
moral, lazy, oversexed, and on and on. In contrast, complaints
about competition for trade, work, and housing were less fre-
quent.41 From this imbalance in coverage, one might deduce that
economic motives were not a factor. But that would be a mistake.
While class perspectives and goals influenced the Klan here as else-
where, to have acknowledged them directly would have under-
mined the order's cardinal contention: that "natural" divisions like
race and sex should take primacy over "artificial" distinctions like
class. As a result, the order generally expressed class concerns in
an opaque racial idiom whose drives only become clear when ana-
lyzed in context.
The subordination of African Americans, after all, undergirded
the entire Southern economy: "the negro," as a representative of
the Athens Chamber of Commerce put it, "is our only and best
form of domestic and general labor." While Klansmen rarely spoke
of this reliance openly—to have done so would have been to recog-


--- PAGE 159 ---
140 Content and Purpose
nize black contributions to America—in practice they sought in
numerous ways to ensure that blacks would remain a cheap, unor-
ganized labor supply. Like its Reconstruction predecessor, the Klan
of the 1920s may thus have posed its mission more often as the
defense of white culture than as the restraint of black labor. But
those familiar with the South understood that the distinction was
academic: the purpose of the former was to safeguard the latter.
"The races in the South may be divided into two classes," as an
Athens mayor observed hyperbolically in 1923: "the Employer and
the Employee." And, in fact, the second Klan, like the first, aspired
to control black workers. When Simmons asserted of his predeces-
sors after Emancipation, "it's all rot about the K. K. swinging
[lynching] niggers—-niggers were loafing and K. K. made 'em go to
work," the potential uses of his own organization could not have
been lost on his listeners.42
The anti-labor animus of the Klan's commitment to white su-
premacy appeared most clearly in other forums, however: namely,
in the racial themes that pervaded the order's anti-communism and
anti-Catholicism. Indeed, one key aspect of the threat Klansmen
saw in communism was the unprecedented commitment of its
white followers to black rights. The Klan thus denounced "Bolshe-
vist agitation" for interracial trade unionism and pointed with
alarm to the Communist Party's overtures to African Americans.
Klansmen believed that communism would mean the end of racial
hierarchy. The "worst" offense of Communist union organizers in
North Carolina, in the view of the Kourier, was their advocacy of
"negro equality."43
Similarly, the Klan denounced the Catholic church for further-
ing "social equality." Klansmen attacked the church, in particular,
for its recruitment and training of black priests to serve interracial
congregations. The doctrine of the equality of believers and the
practice of integrated congregations had the potential, in Klan eyes,
to upend the social order. A Mississippi female Klan supporter thus
summoned the specter of slave rebellions to depict the dangers of
blacks' converting to Catholicism. The result would be the "hor-
rors of Hayti and San Domingo": black men "yearning for the fer-
tile fields and fair women of their masters." More generally, the
Klan charged the Catholic church with being "after the negro as
one of its major steps in dominating the American republic," an
appeal to time-honored republican fears of those with no stake in
society being used as an entering wedge for despots.44
The Klan's varied attacks on African Americans, Jews, and im-


--- PAGE 160 ---
The Politics of Race 141
migrants in fact converged on a common core goal: securing the
power of the white petite bourgeoisie in the face of challenges
stemming from modern industrial capitalism. The Klan sought to
deny political rights to those whom it perceived as threats to that
power. Indeed, one purpose of Klan racialism was to convince peo-
ple that only a small, select group was "fit" for self-government.
Imperial Wizard Simmons insisted, for example, that the supposed
inability of Africans and most Asians to control their own affairs
mandated carrying "the 'white man's burden' " well into the fu-
ture. More generally, he described universal suffrage as "a very dan-
gerous political doctrine." The ballot was not a right, but "a privi-
lege," and neither blacks nor immigrants deserved it. And while
they were hardly the primary target of such assertions, poorer
whites were not immune. Simmons himself insinuated that both
property and literacy qualifications should apply to all voters.45
His successor candidly announced that genuine democracy
would impede the Klan's goals. "The Nordic can easily survive and
rule," Evans explained, "if he holds for himself the advantages"
secured by his forefathers. His supremacy would be lost, however,
"if he surrenders those advantages" to immigrants and their chil-
dren. The "Klansman's Creed" thus declared, "I believe my rights
in this country are superior to those of foreigners."46 African
Americans and immigrants were thus the most immediate and ag-
grieved victims of what by the Klan's own admission was a wider
attack on democracy conducted in defense of property and privi-
lege. In this way, class perspectives, motives, and goals were at the
nerve center of the Klan's racialism. Racism enabled Klansmen to
reconcile conflicting impulses: on one hand, their regard for white
popular sovereignty and their commitment to private property; on
the other hand, their discomfort with growing economic concentra-
tion and their fear of genuine democracy in a society with a mas-
sive, lately quite militant, working class. Yet the Klan's construc-
tion of "race" was also shaped profoundly by gender-specific
perspectives and motives.
Sexual themes saturated the Klan's racial agitation. So obses-
sively that it appeared intentional, Klansmen used bodily imagery
to discuss race. Such terms as "proper blending of blood," "insolu-
ble and indigestible" races, "mongrel population/' "body politic,"
"pure and undefiled" blood, "racial pollution," and the like in-
fested Klan lexicon.47 But more important to the order's appeal
were its oft-repeated allegations that men of other so-called races
coveted native-born white women in various and distinctive ways.


--- PAGE 161 ---
142 Content and Purpose
In effect, Klansmen turned conflicts between classes and ethnic
groups into rivalry over which men might possess which women.
As regards African Americans, the central argument the Klan
put forward to oppose modification of Jim Crow was that any relax-
ation of its barriers would lead to racial "amalgamation." More
specifically, reforms would lead to sex between black men and
white women. Klan propagandists cited instances of multiracial so-
cial events and intermarriage in New York City as examples of the
dangers of black electoral power. The order described the NAACP's
mission as encouraging blacks around the country "to an open de-
mand for social equality," inciting black men to "lust upon women
of the white race," and telling them it was their "duty to marry a
white woman." Voting rights, according to Imperial Wizard Evans,
encouraged black men to sexually assault white women.48
Klansmen shared a sexual siege mentality with large numbers
of their less strident white peers. By the late nineteenth century,
large numbers of white Americans, particularly in the South, be-
lieved that black men had acquired an incorrigible desire to rape
white women. This conviction grew so pervasive that rape came to
be referred to in white society as the "new Negro crime." The most
common and widely accepted—if utterly spurious—justification
advanced for lynching was that it served to punish and prevent this
alleged crime. Thus, Governor Clifford Walker sought to silence
critics of lynching in the northern press with a challenge to report
also "the unspeakable crime which provoked the violence." Walker
then summoned up for his white listeners maudlin images of "the
isolation of the Southern farm, leaving the women defenseless
from the vagrant vagabond while their husbands toil for a living in
the distant fields." More generally, supporters of racial discrimina-
tion employed the bogey of "social equality" as their primary and
most effective argument. "Whenever, wherever, race relations are
discussed," as Lillian Smith later observed, "sex moves arm in arm
with the concept of segregation."49
Activists and historians alike have long struggled to make
sense of the sexualization of racial conflict. The contrast between
the rhetoric of chivalry and the reality of ruthless killing led many
to interpret the sexual demonology of white supremacy as subter-
fuge. Writing in the 1920s, Walter White thus argued that sex
charges were merely "a red herring" used to defame black victims
and defuse white criticism. "Lynching has always been the means
for protection, not of white women," he concluded, "but of


--- PAGE 162 ---
Stone Mountain, Georgia, the imposing granite butte outside Atlanta where the
second Ku Klux Klan held its founding ceremony on Thanksgiving night in
1915. (Courtesy The Georgia Department of Archives and History)
One of the masterminds behind the spectacular growth of this male fraternal
order in the early 1920s was a woman, Mary Elizabeth Tyler. Here, she poses
while reading its publication The Searchlight. (Courtesy The Hargrett Rare Book
and Manuscript Library, University of Georgia Libraries)


--- PAGE 163 ---
The Imperial Palace in its heyday at 2621 Peachtree Road, one of
the most fashionable streets in Atlanta. (Courtesy Atlanta Histor-
ical Society)
This 1925 ad for "Klan Day" at the Southeastern Fair shows how
entrenched in white associational life the organization had be-
come. (Courtesy Atlanta Historical Society)


--- PAGE 164 ---
The Leo Frank case helped create the at-
mosphere in which the Ku Klux Klan
could be revived. Here, gathered about
Frank's suspended corpse, men in the
crowd proudly wave to photographers.
(Courtesy Georgia Department of Ar-
chives and History)


--- PAGE 165 ---
In the climactic scene of D. W. Griffith's 1915 epic film The Birth of a Nation,
Reconstruction-era Klansmen prepared to lynch Gus (Walter Long), the film's
black anti-hero. Censors removed a castration scene, but its point remained.
The Klan used showings of the film to recruit new members. (Courtesy Repre-
sentations, No. 9 (Winter 1976), p. 176)
Conscious of the power of symbol and the allure of ritual, the Klan devised
elaborate rites such as this initiation ceremony to captivate members and sup-
porters. (From World's Work, 1924)


--- PAGE 166 ---
Although scholars have seen it
necessary to emphasize one or an-
other of the Klan's prejudices as
its driving force, contemporary
Klansmen felt no such need, as
this anti-Semitic and anti-Catho-
lic cartoon from a Klan promo-
tional tract makes clear. (From
Heroes of the Fiery Cross]
A view of Clayton Street in downtown Athens, where the Klan had its local
headquarters in the late 1920s. (Courtesy The Hargrett Rare Book and Manu-
script Library, University of Georgia Libraries)


--- PAGE 167 ---
Wartime regimentation and political repression largely wiped out alternative
channels of popular dissent for ordinary white men, creating a vacuum the Klan
came to fill. Here, troops march through the Five Points neighborhood of At-
lanta in 1918. (Courtesy Georgia Department of Archives and History)
Yet the World War also opened a
new era in Southern race rela-
tions; here, Augusta resident
Frank Butler Black posed in his
army uniform, a symbol of pride
among many African-American
servicepeople. (Courtesy Georgia
Department of Archives and
History)


--- PAGE 168 ---
The attenuation of male power and parental authority in the early twentieth
century agitated many Klansmen. Here, the Georgia Young People's Suffrage
Association spreads the word about votes for women in a 1920 parade. (Courtesy
Georgia Department of Archives and History)
The Southern Manufacturing Company, one of the leading area mills, with
workers' homes in background. This community would be a site of several
night-riding incidents in the 1920s. (Courtesy The Hargrett Rare Book and
Manuscript Library, University of Georgia Libraries)


--- PAGE 169 ---
This scene from a black neighborhood in Athens, probably from
the 1910s or 1920s, reveals the poverty and deprivation of munic-
ipal services from which most blacks in the region suffered.
(Courtesy The Hargrett Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Uni-
versity of Georgia Libraries)
Participants in the Fulton Bag and Cotton Mills strike of
1914-1915 march and publicize a mass meeting. One of the
most pivotal and prolonged labor struggles of the area in the
early twentieth century, this Atlanta strike dramatized the overt
class conflicts that disturbed Klan members. (Courtesy National
Archives and Southern Labor Archives, Georgia State University)


--- PAGE 170 ---
Yet this graduation photo of the first woman dentist in Athens—Ida Johnson
Hiram (3rd row, 1st left)—also evokes the growing African-American middle
class. Its members would play a key role in both the NAACP and the CIC.
(Courtesy The Hargrett Rare Book and Manuscript Library, University of Geor-
gia Libraries)


--- PAGE 171 ---
Women and child workers from the King Mill in Augusta in 1909. Wage-earning
opened the way to new constructions of gender and sexuality among whites in
the early twentieth century. Yet note also the black woman concealed from
view in the left rear. Among the poorest-paid American industrial workers,
white mill people could still take advantage of cheap black labor. (Photo by
Lewis Hine. Courtesy The Hargrett Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Univer-
sity of Georgia Libraries)
By the 1910s, even the daughters of salaried employees and craftsmen began
joining the labor force. These employees of the Southern Bell Telephone Com-
pany posed outside its new building in Athens in 1918. (Courtesy The Hargrett
Rare Book and Manuscript Library, University of Georgia Libraries)


--- PAGE 172 ---
The defiant, precocious posturing of these Georgia mill workers, photographed
in 1910, hints at how class was experienced by men and boys, too, in gendered
ways. (Photo by Lewis Hine. Courtesy The Hargrett Rare Book and Manuscript
Library, University of Georgia Libraries)
Capping his triumphant, populist campaign, Tom Watson in 1921 addresses a
crowd in Thomson, Georgia, before leaving for Washington, D.C., to begin his
term as U.S. senator. There, he would use his position to defend the second Ku
Klux Klan from critics. (Courtesy Georgia Department of Archives and History)


--- PAGE 173 ---
The most common single occupation among Athens Klansmen was owner or
proprietor of a small business; this drugstore belonged to one local member,
j Courtesy The Hargrett Rare Book and Manuscript Library, University of Geor-
gia Libraries)
Small numbers and big obstacles notwithstanding, African Americans and im-
migrants were beginning to compete more directly with native-born white men.
The E. D. Harris Drug Store was founded by an Athens black physician in 1910.
(Courtesy The Hargrett Rare Book and Manuscript Library, University of Geor-
gia Libraries)


--- PAGE 174 ---
"Costa's," an ice cream parlor presided over by an extended family of Greek
immigrants, was very popular among Athens young people in the 1910s and
1920s. Indeed, it was one site of the emergence of the heterosocial youth culture
that alarmed so many adults. (Courtesy The Hargrett Rare Book and Manuscript
Library, University of Georgia Libraries)
Klan organizers deftly tapped the potency of religious feeling to build their
movement, as this open-air rally illustrates. (Courtesy Georgia Department of
Archives and History)


--- PAGE 175 ---
Co-ed socializing at the University of Georgia in the 1920s. A crusade against
young people's suggestive dancing and joy-riding in automobiles helped build
the Athens Klan. (Courtesy The Hargrett Rare Book and Manuscript Library,
University of Georgia Libraries)
First Christian Church, whose minister and his assistant served as exalted cy-
clops and kligrapp of the Athens Klan at mid-decade and helped to lead the
city's social purity crusade. (Courtesy The Hargrett Rare Book and Manuscript
Library, University of Georgia Libraries)


--- PAGE 176 ---
A 1917 campaign cartoon from Tom Wat-
son's newspaper. His racist attacks on
Hugh Dorsey were amplified by the Klan
in 1921 as part of a wider effort to subdue
the nascent white racial liberalism embod-
ied in such groups as the Commission on
Interracial Cooperation. (Courtesy Atlanta
Historical Society)
In this Marietta lynching from
the 1920s, the perpetrators mock
the corpse of their victim. Such
gross white indifference to black
suffering—these men obviously
have no fear of identification or
prosecution—helped make the
Klan possible. (Courtesy Georgia
Department of Archives and
History)


--- PAGE 177 ---
Burned out of their home by Klan night-riders in 1949, this black woman and
her son experienced the terror that many other families had in the 1920s. Then,
no one even bothered to photograph the victims. (Courtesy Keystone Press
Agency, New York, and Southern Labor Archives, Georgia State University)
A 1924 magazine article helps ex-
plain the confidence of Klan
night-riders and the sparse docu-
mentation of their crimes. With
so many politicians, law enforce-
ment officers, and judicial person-
nel either cowed or complicit,
prosecution of Klan vigilantes
was unlikely. (From Hearst's In-
ternational Magazine, 1924)


--- PAGE 178 ---
The Politics of Race 143
profits." Similarly, others have concluded that the cry of "social
equality" was a ruse to safeguard economic privilege.50
Unquestionably, the evocation of sexual danger did shore up
the white elite. But such interpretations fail to clear up the real
enigma: why subordinate whites fell for the sleight of hand.51 That
is, how could such rhetoric rally the whites who seemingly stood
to gain little? Because other kinds of power were also at stake. The
charge of rape, as historian Jacquelyn Dowd Hall astutely observed,
derived its power from the fact that it "was embedded ... in the
heart not only of American racism, but of [white] American atti-
tudes toward women as well." At the same time as it enforced
white supremacy, lynching also served to remind white women of
their prescribed asexual, subordinate, and dependent roles in
Southern society. To counterpoise economic concerns and sexual
anxieties is thus to create a false dichotomy.52
Yet the evidence suggests that the prominence of sexual
themes in the Klan's racism also had another important source.
Male dominance and white supremacy shared common material
roots in this setting. The key to the merging of economics and
sexuality in Klan racism was the order's fealty to a vision of white
petty-producer households in which women and youth were domi-
nated by adult men. The Klan's racialism was thus grounded in the
same domestic and social arrangements that its male supremacy
and sexual conservatism issued from. Old traditions persisted in
modified form in the way the male household head's control over
the labor power and sexuality of his dependents helped ensure eco-
nomic viability for contemporary farm and mill households. For all
its irrational aspects, then, fear of female autonomy had a rational
basis in the labor and service requirements of household survival.
So, too, did control over women buttress racial hierarchy. Since
racial affiliation was traced through the lineage of the mother, po-
licing the borders of white society required the regulation of white
women's sexuality. Not surprisingly, then, sexual relations be-
tween white women and black men became "the strongest taboo
of the system."53
One of the commonest white supremacist campaigns waged by
the Klan was in fact to end interracial intimacy. Around the coun-
try, state and local Klans promoted legislation to make marriage
between blacks and whites a felony. There should be "no room in
America," the Klan announced, for "any man or woman who be-
lieves in or teaches the mixing of our blood" with that of African


--- PAGE 179 ---
144 Content and Purpose
Americans. Yet if racial mixture itself had been the real fear, then
the Klan should have included black women in its charges as often
as black men, particularly since sexual contacts between white
men and black' women, usually forced, were far more common.
Universal pronouncements were in fact the exception rather than
the rule.54
The Klan never mentioned the rape of black women; it fo-
cussed almost exclusively on black men and their relations with
white women. Whereas the rape of black women by white men
confirmed the latter in their power over all blacks, male and fe-
male, and all women, black and white, sexual relations between
white women and black men—particularly voluntary relations—
defied white men's power over both groups. To rile up readers
about the Al Smith campaign in 1928, for example, Klan publica-
tions employed front-page pictures of a black Tammany official in
New York dictating a letter to his white secretary with a caption
implying that his authority would translate into sexual access.55
In addition to proposing laws against interracial marriage,
Klansmen worked in other ways to prevent or destroy such rela-
tionships. Southern chapters, for example, persecuted black men
and white women who "violated social ethics," while Northern
chapters warned prospective black grooms to cancel their wed-
dings. The Klan press also printed notices of marriages between
white women and black men to demonstrate "the necessity" of
these legislative and vigilante efforts.56 The image of passive white
women put upon by aggressive black men was belied by the con-
sensual nature of these marriages, however, suggesting that deeper
concerns were at stake. In fact, intermarriage implied both an es-
sential compatibility between blacks and whites and a voluntary
social levelling that the Klan found intolerable.
Klansmen accused Jews, or rather Jewish men, of sexual of-
fenses whose nature differed from those attributed to black men.
One of the commonest was that Jews controlled the popular-
culture industries alleged to be bringing moral ruin upon the na-
tion's youth. The Klan's struggle to safeguard American families
from the dangers of the "Jew-produced motion picture industry and
the Jew-monopolized jazz music [and] sex publications" was thus
adduced as a reason for Georgia men to join. Only "strict censor-
ship," Imperial Wizard Evans insisted, could "keep the Jew-
controlled stage and movies within even gunshot of decency."57
Behind such allegations were deep resentments at how eco-
nomic and social change weakened white men's control over


--- PAGE 180 ---
The Politics of Race 145
"their" women. These resentments found expression in an idiom
at once populist and racist. The Imperial Night Hawk published
the statement of a Protestant minister, supposedly a converted Jew,
that ninety per cent of immigrant Jeil&sh men believed "all Protes-
tant girls are common property and can be bought for a song." Ca-
leb Ridley likewise complained of "the total absence of respect for
American girls by the great majority of foreign-born men and the
younger generation of Jews," as did an Athens Klan lecturer. An-
other variation was to accuse Jewish employers of, as the Kourier
put it, "producing] by the slavery of under-paid girls working amid
conditions and influences such as to make them easy prey to unvir-
tuous lives." Klan propagandists also alleged that Jewish men ran
the "white slave" trade; it was, said a Georgia Klan lecturer, "in
the hands of a 'Jewish trust' so to speak."58
The Klan also charged Jewish men with using their reputed
economic power to seduce gentile women. "They bribe and buy
those poor, uneducated girls," a Klan lecturer informed his Athens
audience, "with fine silk underclothes, silk stockings, fine clocks,
dresses and money." The notion that economic position gave Jew-
ish employers sexual access to female employees had been central
to the mass mobilization against Leo Frank that helped spur the
formation of the second Klan. Now this speaker recalled Frank's
alleged "lust . . . [for] the virtue of American girls" to make his
case against Jews, while his Atlanta colleague cited Frank's case as
evidence that Jews constituted "a national danger." Gentile Ameri-
cans, proclaimed Elaine Mast, a Pennsylvania-based Klan writer,
were "tired of the outrages inflicted upon innocent girls by Hebrew
libertines." Mast offered as evidence for the "crimes and wrongs"
of certain Jews the tale of a middle-aged, wealthy bachelor in his
town. This man supposedly took gentile teenagers, "mostly work-
ing girls," in his car "to unfrequented spots and secluded places"
and brought them to his rooms for "clandestine" trysts. After the
man had "ruined" a young woman, Mast maintained, he discarded
her like "an old worn-out coat."59
The denouement of Mast's allegory showed how Klan propa-
gandists also resented Jews for declining full assimilation into gen-
tile society, a complaint in curious contrast with the order's oppo-
site grievance against blacks. The Searchlight thus criticized what
it construed as the "racial arrogance" of Jews, the product of a
"superiority complex." "By deliberate election," Evans concurred,
the Jew "is unassimilable." This alleged aloofness was one of
the reasons adduced for the frequently made charge that Jews were


--- PAGE 181 ---
146 Content and Purpose
"insoluble and indigestible." One aspect of Jewish "clannishness"
that particularly irked Klansmen (imbuing the charge with over-
tones of wounded pride) was Jews' apparent lack of interest in mar-
rying gentiles. "The descendants of Abraham/' maintained Evans,
"have denied their children the right of intermarriage with the
Gentile."60
Comparison of the sexual demonology of anti-Semitism and of
anti-black racism helps clarify the class and gender issues involved.
In light of how Jews commonly stood surrogate in the Klan's world
view for large capital, and African Americans for the propertyless
population, it is notable that the order charged Jewish men with
attempting to seduce gentile white women and black men with
attempting to take them by force. In each case, the men's perceived
position in the class structure was imagined to give them distinc-
tive access to women of the Klan's group. Indeed, the method of
the fantasized assailant varied according to his social position: the
worker would take a woman by force; the owner, by money and
cunning. In both cases, the method resembled that which his social
group might use against the white proprietor in nonsexual power
plays: for workers, a strike or rebellion; for employers, shrewd ma-
neuvers. All the Klan's sexually related charges, in fact, focussed
on the men of other groups. The lack of corresponding fears about
female African Americans and Jews indicates that sexual jealousy
was an important ingredient in white men's racism, as W. E. B. Du
Bois had once suggested.61 Since the Klan attacked black men for
marrying white women and Jewish men for not doing so, more-
over, it appears that the call for "racial purity" was not an absolute
goal but rather a sign of deeper concerns.
Klansmen viewed women at some level as property; they also
viewed them as symbols of power. From slavery forward, white
men had taken sexual advantage of black women with no fear of
legal reprisal. Such rapes served, among other ends, to humiliate
black men by demonstrating to them—in the most searing way
possible—their utter lack of social power and of the masculine
"honor" whose prerequisite was the ability to control one's "own"
women and protect them from the aggressions of other men.62
Deeply conscious themselves of this tradition of using women as
markers in symbolic power plays between men, Klansmen realized
that other men could play the same game. The image of the black
rapist was thus conjured out of Klansmen's fears of a militant
claim to equality by a social subordinate: he would prove his dig-
nity with their property even if he had to risk his life to get it.


--- PAGE 182 ---
The Politics of Race 147
Conversely, the image of the Jewish seducer connoted a humiliat-
ing display of command by a man with more money and power
than they: he would use the womenfolk of subordinates to gratify
his lust, yet scorn them as permanent partners.
In both fantasies, the association of "their" women with men
of the "other" group denoted loss of position and prestige for Klans-
men. In the one case, they imagined having to endure the dishonor
historically visited on dispossessed, subordinate classes. In the
other, the men of a formerly dispossessed, subordinate class sym-
bolically raised themselves to Klansmen's level by gaining access
to their women. In both cases, women were reified, turned into
inanimate tools with which barriers were built up or brought
down. The real point of reference was the middle-class man, caught
between capital and labor and anxious about how the outcome of
their rivalry would affect his power.
Gender was more than an emblem of race and class power,
though; as these cases show, it gave these relations much of their
charge. The Klan's commitment to WASP supremacy in fact con-
verged with its dread of the growing autonomy displayed by the
female relatives of its own constituents. One piece in the Klan
press complained, not simply that "another white girl" had mar-
ried a black man in New York, but that her parents "were help-
less" to stop the union. The implication was that the Klan-
proposed miscegenation law was necessary to restrain headstrong
daughters over whom parents had lost control. Similarly, Alma
White fretted over the immorality of young women who moved to
the cities for work. Blaming their "fall" not on their own desires
but on conniving Jewish men, White could avoid the troubling fact
of their own sexual initiative.63
Finally, concerns about gender, race, and class came together
in the Klan's eugenics program. Like many whites at the turn of
the century, Klansmen deplored declining birthrates among native-
born white women and urged them to bear more children to offset
the numbers of foreign-born and African Americans. In such exhor-
tations, commitment to an older model of male dominance con-
verged with a desire to ward off democratic challenges from sub-
merged groups. Thus, the Klan's scapegoating of immigrants for
native-born Americans' growing inability to "support large fami-
lies" assumed that having numerous children was indeed desirable,
an assumption rooted in the male-dominated household economy.
"Breeding better Americans in larger numbers" was likewise con-
sidered vital to maintaining position as a leading imperial power.64


--- PAGE 183 ---
148 Content and Purpose
The Klan shared a commitment to pseudo-scientific breeding
with large numbers of contemporaries across the political spec-
trum. Still, there was a difference. The order's virulent racialism
led it to apply eugenics in an especially dehumanizing, ghoulish
manner. One Klan leader and minister thus maintained that "the
methods employed in stock-raising" should be applied to human
reproduction. He envisioned "elimination of the unfit" people and
races from sexual activity and "development of the fit to the high-
est degree through the process of scientific study." Indeed, he went
as far as to suggest the "segregating and isolating of certain males
for the express purpose of developing a super race."65 The Klan's
pro-natalist program for white, native-born gentile women, like its
sexualized racism generally, thus sought to fortify WASP suprem-
acy, male dominance, and the rights of small property as integral
components of one social system. But by far the most frightening
combination of these commitments was that which came into play
in lynchings of black men for alleged assaults on white women.
Three such lynchings primed white residents in the Clarke County
area for a decade of vigilantism in which elements of race, class,
and gender overlapped and provided each other mutual support.


--- PAGE 184 ---
7
Paramilitary Paternalism:
The Politics of Terror
In September of 1917, the body of Rufus Moncrief, a thirty-year-
old black man, was found riddled with bullets on a country road
just south of Athens. Above his corpse was tacked a terse note:
"You have assaulted one white girl but you will not assault an-
other." The murder of Moncrief, carried out by just two carloads
of men operating under cover of darkness, was mild compared with
those that followed as the war aggravated social tensions. A year
later, a posse of enraged white men pursued and caught Obe Cox,
whom they accused of raping and murdering the wife of a promi-
nent white farmer in neighboring Oglethorpe County. As several
thousand spectators gathered, they chained Cox to an iron post,
assembled a pyre beneath him, and burned him alive.1
Prior to these two cases, no lynching had occurred in Clarke
County for more than forty years. So tranquil was it that Athens
appeared a haven to many black Georgians fleeing harsher terri-
tory.2 Then, suddenly, things changed. Between 1917 and 1921,
four lynchings took place in the vicinity, each one involving an
allegation of some threat to the purity or safety of a white woman.
The Klan rode the crest of this wave of killings, encouraged as
much by the tacit approval they received from most whites as by
the acts themselves. In their wake, it set to work with its own
campaign of intimidation and terror. Escalating the attacks on Afri-
can Americans and including deviant whites among its targets, the
Klan would test the limits of that community acceptance.
149


--- PAGE 185 ---
150 Content and Purpose
Whether local Klan members took part in the earlier lynchings
is impossible to determine. Since even when they operated before
the eyes of thousands, the lynchers were always described as "par-
ties unknown," one cannot say for certain whether the rosters
overlapped. But it is possible to understand, from their actions and
words, why Klansmen practiced less lethal forms of vigilantism—
most commonly, flogging men and sometimes women with thick
rawhide straps under cover of darkness. The immediate goal of
Klan violence was to terrify people out of engaging in particular
kinds of behavior. As a collective effort to stave off or redirect
changes in prevailing social relations, Klan violence was thus pro-
foundly political. But methodical aggression like this needed cul-
tural sanction.3 That came from each of the strands in the Klan's
world view: its reactionary populism, its racialism, its gender con-
ventions, and its overall alarm about the state of society and gov-
ernment. Together, they worked to prompt and ennoble white
male violence undertaken in defense of family and community. To
put it another way, there were no significant restraining elements
in Klan culture that might act to inhibit violence against outsiders
to Klansmen's idea of community.
Finally, these episodes appear to have involved something else,
more difficult to document. Assembling with their fellows to warn
or whip a person who embodied the challenges of the day also prob-
ably stilled Klan members' own anxieties. At the same time that
such violence served to subdue the propertyless, it also warned
modernizing elites that ordinary white men were still a force to be
reckoned with. In vigilantism, they acted out their rejection of re-
mote government—whether directed by their social "betters" or
their social "inferiors"—and dramatized instead a voluntary, local
compact of white male household heads. Particularly when im-
mune from punishment or reprisal, these rituals kept alive the vi-
sion of an older social order in which men like themselves still
wielded paternalistic power. In Athens, events in the years before
the Klan's rise made such impunity seem a good bet.
As horrible as the killing of Obe Cox was, the next lynching was
still more grisly. This one, in February of 1921, was "one of the
most horrible in the history of the state," according to the Atlanta
Constitution. The hunt began when a white farmer's wife was
found murdered in neighboring Oconee County. Desperate to find
a culprit, some focussed on John Lee Eberhart. The evidence con-


--- PAGE 186 ---
The Politics of Terror 151
necting him to the crime was flimsy. Eberhart himself swore that
he was innocent. But these details failed to deter the mob of
Oconee and Clarke County men who abducted him from the Ath-
ens jail the night of his arrest, dragged him to a waiting car, and
drove him to the scene of the crime. The fifty-odd police, sheriffs,
and detectives in the vicinity of the courthouse made no effort to
intervene. As an estimated three to seven thousand people raced to
the scene by car and horseback to catch the spectacle, the mob
chained Eberhart to a tree and piled wood beneath him. Taking
their time, they tortured him to death by fire. Shortly after the
murder, conclusive evidence surfaced that proved Eberhart was in-
nocent.4 But no matter.
By December of that year, whites were in such a furor and
black life had become so devalued that a serious charge was no
longer necessary to incite multiple murder. It took little to reacti-
vate the frenzy. Out of work in the postwar depression, a young
man named Aaron Birdsong approached "a prominent farmer" in
Oconee County, and asked him to rent him land or loan him a
dollar. The farmer refused. When he was out of sight, so the reports
went, Birdsong walked into the planter's house. His entry "fright-
en[ed] [the man's] wife and daughter." For this, Birdsong was to
lose his life. A posse-cum-mob quickly assembled to hunt him
down. But Birdsong did not allow the mob to take his life cheaply.
Knowing what they had in mind, he shot the deputy sheriff who
came for him and wounded a member of the mob. Having gained
this brief reprieve, he tried to escape. Two respected local black
men assisted his flight. Not only did they refuse to furnish infor-
mation about Birdsong's direction to his pursuers, but they also
supplied him with ammunition to keep them at bay. This solidar-
ity so incensed the would-be lynchers that they murdered both
men. One was shot from behind when he fled; the other was tor-
tured to death. When the mob finally caught up with Birdsong,
simple killing could not satiate its members. After shooting him,
they exorcised his remains with fire.5
To the extent that they sought to incite terror among other
African Americans, the lynchings succeeded. They certainly fright-
ened black Athenians, who had hitherto felt secure that, as one
doctor and NAACP member put it, "such a thing could not happen
in 'Classic' Athens." Even some white citizens were appalled; the
community began to show fault lines similar to those that ap-
peared in response to Governor Dorsey's statement on the plight of
blacks in Georgia. Following the murder of John Lee Eberhart, the


--- PAGE 187 ---
152 Content and Purpose
Athens Ministerial Association issued a condemnation of lynching,
and many leading local men organized a Law Enforcement League
to aid officials against lynch mobs.6 The public fiction of white
consensus was shattered; the future was open to contest.
It was at this juncture that the Klan set off on its own. By early
1921, according to a horrified black resident, the several hundred
area whites in the Klan had assumed leadership of the offensive
against African Americans. He accused them of practices like tying
blacks to cars and dragging them along the roads, stealing their
mail, driving them out of their homes and confiscating their goods,
and, generally, "treetin the . . . negro worse than a dog."7 At about
the same time, dynamite destroyed a black church, two black
schools, and a black lodge hall in Oconee County, where the
lynching of Eberhart had taken place. As community meeting
places that evinced participants' desire for education, for spiritual
equality, and for economic advancement and general racial better-
ment, the targets were hardly coincidental. "It seems the more
progress the Negro makes, the more his enemies increase/' ob-
served the editor of the Atlanta Independent in a discussion of
such night-riding; "the more he develops and acquires education,
property and wealth, the more he is opposed."8
Also set on fire was the cotton gin of R. E. Fullilove, a promi-
nent Oconee County white man. Fullilove's offense, apparently,
was too much sympathy with African Americans. Several months
later, he received such serious anonymous death threats that he
felt it necessary to post armed guards around his home. The source
of their anger was his comment that blacks "were killed unjustly"
and that lynching was wrong. Both the violence against blacks and
the reprisals against white dissidents sent out messages to wider
audiences: challenges to white supremacy, however modest, could
be lethal. That the messages were heard was evident in the paucity
of indictments and the absence of convictions, even though the
police were said to have plenty of evidence on the culprits. No one
complained, not even the organizations that spoken out for "law
and order."9 Having had their bluff called, elite opponents of mob
violence retreated with barely a whimper.
The state's lenience emboldened the vigilantes. Poor whites
now joined blacks in their scrutiny. In early March of 1922, five
masked men visited Frank Kenney, a mill worker in East Athens,
in the home he shared with his mother and two sisters. The intrud-
ers came to warn him about his conduct. Frank was having an af-
fair with a married woman, Lillie Toole, on whom he spent most


--- PAGE 188 ---
The Politics of Terror 153
of the salary that otherwise would have gone to support his" house-
hold, and he more than once abused his twenty-seven-year-old sis-
ter, Nora. The failure of earlier, informal attempts to change his
ways precipitated the Klan's warning.10 Frank ignored the warning.
Three weeks later, on the night of March 22, seven masked
men broke into the Kenney home. Taking Frank from bed, they
forced him in a waiting car and drove him out to the countryside.
There they whipped him repeatedly and then left him to find his
own way back to the city. Frank's kidnappers threatened to do
worse if he did not change his ways. In effect, Kenney had ex-
ploited the prerogatives of male dominance. He used his power,
not to maintain order in his household, but to safeguard his own
profligate, abusive ways. He failed to provide for his womenfolk,
he courted another man's wife, and he beat his adult sister when
she implored him to change. The Klan in fact entered the case,
according to Mrs. Kenney, on her daughter's request.11
The floggers gained confidence from several features of the
case. The behavior that led to their intervention would make most
of Kenney's contemporaries hesitate to publicly condemn his as-
sailants for fear of being thought to condone it. Toole's own hus-
band had threatened to kill the lovers, an action most would no
doubt have excused as a crime of passion. Aware of the weakness
of his position, Kenney did not press for prosecution, despite his
certainty that the Klan was responsible. His reticence no doubt in-
creased as he watched how the authorities handled his case. Local
officials at first attributed the flogging to the Klan. Yet within days
they began trying to exculpate it by redirecting the blame. They
now said that Kenney was flogged "for paying too much attention
to another man's wife"—as if this motive somehow proved the
Klan's innocence. The case soon disappeared from the press and
never resulted in any indictments. The Klan's repeated flogging, a
few months later, of a man with chronic "domestic troubles" had
a similarly anti-climactic outcome.12 Both men had violated com-
munity notions of right. Although some residents may have dis-
liked the Klan's methods, no one had the courage to challenge
them directly in public. For the victims to have pressed for redress
would have been to court worse trouble. Anyone who doubted that
had only to look at how the Klan handled blacks who believed they
had rights.
Ruthlessly—as Asbury McClusky and Odessa and Willie Peters
were soon to learn. McClusky and the Peters couple lived in a
small community of independent black farmers off the Dixie High-


--- PAGE 189 ---
154 Content and Purpose
way between Athens and Winder, Georgia. Beginning with nothing,
McClusky had acquired over twenty-five thousand dollars' worth
of land and savings. Known to many prominent whites as "a good
and useful citizen," McClusky had for years accommodated the eti-
quette of white supremacy by concealing his wealth and staying
away from conflict. But in 1922, he did something that brought
him to the Klan's attention: he came to the aid of a neighboring
black family whose organ a white lender was trying to confiscate.
Area Klansmen were already on edge; a few weeks before they had
flogged a black Methodist minister whose "only offense," ac-
cording to an outside investigator, was that he was "well educated
and was teaching others of his race how to read and write." The
night McClusky signed the bond to protect his neighbor's organ, a
gang of masked men—the bailiff among them—came to his home.
The men broke down the door and fired over thirty shots in the
house, some of which ripped McClusky's arm to bits. As soon as
they left, he escaped to seek safety in Atlanta.13
Infuriated by his survival and escape, Klansmen sought out
other blacks to make their point. The following night, they came
to the farm of Willie and Odessa Peters. In a struggle with his at-
tackers, Mr. Peters wrestled one of their guns away, shot the owner
in the stomach, and ran from the house. The men turned to Mrs.
Peters, then pregnant, and beat her pitilessly. When finally they
were through, they deposited her, unconscious, in a roadside ditch.
Once she recovered, Mrs. Peters went to Atlanta to find her hus-
band, who had been put in a fortified prison to safeguard him from
lynching. Taking advantage of her fear, disorientation, and illiter-
acy, lawyers from one of Georgia's leading political families then
swindled her out of the deed to her farm. Back home, Klan maraud-
ers drove out some of the remaining neighbors. The Peters never
got their land back. His arm crippled and his spirit broken,
McClusky sold his property at a loss and left the community he
had worked so hard to build. The Klansmen involved suffered noth-
ing. While some "good people" in the community looked askance
at the Klan's actions, they also feared its power too much to speak
out publicly or demand prosecution. As usual, the papers kept
silent.14
Spurred on by their successes, the night riders grew more dar-
ing. In November, a note signed "K.K.K." was affixed to a black
church in a hamlet outside Athens. The note warned "niggers" to
leave the area or face the consequences. The sheriff maintained
that the threat was merely a "joke" by young boys, a fabrication


--- PAGE 190 ---
The Politics of Tenor 155
the Athens press eagerly repeated. Blacks, and .some white employ-
ers worried about the loss of their labor supply, knew otherwise.
Many no doubt remembered similar Klan-led efforts a few years
back in counties north and east of Clarke. In these, such warning
notes were the prelude to a nightmarish campaign of harassment
and terror that included crowds of white men shooting into black
homes on an almost nightly basis. The point of it all was to so
harass and terrify African-American residents that they would
abandon their land and belongings and flee the area. Hundreds did.
Soon after the note was posted outside Athens, groups of masked
night-riders abducted and flogged area black residents in a series of
raids. Terrified, some 250 African Americans held a mass meeting
with fifty "white farmers" from Barrow Country to appeal to "law-
abiding white citizens" for protection.15
The appeal yielded little. Klan representatives were soon win-
ning "thunderous applause" from meetings called to condemn the
night-riding practiced by their organization. By the spring of 1923,
the siege had spread across many rural counties in North Georgia.
Cold calculation joined hysteria as Klan marauders confiscated the
property left behind by owners in their determined haste to seek
safety. Flight from the Clarke County area, which depleted the
black farm population by more than half, in fact peaked in the
years of these vigilante attacks. By October of 1923, Georgia blacks
were heading north at the rate of 1,500 a week; how many went to
escape such terror we will never know. In any event, the "unrest"
and "exodus" resulting from the attacks proved sufficient to widen
the private breach among whites into a quasi-public split. On the
initiative of Judia Jackson Harris of the Athens Teacher Training
and Industrial Institute and the local Interracial Committee, a few
prominent residents denounced what the most forthright among
them, a white female teacher, called the "reign of terror" so many
of the area's African Americans now lived under.16
As they disrupted and destroyed black lives, Klansmen per-
sisted in their efforts to police white ones. While it is hard to tell
what the Klan members who participated in each particular vigi-
lante episode thought, it is possible to tease out something of their
consciousness and modus operandi from cases about which evi-
dence survives. Klan floggers looked to violence as a tool to enforce
hierarchy on recalcitrant community members. In the case of
McClusky and the Peters couple, this intent was obvious. The
floggers wanted to punish these African Americans for their suc-
cess and to break the community solidarity successful resistance


--- PAGE 191 ---
156 Content and Purpose
depended on. In the Kenney case, the way the Klan came to the aid
of a female victim tended to distract from the ultimate purpose of
the effort: to fortify the chain of white male dominance by mend-
ing weak links. Thus, while some white men might find them-
selves disciplined for neglecting their duties and abusing their
power, others might come to the Klan's attention for failing to ex-
ert sufficient control over their wives.17
This was evident in Klansmen's notice to Arnold Moss, a poor
farmer in rural Athens. "We give you fair warning that we have
been called upon to make investigation in you and your wives af-
fairs," they wrote, admonishing him "to keep her off [the]
streets. . . . You Be [ruler] of your home. But treat your wife right.
We mean she must respect you and home and children." As if to
emphasize their regard for mitigating factors, the Klan authors also
stated their awareness that Moss was "a hard working man" and
that he had "cut out drinking." In effect, he had met two of their
criteria for appropriate male conduct; if he would only compel his
wife to act properly, there would be "no more said or done."18
In other cases, the method for shoring up men's power was less
direct, as in several episodes in which Klansmen sought to control
women by using violence against suitors disapproved of by the
women's male relatives. In 1927, for example, the Athens Klan
looked into the case of Miss Came Ivey, who had recently returned
to town. The daughter of an Athens mechanic, Ivey was a "New
Woman" who had moved to Bartow, Florida, and taken a job as a
stenographer. There, according to third parties, she had "been ru-
ined" by the married brother of her employer. The investigation
was requested by the Exalted Cyclops of Bartow, who intimated
that the chapter would take vigilante action against Ivey's suitor if
the rumors were true.19
A more dramatic illustration took place in Royston, about
twenty-five miles north of Athens. There, some fifty Klansmen
conducted an armed, robed "raid" in March of 1926 against a man
involved with another's wife. This time, one Klan member, a
farmer, was killed, and another, a druggist, was wounded when
their intended victim defended himself. Fellow Klan members por-
trayed their attempt to compel the woman's fidelity by attacking
her lover as a valiant effort to maintain "the Chastity of our la-
dies." Describing their fallen brother as a "Christian gentleman,"
they solicited the Athens Klan for funds to build a monument to
this martyr to chivalrous manhood.20
The Royston case illustrated what Klan spokesmen implied but


--- PAGE 192 ---
The Politics of Terror 157
rarely stated outright: that maintaining female chastity was a ser-
vice white men provided for other white men. To have heeded
women's own wishes would have contradicted the purpose of the
enterprise. By punishing the men with whom women defied re-
spectable standards, Klansmen tried to thwart women's own aspi-
rations. Their raids sought to exact a kind of subordinate female
behavior that ordinary economic and community pressure seemed
unable any more to ensure. The focus on men in these attacks re-
vealed graphically how the ideology of chivalry reduced women to
possessions, passive pawns men warred over. Indeed, in these
cases, the Klan made clear its belief that women's sexual comport-
ment ought to be subject to the control of men with proprietary
rights over them.
As they concentrated on immediate issues, however, Klan
floggers probably had more abstract questions at least dimly in
view. In effect, they engaged in a kind of collective fantasy of their
band of white brothers as a surrogate state to replace the one which
they had such doubts about. Perhaps it is not surprising, then,
that critics should complain of "self-constituted authorities" or
"invisible government," for that was precisely the Klan's project.
Its forays, in fact, involved the ritual enactment of the movement's
notions of reasonable government. This was particularly true
where the intended victims were white, since attacks on fellow
whites required more in the way of rationalization. Symbolically
asserting their unilateral claim to public power, floggers self-
consciously acted the parts of prosecutors, judges, and hangmen.
The rites of violence thus usually included a prior investigation, a
practice that prompted to Athens townspeople to complain that
"spying and reporting" on neighbors was turning Athens into "a
warring camp."21 While providing the proceedings with an aura of
legality, warnings that preceded violence and mock trials for the
victims also confirmed to practitioners their own righteousness
and allayed doubts about their ongoing authority over community
life.
White residents understood that the script mattered to the
Klan, which is why those who appealed to it for aid affirmed their
willingness to have their cases "investigated" before it took action.
Male petitioners acted as their own counsel in the kangaroo-court
proceedings. They sometimes buttressed their briefs with the
names of fellow white male witnesses whose word could help con-
vince the judges. When W. A. Lease wrote to the Klan for help in
retrieving his adulterous wife, he thus appended a list of endorse-


--- PAGE 193 ---
158 Content and Purpose
ments from his hometown, including those of a justice of the
peace, the postmaster, and two ministers. Similarly, C. W. Hale, a
worker at the Cord Mill outside Athens, wrote to the organization
the day after Klansmen had paid him a night-riding visit in 1925.
His point in writing was to redirect the blame for his family's prob-
lems. "The trouble," he asserted, "is with my wife." To convince
the Klan of his wife's recalcitrance, Hale secured the signatures of
three male neighbors.22 These men appreciated the common logic
that united scattered acts of intimidation and violence, and tried
to make it serve their ends.
In the attacks it mounted on outsiders to, and transgressors of, its
vision of community, in fact, the Athens Klan was hardly anoma-
lous. The vigilante practices of local Klansmen found support in
the ideology articulated by national Klan leaders and by representa-
tives of the movement in other states and localities. In forums for
members and sympathizers, Klan leaders sometimes even used vig-
ilantism as a selling point to distinguish their organization from
others. Where Klan chapters existed, the Searchlight boasted,
"there's a will ... to stamp out the sort of crime that is no less
criminal because it is without the reach of the legally constituted
authorities."23 A promotional novel used "the Vigilance Commit-
tee" and "the white caps" as synonyms for the Klan, and described
how it "avenged" various "unlawful acts" through vigilante
means. Imperial Wizard Simmons, for his part, warned that "if
needed we have a great invisible and mysterious force that will
strike terror into the hearts of lawbreakers." Lest doubts remained
about the meaning of such assertions, Simmons' successor, Hiram
Evans, proclaimed that his organization, like its Reconstruction-
era namesake, would "restor[e] control."24
But Klansmen did not use violence simply because it was effec-
tive. They used it because they believed they had a right to use it.
They derived this sense of entitlement from many different ele-
ments of their ideology, whose combined effect was to grant per-
mission for such violence. The most obvious'support for vigilan-
tism came from the Klan's reactionary populist world view.
Klansmen trusted established public institutions less than their
more elite contemporaries, whom they also suspected of ambitions
to take over the state. Rather than look to it for redress, the Klans-
men sought to build a white-sheeted militia to enforce their values
and combat threats to their standing.25


--- PAGE 194 ---
The Politics of Terror 159
Klan leaders could justify their acts under the rubric of fight-
ing "tyranny," a term they used in its original, highly specific
meaning in the republican tradition. Thus used, it denoted in-
fringement upon the rights of the property-holding, white, male
citizenry, or failure to respect their collective will. Claiming
Thomas Jefferson and Patrick Henry as his inspiration, Simmons
asserted that, throughout history, the "Ku Klux spirit" had de-
fended "freedom" in the face of "oppression," which included un-
just laws and court decisions as well as acts in civil society. In
Simmons' interpretation, this spirit had animated both the Boston
Tea Party and the Reconstruction Klan. The alleged tyranny came,
in one case, from the minions of the King; in the other case, from
the enfranchisement of propertyless former slaves. Another Klan
propagandist, the Grand Dragon of Pennsylvania, argued that selec-
tive and active intolerance was necessary to defend "liberty."26
In their effort to enlist the core rhetoric of American political
culture in the service of vigilantism, Klan leaders adapted a tradi-
tion common to earlier American vigilante movements from
whose record they took heart. These movements, according to
their leading scholar, had developed by the nineteenth century a
common "ideology of vigilantism." The concept of "popular sover-
eignty" provided the framework to justify the vigilantes' activities.
Since their government was of, by, and for the people, citizens were
entitled to act in its stead when they represented the popular will.
Indeed, vigilantes invoked the Jeffersonian notion of the citizenry's
right to defy the state if it ignored the will of the people. Vigilantes
also portrayed their victims as aggressors and their own acts as
community self-defense. Finally, the simple but eminently republi-
can motive of thrift came into play: as taxpayers, vigilante leaders
found their methods cheaper than those of established authorities.
The latter would be of no small concern when perceived crime
waves coincided with economic recession and tight government
budgets. Like the Klan, moreover, these earlier episodes were most
often practiced by those with a stake in society: propertied white
men, generally adult heads of households. Their leaders generally
came from among the elite, their rank and file from the middle
orders of the community, and their targets from the poor or lower
classes.27
In the Klan's case, middle-class standing, or at least identifica-
tion, led members to feel distinctively entitled to intervene in dis-
putes of the so-called selfish classes above and beneath them with
paramilitary means if need be. Whether America would survive the


--- PAGE 195 ---
160 Content and Purpose
"period before<us now of stress and strain," Gould explained, de-
pended on the will and organization of the middle class. "The Klan
literally is once more the embattled American farmer and artisan,"
proclaimed Evans, "coordinated into a disciplined and growing
army." The Bonapartist flavor of this language, one contemporary
French visitor to the United States recognized, was no doubt inten-
tional: " 'honest men' are those on the side of order who can be
relied upon to strike hard when necessary"—in the case of Klans-
men, "to take the law into their own hands should the government
prove inadequate." Indeed, Klan leaders proffered their movement
as "a stabilizing power" against "the unrest threatening to under-
mine our American civilization." Klan propagandists insisted that
redress could come from no quarter but theirs: political parties,
courts, churches, and private organizations were all either too cor-
rupt, too weak, or too compromised to do the job.28
Some of the clearest intimations of the Klan's intent to sup-
press labor struggle by force if necessary came from its highest na-
tional officers—those who built and directed the movement. Thus,
after invoking the specter of a workers' revolution in the United
States, Simmons said that the Klan insisted of "Americans of all
classes who now prepare their minds for civil war that they must
and shall make peace." "A vast majority of our farming people and
middle classes are ready to demand," he asserted, of "the wage-
working population . . . that America and Americanism can solve
their great problem without rebellion." "Let none mistake our pur-
pose," he warned, "we shall prevent war." In other words, if it
came to it, Klansmen themselves would intervene to suppress such
"rebellion." Simmons' successor elaborated. "The Klan has no
other purpose" than "the breaking down of all barriers between
classes" and "the creation of a united America." But, Evans said,
"vigorous and organized resistance" prevented the peaceful
achievement of this. "The next and immediate objective of the
Klan," therefore, was "to make sure that the patient will take the
medicine."29 Only force could compel labor to give up class loyal-
ties; only the Klan would administer it with the requisite determi-
nation.
Further support for that militancy came from evangelical Prot-
estantism. Defending those who had burned a black man at the
stake, the president of the Georgia State Senate in 1921 admon-
ished critics of the lynchers that "the wages of sin is death." Just
as Klansmen used tendentious readings of the Bible to corroborate
their notions of justice, so they co-opted Christianity's foremost


--- PAGE 196 ---
The Politics of Terror 161
symbol to sanctify their vigilante practices. In Athens as through-
out the nation, the paramount sign of the Klan was the burning
cross. In klavern ceremonies, it was ritually described as "the em-
blem of that sincere, unselfish devotedness of all klansmen to the
sacred purpose and principles we have espoused." In short, it
served to convince members of the righteousness of their cause.
Movement leaders exploited its authority with greatest skill at
Klan rallies. Usually held in open fields after dark, the rallies
would be illuminated by the blaze of a wooden cross, sheathed in
oil-soaked cloth and set afire at a key moment, and sometimes as
tall as seventy feet. No other source of light was permitted, not
even matches. "It is not difficult," as one minister briefly in the
Klan observed, "to see what effect such a surrounding will have
on the mind of one who is easily excited." That effect would be
compounded by the assertions of Klan speakers that this icon—a
source of terror to its victims—was a reminder to members to pat-
tern their lives after Jesus Christ, "to serve and sacrifice for the
right."30
When Klan leaders invoked Christ as the model members
should aspire to, they hardly had in mind liberal Christians' Prince
of Peace. Rather, the man Klansmen were to emulate was the po-
tent and vengeful Redeemer who "purged the temple with a whip
of chords." Evans thus disputed "the usual picture" of Christ as
"effeminate"; the Bible showed, rather, his essential "virility." "Je-
sus," said Evans, "was fit": "a robust, toil-marked young man who
had conserved both His physical and mental strength." American
Protestantism, for its part, was "certainly neither soft nor lax."
Rather, it was "a thing of rugged steel . . . forged in the terrific
stress ... of wresting a continent from savages and from the wil-
derness." Only "the red-blooded and virile" could rise to the chal-
lenge of Christian America.31
Klansmen fused this conception of a virile, manly faith with
the long tradition of Protestant nationalism in the United States
that designated Americans as God's "chosen" people to produce a
fearsome, military rendition of Protestantism. It was, after all, an
axiom needing no proof to Klan members that Christianity was
a "white man's religion" that presumed "white supremacy." The
organization's leaders frequently described themselves as a Protes-
tant "army," and used the language of "battle" to describe their
mission against their "enemies." "Onward Christian Soldiers" be-
came a Klan anthem. Their "fighting instinct," Evans boasted, was
the pre-eminent "racial characteristic" of American men.32


--- PAGE 197 ---
162 Content and Purpose
The ardent masculinism at work here gained force from an-
other critical legitimating mechanism in vigilantism: men's right
to control and protect their households. Republicanism's convic-
tion that the future of the republic lay in orderly families and virtu-
ous citizens became, for the Klan, a justification for the white,
male citizenry to compel obedience to their moral standards on
their own when the state failed them. Time and again, Klan spoke-
speople asserted that extralegal forays were needed to defend their
homes, just as their predecessors in the Reconstruction era had
needed to protect the home and white womanhood. "If the law
will not protect our homes, we must," proclaimed an Oklahoma
minister in defense of the Klan in 1922. "These are strong words,"
he admitted, "but the times call for stern methods." "The reason
the Ku Klux Klan have organized is because our homes have been
threatened," a Klan-affiliated evangelist in Colorado concurred.
Georgia's Grand Dragon referred to morals-related night-riding as
the Klan's "purity of homes" drive; no clear boundaries differenti-
ated legal from illegal methods.33
The persuasiveness of home protection as a rationale for vigi-
lantism came from the way it blended republican premises with
notions of male honor. And male honor, with its associated rheto-
ric of chivalry, was central to the allure of the second Klan. The
word "HONOR" formed the foundation for the seal of the Imperial
Palace; above it stood two Klan "Knights" on rearing stallions. As
a "Knight" of the KKK, each member was bound to the code of
chivalry, hence the "protection" of white womanhood. Indeed, the
member was to be "a MAN who values HONOR more than life."
In this exaltation of honor, the Klan tapped deep roots. The impera-
tives of honor had supported the rule of Southern patriarchs, both
planters and yeomen, over their dependents in the nineteenth-
century South. Slaves, male and female, and white women and
children were denied the honor all free white male proprietors
could lay claim to. "Honor" thus, as historian Edward Ayers con-
cluded, "presupposes undisguised hierarchy."34
It also presupposed a propensity for violence. Offended honor
acted as a hair trigger for many Klansmen. A man's home was his
castle, after all; it "must be protected," by violence if necessary.
When a man's control over "his" women and children was chal-
lenged or his honor affronted in some other manner, particularly
where it involved female sexuality, the price of maintaining that
honor was personal violence. Honor thus contained a built-in im-
perative to violence, since a man only possessed honor insofar as


--- PAGE 198 ---
The Politics of Terror 163
his equals acknowledged it, To seek redress from the state was to
concede the loss of honor and accept public shame. A man who
could not defend his own honor was no man at all. One writer in
Texas demonstrated this logic when he demanded of an anti-Klan
judge what he "would do if some wretch should insult [his] daugh-
ter." The writer inquired whether the judge "would prosecute or
. . . have the real manhood to make it a personal matter—to take
the law into your own hands?"35 Where honor was involved, "real
men" spurned the courts and sought personal vengeance.
In Klan quarters, the line between honor and sadism easily
wore thin, as fervent masculinism sharpened the proclivity to vio-
lence. While Klansmen ridiculed the "sissy," they held up "real
he-men" as role models.36 Some Klan floggers evidently took real
pleasure in their power over their terrified victims and in the vio-
lence they inflicted. Again and again, Klansmen and their sympa-
thizers described night-riding as going "to have some fun." In this
"fun," sexual currents frequently gave violence an erotic charge.
More than a few Klan flogging teams stripped their victims or
pulled down their pants and underwear for the whippings, which
sometimes continued until blood flowed freely—in one case, even
after the terrified victim had defecated all over himself. In so sham-
ing victims, these rituals of degradation thereby also symbolically
divested them of power and exorcised the threat they had posed to
the traditions Klansmen would uphold.37
The view that vigilantism expressed the Klan's core beliefs and
values also finds support in the way that scattered episodes of Klan
vigilantism conformed to common patterns. For reasons that will
become clearer later, it is impossible to estimate reliably either the
frequency of the incidents or the relative proportions of the alleged
offenses precipitating them. But, according to knowledgeable con-
temporaries, the victims appeared to be evenly divided between
blacks and whites. "While the flogging of white persons has re-
ceived the major part of newspaper attention," commented the CIC
in 1927, "the victims of flogging have probably been equally di-
vided between whites and Negroes."38 If the data do not permit
exact calculations, they do clarify how vigilantism served to defend
older relations of power and to compel obedience to lower-middle-
class white codes of conduct. Evidence of this can be found in the
way the Klan attacked different social groups for different reasons.
Native-born whites, in other parts of the United States as in
Athens, were most often flogged for morals offenses. As the leading
subjects in the Klan's vision of society, adult white men also num-


--- PAGE 199 ---
164 Content and Purpose
bered heavily among the victims, attacked for offenses such as
bootlegging, adultery with other men's wives or daughters, failure
to support their families, chronic abuse of their womenfolk, or un-
willingness to marry young women whom they'd had intercourse
with. Family values converged with fiscal conservatism in Klans-
men's worry about the waning of men's sense of duty to their fami-
lies. In Athens and across the nation, Klansmen engaged in extra-
legal efforts to compel delinquent husbands to support their wives
and children, tracing the whereabouts of deserters, issuing them
warnings, and flogging those who failed to comply.39
White women, whom the Klan's gender ideology tended to por-
tray as passive appendages to men, usually suffered the order's vio-
lence only when they acted independently in ways subversive of
this ideology. Their offenses included selling whiskey, adultery,
prostitution, and severely neglecting their children. White chil-
dren, whom Klansmen accorded less moral responsibility than
women, were almost never flogged by the Klan; instead, it held
adults responsible for their indiscretions.40
Yet, whereas the Klan used vigilantism to buttress rigidly de-
marcated gender roles among whites, it almost never attacked
blacks for intraracial morals offenses. The only morals allegations
it appears the Klan flogged blacks for were interracial infractions,
such as selling moonshine to whites or having sex or marrying
across the color line.41 Since one function of the Klan's conserva-
tive moral code was to solidify white supremacy by constituting
"respectable" whites as a cohesive community distinct from
blacks, the order's lack of interest in regulating morality within
the black community made sense.
Indeed, the Klan worked diligently to deny blacks access to
white models of gender. Klansmen made no pretense of offering
even nominal protection to black women; they, like immigrant
women, were by definition beyond the pale of the Klan's vaunted
chivalry. Like black men, they, too, could be intimidated, kicked,
beaten, or whipped; not even old age or pregnancy would shield
them. The order also tried to deprive black men of the very signs
of masculinity it encouraged white men to display. Thus, Klans-
men were liable to attack black men for standing up for their rights
as citizens, for amassing property, for protecting their kinfolk, or
for defending their homes.42
Indeed, most Klan attacks on African Americans stemmed
from their assertions of their own rights or defense of those of
other blacks. Efforts to register and vote by Southern blacks partic-


--- PAGE 200 ---
The Politics of Terror 165
ularly irked the Klan. It employed parades and vigilante violence
to "intimidate" prospective black voters and "make them more
amenable to influence/' in the euphemistic words of one former
Klan leader. S. S. Mincey, a seventy-year-old black Republican
leader in south central Georgia, was thus kidnapped and flogged to
death in 1930 for his political activities; others received threats
because of their protests against segregation or their participation
in the NAACP.43
Resistance to laboring on whites' terms—referred to by the
Klan as "failure to work"—could also result in persecution. Still
other African Americans suffered Klan vengeance for offering eco-
nomic competition to whites or having achieved success on their
own. The order set fire to black businesses and drove their owners
from Waycross, Georgia, in 1922; it whipped black farm owners in
other parts of the state to make them sell their property at a loss.44
In Springfield, Missouri, local Klansmen threatened a black physi-
cian on the grounds that he was performing abortions on white
women, a baseless charge to camouflage their real complaint: the
man's wife was a leading NAACP activist, and together the couple
had "accumulated good property."45
Finally, no matter how upright their morals, whites who defied
the Klan's injunctions to class harmony might also suffer its wrath.
As early as 1918, local Klan chapters burned crosses, kidnapped
and beat or flogged union leaders, and ran activists out of town to
prevent labor organizing and strikes.46 By 1923, an informed jour-
nalist could conclude that "the Klan is nearly everywhere and al-
ways an enemy of organized labor." Its record led even the politi-
cally timorous American Federation of Labor to adopt resolutions
condemning the activities of masked organizations and the Ku
Klux Klan specifically.47
But if the argument so far advanced is true—if vigilante violence
was Klan thought in action—then one must wonder why more evi-
dence of such activities is not easily accessible. After all, it might
be argued, even the hundreds of episodes reported in the national
press seem few compared to the numbers enrolled in the Klan.
Some recent studies have argued essentially this point: the Klan of
this era, the authors say, was not particularly violent. Indeed, they
explicitly distinguish it on these grounds from the Klans built dur-
ing Reconstruction and the civil rights movement.48
The problems with such arguments are many. First of all, they


--- PAGE 201 ---
166 Content and Purpose
display the same fallacious emphasis on quantification that led a
few historians in the early 1970s to play down the extent and sig-
nificance of whipping as a means of control by slaveholders in the
antebellum South. As Herbert Gutman pointed out in a biting cri-
tique of such efforts, not every slave had to be whipped regularly
for the owners to make their will felt. Similarly, an episode of Klan
flogging affected, not just the individual victim, but every member
of the community who learned of it. Evoking this violence as they
did, even warnings could instill sufficient terror to make people
change their behavior.49 More generally, though, the problem with
attempts to characterize the second Klan as nonviolent is their
epistomological innocence: their assumption that, if evidence of
violence does not appear in the usual sources—newspapers in par-
ticular—then it must not have occurred. Such interpretations have
also tended to accept Klan leaders' public proclamations against
"lawlessness."
Klan leaders did, after all, repeatedly deny that their movement
engaged in extralegal activity, and the historian cannot simply ig-
nore these disavowals.50 But to accept them at face value would be
naive and dangerous. The same men, after all, regularly denied—
sometimes in the same breath—that the Reconstruction-era Klan
was violent or that their own organization was racist or anti-
Semitic. The occasions of such denials were also important. They
usually came after the public revelation of some vigilante activity
attributed to the Klan. As part of an effort to evade prosecution,
the disavowals were obviously self-interested.51
A close reading of the wording of the denials suggests further
cause for skepticism. Klan speakers and publications often purpose-
fully qualified their affirmations of respect for the law. A guide
to organizing Klan chapters spoke of how the Klan's investigating
committee should aid law enforcement personnel "in the proper
performance of their legal duties." The Klan's Constitution bound
members "to protect and defend the [U.S.] Constitution . . . and
all laws passed in conformity thereto, and to protect the States and
the people thereof from all invasion of their rights from any
sources whatsover." In other words, some laws were constitu-
tional, therefore worthy of defense; others, it would seem, could be
defied in the name of the people. Which was which, presumably,
was up to the Klan.52
Here the exclusivity of the Klan's vision of American citizen-
ship played a critical enabling role. For the movement did not be-
lieve that anyone other than native-born, Protestant white people


--- PAGE 202 ---
The Politics of Terror 167
had the right to a say in American law-making; blacks, Jews, and
Catholics had no place in public affairs. This is what Klan leaders
meant when they said their movement had only "one purpose":
"to put the Government of the United States into the hands of
none but American citizens." Laws passed in the interests of other
groups could thus be represented as necessarily illegitimate, while
regulation of the activities of such "aliens" by true citizens was by
definition lawful. African Americans were particularly vulnerable
in this line of reasoning because the assumption that they were
outsiders to American democracy and unworthy of due process of
law was so ingrained in the dominant culture.53 Philosophically,
then, Klansmen would have had little difficulty justifying vigilan-
tism as law-abiding conduct.
In practical terms, their organization was also well suited to
supporting and protecting such activities. Why don masks and
robes if there was nothing to hide? "It is not logical," as one former
member observed, "to believe that if the intent and purpose is good
and for the general welfare, the members will be ashamed, or
afraid, to be known." The order's commitment to strict confiden-
tiality could also serve clandestine ends. Members were warned
to keep quiet, especially about "Secret Work." "Just remember,"
concluded one such counsel, "even a sucker would not get caught
if he kept his mouth shut."54 Nothing was left to chance. Members
were tutored in "complete obligation," "secrecy and obedience,"
and "loyalty." As one manual for organizers bluntly put the code:
"he who violates the standard ought to be made to pay the price."
The warnings were not idle. When Klan secrets leaked in Athens,
the organization saw the danger as sufficiently serious that it hired
a private investigator to find out how and by whom. Those who
violated their oath of loyalty to the Klan could suffer expulsion,
social ostracism, and sometimes violence or even the threat of as-
sassination.55
Some evidence exists, moreover, that top Klan leaders actively
fostered vigilante activities. Former Klan members reported that
officials from the Imperial Palace—Simmons and Evans included—
tutored regional warlords in the how-tos of "rough stuff." For their
part, members of the Simmons block, once deposed, charged that
their former organization took upon itself "the purpose of regulat-
ing men and women at the whipping post, blackmail, murder, and
arson."56 The testimony of disgruntled members should of course
be handled with care. Still, the charges were remarkable both for
their unanimity—despite coming from widely scattered parts of the


--- PAGE 203 ---
168 Content and Purpose
country—and for their singularity. It is difficult to imagine the
same things being said of any other contemporary organization, no
matter how much it had disappointed its members.
Similarities in the methods employed by Klan floggers in differ-
ent areas lend further credibility to accusations that the practice
was institutionalized. The commonest pattern was for the Klan to
discover the offending behavior either through its own
"intelligence "-gathering apparatus or through a complaint made by
a third party. The case would then be turned over the chapter Klo-
kann, or "investigating committee" head. If this body found the
accused guilty, the first "corrective" act was usually a warning de-
signed to intimidate: a note, a night-time visit, or a cross-burning
or parade at their home. If the offenders failed to oblige, a group of
Klansmen, often robed and wearing black masks—known inter-
nally as "the wrecking crew"—would abduct them from their
homes under the cover of night. After taking them to a secluded
site, usually a spot outside city limits, Klansmen would flog their
victims with as many as fifty lashes with a thick leather strap.57
Scattered evidence also suggests, however, that not all Klan
members had access to knowledge of these activities. Some
Atlanta-area members said that they had belonged for several years
before they became aware of the local "secret committee" that car-
ried out flogging operations. The Exalted Cyclops was fully aware
of its activities, however; he appointed its chief—sometimes a dif-
ferent one for each action—and passed on complaints for action.
The members of the committee were known only to its head—who
drafted them—and the Exalted Cyclops.58
On the rare occasions when Klan members were indicted or
their methods exposed, Klan leaders followed what seemed a pre-
fabricated script. As soon as arrests were made, national and state
Klan officials set to work to thwart prosecution with public denials
of culpability and efforts to suppress testimony and destroy evi-
dence. While publicly condemning extralegal violence, the Klan
quickly hired lawyers for its accused members. Its representatives
also tried to intimidate witnesses, and sometimes journalists and
even judges as well. The Imperial Office also sent its own "investi-
gators" to stymie inquiry in the guise of aiding it. If a case did
reach trial, Klan officials instructed subpoenaed members to lie on
the stand—as they themselves did to the press—and tried to ensure
juries stacked with their fellows.59 Here honor worked as insula-
tion; historically, the rule of honor had helped to solidify military
bodies against civilian interference. If none of these subterfuges


--- PAGE 204 ---
The Politics of Tenor 169
succeeded, the Klan might protect itself with the specious claim
that the local "secret" committees acted autonomously, without
the formal authorization of the parent order.60
These methods almost never failed. So efficacious were they
that the governor of Oklahoma found he had to declare martial law
and institute military tribunals in order to successfully prosecute
Klan vigilantism. But he soon found himself impeached by the
Klan-dominated state legislature. Not until 1987, in fact, was the
Ku Klux Klan as a body ever successfully held accountable for the
violence its members perpetrated in service to its goals.61
Seen in this light, the relative lack of documentation of Klan
vigilantism is much less puzzling. Indeed, the gaps in the record
appear rather as yet another illustration of the Klan's remarkable
power. That power included the capacity to shape—and distort—
the historical record by keeping victims silent and journalists and
courts at bay. Indeed, the Klan seems to have practiced violence
most commonly where its members could get away with it—and,
thus, where evidence of it would be least likely to survive.
Klan leaders were not stupid; they took care to prevent haphaz-
ard violence.62 To have engaged in vigilantism wherever they had
members would have been to invite destruction of their move-
ment. After all, there were parts of the country where its chapters
could not even assemble publicly without risking counterattack. In
many areas of the Northeast, for example, Catholics in particular
mobilized fierce counter-demonstrations against the Klan.63 In
such areas, Klan violence would have invited physical reprisal.
Such people also cast ballots and sat on juries. Klans in areas in
which Catholics, African Americans, or Jews were a significant
part of the electorate, or where white non-members became
aroused, might find themselves facing hostile courts or being
subjected to restrictive laws, such as the anti-mask legislation
proposed in several states and passed in a few.64 In short, where
Klansmen and their sympathizers were in a minority, to have an-
tagonized opponents would have invited bad publicity, prosecu-
tion, political battles, and possible retaliation.
A successful campaign of terror required conditions found in a
different kind of setting: a restricted electorate, compliant politi-
cians, a cowed press, and the active complicity of law enforcement
officials. This environment was most common in the South. Hence
it is not surprising that Southern Klans practiced the lion's share
of vigilantism.65 They did it because they could. In the South, par-
ticularly in small towns and rural areas, the potential gains from


--- PAGE 205 ---
170 Content and Purpose
vigilantism outweighed the costs. The groups who most barred the
Klan's way in other areas of the country lacked power here: immi-
grants, because of their small numbers; workers, because of the
Southern ruling class's fierce opposition to labor organization; and
blacks, because of the coercive apparatus of Jim Crow. The only
force left with any power to oppose the Klan, then, was the small
fraction of the Southern elite that disdained it, men and women
not notable for stiff resistance to injustice.
Operating in such an environment, many Southern public of-
ficials, perhaps most, gave tacit endorsement to Klan vigilantism,
especially in the unsettled years immediately following the war. As
a result, those responsible were seldom indicted and almost never
convicted. In Georgia and Alabama, for example, governors Clifford
Walker and Bibb Graves conspired from their executive offices to
avert legal punishment for their fellow Klan members. Walker
commuted the sentence of one of the only Georgia Klansmen in-
dicted for vigilante activity. For his part, Walker's predecessor,
Thomas Hardwick, assigned to the investigation of one flogging a
sheriff and a police chief the victim had already identified as
among his assailants.66
Some evidence in fact suggests that the Klan enrolled or en-
listed the support of law enforcement officials—police, prosecutors,
justices of the peace, and judges—before initiating vigilante activ-
ity, presumably to stave off indictments.67 Such men, after all, had
a history in the South at least of habitual violence against blacks
who asserted their rights. Their off-duty practices were but one end
of a continuum of repression; "extralegal force supplements and
supports the legal action if it is considered uncertain or inade-
quate." Imperial Wizard Simmons even stated once, in defending
the Klan from charges of vigilantism against blacks, that "there is
never a stand taken unless an officer of the law supervise[s] K.K."
In cases that did come to light, time after time it surfaced also that
police or other law enforcement personnel had either participated
in the violence, suggested that the Klan undertake it, belonged to
the order, or condoned its activities more indirectly.68 Even South-
ern police who did not actually belong themselves were unlikely
to disapprove of Klan violence. "They liked them," one Atlanta
non-member on the police force recalled of his fellow officers' atti-
tudes to the Klan; "they didn't have nothing against the Ku Klux."
Some victims, having recognized law enforcement officials among
their assailants, understandably believed prosecution futile.69
It was. Since particularly in less populous rural counties,


--- PAGE 206 ---
The Politics of Terror 171
native-born white property-holders (those likeliest to sympathize
with the Klan even if they did not belong) generally staffed the
juries, the chances of conviction were scant in any case. Moreover,
the few indicted Klansmen could look forward, in some states, to
having fellow members decide their appeals in state supreme
courts. "Experience seems to indicate," observed the Commission
on Interracial Cooperation in 1927, "that in most American com-
munities the members of lynching or flogging bands need have lit-
tle or no fear of prosecution."70
The rarity of prosecution resulted also from the vulnerability of
the victims singled out by Klan floggers. Black residents especially
appeared convinced that efforts to seek legal redress locally might
only bring worse trouble upon them. Some would appeal to na-
tional organizations in Washington, D.C., without even bothering
to try to obtain relief from local authorities. Their dismal appraisal
of the prospects for redress through ordinary channels was well-
founded in a state like Georgia, where addressing a black female
witness with the respectful title of "Miss" could land a black man
in jail for contempt of court.71
While black victims of the Klan had no hope of justice, most
white victims had little more. Indeed, "through fear or shame,"
few of the Klan's white victims reported to legal authorities.72 "It
is not considered an honor to be whipped by masked men," as one
sardonic Georgian put it in 1927. A North Carolinian opponent of
the Klan later explained that much of its support derived from a
public consensus that "generally speaking the [white] people that
they punished had a whole lot lacking in their character and they
deserved some punishment." According to him, non-Klan white
residents would point to people "leading these immoral lives, and
they've been doing it for ten years and the children out there are
suffering and nothing's being done about it. So the Klan did some-
thing about it; they put the whip to them."73 Neighbors like these
were unlikely to indict or .convict.
The most instructive illustration, however, of the factors con-
spiring to limit the documentary record of Klan violence comes
from the case of a multiple lynching in Aiken, South Carolina. As
a lynching, it was unusual as an episode of Klan vigilantism in the
1920s, which most commonly involved intimidation or violence
short of murder. Yet, as a case of uncommon crime that would
seem difficult to cover up, its resolution speaks eloquently about
how less noteworthy incidents would be handled. The case was
that of the Lowmans, a black family who lived in the countryside


--- PAGE 207 ---
172 Content and Purpose
outside Aiken. In the spring of 1926, a sheriff and his deputies
came to the Lowman home to arrest one of the sons on suspicion—
later proved baseless—of selling whiskey. Finding him missing, the
sheriff hit the young man's sister, Bertha, in the mouth; when Mrs.
Lowman came to her daughter's rescue, he shot her through the
heart. Hearing the shots, the Lowman men ran in from the fields.
A scuffle and weapon fire ensued, in which the sheriff was killed.
The bullet most likely came from the gun of one of his own depu-
ties, but the three Lowman siblings were arrested all the same. A
"farcical" trial in a courtroom packed with armed Klan members
resulted in death sentences for the two brothers and life imprison-
ment for their sister. Outraged, a black lawyer from Columbia,
South Carolina, appealed the case to the State Supreme Court and
won them a retrial. One of the brothers was acquitted as a result.
Upon hearing of the acquittal, a mob began to gather in Aiken.
Knowing what was coming, white men and women from as far as
ninety miles away began to converge on the site. The mob marched
on the jail and carried the prisoners outside town to the site where
the crowd, now numbering almost a thousand, had gathered.
There, Bertha Lowman "begged so piteously for her life that mem-
bers of the mob had a hard time killing her." But they did. The
mob leaders freed Bertha and her brothers and told them to run—
only to fire dozens of shots into their backs when they did, to the
glee of the crowd.
No one was indicted for the willful murder of Clarence, Da-
mon, and Bertha Lowman. The coroner's jury charged the crime to
"parties unknown." The governor paid lip service to the need to
apprehend the guilty parties, but did nothing. Investigating for the
NAACP, Walter White found out why. The dead sheriff and the
deputies who first visited the Lowman home were all Klansmen.
So was the new sheriff, who handed over his prisoners over to the
mob without any struggle, and the Aiken attorney—and newly
elected state representative—at whose office the murder was
planned. The mob itself was organized, led, and staffed by the
Klan—although it tried to enlist non-members so as to be able to
maintain later, if need be, that the lynching "was not a Klan af-
fair." White supplied the governor with the names, addresses, and
occupations of the killers in the mob, all of whom belonged to
the Klan. Fourteen of the twenty-four men were some kind of law
enforcement personnel. Among the spectators at the lynching were
the president and vice-president of one local manufacturing com-
pany, superintendents from three plants, and an overseer from an-


--- PAGE 208 ---
The Politics of Terror 173
other—along with three of the governor's own cousins. Not sur-
prisingly, in these circumstances, the lynchers were never
prosecuted. That fact alone should convince us of the dangers of
uncritical reliance on public sources in writing the history of the
Klan. If Walter White had not investigated, historians today would
never have heard of the Lowman case, much less known of the
leading part the Klan played in it. The official record woulcj have
had us conclude that the culprits were "parties unknown."74
Rarely does a story so vividly illustrate the maxim that history is
written by the victors.
In short, the decision about whether to use violence was for
the Klan a tactical one, one answered in the affirmative most often
south of the Mason-Dixon line. Yet, even in areas where it seemed
too risky to try at the moment, the possibility of violence at some
later date loomed. For Klan culture generated a propensity to vigi-
lantism like an acorn does an oak; all the seed needed to grow was
nourishment from good soil. Vigilante violence was the concen-
trated expression of that culture, of the brutal determination to
maintain inherited hierarchies of race, class, and gender that Klans-
men sought, to conceal with a mask of chivalry. "The only reason
that men are not tarred and feathered, whipped and driven from
their homes and deprived of their constitutional rights in Ohio,"
observed one astute contemporary, "is because the klan is not
strong enough. When it is," he predicted, "those things will
come."75


--- PAGE 209 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 210 ---
III
MEANINGS


--- PAGE 211 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 212 ---
8
Conclusion:
The Second Klan
in Wider Perspective
This story should convince us of one thing: that there are not
two Germanys, a good one and a bad one, but only one. . . .
Wicked Germany is merely good Germany gone astray, good
Germany in misfortune, in guilt, and ruin. For that reason it is
quite impossible for one born there simply to renounce the
wicked, guilty Germany and to declare, "I am the good, the
noble, the just Germany in the white robe; I leave it to you to
exterminate the wicked one."
—Thomas Mann1
The Klan never did become strong enough to attempt in Ohio what
it had in Georgia. Within a decade of its founding, the Knights of
the Ku Klux Klan was on the wane. Nationally, the Klan's power
crested in the years 1924 and 1925. With state and local variations,
it began to flag thereafter. By 1926, observers around the country
were reporting smaller numbers and dwindling influence.2 Follow-
ing a brief revival when Catholic New Yorker Al Smith ran for
President, the decline became terminal in 1928. A later, short-lived
resuscitation in the mid-'thirties proved insufficient to keep credi-
tors at bay. With initiation and dues receipts dwindling, Klan offi-
cers sold the Imperial Palace in 1936. Eight years later, the order
quietly dissolved, unable to pay the taxes it had evaded over the
years.3
177


--- PAGE 213 ---
178 Meanings
As in other parts of the country, in Georgia the Klan began to
ebb after mid-decade. In 1926, it proved unable to unseat Superior
Court Judge James K. Hines, a Klan critic whom it had declared
war upon. Nor did it prevent the state from going to Al Smith in
the presidential election of 1928. One observer estimated that from
156,000 in 1925, the Klan's membership in Georgia plummeted to
1,400 in 1930. If the figures exaggerated the extent of the decline,
they nonetheless captured its pace. During the 1928 presidential
campaign, the Athens chapter experienced a brief revival; one hun-
dred lapsed members sought reinstatement, and almost that many
new ones signed up. But thereafter, the numbers resumed their
downward slide. By 1930, Klansmen had given up their headquar-
ters in downtown Athens, and met instead at the Masonic Hall in
nearby Bogart.4
Historians have explained the demise of the Klan in a variety
of ways, usually a combination. Many have pointed to internal
problems such as hypocritical leaders and factionalism. Others
have cited effective opposition from the press, civic leaders, or resi-
dents in particular locales. Some have argued that the very success
of Klan politicians in winning office bred demoralization, as once
in power they failed to furnish the dramatic changes they had
promised. Similarly, some point to the subsiding of local problems
such as crime, or to how experience exposed the falsity of Klan
claims.5 One writer has even suggested that the Klan's very nature
doomed it.6
If that particular assertion seems wishful thinking, many of the
other observations are apt. But as full explanations, they beg some
important questions. Opposition from the press and local elites
may well have spurred decline in some areas, for example, but why
did a corresponding decline take place in areas without such indig-
enous opposition? Similarly, the notion that the Klan so contra-
dicted core American values that defeat was foreordained runs
aground in the face of evidence showing, not only a great deal in
the way of shared values, but also a lack of contrition in Klan
members even years later. In interviews, many affirmed their will-
ingness to "do it again" if they felt conditions warranted a resur-
gence of their movement.7
But the main problem with prevailing accounts of the Klan's
decline is the parochial vision that serves as their starting point.
State or local in conception, almost none of the scholarly studies
on the Klan, particularly those in recent years, examines the Amer-
ican movement in its international setting.8 They make no effort


--- PAGE 214 ---
The Second Klan in Wider Perspective 179
to come to terms with the Klan as an expression of what European
historian Arno Mayer refers to as "the General Crisis and Thirty
Years' War of the twentieth century." Bounded on one end by the
First World War and on the other by the Second World War, this
epoch was marked by pervasive social change and political crisis,
above all by the contest between right and left, "the ideological
struggle," as Mayer sums it up, "between fascism and bolshevism."
That match ultimately yielded the regimes of Mussolini in Italy,
of Franco in Spain, and of Hitler in Germany.9 Any account of the
second Klan that fails to consider it in the light of these contempo-
raneous movements is bound to yield a limited understanding of
its place in history.
If historians have largely overlooked the common ground occupied
by European fascist movements and the Klan of the 1920s, many
contemporaries did not. "A 'legitimate offspring of the Facista
movement in Italy' " was how small farmers in Oklahoma's
Farmer-Labor Union described the Klan of their day; Atlanta's
black newspaper referred to Klansmen as "American Fascist!."
Some pundits concurred. "Fascist in inspiration" in the view of a
contemporary French writer sojourning in the United States, the
Klan was "mob rule in favour of order." Arthur Corning White also
argued that the Klan was a homegrown variant of European fas-
cism. He observed that, unlike traditional elite-based conserva-
tism, Mussolini's movement and the Klan both had their roots in
the petite bourgeoisie. The Klan's largely middle-class members,
White argued, were roused in good part by a deep-seated economic
malaise. They saw in the Klan a force to end the debilitating con-
flict between labor and capital, by violent means if need be. "That
the Klan in the long run will resort to brickbats instead of ballots,"
White concluded, "seems as certain as the setting sun."10
Some Klan spokespeople recognized the kinship between their
movement and those of Mussolini and Hitler. The Searchlight in
1922 described Mussolini's rise to power as "a sign of political
health in Italy and a guarantee against the crazy and experimental
forms of government with which Russia is afflicted." The Imperial
Night Hawk, for its part, asserted that Mussolini's fight to crush
"communism and anarchy" was "an entirely worthy cause." A
California Klan minister coupled the Klan as "a nationalistic
movement" with "the Black Shirts of Italy and the Grey Shirts of
Germany." The Reverend Charles Jefferson of New York stated the


--- PAGE 215 ---
180 Meanings
relationship most aptly. In postwar Italy, he said, "things got into
a mess" and the established politicians flailed ineffectually until
"a strong man" stepped in and took charge. "The Ku Klux Klan,"
he explained, "is the Mussolini of America," the organizational ex-
pression of the "vast volume of discontent in this country with
things as they are."11
When, after the onset of the Great Depression, organizations
emerged in the United States that openly identified with fascists
across the sea, moreover, the Klan came to their aid. Many Klan
figures cooperated with and helped build these organizations, in-
cluding the Georgia Klan leaders Walter A. Sims, Caleb Ridley,
J. O. Wood, and James R. Venable. The reason for the crossover is
not hard to find. The Mussolini-inspired American Order of Fas-
cisti, or Black Shirts, which enlisted several of these Klan stal-
warts, proclaimed its commitment to white supremacy, its opposi-
tion to both communism and conventional conservatism, and its
dedication to organizing "the great middle class." It campaigned to
solve white unemployment by taking jobs from blacks, and de-
fended racist murders. Arthur Bell, Grand Dragon of the New Jer-
sey Klan for two decades and later vice-president of the Nazi-
identified German-American Bund, characterized the relationship
between the two thus in 1940: "The principles of the Bund and the
principles of the Klan are the same."12
Much more than American historians have realized, in fact,
Klan ideology shared common features with its Nazi contempo-
rary.13 Like the Klan, Hitler embraced a reactionary populism that
blended outspoken resentment of established elites with vitriolic
anti-communism. Regularly exaggerating the power and prospects
of the left, he was obsessed with destroying the organized workers'
movement. Yet his was a counterrevolutionary ideology for a mod-
ern age of mass politics. National Socialism spoke in the name
of the middle classes, of the "masses" as against the "classes" it
excoriated for pulling society apart. Like the Klan's criticisms of
America's economic system, his attacks on Germany's were super-
ficial, and his positive proposals vague. Sidetracking basic ques-
tions of class power, they focussed on exploitative relations of ex-
change; in particular, the alleged machinations of finance capital
and the corrupting reign of "Mammon."14
His detestation of Marxism as "the concentrated intellectual
essence of today's universal world-concept," led Hitler to reject
much of the rest of the heritage of the French revolution and the
Enlightenment. In place of reason, he exalted passion and advo-


--- PAGE 216 ---
The Second Klan in Wider Perspective 181
cated a propaganda geared to the emotions. He recognized and ex-
ploited the power of symbolism and such rituals as torchlight pa-
rades. In place of careful analysis, he pushed conspiratorial,
explanations. In his view, "part of a great leader's genius was to
make even widely separated adversaries appear as if they belonged
to one category."15 In place of a parliamentary democracy he de-
clared mired in corruption and soft on communism, he called for a
strong man to take charge with a plebiscitary popular mandate. In
place of the rule of law, he substituted the calculated paramilitary
terror of the Brown Shirts. As one German historian wrote: "The
Nazi answer to the problem of class division was to abolish its
expression by force." And, finally, in place of the notion of funda-
mental human equality, "the idea of the majority," Hitler substi-
tuted "the aristocratic principle within the people": strident na-
tionalism and murderous racism.16
Indeed, as they were for the Klan, nationalism and racialism
were National Socialism's means of countering the class divisions
it so abhorred. Race was posited as the wellspring of human culture
and history. Demonizing Jews, in particular, as the source of all the
purported evils of modernity—from materialism, to Bolshevism, to
changes in sexual mores and mass culture—Hitler positioned them
at the core of his revolutionary counterrevolutionism, a lightning
rod to give it mass appeal.17
Like the Klan's, the Nazis' anti-Semitism was steeped in sexual
themes. It both preyed on and promoted anxieties about changes in
women's roles and sexuality. As part and parcel of their antipathy
to modern social relations and attitudes, the Nazis execrated the
transformations occurring in gender roles and relations between
the sexes and generations and upheld conventional family values.
Hitler denounced the selfishness and sensuality of the New
Woman and urged upon German womanhood a nostalgic version
of the nineteenth-century respectable middle-class housewife, an
intensely familial and communally oriented woman who always
put the needs of her husband and children ahead of her own. Push-
ing women to make motherhood the center of their lives, he also
condemned birth control and promised to outlaw abortion. And, all
the homoerotic undercurrents flowing among his band of brothers
notwithstanding, he condemned homosexuality as evidence of
modern degeneracy.18
Not only in its world view, but also in its dynamics as a social
movement, the Klan had much in common with German National
Socialism and Italian Fascism. All three movements emerged from


--- PAGE 217 ---
182 Meanings
the crucible of world war, and grew in times of economic difficulty,
class polarization, and political impasse. Each mobilized men and
women from a broad spectrum of the population, but had particular
attraction for the petite bourgeoisie. Notwithstanding their popular
mass basis, however, each of these movements also enlisted the
active backing or toleration of important members of the estab-
lished elite, and gained strength from the legitimacy thus be-
stowed. They also exerted particular appeal for members of the po-
lice and armed forces, who in turn provided aid and cover for the
movements' extralegal terror. Finally, all three movements had
similar organizational styles in their conscious emphasis on the
irrational, on liturgical rituals, and on public displays of power.19
Of course, to highlight the family resemblance is not to assert
that these movements were similar in all respects. Italian fascism,
for example, did not rely on anti-Semitism and other racialism the
way that the Klan and National Socialism did.20 And the Klan dif-
fered in some important ways from those two prototypical fascist
movements. Not least, the Klan's class politics were more ambigu-
ous. Here the Klan bore the marks of its birthplace. Operating in a
nation with much lower levels of working-class organization and
consciousness, the Klan sometimes even posed as the friend of "or-
ganized labor" in the face of common enemies.21 More commonly,
the Klan took advantage of the deep racial, ethnic, and skill divi-
sions in the American working class to advance its project, espe-
cially in the South. It preyed on the narrow craft-union conscious-
ness of native-born, Protestant, white, skilled workers in efforts to
turn them against black, foreign-born, and radical workers. And it
managed to win the support of some, most notably in conservative
Jim Crow locals that, like the Klan, opposed industrial unionism.22
The Klan's greatest successes among trade unionists, in fact,
tended to follow disastrous defeats, sometimes involving strike-
breakers from other ethnic groups, which left some native-born
white workers casting about for scapegoats and alternatives to
class-based politics.23
The particular constellation of class and race in the American
South also made for some unusual conflicts within the Klan and
between the Klan and local elites. Of all sections of the American
capitalist class, the South's planter class appeared most akin to the
peripheral elites who provided critical early support to European
fascism.24 And, yet, things were more complicated than they might
at first appear. While Klan vigilantism against rural African Ameri-


--- PAGE 218 ---
The Second Klan in Wider Perspective 183
cans usually served the interests of white planters who wanted a
cheap and pliant labor force, on occasion it went so far as to
threaten the very basis of production by driving out the workers
who performed it. When masked terror led to black exodus, in fact,
planters sometimes came to believe things had gone too far. Often
enough, however, they then found it difficult to restrain their erst-
while allies. White small farmers and tenants probably enjoyed this
opportunity to outdo planters in proving their loyalty to the "white
race" while in the process enhancing their own immediate bar-
gaining position by limiting labor supply. Planter representative
J. J. Brown, past president of the Georgia Farmers' Union and then
state Secretary of Agriculture, thus once found himself confronted
with the odd task of urging his fellow Klan members to "do all
they could to hold the Negro[e]s in the South."25
There were other contrasts as well. Klansmen seemed less in-
clined than their Continental peers to welcome the idea of dicta-
torship, even if that was the conclusion their leaders' screeds
against impotent government pointed to. Klan spokespeople some-
times criticized Mussolini, not only for being an "ally of the Pope"
or a rival nationalist who might appeal to Italian Americans, but
also for being a despotic ruler.26 Internally, the unruliness of the
Klan's rank and file plagued its leaders from early on. Having been
recruited with an ideology that stressed popular sovereignty for
native-born Protestant whites, many members came to resent the
discipline that Klan leaders sought to impose. The ability of such
fractious members to win support from their fellows in Klan ranks
contributed mightily to the hothouse environment that produced
offshoot organizations on a regular basis. Other aspects of the
movement similarly complicate the analogy with European fas-
cism. However hedged in formulation and belied in practice, Klan
leaders' declared regard for the Constitution meant that they at
least feared appearing to deviate from it. Finally, the Klan's rever-
ence for Protestantism also distinguished it. Seeing established
churches as competing centers of belief or power, Nazis were far
less inclined to accept them.27 Future research will undoubtedly
uncover more contrasts.
The point is thus not to argue for absolute homology. It is
rather to insist that the Klan was not a movement sui generis: it
had enough in common with contemporary European mass move-
ments of far right to make for meaningful comparison. The family
resemblance between the Klan and classic fascism, however, puts


--- PAGE 219 ---
184 Meanings
the problem of interpreting the Klan's demise into a whole new
light.
Once the Klan is viewed in transnational perspective, a more chill-
ing hypothesis emerges about why Klan strength waned so quickly
right across the country after mid-decade. The causes usually ad-
duced for this decline may be incidental to the simple fact that
circumstances in the United States never reached the point that
they did in the nations where fascism ultimately triumphed. After
all, as late as the elections of 1928, the Nazis took only 2.6 percent
of the total vote and were seen as "a minor, and declining splinter
party." By contrast, in 1924, a Klan write-in candidate for mayor
was able to attract more than one-third of the vote in Detroit, the
fourth-largest American city. Had the Depression not hit Germany
as hard as it subsequently did, National Socialism might today be
dismissed as the Klan sometimes is: a historical curiosity whose
doom was foreordained.28
In the United States, on the other hand, the social conditions
that once fueled Klan growth had largely abated by mid-decade. In
the nation at large, the postwar recession gave way to boom and
renewed growth by 1923. The economic crisis loomed larger and
longer in the South and in farming regions of the Midwest than in
the industrial North, not as dependent on the "sick" industries of
agriculture, textiles, and mining. Yet, even in the South, the sense
of economic apocalypse had faded by mid-decade. By 1925, the re-
gional economy had rebounded, and the press was reporting with
palpable relief the revival of crop values and textile demand.29
The pitched class conflict of 1919-1921 also rapidly abated, as
employers, with the aid of the government Red Scare and new
technology, regained the upper hand. By 1924, the offensive against
labor and the left had largely succeeded. For the first time in Amer-
ican history, unions failed to grow during a time of relative pros-
perity. On the contrary, the proportion of the labor force in unions
dropped from over twelve percent in 1920 to eight percent in 1930,
as the number of union members fell from five million to less than
three and a half million. In proportion to the wage-earning popula-
tion, it was the weakest labor movement of any of the leading
Western industrial powers. Socialist Party membership in the na-
tion as a whole dropped drastically from 110,000 in 1919 to 12,000
four years later; the Communist Party, for its part, never amassed
more than 20,000 members at any point in the decade. By contrast,


--- PAGE 220 ---
The Second Klan in Wider Perspective 185
the German Communist Party in the 'twenties—the smaller of the
country's main left-wing parties—enlisted a membership that ran
as high as 380,000, and drew as many as three million votes.30
Like the struggle for "industrial democracy" in the United
States, the wartime and postwar offensive for racial equity had
clearly run aground by a few years into the new decade. Despite
determined, often heroic, efforts, blacks had been unable to attract
enough white support to dismantle any of the apparatus of white
supremacy, as the federal government's unwillingness to pass even
mild anti-lynching legislation attested. The NAACP lost almost
200 branches by 1923, and over 70,000 members—or more than
two-thirds of its 1919 roster—over the decade. The hemorrhage
was especially severe in the South, where both challenge and resis-
tance had been greatest.31
Locally, the discouragement African Americans felt was evi-
dent in that the Athens NAACP, which inspired such hopes at its
founding, ceased functioning by mid-decade. By then, even the At-
lanta chapter, the boldest in the state, had lapsed into inactivity.
Nationally, black disillusionment found expression in the massive
following attracted by nationalist leader Marcus Garvey. His advo-
cacy of black pride and program of self-determination bore witness
to his followers' aspirations, much as his insistence on the impos-
sibility of achieving racial equity in the United States did their
despair. The discouragement of blacks, like that of labor, no doubt
undercut the urgency many of the Klan's followers and sympathiz-
ers had hitherto felt.32
The decline of that challenge from below also helps explain the
changed attitudes of members of the governing elite towards the
Klan. Many public officials, business leaders, and opinion makers
had proved more than willing to turn a blind eye to the Klan's
activities in early years, just as their counterparts in Italy and Ger-
many did. Occasional pieties about letting the law take its course
notwithstanding, they looked away as Klan shock troops did the
dirty work of enforcing the hierarchies of class, race, and sex. Only
after the challenge from below had been successfully staved off did
large numbers come to identify the Klan as a threat. When they
did, it was sometimes less for its unsavory features than for its
mass following. Across the country, elite critics used phrases such
as "the menace of such Jacobins," and "the incubator of anarchy
and the aide de camp of Lenine and Trotsky" to denounce the Klan,
or equated it with the radical wing of organized labor.33
Without the extra charge that came from association with la-


--- PAGE 221 ---
186 Meanings
bor militancy and black struggle, the changes in gender and genera-
tional relations came to seem less threatening. As important as
feminism, the so-called sexual revolution, and the spread of the
commercial leisure industry had been in winning the Klan a mass
following, neither their continued spread nor the ongoing and
widespread defiance of Prohibition proved sufficient to keep Klan
members mobilized after the other challenges had receded. Here,
in fact, if in few other areas, the Klan defeat was unambiguous.
The persistence of bootlegging and gambling, the popularity of
dancing and movie-going, and young women's enthusiasm for the
social freedom and sensual pleasures symbolized by the flapper all
made clear the tenuousness of the family values the Klan stood for.
In short, on most fronts, Klansmen could feel, if not trium-
phant, at least relieved by mid-decade. As the sharp polarizations
of the postwar years abated, their movement must have come to
seem like overkill to all but the most devoted. Without extreme
conditions, extreme measures enjoyed less legitimacy. But that
change in circumstances leaves open, for us, an unsettling ques-
tion: what if the interwar social crisis had reached the scale in
America that it did in Italy or Germany? How might native-born,
middle-class whites have reacted?
We can never know the answer to that question. But we do
know enough to make easy optimism untenable. Indeed, what
emerges most forcefully from this study of the Klan is the wealth
of cultural material at hand that a movement like the Klan could
build on. Under conditions of economic uncertainty, sharply con-
tested social relations, and political impasse, assumptions about
class, race, gender, and state power so ordinary as to appear "com-
mon sense" to most WASP Americans could be refashioned and
harnessed to the building of a virulent reactionary politics able to
mobilize millions. What appears distinctive about the Klan is less
the specific ideas it stood for than the way it synthesized them and
proffered itself as, in the words of contemporary Walter White,
their "direct-action expression."34 But those ideas themselves, at
least in more understated form, had a long-standing and widely ac-
cepted place in the dominant culture.
Of course, to say this is not to imply that all elements in
American culture worked to the Klan's advantage, or even that all
of those that did necessarily did so, that they could not have led to
different conclusions. Here I am much persuaded by the accounts
of European fascism that reject fatalistic readings of the proclivities
of the petite bourgeoisie and stress, instead, contingency: the de-


--- PAGE 222 ---
The Second Klan in Wider Perspective 187
gree of organization of anti-fascist forces and the political choices
made by their leaders mattered very much.35 We simply have no
way of knowing how the Klan would have fared had not the Red
Scare and the American Plan for industry eliminated left-wing pop-
ular alternatives to the status quo. In any event, even in the nar-
rowed political spectrum of the 1920s, Klan leaders confronted
some ideas and values that defied their ambitions. Majority rule,
religious tolerance, and regard for the rule of law, for example, all
had significant, if not majoritarian, followings.
Nevertheless, what seems most striking in this story is the
adaptability of many conventional American sensibilities to a reac-
tionary populist project. The core elements of Klan ideology were
not as aberrant as one might imagine. Generations of observers of
American culture, for example, have remarked on what one writer
calls "the imperial middle": the pervasive assumption that
America had always been and should stay a middle-class society,
and the corollary denial that other classes had valid interests of
their own. In times of pitched struggle, such as that which fol-
lowed World War I, those axioms could easily slide into an insis-
tence that class conflict was illegitimate, even treasonous, and
should be suppressed. The unusual sway of individualism, more-
over, made the United States fertile terrain for racialist explana-
tions of why some people succeeded and others failed, explanations
that ranged from Manifest Destiny to Social Darwinism and eugen-
ics. Indeed, historians have lately become more aware of how, from
the time of the republic's founding, American ideas of middle-class
standing and citizenship rights were coded in racially exclusive
ways. So, too, was American middle-class consciousness molded
and galvanized, from its very origins, by notions of appropriate gen-
der roles and moral respectability.36 The evangelical strain so
prominent in American culture could also play its part in establish-
ing an indigenous form for the apocalyptic, anti-rational, and Mani-
chean emphases of fascist thought.
Finally, each of these elements in turn contributed to the un-
usual sanction American culture conferred on extralegal violence in
defense of prevailing relations of power. This country was, after all,
as James Weldon Johnson once reminded an impervious Congress,
"the only spot, civilized or uncivilized, on the face of the globe
where a human being can be burned alive with immunity." It would
not be such a long leap from the many American varieties of vigilan-
tism—not only lynching, but also white-capping, anti-labor citizens'
committees, and, more generally, the veneration of rough-and-ready


--- PAGE 223 ---
188 Meanings
frontier "justice" in popular culture—to the "politics of the piazza"
characteristic of fascism in its mobilization phase.37
If this assessment is valid, if core elements in American cul-
ture were more amenable to a fascist sensibility than is usually
recognized, the question inevitably follows of why the Great De-
pression turned out as it did in the United States. In fact, mass
middle-class movements of the far right did develop in the 1930s,
although not under the aegis of the Klan, perhaps then too spent
from its earlier performance. Some of these movements—like Wil-
liam Dudley Pelley's Silver Shirts—were openly sympathetic to
fascism. Others—like the followings of Huey Long and Father
Coughlin in the early 1930s—are more difficult to classify. But all
enlisted a predominantly petit-bourgeois following and mobilized
around the core axioms discussed here.38 Perhaps, in fact, given
these cultural traditions and political mobilizations, the question
we should be asking is not the common one of why American re-
form was not more radical in the 1930s, but why it happened in
the relatively benign ways it did at all.
That question is too big for this book, and no single answer to
it will do. But among the reasons ordinarily cited by historians for
why the United States bypassed the road some of its great-power
peers took, one may call for special emphasis at a time in which
trade unions have become targets of scorn for nearly all points on
the political spectrum: the fact that, in contrast to the 1920s, a
strong and inclusive working-class movement was able to pose an
alternative to both the far right and the discredited status quo. As
civil rights movement veteran Anne Braden once observed, the
times when the Klan has failed to grow are as instructive as those
when it has. In neither the 1930s nor the 1960s did it make much
headway, she argues, because in each period "strong mass move-
ments advocated real answers to social and economic problems" at
the same time as "there was a strong offensive against the ideology
of racism."39
If this analysis has merit, then the irony is acute. That phe-
nomenon deemed least American by the dominant culture from
the founding of the republic forward—class struggle waged by the
propertyless, many of them African Americans, Catholics, and re-
cent immigrants—may have contributed more than we will ever
know to keeping reactionary populist movements at bay in the
United States during the Great Depression. Perhaps, after all, it
was those with the least "stake in society" who had the most stake
in defending democracy.


--- PAGE 224 ---
Appendix on Names
The author-unfriendly state of current United States law has led
me to change some of the names used in this book. I have no desire
to protect these individuals or their families' reputations. On the
contrary, one subtheme of this book is how white Americans' re-
fusal to face the truth about the first Klan helped make the second
Klan possible. But neither am I interested in scandal. Since my pur-
poses are scholarly and political rather than sensational, I have de-
cided that it would not detract from them to alter names to conceal
identities. The principles followed were these. Where individuals'
membership in or contact with the Klan was reported by the press
or in the courts, and is thus already a matter of public record, I
have used real names. Where -the membership or contact was re-
vealed only in the unpublished Klan manuscript, I have created
pseudonyms whose fictitious character is signalled by italics.
Where the names must also appear as correspondents in the notes,
however, I have kept the initials constant and used them in lieu of
full names in citations. Those who need to know the actual identi-
ties of people in this study for scholarly purposes may contact me
through my publisher. Others should consult the Klan manuscript
for themselves.
189


--- PAGE 225 ---
Appendix on Database
The information about Athens Klan members in this work comes
from a database built from a variety of sources. The Athens Klan
manuscript and the local newspaper yielded an initial list of mem-
bers. This group was then pared down to exclude anyone whose
name was listed only once (to reduce the possibility of accidental
misidentification), those whose initials were shared by more than
one resident, and those whom the sources listed as residents of a
county other than Athens, since tracking members through public
records for the five counties adjoining Clarke County as well
would have been an insuperable task. Such pruning resulted in a
final list of 543 members.
These individuals were then traced through a variety of
sources: the Clarke County federal manuscript censuses for 1910
and 1920; Athens city directories for the years 1904, 1916-17, and
1926-27; county tax digests for the years 1900, 1910, 1918, 1921,
and 1927; Superior Court records; the local press; and records of
local churches and voluntary organizations held by the Georgia De-
partment of Archives and History and the Hargrett Rare Book and
Manuscript Library at the University of Georgia. Among the
sources of the data on class position, the most unusual in historiog-
raphy of the Klan and the most rewarding for the analysis offered
here were tax digests, which recorded annually the value of the
assets held by all Georgia households. These digests made it possi-
ble to portray Klan members' economic standing in a more con-
crete way than other studies, using only city directories and the
census, have been able to. Also, by tracing members over the
190


--- PAGE 226 ---
Appendix on Database 191
course of two decades, one may develop a more dynamic and rela-
tional understanding of class than is common in the literature on
the Klan.
As do any historical data, however, these suffer flaws and omis-
sions. Of the 543 members on the final list, 125 could not be found
in other Clarke County public records—presumably because they
resided outside county limits or only came to the area in the 'twen-
ties—leaving 418 on whom some information was available. Data
could not be found on each variable for every member, so percent-
ages cited in the text are adjusted to the variable at hand. The data-
base also probably understates the participation of certain groups.
Farmers of all tenures—planters, working landowners, and ten-
ants—probably joined the Klan in greater numbers than my data
suggest. City directories only included farmers near city limits, and
Clarke County was in any case more urban than most contempo-
rary Southern counties. Similarly, transients would be underenu-
merated in the public records, as would mill workers in villages
outlying Clarke County. Finally, since internal Klan records for the
early 'twenties are not available, the data probably understate the
participation of high-status, wealthy men, who, at least in other
areas of the country, tended to drop out before mid-decade. These
weaknesses tend to rule each other out, however: since certain
high, low and middle categories are all probably undercounted, the
overall profile should be fairly accurate.


--- PAGE 227 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 228 ---
Abbreviations
Used in Notes
ABH
ACHF
ACLU
ADB
ADH
AGC
AHR
AHS
AK
BUGA
CES
CCL
CCSC
CDF
CIC
CNM
CSB
DCB
DU
ECB
Athens Banner Herald
Athens-Clarke County Heritage Foundation
American Civil Liberties Union Archives
Athens Daily Banner
Athens Daily Herald
Asa Griggs Candler Papers
American Historical Review
Atlanta Historical Society
Ku Klux Klan, Athens Chapter No. 5, Papers
Bulletin of the University of Georgia
Columbus Enquirer-Sun
Georgia, Commissioner of Commerce and Labor
Clarke County, Superior Court
Cameron Douglas Flanigen Papers
Commission on Interracial Cooperation Papers
Carlton-Newton-Mell Collection
Charles S. Bryan Papers
David Crenshaw Barrow Papers
Special Collections Library, Duke University
Eugene Cunningham Branson Papers
193


--- PAGE 229 ---
194 Abbreviations Used in Notes
EDC
EU
FLT
FSAA
FWP
GDAH
GHQ
HGG
HJA
HS
JAH
JJB
JLH
JMB, AHS
JMB, UGA
JRH
JSH
JWB
LAC
LH
NAACP
NEH
NSMC
NYPL
NYT
PCM
RBR
REM
RL
RLE
RLR
Incoming Correspondence, Records of the Executive
Department, Georgia Department of Archives and
History
Special Collections, Robert W. Woodruff Library, Em-
ory University
Frances Long Taylor Papers, UGA
Federal Surveillance of Afro-Americans
Federal Writers' Project Papers
Georgia Department of Archives and History
Georgia Historical Quarterly
Hugh Gladney Grant Papers
Henry J. Allen Papers
Hoke Smith Papers, Russell Library
Journal of American History
John James Blaine Papers
Julian Larose Harris Papers
Joseph Mackey Brown Papers, Atlanta Historical So-
ciety
Joseph Mackey Brown Papers, UGA
James Robert Hamilton Papers
Journal of Southern History
Josiah William Bailey Papers
Living Atlanta Collection
Labor History
National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People Papers
Nathaniel E. Harris Section, Executive Department
Correspondence
Nina Scudder Memorial Collection
New York Public Library
New York Times
University of Georgia, Prudential Committee Minutes
Richard B. Russell, Jr., Papers
Ralph Emerson McGill Papers
Russell Library, University of Georgia— Athens
Rebecca Latimer Felton Collection
Robert L. Rodgers Papers


--- PAGE 230 ---
Abbreviations Used in Notes 195
SHC
SHSW
TEW
TINCF
UA
UGA
USDA
WAC
WTA
Southern Historical Collection
State Historical Society of Wisconsin
Thomas Edward Watson Papers, Southern Historical
Collection
Tuskegee Institute News Clippings File
University Archives, University of Georgia, Athens
University of Georgia Libraries, Hargrett Rare Book
and Manuscript Library
United States Department of Agriculture
Bishop Warren Akin Candler Papers
William Tate Archives


--- PAGE 231 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 232 ---
Notes
Introduction
1. W. E. B. DuBois, "The Shape of Fear," North American Review
223(1926),294-95.
2. Reports of the second Klan's numerical strength vary from a histo-
rian's low estimate of 1.5 million to the organization's own claim of five
million men in 1926. See, respectively, Kenneth T. Jackson, The Ku Klux
Klan in the City, 1915-1930 (New York, 1967), xii,' 236; New York Herald
Tribune, Sept. 15, 1926, in series C, box 317, National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People, Papers, Manuscripts Division, Library of
Congress, Washington, B.C. (hereafter, NAACP).
3. For overviews of the Klan's successive incarnations, see David M.
Chalmers, Hooded Americanism: The History of the Ku Klux Klan, third
ed. (New York, 1981); Arnold S. Rice, The Ku Klux Klan in American
Politics (Washington, D.C., 1962); Wyn Craig Wade, The Fiery Cross: The
Ku Klux Klan in America (New York, 1987). On Duke, see The Emergence
of David Duke and the Politics of Race, ed. Douglas Rose (Chapel Hill,
1992).
4. Quote from Stanley Frost, The Challenge of the Klan, 6-7. Recent
published studies that apply the methods of the new social history include
Robert Alan Goldberg, Hooded Empire: The Ku Klux Klan in Colorado
(Urbana, 1981); Larry R. Gerlach, Blazing Crosses in Zion: The Ku Klux
Klan in Utah (Logan, Utah, 1982); Shawn Lay, War, Revolution and the
Ku Klux Klan: A Study of Intolerance in a Border City (El Paso, 1985);
William D. Jenkins, Steel Valley Klan: The Ku Klux Klan in Ohio's Ma-
honing Valley (Kent, Ohio, 1990); Leonard J. Moore, Citizen Klansmen:
The Ku Klux Klan in Indiana, 1921-1928 (Chapel Hill, 1991). For a sam-
197


--- PAGE 233 ---
198 Notes to Pages xii-xiii
pling of the new work, see Shawn Lay, ed., The Invisible Empire in the
West: Toward a New Historical'Appraisal of the Ku Klux Klan of the
1920s (Urbana, 1992). Among the leading older works on the Klan are, in
addition to those already cited, John Moffat Mecklin, The Ku Klux Klan:
A Study of the American Mind (1923; reprint, New York, 1963); Emerson
H. Loucks, The Ku Klux Klan in Pennsylvania: A Study in Nativism (Har-
risburg, Penn., 1936); Charles Alexander, The Ku Klux Klan in the South-
west (Lexington, 1965); idem, Crusade for Conformity: The Ku Klux Klan
in Texas, 1920-1930 (Houston, 1962); Jackson, Ku Klux Klan in the City.
Some scholars whose primary focus lay elsewhere have also offered influ-
ential interpretations of the second Klan. See, in particular, Richard Hof-
stadter, The Age of Reform, from Bryan to F.D.R. (New York, 1955); John
Higham, Strangers in the Land: Patterns of American Nativism,
1860-1925 (1963; reprint, New York, 1974); Seymour Martin Lipset and
Earl Raab, The Politics of Unreason: Right Wing Extremism in America,
1790-1970 (New York, 1970); Stanley Coben, Rebellion Against Victori-
anism: The Impetus for Change in 1920s America (New York, 1991).
5. Important recent arguments to this effect include Paula Giddings,
When and Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Womanhood on Race and
Sex in America (New York, 1984); Bell Hooks, From Margin to Center,
(Boston, 1984); Hazel Carby, Reconstructing Womanhood: The Emergence
Of the Afro-American Woman Novelist (New York, 1987); Elsa Barkley
Brown, "Womanist Consciousness: Maggie Lena Walker and the Indepen-
dent Order of Saint Luke," Signs 14 (Spring 1989); Evelyn'Brooks Higgin-
bottom, "African-American Women's History and the Metalanguage of
Race," Signs 17 (Winter 1992), 251-74; and the synthesis by Patricia Hill
Collins, Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Pol-
itics of Empowerment (New York, 1990). For a groundbreaking study of
female involvement in the Klan, see Kathleen M. Blee, Women of the
Klan: Racism and Gender in the 1920s (Berkeley, 1991). My work, in con-
trast, applies gender analysis to men.
6. Quotes from Leonard J. Moore, "Historical Interpretation of the
1920's Klan: The Traditional View and the Populist Revision," Journal of
Social History 24 (Winter 1990), 348, 352. Moore's is the most extreme
statement of this tendency; more nuanced versions include Goldberg,
Hooded Empire-, Gerlach, Blazing Crosses in Zion-, Lay, War, Revolution
and the Ku Klux Klan-, Christopher N. Cocoltchos, "The Invisible Govern-
ment and the Viable Community: The Ku Klux Klan in Orange County,
California, During the 1920's" (Ph.D. diss., University of California, Los
Angeles, 1979). Interestingly, the Reconstruction-era Ku Klux Klan, whose
violence and racism no scholar today would dispute, also sought to regu-
late community morality. See Charles Flynn, White Land, Black Labor:
Caste and Class in Late Nineteenth-Century Georgia (Baton Rouge, 1983),
31-56; also U.S. Congress, Senate, Testimony Taken by the Joint Select
Committee to Inquire into the Condition of Affairs in the Late Insurrec-


--- PAGE 234 ---
Notes to Pages xiii-xiv 199
tionary States, Georgia, vols. 1 and 2, 42nd Congress, 2nd session (Wash-
ington, D.C., 1872).
7. For an incisive review of the literature about race-coding in con-
temporary American politics,, see Adolph Reed, Jr., and Julian Bond,
"Equality: Why We Can't Wait," Nation 253 (9 Dec. 1991), 733-37. For
analysis of how such signs work, see Murray Edelman, The Symbolic Uses
of Politics (Urbana, 1967).
8. On the concept of reactionary populism, see Nancy MacLean,
"The Leo Frank Case Reconsidered: Gender and Sexual Politics in the
Making of Reactionary Populism," Journal of American History 78 (Dec.
1991), esp. 920-21; also Ronald P. Formisano, Boston Against Busing:
Race, Class, and Ethnicity in the 1960s and 1970s (Chapel Hill, 1990).
9. The treatments of republican ideology that have most influenced
my thinking include Edmund S. Morgan, American Slavery, American
Freedom: The Ordeal of Colonial Virginia (New York, 1975); Gordon
Wood, The Creation of the American Republic, 1776-1787 (Chapel Hill,
1969); Isaac Kramnick, Republicanism and Bourgeois Radicalism: Politi-
cal Ideology in Late Eighteenth-Century England and America (Ithaca,
1990); Eric Foner, Tom Paine and Revolutionary America (New York,
1976); Steven Hahn, The Roots of Southern Populism: Yeomen Farmers
and the Transformation of the Georgia Upcountry, 1850-1890 (New York,
1983); Sean Wilentz, Chants Democratic: New York City and the Rise of
the American Working Class, 1788-1850 (New York, 1984); Edward L.
Ayers, Vengeance and Justice: Crime and Punishment in the Nineteenth-
Century American South (New York, 1984), esp. 40-45. Of these, Kram-
nick is most attentive to the reactionary elements of republicanism vis-a-vis
the liberalism of its day and to the way, notwithstanding their contrariety,
both streams continued to influence the political discourse of Americans
(see esp. 1-40, 294). The common tendency of recent scholars to assume
people in the past must have accepted either republicanism or liberalism
is also criticized by Daniel T. Rodgers, Contested Truths: Keywords in
American Politics Since Independence (New York, 1987), esp. 9-10.
On republican thought's presuppositions about race, see Morgan,
American Slavery, American Freedom-, J. William Harris, Plain Folk and
Gentry in a Slave Society: White Liberty and Black Slavery in Augusta's
Hinterlands (Middletown, 1985). On gender, see Linda Kerber, Women of
the Republic: Intellect and Ideology in Revolutionary America (New
York, 1986); Joan Gunderson, "Independence, Citizenship, and the Ameri-
can Revolution," Signs 13 (1987), 59-77; Ruth H. Bloch, "The Gendered
Meanings of Virtue in Revolutionary America," ibid., 37-58; Stephanie
McCurry, "The Two Faces of Republicanism: Gender and Proslavery Poli-
tics in Antebellum South Carolina," JAH 78 (March 1992), 1,245-64.
10. W. E. Burghardt Du Bois, "Georgia: Invisible Empire State," in
These United States: A Symposium, vol. I, ed. Ernest Gruening (New
York, 1924), 322-45.


--- PAGE 235 ---
200 Notes to Pages xv-4
11. For scholarly treatments of Southern Klan chapters' vigilante ac-
tivities in these years, see Alexander, Crusade for Conformity-, idem, Ku
Klux Klan in the Southwest; Roger Kent Hux, "The Ku Klux Klan in Ma-
con, 1922-1925" (M.A. thesis, University of Georgia, 1968); idem, "The
Ku Klux Klan in Macon, 1919-1925," GHQ 62 (1978), 155-68; idem, "The
Ku Klux Klan and Collective Violence in Horry County, South Carolina,
1922-1925," South Carolina Historical Magazine 85 (July 1984), 211-19.
12. Examples of this kind of reasoning in scholarship on the Klan
include Alexander, Crusade for Conformity, 6; Hux, "Klan in Macon," 66;
Gerlach, Blazing Crosses in Zion, 138-39.
13. Among the outstanding models of such inquiry are Morgan,
American Slavery, American Freedom-, and Barbara J. Fields, "Ideology and
Race in American History," in J. Morgan Kousser and James M. McPher-
son, eds., Region, Race, and Reconstruction (New York, 1982). In discus-
sions of Klan ideology, I use the word "racialist" in preference to "racist"
in order to emphasize that we are not looking simply at attitudes, but
rather at expressions of a systematic world view with racial categories as
one of its core elements.
Chapter 1
1. Minutes, 15 Sept. 1925, box 2, Ku Klux Klan, Athens Chapter No.
5, Papers, Hargrett Rare Book and Manuscript Library, University of Geor-
gia Libraries, Athens, Georgia (hereafter, AK and UGA, respectively). All
names italicized in the text are fictitious. See Appendix on Names for ex-
planation.
2. Ibid. For policy and depictions of dangerous members, see Knights
of the Ku Klux Klan, Department of Realms, Klan Building: An Outline
of Proven Klan Methods for Successfully Applying the Art of Klancraft in
Building and Operating Local Klans (Atlanta, n.d.), 10. For a former At-
lanta member's recollections of how such reports were treated, see Sanders
Ivey interview by Cliff Kuhn, transcript, p. 30, box 37, Living Atlanta Col-
lection, Atlanta Historical Society (hereafter, LAC and AHS, respectively).
3. See COM to Governor L. G. Hardman, 15 March 1927, Record
Group 1, Incoming Correspondence, 1927-1931, Records of the Executive
Department, Georgia Department of Archives and History (hereafter, EDC
and GDAH, respectively). Local Klan members were identified through the
Athens Klan Papers and, in some cases, the press. Further information
about individual members was culled from a wide variety of sources, in-
cluding the local press, the federal manuscript census, state tax digests,
city directories, superior court minutes, and publications by or about local
churches and civic organizations. The database is described further in the
Appendix. Subsequent references to members that draw on the database
will only cite sources in the case of direct quotes, newsworthy events,
or information gleaned from manuscript sources. Readers who want more


--- PAGE 236 ---
Notes to Pages 4-7 201
extensive documentation for the points made in this book are urged to
consult my doctoral dissertation, "Behind the Mask of Chivalry: Gender,
Race, and Class in the Making of the Ku Klux Klan of the 1920s in Geor-
gia" (Ph.D. diss., University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1989).
4. C. Lewis Fowler, The Ku Klux Klan: Its Origin, Meaning and
Scope of Operation (Atlanta, 1922) 12; undated ABH clipping, Vertical
Files, Biography, s.v. "M. G. Michael," UGA.
5. See Kenneth Coleman and Charles Stephen Gurr, eds., Dictionary
of Georgia Biography (Athens, 1983), s.v. "Simmons, William }."-, Clement
C. Moseley, "Invisible Empire: The History of the Ku Klux Klan in
Twentieth-Century Georgia" (Ph.D. diss., University of Georgia, 1968), 7;
Jackson, Klan in the City, 4-8.
6. See Coleman and Gurr, eds., Dictionary of Georgia Biography,
s.v. "Tyler, Mary Elizabeth Grew"; Moseley, "Invisible Empire," 12, 8;
Wilma Dykeman and James Stokely, Seeds of Southern Change: The Life
of Will Alexander (Chicago, 1962), 101; Jackson, Klan in the City, 11-12.
7. Clarke, as quoted in Jackson, Klan in the City, 10; see also Chal-
mers, Hooded Americanism, 32-33; Dykeman and Stokely, Seeds of
Southern Change, 97-98.
8. Athens Daily Herald, 24 Dec. 1915, p. 1 (hereafter, ADH); George
Tindall, The Emergence of the New South, 1913-1945, (Baton Rouge,
1967), 53; Frances Long Taylor, "The Negroes of Clarke County, Georgia,
During the Great War," BUGA, 29, n. 8 (Sept. 1919), 45; Jack E. Parr inter-
view, 2 Dec. 1976, transcript, p. 3, Athens-Clarke County Heritage Foun-
dation, Oral History Tapes, UGA (hereafter, ACHF); S. V. Sanford to Jo-
seph Mackey Brown, 12 July 1917, Joseph Mackey Brown Papers (restricted
section), UGA (hereafter cited as JMB, UGA); C. D. Flanigen to R. B. Nev-
itt, 9 Nov. 1917, box 2, Cameron Douglas Flanigen Papers, UGA (hereafter,
CDF); typed minutes from meeting of the ministers of Athens, 10 Oct.
1917, box 5, Carlton-Newton-Mell Collection, UGA (hereafter, CNM);
Athens Daily Banner, 9 Jan. 1921, p. 2 (hereafter, ADB).
9. Hiram Wesley Evans, The Klan of Tomorrow and the Klan Spiri-
tual (n.p., 1924), 20; Jackson, Klan in the City, 29; Knights of the Ku Klux
Klan, Official Message of the Emperor of the Invisible Empire of the
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan to the Initial Session of the Imperial Klonvo-
cation (Atlanta, 1922), 5; ADH, 24 Dec. 1915, p. 1. For the rituals, see
Alvin J. Schmidt, Fraternal Organizations (Westport, 1980), 196-201. For
members' enthusiasm for the rituals, see correspondence in box 1, AK.
10. Norman Fredric Weaver, "The Knights of the Ku Klux Klan in
Wisconsin, Indiana, Ohio and Michigan" (Ph.D. diss., University of Wis-
consin, 1954), 29; Gerlach, Blazing Crosses, 136; Knights of the Ku Klux
Klan, Realm of Georgia, Official Document, Jan.-Mar. 1928, 7; Robert L.
Duffus, "Ancestry and End of the Ku Klux Klan," World's Work, 46 (1923),
532; Carl Hutcheson to Thomas E. Watson, 12 July 1921, box 12, Thomas
E. Watson Papers, Southern Historical Collection, Library of the Univer-


--- PAGE 237 ---
202 Notes to Pages 7-10
sity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (hereafter, TEW and SHC, respec-
tively); Searchlight, 24 March 1923; Imperial Night Hawk, 24 Oct. 1923;
Winfield Jones, Story of the Ku Klux Klan (Washington, D.C., 1921), 93.
11. Marion Monteval, The Klan Inside Out (1924; reprint, Westport,
1970), 53; Edward. Vance Toy, "The Ku Klux Klan in Oregon: Its Program
and Purpose" (M.A. thesis, University of Oregon, 1959), 39, 58; Jackson,
Klan in the City, 10. For Clarke County, see Minutes, May 4, 1925, box 2,
AK; also Samuel Green to H. K. Brackett, 24 June 1930, box 1, AK; Athens
Banner Herald, 6 Aug. 1930, pp. 1, 5 (hereafter, ASH); ADH, 24 Dec. 1915,
p. 1; ADH, 3 April 1915, p. 1.
12. ADH, 28 Dec. 1915, p. 1, ABH, 12 Nov. 1928, p. 1.
13. ABH, 3 July 1930, pp. 1, 6; Lipset and Raab, Politics of Unreason,
125. See also Gerlach, Blazing Crosses, 38, 134; Jackson, Klan in the City,
10, 18-19, 29-30, table 4; Goldberg, Hooded Empire, 35-37, 65.
14. Kourier, Dec. 1924, p. 26; Jackson, Klan in the City, 64, 150; Co-
coltchos, "Invisible Government," 138, 163; Goldberg, Hooded Empire,
47, 168; Gerlach, Blazing Crosses, 45; Lipset and Raab, Politics of Unrea-
son, 123-24; Toy, "Klan in Oregon," 134-36; Jenkins, Steel Valley Klan,
esp. ix-xi. Percentages for Clarke County are adjusted. These numbers no
doubt underestimate Klansmen's church membership, since rosters were
not available for all churches, and they were not always complete. The
distribution of Protestant church members in the general Clarke County
white population roughly corresponded to that in the Klan. United States,
Bureau of the Census, Census of Religious Bodies, 1926, Part I, Summary
and Detailed Tables (Washington, 1930), 589, 592.
15. ABH, 8 Jan. 1928, p. 8; ADB, 15 Nov. 1921, p. 5.
16. Robert Moats Miller, "A Note on the Relationship between the
Protestant Churches and the Revival of the Ku Klux Klan," JSH 22 (Aug.
1956), 356; Imperial Night Hawk, 21 May 1924, p. 8.
17. ABH, 15 Jan. 1925, pp. 1, 8; ABH, 2 Dec. 1927, p. 1, ABH, 29 Oct.
1925, p. 4.
18. Searchlight, 17 Nov. 1923, p. 1; Kligrapp's Quarterly Report forms
in box 3, AK; Searchlight, 17 Nov. 1923, p. 1.
19. Jackson, Klan in the City, 37; correspondence in preparation
for a 1924 Athens rally in box 1, AK; "Special Bulletin," 31 Dec. 1926,
loc cit.
20. Jackson, Klan in the City, xii, 15, 237; Imperial Night Hawk, 28
March 1923, p. 8; Kenneth Coleman, ed., A History of Georgia (Athens,
1977), 293; New York Herald-Tribune, 15 Sept. 1926, in series C, box
317, NAACP.
21. Quote from Frost, Challenge of the Klan, 1; Loucks, Klan in Penn-
sylvania, 147; Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, Papers Read at the Meeting
of the Grand Dragons of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan (Atlanta, 1923),
97-98.


--- PAGE 238 ---
Notes to Pages 10-15 203
11. See, for example, Goldberg, Hooded Empire, 38-40, 48; and Ger-
lach, Blazing Crosses, 133.
23. For analysis of these organizations, see Blee, Women of the Klan.
In Athens, see Klan, Minutes, 18 May 1926, AK; B. E. V. to Knights of the
KKK, 7 June 1927, box 1, AK; ABH, 2 May 1926. Unfortunately, no other
records of the Athens WKKK survive.
24. Ticket to "Great Klan Barbecue," folder 6, Ku Klux Klan Miscel-
lany Collection, UGA; Klan, Georgia, Official Document, 23 Dec. 1926, p.
4; Minutes, 29 Sept. 1925, box 2, AK; ibid., Jan. 19, 1926, AK; Mrs. S. A.
et al. to "Officers and Members of Athens Klan No. 5," 1 Feb. 1926, box
1, AK.
25. Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Nov. 1926, p. 2; Klan, Klan
Building, 4, 5, 7 (italics in originals).
26. Quoted in Jackson, Klan in the City, 257. See also Leonard Din-
nerstein, The Leo Frank Case (New York, 1968).
27. Coleman, History of Georgia, 292-93; William G. Shepherd,
"Fighting the K.K.K. on Its Home Grounds," Leslie's 133 (15 Oct. 1921), 511.
28. For a deft analysis, see Michael Rogin, " 'The Sword Became a
Flashing Vision'; D. W. Griffith's The Birth of a Nation," Representations
9 (Winter 1985), 150-95.
29. Quoted in Jackson, Klan of the City, 3-4; Robert L. Zangrando,
The NAACP Crusade Against Lynching, 1909-1950 (Philadelphia, 1980),
33-34; John Dittmer, Black Georgia in the Progressive Era (Urbana,
1977), 185-86.
30. Henry Lincoln Johnson to Nathaniel E. Harris., 9 Dec. 1915, box
234, EDC; C. C. Pope to James Weldon Johnson, 17 Jan. 1921, series C,
box 312, NAACP. See also New York Call, 23 March 1921, in v. 190,
American Civil Liberties Union Archives, Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Li-
brary, Princeton University (hereafter, ACLU); Atlanta Independent, Jan.
20, 1921, p. 4; Atlanta Independent, May 1; 1924, p. 1.
31. Catholic World, Jan. 1923, p. 443; New York Times, 7 Sept. 1923,
p. 17 (hereafter, NYT); Weaver, "Klan in Wisconsin," 244-48; depositions
in John James Elaine Papers, Manuscripts Section, State Historical Society
of Wisconsin (hereafter, JJB and SHSW, respectively); also Weaver, "Klan
in Wisconsin," 255-64; Jackson, Klan in the City, 168.
32. NYT, 25 July 1926, II, 2, 3; NYT, 17 Nov. 1922, p. 4; NYT, 17 June
1921, p. 15; NYT, 5 Oct. 1921, p. 18; NYT, 3 April 1923, p. 2; NYT, 1 Nov.
1924, in series C, box 317, NAACP. See also Philip S. Foner, Organized
Labor and the Black Worker, 1619-1981 (New York, 1982), 166n.
33. Dorsey quoted in Horace C. Patterson and Gilbert C. Fite, Oppo-
nents of War, 1917-1918 (Seattle, 1968), 223; Casefile OG 196145, RG 65,
FBI, frame 536, reel 10, FSAA (italics mine).
34. See Robert K. Murray, Red Scare: A Study of National Hysteria,
1919-1920 (New York, 1964); William Preston, Jr., Aliens and Dissenters:


--- PAGE 239 ---
204 Notes to Pages 15-17
Federal Suppression of Radicals, 1903-1933 (New York, 1963); Nell Irvin
Painter, Standing at Armageddon: The United States, 1877-1919 (New
York, 1987), esp. 388.
35. Copy of the petition in series I, frames 725-27, reel 7, CIC; un-
dated ABH clipping, frame 291, reel 14, Federal Surveillance of Afro-
Americans (1917-1925): The First World War, the Red Scare, and the Gar-
vey Movement, ed. Theodore Kornweibel (Frederick, Maryland, 1985),
(hereafter, FSAA). While the historian is hard pressed to uncover evidence
of active local opposition, the Klan itself later claimed that in Athens it
was "BEING FOUGHT TO THE LAST DITCH," an opposition it blamed
on "Catholics and Jews in the city." Searchlight, 5 April 1924, p. 8; ibid.,
21 June 1924, pp. 1, 8.
36. See Klan, Georgia, Official Document, March 1927, p. 2; J. Q. Jett
to R. L. Felton, box 8, Rebecca Latimer Felton Papers, UGA (hereafter,
RLF); CIC, Annual Report, 1922-23, series 1, frames 442 and 555, reel
4, CIC.
37. Will W. Alexander to Marion M. Jackson, 4 June 1926, series I,
frames 481-82, reel 7, CIC; ABH, 7 Dec. 1927.
38. Telegram from Herbert Bayard Swope to David C. Barrow, 3 May
1924, box 26, David Crenshaw Barrow Papers, University Archives, Main
Library, University of Georgia, and Barrow's response, ibid. (Hereafter,
DCB and UA, respectively); Thomas G. Dyer, The University of Georgia:
A Bicentennial History, 1785-1985 (Athens, 1985), 180-82; University of
Georgia, Prudential Committee Minutes and Miscellaneous Papers, 1922,
UA (hereafter, PCM); notes on resolution, 30 Jan. 1921, box 1, PCM. For a
sense of the criteria considered relevant in faculty appointments, see R. P.
Brooks to C. M. Snelling, 12 April 1926, box 21, Robert Preston Brooks
Papers, UGA.
39. John Wade to Mrs. J. H. Harris, 4 Aug. 1924, box 6, JLH; Minutes,
17 Oct. 1923, University of Georgia Demosthenian Society, UA.
40. For examples of Klan legislative projects, see Klan, Official
Monthly Bulletin, 1 Dec. 1926, p. 1; Klan, Georgia, Official Document,
Dec. 1926, p. 1; ibid., Oct.-Nov. 1927.
41. N. B. Forrest to JPM, 9 April 1926, box 1, AK; Athens Klan, Min-
utes, 20 April 1926, box 2, AK; JPM to N. B. Forrest, 29 Nov. 1925, box 1,
AK. See also J. Mills Thornton III, "Alabama Politics, J. Thomas Heflin,
and the Expulsion Movement of 1929," Alabama Review 22 (April 1968),
90; Weaver, "Klan in Wisconsin," 118; Blee, Women of the Klan, 148-49.
42. See Athens Banner, 8 Sept. 1922, p. 1 (hereafter, AB); N. B. Forrest
to JPM, 3 Dec. 1925, box 1, AK; Imperial Night Hawk, 1 July 1924, p. 1;
Klan, Georgia, Official Document, May-June, 1927, p. 2; Anon, to "Dear
Sir," 14 June 1922, Pre-Gub. series, box 1, Richard B. Russell, Jr., Papers,
Russell Library, University of Georgia—Athens (hereafter, RBR and RL, re-
spectively); Monteval, Klan Inside Out, 103-6, 172; Lem A. Dever, Masks


--- PAGE 240 ---
Notes to Pages 17-20 205
Off! Confessions of an Imperial Klansmen, 2nd ed. (n.p., 1925), 9, 35;
Dykeman and Stokely, Seeds of Southern Change, 109.
43. NYT, 18 Nov. 1923, H, 1, Moseley, "Invisible Empire," 38, 40-41,
45, 61-64; J. Q. Jett to Rebecca Latimer Felton, [1924], box 8, RLF; William
F. Mugleston, "Julian Harris, the Georgia Press, and the Ku Klux Klan,"
GHQ 59 (1975), 291-92; Edward Young Clarke to "Dear Sir," [c. 1921],
Pre-Gub. series, box 1, RBR; Press Release, 12 Jan. 1923, series C, box
313, NAACP.
44. NYT, 23 Sept. 1923, II, 1, Atlanta Independent, 21 Dec. 1922, l.;
NYT, 10 Dec. 1922, in series C, box 315, NAACP; NYT, 1 Nov. 1923, 1,
Klan, Official Monthly Bulletin, 1 Dec. 1926; Goldberg, Hooded Empire,
xi.
45. N. B. Forrest to JPM, 9 April 1926, box 1, AK; Moseley, "Invisible
Empire," 71-72; New York Herald Tribune, 28 April 1924, in series C, box
316, NAACP; NYT, 21 March 1924, p. 3; New York World, Oct. [n.d.] 1924,
in series C, box 317, NAACP; Imperial Night Hawk, 1 July 1929, p. 1.
46. Moseley, "Invisible Empire," 42-43; NYT, 14 Sept. 1922, in series
C, box 314, NAACP; NYT, 13 Nov. 1922, 16. For one Georgia newspaper
editor's subsequent counsel to Hoke Smith to avoid this "hornet's nest"
during the gubernatorial race of 1926, advice Smith took, see Ben A. Neal
to Hoke Smith, 26 Jan. 1926, box 9, Hoke Smith Papers, RL (hereafter,
HS); NYT, 18 Nov. 1923, II, 1. See also NYT, 7 July 1924, in series C, box
316, NAACP. In Alabama, according to one non-member politician, the
entire "ruling class" in state politics belonged to the Klan. Diary,
1928-1930, pp. 2, 72, box 12, Hugh Gladney Grant Papers, DU (hereafter
HGG); see also Jackson, Klan in the City, 38.
47. Quoted in Clifford M. Kuhn, Harlon E. Joye, and E. Bernard West,
Living Atlanta: An Oral History of the City, 1914-1948 (Athens, 1990),
313-14.
48. ABH, p. 4 July 1926, p. 4; Moseley, "Invisible Empire," 82-83;
Mugleston, "Julian Harris," 284-90; Robert Preston Brooks, "What Is
Worth Fighting for in American Life?" typescript of speech, box 20, Brooks
Papers; Mrs. James Cornelison interview, transcript, p. 6, ACHF.
49. ABH, 30 July 1926, p. 8; J. R. Hamilton, Address to the Grand
Jury, 3 Oct. 1921, James Robert Hamilton Papers, SHC (hereafter, JRH).
50. Loucks, Klan in Pennsylvania, 62-69; Jackson, Klan in the City,
7, Klan, Georgia, Official Document, March 1927, p. 3; ibid., April 1927, 1.
51. Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Nov. 1926, pp. 2, 4; Evans,
Klan of Tomorrow, 25; Klan, Klan Building, 7, 8; also Loucks, Klan in
Pennsylvania, 62-69.
52. Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, Thirty Three Questions Answered
(Atlanta, 1924), 16; Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Oct. 1926, p. 1.
53. Klan, Georgia, Official Document, March 1927, p. 4; ibid.,
Jan-Mar. 1928, p. 4; R. A. Patton, "A Klan Reign of Terror," Current His-


--- PAGE 241 ---
206 Notes to Pages 20-24
tory 28 (April 1928), 54; "Confession of Luke Trimble," p. 4, box 60, Ralph
Emerson McGill Papers, EU (hereafter, REM); Robert L. Duffus, "The Ku
Klux Klan in the Middle West," World's Work 46 (1923), 367-68; Donald
W. Stewart to Gov. H. J. Allen, 7 July 1922, series B, box 48, Henry J. Allen
Papers, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. (hereafter, HJA); NYT, 14
Sept. 1924, section VIII, 12.
54. Howard Washington Odum, An American Epoch: Southern Por-
traiture in the National Picture (New York, 1930), 321; John A. Cobb to
Mrs. M. A. L. Erwin, 16 July 1924, box 89, Howell Cobb Papers, UA.
55. "Application for Citizenship" forms, box 2, AK; Ku Klux Klan,
Kloran, 5th ed. (Atlanta, 1916), 28, 40; Klan, Georgia, Official Document,
Nov. 1926, p. 4; Klan, Klan Building, 10; Atlanta Independent, Nov. 15,
1923; J. Q. Jett to R. L. Felton, [1924], box 8, RLF. See also NYT, 2 Sept.
1924, p. 21; NYT, 11 April 1925, p. 9.
56. Alfred Vagts, A History of Militarism, Civilian and Military (New
York, 1959), quote on 13-14. For the growth of militarism among frater-
nalists by the late nineteenth century, see Mary Ann Clawson, Con-
structing Brotherhood: Class, Gender, and Fraternalism (Princeton,
1989), 233-38.
57. See the "Application for Citizenship" forms in box 2, AK; Klan,
Klan Building, 4, 13, 14. The Klan also idolized Theodore Roosevelt, the
foremost civilian militarist in the nation's history. See Kourier, Dec. 1927,
p. 15; Evans, Klan of Tomorrow, 14. For martial men, see Robert L. Duffus,
"Ancestry and End of the Ku Klux Klan," World's Work 46 (1923), 534;
Chester T. Crowell, "The Collapse of Constitutional Government," Inde-
pendent 109 (9 Dec. 1922), 334; NYT, 18 March 1928, p. 2; NYT, 30 March
1928, p. 7; Samuel Streetsman to Gov. Henry J. Allen, 1 Nov. 1922, series
B, box 49, HJA; Lipset and Raab, Politics of Unreason, 124.
Chapter 2
1. Quoted in N. Gordon Levin, Jr., Woodrow Wilson and World
Politics: America's Response to War and Revolution (New York, 1968),
132.
2. For recognition by contemporaries of the transformation in South-
ern life, see Robert Preston Brooks, Georgia Studies: Selected Writings
(Athens, 1952), esp. 224; William Joseph Robertson, The Changing South
(New York, 1927). More generally, see, on developments in the South,
Gavin Wright, Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Econ-
omy Since the Civil War (New York, 1986), 52, 62; Daniel Joseph Singal,
The War Within: From Victorian to Modernist Thought in the South,
1919-1945 (Chapel Hill, 1982); and in the nation at large, Robert H.
Wiebe, The Search for Order, 1870-1920 (New York, 1967); Walter Dean
Burnham, The Current Crisis in American Politics (New York, 1982), esp.
138; Louis Galambos and Joseph Pratt, Rise of the Corporate Common-


--- PAGE 242 ---
Notes to Pages 24-26 207
wealth: U.S. Business and Public Policy in the 20th Century (New York,
1988), esp. 39-99; Stephen Skowronek, Building a New American State:
The Expansion of National Administrative Capacities, 1877-1920 (Cam-
bridge, Mass., 1982), esp. 163-284.
3. Frank Jackson Huffman, "Old South, New South: Continuity and
Change in a Georgia County, 1850-1880" (Ph.D. diss., Yale University,
1974), 138-39; Barrow et al., History of Athens, 49, 99.
4. Quote from Thomas Jackson Woofter, Jr., "The Negroes of Ath-
ens, Georgia," BUGA, 14, n. 4 (Dec. 1913), 13. See also Institute for
the Study of Georgia Problems, "Survey of Athens and Clarkd County,
Georgia; Part I," BUGA, v. 44, n. 3 (March 1944), 1-3; Earnest B. Wil-
son, "The Water Supply of the Negro," BUGA, v. 31, n. 3a (March 1931),
34-35.
5. "Oldest Barber in Town," interview by Grace McCune, 28 March
1939, transcript, p. 5, box 13, Federal Writers' Project Papers, SHC (hereaf-
ter, FWP); Jack Thomas interview, transcript, p. 1, box 2, ACHF. For a
sense of Athens in 1920, see American Red Cross, Report of Survey: Ath-
ens and Clarke.County. (Athens, [1920]).
6. ADB, 19 Feb. 1921, in series C, box 355, NAACP; ADB, 8 Sept.
1921, p. 4.
7. Jurgen Kuczynski, "The Merchant and His Wage Earning Custom-
ers in the South and in the North," American Federationist, 35 (Nov.
1928), 1,340; Georgia, Commissioner of Commerce and Labor, Annual Re-
port (1920), 3, 10 (hereafter, CCL); ibid. (1917), 4; ibid. (1918), 4; ibid.
(1922), 5; Taylor, "Negroes of Clarke County," 36-37; Robert Preston
Brooks, "A Local Study of the Race Problem," Political Science Quarterly
26 (June 1911), 218-19.
8. On these efforts, see Jacquelyn Dowd Hall, Robert Korstad, and
James Leloudis, "Cotton Mill People: Work, Community, and Protest in
the Textile South, 1880-1940," AHR 91 (1986), 266; Herbert Jay Layne,
The Cotton Mill Worker in the Twentieth Century (New York, 1944),
203-6; Bernard Yabroff and Ann J. Herlihy, "History of Work Stoppages in
Textile Industries," Monthly Labor Review 76 (April 1953), 369-70; Mer-
cer Griffin Evans, "The History of the Organized Labor Movement in
Georgia" (Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, 1929), esp. 32, 90-95,
348-49; George L. Googe, "Organizing the Workers of Georgia," American
Federationist 35 (Nov. 1928), 1,326.
9. ADH, 22 Jan. 1914, p. 1; ADH, 24 March 1914, p. 1, ADH, 2 Oct.
1916, p. 1; ADH, 8 Jan. 1914, p. 4; ADB, 28 April 1920; "Life of a Retired
Mill Worker," interview by Sadie B. Hornsby, 10 Jan. 1939, transcript, pp.
13, 8, box 11, FWP; ADH, 25 Jan. 1916, p. 4; ADB, 21 June 1921, p. 1.
10. Quoted in Brooks, "Local Study of the Race Problem," 212-13,
218-19; Willard Range, A Century of Georgia Agriculture, 1850-1950
(Athens, 1954), 259-61; H. S. O'Kelley, "Sanitary Conditions Among the
Negroes of Athens, Georgia," BUGA, 18, n. 7 (July 1918), 23; Jacqueline


--- PAGE 243 ---
208 Notes to Pages 26-30
Jones, Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and the Fam-
ily, from Slavery to the Present (New York, 1986), 130-31, 133; Robertson,
Changing South, 130.
11. T. W. Singleton to Joseph Mackey Brown, 14 June 1913, box 6,
Joseph Mackey Brown Papers, Atlanta Historical Society (hereafter, JMB
and AHS, respectively).
12. Wilson Jefferson to Mr. James Weldon Johnson, 3 May 1917, series
G, box 45, NAACP. See also Thomas Jackson Woofter, Negro Migration:
Changes in Rural Organization and Population of the Cotton Belt (New
York, 1920), 15, 139.
13. Quoted in Taylor, "Negroes of Clarke County," 39, 40-41, also
35-36, 43, 51-54. See also Range, A Century of Georgia Agriculture,
266-67; Tindall, Emergence of the New South, 61.
14. Case file 10218-117, RG 165, frames 545-49, reel 19, FSAA. See
also Atlanta Independent, 28 Aug. 1918, frame 704, reel 221, Tuskegee
Institute News Clipping File, Hollis Burke Frissell Library, Tuskegee Insti-
tute, Alabama (hereafter, TINCF).
15. For exceptions to this neglect, see Raymond Wolters, The New
Negro on Campus: Black College Rebellions of the 1920s (Princeton,
1975); Neil R. McMillen, Dark Journey: Black Mississippians in the Age
of Jim Crow(Urbana, 111., 1989), 302-17.
16. Wilson Jefferson to Mr. James Weldon Johnson, 3 May 1917, series
G, box 45, NAACP. Tindall, Emergence of the New South, 159. See also
the branch files of the NAACP (series G).
17. Application for Charter, Athens Branch, NAACP, 7 Feb. 1917, se-
ries G, box 43, NAACP; [Walter F.] White to John R. Shillady, 9 July 1918,
series G, box 49, NAACP; G. C. Callaway to Roy Nash, 3 June 1917, series
G, box 43, NAACP.
18. Branch report, Atlanta NAACP, 3 April 1919, series G, box 49,
NAACP; ibid, 20 June 1921, loc. cit. Synopsis of Work of NAACP, Atlanta
Branch, 1919, loc. cit.; T. K. Gibson to James Weldon Johnson, 7 March
1919, box 43, loc. cit. See also Atlanta Branch circular, 12 Feb. 1919, loc.
cit.; Georgia, House Journal (1920), 452.
19. Dykeman and Stokely, Seeds of Southern Change, 55; John Mi-
chael Matthews, "Studies in Race Relations in Georgia, 1890-1930"
(Ph.D. diss., Duke University, 1970), 157; John William Fanning, "Negro
Migration: A Study of the Exodus of the Negroes between 1920 and 1925
from Middle Georgia Counties," BUGA 30, no. 8b (June 1930), 32-33.
20. Case file 10218-319, RG 165, NARC, frame 254, reel 21, FSAA;
Case file 10218-289, RG 165, frames 175-76, loc. cit.; Case file 10218-311,
RG 165, frame 241, loc. cit.
21. Taylor, "Negroes of Athens," 54; Case file BS 203677, RG 65,
frames 872-916, reel 7, FSAA.
22. Typescript history, "Origin and Purpose," [n.d.], series I, frames
908-9, reel 4, CIC; also Progress in Race Relations: Survey of the Work of


--- PAGE 244 ---
Notes to Pages 30-32 209
the CIC, 1924-1925, frame 516, loc. cit.; Alexander quoted in Dykeman
and Stokely, Seeds of Southern Change, 80, also 11. For overviews of the
CIC, see ibid., 52-96; Morton Sosna, In Search of the Silent South: South-
ern Liberals and the Race Issue (New York, 1977), 20-41.
23. CIC, "Annual Report, 1922," series I, frame 418, reel 4, CIC;
Kuhn et al., Living Atlanta, 165-66; Prudential Committee, Minutes, 14
Feb. 1927, PCM; Dyer, University of Georgia, 178-82.
24. Quoted in Dykeman and Stokely, Seeds of Southern Change, 95;
also 81-96. See also Kuhn et al., Living Atlanta, 249; Jacquelyn Dowd
Hall, Revolt Against Chivalry: Jessie Daniel Ames and the Women's
Campaign Against Lynching (New York, 1979).
25. Annie Laura Ragsdale, "The History of Co-Education at the Uni-
versity of Georgia, 1918-1945" (M.A. thesis, University of Georgia, 1948)
[no page numbers in text]; Dyer, University of Georgia, 170-73; ADH, 17
Jan. 1914, p. 2; ADH, 22 April 1914, p. 8; ADH, 29 April 1914, p. 2. More
generally, see A. Elizabeth Taylor, "Revival and Development of the
Woman Suffrage Movement in Georgia," GHQ 42 (1958), esp. 345-46;
Ann Firor Scott, The Southern Lady: From Pedestal to Politics (Chicago,
1970).
26. ADH, 8 July 1914, p. 4; A. Elizabeth Taylor, "The Last Phase of
the Woman Suffrage Movement in Georgia," GHQ 43 (March 1959), 16,
18; ADH, 12 June 1916, p. 4.
27. Ragsdale, "Co-Education"; Dyer, University of Georgia, 172-73.
For like sentiments now common elsewhere in the South, see Robertson,
Changing South, 128-29; nationally, see Nancy Cott, The Grounding of
Modern Feminism (New Haven, 1987), 11-50.
28. "Mildred Lawson," [pseud.], interview by S. B. Hornsby, tran-
script, p. 7, box 12, FWP; Martha Comer, interview, transcript, box 1,
ACHF, 3; also "I Maids for the Co-Eds," interview by S. B. Hornsby, 14-16
March 1939, transcript, p. 7, box 11, FWP.
29. ADH, 5 June 1921, II, p. 4; CES, 2 July 1920, p. 4; ADB, 23 July
1921, p. 4; ADB, 13 Aug. 1921, p. 5. For analogous fears elsewhere, see
Carroll Smith-Rosenberg, "The New Woman as Androgyne," in Disorderly
Conduct: Visions of Gender in Victorian America (New York, 1985),
250-52.
30. ADB, 25 Aug. 1921, p. 5; ABH, 7 Feb. 1930, 1, also ADB, 25 Feb.
1920, 4.
31. "I Maids for the Co-Eds," transcript, p. 11, FWP. See also "Mildred
Lawson," [pseud.], transcript, loc. cit.; "Julie Nickerson," [pseud.], inter-
view by L. T. Bradley, transcript, p. 9, box 11, loc. cit.
32. Elaine Tyler May, Great Expectations: Marriage and Divorce in
Post-Victorian America (Chicago, 1980), 2; Department of Commerce, Bu-
reau of the Census, Marriage and Divorce, 1916 (Washington, D.C., 1919),
11, 36, 40; idem, Marriage and Divorce, 1922 (Washington, D.C., 1925),
75.


--- PAGE 245 ---
210 Notes to Pages 33-35
33. ADH, 28 March 1914, p. 4; ABH, 1 April 1927, p. 4; ABH, 10 July
1923, p. 4; ADB, 20 July 1919, p. 3; ADB, 13 April 1920, p. 1.
34. For the related shift from Victorianism to modernism in Southern
culture, see Singal, War Within, esp. 9, 83, 111, 318. For gender as a sign
in a wider discourse of ambivalence about modernity, see Cott, Grounding
of Modern Feminism, 271.
35. Barrow, History of Athens, 98; Coleman, History of Georgia, 235,
269; Howard A. Turner and L. D. Howell, "Condition of Farmers in a
White-Farmer Area of the Cotton Piedmont, 1924-1926," U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture, Circular No. 78 (Washington, D.C., 1929), 20-21;
U.S. Department of Agriculture, brochure, "Clarke County Farm Statis-
tics, 1900-1955," p. 2, s.v. "Clarke County," File II, Record Group 4,
GDAH; Range, Century of Georgia Agriculture, 267.
36. Allison Davis, Burleigh B. Gardner, and Mary R. Gardner, Deep
South: A Social Anthropological Study of Caste and Class (Chicago,
1941), 73-75, 84-89, 91, 327-28, 409-10, 413; Walter B. Hill, "Rural Sur-
vey of Clarke County, Georgia, with Special Reference to the Negroes,"
BUGA, 15, n. 3 (March 1915), 23; Huffman, "Old South," 221; Jones, La-
bor of Love, 90-91; Turner and Howell, "Condition of Farmers," 16, 26,
37; Wright, Old South, New South, 55; Joseph and James Costa interview,
transcript, pp. 1-2, box 1, ACHF.
37. Quote from "Life on 'Happy Top,' " interview by S. B. Hornsby,
transcript, p. 5, box 11, FWP. See also Layne, Cotton Mill Worker, 65, 129;
Lois MacDonald, Southern Mill Hills: A Study of Social and Economic
Forces in Certain Mill Villages (New York, 1928), 27; Douglas DeNatale,
"Traditional Culture and Community in a Piedmont Textile Mill Village"
(M.A. thesis, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1980), 19, 27.
38. D. W. Dyal to Thomas E. Watson, 6 June 1922, box 14, TEW,
SHC. See also "Life of a Retired Mill Worker," transcript, pp. 14, 15, 19;
John Morland, Millways of Kent (Chapel Hill, 1958), 42, 67-68; "Life His-
tory of Mrs. Ann Waldrop," [pseud.], interview by S. B. Hornsby, 3 Jan.
1939, transcript, p. 15, box 11, FWP.
39. Testimony of Walter Francis White, U.S. Congress, Senate, Com-
mittee of the Judiciary, Punishment for the Crime of Lynching, 73rd Con-
gress, 2nd session, 20-21 Feb. 1934, p. 10; Walter White, Rope and Faggot:
A Biography of fudge Lynch (New York, 1929), 232, 234, 255; CIC, Annual
Report (1922), series I, frame 421, reel 4, CIC.
40. Arthur F. Raper, Preface to Peasantry: A Tale of Two Black Belt
Counties (Chapel Hill, 1936), 172; the Rev. R. D. Ponder to Editor, The
Crisis, 31 May 1920, series G, box 43, NAACP; see also S. S. Humbert to
Mr. J. W. Johnson, 10 Aug. 1922, loc. cit.
41. ABH, 11 Feb. 1923, p. 1; ABH, 11 June 1922, p. 4; ABH, 15 April
1927, p. 1; NYT, 22 Nov. 1920, p. 8.
42. Quoted in Dale Newman, "Work and Community Life in a South-
ern Town," LH 19 (Spring 1978), 212. See also Marjorie A. Potwin, Cotton


--- PAGE 246 ---
Notes to Pages 35-37 211
Mill People of the Piedmont: A Study in Social Change (New York, 1927),
102-4, 108; MacDonald, Southern Mill Hills, 31, 44-45; Hall et al.; "Cot-
ton Mill People," 250.
43. For examples, see David Montgomery; "Violence and the Struggle
for Unions in the South, 1880-1930," Perspectives on the American South
1 (1981), 35-47; Tom Tippett, When Southern Labor Stirs (New York,
1931), 64-65, 87, 106; Irving Bernstein, The Lean Years (Boston, 1960), 17,
23, 41; Evans, "Organized Labor," 229.
44. See ADB, 11 May 1922, p. 5; ADH, 4 Aug. 1914, p. 8; ABH, 16
May 1927, p. 1; ABH, 11 July 1926, p. 10; Morland, Millways of Kent,
90-91; J. Wayne Flynt, "Folks Like Us: The Southern Poor White Family,"
in The Web of Southern Social Relations, ed. Walter J. Fraser, Jr., et. al.
(Athens, 1985), 229-30; Kuhn et al., Living Atlanta, 131, 136-37. More
generally, see Linda Gordon, Heroes of Their Own Lives: The Politics and
History of Family Violence, Boston, 1880-1960 (New York, 1988), 250-88.
45. For class structure and power in the South in these years, see
Wright, Old South, New South; David L. Carlton, Mill and Town in South
Carolina, 1880-1920 (Baton Rouge, 1982), 118-19; Paul D. Escott, Many
Excellent People: Power and Privilege in North Carolina, 1850-1900
(Chapel Hill, 1985); C. Vann Woodward, Origins of the New South,
1877-1913 (Baton Rouge, 1951). For Georgia see Numan V. Bartley, The
Creation of Modern Georgia (Athens, 1983), 103-46.
46. See Robert Preston Brooks, The Agrarian Revolution in Georgia,
1865-1912 (Madison, 1914), 52-53, 63-68; Harold D. Woodman, "Post-
Civil War Southern Agriculture and the Law," Agricultural History 53
(Jan. 1979), 319-37; idem, "Postbellum Social Change and Its Effects on
Marketing the South's Cotton Crop," Agricultural History 56 (Jan. 1982),
215-30.
47. United States Department of the Interior, Census Office, Tenth
Census of the United States (Washington, D.C., 1883), vol. 3, Agriculture,
252; ibid., Fourteenth Census of the United States (1920), pt. 2, vol. 6,
p. 334. Hereafter cited as Census, with decennial year. On commercial
production and the yeomanry's demise, see Hahn, Roots of Southern Popu-
lism; Coleman, History of Georgia, 266.
48. Wright, Old South, New South, 111-12; Range, Century of Geor-
gia Agriculture, 265; Coleman, History of Georgia, 259; Census (1920), pt.
2, vol. 6, Agriculture, 297-98, 306-7.
49. Hall et al., "Cotton Mill People," 245; Census (1910), Supplement
for Georgia, 592, 608; Census (1920), vol. 3, Population, 206, 222; ibid.
(1890), 758; Census (1880), Manufactures, 104, 114; ibid. (1919), vol. 9, p.
265; Barrow, History of Athens, 98; ADB, 3 March 1922, 3. The domi-
nance of town life in Clarke County differentiated it from the South as a
whole where three in every four people remained in the countryside, al-
though only one in two in farming. See I. A. Newby, The South : A History
(n.p., 1978), 294, 382.


--- PAGE 247 ---
212 Notes to Pages 37-41
50. Morland, Mill-ways of Kent, 23-24; MacDonald, Southern Mill
Hills, 49, 52; CCL, Annual Report (1921), 4; Census (1920), vol. 9, Manu-
factures, 270; "Life of a Retired Mill Worker," transcript, p. 16.
51. Ralph C. Patrick, Jr., "A Cultural Approach to Social Stratifica-
tion" (Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, 1953), 297, 300-304; Morland, Mill-
ways of Kent, passim; Bess Beatty, "Textile Labor in the North Carolina
Piedmont: Mill Owner Images and Mill Worker Response," LH 25 (Fall
1984), 496; Kuhn et al., Living Atlanta, 35.
52. Jack Thomas, interview, transcript, p. 1, ACHF; Morland, Mill-
ways of Kent, 31, 35, 39, 43-44, 202, 215; Jennings J. Rhyne, Some South-
ern Cotton Mill Workers and Their Villages (Chapel Hill, 1930), 206-7,
34; MacDonald, Southern Mill Hills, 75-76, 113-115; Harriet L. Herring,
Passing of the Mill Village (Chapel Hill, 1949), 57; Carlton, Mill and
Town, 165, 170. More generally, see Jacquelyn Dowd Hall et al., Like a
Family: The Making of a Southern Cotton Mill World (Chapel Hill, 1987),
esp. chapters 3-6.
53. Carlton, Mill and Town, 157; Morland, Millways of Kent, ix, 80,
183; Bernstein, Lean Years, 8; Dale Newman, "Work and Community Life
in a Southern Town," LH 19 (Spring 1978), 207; MacDonald, Southern Mill
Hills, 83, 99, 103, 132-134, 150; Patrick, "Cultural Analysis," 296-97; Ina
Cooper to Aaron Cohen, 24 March 1917, box 2, CDF.
54. Bernstein, Lean Years, 9; MacDonald, Southern Mill Hills, 28, 56,
96, 128-29,- Harriet L. Herring, Welfare Work in Mill Villages (Chapel Hill,
1929), 28-29; Layne, Cotton Mill Worker, 58-59; Ina Cooper to Aaron
Cohen, 24 March 1917, box 2, CDF; Cooper to C. D. Flanigen, 3 Feb. 1917,
loc. cit.; saying quoted in MacDonald, Southern Mill Hills, 78.
55. Woofter, Negro Migration, 55. More generally, see Census (1920),
Agriculture, pt. 2, vol. 6, pp. 297, 306-7; Wright, Old South, New South,
101, 104-7, 119.
56. Davis et al., Deep South, 55; Dittmer, Black Georgia in the Pro-
gressive Era, 27; Woofter, "Negroes of Athens," 7, 8, 12; "Principle of
Grammar School Thirty-Three," interview by S. B. Hornsby, 27 July 1939,
transcript, pp. 4-7, 10, box 11, FWP; ADH, 17 Nov. 1914, 1.
57. M. Ashby Jones to "Dear Brother," 24 May 1921, box 3, Robert L.
Rodgers Papers, GDAH (hereafter, RLR). On the roots and content of the
CIC, see Elaine A. Brownell, The Urban Ethos in the South, 1920-1930
(Baton Rouge, 1975), 151-53; Sosna, In Search of the Silent South, 26-27;
Dykeman and Stokely, Seeds of Southern Change, 53-54, 64-65; Cynthia
Neverdon-Morton, Afro-American Women of the South and the Advance-
ment of the Race, 1895-1925 (Knoxville, 1989).
58. Huffman, "Old South," 86; DeNatale, "Traditional Culture," 19,
27; Census (1920), Manufactures, 267; ibid., (1930), Population, pt. 1, p.
510; Bessie Mell Industrial Home, Minutes, 1901-1909, box 6, Nina Scud-
der Memorial Collection, UGA (hereafter, NSMC).
59. On inheritance and authority, see Davis, Deep South, 95-99; John


--- PAGE 248 ---
Notes to Pages 41-43 213
Bondurant, Sr., interview, transcript, p. 1, ACHF; Turner and Howell,
"Condition of Farmers," 26, 30, 37-39. On the flight of rural youth, see
ADH, 14 Jan. 1914, p. 4; Brownell, Urban Ethos in the South, 74-75,
79-80; Orie Latham Hatcher, Rural Girls in the City for Work (Richmond,
1930), 41, 83-84. On child labor, see Coleman, History of Georgia, 306;
Bernstein, Lean Years, 57.
60. For "filiarchy," see Gilman M. Ostrander, American Civilization
in the First Machine Age: 1890-1940 (New York, 1970), esp. 9-13, 237-73.
On challenges to Victorianism as a factor in the Klan's rise, see Cohen,
Rebellion Against Victorianism, 136-56; also Singal, The War Within,
318. For declining church participation among young people, see Edmund
D. Brunner, Church Life in the Rural South (1923; reprint, New York,
1969), 75.
61. See ADH, 9 Nov. 1914, p. 4, Grand Jury Report, 17 Jan. 1922, p.
391, Clarke County Superior Court, Minutes (hereafter, CCSC); "Life on
'Happy Top,' " interview by S. B. Hornsby, 17 March 1939, transcript, pp.
5-6, 17, FWP. Elsewhere, see Robertson, The Changing South, 114,
126-27; John D'Emilio and Estelle B. Freedman, Intimate Matters: A His-
tory of Sexuality in America (New York, 1988), 171-235.
62. Dyer, University of Georgia, 178-82; William F. Mugleston, "The
Press and Student Activism at the University of Georgia in the 1920s,"
GHQ 64 (Fall 1980), 214-52; William Tate, Diary, vol. I, 16 Jan. 1925,
William Tate Archives, UA; also, ibid., 14 Jan. 1925; ibid., 20 March 1925.
63. Bartley, Creation of Modern Georgia, 75-87; Coleman, History of
Georgia, esp. 218-22; Evans, "Organized Labor,"24-26; Jonathan Garlock,
comp., A Guide to Local Assemblies of the Knights of Labor (Westport,
1982), 53.
64. On Georgia Populism, see C. Vann Woodward, Tom Watson:
Agrarian Rebel (1938; reprint, New York, 1977); Hahn, Roots of Southern
Populism-, William F. Holmes, "The Southern Farmers' Alliance: the Geor-
gia Experience," GHQ 72 (Winter 1988), 627-52.
65. Bartley, Creation of Modern Georgia, 96-102; Coleman, History
of Georgia, 300-301; Alex Matthews Arnett, The Populist Movement in
Georgia (New York, 1922), 185; CCSC, Registration of Charters, Book 2,
25 Jan. 1890 (pp. 1-2), and 11 Dec. 1894 (pp. 98-99), GDAH.
66. See Escott, Many Excellent People, esp. 241, 253-61; Woodward,
Origins of the New South, 212; Coleman, History of Georgia, 248, 277;
J. Morgan Kousser, The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction
and the Establishment of the One-Party South, 1880-1910 (New Haven,
1974).
67. Russell Korobkin, "The Politics of Disfranchisement in Georgia,"
GHQ 74 (Spring 1990), 20-58; Matthews, "Studies in Race Relations,"
116-17; Thomas E. Watson, Socialists and Socialism (Thomson, Ga.,
1910). On Populism as a movement representing the interests of middle-
range farmers and cool towards large planters and propertyless rural people


--- PAGE 249 ---
214 Notes to Pages 43-46
alike, see Holmes, "Southern Farmers' Alliance," 646-51; David Mont-
gomery, "On Goodwyn's Populists," Marxist Perspectives 1 (Spring 1978),
166-73; James Green, "Populism, Socialism, and the Promise of Democ-
racy," Radical History Review 24 (1980), 7-40.
68. Institute for the Study of Georgia Problems, "Survey of Athens
and Clarke County," 4-8. On the commercial-civic elite and municipal
reform, see Brownell, Urban Ethos in the South, 47, 157-58, 172; Kuhn et
al., Living Atlanta, 89, 311; Coleman, History of Georgia, 303-4, 308.
69. Ina Cooper to Aaron Cohen, 24 March 19.17, box 2, CDF;
Brownell, Urban Ethos in the South, 54; Dykeman, Seeds of Southern
Change, 101; Escott, Many Excellent People, 260-67; Wright, Old South,
New South, 123, 176-77, 259.
70. "I've Been Drifting," interview by S. B. Hornsby, 21 July 1939,.
transcript, p. 14, box 12, FWP; Ralph Wardlow, "Negro Suffrage in Geor-
gia, 1867-1930," BUGA, vol. 33, n. 2a (Sept. 1932), 78-79.
71. See Samuel P. Hays, "The Politics of Reform in Municipal Gov-
ernment in the Progressive Era," in American Political History as Social
Analysis (Knoxville, 1980); James Weinstein, The Corporate Ideal in the
Liberal State, 1900-1918 (Boston, 1968), 92-116; Tindall, Emergence of
the New South, 143, 145; Skowronek, Building a New American State,
esp. 165, 211, 286-87; Burnham, Current Crisis in American Politics, 110,
also 86-87, 97, 109.
72. Tindall, Emergence of the New South, 111-13; Harry Hodgson to
E. C. Branson, 28 October 1922, box 6, Eugene Cunningham Branson Pa-
pers, SHC (hereafter, ECB); Fanning, "Negro Migration," 17-21; USDA,
"Clarke County Farm Statistics," box 9, File II, GDAH.
73. H. G. Smith to Hoke Smith, 28 Dec. 1920, box 5, HS; Harry Hodg-
son to E. C. Branson, 28 Oct. 1922, box 6, ECB; T. E. Fillyow to TEW, 8
August 1921, box 12, TEW; T. Z. Daniel to TEW, 23 June 1921, loc. cit.;
see also F. M. Hughes to TEW, loc. cit.
74. ADB, 25 Aug. 1921, p. 6; MacDonald, Southern Mill Hills, 83-84,
104; Bernstein, Lean Years, 3, 9; "Life on "Happy Top,' " transcript, p. 17.
75. Georgia, Senate Journal (1922), 49; R. L. Woodruff to Hoke Smith,
11 December 1920, box 5, HS; J. J. Brown quoted in Fite, American Farm-
ers, 34-35; W. F. Bowe, Jr., to TEW, 24 Dec. 1921, box 13, TEW; ADB, 11
July 1922, p. 1. On the growth of vagrancy, see E. I. Price to Superinten-
dent M. L. Brittain, 8 Feb. 1921, box 2, CDF; Brownell, Urban Ethos in
the South, 107; Kuhn et al., Living Atlanta, 89.
76. Yabroff and Herlihy, "Work Stoppages," 368; David Montgomery,
"Struggle for Unions," 35-47; Layne, Cotton Mill Worker, 206; nationally,
see Bernstein, Lean Years, 144-49, 200; Robert W. Dunn, The American-
ization of Labor: The Employers' Offensive Against the Trade Unions
(New York, 1927), esp. 21-33.
77. Evans, "Organized Labor," 32; Coleman, History of Georgia, 272;
Bernstein, Lean Years, 63-64, 84, 89, 149, 242; Murray, Red Scare,


--- PAGE 250 ---
Notes to Pages 46-49 215
263-81; Frank Strieker, "Affluence for Whom? Another Look at Prosperity
and the Working Classes in the 1920s," LH 24 (1983), 5-33.
78. NYT, 11 Oct. 1920, p. 20; J. S. Hale to Hoke Smith, 7 Dec. 1920,
box 5, HS; J. L. Cartledge to TEW, 28 Dec. 1921, TEW; Helen Dortch
Longstreet to Rebecca Latimer Felton, 20 Oct. 1923, box 7, RLF. See also
Turner and Howell, "Condition of Farmers," 34-35; Range, Century of
Georgia Agriculture, 251; Fite, American Farmers, 34.
79. Thomas J. Shackelford to Hoke Smith, 29 Dec. 1920, box 5, HS;
the Rev. R. M. Walker to TEW, 14 Jan. 1922, box 13, TEW; Ernest W.
Fanning to TEW; box 12, loc. cit. See also L. R. Driskell to TEW, 6 Sept.
1922, box 15, loc. cit.; MacDonald, Southern Mill Hills, 71, 144.
80. August Andrae [illeg.] to TEW, 2 June 1921, box 12, TEW, SHQ
Thomas W. Hardwick to Rebecca Latimer Felton, 16 Oct. 1918, box
5, RLF; Thomas W. Hardwick to RLF, 12 Jan. 1918, loc. cit. See also TEW
to Robert L. Rodgers, 19 Aug. [n.d.], box 5, RLR; Dr. Grace Kirkland to
Rebecca Latimer Felton, 11 Oct. 1920, box 6, RLF.
81. TEW to Rebecca Latimer Felton, 4 June 1921, box 8, RLF, UGA;
Helen Dortch Longstreet to Hoke Smith, 3 May 1923, box 17, HS.
82. For the election results, see Edward L. Cashin, "Thomas E. Wat-
son and the Catholic Layman's Association of Georgia" (Ph.D. diss., Ford-
ham University, 1962), 235. For Watson's causes, see Woodward, Tom
Watson, 473-86.
83. R. M. Johnson to TEW, 8 Dec. 1921, box 13, TEW; two Valdosta
telegrams to TEW dated 27 Jan. 1922, loc. cit.; J. S. Dean to TEW, 7 Feb.
1922, loc. cit. Citations in the text are limited to Georgia, but Watson's
papers from these years contain communications of support from all over
the nation.
84. J. S. Hale to Hoke Smith, 7 Dec. 1920, box 5, HS. "Shall we be
yoked into slavery to the moneypower?" queried another Georgian. Au-
gust Andrae [illeg.] to TEW, 2 June 1921, box 12, TEW.
85. The best treatment of Watson's evolution can be found in Wood-
ward, Tom Watson. See also Barton C. Shaw, The Wool-Hat Boys : Geor-
gia's Populist Party (Baton Rouge, 1984), esp. 46, 101, 149-153. For a simi-
lar trajectory, see "Sketch of Robert L. Rodgers," box 5, RLR. This is not
to imply that there was a linear movement from Populism to the Klan; on
the contrary, Georgia Populists no doubt divided after the 1890s, as did
their counterparts elsewhere. At least one former state Populist leader,
Judge James K. Hines, became an outspoken opponent of the Klan. See
ABH, 5 Nov. 1928, p. 5.
86. For his own denial coupled with endorsement, see Watson to F. J.
Barbee, 26 May 1921, box 11, TEW. See also Z. Tiffy to TEW, 9 Sept. 1921,
box 12, loc. cit., in which the writer informed Watson of a rumor that he
was "a chartered member of the Klan and empowered to solicit member-
ship of the U.S. Senators." The rumor is plausible, as the Klan reportedly
had a secret section for prominent politicians.


--- PAGE 251 ---
216 Notes to Pages 49-51
87. See Woodward, Tom Watson, 463-86; Benjamin M. Blackman to
TEW, 19 Dec. 1921, box 13, TEW; Carl Hutchinson to TEW, 12 July 1921,
box 12, TEW; Rice, Klan in American Politics, 59-60; Sam H. Campbell
to TEW, 16 Sept. 1922, box 15, TEW; J. J. Brown to TEW, 21 Jan. 1921,
box 11, TEW; W. A. Sims to Watson, 24 Dec. 1921, box 13, TEW; Cashin,
"Thomas E. Watson," passim; Sam H. Campbell to TEW, 16 Sept. 1922,
box 15, TEW.
88. Caleb A. Ridley in Searchlight, 7 Oct. 1922, 4; ibid., 21 July 1923,
7; Jefferson Davis Klan No. 3 to TEW, 7 Oct. 1921, box 13, TEW; telegram
from Clarke to Mrs. TEW, 27 Sept. 1922, box 15, TEW; A. D. Kean to Sen.
TEW, 23 March 1922, box 14, TEW; A. S. Whitfield to TEW, 9 Sept. 1922,
box 15, TEW, 88.
89. For Watson's critics in the Frank case, see Dinnerstein, Leo Frank
Case, passim; for the transition to anti-Klan efforts, see Shepherd, "Fight-
ing the K.K.K. on Its Home Grounds," 508-11, 526; Robert L. Duffus,
"Counter-Mining the Ku Klux Klan," World's Work, 46 (July 1923),
275-84. On Athens, see Paul Hunnicutt to Hoke Smith, 12 Aug. 1920,
box 32, HS; Moseley, "Invisible Empire," 71-72; ADB, July 20, 1920, 4;
telegram to W. T. Anderson from J. H. Beusse et al., 5 Aug. 1920, box
32, HS.
90. Thomas Walter Reed, David Crenshaw Barrow (Athens, 1935), 71,
183-84; article reprinted in ABH, 21 Feb. 1926, 10. For concern over the
danger to outside investment, see form letter from M. Ashby Jones, for
CIC, May 24, 1921, box 3, RLR; W. M. Bryant to Hoke Smith, Feb. 4, 1926,
box 9, HS; Howell C. Erwin to Smith, Dec. 23, 1925, loc. cit.
91. Charles Tilly, "Collective Violence in European Perspective," in
Graham and Gurr, History of Violence in America, 41. See also E. P.
Thompson, "The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the Eighteenth
Century," Past Present 50 (Feb. 1971), 76-136; George Rude, The
Crowd in History: A Study of Popular Disturbances in France and En-
gland, 1730-1848, rev. ed. (London, 1981). For an American example of
this approach, see Robert P. Ingalls, "Lynching and Establishment Vio-
lence in Tampa, 1858-1935," JSH 53 (Nov. 1987), 613-44.
92. On the Regulators, see Rachel N. Klein, "Ordering the Backcoun-
try: The South Carolina Regulation," William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd
series, 38 (Oct. 1981), 661-80. On White Caps, see Ayers, Vengeance and
Justice, 255-61; Richard Maxwell Brown, "Historical Patterns of Violence
in America," in Graham and Gurr, History of Violence in America, 70-71;
James O. Nall, The Tobacco Night-Riders of Kentucky and Tennessee,
1905-1909 (Louisville, 1939); E. W. Crozier, The White-Caps: A History
of the Organization in Sevier County (1899; reprint; n.p., 1963); Paul J.
Vanderwood, Nightriders of Reelfoot Lake (Memphis, 1969); William F.
Holmes, "Whitecapping in Georgia: Carroll and Houston Counties, 1893,"
GHQ 64 (1980), 388-404; idem, "Moonshining and Collective Violence:
Georgia, 1889-1895," JAH 67 (1980), 589-611.


--- PAGE 252 ---
Notes to Pages 52-58 217
Chapter 3
1. "The Red, White, and Blue Barber Shop," interview by S. B.
Hornsby, 30 March 1939, transcript, p. 14, box 12, FWP; also "Life on
'Happy Top,' " transcript, passim,- "A Visit with Aunt Jerry," interview by
Grace McCune, 13 Jan. 1939, transcript, pp. 8-10, FWP.
2. "The Red, White, and Blue Barber Shop," transcript, p. 17, passim;
also "Life on 'Happy Top,' " transcript, p. 16.
3. Frost, Challenge of the Klan, 6-7. One 1930 study reported that
the highest stratum of mill workers was the homeowners, who suffered
little from the social segregation or stigma that their non-owning co-
workers did. Rhyne, Southern Cotton Mill, 49. The figure in the text is an
adjusted percentage, reflecting the 327 members for whom this data was
available. Where members were dependents in the period under consider-
ation, the variable reflects their parents' home ownership.
4. For similar patterns elsewhere, see Jackson, Klan in the City, 64,
150; Alexander, Crusade for Conformity, 28-30; Cocoltchos, "Invisible
Government," 138, 163; Goldberg, Hooded Empire, 47, 168; Gerlach, Blaz-
ing Crosses, 45; Lipset and Raab, Politics of Unreason, 123-24; Toy, "Klan
in Oregon," 134-36.
5. See Appendix for explanation of how the data were compiled and
why they probably understate rural participation.
6. See Census (1920), Agriculture, pt. 2, vol. 6, pp. 306-7; Census of
Agriculture: 1925, pt. II, The Southern States, 407. On the old and new
middle class, see C. Wright Mills, White Collar: The American Middle
Classes (1951; reprint, New York, 1976); Jurgen Kocka, White-Collar
Workers in America , 1890-1940: A Social-Political History in Interna-
tional Perspective (Beverly Hills, 1980).
7. In the dynamic class analysis used in this study, "dominant occu-
pation" indicates direction. Thus, the dominant occupation of a man who
worked in the mills as a youth but later acquired a farm would be regis-
tered as farmer; conversely, that of a farm laborer who became a clerk
would be clerk. For observations of declining elite participation by mid-
decade, see Robert S. Lynd and Helen Merrell Lynd, Middletown: A Study
in Contemporary American Culture (New York, 1929), 481-84; Goldberg,
Hooded Empire, 45.
8. See, e.g., Floyd Adams interview, 15 Dec. 1976, transcript, box 1,
ACHF; B. L. Flanigen interview, 11 Nov. 1976, transcript, loc. cit. I used
$7,000 in assets as a baseline for major proprietors, this being the average
among rural landowners able to hire tenants, according to Turner and
Howell: see "Condition of Farmers in a White-Farmer Area of the Cotton
Piedmont," 28-29.
9. ADH, 1 July 1914, p. 2; ADH, 19 March 1914, p. 1. Copy of peti-
tion in series I, frames 725-27, reel 7, Commission on Interracial Coopera-
tion Papers, originals held by Robert W. Woodruff Library, Atlanta Univer-


--- PAGE 253 ---
218 Notes to Pages 58-62
sity, Atlanta, Georgia (microfilm edition: Ann Arbor, 1984). Hereafter,
CIC.
10. Patrick, "Cultural Analysis," 69-70, 219-20, 299, 322, 335-36,
394; Davis et al., Deep South, 75-79, 108; Hall, "Disorderly Women,"
374-76; Morland, Millways of Kent, 65, 167-68, 175-80; "Red, White, and
Blue Barber Shop," transcript, pp. 2-3.
11. This discussion builds on a classic USDA study of a neighboring
Piedmont farming county in order to make meaningful inferences from
assets about relative class standing. That study found the average net
assets of sharecroppers to be $77; of renters, $440; of landowning farmers
with no tenants, $3,160; and of landowning farmers with one or more ten-
ants, $7,164. See Turner and Howell, "Condition of Farmers," 28-29. On
property requirements for suffrage, see Wardlow, "Negro Suffrage in Geor-
gia/'81-83.
12. When corrected to include only those born before 1890, for exam-
ple, the mean assets for 1921 rose to $3,189, while for those born after
1890, the corresponding figure was $678.
13. The proportion of Klan members in unskilled, menial labor
dropped from seventeen percent in 1910 to two percent in 1926-27. The
proportions in skilled trades and lower-level white-collar employment, in
contrast, grew from three percent and fifteen percent, respectively, in
1900, to twenty percent and thirty-four percent in 1926-27. The absolute
numbers of those whose occupation could be identified in the earlier years
were relatively small, however—forty in 1900 and 104 in 1910.
14. The mean assets of Klan owners or managers of small businesses
were valued at $1,348 in 1918, $2,022 in 1921, and $1,965 in 1927.
15. "Oldest Barber in Town," transcript, pp. 2-5; Woofter, "Negroes
of Athens," 38; idem, Negro Migration, 54.
16. "Grocery Store," interview by S. B. Hornsby, 3 Aug. 1939, tran-
script, pp. 1-7, FWP; "Waiting Room in a Bus Station," interview by Grace
McCune, 27 and 29 March 1939, transcript, p. 6, box 13, loc. cit. The
"average" referred to was that specified in Turner and Howell, "Condition
of Farmers."
17. These professors were not included in the data base since their
membership could not be verified. See Appendix for explanation.
18. ABH, 29 July 1926, p. 5; ABH, 1 Aug. 1926, p. 7; ABH, 16 May
1926, p. 6.
19. Hiram Wesley Evans, "The Ballots Behind the Ku Klux Klan,"
World's Work 55 (1927-28), 246; Searchlight, 30 Sept. 1922, p. 4; ibid., 11
Aug. 1923, p. 2.
20. Quotes from Klan, Papers Read at the Meeting, 86; Searchlight,
16 Jan. 1922, p. 3. For Simmons and Mary Elizabeth Tyler, see entries in
Coleman and Gurr, Dictionary of Georgia Biography. For other leading
Klansmen, see the "Biographical Introduction" to Leroy Amos Curry, The
Ku Klux Klan Under the Searchlight (Kansas, 1924).


--- PAGE 254 ---
Notes to Pages 63-67 219
21. On "rapid, uneven expansion and abrupt collapse [as] the motor
force behind small owner protest" in another context, see Philip G. Nord,
Paris Shopkeepers and the Politics of Resentment (Princeton, 1986), 484.
22. Georgia, State Tax Commission, Annual Report, 1921, quote from
p. 4, loss figures on p. 10. Generalizations in text based on this and subse-
quent Annual Reports.
23. Ibid., 1925-1926, p. 4. On the growth of outside capital in the
South in the 1920s, see Wright, Old South, New South, 63-64. On local
business, see G. H. Bell interview, transcript, pp. 3-5, ACHF; B. L. Flani-
gen interview, transcript, pp. 5-7, loc. cit.; Mrs. James Cornelison inter-
view, transcript, p. 5, loc. cit. See also Galambos and Pratt, Rise of the
Corporate Commonwealth, esp. 89.
24. "Oldest Barber in Town," transcript, 11-13; "Grocery Store,"
transcript, 1-8; also "From Farm to Filling Station," interview by S. B.
Hornsby, transcript, pp. 5-9, box 11, loc. cit. On the disproportionate toll
of regulation on small business, see Weinstein, Corporate Ideal in the Lib-
eral State, 252.
25. The total number this information was available for was 180.
26. See, for example, Goldberg, Hooded Empire, 35-37, 45-48, 64-65,
174-78; Cocoltchos, "Invisible Government," 614; Gerlach, Blazing
Crosses, 77, 133; Moore, Citizen Klansmen, 60-70. Since the 1920 census
does not provide breakdowns for local communities, it is impossible to
systematically compare Klan members with the wider population.
27. Arno J. Mayer, "The Lower Middle Class as Historical Problem,"
Journal of Modern History 47 (Sept. 1975), 409-36; Rudy Koshar, ed.,
Splintered Classes: Politics and the Lower Middle Class in Interwar Eu-
rope (New York, 1990); Kramnick, Republicanism and Bourgeois Radical-
ism, 23-34; Benjamin DeMott, The Imperial Middle: Why Americans
Can't Think Straight About Class (New York, 1990).
28. Rudy Koshar, "On the Politics of the Splintered Classes: Introduc-
tory Essay," in Koshar, Splintered Classes, 10-11; Hal Draper, Karl Marx's
Theory of Revolution, vol. 2, The Politics of Social Classes (New York,
1978), esp. 288-91, and chaps. 11-18.
29. Mayer, "Lower Middle Class," 415-22; Draper, Politics of Social
Classes, 291-300.
30. Mayer, "Lower Middle Class," 434, 423; Draper, Politics of Social
Classes, 300-305. On the most extreme such example, Nazi anti-
Semitism, see Arno J. Mayer, Why Did the Heavens Not Darken! The
"Final Solution" in History (New York, 1990), esp. 90-109; Thomas
Childers, The Nazi Voter: The Social Foundations of Fascism in Germany,
1919-1933 (Chapel Hill, 1983); Leon Trotsky, The Struggle Against Fas-
cism in Germany (New York, 1971).
31. For a view of the modern petite bourgeoisie as ineluctably conser-
vative in times of acute crisis, see Mayer, "Lower Middle Class," esp. 416,
436. For emphasis on contingency, see Jonathan M. Weiner, "Marxism and


--- PAGE 255 ---
220 Notes to Pages 67-71
the Lower Middle Class: A Reply to Arno Mayer," Journal of Modern His-
tory 48 (1976), 666-71; Draper, Politics of Social Classes, esp. 305-16;
Trotsky, Struggle Against Fascism in Germany, Nord, Paris Shopkeepers;
and the essays in Koshar, Splintered Classes.
32. One study thus reported two key political blocs, one of larger mer-
chants, professional men, and the rich generally; the other of smaller busi-
nesspeople, joined by carpenters, machinists and a smattering of mill
workers, who were " 'the knockers,' or those who habitually tend to ob-
struct [the] progress" promoted by the first group. Rhyne, Southern Cotton
Mill, 50-51. See also Morland, Millways of Kent, 223.
33. ADB, 11 Ian. 1918, p. 8; ADB, 17 Oct. 1919, p. 4; ADB, 13 July
1921, p. 6; CCL, Annual Report, 1916 to 1926.
34. H. G. Smith to Hoke Smith, 28 Dec. 1920, box 5, HS; Wright,
Old South, New South, 149-50; Range, A Century of Georgia Agriculture,
213, 262.
35. Murray,, Red Scare, 7; Kocka, White-Collar Workers, 155-56,
158-60, 178-80; Kourier, March 1926, p. 10.
36. Kocka, White-Collar Workers, 179, 186-89. "Office Rules,"
mimeo, box 3, CDF. The petition is contained in series I, frames 725-27,
reel 7, CIC.
37. Bernstein, Lean Years, 113.
38. Census (1920), vol. 9, Manufactures, 271; Mrs. James Cornelison
interview, transcript, p. 3, ACHF; see also "Life of a Retired Mill
Worker," passim.
39. Tindall, Emergence of the New South, 164; Coleman, History of
Georgia, 281.
40. Many instances of both are reported by Evans, who describes the
GFL's more conservative wing as comprising men who were "Democratic,
perhaps even Protestant and Ku Klux Klannish, and have maintained eco-
nomic and social 'respectability.' " See Evans, "History of Organized La-
bor," 215.
41. GFL quoted in Rowland T. Berthoff, "Southern Attitudes toward
Immigration, 1865-1914," fSH 17 (Feb. 1951), 348; L. R. Driskell to
Thomas E. Watson, 6 Sept. 1922, box 15, TEW.
42. Searchlight, 11 Nov. 1922, p. 6; ADH, 21 April 1914. For in-
stances of union collaboration with the Klan elsewhere, see Goldberg,
Hooded Empire, 80, 134; Lay, War, Revolution and the Ku Klux Klan, 92,
98; Alec Dennis interview by Cliff Kuhn, transcript, p. 19, box 36, LAC.
43. Note the way office workers are pointedly described as "ladies"
and their blue-collar counterparts as "females" in CCL, Annual Report,
1920, p. 60. For the sexual conservatism of craft union officials, see Hall,
"Disorderly Women," 376.
44. Turner and Howell, "Condition of Farmers," 11, 13, 24, 29. For
the freedom of renting tenants and even some croppers from direct super-
vision, see Range, Century of Georgia Agriculture, 261.


--- PAGE 256 ---
Notes to Pages 72-78 221
45. Hall et al., Like a Family, esp. chap. 1; MacDonald, Southern Mill
Hills, 18-19, 21, 149; Rhyne, Southern Cotton Mill, 71-74; Morland, Mill-
ways of Kent, 4, 14, 22, 36; DeNatale, "Traditional Culture," 17, 51.
46. "Life on 'Happy Top,' " transcript, pp. 2, 9; also "A Visit to a
Laundry and Dry Cleaning Plant," interview by S. B. Hornsby, 9-10 March
1939, transcript, box 11, FWP; "From Farm to Filling Station," loc. cit.;
"I've Been Drifting," loc. cit.
47. Morland, Millways of Kent, 53; J. H. Blackman to TEW, 7 April
1917, box 11, TEW; Carlton, Mill and Town, 224, also 161.
48. See Hall, "Disorderly Women," 360-61; Hall et al., "Cotton Mill
People," 273, 275; Morland, Millways of Kent, 23-24; MacDonald, South-
ern Mill Hills, 49, 52, 54, 86; Rhyne, Southern Cotton Mill, 71-77, 176,
199; also "The Red, White, and Blue Barber Shop," transcript, p. 12; "Life
on 'Happy Top,' " transcript, pp. 7, 9, 17; "Life of a Retired Mill Worker,"
transcript, pp. 6, 14.
49. Quoted in MacDonald, Southern Mill Hills, 44, 107. See also
Rhyne, Southern Cotton Mill, 18; Morland, Millways of Kent, 42, 61-62.
50. "Life on 'Happy Top,' " transcript, p. 6. On the exclusion of blacks
from the mills, see Dittmer, Black Georgia, 33. In 1900, ninety-eight per-
cent of Southern mill workers were native-born whites of native parent-
age, as against only seven percent in the mills of New England. Layne,
Cotton Mill Worker, 76. Significantly, however, close observers noted that
mill workers were less often extreme racists than middle-class whites, and
had friendlier, more respectful relations with individual blacks. See, e.g.,
Morland, Millways of Kent, 185-87; Davis et al., Deep South, 50, 52.
51. Mary Ann Clawson, Constructing Brotherhood: Class, Gender,
and Fraternalism (Princeton, 1989), 16, 95-106.
52. Ibid., 14-15, 45-51, 82-83, 145-77. See also Mark C. Games, Se-
cret Ritual and Victorian Manhood (New Haven, 1989).
53. Clawson, Constructing Brotherhood, 15, also 110. For the Klan's
insistence that class should not distinguish men from one another within
its ranks, see Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, The Practice of Klannishness,
Imperial Instructions, Document No. 1 (Atlanta, 1922), 1.
Chapter 4
1. ABH, 21 March 1930, p. 1; ABH, 27 April 1930, p. 14; ABH, 5
March 1930, p. 1; ABH, 4 May 1930, p. 14; "Americanism," 1926 type-
script speech, box 1, AK. For Rivers' appointment as Great Titan, see Klan,
Georgia, Official Document, 15 Feb. 1927, box 3, loc. cit.
2. ABH, 5 March 1930, p. 1; ABH, 4 May 1930, p. 14; ABH, 6 Aug.
1930, pp. 1, 5. .
3. "Americanism," 1926 typescript, box 1, AK; also Searchlight, 29
March 1924, p. 8; William Joseph Simmons, The Klan Unmasked (Atlanta,
1923), 104.


--- PAGE 257 ---
222 Notes to Pages 78-82
4. The local press sought to refute beliefs, apparently common by
1921, that Jews were parasitic "plutocrats." See ADB, 5 Nov. 1921, p. 2.
While information on Athens Jewry is lacking, a study of Atlanta Jews at
the turn of the century concluded that they had achieved "astonishing
[economic] success" relative to native-born gentile whites, and "a level
of integration that their northern counterparts could well envy." Steven
Hertzberg, Strangers within the Gate City: The Jews of Atlanta,
1845-1915 (Philadelphia, 1978), 153, 155. Hertzberg also notes that the
attitudes of gentile Atlantans towards Jews "underwent a steady erosion
as the nineteenth century passed into the twentieth," with particular hos-
tility directed toward Jewish businesspeople. Ibid., 172.
5. Phrase from the "Honorable J. O. Wood," mimeo, p. 2, AK.
6. For the concept of a "structure of feeling," see Raymond Wil-
liams, Marxism and Literature (Oxford, 1978), 128-35. For liberalism and
republicanism in American political culture, see Daniel T. Rodgers, "Re-
publicanism: The Career of a Concept," JAH 79 (1992), 11-38.
7. C. B. MacPherson, The Political Theory of Possessive Individual-
ism (New York, 1964), 3, 6, 266; Harry Fuller Atwood, Safeguarding Amer-
ican Ideals (Chicago, 1921), 22, 67-68. See also Searchlight 4 Nov. 1922,
p. 1; Imperial Night Hawk, 16 Jan. 1924, p. 5.
8. Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 142, also 248-53; Hiram Wesley Ev-
ans, The Rising Storm: An Analysis of the Growing Conflict over the Po-
litical Dilemma of the Roman Catholics in America (Atlanta, 1930), 175;
Charles W. Gould, America: A Family Matter (New York, 1922), 70-71;
Atwood, Safeguarding American Ideals, 46.
9. Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 165; Imperial Night Hawk, 16 May
1923, p. 2; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 52, 190-91. See also Kourier, Oct.
1926, p. 23; Evans, "Ballots Behind the Ku Klux Klan," 246.
10. Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 163; Gould, America, 25—26; Kourier,
Dec. 1927, p. 26.
11. Curry, Klan Under the Searchlight, 72, 229; Searchlight, 18
March 1922, p. 6; ibid., 2 Sept. 1922, p. 4; William Joseph Simmons, Amer-
ica's Menace, or the Enemy Within (Atlanta, 1926), 14.
12. Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 26-27, 146, 193, 207; Hiram Wesley
Evans, "The Klan: Defender of Americanism," Forum 74 (Dec. 1925), 809.
For the same theme, see idem, The Public School Problem in America:
Outlining Fully the Policies and the Program of the Knights of the Ku
Klux Klan Toward the Public School System (n.p., 1924), 18.
13. Searchlight, 5 Aug. 1922, p. 4; Curry, Klan Under the Searchlight,
chap. 5; Kourier, March 1925, p. 29; Charles E. Jefferson, Roman Catholi-
cism and the Ku Klux Klan (New York, 1925), 143; Simmons, Klan Un-
masked, 204-5, also 185; Kourier, March 1925, p. 29; Searchlight, 15 April
1922, p. 4.
14. Samuel Saloman, The Red War on the Family (New York, 1922),
117; Searchlight, 5 May 1923, p. 2; Imperial Night Hawk, 9 May 1923, p.


--- PAGE 258 ---
Notes to Pages 82-86 223
8; Samuel Green, later Imperial Wizard, quoted in Lipset and Raab, Poli-
tics of Unreason, 135.
15. ADB, 11 July 1920, p. 4; Inaugural Address, 30 June 1923, Senate
Journal (1923), 115, 126; ABH, 6 Aug. 1930, pp. 1, 5; Klan, Georgia, Offi-
cial Document, Jan-Mar. 1927, p. 4; ibid., Oct.-Nov. 1927, p. 5.
16. Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Nov. 1926, p. 4; Alma White,
Heroes of the Fiery Cross (Zarepath, 1928), 85. For analysis of such "con-
densation symbols," see Edelman, Symbolic Uses of Politics, esp. 6-11,
198-99.
17. Searchlight, 30 Sept. 1922, p. 1; ibid., 7 Oct. 1922, p. 1; Saloman,
Red War on the Family, v; Imperial Night-Hawk, 20 June 1923, pp. 2-3;
Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 185, 124.
18. White, Heroes of the Fiery Cross, 85; Curry, Klan Under the
Searchlight, 204; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 192; Saloman, Red War, 45.
19. Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 113, 115; Searchlight, 7 Oct. 1922, p.
1; ibid., 2 Dec. 1922, p. 5; ibid., 8 Dec. 1923, p. 2; Evans, "Fight for Ameri-
canism," 42; Imperial Night Hawk, 20 June 1923, pp. 2-3.
20. Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 51, 116-117, 167, 174-75, 180; Kour-
ier, Sept. 1927, p. 16. See also Hiram W. Evans, The Attitude of the
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan Toward the Jew (Atlanta, 1923), 4.
21. Searchlight, 9 Dec. 1922, p. 4; ibid., 5 April 1924, p. 8; Simmons,
Klan Unmasked, 104, 129; Curry, Klan Under the Searchlight, 48, 101-2.
See also Evans, "Ballots Behind the Ku Klux Klan," 252; Klan, Official
Message of the Emperor, 10; Imperial Night Hawk, 25 April 1923, p. 5.
22. Birmingham News, 7 May 1918, in series C, box 316, NAACP;
NYT, 1 Sept. 1918, sec. IV, p. 5; Searchlight, 4 March 1922, p. 7; ADB, 25
Sept. 1921, p. 2; ADB, 11 Jan. 1922, p. 5; ADB, 17 March 1922, p. 1, At-
wood, Safeguarding American Ideals, 16, 18; Searchlight, 30 Sept. 1922,
p. 4. Punitive vagrancy measures we often used to compel African Ameri-
cans to work for whites on the latter's terms. See Evans, "History of Orga-
nized Labor," 316-20. On producerism, see Daniel T. Rodgers, The Work
Ethic in Industrial America, 1850-1920 (New York, 1987).
23. Evans, "Ballots Behind the Ku Klux Klan," 245; ABH, 28 July
1926, p. 5; Macon Telegraph, 15 March 1928, p. 17 (Clarke was then pro-
moting a new organization, but one with the same ideology); Kourier, May
1925, p. 24; ibid., Oct. 1925, p. 18.
24. "A lecture to the K.K.K.," box 3, AK; also Evans, Klan of Tomor-
row, 19; N. B. Forrest to JPM, 11 Nov. 1925, box 1, AK; Minutes, 2 June
1925, loc. cit.; JNJ to the "K. K. Klan," 11 Aug. [no year], loc. cit.; Mrs.
GJB to Mr. A., n.d., loc. cit.
25. Industrial Home, Minutes, 2 Feb. 1914, box 6, NSMC "Welfare
Work in Athens," loc. cit.; "Officers and Various Committees," loc. cit.;
Minutes, 2 Dec. 1901, 5 Dec. 1910, 5 Oct. 1914, 3 June 1901, respectively,
loc. cit. For the gender, race, and class moorings of privatism, see Rosalind
Pollack Petchesky, Abortion and Woman's Choice: The State, Sexuality,


--- PAGE 259 ---
224 Notes to Pages 86-90
and Reproductive Freedom (Boston, 1985), 248-50; and the essays in Linda
Gordon, ed., Women, the State, and Welfare (Madison, 1990).
26. Evans, Public School Problem, 5; ABH, 21 March 1930, p. 1;
"Americanism," 1926 typescript speech, box 1, AK; Simmons, America's
Menace, 15; Klan, Kloran, 34-35; E. F. Stanton, Christ and Other Klans-
men, or Lives of Love; The Cream of the Bible Spread Upon Klanism
(Kansas City, 1924), 59; Clarke quoted in Jones, Story of the Ku Klux
Klan, 82.
27. Curry, Klan Under the Searchlight, 81; "Life on 'Happy Top,'"
transcript. For like complaints, see Searchlight, 12 Aug. 1922, p. 4; Stan-
ton, Christ and Other Klansmen, 35. For variants of the ideal, see Hahn,
Roots of Southern Populism; Bruce Palmer, "Man over Money": The
Southern Populist Critique of American Capitalism (Chapel Hill, 1980);
Clawson, Constructing Brotherhood.
28. Klan, Practice of Klanishness, 2, 8. Studies of mill communities
found that foremen and skilled workers joined fraternal lodges and
churches in part to obtain prestige and demonstrate to uptown men their
difference from ordinary operatives. See Rhyne, Southern Cotton Mill,
162-64, 166; Morland, Millways of Kent, 31, 164, 208, 213; Herring, Wel-
fare Work, 147. See also Samuel Taylor Moore, "How the Kleagles Col-
lected the Cash," Independent (13 Dec. 1924), 518. For local practice, see
Minutes, 27 April 1925, box 2, AK; N. B. Forrest to JPM, 4 May 1926, box
1, loc. cit.; AJW to JPM, 16 July 1926, loc. cit.; WFD to L. G. Hardman, 23
July 1927, box 274, EDC.
29. Quoted in Searchlight, 13 May 1922, p. 1. See also Moseley, "In-
visible Empire," 58; Mugleston, "Julian Harris," 287-88. On the politics
of municipal reform in the South, see Brownell, Urban Ethos in the South,
54, 157-89; nationally, see Weinstein, Corporate Ideal in the Liberal
State; Hays, American Political History.
30. ADB, 4 May 1914, 4; Georgia, House, Journal (1923), 574; ABH,
23 Nov. 1925; ADH, 16 Sept. 1914; ADH, 28 July 1915, p. 1; ABH, 12 June
1924, 1; ABH, 29 July 1926, p. 8.
31. Letter in ABH, 10 Aug. 1926, p. 8. Arnold's hostility to Demo-
cratic elites ultimately outweighed his loyalty to the party of white su-
premacy. In 1930, he would join a black doctor as a Clarke County's repre-
sentative to the state Republican convention. ABH, 6 April 1930, 1.
32. Searchlight, 29 March 1924, p. 8; ibid., 5 April 1924, p. 4; obitu-
ary, ABH, 20 Nov. 1944, in Georgia Biography File, s.v. "Michael," UGA.
33. Minutes, 19 Jan. 1926, box 2, AK; Kourier, Feb. 1927, p. 2; Klan,
Papers Read at the Meeting, 49; Kourier, Dec. 1925, p. 27; Searchlight, 22
March 1922; also Evans, "Ballots Behind the Ku Klux Klan," 245-46;
Curry, Klan Under the Searchlight, 100, 105. Opposition to the League, of
course, spread far beyond the ranks of the Klan.
34. Sam H. Campbell to TEW, 16 Sept. 1922, TEW, SHC; NYT, 11
Oct. 1920, p. 1; Searchlight, 8 April 1922, p. 4; ibid., 11 March 1922, p. 4;


--- PAGE 260 ---
Notes to Pages 90-92 225
ibid., 17 June 1922, p. 4; ibid., 25 Feb. 1922, p. 4; ibid., 16 Sept. 1922, p. 4.
35. Tom Watson to Robert L. Rodgers, 3 Jan 1921, box 5, RLR;
Searchlight, 29 July 1922, p. 4.
36. ABH, 30 July 1926, p. 5; also, on the state's credit system, Range,
Century of Georgia Agriculture, 247-48. Benton spoke in the wake of a
bank failure that had cost many local residents "their earnings of years."
See "Your Devoted Mama" to "My Precious Guy," 2 May 1925, folder 6,
CNM Collection, UGA; also December 1925 YMCA circular, box 1, Fran-
ces Long Taylor Papers, UGA.
37. ABH, 6 Aug. 1930, pp. 1, 5; Searchlight, 25 Feb. 1922, p. 4. For
other criticisms of "international banking," often anti-semitic, see ibid.,
21 Oct. 1922, p. 4; Kourier, Feb. 1927, p. 2; ibid., Dec.1925, p. 27.
38. Searchlight, 12 Aug. 1922, p. 1; Klan, Papers Read at the Meeting,
129. See also Searchlight, 5 May 1923, p. 2; Imperial Night Hawk, 28 May
1924, p. 2. In one of the only instances I have come across of the Klan
threatening a wealthy white man with flogging, it was largely because,
in their words, he did "not employ any help except Japs and Chinese."
Indianapolis News, in box 10, William Dudley Foulke Papers, Library of
Congress.
39. ABH, 14 Oct. 1924, p. 1; Oscar Ameringer, If You Don't Weaken:
The Autobiography of Oscar Ameringer (New York, 1940), 371; Weaver,
"Klan in Wisconsin," 233; Gerlach, Blazing Crosses, 32; Moore, "How the
Kleagles Collected the Cash," 1.
40. Searchlight, 15 Dec. 1923, p. 4, ibid., 12 Aug. 1922, p. 4; Curry,
Klan Under the Searchlight, 81.
41. George M. Marsden, Fundamentalism and American Culture:
The Shaping of Twentieth-Century Evangelicalism, 1870-1925 (New
York, 1980), 119, also 141-95; Sydney E. Ahlstrom, A Religious History of
the American People, vol. 2 (Garden City, 1975), 359-407.
42. Kourier, Oct. 1927, pp. 20-22. What is being described here is an
ideological affinity for fundamentalism. In practice, the Klan was ecumen-
ical. It hoped to surmount the barriers between different conservative Prot-
estant denominations so as to unite their members behind a common sec-
ular program. See, for example, Klan, Klan Building, 11; Ku Klux Klan,
"The University of America" (Atlanta, [1924]), in box 27, DCB. For a sug-
gestive parallel, see the discussion of religion and the New Right in Pet-
chesky, Abortion and Woman's Choice, 245. For the way evangelical Prot-
estantism served as a court of last resort in the defense of inequality in
this period, see MacDonald, Southern Mill Hills, 77, 144; Raper, Preface
to Peasantry, 164-65.
43. Searchlight, 4 Nov. 1922, pp. 1, 4; Kourier, April 1925, p. 12;
Searchlight, 20 June 1923, p. 2; ibid., 4 Nov. 1922, pp. 1, 4; Klan, Monthly
Bulletin, Jan. 1927, p. 3. The Klan was not alone in such thinking, of
course. See AB, 17 May 1921, p. 7.
44. Klan, Message of the Emperor, 12; Kourier, May 1925, p. 26;


--- PAGE 261 ---
226 Notes to Pages 92-95
Georgia, Official Bulletin, I Feb. 1926, box 3, AK (italics in original); Kour-
ier, Oct. 1926, p. 21. See also H. W. Evans et al, Is the Ku Klux Klan
Constructive or Destructive (Girard, Kansas, 1924), 21.
45. Evans, "Fight for Americanism," 54, also 36; Evans, "Defender of
Americanism," 805; Evans, Rising Storm, 166. See also Curry, Klan Under
the Searchlight, 50; Wood, Are You a Citizen! 43; Kourier, Dec. 1926,
p. 4. For other interpretations along these lines of the fundamentalism
in the decade, see Robert A. Garson, "Political Fundamentalism and Popu-
lar Democracy in the 1920s," South Atlantic Quarterly 76 (Spring
1977), 219-33; Lawrence W. Levine, Defender of the Faith: William
Jennings Bryan: The Last Decade, 1915-1925 (New York, 1965). For a
contemporary parallel from the anti-abortion movement, see Kristin
Luker, Abortion and the Politics of Motherhood (Berkeley, 1984), esp.
207-10.
46. Wood, Are You a Citizen! 42; Blaine Mast, K.K.K. Friend or Foe:
Which! (n.p., 1924), 64-65; ABH, 29 Jan. 1925, p. 1. For other examples,
see Imperial Night Hawk, 9 March 1923; ibid., 6 June 1923, p. 1.
47. Klan, Thirty-three Questions Answered, p. 16, box 3, AK; Mast,
K.K.K. Friend or Foe, 94-95.
48. Wood, Are You a Citizen! 48; Imperial Night Hawk, 16 May
1923; Curry, Klan Under the Searchlight, 79; Georgia, House Journal
(1923), 1,001-2. See also Evans, "The Klan: Defender of Americanism,"
Forum 74 (1925), 813.
49. Kourier, April 1925, p. 9; Searchlight,. 4 Nov. 1922, pp. 1, 4; Klan,
Papers Read at the Meeting, 55, 125; Evans, Rising Storm, 175; Klan,
"University of America," 2. Not surprisingly, the Protestant publications
and bodies associated with the Social Gospel were also the ones who most
consistently criticized the Klan. See Miller, "Protestant Churches,"
357-63. For the Georgia Grand Dragon's enthusiasm about the death pen-
alty for Communists, see Kourier, Sept. 1930, pp. 11-12.
50. Kourier, June 1925, p. 1, ABH, 13 Sept. 1925, p. 3; JHC to
"Knights of Klu Kluck Klan," 9 Sept. 1925, box 1, AK; NBF to JPM, 31
Aug. 1925, loc. cit.; N. B. Forrest to JPM, 22 March 1926, loc. cit.; letter
in Minutes, 23 March 1926, box 2, loc. cit.
51. Lillian Smith, Killers of the Dream, rev. ed. (New York, 1978),
103; ABH, 4 April 1926, p. 1, N. B. Forrest to J. P. McCall, 10 April 1926,
box 1, AK; Imperial Night Hawk, 11 July 1923; ibid., 30 April 1924, p. 1,
William G. McLoughlin, Jr., Billy Sunday Was His Real Name (Chicago,
1955), esp. 274-87.
52. Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Nov. 1926, p. 4. For earlier epi-
sodes of anti-Catholicism, see Higham, Strangers in the Land, For the
view that anti-Catholicism was the driving force of the second Klan, see
Mecklin, Ku Klux Klan, 28, 157-58; Fry, Modern Klan, 107, 128-47.
53. For example, the leading nineteenth-century anti-Catholic organi-
zation, the American Protective Association, had admitted both Jews and


--- PAGE 262 ---
Notes to Pages 95-99 227
African Americans. See Donald Kinzer, An Episode in Anti-Catholicism:
The American Protective Association (Seattle, 1964), 46-47.
54. Searchlight, 18 Aug. 1923, 2, "A lecture to the K.K.K.," box 3,
AK; Evans, Rising Storm, 252. For comparable fears, see Klan, Georgia,
Official Document, May-June 1927, p. 3; NYT, 12 Jan. 1923, p. 10; Estes,
Roman Katholic Kingdom and the Ku Klux Klan, 12.
55. Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Oct. 1926, p. 4; David Brion
Davis, The Fear of Conspiracy: Images of Un-American Subversion from
the Revolution to the Present (Ithaca, 1971), xviii; Kourier, Sept. 1925, p.
10. The Klan also recommended the "patriotic journalism" of the vi-
ciously anti-Catholic newspaper The Menace; Athens Klansmen voted
to purchase bulk subscriptions to its fraternalist counterpart, the Fellow-
ship Forum. See Searchlight, 19 May 1923; Minutes, 1 Dec. 1925, box 2,
AK.
56. Evans, Public School Problem, 16; Estes, Roman Katholic King-
dom, 6, 16-17, 19, 22, 25, 29; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 75; "A lecture
to the K.K.K.," box 3, AK; "Oaths" in loc. cit.; Dever, Masks Off! 8. For
more specific complaints, see Evans, Public School Problem, 13-14; idem,
Rising Storm, 98; Kourier, April 1927, p. 21.
57. White, Heroes of the Fiery Cross, 86-87; idem, The Ku Klux Klan
in Prophecy (Zarepeth, N.J., 1925), 82; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 124;
Searchlight, 21 April 1923, p. 1; Kourier, Oct. 1927, pp. 20-22.
58. Estes, Roman Katholic, 31; Klan, Alabama, Official Document,
Oct. 1928, p. 3; also Kourier, Aug. 1929, pp. 20-21. For defenses of em-
ployer prerogatives, see Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 205-6; Atwood, Safe-
guarding American Ideals, 73-75, 78; Kourier, April 1929, p. 5. In many
towns where the Klan built, the local class structure divided along lines
of religion and ethnicity, with Catholics disproportionately working-class.
See, e.g., "Memoirs of Father Peter Minwegan," Father Peter Minwegan
Manuscript, SHSW; Bohn, "Klan Interpreted," 406.
59. See Kourier, March 1925, pp. 4-5, 29; Evans, "Ballots Behind the
Klan"; Klan, Papers Read at the Meeting, 116; Searchlight, 22 July 1922,
pp. 1, 2; ibid., 29 July 1929, p. 4. Population figures from Cashin, "Thomas
E. Watson," 123.
Chapter 5
1. NYT, 18 Oct. 1923, p. 23; ABH, 19 Dec. 1923, p. 1; depositions (2)
of W. V. Guerard, July 1922, box 48, Legal Series, JWB; Jackson, Klan in
the City, 13-17, 35; Monteval, Klan Inside Out, 13-15; Imperial Night
Hawk, 12 March 1924.
2. Fry, Modem Klan, 24; Wood, Are You a Citizen 38; Searchlight,
25 Feb. 1922, p. 5. On efficacy, see correspondence in series C, box 127,
and series B, boxes 48 and 49, HJA; Mecklin, Ku Klux Klan, 40-41, 78;
Loucks, Klan in Pennsylvania, 39; Frost, Challenge of the Klan, 168; Gold;


--- PAGE 263 ---
228 Notes to Pages 99-102
berg, Hooded Empire, 7; Lila Lee Jones, "The Ku Klux Klan in Eastern
Kansas during the 1920's," Emporia State Research Studies 23 (Winter
1975), 29; William D. Jenkins, "The Ku Klux Klan in Youngstown, Ohio:
Moral Reform in the Twenties," Historian 61 (Nov. 1978), 86-87, 93; Lay,
War, Revolution, 75-76; Moore, "How the Kleagles Collected the Cash,"
518; Toy, "Klan in Oregon," 85.
3. For Klansmen's own self-consciousness in this regard, see Kourier,
Oct. 1926, p. 23; also ibid., Dec. 1927, p. 26; ibid., Oct. 1925, p. 10; Impe-
rial Night Hawk, 28 May 1924, p. 2. More generally, see George L. Mosse,
Nationalism and Sexuality: Respectability and Abnormal Sexuality in
Modern Europe (New York, 1985); Mayer, "Lower Middle Class."
4. Atwood, Safeguarding American Ideals, 24; ADB, 28 Sept. 1921,
p. 4. For earlier efforts in Georgia and Athens, see Coleman, History of
Georgia, 184-85, 305; ADH, 18 Sept. 1914, p. 1; ADH, I March 1915, p.
4; ADH, 14 Sept. 1915, p. 1; ADH, 30 Sept. 1916, p. 1; ADH, 19 March
1915, p. 8; ADH, 10 March 1914, p. 1.
5. ADB, 17 July 1920, p. 1. For northern cities, see Kathy Lee Peiss,
Cheap Amusements: Working Women and Leisure in New York City,
1880-1920 (Philadelphia, 1986); Joanne J. Meyerowitz, Women Adrift: In-
dependent Wage Earners in Chicago, 1880-1930 (Chicago, 1988).
6. A. J. Woodruff to the Hon. R. B. Russell, Jr., 12 May 1922, box
1, Pre-Gub. series, RBR; Patrick, "Cultural Analysis," 337; also Morland,
Millways of Kent, 168.
7. Printed in ADB, 5 Jan. 1921, p. 2.
8. See, for example, Martin F. Amorous to Gov. L. G. Hardman, 30
June 1928, box 66, WAC; Amorous to Bishop Warren Akin Candler, 1 June
1928, loc. cit.; George Edward Drayton to James Robert Hamilton, 21 May
1922, folder 3, JRH; I. Heard to Hamilton, 14 May 1922, loc. cit.; Evans,
"Organized Labor," 251; Ronald Morris Benson, "American Workers and
Temperance Reform, 1866-1933" (Ph.D. diss., University of Notre Dame,
1974). Bootlegging and political radicalism came from the same districts
in some areas, according to Garin Burbank, "Agrarian Radicals and Their
Opponents: Political Conflict in Southern Oklahoma," [AH 58 (June
1971), 19. The mutual antagonisms are conveyed in the pro-Klan novel by
Egbert Brown, The Final Awakening: A Story of the Ku Klux Klan (Bruns-
wick, Ga., 1923), 10-29.
9. ADB, 7 June 1921, p. 1; ADB, 21 Sept. 1921, p. 8; ABH, 19 Feb.
1921, in series C, box 355, NAACP.
10. ADB, 23 Sept. 1921, p. 6; ADB, 8 Oct., 1921, p. 1.
11. CCSC, Minutes, Book 47 (1921), 322-23; ADB, 18 Oct. 1921,
p. 8; ADB, 26 Oct. 1921, p. 1, ADB, 24 Nov. 1921, p. 4; ADB, 27 Nov.
1921, p. 1.
12. ADB, 24 March 1922, p. 4. Copies of the Daily News have not
survived, so the account here comes from the established press and Klan
.sources.


--- PAGE 264 ---
Notes to Pages 102-107 229
13. Searchlight, 4 March 1922, p. 7; case no. 1975, State vs. Abe
Farbstein (1922), CCSC, Office of County Clerk, Athens; AB, 28 March
1922, p. 2. For other complaints about dances, see Dyer, University of
Georgia, 177-82.
14. ADB, 13 April 1922, p. 1; quotes from CCSC, Minutes, Book 47
(1922), 493-98.
15. CCSC, Minutes, Book 47 (1922), 494, 498, 499, 500; ADB, 22
April 1922, 1.
16. CCSC, Minutes (1922), 500. For the prejudices of earlier social
purity efforts, see ADH, 16 March 1914, p. 8; Woofter, Negroes of Athens,
10, 54; and, more generally, Paul S. Boyer, Urban Masses and Moral Or-
der, 1820-1920 (Cambridge, 1978); Egal Feldman, "Prostitution, the Alien
Woman and the Progressive Imagination," American Quarterly 19 (1967),
192-206; Barbara L. Epstein, The Politics of Domesticity: Women, Evange-
lism and Temperance in Nineteenth-Century America (Middletown,
Conn., 1981); David Pivar, Purity Crusade: Sexual Morality and Social
Control, 1868-1900 (Westport, 1973).
17. Searchlight, 20 May 1922, p. 6.
18. ADB, 22 April 1922, pp. 1, 5; ADB, 25 April 1922, p. 4; ADB, 26
April 1922, p. 4.
19. ADB, 22 April 1922, pp. 1, 5; ADB, 25 April 1922, p. 4; ADB, 26
April 1922, p. 4.
20. ADB, 26 April 1922, p. 4; ADB, 21 Nov. 1922; ADB, 13 Dec. 1922,
p. 4; CCSC, Minutes, Book 48 (1922), 19.
21. Searchlight, 22 Dec. 1923, pp. 1, 4; ibid., 29 March 1924, p. 8;
University of Georgia, Senior Class, Pandora, s.v. "Kappa Kappa Kappa"
(Athens, 1925). Leaders of student organizations also issued a statement
asserting that "there has been exaggeration as to conditions here"—an
oblique criticism of the Klan's use of sensationalist tactics to build its own
ranks. Statement of campus leaders, 24 April 1924, University of Georgia,
Board of Trustees, Correspondence and Reports, UA; also report of Board
of Trustees, 12 June 1924, p. 4, loc. cit. For a similar example from the
Midwest of moral issues as the hook for vicious racism, see New York
World, 20 July 1924, in vol. 252, American Civil Liberties Union Archives,
Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J.
(hereafter, ACLU).
22. CCSC, Minutes, Book 48 (1924), 571-72.
23. Anon. to Rebecca Latimer Felton, 19 Dec. 1924, box 8, RLF; ABH,
20 May 1924, p. 1. See also Judge M. C. Tarver to Rebecca L. Felton, 3
Sept. 1924, loc. cit.; Anon, to Judge Clifford H. Walker, 8 Jan. 1925, box 5,
J. J. Brown Papers, SHC. On gender and temperance more generally, see
Epstein, Politics of Domesticity-, Ruth Bordin, Woman and Temperance:
The Quest for Power and Liberty, 1873-1900 (Philadelphia, 1981).
24. Searchlight, 7 June 1924, p. 3; ABH, 26 May 1924, pp. 1, 6, ABH,
28 May 1924, p. 6; ABH, 28 June 1923, p. 1; NYT, 15 May 1924, p. 3.


--- PAGE 265 ---
230 Notes to Pages 107-112
25. Searchlight, 21 June 1924, pp. 1, 8; Imperial Night Hawk, 28 May
1924, p. 5; CCSC, Minutes, Book 49 (1924), 103. See also Imperial Night-
Hawk, 18 June 1924; ibid., 2 July 1924, p. 5. For rally preparations, see box
1, AK.
26. ABH, 25 Jan. 1925, p. 1; G. L. Johnson vs. Knights of the Ku Klux
Klan, case no. 4776, April Term 1925, CCSC, Office of the County Clerk;
Mrs. E. T. Eppes vs. Knights of the Ku Klux Klan et al., case no. 4761, loc.
cit.; JPM to Nathan Bedford Forrest, 29 Nov. 1925, box 1, AK.
27. ABH, 25 Jan. 1925, p. 1; ABH, 21 Jan. 1925, p. 1; ABH, 30 June
1925, p. 2.
28. ADB, 28 April 1922, p. 2; ABH, 3 July 1930, pp. 1, 6; ABH, 13
June 1.927, p. 1; ABH, 25 May 1924, p. 1.
29. See, for example, Klan, Klan Building, 5; ADB, 25 April 1922, p.
4; ABH, 15 Jan. 1925, pp. 1, 8; ABH, 18 Jan. 1925, pp. 1, 5.
30. See ABH, 8 Jan 1925, pp. 1, 5; ABH, 21 Jan 1925, pp. 1, 8; ABH,
13 Feb. 1925, pp. 1, 6. For the governor's involvement, see ABH, 25 Jan.
1925, p. 1; "Exhibit A," Mrs. E. T. Eppes vs. Knights of the Ku Klux Klan,
op. cit. For the denials, suspension, and cover-up, see ABH, 9 Jan. 1925, p.
1; ABH, 15 Jan. 1925, pp. 1, 8; ABH, 18 Jan. 1925; ABH, 22 Jan. 1925, p.
1; ABH, 19 Jan. 1925, p. 4.
31. ABH, 8 Jan. 1925, p. 1, ABH, 21 Jan. 1925, p. 1.
32. ABH, 23 Jan. 1925, pp. 1, 5.
33. ABH, 23 Jan. 1925, pp. 1, 5; also 23 Jan. 1925, p. 1, and 25 Jan.
1925, p. 1. On means and ends, see, e.g., Searchlight, 18 March 1922, p. 1;
ibid., 4 March 1922, 3.
34. ABH, 30 Jan. 1925, p. I, ABH, 8 Feb. 1925, pp. 1, 8.
35. Minutes, 18 March 1925, box 2, AK; JPM to N. B. Forrest, 29 Nov.
1925, box 1, loc. cit.
36. M. B. Miller to Athens Klan No. 5, n.d., box 1, loc. cit.; JPM to
N. B. Forrest, 29 Nov. 1929, loc. cit. N. B. Forrest to JPM, 30 Nov. 1925,
loc. cit.; N. B. Forrest to JPM, 15 Feb. 1926, loc. cit.; N. B. Forrest to JPM,
23 Feb. 1926, loc. cit.; CCSC, Minutes, Book 51 (1928), 487.
37. Kourier, Oct. 1926, p. 23. See also ibid., May 1925, p. 23; ibid.,
Dec. 1927, p. 26; ibid., Oct. 1925, p. 10; Searchlight, 15 April 1922, p. 7;
Imperial Night-Hawk, 28 May 1924, p. 2.
38. Kourier, Aug. 1925, p. 17; ibid., March 1927, pp. 9-11; White, He-
roes of the Fiery Cross, 41-42; Searchlight, 18 March 1922, p. 6; Evans,
Rising Storm, 161, 172, 178; also idem, Public School Problem, 6; Salo-
man, Red War, 136-37.
39. Stanton, Christ and Other Klansmen, 35; Saloman, Red War, 5,
93-113, 128; Kourier, June 1926, p. 16; Searchlight, 1 Sept. 1922, p. 4;
ibid., 20 May 1922, p. 4; A. D. Kean to Thomas E. Watson, 23 March 1922,
box 14, TEW; "Life on 'Happy Top,' " transcript, pp. 7, 18.
40. "Grocery Store," transcript, p. 6; "The Red, White and Blue Barber
Shop," transcript, pp. 12, 14; "Oldest Barber in Town," interview by S. B.


--- PAGE 266 ---
Notes to Pages 112-116 231
Hornsby, 28 March 1939, box 13, FWP, 14; Minutes, 28 March 1928, box
1, Women of the Ku Klux Klan, Klan 14, Chippewa Falls, Wise., Papers,
SHSW.
41. Searchlight, 20 May 1922, p. 4, ABH, 27 June 1923, p. 1.
42. Evans, "Fight for Americanism," 39; Searchlight, 18 March. 1922,
p. 4; ibid., 15 April 1922, p. 7; Evans et al., Constructive or Destructive,
21; Kourier, April 1926, p. 11.
43. Kourier, Aug. 1925, p. 3; Simmons, America's Menace, 37;
Searchlight, 15 April 1922, p. 7; Kourier, Nov. 1925, p. 13. Ideas of Pollu-
tion arid purity, according to anthropologist Mary Douglas, give ritual en-
actment to hierarchical social divisions that have become weakened and
open to challenge. Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger: An Analysis of the.
Concepts of Pollution and Taboo (London, 1966), esp. 4, 139, 141-42.
44. Atwood, Safeguarding American Ideals, -$8; Gould, America, 88.
45. Searchlight, 4 March 1922. Also ibid., 12 Aug. 1922, p. 5; Gould,
America, 135; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 274, 277; ABH, 6 Aug. 1930,
pp. 1, 5.
46. Kourier, Oct. 1926, p. 23.
47. Searchlight, 16 Jan. 1922, p. 5; Brown, Final Awakening, 102;
Wood, Are You a Citizen! 44; "A Lecture to the K.K.K.," box 3, AK. See
also Curry, Klan Under the Searchlight, 206. For the relationship between
female chastity and male honor, see Julian Pitt-Rivers, "Honor," Interna-
tional Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, vol. 6, ed. Daniel L. Sills (New
York, 1968), 506, 510.
48. ADH, 9 June 1914, p. 1; ABH, 6 June 1927, p. 1; ABH, 4 Oct.
1923, p. 1; Bessie Mell Industrial Home, Minutes, 5 Feb. 1906, p. 94,
NSMC; Clarke County, Office of the Ordinary, Marriages, Book M, p. 197,
GDAH; CCSC, Minutes, Book 46 (1919), 30; ibid., Book 49 (1925), 284,
329, 376-77; Kourier, Nov. 1927, p. 18. See also Curry, Klan under the
Searchlight, 108; Klan, Papers Read at the Meeting, 63.
49. Stanton, Christ and Other Klansmen, 35; Searchlight, 2 Sept.
1922, p. 4; also ibid., 18 March 1922, p. 4; ibid., 7 Oct. 1922, p. 4; ibid., 17
June 1922, p. 4; also ibid., 6 May 1922, p. 4. For the more permissive dating
practices then developing in Athens, see "How Many Days Have I Regret-
ted," interview by S. B. Hornsby, 23 June 1939, transcript, p. 10, box 12,
FWP.
50. Searchlight, 29 July 1922, p. 4; also ibid., 12 Aug. 1922, p. 4; ibid.,
30 Sept. 1922, p. 4; ibid., 11 March 1922, p. 4. Stanton, Christ and Other
Klansmen, 35; Gould, America: A Family Matter, 101; Klan, Papers Read
at the Meeting, 82, 90; White, Klan in Prophecy, 129; Kourier, Nov. 1926,
pp. 11-21; ibid., April 1925, p. 11; Saloman, Red War, 119-20:
51. Bigger's Magazine, May 1922, p. 6, in Scrapbook, Don Hampton
Biggers Papers, Southwest Collection, Texas Tech University, Lubbock,
Texas; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 280-82,- Saloman, Red War, 119-20;
NYT, 27 Nov. 1922, p. 1.


--- PAGE 267 ---
232 Notes to Pages 116-119
52. Searchlight, 24 March 1923, p. 4; Kourier, Dec. 1924, p. 29; also
Imperial Night Hawk, 14 May 1924, p. 7; Klan, Papers Read at the Meet-
ing, 91.
53. Searchlight, 8 April 1922, p. 4; Kourier, Oct. 1928, pp. 32-33;
Mary Latimer McLendon to Richard B. Russell, Jr., 23 June 1921, Pre-Gub.
Series, box 1, RBR; Clement C. Moseley, "Political Influence of the Ku
Klux Klan in Georgia, 1915-1925," GHQ 57 (1973), 235-55.
54. ABH, 26 May 1924, pp. 1, 6; Kourier, Sept. 1928, p. 40; ibid., Jan.
1929, p. 17. See also Hux, "Klan in Macon," 60; Jenkins, "Klan in Youngs-
town"; Toy, "Klan in Oregon," 89.
55. White, Heroes of the Fiery Cross, 51; Searchlight, 27 May 1922,
p. 2; ibid., 15 Sept. 1923, p. 1; Kourier, Dec. 1924, p. 21; ibid., April 1926,
p. 21; ibid., Aug. 1925, p. 9.
56. Cocoltchos, "Invisible Government," 371; Lay, War, Revolution
and the Klan, 85, 39t; Kourier, Feb. 1928, pp. 22-23; Searchlight, 9 Sept.
1922, p. 3; Toy, "Klan in Oregon," 35, 71, 89, 129; Gerlach, Blazing
Crosses, 42, 51; Hux, "Klan in Macon," 60. The Klan's rendition of the
motto was "For God, and Home and Country." See Searchlight, 15 April
1922, p. 7.
57. For the convergence, see ABH, 1 Dec. 1927, p. 1; ABH, 8 July
1928, p. 1. For women's clubs, see Searchlight, 20 May 1922, p. 8; ibid., 4
March 1922, p. 3; Kourier, June 1925, p. 26; Imperial Night Hawk, 16 May
1923, p. 8; Lay, War, Revolution, 45, 78; ABH, 20 Nov. 1927, pp. 1, 4;
ABH, 11 Nov. 1923, p. 1.
58. See Steven Hahn, "Honor and Patriarchy in the Old South,"
American Quarterly 31 (Spring 1984), 145-53; Ayers, Vengeance and Jus-
tice, 10-29, 274-75; John Mack Faragher, "History from the Inside-Out:
Writing the History of Women in Rural America," American Quarterly 33
(Winter 1981), 537-57; McCurry, "The Two Faces of Republicanism."
59. Imperial Night Hawk, June 13, 1923, p. 5; Curry, Klan Under the
Searchlight, 220. For examples of the fiction and the reality, see Imperial
Night Hawk, 23 April 1923, p. 7; ibid., 20 June 1923, p. 8; NYT, 7 Nov.
1923, p. 15. These tensions led to open conflict in the late 'twenties, as
described in Loucks, Klan in Pennsylvania, 155-60, and, more recently, in
Blee, Women of the Klan.
60. Saloman, Red War on the Family, 50-53, 118, 126-28, also 132.
See also Kourier, April 1926, p. 24; Curry, Klan Under the Searchlight, 32.
Saloman's book was recommended to Klan members by the Kourier, Feb.
1927, p. 27.
61. Saloman, Red War, 22-23, 29-30, 50-51, 68, 71, 83-84, 90-91,
105; Imperial Night Hawk, 20 June 1923, p. 1. See also Searchlight, 28
Oct. 1922, p. 1.
62. Saloman, Red War, 18, 28, 32, 46, 47, 84. See also White, Heroes
of the Fiery Cross, 90.
63. Saloman, Red War, 73. "The bourgeois sees in his wife a mere


--- PAGE 268 ---
Notes to Pages 119-122 233
instrument of production," Marx and Engels wrote. "He hears that the
instruments of production are to be exploited in common, and, naturally,
can come to no other conclusion than that the lot of being common to all
will likewise fall to the women. He has not even a suspicion that the real
point being aimed at is to do away with the status of women as mere
instruments of production." Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Manifesto of
the Communist Party (Peking: Foreign Languages Press, 1972), 54.
64. Thomas E. Watson, The Inevitable Crimes of Celibacy (Thomson,
Ga., 1917), box 11, TEW.
65. Evans, Rising Storm, 154; "A lecture to the K.K.K.," box 3, AK.
66. Quote from Fred D. Regan, "Obscenity or Politics? Tom Watson,
Anti-Catholicism, and the Department of Justice," GHQ 70 (Spring 1986),
35; William Lloyd Clark, The Devil's Prayer Book, or an Exposure of Au-
ricular Confession as Practiced by the Roman Catholic Church: An Eye-
Opener for Husbands, Fathers, and Brothers (Milan, Illinois, 1922). Copy
in papers of Klan member Robert L. Rodgers, box 3, RLR.
67. Quoted in Cashin, "Thomas E. Watson," 19, 46, and 135; Mose-
ley, "Invisible Empire," 44.
68. White, Heroes of the Fiery Cross, 171, 176; Searchlight, 27 May
1922, p. 8. Among the order's favorite tactics to incite anti-Catholicism
was thus speaking tours by phony ex-nuns, and the circulation of publica-
tions by such women recounting their imprisonment and humiliation.
See, for example, the Klan favorite by Helen Jackson, Convent Cruelties,
or, My Life in a Convent (Toledo, 1919). These accounts, while presented
with proper Victorian outrage, often verged on the pornographic. Of the
speech of one Klan-sponsored "ex-nun," the Denver press said: "for utter
foulness . . . [she] simply could not be surpassed. It was the vomit not of
the red light district, but of hell's depths." Quoted in Goldberg, Hooded
Empire, 31. Titillation no doubt augmented their power.
69. "A Lecture to the K.K.K.," box 3, AK. In total, sixteen Athens
Klansmen were divorced in the decade, the records of which appear in
CCSC, Minutes, Books 46-52.
70. Georgia Free Lance, 17 Dec. 1925, p. 1; Frost, Challenge of the
Klan, 31. See also Hux, "Klan in Macon," 33, 68-69; Confession of Luke
Trimble, pp. 3-4, box 60, REM; Confession of W. C. Bishop, pp. 7-8, 13,
loc. cit.; N.Y. (Pete) Rutherford interview by Cliff Kuhn, transcript, pp. 52,
54, box 10, LAC; Weaver, "Klan in Wisconsin," 115; Searchlight, 1 April
1922, p. 4; ibid., 4 March 1922, p. 6; ADB, 12 Jan. 1923, p. 1. The letters
will be cited as appropriate below. Destitute women also requested aid
from the Klan, while deserted wives asked it to locate their husbands. For
an example of the latter, see N. B. Forrest to J. W. Arnold, 14 Dec. 1923,
box 1, AK.
71. B. T. P., to "Members of the Ku Klux Klan," 19 July 1928, box
1, AK.
72. Ibid.


--- PAGE 269 ---
234 Notes to Pages 122-126
73. "Yours Truly" to "Klu Klux Klan," 3 Nov. 1925, box 1, AK. See
also Mrs. A. L. O. to Mr. B., 3 Oct. 1926, loc. cit.
74. See divorce proceedings involving A. G. A., C. B. B., C. M. H.,
K. A. O., and Dr. B. B. C., as recorded in CCSC, Minutes, Book 46 (1920),
487; ibid., Book 48 (1923), 393; ibid., Book 49 (1925), 259; ibid., Book 50
(1926), 152; ibid, Book 52 (1928), 178-80, respectively. For mention of
wife-beating in another Klan chapter, see Cocoltchos, "Invisible Govern-
ment," 37-38.
75. ADB, 26 March 1922, p. 1. The case will be discussed in chapter
7. For complaints about "rough" people in the Southern Mill neighborhood
from the wife of a local Klansman, see "Life on 'Happy Top,' " transcript,
p. 17.
76. For the concept of moral economy, see Thompson, "Moral Econ-
omy of the English Crowd," esp. 78-79.
77. Mrs. B. T. P. to "Members of the Ku Klux Klan," box 1, AK;
"Yours in this great work" to "The Klansman," 31 March 1927, loc. cit.
See also Mrs. T. M. P. to "Dear Sir," July 1926, loc. cit. Whether from
sincerity or desperation, some recipients of Klan aid lavished the order's
members with praise. See Mrs. S. H. to "My Dear Friends in White," 11
Jan. 1925, loc. cit.; Mrs. S. K. to idem, n.d., loc. cit.; Mrs. W. P. and Chil-
dren to "the Kind friends of the Klu Klux Klan," 22 Nov. [1925], loc. cit.
78. Kourier, Oct. 1926, p. 23; also ibid., Dec. 1927, p. 26; ibid., Oct.
1925, p. 10; Imperial Night Hawk, 28 May 1924, p. 2.
Chapter 6
1. Hugh M. Dorsey, A Statement from Governor Hugh M. Dorsey as
to the Negro in Georgia, April 22, 1921 (New York, 1921), in series I, reel
45, CIC; Atlanta Independent, March 3, 1921, p. 1; M. Ashby Jones (for
the CIC) to "Dear Brother," 24 May 1921, box 3, RLR. The CIC went by
different names in its early years; sometimes, as here, the Committee on
Race Relations. For the sake of clarity, I refer to it always as the CIC.
2. Atlanta Independent, April 7, 1921, p. 6; Dorsey, Statement from
Governor Hugh M. Dorsey, 22-23; Sosna, In Search of the Silent South,
26; correspondence between Marion M. Jackson and Will Alexander in se-
ries I, frames 475-76, reel 7, CIC; ADB, 9 Aug. 1921, p. 4; Atlanta Inde-
pendent, March 24, 1921, p. 1.
3. Quoted in "Governor Dorsey Stirs Up Georgia," Literary Digest
69 (4 June 1921), 19. See also Atlanta Journal, 15 May 1921, in Vertical
File, s.v. "Hugh Manson Dorsey," UGA. The backlash is reported in ADB,
21 May 1921, p. 1; "Georgia's Indictment," Survey, 7 May 1921, pp.
183-84. For the cast of characters, see Hux, "Klan in Macon"; Carl F.
Hutcheson to Thomas E. Watson, 22 June 1921, box 12, TEW; Edward
Young Clarke to "Dear Sir," n.d., box 3, Pre-Gub., RBR; Miss A. Benton
to R. L. Rodgers, 14 Nov. 1921, box 3, RLR.


--- PAGE 270 ---
Notes to Pages 127-131 235
4. A. Benton to R. L. Rodgers, 14 Nov. 1921, box 3, RLR.
5. The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Started It:
The Memoir of Jo Ann Gibson Robinson, ed. David J. Garrow (Knoxville,
1987), xv.
6. For examples of such language and thought, see Searchlight, 26
April 1924, p. 8. My thinking about the Klan's racialism has benefitted
from Barbara Fields, "Ideology and Race in American History"; Evelyn
Brooks Higgenbottom, "African-American Women's History and the Meta-
language of Race"; Benedict R. Anderson, Imagined Communities: Re-
flections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (London, 1983).
7. Dixie Defense Committee, The "Negro in Georgia" (n.p., 1921),
3, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12. See also Searchlight, 4 June 1921, p. 1.
8. Dixie Defense Committee, "Negro in Georgia," 4, 6, 9. "The race
question," Ridley himself stated, "has become a controversy between the
two factions of the white race, and the negro question is no longer the
serious one for consideration." (Ibid., 9). From the other side of the divide,
Dorsey supporters recognized as a potential boon the salutary effect his
statement was having on outside opinion of Georgia. (See "Governor Dor-
sey Stirs Up Georgia," 19).
9. Dixie Defense Committee, "Negro in Georgia", 11, 4.
10. DuBois, "Shape of Fear," 301; "The Ku Klux Are Riding Again,"
The Crisis 17 (March 1919), 231,
11. Klan, Practice of Klanishness, 5; Klan, Georgia, Official Docu-
ment, May-June 1927, pp. 5, 7; Kourier, Nov. 1929, p. 23. Evans, Klan
of Tomorrow, 9; Klan, Georgia, Official Document, May-June 1927, p. 7
(italics mine).
12. Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 172; Searchlight, 5 Aug. 1922, p. 4;
Klan, Message of the Emperor, 12-13; Kourier, Oct. 1926, p. 20, On Stod-
dard, see Carey McWilliams, A Mask for Privilege: Anti-Semitism in
America (Boston, 1948), 63-67.
13. "Notes Taken from the Speech of Col. Wm. J. Simmons," series
C, box 312, NAACP; see also "Notes from 24 Jan. 1921 Speech of Col.
William J. Simmons," series I, frames 522-23, reel 7, CIC; West Virginia
leader quoted in Trotter, Coal, Class, and Color, 128; Klan, Official
Monthly Bulletin, 1 June 1927, p. 3; Klan, Georgia, Official Document,
May-June 1927, p. 9; ibid., April 1927, pp. 3, 4. For illustrations of such
race-baiting from Georgia, see Kuhn et al., Living Atlanta, 324; Angelo
Herndon, Let Me Live (New York, 1969), 144; ABH, 5 Nov. 1928, p. 1.
14. Klan, Practice of Klannishness, 6; Klan, Georgia, Official Docu-
ment, May-June 1927, p. 8; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 22; also Wood,
Are You a Citizen 47; Klan, Message of the Emperor, 15-16; Atlanta In-
dependent, 1 Feb. 1919, in series C, box 313, NAACP; Kligrapp's Quar-
terly Report forms, box 3, AK; Klan, Constitution and Laws, 16.
15. See "W. J. Simmons," p. 3 (affidavit by W. V. Guerard, July 1922),
box 48, JWB; ABH, 29 July 1926, p. 5.


--- PAGE 271 ---
236 Notes to Pages 131-135
16. The best example from within the Klan is the lionization of the
Reconstruction Klan as a force for national salvation at the center of the
K-UNO degree ritual, the beginning of the Klan's fraternal ladder. See
Klan, Kloran, 5th ed., 48-51. On the Dunning school, see W. E. B. Du Bois,
Black Reconstruction in America (1935; reprint, Cleveland, 1964), 711-28.
17. Evans, "Fight for Americanism," 36, 41, 51; idem, "Defender of
Americanism," 802-3; ABH, 5 Nov. 1928, p. 1. See also Guy B. Johnson,
"The Race Philosophy of the Ku Klux Klan," Opportunity 1 (Sept. 1923),
269; Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Oct.-Nov. 1927, p. 7.
18. Evans, "Fight for Americanism," 42, 38; Evans, "Defender of
Americanism," 803, 808-9.
19. Evans, "Defender of Americanism," 804; Searchlight, 5 Aug.
1922, p. 4; Klan, Kloran, 5th ed., 2; also Dixie Defense Committee, "Negro
in Georgia," 3.
20. Kourier, Jan. 1926, p. 19. Gould, America, 27, 49, 57, 124-25; At-
lanta Independent, 13 Jan. 1921, p. 1; Evans, Klan of Tomorrow, 8-9, 13;
Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 49; Evans, Rising Storm, 152, 154. For a con-
temporary's recognition of the racial element in Klan anti-Catholicism,
see Andre Siegfried, America Comes of Age, trans. H. H. Heming and
Doris Heming (New York, 1927), 137.
21. Gould, America, 163; also, Klan, Official Monthly Bulletin, 1
Nov. 1926, p. 1; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 143; Evans, "Defender of
Americanism," 806-7. For how racial exclusivity became part of earlier
republicanism, see Morgan, American Slavery, American Freedom; Win-
throp D. Jordan, White over Black: American Attitudes Toward the Negro,
1550-1812 (Chapel Hill, 1968).
22. Curry, Klan Under the Searchlight, 137; Klan, Message of the Em-
peror, 9; Evans, Klan of Tomorrow, 13, 16; Grady quote from Kourier,
Sept. 1925, p. 7; Coolidge and Hoover from Lipset and Raab, Politics of
Unreason, 142. For the Klan's use of such statements, see Kourier, April
1925, pp. 28, 32; ibid., Feb. 1925, p. 12; ibid., Dec. 1927, p. 15.
23. I. A. Newby, Jim Crow's Defense: Anti-Negro Thought in
America, 1900-1930 (Baton Rouge, 1965), quote from xi; Evans, Rising
Storm, 151; idem, "Defender of Americanism," 810; also, idem, "Fight for
Americanism," 43, 49; and idem, Klan of Tomorrow, 13; Klan, "Thirty-
Three Questions Answered," 7, box 3, AK. On eugenics, see Linda Gordon,
Woman's Body, Woman's Right: A Social History of Birth Control in
America (New York, 1977), 116-58. On anti-Semitism, see McWilliams,
Mask of Privilege, 57-67 and passim; Donald S. Strong, Organized Anti-
Semitism in America: The Rise of Group Prejudice During the Decade
1930-1940 (1941; reprint, Westport, 1979).
24. Klan, Georgia, Official Document, May-June 1927, p. 4; Klan,
Kloran, 5th ed., 49; Klan, Practice of Klanishness, 5; Monteval, Klan In-
side Out, 65; Klan, Message of the Emperor, 12, 13.
25. Klan, Message of the Emperor, 9; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 33;


--- PAGE 272 ---
Notes to Pages 135-137 237
Evans, "Fight for Americanism," 53. See also Sweeney, "Great Bigotry
Merger," 9; Klan, Georgia, Official Document, May-June 1927, p. 8; the
report in New York World, 20 July 1924, in vol. 252, p. 104, ACLU Papers;
Dixie Defense Committee, "Negro in Georgia," 12; Johnson, "Race Philos-
ophy of the Ku Klux Klan," 269.
26. Kourier, Feb. 1925, p. 9; ibid., Sept. 1925, p. 27; quotes from
Charles. S. Bryan to Henry Ford, 13 Nov. 1920, box 31, Charles S. Bryan
Papers, SHC (hereafter, CSB). See also Searchlight, 30 June 1923, p. 2.
27. McWilliams, Mask for Privilege, 179 and passim; Abram Leon,
The Jewish Question: A Marxist Interpretation, 2d ed. (New York, 1970),
226-27, 233; John Higham, "American Anti-Semitism Historically Recon-
sidered," in Jews in the Mind of America, ed. Charles H. Stember et al.
(New York, 1966), 248. On Henry Ford, see Lipset and Raab, Politics of
Unreason, 135-38.
28. Strong, Organized Anti-Semitism, 4, also 5-6, 14-15; Jean-Paul
Sartre, Anti-Semite and Jew, trans. George J. Becker (1948; reprint, New
York, 1965), 149. See also McWilliams, Mask for Privilege, 88, 94, 103;
Morton Rosenstock, Louis Marshall, Defender of Jewish Rights (Detroit,
1965), 110-15, 119.
29. For religious themes, see White, Klan in Prophecy, 27, 49-50;
Stanton, Christ and Other Klansmen, 40; Imperial Night Hawk, 27 June
1923, p. 7. For economic themes, see Charles S. Bryan to Henry Ford, 13
Nov. 1920, box 31, CSB; Searchlight, 30 Dec. 1922, p. 4; Kourier, Oct.
1925, p. 32; Curry, Klan Under the Searchlight, 161, 163; Klan, Papers
Read at the Meeting, 125; Imperial Night Hawk, 27 June 1923, pp. 6-7;
Searchlight, 30 June 1923, p. 2. See also Rosenstock, Louis Marshall,
204-5.
30. Curry, Klan Under the Searchlight, 161; Evans, Attitude ... To-
ward the few, 6; "Americanism," typescript speech, 11 May 1926, box 1,
AK; White, Klan in Prophecy, 53-54; idem, Fiery Cross, 34.
31. For a European parallel, see Leon, The Jewish Question, esp.
236-37.
32. Evans, Attitude . . . Toward the few, 4-5; Kourier, Oct. 1926, p.
23. John Higham argued that American anti-Semitism was usually
"pseudo-agrarian" and bound up with a producerist ideology, in "Ameri-
can Anti-Semitism Historically Reconsidered," 247-48.
33. Samuel H. Campbell to TEW, 16 Sept. 1922, box 15, TEW; Impe-
rial Night Hawk, 17 June 1923, pp. 6-7; also Campbell, The Jewish Prob-
lem in America (Atlanta, 1923). See also Evans' claim that "the Jew" acted
as a parasitic "middle-man," in Evans, Attitude . . . Toward the Jew, 5-6.
34. Searchlight, 30 June 1923, p. 2; ibid., 28 Oct. 1922, p. 4; Imperial
Night Hawk, 1 Aug. 1923, p. 7; Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Oct.
1926, p. 4. On anti-Semitism more generally in these years, see Rosen-
stock, Louis Marshall, 110-15, 119, 127; McWilliams, Mask for Privilege,
41; Strong, Organized Anti-Semitism, 6, 149-50.


--- PAGE 273 ---
238 Notes to Pages 138-140
35. For the "magical" quality of anti-Semitic thought, see Sartre,
Anti-Semite and few, esp. 39. For the class basis of anti-Semitic groups,
see Strong, Organized Anti-Semitism, 169, 172-74. On the Janus face, see
McWilliams, Mask for Privilege, 92; Draper, Politics of Social Classes,
300-302, 413.
36. Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Oct. 1926, p. 4; Searchlight, 28
Oct. 1922, p. 4; Kourier, Feb. 1927, p. 2; ibid., Jan. 1926, 15; Imperial
Night-Hawk, 27 June 1923, p. 7; Georgia, Official Document, Oct. 1926,
p. 4.
37. White, Heroes of the Fiery Cross, 85; Searchlight, 5 May 1923, p.
2; ibid., 30 Sept. 1922, p. 1; Imperial Night Hawk, 20 June 1923, p. 1.
38. Klan, Message of the Emperor, 10; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 69,
also 132, 252; Searchlight, 9 Dec. 1922, p. 4. See also Imperial Night
Hawk, 25 April 1923, p. 5; Curry, Klan Under the Searchlight, 101-2;
Kourier, Oct. 1925, p. 32.
39. Searchlight, 19 Aug. 1922, p. 4; Evans, "Defender of American-
ism," 810; Imperial Night Hawk, 1 May 1923, p. 7; Jones, Story of the
Klan, 84-85; Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Jan.-Mar. 1927, p. 8. See
also Evans, "Fight for Americanism," 40-41, 51; Curry, Klan Under the
Searchlight, 101-2, 115; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 138; Searchlight, 17
May 1922, p. 4; ibid, 5 May 1923, p. 2.
40. Klan, Papers Read at the Meeting, 129; Imperial Night Hawk, 28
May 1924, p. 2; Kourier, Dec. 1926, p. 5; Curry, Klan Under the Search-
light, 54, 115; Kourier, Oct. 1925, p. 10; Goldberg, Hooded Empire, 61;
Bohn, "Klan Interpreted," 399; Weaver, "Klan in Wisconsin," 139-42; Ger-
lach, Blazing Crosses, 41-42, Angle, Bloody Williamson, 139, 145,
150-51.
41. See, for example, Kourier, Jan. 1926, pp. 18-19; Dixie Defense
Committee, "Negro in Georgia," 3.
42. Julius S. Goetchius, in Judia C. Jackson Harris, Race Relations
(Athens, 1925), 9; George C. Thomas, in Race Relations, 9; also Dixie
Defense Committee, "Negro in Georgia," 6; Simmons, "Notes Taken from
Speech," series C, box 312, NAACP.
43. Searchlight, 30 Sept. 1922, p. 2, Imperial Night Hawk, 18 April
1923, pp. 1, 7; Kourier, Nov. 1929, p. 24. For the Communist Party's novel
commitment, see Robert L. Allen, Reluctant Reformers: Racism and So-
cial Reform Movements in the United States (Washington, D.C., 1974).
For later fears Southern Klansmen had about Communist influence on
blacks, see Mary C. Brown to Hugh Gladney Grant, 30 Nov. 1932, box
3, HGG.
44. Searchlight, 12 Aug. 1922, p. 6; Searchlight, 1 April 1922, p. 1;
Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Jan.-Mar. 1928, p. 7. A 1921 city coun-
cil resolution aimed at the Catholic Church to prohibit interracial worship
helped win Klansman Walter Sims the mayoralty of Atlanta. ADB, 20
Sept. 1921, p. 1.


--- PAGE 274 ---
Notes to Pages 141-144 239
45. Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 141, 142, 193, 248, 251, 253-255. See
also Atlanta Independent, Jan. 13, 1921, p. 1; Kourier, Jan. 1926, p. 18;
Searchlight, 22 March 1922, p. 3; Evans, Klan of Tomorrow, 15; New York
World, 20 July, 1924, vol. 252, p. 104, ACLU Papers.
46. Evans, "Fight for Americanism," 40-41; Imperial Night Hawk, 2
May 1923, p. 7.
47. Kourier, March 1927, p. 11; White, Klan in Prophecy, 27, 49; Klan,
Papers Read at the Meeting, 125; Klan,' Message of the Emperor, 10, 13;
Evans et al., Constructive or Destructive 9, 16; Kourier, Nov. 1926, p. 21;
Imperial Night-Hawk, 14 May 1924, p. 7.
48. Klan, Alabama, Official Document, Oct. 1928, pp. 1, 2, 4; Kourier,
Nov. 1929, pp. 23-24; Georgia, Official Document, May-June 1927, p. 5;
White, Heroes of the Fiery Cross, 144; Kourier, Aug. 1925, p. 10; ibid.,
Dec. 1929, p. 14.
49. Walker, "Inaugural Address," in Georgia, Senate Journal (1923),
118-19; Smith, Killers of the Dream, 124. On the larger pattern, see Ar-
thur F. Raper, The Tragedy of Lynching (1933; reprint, New York, 1969),
20, 50; Newby, Jim Crow's Defense, 135; Hall, Revolt Against Chivalry,
145-47; Tindall, Emergence of the New South, 170-71; James Weldon
Johnson, Along This Way: The Autobiography of James Weldon Johnson,
(1933; reprint, New York, 1968), 170, 311-13, 365-66, 391; White, Rope
and Faggot, 17, 54-55, 82; Ralph Ellison, Shadow and Act (New York,
1964), 311.
50. White, Rope and Faggot, 76, 82. See also White, Rope and Faggot,
17; Raper, Tragedy of Lynching 36-37; Johnson, Along This Way, 330;
Robert L. Zangrando, The NAACP Crusade Against Lynching (Philadel-
phia, 1980), 4-8.
51. For the classic statement of this problem, see Wilhelm Reich, The
Mass Psychology of Fascism, trans. Vincent R. Carfango (New York, 1970),
36. See also Charles Herbert Stember, Sexual Racism: The Emotional Bar-
rier to an Integrated Society (New York, 1976), 13 and passim.
52. Hall, Revolt Against Chivalry, quote on 149, discussion on
149-53. For another attempt to make sense of the role of gender in
lynching, this one more focussed on the psychology of individual white
male perpetrators, see Joel Williamson, The Crucible of Race: Black/White
Relations in the American South Since Emancipation (New York, 1984).
53. Davis et al., Deep South, 6, 24-25. For theoretical discussions of
this kind of boundary policing, see Douglas, Purity and Danger, 125; Ver-
ena Martinez-Alier, Marriage, Class and Colour in Nineteenth-Century
Cuba: A Study of Racial Attitudes and Sexual Values in a Slave Society
(London, 1974), 1, 7, 123-24.
54. See, for example, Klan, Official Monthly Bulletin, 1 Dec. 1926,
pp. 1-2; ibid:, 1 April 1927, p. 2; Evans, "Defender of Americanism," 804;
Klan, Georgia, Official Document, April 1927, p. 4; ibid., May-June 1927,
p. 5. For a rare exception, see Searchlight, 18 Nov. 1922, p. 7.


--- PAGE 275 ---
240 Notes to Pages 144-149
55. Klan, Alabama, Official Document, Oct. 1928, p. 1.
56. Quote from account in Greensboro, N.C., Daily News, 18 March
1922, series C, box 312, NAACP; also Searchlight, 6 May 1922, p. 7; ibid.,
18 Nov. 1922, p. 7; NYT, 25 April 1926, p. 16; NYT, 7 Nov. 1925, p. 7;
Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Jan.-March 1928, p. 6; Kourier, Aug.
1925, p. 10.
57. White, Klan in Prophecy, 53; idem, Heroes of the Fiery Cross, 10;
Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Oct. 1926, p. 4; Imperial Night Hawk,
4 April'1923, p. 3; Searchlight, 30 June 1923, p. 2; Kourier, Dec. 1926, p. 5.
58. Imperial Night Hawk, 30 April 1924, 6; Ridley, in Wood, Are You
a Citizen 44; "Americanism," box 1, AK; Kourier, May 1925, p. 32; Impe-
rial Night Hawk, 27 June 1923, p. 7. See also White, Heroes of the Fiery
Cross, 34, 36; idem, Klan in Prophecy, 53-54; also Bohn, "Klan Interpre-
ted," 388.
59. "Americanism," box 1, AK; Imperial Night Hawk, 27 June 1923,
p. 7; MacLean, "The Leo Frank Case Reconsidered"; Mast, Friend or Foe ,
19, 22.
60. Searchlight, 30 June 1923, p. 2; Evans et al., Constructive or De-
structive 14; White, Klan in Prophecy, 27, 49; Klan, Papers Read at the
Meeting, 125; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 55, 59; Curry, Klan Under the
Searchlight, 162; Evans et al., Constructive or Destructive! 14; Kourier,
May 1925, p. 32; Evans, Attitude . . . Toward the Jew, 5, 6.
61. "To the ordinary American," he wrote, "the race question at bot-
tom is simply a matter of ownership of women; white men want the right
to use all women, colored and white, and they resent the intrusion of col-
ored men in this domain." Quoted in Giddings, When and Where I Enter,
61.
62. Gerda Lerner, Black Women in White America: A Documentary
History (New York, 1973), 150, 172-73.
63. Kourier, Nov. 1926, p. 23; NYT, 1 Nov. 1925, p. 7; White, Heroes
of the Fiery Cross, 34-35. See also Ridley, in Wood, Are You a Citizen! 44.
64. Evans, Klan of Tomorrow, 9; idem, "Fight for Americanism," 39,
44; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 32-36, 274, 275, 279; NYT, 27 Nov. 1922,
p. 1; Searchlight, 11 March 1922, p. 4; ibid., 29 July 1922, p. 4; ibid., 15
April 1922, p. 4; Gould, America, 27. On the turn-of-the-century "race
suicide" panic, see Gordon, Woman's Body, Woman's Right.
65. Kourier, Oct. 1926, p. 22.
Chapter 7
1. Atlanta Constitution, 19 Sept. 1917, frame 552, reel 221, TINCF;
New York Herald Tribune, 11 Sept. 1919, in series C, box 355, NAACP;
[Albany, Ga.] Supreme Circle News, [undated], loc. cit.


--- PAGE 276 ---
Notes to Pages 149-152 241
2. Atlanta Independent, undated 1917 clippings, frames 631-32, reel
221, TINCF.
3. For evidence of Klan involvement in lynchings in Georgia and
South Carolina, see New York Call, 23 March 1921, in vol. 190, ACLU;
Walter White to Governor Thomas G. McLeod, 26 Oct. 1926, Correspon-
dence file, Walter Francis White Papers, Yale Collection of American Lit-
erature, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University,
New Haven. For illustrations of the social roots and political character of
collective violence, see Tilly, "Collective Violence in European Perspec-
tive," 4-42; and Ayers, Vengeance and fustice, 239-64. On the need for
cultural sanction, see Thompson, "Moral Economy of the English Crowd,"
esp. 78-79.
4. Quotes from Atlanta Constitution, 20 Feb. 1921, frame 462, reel
222, TINCF; Chicago Defender, [date illegible], loc. cit. See also Atlanta
Independent, 24 Feb. 1921, p. 4; W. H. Harris to Walter White, 19 Feb.
1921, series C, box 355, NAACP; Atlanta Constitution, 8 Feb. 1921, loc.
cit.; Atlanta Constitution, 17 Feb. 1921, loc. cit.; Atlanta Constitution,
27 Feb. 1921, loc. cit.; Macon Chronicle, 17 Feb. 1921, loc. cit.; ADB, 19
Feb. 1921.
5. Quote from Atlanta Constitution, 6 Dec. 1921, frame 309, reel
222, TINCC; see also Atlanta Constitution, 26 Jan. [1922], frame 927, loc.
cit.; Atlanta Constitution, 11 Dec. 1921, frame 461, loc. cit.; ADB, 6 Dec.
1921, p. 6.
6. William H. Harris to Mr. Walter White, 19 Feb. 1921, series C,
box 355, NAACP; ADB, 19 Feb. 1921, series C, box 355, NAACP; ADB,
23 Sept. 1921, pp. 1, 2, 8; ADB, 11 April 1922, p. 1; Atlanta Independent,
24 Feb. 1921, frame 460, reel 222, TINCF.
7. Anon, to the Hon. Warren G. Harding, frames 289-90, reel 14,
FSAA. At least one national Klan leader was arrested for robbing the mails.
See U.S. Congress, Senate, Senator from Texas: Hearings before a Subcom-
mittee of the Committee on Privileges and Elections, 68th Congress, 1st
session (Washington, 1924), 282.
8. ADB, 8 March 1921, p. 1; Atlanta Independent, 20 Jan. 1921, p.
4. For white uneasiness about black institutions, see Jones, Labor of Love,
133; Brooks, "Local Study," 218. For evidence of Klan perpetration of simi-
lar cases of arson, see Monteval, Klan Inside Out, 65; J. Q. Jett to Rebecca
Latimer Felton, [1924], box 8, RLF. Perhaps this is why some African
Americans referred to the KKK as the "Knights of the Kerosene Kan." At-
lanta Independent, 8 Sept. 1921, p. 1.
9. ADB, 8 March 1921, p. 1; quote from ADB, 13 Dec. 1921, p. 4.
See also Atlanta Constitution, 11 Dec. 1921, frame 461, reel 222, TINCF;
NYT, 23 Nov. 1921, p. 23. For other threats, see Athens Herald, clipping
in series C, box 355, NAACP. Although "aimed ostensibly at blacks," Jac-
quelyn Hall observed in another context, lynching "also operated as a


--- PAGE 277 ---
242 Notes to Pages 152-158
means of indoctrination and social control over whites." See Hall, Revolt
Against Chivalry, 142.
10. ADB, 26 March 1922, p. 1; ADB, 28 March 1922, pp. 1, 8; ADB,
25 March 1922, p. 5.
11. ADB, 24 March 1922, p. 1; ADB, 28 March 1922, pp. 1, 8; ADB,
24 March 1922, p. 1; ADB, 25 March 1922, p. 5; ADB, 26 March 1922,
pp. 1-2.
12. ADB, 28 March 1922, pp. 1, 8; ADB, 24 March 1922, p. 1; ADB,
25 March 1922, p. 5; ADB, 26 March 1922, p. 1. The other case was that
of a man from nearby Winterville, who was first warned by the Klan and
then taken out twice and whipped. He and his wife were fighting to the
point where it appeared likely that one would kill the other. ADB, 21 July
1922, p. 1; ADB, 22 July 1922, p. 1; CCSC, Minutes, Book 48 (1922), 21.
13. On the minister, see Case file 311.4113, RG 59, frames 197-245,
reel 18, FSAA. For the McClusky/Peters case, see T. J. Woofter, Jr., to
Roger N. Baldwin, 30 June 1922, vol. 215, 358-61, ACLU; Dykeman and
Stokely, Seeds of Southern Change, 104-5.
14. T. J. Woofter, Jr., to Roger N. Baldwin, 30 June 1922, vol. 215,
358-61, ACLU Papers; Dykeman and Stokely, Seeds of Southern Change,
106-8; "Affidavit of Odessa Peters," August 1922, series 7, frames
1627-29, reel 45, CIC.
15. ADH, 18 Nov. 1922, p. 5, ADB, 26 Nov. 1922; Atlanta Indepen-
dent, 20 Jan. 1921, pp. 1, 4; NYT, 23 Nov. 1922, p. 23. In Clarke County,
several people complained to the grand jury "that pistol firing [had]
become a nightly occurrence" in the city and out, but whether Klans-
men were involved is impossible to determine. See CCSC, Minutes (1922),
391.
16. ABH, 16 Dec. 1922, p. 1; "Report Negroes Driven from Georgia
Towns," [press release], 2 March 1923, series C, box 313, NAACP; Atlanta
Independent, 16 Aug. 1923, p. 1; Donald Dewey Scarborough, "An Eco-
nomic Study of Negro Farmers as Owners, Tenants, and Croppers," BUGA
25, n. 2a (Sept. 1924), 9; Fanning, "Negro Migration," 7, 9, 12-13, 15;
ABH, 11 Oct. 1923, p. 1; Harris, Race Relations, esp. 4, 8, 9.
17. For interesting similarities, see A. James Hammerton, "The Tar-
gets of 'Rough Music': Respectability and Domestic Violence in Victorian
England," Gender History 3 (Spring 1991), 23-44.
18. K.K.K. to A.M., n.d., in Ku Klux Klan Miscellany Collection,
UGA.
19. Exalted Cyclops, Bartow, Florida, Klan, to Exalted Cyclops, Ath-
ens, Georgia, 27 April 1927, box 1, AK.
20. NYT, 11 March 1926, p. 24; W. G. Brock to JPM, 26 July 1926,
box 1, AK.
21. ABH, 7 June 1926, 4; ADB, 26 Sept. 1922, p. 1, ADB, 25 April
1922, p. 4.
22. B. T. P. to "Members of the Ku Klux Klan," 19 July 1928, box 1,


--- PAGE 278 ---
Notes to Pages 158-161 243
AK; W. A. L. [to Ku Klux Klan], 22 March 1926, loc. cit.; C. W. H. to
"Dear Clammans," 28 Oct. 1925, loc. cit.
23. Searchlight, 16 Jan. 1922, p. 5. See also Klan, Papers Read at the
Meeting, 136; Glavis, "When the Klan Tells the Truth," 28.
24. Brown, The Final Awakening, esp. 45, 62-63, 88-99, 104-8, 113,
120, 147; Simmons quoted in Albert De Silver, "The Ku Klux Klan—'Soul
of Chivalry,'" Nation 113 (14 Sept. 1921), 285; Georgia, Official Docu-
ment, Dec. 1926, 1. The Klan press, for its part, maintained that the order
was "impelled by the same chivalric impulses as the original Knights of
the Ku Klux Klan." Searchlight, 16 Jan. 1922.
25. One person who had driven around the Georgia countryside
speaking with white farmers reported that when asked about Klan activi-
ties, "they unfailingly answer: ' The Ku Klux Klan are organized to enforce
law. The time has come when a poor man can't get justice in the courts
or a rich man punishment.' " See Helen Dortch Longstreet to Mrs. W. H.
Felton, 20 Oct. 1923, RLF.
26. Simmons, as quoted in Jones, Story of the Klan, 65, and "Notes
Taken from Speech of Wm. J. Simmons," 24 Jan. 1921, series C, b;x 312,
NAACP;'Paul M. Winter, What Price Tolerance (New York, 1928), iii, vi.
27. Richard Maxwell Brown, "The American Vigilante Tradition," in
Hugh Davis Graham and Ted Robert Burr, eds., The History of Violence
in America: Historical and Comparative Perspectives (New York, 1969),
168-70, 179-83. For illustrations, see Nall, Tobacco Night Riders; Cro-
zier, White Caps. The preservationist character of vigilante activity and
its consistent association with the right wing of the political spectrum are
stressed in Andrew A. Karmen, "Vigilantism," Encyclopedia of Crime and
Justice, ed. Sanford H. Kadish, vol. 4 (New York, 1983), 1,616-18.
28. Gould, America, 25-26; Evans, "Fight for Americanism," 49;
Siegfried, America Conies of Age, 134; "Knights of the Ku Klux Klan" to
"Dear Sir," loose one-page lecture admission card, box KY/KU in main
reading room, SHSW; Kourier, March 1925, p. 29; Curry, Klan Under the
Searchlight, 169-70; Simmons, America's Menace, 42, 44-45; Jefferson,
Roman Catholicism, 145.
29. Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 196 (italics mine), 205-6, 209-10; Ev-
ans, "Defender of Americanism," 814. See also Klan, Thirty-Three Ques-
tions Answered.
30. Samuel Olive, as quoted in Atlanta Journal, 15 May 1921, in Ver-
tical File, s.v. "Hugh Manson Dorsey," UGA; Klan, Kloran, 5th ed., 12;
New York World, 20 July 1924, in vol. 252, p. 105, ACLU Papers; Sermon
by Imperial Kludd Caleb Ridley, in Wood, Are You a Citizen 43. For evi-
dence of local cross-burnings, never reported by the press, see the reim-
bursements of members for materials in Athens Klan, Minutes, 15 Sept.
1925 and 23 March 1926, box 2, AK.
31. Searchlight, 3 May 1924, p. 8; Evans, Klan of Tomorrow, 23, 26;
Evans, "Defender of Americanism," 805; Kourier, Oct. 1926, p. 21. See


--- PAGE 279 ---
244 Notes to Pages 161-163
also George Estes, The Roman Katholic Kingdom and the Ku Klux Klan
(Troutdale, Ore., 1923), 31; Ridley sermon in Wood, Are You a Citizen 48;
"A lecture to the K.K.K.," box 3, AK; Klan, Message of the Emperor, 15.
32. Wood, Are You a Citizen 6, 43; Evans, Constructive or Destruc-
tive, 10; Kourier, Oct. 1926, p. 21; Imperial Night Hawk, 8 Aug. 1923, p.
6; Klan, Message of the Emperor, 3, 5, 8, 12, 13; Jones, Story of the Klan,
82; Evans, Klan of Tomorrow, 7, 17, 25, 27.
33. Mr. and Mrs. W. B. Romine, Story of the Ku Klux Klan (Pulaski,
Tenn., 1924), 14-15; Wood, Are You a Citizen! 47; Searchlight, 18 March
1922, p. 1; also ibid., 4 March 1922, p. 3; ibid., 11 March 1922, p. 7. For-
rest's comment was a defensive parry against Judge James K. Hines, who
had recently censured "secret organizations banded together for the pur-
pose of regulating the morals of a community without respect for the law
or courts." ABH, 7 June 1926, p. 4; Realm of Georgia, "Special Bulletin,"
27 July 1926, box 3, AK. On the fear of vice in republicanism, see Wood,
Creation of the American Republic, 68, 91-124; Ayers, Vengeance and
Justice, 45.
34. See the Klan letterhead in N. B. Forrest to J. P. M., 11 Nov. 1925,
box 1, AK; Wood, Are You a Citizen 45; Klan, Practice of Klannishness,
1. See also Searchlight, 16 Jan. 1922, p. 5; Jones, Story of the Klan, 83-84;
Brown, The Final Awakening, 40, 51, 442. On honor, see Ayers, Vengeance
and Justice, 13, 26; Bertram Wyatt-Brown, Southern Honor: Ethics and
Behavior in the Old South (New York, 1982); Hahn, "Honor and Patri-
archy."
35. Searchlight, 18 March 1922, p. 6; Anon, to Judge J. R. Hamilton,
31 March 1922, JRH. On the imperative to violence, see Ayers, Vengeance
and Justice, 13, 15-19; Pitt-Rivers, "Honor," 506, 509; Lynwood Montell,
Killings: Folk Justice in the Upper South (Lexington, 1986), 29, 146, 149;
John Dollard, Caste and Class in a Southern Town (New York, 1949),
331-32.
36. Kourier, April 1924, p. 18. See also Imperial Night Hawk, 18 June
1924, p. 5; Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 80.
37. For examples, see "Confession of W. C. Bishop," 6, 10, box 60,
REM; Atlanta Independent, 20 Jan. 1921, p. 1; Grady R. Kent, Flogged by
the Ku Klux Klan (Cleveland, Tenn., 1942), 19; NAACP, Press Release, 18
July 1921, series C, box 312, NAACP; NYT 16 April 1923, p. 8; The Madi-
sonian, 30 March 1928, in box 317, NAACP; W. C. Witcher, The Reign of
Terror in Oklahoma (Fort Worth, n.d.), 14; Case file 311.4113, reel 18,
frames 208, 233-34, FSAA. For related interpretations of crowd violence,
see Hall, Revolt Against Chivalry, 149-52; Natalie Zemon Davis, "The
Rites of Violence," in Society and Culture in Early Modern France (Palo
Alto, 1975); Roger Kent Hux, "The Ku Klux Klan and Collective Violence
in Horry County, South Carolina, 1922-1925," South Carolina Historical
Quarterly 85 (July 1984), 218.
38. CIC, "Race Relations in 1927" (Annual Report), series I, frame


--- PAGE 280 ---
Notes to Pages 163-165 245
552, reel 4, CIC. See also Jonathan A. Manget to Editor, Columbus
Enquirer-Sun, 21 Feb. 1923, in box 5, JLH. One might infer the frequency
of local flogging raids from the cases that occasionally came to light. The
Klan vigilantism uncovered in a series of Georgia counties comprised
scores of separate incidents, conducted sometimes more than once a week
in the periods about which evidence emerged. For Bibb County, see Hux,
"Klan in Macon"; for Toombs County, NYT, 14 Feb. 1927, p. 10; NYT, 14
March 1927, p. 1; for Fulton County, the typed confessions of three Klans-
men in box 60, REM; Nation, 6 April 1940, pp. 445-46; for Barrow
County, ADB, 13 Feb. 1922, p. 1. For a similar frequency in Alabama, see
Outlook, 2 Nov. 1927, p. 261; in Texas, see article reprinted from Houston
Press, series I, frames 533-36, reel 7, CIC. It is possible, however, that the
zeal of these chapters contributed to their eventual prosecution.
39. For examples, see Literary Digest, 26 March 1927, p. 8; NYT, 8
Jan. 1925, p. 12; NYT, 12 Jan. 1923, p. 10; NYT, 31 Jan. 1924, p. 30; NYT,
30 Nov. 1926, p. 31; NYT, 27 Aug. 1924, p. 1; NYT, 16 June 1922, p. 17;
N. B. Forrest to J. W. Arnold, 14 Dec. 1923, box 1, AK; idem to J. P. M.,
19 March 1926, loc. cit.; Klan, Georgia, Official Document, March 1927,
p. 3; ibid., Jan.-Mar. 1928, p. 3; ibid., April 1927, p. 4; Searchlight, 1 April
1922, p. 4.
40. For examples, see NAACP Press Release, 18 July 1921, series C,
box 312, NAACP; The Madisonian, 30 March 1928, in series C, box 317,
NAACP; Augusta Chronicle, 15 June 1927; NYT, 26 April 1923, p. 8; NYT,
15 Dec. 1924, p. 14; NYT, 22 Nov. 1923, p. 3; NYT, 27 Feb. 1927, p. 5;
NYT, 17 Jan. 1923, p. 8; NYT, 18 Jan. 1923, p. 9; Lay, War, Revolution and
the Ku Klux Klan, 108.
41. For examples, see Kuhn et al., Living Atlanta, 317-19; NYT, 25
April 1926, p. 16; NYT, 7 Nov. 1925, p. 7; NYT, 30 June 1922, in series C,
box 344, NAACP; Greensboro Daily News, 18 March 1922, in loc. cit.,
box 312; Confession of W. C. Bishop, 24 March 1940, 5, box 3, REM. Even
here, the alleged offense was sometimes a fabrication to cover economic
jealousy. See, for example, Roger Baldwin to N. G. Romey, 5 July 1922;
and N. G. Romey to Roger Baldwin, 7 July 1922, vol. 215 (1922), pp.
323-25, ACLU.
42. See, for example, T. J. Woofter, Jr., to Roger N. Baldwin, 30 June
1922, vol. 215, 358-59, ACLU; Mary McLeod Bethune to William Alexan-
der, 12 Jan. 1921, series I, frame 520 of reel 7, CIC; Mrs. R. E. B. Lake to
Grace Abbott, 26 Aug. 1923, box 162, U.S. Children's Bureau Papers, Na-
tional Archives, Washington, D.C. For such gendered racial terror in slav-
ery and after Emancipation, see Gerda Lerner, Black Women in White
America, 149, 163-64, 172-73.
43. Monteval, Klan Inside Out, 79, 81; ABH, 31 July 1930, p. 1. For
other examples, see Kourier, Sept. 1930, pp. 8-12; NYT, 31 Oct. 1920, p.
12; Case file BS 213410, RG 65, frames 924-65, reel 7, FSAA; Case file BS
212117, frame 921, loc. cit.; NYT, 7 Oct. 1920, p. 2; NYT, 9 July 1920, p.


--- PAGE 281 ---
246 Notes to Pages 165-166
3; NYT, 6 Sept. 1922, p. 19; NYT, 14 March 1922, p. 1; NYT, 6 Dec. 1922,
p. 4; Kuhn et al., Living Atlanta, 42-45, 316.
44. See, e.g., New York Herald Tribune, 14 March 1927, in series C,
box 354, NAACP; NYT, 14 March 1927, loc. cit.; NYT, 26 Dec. 1920, loc.
cit. 2; NYT, 6 Sept. 1921, p. 17; NYT, 4 July 23, p. 1; Literary Digest, 26
March 1927, p. 8; Baltimore Afro-American, 10 Feb. 1922, in series C, box
313, NAACP; CIC, Race Relations in 1927, series I, frame 552, reel 4, CIC.
45. James B. Clark to William Pickens, 19 July 1923, series C, box
3313, NAACP.
46. For examples, see NYT, 9 Jan. 1918, IV, 5; Searchlight, 25 Feb.
1922, p. 7; ibid., 11 Aug. 1923, p. 1, ABH, 18 July 1930, p. 1, "For and
Against the Ku Klux Klan," Literary Digest 70 (24 Sept. 1921), 38; De
Silver, "The Ku Klux Klan—'Soul of Chivalry,' " 286; Jackson, Klan in the
City, 80, 192, 209; Federated Press Bulletin, [Chicago], 28 Jan. 1922, in
series C, box 313, NAACP; ACLU, Annual Report (1923), 20; Toy, "Klan
in Oregon," 143.
47. Duffus, "Klan in the Middle West," 365-66; NYT, 2 Oct. 1923, p.
9; also Mecklin, Ku Klux Klan, 97-98, Toy, "Klan in Oregon," 125. This
is not to deny that some local unions and members supported or collabo-
rated with the Klan. For examples, see Toy, "Klan in Oregon," 91; Lipset
and Raab, Politics of Unreason, 127-28; Goldberg, Hooded Empire, 80;
Layne, Cotton Mill Worker, 222.
48. See, for example, Goldberg, Hooded Empire, vii; Cocoltchos, 4;
Moore, Citizen Klansmen, 1-2.
49. Herbert G. Gutman, Slavery and the Numbers Game: A Critique
of Time on the Cross (Urbana, 1975), 17-20. For an illustration, see the
poignant inquiry from the wife of a black Virginia minister: Mrs. R. E. B.
Lake to Miss Grace Abbott, 26 Aug. 1923, box 162, Children's Bureau Pa-
pers. I am grateful to Linda Gordon for this source.
50. For examples, see Imperial Night Hawk, 12 Sept. 1923, p. 1; Kour-
ier, March 1925, p. 13; ibid., August 1925, pp. 19, 31; Simmons, Klan Un-
masked, 43.
51. See, for example, Simmons quoted in NYT, 1 Nov. 1920, 27; Sim-
mons, Klan Unmasked, 12, 15, 20-22, 29, 38. Georgia Governor Clifford
Walker and Grand Dragon Nathan Bedford Forrest, for example, main-
tained publicly that they opposed people taking the law into their own
hands. Yet behind the scenes, both men had collaborated in the extralegal
entrapment effort and cover-up that came out of the Athens anti-vice
crusade.
52. Klan, Klan Building, 14-15 (italics mine); Klan, Constitution,
11—12 (italics mine). For a declaration of opposition to vigilantism, fol-
lowed by approval in cases where the law or courts acted negligently or
inadequately, see Searchlight, 4 March 1922, 3. For similar qualifications,
see Klan, Kloran, 2; Klan, Papers Read at the Meeting, 133; Klan, "Univer-
sity of America," [4]; Oregon Klan leader quoted in Glavis, "When the


--- PAGE 282 ---
Notes to Pages 166-168 247
Klan Tells the Truth," 28. The Klan also encouraged study of the Consti-
tution, "American courts," and the "history of law"—presumably to equip
members for safe, efficacious action. See Klan, Klan Building, 9-10.
53. New York World, 20 July 1924, in vol. 252, p. 104, ACLU. On the
assumptions, see Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 156-57; quotes in Johnson,
"Race Philosophy of the Ku Klux Klan," 268, 269.
54. New York World, 20 July 1924, in vol. 252, p. 104, ACLU; Klan,
Georgia, Official Document, March 1927, p. 4. See also ibid., Jan-Mar.
1928, p. 4; Klan, Official Monthly Bulletin, 1 Dec. 1926, pp. 2, 3; ibid.,
Jan. 1927, 2; ibid., Feb. 1927, p. 2.
55. Klan, Klan Building, 9-10; Petition, G. L. Johnson vs. Knights of
the Ku Klux Klan, p. 2, Case no. 4776, filed 24 Feb. 1925, CCSC; "Applica-
tion for Citizenship" forms, box 2, AK; Klan, Georgia, Official Document,
Nov. 1926, p. 4; Witcher, Reign of Terror, 27; Atlanta Independent, 15
Nov. 1923, p. 1; NYT, 2 Sept. 1924, p. 21; NYT, 11 April 1925, p. 9.
56. Monteval, Klan Inside Out, 66, also 69, 70, 83-84; W. V. Guerard,
deposition on "W. J. Simmons," box 48, JWB, 1, 3; Duffus, "Klan in the
Middle West," 368; Atlanta Independent, 3 Jan. 1924, p. 4; also J. Q. Jett
to R. L. Felton, [1924], box 8,' RLF. For similar testimony from Pennsylva-
nia, see NYT, 10 April 1928, in series C, box 317, NAACP; from Indiana,
see New York Evening World, in loc. cit.; NYT, 2 April 1928, p. 9; NYT,
10 April 1928, p. 1; NYT, 11 April 1928, p. 1; NYT, 14 April 1928, p. 1.
57. This description is compiled from several kinds of overlapping ac-
counts: internal documents, court cases, members' confessions, victims'
complaints, and reports by contemporaries. See, in addition to the Athens
material discussed earlier; Klan, Klan Building, 8, 14-15; Hux, "Klan in
Macon"; Sweeney, "Great Bigotry Merger," 9; Monteval, Klan Inside Out,
65, 76-78; Duffus, "How the Klan Sells Hate," 177; Loucks, Klan in Penn-
sylvania, 60, 78-79; Kent, Flogged by the Ku Klux Klan, 19; Klan, Official
Monthly Bulletin, 1 April 1927, p. 1; confessions of Atlanta Klan floggers
in box 60, REM.
58. Confession of F. I. Lee, 28 March 1940, pp. 1-2, box 4, REM; Con-
fession of Luke Trimble, 1, loc..cit.; Confession of W. C. Bishop, 1-2, loc.
cit.; also Loucks, Klan in Pennsylvania, 79. For the claim that ministers
were kept "in the dark" and then "used to hold up the cross & defend"
the Klan after it was charged with illegal acts, see J. Q. Jett to Mrs. W. H.
Felton, [1924], pp. 3-4, box 8, RLF. For similar patterns in the flogging
operations of the post-World War II Klan, see Stetson Kennedy, / Rode
with the Ku Klux Klan (London, 1954), 95-119.
59. Monteval, Klan Inside Out, 86-90, 99-100; Kuhn et al., Living
Atlanta, 320; G-l-NJ to E. P. Banta, 13 June 1923, Edwin P. Banta Papers,
Rare Books and Manuscripts Division, New York Public Library, New
York City; Hux, "Klan in Macon," 43; Dykeman and Stokely, Seeds of
Southern Change, 107; "Sincerely yours" to J. R. Hamilton, 31 March
1922, folder 3, JRH; ADB, 12 Dec. 1922, p. 1; ADB, 13 Dec. 1922, 1, NYT,


--- PAGE 283 ---
248 Notes to Pages 168-170
14 March 1927, series C, box 354, NAACP; NYT, 28 Oct. 1923, 1. On
jury-stacking, see Klan, Klan Building, 10; John V. Baiamonte, Jr., Spirit of
Vengeance: Nativism and Louisiana Justice, 1921-1924 (Baton Rouge,
1984), 120, 125. On attempts to intimidate journalists, see Shepherd,
"Fighting the K.K.K. on Its Home Grounds," esp. 509; Henry Louis Suggs,
ed., The Black Press in the South, 1865-1979 (Westport, 1983). On willful
destruction of evidence, see ABH, 13 Feb. 1925, pp. 1, 6; Minutes, 29 Dec.
1925, AK; W.G.B. to J.P.M., 26 July 1926, box 1, loc. cit.
60. Vagts, History of Militarism, 66-74, 175-79; Hux, "Klan in Ma-
con," 24. As illustrated by the Athens social purity entrapment scandal,
this tactic was generally successful.
61. Howard A. Tucker, History of Governor Walton's War on [the]
Ku Klux Klan (Oklahoma City, 1923), esp. 26, 64. For an account of the
1987 case, see Morris Dees, with Steve Fiffer, A Season for Justice: The
Life and Times of Civil Rights Lawyer Morris Dees (New York, 1991).
62. See, for example, the controls on the use of robes in Klan, Klan
Building, 14.
63. For examples, see NYT, 25 July 1926, II, 2; NYT, 4 Oct. 1921, p.
5; NYT, 1 Sept. 1923, p. 5; NYT, 5 June 1923, p. 4; NYT, 20 Oct. 1924, p.
18; Loucks, Klan in Pennsylvania, 128 ff.
64. On anti-mask efforts, see Klan, Official Monthly Bulletin, Jan.
1927, p. 2; H. G. Connor, Jr. to E. C. Branson, 8 March 1923, box 6, ECB;
Jackson, Klan in the City, 79.
65. For reports to this effect, see Johnson, "Sociological Interpretation
of the New Ku Klux Klan," 444. The most extensive and sensational epi-
sodes were also largely concentrated in the South. See, for example,
Witcher, Reign of Terror.
66. Hux, "Klan in Macon," 52-53; Case file 311.4113, RG 59, frames
199 and 219, reel 18, FSAA; New York World, 12 Dec. 1926, series C,
box 317, NAACP; Patton, "Klan Reign of Terror," 54; Witcher, Reign of
Terror, 30.
67. Fry, Modern Klan, 7; Tucker, Governor Walton's War, 26; Mon-
teval, Klan Inside Out, 93-94, 127; Ben B. Lindsey, "My Fight with the
Ku Klux Klan," Survey 54 (1 June 1925), 274; New York World, 12 Dec.
1926, in ACLU; NYT, 29 Oct. 1926, p. 48; Glavis, "When the Klan Tells
the Truth," 26; Baiamonte, Spirit of Vengeance, 16, 62, 120.
68. Dollard, Caste and Class, quote on 333; see also 211-12, 328,
339; "Notes Taken from Speech of Wm. J. Simmons," 24 Jan. 1921, series
C, box 312, NAACP. For the pattern in Georgia, see W. C. Bishop Confes-
sion, box 60, REM, 13; Kuhn et al., Living Atlanta, 313-14; Hux, "Klan in
Macon," 34. Elsewhere, see Grand Jury Report to Judge J. R. Hamilton, 5
Dec. 1921, folder 2, JRH; "Yours for Law & Order," [anon.] to J. R. Hamil-
ton, 28 June 1921, folder 1, loc. cit.; NYT, 26 April 1923, p. 40; NYT, 18
March 1928, p. 2; NYT, 13 April 1928, p. 27; Duffus, "Ancestry and End,"
534; Crowell, "Collapse of Constitutional Government," 334; Harold W.


--- PAGE 284 ---
Notes to Pages 170-178 249
Stephens, "Mask and Lash in Crenshaw," North American Review 225
(April 1928), 400, 438; Toy, "Klan in Oregon," 75.
69. N.Y. "Pete" Rutherford interview by Cliff Kuhn, transcript, pp.
49, 55, box 10, LAC. For examples, see James A. McDermott to Gov. H. J.
Allen, 12 Oct. 1922, series B, box 49, HJA; Hux, "Klan in Macon," 34;
Grand Jury Report to Judge J. R. Hamilton, JRH.
70. For examples, see Stephens, "Mask and Lash in Crenshaw," 437;
Toy, "Klan in Oregon," 75; Moseley, "Invisible Empire," 40-41; Baia-
monte, Spirit of Vengeance, 141; CIC, "Race Relations in 1927," series I,
reel 4, frame 552, CIC. See also Arthur Raper interview by Cliff Kuhn,
transcript, p. 24, box 39, LAC.
71. See, for example, the incidents recounted in Dorsey, Statement of
Governor, esp. p. 12; also New York Tribune, 14 March 1927, in series C,
box 354, NAACP; Mrs. R. E. B. Lake to Grace Abbott, 26 Aug. 1923, box
162, Children's Bureau Papers; N. G. Romey to ACLU, 7 July 1922, vol.
215, p. 326, ACLU; Atlanta Independent, 23 Aug. 1923, p. 4; ADB, 27
Aug. 1921, p. 1; ADB, 23 Oct. 1921, p. 1.
72. NYT, 14 March 1927, in series C, box 354, NAACP; Hux, "Klan
in Macon," 20, 39-40; James A. McDermott to Gov. H. J. Allen, 12 Oct.
1922, series B, box 49, HJA.
73. Quoted in New York Herald Tribune, 14 March 1927, in series C,
box 354, NAACP; Walter Horace Carter interview, 17 Jan. 1976, tran-
script, p. 23, Southern Oral History Program Collection, SHC.
74. Walter White to Thomas G. McLeod, 26 Oct. 1928, folder 136,
Walter White Papers; also White, Rope and Faggot, 29-33; Zangrando,
NAACP, 92-93.
75. Atlanta Independent, 6 Dec. 1923, p. 1.
Chapter 8
1. Thomas Mann, "Germany and the Germans," speech at the Li-
brary of Congress after the defeat of Germany and the fall of the Nazis,
May 1945, quoted in the exhibit Degenerate Art: The Fate of the Avant-
Garde in Nazi Germany, ed. Stephanie Barron (Los Angeles, 1991).
2. NYT, 17 Aug. 1924, VIII, 4; NYT, 21 Feb. 1926, VIII, 1; NYT, 5
Feb. 1928, II, 1; ACLU, Annual Report (1925), 4; Lynd and Lynd, Middle-
town, 484; Loucks, Klan in Pennsylvania, 162; Weaver, "Klan in Wiscon-
sin," 43-44, 142; Toy, "Klan in Oregon," 33; Gerlach, Blazing Crosses,
xvi-xvii. For a dissenting view, see Cocoltchos, "Invisible Government,"
567.
3. Jackson, Klan in the City, 43, 253-54; Rice, Klan in American
Politics, 92.
4. N. B. Forrest, "Special Bulletin," 2 Sept. 1926, box 3, AK; Klan,
Georgia, Official Document, Dec. 1926, p. 3; Coleman, History of Georgia,


--- PAGE 285 ---
250 Notes to Pages 178-180
293; Kligrapp's Quarterly Report forms in box 3, AK; Samuel Green to
H.K.B., 24 June 1930, box 1, loc. cit.
5. Hux, "Klan in Macon," 21; Loucks, Klan in Pennsylvania, 164;
Moore, Citizen Klansmen, 184-86; Goldberg, Hooded Empire, 58, 94-95,
178-79; Gerlach, Blazing Crosses, xvi-xvii, 8; Jenkins, Steel Valley Klan,
153; Alexander, Crusade for Conformity, 27.
6. The Klan's "ultimate weakness," maintained Kenneth Jackson,
"was its lack of a positive program and a corresponding reliance upon emo-
tion rather than reason." "The genuine American sense of decency," he
concluded, "finally asserted itself and consigned the once mighty Klan to
obscurity." Jackson, Klan in the City, 254-55. For similar, if less cheerful,
views, see Gerlach, Blazing Crosses, 8, 83.
7. Gerlach, Blazing Crosses, 154; Loucks, Klan in Pennsylvania,
163; Blee, Women of the Klan, 5-6.
8. To the extent that scholars of the Klan make the comparison,
they tend to dispose of it quickly and speciously. See, for example, Co-
coltchos, "Invisible Government," 626. Exceptions to the prevailing pro-
vincialism are Robert Moats Miller, "The Ku Klux Klan," in Change and
Continuity in Twentieth-Century America: The 1920's, ed. John Braeman,
Robert H. Bremner, and David Brody (n.p., 1968), 215-55; Victor C. Fer-
kiss, "Populist Influences on American Fascism," Western Political Quar-
terly 10 (June 1957), 350-73. Both of these works are now quite dated;
Ferkiss's work is particularly flawed by its one-sided caricature, taking off
from Richard Hofstadter, of the Populism of the 1890s and its assertion of
a direct, unmediated link between it and the fascisms of the twentieth
century.
9. Mayer, Why Did the Heavens Not Darken 31. For discussion of
the international retreat in recent years from comparative study of these
movements, see Tim Mason, "Whatever Happened to Fascism?" Radical
History Review 49 (1991), 89-98. For the differences between counterrevo-
lution, reaction, and conservatism and why they matter, see Arno J.
Mayer, Dynamics of Counterrevolution in Europe, 1870-1956: An Ana-
lytic Framework (New York, 1971).
10. Quoted in James R. Green, Grass-Roots Socialism: Radical Move-
ments in the Southwest, 1895-1943 (Baton Rouge, 1978), 401-5; Siegfried,
America Comes of Age, 134; Arthur Corning White, "An American Fas-
cismo," Forum 72 (1924), 636-42. See also Atlanta Independent, 21 Dec.
1922, p. 1; "Our Own Secret Fascisti," Nation 115 (15 Nov. 1922), 514;
Burbank, "Agrarian Radicals and Their Opponents"; see also DuBois, "The
Shape of Fear," 293; Bohn, "The Klan Interpreted," 397. The discussion
that follows concentrates on the commonalities between the Klan and fas-
cist movements, not fascist governments in power, given the changes in
composition, ideology, and object that occurred once fascist leaders as-
sumed direction of the state.
11. Searchlight, 4 Nov. 1922, p. 4; Imperial Night Hawk, 4 April


--- PAGE 286 ---
Notes to Pages 180-181 251
1923, p. 2; Kourier, June 1925, p. 10; Jefferson, Roman Catholicism and
the Ku Klux Klan, 145.
12. Quotes from Charles H. Martin, "White Supremacy and Black
Workers: Georgia's 'Black Shirts' Combat the Great Depression." LH, 18
(1977) 366, also 369; and John Roy Carlson [pseud.], Under Cover: My Four
Years in the Nazi Underworld of America (Philadelphia, 1943), 152-53,
198. See also John Hammond Moore, "Communists and Fascists in a
Southern City: Atlanta, 1930," South Atlantic Quarterly 57 (1968),
446-47, 460-61; Toy, "Klan in Oregon," 45-46; ABH, 31 Aug. 1930, p. 1.
For Bell's Klan involvement, see White, Heroes of the Fiery Cross, 197.
13. The discussion of Nazi ideology in this and ensuing paragraphs
builds heavily on Mayer, "The Syncretism of Mein Kampf," chap. 4 of
Why Did the Heavens Not Darken 90-109. Hereafter, it will only be cited
when quoted; other sources will be cited as appropriate.
14. See William Sheridan Allen, The Nazi Seizure of Power: The Ex-
perience of a Single German Town, 1930-1935 (Chicago, 1965), 26-27;
also Mayer, Dynamics of Counterrevolution, 68, 70; Childers, The Nazi
Voter, 268; Geoff Eley, "What Produces Fascism: Preindustrial Traditions
or a Crisis of the Capitalist State?" in Michael N. Dobkowski and Isidor
Walliman, eds., Radical Perspectives on the Rise of Fascism in Germany,
1919-1945 (New York, 1989), 91; Reich, Mass Psychology of Fascism, 81;
Mayer, Dynamics of Counterrevolution, 63-66.
15. Quotes from Mayer, Why Did the Heavens Not Darken! 9, 99.
See also idem, Dynamics of Counterrevolution, 6-66; George L. Mosse,
Nazi Culture: Intellectual, Cultural, and Social Life in the Third Reich
(New York, 1966), 3, 95-96, 133-34.
16. Quotes from Allen, Nazi Seizure of Power, 22; Mayer, Why Did
the Heavens Not Darken! 98. See also Mosse, Nazi Culture, 319-22;
Mayer, Dynamics of Counterrevolution, 64; Gunter W. Remmling, "The
Destruction of the Workers' Mass Movements in Nazi Germany," in Dob-
kowski and Walliman, Radical Perspectives on the Rise of Fascism,
215-30; Kurt Patzold, "Terror and Demagoguery in the Consolidation of
the Fascist Dictatorship in Germany, 1933-34," in loc. cit., 231-46.
17. The phrase "revolutionary counterrevolutionism" comes from
Mayer, who uses it to capture Hitler's self-representation as "a revolution-
ary against revolution." (Mayer, Why Did the Heavens Not Darken! 94).
On Nazi racialism, see Mosse, Nazi Culture, 2, 57-60.
18. For the way this conservative sexual politics was rooted in Hit-
ler's disdain for the rise of a concentrated urban working class, see Mayer,
Why Did the Heavens Not Darken! 103. My understanding of the sexual
politics of European fascism conies from Reich, Mass Psychology of Fas-
cism; the essays in Renate Bridenthal et. al., eds., When Biology Became
Destiny: Women in Weimar and Nazi Germany (New York, 1984); Clau-
dia Koonz, Mothers in the Fatherland: Women, the Family, and Nazi Poli-
tics (New York, 1987); and Mosse, Nationalism and Sexuality.


--- PAGE 287 ---
252 Notes to Pages 182-183
19. For analyses along these lines of fascism as a social movement,
see Allen, Nazi Seizure of Power; the essays in David Forgacs, ed., Re-
thinking Italian Fascism: Capitalism, Populism and Culture (London,
1986); Giampiero Carocci, Italian Fascism, trans. Isabel Quigly (Baltimore,
1975), esp. 7-27; Childers, The Nazi Voter: The Social Foundations of Fas-
cism in Germany, 1919-1933 (Chapel Hill, 1983); Mayer, Dynamics of
Counterrevolution; Trotsky, Struggle Against Fascism in Germany; idem,
Whither France (1936; reprint, New York, 1968); Daniel Guerin, Fascism
and Big Business, trans. Frances and Mason Merr (n.p., 1973); Felix Mor-
row, Revolution Counter-Revolution in Spain (New York, 1974). For a
dissenting view about lower-middle-class dominance in Hitler's popular
following, and emphasis, instead, on upper- and upper-middle-class back-
ing, see Richard F. Hamilton, Who Voted for Hitler (Princeton, 1982).
20. Roderick Kedward, "Afterword: What Kind of Revisionism," in
Forgacs, Rethinking Italian Fascism, 198; Mayer, Why Did the Heavens
Not Darken! 54-55.
21. See, for example, Searchlight, 22 July 1922, p. 4.
22. See Simmons, Klan Unmasked, 208. For examples, see Search-
light, 11 Nov. 1922, p. 6; ibid., 19 Aug. 1922, p. 5; Evans, "History of
Organized Labor," 291-92, 294-95; Toy, "Klan in Oregon," 143.
23. For illustrations, see Duffus, "Klan in the Middle West," 365;
Gladys L. Palmer, Union Tactics and Economic Change (Philadelphia,
1932), 38-44; Cocoltchos, "Invisible Government," 194-96, 260-61, 331.
24. See Brian Peterson, "Regional Elites and the Rise of National So-
cialism," in Dobkowski and Walliman, Radical Perspectives on the Rise
of Fascism, esp. 172; Mayer, Why Did the Heavens Not Darken! 94-95;
idem, Dynamics of Counterrevolution, 119. Earlier in U.S. history, such
threatened elites had played important roles in anti-abolition vigilantism.
See Leonard L. Richards, "Gentlemen of Property and Standing": Anti-
Abolition Mobs in facksonian America (New York, 1970), 131-50.
25. J. Q. Jett to Mrs. W. H. Felton, [1924], p. 7, RLF. For examples of
intramural rivalries among whites over black labor involving the Klan, see
Atlanta Independent, 20 Jan. 1921, pp. 1, 3; Imperial Night-Hawk, 4 April
1922. The question of the Klan's precise role—or roles—in the class rela-
tions of the rural countryside is a complex one that merits more research.
But it should be addressed in light of evidence—unrelated to the Klan—
that white farm tenants and small farmers sometimes employed whitecap-
ping to drive out their black rivals. See Mathews, "Studies in Race Rela-
tions in Georgia," 193. For an interesting discussion of how elite support
for vigilantism waned with changes in the political economy in one South-
ern city, see Ingalls, "Lynching and Establishment Violence in Tampa,"
esp. 640, 643-44.
26. Kourier, Dec. 1929, p. 4; also Imperial Night-Hawk, 4 April 1923,
p. 2; White, Heroes of the Fiery Cross, 79-84.
27. For examples from Athens, see ABH, 21 Jan. 1925, p. 1; J. T. Jones


--- PAGE 288 ---
Notes to Pages 183-187 253
to Exalted Cyclops and Klansmen of Athens, 1 June 1925, box 1, AK. Na-
tionally, see Klan, Georgia, Official Document, Nov. 1926, pp. 1, 2—3;
Klan, Official Monthly Bulletin, 1 Dec. 1926, pp. 1, 2. On churches, see
Allen, The Nazi Seizure of Power, 272; Mosse, Nazi Culture, 235-40.
28. Hamilton, Who Voted for Hitler! 3; Jackson, Klan in the City,
137-38. On conditions in Germany at the time of the election of 1932,
see Childers, Nazi Voter, 192-93. In terms of social setting, the American
experience of these years was more like that of England. Victors in the
war, both of these countries developed similar movements of the far right,
yet the impasse was less severe and their systems more able to accommo-
date the strain.
29. See, e.g., ABH, 5 April 1927, p. 1; ABH, 20 Jan. 1930, p. 1.
30. Leo Wolman, The Growth of American Trade Unions, 26, 33-37;
Barnett, "American Trade Unionism"; Montgomery, Fall of the House of
Labor, 453-54; Bernstein, Lean Years; and Dunn, Americanization of La-
bor. The rout of labor in the South was especially thorough. See Layne,
Cotton Mill Worker, 203-6; Evans, "History of Organized Labor," 90; Ya-
broff and Herlihy, "History of Work Stoppages," 368-70. On the Left, see
Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, 187, 513; Stein, World
of Marcus Garvey, 130-31; Hamilton, Who Voted for Hitler! 301.
31. Stein, World of Marcus Garvey, 162; McMillen, Dark Journey,
314-16.
32. For the rise and demise of black militancy in the postwar U.S.,
see Stein, World of Marcus Garvey, esp. 129-32. For Garvey's accommoda-
tion to the Ku Klux Klan in the South, see ibid., 153-54, 159-60; Zan-
grando, NAACP Crusade Against Lynching, 91.
33. Rebecca Latimer Felton to Editor, Walton News, 16 Sept. 1924,
box 8, RLF; A. B. Martin to J. R. Hamilton, 7 April 1922, folder 3, JRH;
Searchlight, 22 July 1922, p. 4. See also J. M. Robinson to James W. John-
son, 20 Oct. 1921, series C, box 312, NAACP; W. H. Woodhouse to Henry
J. Allen, 8 July 1922, series B, box 48, HJA.
34. White, Rope and Faggot, 120.
35. Allen, Nazi Seizure of Power, esp. 276; David Forgacs, "The Left
and Fascism: Problems of Definition and Strategy," in Forgacs, ed., Re-
thinking Italian Fascism; Mabel Berezin, "Created Constituencies: The
Italian Middle Classes and Fascism," in loc. cit., esp. 158; Hamilton, Who
Voted for Hitler esp. 422, 441; Rudy Koshar, "On the Politics of the Splin-
tered Classes: An Introductory Essay," in Koshar, ed., Splintered Classes,
esp. 6, 15; and the tragically prescient commentary by Leon Trotsky,
Struggle Against Fascism in Germany.
36. The phrase comes from DeMott, Imperial Middle. For growing
militarism and antipathy to labor struggle in the larger, multi-million-
member fraternal tradition, see Clawson, Constructing Brotherhood, chap.
8, 26-28; Lynn Dumenil, Freemasonry and American Culture, 1880—1930
(Princeton, 1984), 147; and chap. 4. For American racialist traditions, see,


--- PAGE 289 ---
254 Notes to Pages 187-188
for example, Richard Hofstadter, Social Darwinism in American Thought,
rev. ed. (Boston, 1955); Stephen Steinberg, The Ethnic Myth: Race, Eth-
nicity, and Class in America (Boston, 1981); Higham, Strangers in the
Land; Gordon, Woman's Body, Woman's Right, 136-58; Thomas G. Dyer,
Theodore Roosevelt and the Idea of Race (Baton Rouge, 1980). On the
face-coding of class, see Jordan, White Over Black; Morgan, American
Slavery, American Freedom; Ronald T. Takaki, Iron Cages: Race and Cul-
ture in Nineteenth-Century America (New York, 1979); Alexander Saxton,
The Rise and Fall of the White Republic: Class Politics and Mass Culture
in Nineteenth-Century America (London, 1990); David R. Roediger, The
Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the American Working
Class (London, 1991). On gender and middle-class consciousness, see, for
a start, Mary P. Ryan,' Cradle of the Middle Class: The Family in Oneida
County, New York, 1790-1865 (Cambridge, Mass., 1981); Christine
Stansell, City of Women: Sex and Class in New York, 1789-1860 (New
York, 1986).
37. James Weldon Johnson, testimony before United States Senate, To
Prevent and Punish the Crime of Lynching, Hearing before a Subcommit-
tee of the Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate, 69th Congress, 1st
session, 16 February 1926 (Washington, D.C., 1926), 24. For the cultural
legitimacy of such violence, see, in particular, Richard Maxwell Brown,
Strain of Violence: Historical Studies of American Violence and Vigilan-
tism (New York, 1975), esp. chap. 6, "Lawless Lawfulness: Legal and Be-
havioral Perspectives on American Vigilantism."
38. See Leo P. Ribuffo, The Old Christian Right: The Old Protestant
Right from the Great Depression to the Cold War (Philadelphia, 1983);
Alan Brinkley, Voices of Protest: Huey Long, Father Coughlin, and the
Great Depression (New York, 1983).
39. Anne Braden, "Lessons from a History of Struggle," Southern Ex-
posure 8, n. 2 (Summer 1980), 56. There are even some reports of former
Klansmen in the South crossing over to the interracial Southern Tenant
Farmers Union and the Socialist and Communist Parties. See Foner, Orga-
nized Labor and the Black Worker, 207; Green, Grass-Roots Socialism,
414; Robin D. G. Kelley, Hammmer and Hoe: Alabama Communists Dur-
ing the Great Depression, (Chapel Hill, 1990), 28, 61. For an extraordinary,
suggestive recent example of such a turn, see " 'Why I Quit the Klan';
.Studs Terkel Interviews C. P. Ellis," Southern Exposure 8, n. 2 (Summer
1980), 95-98.


--- PAGE 290 ---
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Manuscript Collections, by Repository
Atlanta Historical Society:
Brown, Joseph Mackey, Papers
Living Atlanta Collection.
Clark Atlanta University, Robert W. Woodruff Library, Special Collections
and Archives:
Commission on Interracial Cooperation, Papers. Microfilm ed. Ann
Arbor: University Microfilms International, 1984.
Duke University (Durham, N.C.), Special Collections Library:
Bailey, Josiah William, Papers.
Etheridge, Paul Sharp, Jr., Papers.
Grant, Hugh Gladney, Papers.
Emory University, Special Collections, Robert W. Woodruff Library:
Candler, Warren Akin, Papers.
Harris, Julian LaRose, Papers.
McGill, Ralph Emerson, Papers.
Federal Surveillance of Afro-Americans (1917-1925): The First World
War, the Red Scare, and the Garvey Movement. Ed. Theodore Korn-
weibel. Black Studies Research Sources: Microfilms from Major Archi-
val and Manuscript Collections. Frederick, Maryland: University Pub-
lications of America, 1985.
Georgia, Department of Archives and History, Atlanta:
Records of the Department of Archives and History, Record Group 4,
File II, Clarke County.
255


--- PAGE 291 ---
256 Bibliography
Records of the Executive Department, Record Group 1, Incoming Corre-
spondence, 1927-1931.
Rodgers, Robert L., Collection, 1872-1927. AC 27-101.
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C., Manuscript Division:
Allen, Henry J., Papers.
Foulke, William Dudley, Papers.
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Papers.
New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox, and Tilden Foundations, Rare
Books and Manuscripts Division:
Banta, Edwin P., Papers.
Princeton University, Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library:
American Civil Liberties Union Archives. Quoted with permission of
Princeton University Libraries.
State Historical Society of Wisconsin, Madison, Manuscripts Section:
Blaine, John James, Papers.
Minwegen, Father Peter, Manuscript.
.Women of the Ku Klux Klan, Klan No. 14, Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin,
Papers.
Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Southwest Collection:
Biggers, Don Hampton, Papers.
Tuskegee Institute, Hollis Burke Frissell Library:
Tuskegee Institute News Clippings File.
University Archives, Main Library, University of Georgia, Athens:
Barrow, David Crenshaw, Papers.
Tate, William, Archives.
University of Georgia, Board of Trustees, Correspondence and Reports.
, Board of Trustees, Minutes.
, Demosthenian Society, Minutes.
, Prudential Committee, Minutes and Miscellaneous Papers.
University of Georgia Libraries, Athens, Hargrett Rare Book and Manu-
script Library:
Athens-Clarke County Heritage Foundation. Oral History Tapes.
Brooks, Robert Preston, Papers.
Brown, Joseph Mackey, Papers.
Carlton-Newton-Mell Collection.
Cobb, Howell, Papers.
Coulter, E. Merton, Pamphlet Collection.
Felton, Rebecca L., Collection.
Flanigen, Cameron Douglas, Papers.


--- PAGE 292 ---
Bibliography 257
Jett, John Quincy, Papers.
Ku Klux Klan, Athens Chapter No. 5, Papers.
Ku Klux Klan, Miscellany.
.Scudder, Nina, Memorial Collection.
Taylor, Frances Long, Papers.
University of Georgia Libraries, Athens, Richard B. Russell Memorial Li-
brary:
Russell, Richard B., Jr., Collection.
Smith, Hoke, Papers.
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Southern Historical Col-
lection:
Branson, Eugene Cunningham, Papers.
Brown, J. J., Papers.
Bryan, Charles S., Papers and Books.
Federal Writers' Project, Papers.
Hamilton, James Robert, Papers.
Robinson, W. D., Papers.
Southern Oral History Program, Collection.
Watson, Thomas Edward, Papers.
Yale University, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale Collec-
tion of American Literature:
White, Walter Francis, Papers.
State and Federal Government Documents and Publications
Georgia. Department of Archives and History. Georgia's Official Register,
1923-1931. Atlanta, 1923-1931.
. Commissioner of Commerce and Labor. Annual Report of the
Commissioner of Commerce and Labor, 1915-1929/30. Atlanta,
1916-1931.
. House of Representatives. Journal of the House of Representatives
of the State of Georgia, 1920-1929. Atlanta, 1920-1929.
. Senate. Journal of the Senate of the State of Georgia, 1920-1929.
Atlanta, 1920-1929.
. State Tax Commissioner. Annual Report, 1917-1929/30. Atlanta,
1918-1931.
Turner, Howard A., and L. D. Howell. "Condition of Farmers in a White-
Farmer Area of the Cotton Piedmont, 1924-1926." U. S. Department
of Agriculture. Circular No. 78. Washington, D.C., 1929.
United States Congress. House of Representatives. Committee on Rules.


--- PAGE 293 ---
258 Bibliography
Hearings on the Ku Klux Klan. 67th Congress, 1st session. Washing-
ton, D.C., 1921.
. Senate. To Prevent and Punish the Crime of Lynching. Hearing
before a Subcommittee of the Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Sen-
ate, 69th Congress, 1st session, 16 February 1926. Washington, D.C.,
1926.
. Senate. Punishment for the Crime of Lynching. 73rd Congress, 2nd
session. Washington, D.C., 1934.
. Senate. Senator from Texas, Hearings Before a Subcommittee of
the Committee on Privileges and Elections. 68th Congress, 1st ses-
sion. Washington, D.C., 1924.
. Senate. Testimony Taken by the Joint Select Committee to In-
quire into the Condition of Affairs in the Late Insurrectionary States.
Georgia, vols. 1 and 2. 42nd Congress, 2nd Session. Washington,
D.C., 1872.
United States Department of the Interior. Census Office. Tenth Census of
the United States: 1880. Washington, D.C., 1883.
. Census Office. Eleventh Census of the United States: 1890. Wash-
ington, D.C., 1895.
. Census Office. Twelfth Census of the United States: 1900. Wash-
ington, D.C., 1901-1904.
United States Department of Commerce. Bureau of the Census. Census of
Religious Bodies, 1926, Part I, Summary and Detailed Tables. Wash-
ington, D.C., 1930.
. Bureau of the Census. Marriage and Divorce, 1916. Washington,
D.C., 1919.
. Bureau of the Census. Marriage and Divorce, 1922. Washington,
D.C., 1925.
. Bureau of the Census. Thirteenth Census of the United States:
1910. Washington, D.C., 1912-1914.
. Bureau of the Census. Fourteenth Census of the United States:
1920. Washington, D.C., 1921-1926.
. Bureau of the Census. Fifteenth Census of the United States: 1930.
Washington, D.C., 1931-1933.
. Bureau of the Census. Census of Agriculture: 1925, Pt. II, The
Southern States. Washington, D.C.
County Records
Note: Owing to the extensive demographic research on local Klan mem-
bers conducted for this study, county sources are too numerous to list
individually here. They included the federal manuscript census; city direc-
tories; tax digests; court records; miscellaneous church minutes, histories,


--- PAGE 294 ---
Bibliography 259
records, registers, directories, and cemetery files; histories of local civic
and social organizations; county Servicemen's Books and Veteran's Dis-
charge records. All of these records can be found in either the Hargrett
Rare Book and Manuscript Library in Athens or the Georgia Department
of Archives and History in Atlanta. The citations that follow refer only to
sources cited in the notes of this work.
Clarke County. Office of the Ordinary. Marriages. Georgia Department of
Archives and History, Atlanta.
Clarke County. Office of the Ordinary. Minutes, 1889-1946. Georgia De-
partment of Archives and History, Atlanta.
Clarke County. Superior Court. Minutes, 1914-1929. Georgia Department
of Archives and History, Atlanta.
Clarke County. Superior Court. Registration of Charters, 1890-1929.
Georgia Department of Archives and History, Atlanta.
Newspapers, Periodicals, and Annuals
American Civil Liberties Union. Annual Reports, vol. I, Jan. 1920-May
1930. Reprint, New York: Arno Press, 1970.
Athens Banner Herald (Athens, Ga.)
Athens Daily Banner (Athens, Ga.)
Athens Daily Herald (Athens, Ga.)
Atlanta Independent (Atlanta, Ga.)
Columbus Enquirer-Sun (Columbus, Ga.)
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. Department of the Imperial Klaliff. Official
Monthly Bulletin (Atlanta).
. Imperial Night Hawk (Atlanta).
. Kourier (Atlanta).
. Realm of Georgia. Office of the Grand Dragon. Official Docu-
ment (Atlanta).
New York Times
Searchlight (Atlanta)
Contemporary Books, Articles, and Pamphlets
Aikman, Duncan. "Prairie Fire." American Mercury 6 (Sept.-Dec. 1925),
209-14.
"Alabama Aroused." Outlook 147 (2 November 1927), 261.
American Red Cross, Report of Survey: Athens and Clarke County. Ath-
ens: n.p., 1920.
Atwood, Harry Fuller. Safeguarding American Ideals. Chicago: Laird &
Lee, 1921.


--- PAGE 295 ---
260 Bibliography
Bohn, Frank. "The Klan Interpreted." American Journal of Sociology 30
(January 1925), 385-407.
Boyd, Thomas. "Defying the Klan." Forum 76 (July-Dec. 1926), 48-56.
Brooks, Robert Preston. The Agricultural Revolution in Georgia,
1865-1912. Bulletin of the University of Wisconsin, no. 639 (Madi-
son, 1914).
. "A Local Study of the Race Problem." Political Science Quarterly
26 (June 1911), 193-221.
. Georgia Studies; Selected Writings. Athens: University of Georgia
Press, 1952.
Brown, Egbert. The Final Awakening; A Story of the Ku Klux Klan. Bruns-
wick, Georgia: Overstreet & Company, 1923.
Brunner, Edmund D. Church Life in the Rural South: A Study of the Op-
portunity of Protestantism Based upon Data from Seventy Counties.
1923; reprint, New York: Negro Universities Press, 1969.
Carlson, John Roy. Under Cover: My Four Years in the Nazi Underworld
of America. Philadelphia: Blakiston Co., 1943.
Clark, William Lloyd. The Devil's Prayer Book, or an Exposure of Auricu-
lar Confession as Practiced by the Roman Catholic Church: An Eye-
Opener for Husbands, Fathers, and Brothers. Milan, I11., 1922.
Crowell, Chester T. "The Collapse of Constitutional Government." Inde-
pendent 109 (9 Dec. 1922), 333-34.
Curry, Leroy Amos. The Ku Klux Klan Under the Searchlight: An Author-
itative, Dignified and Enlightened Discussion of the American Klan.
Kansas City, Mo.: Western Baptist Publishing Company, 1924.
Dau, W. H. T. Weighed, and Found Wanting. Fort Wayne, Ind.: American
Luther League, n.d.
De Silver, Albert. "The Ku Klux Klan—'Soul of Chivalry.' " Nation 113
(14 Sept. 1921), 285-86.
Dever, Lem A. Masks Off! Confessions of an Imperial Klansman. 2nd ed.
N.p: n.p., 1925.
Dixie Defense Committee. The "Negro in Georgia." N.p.: n.p., 1921.
Dorsey, Hugh M. A Statement from Governor Hugh M. Dorsey as to the
Negro in Georgia, April 22, 1921. New York: NAACP, 1921.
Du Bois, W. E. Burghardt. "Georgia: Invisible Empire State." In These
United States: A Symposium, vol. I, ed. Ernest Gruening. New York:
Boni & Liveright, 1924.
. "The Shape of Fear." North American Review 223 (1926), 291-304.
Duffus, Robert L. "Ancestry and End of the Ku Klux Klan." World's Work
46(1923), 527-36.
. "Counter-Mining the Ku Klux Klan." World's Work 46 (1923),
275-84.


--- PAGE 296 ---
Bibliography 261
. "How the Klan Sells Hate." World's Work 46 (1923), 174-83.
. "The Ku Klux Klan in the Middle West." World's Work 46 (1923),
363-72.
Dunn, Robert W. The Americanization of Labor: The Employers' Offen-
sive Against the Trade Unions. New York: International Publishers,
1927.
Estes, George. The Roman Katholic Kingdom and the Ku Klux Klan.
Troutdale, Oregon: George Estes, 1923.
Evans, Hiram Wesley. The Attitude of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan
Toward the few. Atlanta: n.p., 1923.
. "The Ballots Behind the Ku Klux Klan." World's Work 55 (1927/
28), 243-52.
. "The Klan: Defender of Americanism." Forum 74 (Dec. 1925),
801-14.
. The Klan of Tomorrow and the Klan Spiritual. N.p.: Knights of
the Ku Klux Klan, 1924.
. "The Ku Klux Klan's Fight for Americanism." North American
Review 223 (1926), 33-63.
. The Public School Problem in America: Outlining Fully the Poli-
cies and the Program of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan Toward the
Public School System. N.p: Ku Klux Klan, 1924.
. The Rising Storm: An Analysis of the Growing Conflict over the
Political Dilemma of the Roman Catholics in America. Atlanta:
Buckhead Publishing Co., 1930.
et al. Is the Klan Constructive or Destructive! A Debate Between
Imperial Wizard Evans, Israel Zangwill, and Others. Girard, Kansas:
Haldeman-Julius Company, 1924.
Evans, Mercer G. "Are Southern Cotton Mills Feudalistic?" American
Federationist 35 (Nov. 1928), 1,354-59.
"For and Against the Ku Klux Klan." Literary Digest 70 (24 Sept. 1921),
34-40.
Fowler, C. Lewis. The Ku Klux Klan: Its Origin, Meaning and Scope of
Operation. Atlanta: n.p. 1922.
Frank, Glenn. "Christianity and Racialism: Has the Klan the Right to Cel-
ebrate Christmas?" Century 109 (1924/25), 277-84.
Frost, Stanley. The Challenge of the Klan. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill,
1924.
Fry, Henry P. The Modern Ku Klux Klan. Boston: Small, Maynard &. Com-
pany, 1922.
"Georgia's Indictment." Survey, 1 May 1921, pp. 183-84.
Glavis, Louis R. "The Ku Klux Klan Invades Two Capitals." Hearst's In-
ternational Magazine (Feb. 1924), 10.


--- PAGE 297 ---
262 Bibliography
. "When the Klan Tells the Truth." Hearst's International Magazine
(March 1924), 26-29.
Googe, George L. "Organizing the Workers of Georgia." American Federa-
tionist 35 (Nov. 1928), 1,326-27.
Gould, Charles W. America: A Family Matter. New York: Charles
Scribner's Sons, 1922.
"Governor Dorsey Stirs Up Georgia." Literary Digest 69 (4 June 1921), 19.
Harris, Judia C. Jackson. Race Relations. Athens: n.p., 1925.
Herndon, Angelo. Let Me Live. New York: Arno Press, 1969.
Jackson, Helen. Convent Cruelties; or, My Life in a Convent. Toledo,
Ohio: John & Helen Jackson, 1919.
Jefferson, Charles E. Roman Catholicism and the Ku Klux Klan. New
York: Fleming H. Revell Company, 1925.
Johnson, Guy B. "The Race Philosophy of the Ku Klux Klan." Opportunity
1 (1923), 268-70.
. "A Sociological Interpretation of the New Ku Klux Klan Move-
ment." Social Forces 1 (May 1923), 440-45.
Johnson, M. K. "School Conditions in Clarke County, Georgia, with Spe-
cial Reference to Negroes." Bulletin of the University of Georgia 16,
n. lla (August 1916).
Jones, Winfield. Story of the Ku Klux Klan. Washington, D.C.: American
Newspaper Syndicate, 1921.
Kennedy, Stetson. I Rode with the Ku Klux Klan. London: Arco Publish-
ers, 1954.
Kent, Grady R. Flogged by the Ku Klux Klan. Cleveland, Tenn.: White
Wing Publishing House, 1942.
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. Constitution and Laws of the Knights of the
Ku Klux Klan. Atlanta: 1921.
. Kloran. 5th ed. Atlanta: Imperial Palace, 1916.
. Official Message of the Emperor of the Invisible Empire of the
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan to the Initial Session of the Imperial
Klonvocation. Atlanta: n.p., 1922.
. Papers Read at the Meeting of the Grand Dragons of the Knights
of the Ku Klux Klan, At their First Annual Meeting held at Asheville,
North Carolina, July 1923, Together With Other Articles of Interest
to Klansmen. Atlanta: Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, 1923.
. The Practice of Klannishness. Imperial Instructions, Document
No. 1. Atlanta: Imperial Palace, 1924.
. Thirty-Three Questions Answered. Atlanta: Knights of the Ku
Klux Klan, n.d.
. Department of Realms. Klan Building: An Outline of Proven Klan


--- PAGE 298 ---
Bibliography 263
Methods for Successfully Applying the Art of Klancraft in Building
and Operating Local Klans. Atlanta: n.p., n.d.
"The Ku Klux Are Riding Again." The Crisis 17 (March 1919), 231.
"The Ku Klux Klan." Catholic World 116 (January 1923), 433-43.
Kuczynski, Jurgen. "The Merchant and His Wage Earning Customers
in the South and in the North." American Federationist 35 (Nov.
1928).
Lindsey, Ben B. "My Fight with the Ku Klux Klan." Survey 54 (1 June
1925), 271-74.
Lynd, Robert S., and Helen Merrell Lynd. Middletown: A Study in Con-
temporary American Culture. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and
World, 1929.
Mast, Blaine. K.K.K. Friend or Foe: Which N.p.: Blaine Mast, 1924.
Mecklin, John Moffat. The Ku Klux Klan: A Study of the American Mind.
1923; reprint, New York: Russell & Russell, 1963.
Monteval, Marion. The Klan Inside Out. 1924; reprint, Westport: Negro
Universities Press, 1970.
Moore, Samuel Taylor. "How the Kleagles Collected the Cash." Indepen-
dent (13 Dec. 1924).
Odum, Howard Washington. An American Epoch: Southern Portraiture in
the National Picture. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1930.
O'Kelley, H. S. "Sanitary Conditions among the Negroes of Athens,Geor-
gia." Bulletin of the University of Georgia 18, n. 7 (July 1918).
"Our Own Secret Fascisti." Nation 115 (15 Nov. 1922), 514.
Patton, R. A. "A Klan Reign of Terror," Current History 28 (April 1928),
51-5.
"The Reign of the Tar Bucket." Literary Digest 70 (27 August 1921),
12-13.
Robertson, William Joseph. The Changing South. New York: Boni and
Liveright, 1927.
Rogers. J. A. The Ku Klux Spirit. New York: Messenger Publishing Co.,
1923.
Romine, Mr., and Mrs. W. B. A Story of the Ku Klux Klan. Pulaski, Tenn.:
Pulaski Citizen, 1924.
Saloman, Samuel. The Red War on the Family. New York: J. J. Little &
Ives, 1922.
Scarborough, Donald Dewey. "An Economic Study of Negro Farmers as
Owners, Tenants, and Croppers." Bulletin of the University of Geor-
gia 25, n. 2a (Sept. 1924).
Siegfried, Andre. America Comes of Age. Trans. H. H. Heming and Doris
Heming. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1927.


--- PAGE 299 ---
264 Bibliography
Shepherd, William G. "Fighting the K.K.K. on Its Home Grounds." Leslie's
133 (15 Oct. 1921).
Simmons, William Joseph. America's Menace, or the Enemy Within.
Atanta: Bureau of Patriotic Books, 1926.
. The Klan Unmasked. Atlanta: William E. Thompson Publishing
Company, 1923.
Stanton, E. F. Christ and Other Klansmen, or Lives of Love; The Cream
of the Bible Spread upon Klanism. Kansas City, Mo.: Stanton &
Harper, 1924.
Stephens, Harold W. "Mask and Lash in Crenshaw." North American Re-
view 225 (April 1928), 435-42.
Sweeney, Charles P. "The Great Bigotry Merger." Nation 115 (5 July 1922).
Taylor, Francis Long. "The Negroes of Clarke County, Georgia, During the
Great War." Bulletin of the University of Georgia 29, n. 8 (Sept. 1919).
Tucker, Howard A. History of Governor Walton's War on [the] Ku Klux
Klan. Oklahoma City: Southwest Publishing Company, 1923.
University of Georgia. Senior Class of 1925. Pandora. Athens: n.p., 1925.
Upshaw, William David. Clarion Calls from Capitol Hill. New York:
Fleming H. Revell Company, 1923.
Watson, Thomas E. The Inevitable Crimes of Celibacy. Thomson, Ga.:
Jeffersonian Publishing Co., 1917.
. The Life and Speeches of Thomas E. Watson. Thomson, Ga,: Jeffer-
sonian Publishing Co., 1916.
. Socialists and Socialism. Thomson, Ga.: Press of thejeffersonians,
1910.
White, Alma. Heroes of the Fiery Cross. Zarepath, N.J.: Good Citizen,
1928.
. The Ku Klux Klan in Prophecy. Zarepath, N.J.: Good Citizen, 1925.
White, Arthur Corning. "An American Fascismo." Forum 72 (July-Dec.
1924), 636-42.
Winter, Paul M. What Price Tolerance New York: All-American Book,
Lecture and Research Bureau, 1928.
Witcher, W. C. The Reign of Terror in Oklahoma. Fort Worth: The au-
thor, n.d.
Wood, J. O. Are You a Citizen Atlanta: Searchlight Publishing Com-
pany, n.d.
Woofter, Thomas Jackson, Jr. Negro Migration: Changes in Rural Organi-
zation and Population of the Cotton Belt. New York: W. D. Gray,
1920.
. "The Negroes of Athens, Georgia." Bulletin of the University of
Georgia 14, n. 4 (Dec. 1913),


--- PAGE 300 ---
Bibliography 265
Secondary Sources
Books
Ahlstrom, Sydney E. A Religious History of the American People. Vol. 2.
Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Company, 1975.
Alexander, Charles C. Crusade for Conformity: The Ku Klux Klan in
Texas, 1920-1930. Houston: Texas Gulf Coast Historical Association,
Publication Series, vol. 6, n. 1 (August, 1962).
. The Ku Klux Klan in the Southwest. Lexington: University of Ken-
tucky Press, 1965.
Allen, Robert L. Reluctant Reformers: Racism and Social Reform Move-
ments in the United States. Washington, D.C.: Howard University
Press, 1974.
Allen, William Sheridan. The Nazi Seizure of Power: The Experience of
a Single German Town, 1930-1935. Chicago: Quadrangle Books,
1965.
Ameringer, Oscar. // You Don't Weaken: The Autobiography of Oscar
Ameringer. New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1940.
Anderson, Benedict R. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin
and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso Books, 1983.
Angle, Paul M. Bloody Williamson: A Chapter in American Lawlessness.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1952.
Amett, Alex Matthews. The Populist Movement in Georgia. New York,
1922.
Ayers, Edward L. Vengeance and Justice: Crime and Punishment in the
Nineteenth-Century American South. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1984.
Baiamonte, John V., Jr. Spirit of Vengeance: Nativism and Louisiana Jus-
tice, 1921-1924. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1986.
Barrow, David C., et al. History of Athens and Clarke County. Athens:
H. J. Rowe, 1923.
Bartley, Nurnan V. The Creation of Modern Georgia. Athens: University
of Georgia Press, 1983.
Bernstein, Irving. The Lean Years. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1960.
Blee, Kathleen M. Women of the Klan: Racism and Gender in the 1920s.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.
Boyer, Paul S. Urban Masses and Moral Order in America, 1820—1920.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1978.
Bridenthal, Renate, et al., eds. When Biology Became Destiny: Women
in Weimar and Nazi Germany. New York: Monthly Review Press,
1984.


--- PAGE 301 ---
266 Bibliography
Brinkley, Alan. Voices of Protest: Huey Long, Father Coughlin, and the
Great Depression. New York: Random House, 1983.
Brown, Richard Maxwell. Strain of Violence: Historical Studies of Ameri-
can Violence and Vigilantism. New York: Oxford University Press,
1975.
Brownell, Elaine A. The Urban Ethos in the South, 1920-1930. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1975.
Burnham, Walter Dean. Critical Elections and the Mainsprings of the
American Party System. New York: W. W. Norton, 1970.
. The Current Crisis in American Politics. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1982.
Carby, Hazel. Reconstructing Womanhood: The Emergence of the Afro-
American Woman Novelist. New York: Oxford University Press,
1987.
Carlton, David L. Mill and Town in South Carolina, 1880-1920. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1982.
Carnes, Mark C. Secret Ritual and Manhood in Victorian America. New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1989.
Carocci, Giampiero. Italian Fascism. Trans. Isabel Quigly. Baltimore: Pen-
guin Books, 1975..
Chalmers, David M. Hooded Americanism: A History of the Ku Klux
Klan. Rev. ed. New York: Franklin Watts, 1981.
Childers, Thomas. The Nazi Voter: The Social Foundations of Fascism
in Germany, 1919-1933. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1983.
Clark, Norman. Deliver Us from Evil: An Interpretation of American Pro-
hibition. New York: W. W. Norton, 1976.
Clawson, Mary Ann. Constructing Brotherhood: Class, Gender, and Fra-
ternalism. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989.
Coben, Stanley. Rebellion Against Victorianism: The Impetus for Change
in 1920s America. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Coleman, Kenneth, ed. A History of Georgia. Athens: University of Geor-
gia Press, 1977.
and Charles Stephen Gurr, eds. Dictionary of Georgia Biography.
Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1983.
Collins, Patricia Hill. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Conscious-
ness, and the Politics of Empowerment. New York: Routledge, 1990.
Cott, Nancy. The Grounding of Modern Feminism. New Haven: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 1987.
Crozier, E. W. The White-Caps: A History of the Organization in Sevier
County. 1899; reprint, n.p.: Brazos Printing Co., 1963.


--- PAGE 302 ---
Bibliography 267
Daniel, Pete. The Shadow of Slavery: Peonage in the South, 1901-1969.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1972.
Davis, Allison, Burleigh B. Gardner, and Mary R. Gardner. Deep South: A
Social Anthropological Study of Caste and Class. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1941.
Davis, David Brion, ed. The Fear of Conspiracy: Images of Un-American
Subversion from the Revolution to the Present. Ithaca: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 1971.
Dees, Morris, with Steve Fiffer. A Season for Justice: The Life and Times
of Civil Rights Lawyer Morris Dees. New York: Charles Scribner's
Sons, 1991.
D'Emilio, John, and Estelle B. Freedman. Intimate Matters: A History of
Sexuality in America. New York: Harper & Row, 1988.
DeMott, Benjamin. The Imperial Middle: Why Americans Can't Think
Straight About Class. New York: William Morrow and Company,
1990.
Dinnerstein, Leonard. The Leo Frank Case. New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press, 1968.
Dittmer, John. Black Georgia in the Progressive Era. Urbana: University
of Illinois Press, 1977.
Dobkowski, Michael N., and Isidor Walliman, eds. Radical Perspectives
on the Rise of Fascism in Germany, 1919-1945. New York: Monthly
Review Press, 1989.
Dollard, John. Caste and Class in a Southern Town. Garden City, New
York: Doubleday, 1949.
Douglas, Mary. Purity and Danger: An Analysis of the Concepts of Pollu-
tion and Taboo. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1966.
Draper, Hal. The Politics of Social Classes, vol. 2, Karl Marx's Theory of
Revolution. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1978.
Draper, Theodore. American Communism and Soviet Russia. New York:
Random House, 1986.
Du Bois, W. E. Burghardt. Black Reconstruction in America. 1935; reprint,
Cleveland: World Publishing Company, 1964.
Dumenil, Lynn. Freemasonry and American Culture, 1880-1930.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984.
Dyer, Thomas G. Theodore Roosevelt and the Idea of Race. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 1980.
. The University of Georgia: A Bicentennial History, 1785-1985.
Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1985.
Dykeman, Wilma and James Stokely. Seeds of Southern Change: The Life
of Will Alexander. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962.


--- PAGE 303 ---
268 Bibliography
Edelman, Murray. The Symbolic Uses of Politics. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 1967.
Ellison, Ralph. Shadow and Act. 1964; reprint, New York: Vintage, 1972.
Epstein, Barbara. The Politics of Domesticity: Women, Evangelism and
Temperance in Nineteenth-Century America. Middletown: Wesleyan
University Press, 1981.
Escott, Paul D. Many Excellent People: Power and Privilege in North Car-
olina, 1850-1900. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1985.
File, Gilbert C. American Farmers: The New Minority. Bloomington: Uni-
versity of Indiana Press, 1981.
Flynn, Charles. White Land, Black Labor: Caste and Class in Late
Nineteenth-Century Georgia. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State Univer-
sity Press, 1983.
Foner, Eric. Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863-
1877. New York: Harper & Row, 1988.
. Tom Paine and Revolutionary America. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1976.
Foner, Philip S. Organized Labor and the Black Worker, 1619-1981. 2d
ed. New York: International Publishers, 1982.
Forgacs, David, ed. Rethinking Italian Fascism: Capitalism, Populism and
Culture. London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1986.
Formisano, Ronald P. Boston Against Busing: Race, Class, and Ethnicity
in the 1960s and 1970s. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina,
1990.
Friedman, Jean E. The Enclosed Garden: Women and Community in the
Evangelical South, 1830-1900. Chapel Hill: University of North Caro-
lina Press, 1985.
Galambos, Louis, and Joseph Pratt. Rise of the Corporate Commonwealth:
U.S. Business and Public Policy in the 20th Century. New York: Basic
Books, 1988.
Garlock, Jonathan, comp. A Guide to Local Assemblies of the Knights of
Labor. Westport: Greenwood Press, 1982.
Garrow, David J., ed. The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who
Started It: The Memoir of Jo Ann Gibson Robinson. Knoxville: Uni-
versity of Tennessee Press, 1987.
Gerber, David, ed. Anti-Semitism in American History. Urbana: Univer-
sity of Illinois Press, 1986.
Gerlach, Larry R. Blazing Crosses in Zion: The Ku Klux Klan in Utah.
Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1982.
Giddings, Paula. When and Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Women
on Race and Sex in America. New York: Bantam Books, 1985.


--- PAGE 304 ---
Bibliography 269
Goldberg, Robert Alan. Hooded Empire: The Ku Klux Klan in Colorado.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1981.
Goodwyn, Lawrence. The Populist Moment: A Short History of Agrarian
Revolt in America. New York: Oxford University Press, 1978.
Gordon, Linda. Heroes of Their Own Lives: The Politics and History of
Family Violence; Boston, 1880-1960. New York: Viking, 1988.
. Woman's Body, Woman's Right: A Social History of Birth Control
in America. New York: Penguin Books, 1977.
, ed. Women, the State, and Welfare. Madison: University of Wis-
consin Press, 1990.
Green, James. Grass Roots Socialism: Radical Movements in the South-
west, 1895-1943. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press,
1978.
Guerin, Daniel. Fascism and Big Business. Trans. Frances Merrill and Ma-
son Merrill. New York: Monad Press, 1973.
Gutman, Herbert G. Slavery and the Numbers Game: A Critique of Time
on the Cross. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1975.
Hahn, Steven. The Roots of Southern Populism: Yeoman Farmers and the
Transformation of the Georgia Upcountry, 1850-1890. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1983.
Hamilton, Richard F. Who Voted for Hitler? Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1982.
Hall, Jacquelyn Dowd. Revolt against Chivalry: Jessie Daniel Ames and
the Women's Campaign against Lynching. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 1979.
, James Leloudis, Robert Korstad, Mary Murphy, Lu Ann Jones,
and .Christopher B. Daly. Like a Family: The Making of a Southern
Cotton Mill World. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1987.
Harris, J. William. Plain Folk and Gentry in a Slave Society: White Liberty
and Black Slavery in Augusta's Hinterlands. Middletown: Wesleyan
University Press, 1985.
Hatcher, Orie Latham. Rural Girls in the City for Work. Richmond, Va.:
Garratt and Massie, 1930.
Hays, Samuel P. American Political History as Social Analysis. Knoxville:
University of Tennessee Press, 1980.
Herring, Harriet L. Passing of the Mill Village. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1949.
. Welfare Work in Mill Villages. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1929.
Hertzberg, Steven. Strangers within the Gate City: The Jews of Atlanta,


--- PAGE 305 ---
270 Bibliography
1845-1915. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America,
1978.
Higham, John. Strangers in the Land: Patterns of American Nativism,
1860-1925. 1963; reprint, New York: Atheneum, 1974.
Hofstacker, Richard. The Age of Reform. New York: Random House, 1955.
. Social Darwinism in American Thought, rev. ed. Boston: Beacon
Press, 1955.
Hooks, Bell. From Margin to Center. Boston: South End Press, 1984.
Jackson, Kenneth T. The Ku Klux Klan in the City, 1915-1930. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1967.
Jenkins, William D. Steel Valley Klan: The Ku Klux Klan in Ohio's Ma-
honing Valley. Kent: Kent State University Press, 1990.
Johnson, James Weldon. Along This Way: The Autobiography of fames
Weldon Johnson. 1933; reprint, New York: Viking Press, 1968.
Jones, Jacqueline. Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work,
and the Family, from Slavery to the Present. New York: Random
House, 1986.
Jordan, Winthrop D. White Over Black: American Attitudes Toward the
Negro, 1550-1812. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1968.
Kelley, Robin D. G. Hammer and Hoe: Alabama Communists During the
Great Depression. Chapel Hill, 1990.
Kerber, Linda. Women of the Republic: Intellect and Ideology in Revolu-
tionary America. New York: W. W. Norton, 1986.
Kinzer, Donald. An Episode in Anti-Catholicism: The American Protec-
tive Association. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1964.
Kocka, Jurgen. White Collar Workers in America, 1890-1940. Trans.
Maura Kealey. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1980.
Koonz, Claudia. Mothers in the Fatherland: Women, the Family, and Nazi
Politics. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1987.
Koshar, Rudy, ed. Splintered Classes: Politics and the Lower Middle Class
in Interwar Europe. New York: Holmes & Meier, 1990.
Kousser, J. Morgan. The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction
and the Establishment of the One-Party South, 1880-1910. New Ha-
ven: Yale University Press, 1974.
Kramnick, Isaac. Republicanism and Bourgeois Radicalism: Political Ide-
ology in Late Eighteenth-Century England and America. Ithaca: Cor-
nell University Press, 1990.
Kuhn, Clifford M., Harlon E. Joye, and E. Bernard West. Living Atlanta:
An Oral History of the City, 1914-1948. Athens: University of Geor-
gia Press, 1990.


--- PAGE 306 ---
Bibliography 271
Lay, Shaun. War, Revolution and the Ku Klux Klan: A Study of Intoler-
ance in a Border City. El Paso: Texas Western Press, 1985.
—, ed. The Invisible Empire in the West: Toward a New Historical
Appraisal of the Ku Klux Klan of the 1920s. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 1992.
Layne, Herbert Jay. The Cotton Mill Worker in the Twentieth Century.
New York: Farrar & Rinehart, 1944.
Leon, Abram. The Jewish Question: A Marxist Analysis. Second ed. New
York: Pathfinder Press, 1970.
Lerner, Gerda. Black Women in White America: A Documentary History.
New York: Vintage Books, 1973.
Levin, N. Gordon, Jr. Woodrow Wilson and World Politics: America's Re-
sponse to War and Revolution. New York: Oxford University Press,
1968.
Levine, Lawrence W. Defender of the Faith: William Jennings Bryan; The
Last Decade, 1915-1925. New York: Oxford University Press, 1965.
Lewis, Hylan. Blackways of Kent. Chapel Hill: University of North Caro-
lina Press, 1955.
Lipset, Seymour M., and Earl Raab. The Politics of Unreason: Right-
Wing Extremism in America, 1790-1970. New York: Harper & Row,
1970.
Loucks, Emerson H. The Ku Klux Klan in Pennsylvania: A Study in Nativ-
ism. Harrisburg, Pa.: Telegraph Press, 1936.
Luker, Kristin. Abortion and the Politics of Motherhood. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1984.
MacDonald, Lois. Southern Mill Hills: A Study of Social and Economic
Forces in Certain Mill Villages. New York: A.L. Hillman, 1928.
MacPherson, C. B. The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1964.
Marsden, George M. Fundamentalism and American Culture: The Shap-
ing of Twentieth-Century Evangelicalism, 1870-1925. New York: Ox-
ford University Press, 1980.
Marshall, F. Ray. Labor in the South. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1967.
Martinez-Alier, Verena. Marriage, Class and Colour in Nineteenth-
Century Cuba: A Study of Racial Attitudes and Sexual Values in a
Slave Society. London: Cambridge University Press, 1974.
Marx, Karl, and Frederick Engels. Manifesto of the Communist Party. Pe-
king: Foreign Languages Press, 1972.
May, Elaine Tyler. Great Expectations: Marriage and Divorce in Post-
Victorian America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980.


--- PAGE 307 ---
272 Bibliography
Mayer, Arno J. Dynamics of Counterrevolution in Europe, 1870-1956: An
Analytic Framework. New York: Harper & Row, 1971.
. Why Did the Heavens Not Darken? The "Final Solution" in His-
tory. New York: Pantheon Books, 1990.
McLoughlin, William G., Jr. Billy Sunday Was His Real Name. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1955.
McMath, Robert C., Jr. Populist Vanguard: A History of the Southern
Farmers' Alliance. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1975.
McMillen, Neil R. Dark Journey: Black Mississippians in the Age of Jim
Crow. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1989.
Me Williams, Carey. A Mask for Privilege: Anti-Semitism in America. Bos-
ton: Little, Brown & Co., 1948.
Meyerowitz, Joanne J. Women Adrift: Independent Wage Earners in Chi-
cago, 1880-1930. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988.
Miller, Nora. The Girl in the Rural Family. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1935.
Mills, C. Wright. White Collar: The American Middle Classes. 1951; re-
print, New York: Oxford University Press, 1976.
Montell, Lynwood. Killings: Folk Justice in the Upper South. Lexington:
University of Kentucky Press, 1986.
Montgomery, David. The Fall of the House of Labor: The Workplace, the
State, and American Labor Activism, 1865-1925. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1989.
Moore, Leonard J. Citizen Klansmen: The Ku Klux Klan in Indiana,
1921-1928. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1991.
Morgan, Edmund S. American Slavery, American Freedom: The Ordeal of
Colonial Virginia. New York: W. W. Norton, 1975.
Morland, John Kenneth. Millways of Kent. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1958.
Mosse, George L. Nationalism and Sexuality: Respectability and Ab-
normal Sexuality in Modern Europe. New York: Howard Fertig,
1985.
. Nazi Culture: Intellectual, Cultural, and Social Life in the Third
Reich. New York: Grosset &. Dunlap, 1966.
Murray, Robert K. Red Scare: A Study of National Hysteria, 1919-1920.
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1964.
Nall, James O. The Tobacco Night-Riders of Kentucky and Tennessee,
1905-1909. Louisville: Standard Press, 1939.
Neverdon-Morton, Cynthia. Afro-American Women of the South and the
Advancement of the Race, 1895-1925. Knoxville: University of Ten-
nessee Press, 1989.


--- PAGE 308 ---
Bibliography 273
Newby, I. A. Jim Crow's Defense: Anti-Negro Thought in America,
1900-1930. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1965.
. The South: A History. N.Y.: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1978.
Nord, Phillip G. Paris Shopkeepers and the Politics of Resentment.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986.
Ostrander, Gilman M. American Civilization in the First Machine Age:
1890-1940. New York: Harper & Row, 1970.
Painter, Nell Irvin. Standing at Armageddon: The United States,
1877-1919. New York: W. W. Norton, 1987.
Palmer, Bruce. "Man Over Money": The Southern Populist Critique of
American Capitalism. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1980.
Palmer, Gladys L. Union Tactics and Economic Change. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1932.
Patterson, Horace C, and Gilbert C. Fite. Opponents of War, 1917-1918.
Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1968.
Peiss, Kathy Lee. Cheap Amusements: Working Women and Leisure in
New York City, 1880-1920. Philadelphia: Temple University Press,
1986.
Percy, William Alexander. Lanterns on the Levee: Recollections of a
Planter's Son. 1941; reprint, Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
Press, 1973.
Petchesky, Rosalind P. Abortion and Woman's Choice: The State, Sexual-
ity, and Reproductive Freedom. Boston: Northeastern University
Press, 1984.
Pivar, David. Purity Crusade: Sexual Morality and Social Control,
1868-1900. Westport: Greenwood, 1973.
Potwin, Marjorie A. Cotton Mill People of the Piedmont: A Study in So-
cial Change. New York: Columbia University Press, 1927.
Preston, William, Jr. Aliens and Dissenters: Federal Suppression of Radi-
cals, 1903-1933. New York: Harper & Row, 1963.
Range, Willard. A Century of Georgia Agriculture, 1850-1950. Athens:
University of Georgia Press, 1954.
Raper, Arthur F. Preface to Peasantry: A Tale of Two Black Belt Counties.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1936.
——. The Tragedy of Lynching. 1933; reprint, New York: Arno Press,
1969.
Reed, Thomas Walter. David Crenshaw Barrow. Athens: The author,
1935.
Reich, Wilhelm. The Mass Psychology of Fascism. Trans. Vincent R. Car-
fagno. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1970.


--- PAGE 309 ---
274 Bibliography
Rhyne, Jennings J. Some Southern Cotton Mill Workers and Their Vil-
lages. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1930.
Ribuffo, Leo P. The Old Christian Right: The Protestant Far Right from
the Great Depression to the Cold War.' Philadelphia: Temple Univer-
sity Press, 1983.
Rice, Arnold S. The Ku Klux Klan in American Politics. Washington: Pub-
lic Affairs Press, 1962.
Richards, Leonard L. "Gentlemen of Property and Standing": Anti-
Abolition Mobs in facksonian America. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1970.
Rodgers, Daniel T. Contested Truths: Keywords in American Politics
Since Independence. New York: Basic Books, 1987.
. The Work Ethic in Industrial America, 1850-1920. Chicago: Uni-
versity of North Carolina Press, 1978.
Roediger, David R. The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the
American Working Class. London: Verso, 1991.
Rose, Douglas, ed. The Emergence of David Duke and the Politics of Race.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 1992.
Rosenstock, Morton. Louis Marshall, Defender of Jewish Rights. Detroit:
Wayne State University Press, 1965.
Rude, George. The Crowd in History: A Study of Popular Disturbances
in France and England, 1730-1848. Rev. ed. London: Lawrence and
Wishart, 1964.
Ryan, Mary. Cradle of the Middle Class: The Family in Oneida County,
New York, 1790-1865. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. Anti-Semite and few. Trans. George G. Becker. 1948;
reprint, New York: Schocken Books, 1965.
Saxton, Alexander. The Rise and Fall of the White Republic: Class Politics
and Mass Culture in Nineteenth-Century America. London: Verso,
1990.
Schmidt, Alvin J. Fraternal Organizations. Vol. 3 of Greenwood Encyclo-
pedia of American Institutions. Westport: Greenwood Press, 1980.
Scott, Ann Firor. The Southern Lady: From Pedestal to Politics,
1830-1930. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970.
Shaw, Barton C. The Wool-Hat Boys: Georgia's Populist Party. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1984.
Singal, Daniel Joseph. The War Within: From Victorian to Modernist
Thought in the South, 1919-1945. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1982.
Skowronek, Stephen. Building a New American State: The Expansion of
National Administrative Capacities, 1877-1920- Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1982.


--- PAGE 310 ---
Bibliography 275
Smith, Lillian. Killers of the Dream. New York: W. W. Norton, 1978.
Sosna, Morton. In Search of the Silent South: Southern Liberals and the
Race Issue. New York: Columbia University Press, 1977.
Stansell, Christine. City of Women: Sex and Class in New York,
1789-1860. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1986.
Stein, Judith. The World of Marcus Garvey: Race and Class in Modern
Society. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1986.
Steinberg, Stephen. The Ethnic Myth: Race, Ethnicity, and Class in
America. Boston: Beacon Press, 1981.
Stember, Charles Herbert. Sexual Racism: The Emotional Barrier to an
Integrated Society. New York: Elsevier, 1976.
Strong, Donald S. Organized Anti-Semitism in America: The Rise of
Group Prejudice During the Decade 1930-40. 1941; reprint, Westport:
Greenwood Press, 1979.
Suggs, Henry Louis, ed. The Black Press in the South, 1865-1979. West-
port: Greenwood Press, 1983.
Takaki, Ronald T. Iron Cages: Race and Culture in Nineteenth -Century
America. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1979.
Tindall, George. The Emergence of the New South, 1913-1945. Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1967.
Tippett, Tom. When Southern Labor Stirs. New York: Jonathan Cape and
Harrison Smith, 1931.
Trelease, Allen W. White Terror: The Ku Klux Klan Conspiracy and
Southern Reconstruction. New York: Harper & Row, 1971.
Trotsky, Leon. The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany. New York:
Pathfinder Press, 1971.
. Whither France 1936; reprint, New York: Merit Publishers, 1968.
Trotter, Joe William. Coal, Class, and Color: Blacks in Southern West
Virginia, 1915-1932. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1990.
Vagts, Alfred. A History of Militarism, Civilian and Military. Rev. ed.
New York: The Free Press, 1959.
Vanderwood, Paul J. Nightriders of Reelfoot Lake. Memphis: Memphis
State University Press, 1969.
Wade, Wyn Craig. The Fiery Cross: The Ku Klux Klan in America. New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1987.
Weinstein, James. The Corporate Ideal in the Liberal State, 1900-1918.
Boston: Beacon Press, 1968.
White, Walter. Rope and Faggot: A Biography of Judge Lynch. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 1929.
Wiebe, Robert H. The Search for Order, 1870-1920. New York: Hill a
Wang, 1967.
Wilentz, Sean. Chants Democratic: New York City &) the Rise of the


--- PAGE 311 ---
276 Bibliography
American Working Class, 1788-1850. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1984.
Williams, Raymond. Marxism and Literature. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1978.
Williamson, Joel. The Crucible of Race: Black/White Relations in the
American South Since Emancipation. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1984.
Wolman, Leo. The Growth of American Trade Unions, 1880-1923. New
York: Bureau of Economic Research, 1924.
Wolters, Raymond. The New Negro on Campus: Black College Rebellions
of the 1920s. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1975.
Wood, Gordon. The Creation of the American Republic, 1776-1787.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1969.
Woodward, C. Vann. Origins of the New South, 1877-1913. Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 1951.
. Tom Watson: Agrarian Rebel. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1977.
Wright, Gavin. Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Econ-
omy Since the Civil War. New York: Basic Books, 1986.
Wyatt-Brown, Bertram. Southern Honor: Ethics and Behavior in the Old
South. New York: Oxford University Press, 1982.
Zangrando, Robert L. The NAACP Crusade Against Lynching, 1909-1950.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1980.
Articles
Braden, Anne. "Lessons from a History of Struggle." Southern Exposure 8,
n. 2 (Summer 1980), 56-61.
Beatty, Bess. "Textile Labor in the North Carolina Piedmont: Mill Owner
Images and Mill Worker Response." Labor History 25 (Fall 1984),
486-503.
Berthoff, Rowland T. "Southern Attitudes Toward Immigration,
1865-1914." Journal of Southern History 17 (February 1951), 328-60.
Bloch, Ruth H. "The Gendered Meanings of Virtue in Revolutionary
America." Signs 13 (1987), 37-58.
Brown, Elsa Barkley. "Womanist Consciousness: Maggie Lena Walker and
the Independent Order of Saint Luke." Signs 14 (Spring 1989), 251-74.
Brown, Richard Maxwell. "The American Vigilante Tradition." In The
History of Violence in America: Historical and Comparative Perspec-
tives, ed. Hugh Davis Graham and Ted Robert Gurr. New York: Fred-
erick A. Praeger, 1969.
. "Historical Patterns of Violence in America." In The History of


--- PAGE 312 ---
Bibliography 277
Violence in America: Historical and Comparative Perspectives, ed.
Hugh Davis Graham and Ted Robert Gurr. New York: Frederick A.
Praeger, 1969.
Burbank, Garin. "Agrarian Radicals and Their Opponents: Political Con-
flict in Southern Oklahoma, 1910-1924." Journal of American His-
tory 58 (June 1971), 5-23.
Davis, Natalie Zemon. "The Rites of Violence." In her Society and Cul-
ture in Early Modern France. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press,
1975.
Fanning, John William. "Negro Migration: A Study of the Exodus of the
Negroes between 1920 and 1925 from Middle Georgia Counties." Bul-
letin of the University of Georgia 30, n. 8b (June 1930).
Faragher, John Mack. "History from the Inside-Out: Writing the History
of Women in Rural America." American Quarterly 33 (Winter 1981),
537-57.
Feldman, Egal. "Prostitution, the Alien Woman, and the Progressive Imag-
ination." American Quarterly 19 (1967), 192-206.
Ferkiss, Victor C. "Populist Influences on American Fascism." Western
Political Quarterly 10 (June 1957), 350-73.
Fields, Barbara J. "Ideology and Race in American History." In Region,
Race, and Reconstruction, ed. J. Morgan Kousser and James B. Mc-
Pherson. New York: Oxford University Press, 1982.
Flynt, J. Wayne. "Folks Like Us: The Southern Poor White Family." In
The Web of Southern Social Relations, ed. Walter J. Fraser, Jr., et. al.
Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1985.
Garson, Robert A. "Political Fundamentalism and Popular Democracy in
the 1920s." South Atlantic Quarterly 76 (Spring 1977), 219-233.
Gunderson, Joan. "Independence, Citizenship, and the American Revolu-
tion." Signs 13 (1987), 59-77.
Hahn, Steven. "Class and State in Postemancipation Societies: Southern
Planters in Comparative Perspective." American Historical Review 95
(Feb. 1990), 75-98.
. "Honor and Patriarchy in the Old South." American Quarterly, 31
(Spring 1984), 145-53.
Hall, Jacquelyn Dowd. "Disorderly Women: Gender and Labor Militancy
in the Appalachian South." Journal of American History 73 (Sept.
1986), 354-82.
, Robert Korstad, and James LeLoudis. "Cotton Mill People: Work,
Community, and Protest in the Textile South, 1880-1940." American
Historical Review 91 (1986), 245-86.
Hammerton, A. James. "The Targets of 'Rough Music': Respectability and
Domestic Violence in Victorian England." Gender &) History 3 (Spring
1991), 23-44.


--- PAGE 313 ---
278 Bibliography
Higginbottom, Evelyn Brooks. "African-American Women's History and
the Metalanguage of Race." Signs 17 (Winter 1992), 51-74.
Higham, John. "American Anti-Semitism Historically Reconsidered." In
Jews in the Mind of America, ed. Charles H. Stember et al. New York:
Basic Books, 1966.
Hill, Walter B. "Rural Survey of Clarke County, Georgia, with Special Ref-
erence to the Negroes." Bulletin of the University of Georgia 15, n. 3
(March 1915).
Holmes, William F. "Moonshining and Collective Violence: Georgia,
1889-1895." Journal of American History 67 (1980), 589-611.
. "The Southern Farmers' Alliance: The Georgia Experience." Geor-
gia Historical Quarterly 72 (Winter 1988), 627-52.
. "Whitecapping in Georgia: Carroll and Houston Counties, 1893."
Georgia Historical Quarterly 64 (1980), 388-404.
Hux, Roger K. "The Ku Klux Klan and Collective Violence in Horry
County, South Carolina, 1922-1925." South Carolina Historical Mag-
azine 85 (July 1984), 211-19.
. "The Ku Klux Klan in Macon, 1919-1925." Georgia Historical
Quarterly 62 (1978), 155-68.
Ingalls, Robert P. "Lynching and Establishment Violence in Tampa,
1858-1935." Journal of Southern History 53 (Nov. 1987), 613-44.
Institute for the Study of Georgia Problems. "Survey of Athens and Clarke
County, Georgia; Part I." Bulletin of the University of Georgia 44, n.
3 (March 1944).
Jenkins, William D. "The Ku Klux Klan in Youngstown, Ohio: Moral Re-
form in the Twenties." Historian 61 (Nov. 1978), 76-93.
Jones, Lila Lee. "The Ku Klux Klan in Eastern Kansas During the 1920's."
Emporia State Research Studies 23 (Winter 1975).
Karmen, Andrew A. "Vigilantism." Encyclopedia of Crime and Justice,
vol. 4. Ed. Sanford Kadish. New York: Free Press, 1983.
Klein, Rachel N. "Ordering the Backcountry: The South Carolina Regula-
tion." William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd series, vol. 38 (Oct. 1981),
661-80.
Korobkin, Russell. "The Politics of Disfranchisement in Georgia." Georgia
Historical Quarterly 74 (Spring 1990), 20-58.
MacLean, Nancy. "The Leo Frank Case Reconsidered: Gender and Sexual
Politics in the Making of Reactionary Populism." Journal of American
History 78 (Dec. 1991), 917-48.
Mann, Thomas. "Germany and the Germans." Speech at the Library of
Congress after the Defeat of Germany and the Fall of the Nazis, May
1945. Quoted in the exhibit Degenerate Art: The Fate of the Avant-
Garde in Nazi Germany. Ed. Stephanie Barron, Los Angeles County
Museum of Art. New York: Larry N. Abrams, 1991.


--- PAGE 314 ---
Bibliography 279
Martin, Charles H. "White Supremacy and Black Workers: Georgia's
'Black Shirts' Combat the Great Depression." Labor History 18
(1977),366-81.
Mason, Tim. "Whatever Happened to Fascism?" Radical History Review
49 (1991), 89-98.
Mayer, Arno J. "The Lower Middle Class as Historical Problem." Journal
of Modem History 47 (Sept. 1975), 409-36.
McCurry, Stephanie. "The Two Faces of Republicanism: Gender and Pro-
slavery Politics in Antebellum South Carolina." Journal of American
History 78 (March 1992), 1,245-64.
Miller, Robert Moats. "The Ku Klux Klan." Change and Continuity in
Twentieth-Century America: The 1920's. Ed. John Braeman, Robert
H. Bremner, and David Brody. N.p.: Ohio State University Press, 1968.
. "A Note on the Relationship Between the Protestant Churches and
the Revival of the Ku Klux Klan." Journal of Southern History 22
(Aug. 1956), 355-68.
Montgomery, David. "On Goodwyn's Populists." Marxist Perspectives 1
(Spring 1978), 166-73.
. "Violence and the Struggle for Unions in the South, 1880-1930."
Perspectives on the American South 1 (1981), 35-47.
Moore, John Hammond. "Communists and Fascists in a Southern City:
Atlanta, 1930." South Atlantic Quarterly 57 (1968).
Moore, Leonard J. "Historical Interpretation of the 1920's Klan: The Tradi-
tional View and the Populist Revision." Journal of Social History 24
(Winter 1990).
Moseley, Clement Charlton. "Political Influence of the Ku Klux Klan in
Georgia, 1915-1925." Georgia Historical Quarterly 57 (1973), 235-55.
Mugleston, William F. "Julian Harris, the Georgia Press, and the Ku Klux
Klan." Georgia Historical Quarterly 59 (1975), 284-95.
. "The Press and Student Activism at the University of Georgia in
the 1920s." Georgia Historical Quarterly 64 (Fall 1980), 241-52.
Newman, Dale. "Work and Community Life in a Southern Town," Labor
History 19 (Spring 1978), 204-25.
Peiss, Kathy. "Dance Madness: New York City Dance Halls and Working-
Class Sexuality, 1900-1920." In Life and Labor: Dimensions of Amer-
ican Working-Class History, ed. Charles Stephenson and Robert
Asher. New York: SUNY Press, 1986.
Pitt-Rivers, Julian. "Honor." International Encyclopedia of the Social Sci-
ences, vol. 6. Ed. Daniel L. Sills. New York: Macmillan, 1968.
Racine, Philip N. "The Ku Klux Klan, Anti-Catholicism, and Atlanta's
Board of Education, 1916-1927." Georgia Historical Quarterly 57
(1973),63-75.


--- PAGE 315 ---
280 Bibliography
Reed, Adolph, Jr., and Julian Bond. "Equality: Why We Can't Wait." Na-
tion 253 (9 Dec. 1991), 733-37.
Regan, Fred D. "Obscenity or Politics? Tom Watson, Anti-Catholicism,
and the Department of Justice." Georgia Historical Quarterly 70
(Spring 1986), 17-46.
Rodgers, Daniel T. "Republicanism: The Career of a Concept." Journal of
American History 79 (1992), 11-38.
Rogin, Michael. '"The Sword Became a Flashing Vision'; D. W. Griffith's
The Birth of a Nation." Representations 9 (Winter 1985), 150-95.
Smith-Rosenberg, Carroll. "The New Woman as Androgyne." Disorderly
Conduct: Visions of Gender in Victorian America. New York: Alfred
A. Knopf, 1985.
Strieker, Frank. "Affluence for Whom? Another Look at Prosperity and the
Working Classes in the 1920s." Labor History 24 (1983), 5-33.
Taylor, A. Elizabeth. "Revival and Development of the Woman Suffrage
Movement in Georgia." Georgia Historical Quarterly 42 (1958).
. "The Last Phase of the Woman Suffrage Movement in Georgia."
Georgia Historical Quarterly 43 (1959).
Terkel, Studs. "'Why I Quit the Klan': Studs Terkel Interviews C. P. El-
lis." Southern Exposure 8, n, 2 (Summer 1980), 5-98.
Thompson, E. P. "The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the Eigh-
teenth Century." Past &) Present 50 (Feb. 1971), 76-136.
Thornton, J. Mills, III. "Alabama Politics, J. Thomas Heflin, and the Expul-
sion Movement of 1929." Alabama Review 22 (April 1968).
Tilly, Charles. "Collective Violence in European Perspective." The History
of Violence in America: Historical and Comparative Perspectives, ed.
Hugh Davis Graham and Ted Robert Gurr. New York: Frederick A.
Praeger, 1969.
Tyrrell, Ian R. "Drink and Temperance in the Antebellum South: An
Overview and Interpretation." Journal of Southern History 48 (Nov.
1982), 485-510.
Wardlow, Ralph. "Negro Suffrage in Georgia, 1867-1930," Bulletin of the
University of Georgia 33, n. 2a (Sept. 1932).
Weiner, Jonathan M. "Marxism and the Lower Middle Class: A Reply to
Arno Mayer." Journal of Modern History 48 (1976), 666-71.
Wilson, Earnest B. "The Water Supply of the Negro." Bulletin of the Uni-
versity of Georgia, v. 31, n. 3a (March 1931).
Woodman, Harold D. "Postbellum Social Change and Its Effects on Mar-
keting the South's Cotton Crop." Agricultural History 56 (Jan. 1982),
215-30.
. "Post-Civil War Southern Agriculture and the Law." Agricultural
History 53 (Jan. 1979), 319-37.


--- PAGE 316 ---
Bibliography 281
Yabroff, Bernard, and Ann J. Herlihy. "History of Work Stoppages in Tex-
tile Industries." Monthly Labor Review 76 (April 1953), 367-70.
Unpublished Dissertations, Theses, and Papers
Benson, Ronald Morris. "American Workers and Temperance Reform,
1866-1933." Ph.D. diss., University of Notre Dame, 1974.
Cashin, Edward L. "Thomas E. Watson and the Catholic Layman's Associ-
ation of Georgia." Ph.D. diss., Fordham University, 1962.
Cocoltchos, Christopher Nickolas. "The Invisible Government and the Vi-
able Community: Ku Klux Klan in Orange County, California, During
the 1920s." Ph.D. diss., UCLA, 1979.
DeNatale, Douglas. "Traditional Culture and Community in a Piedmont
Textile Mill Village." M.A. thesis, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, 1980.
Evans, Mercer Griffin. "The History of the Organized Labor Movement in
Georgia." Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, 1929.
Huffman, Frank Jackson. "Old South, New South: Continuity and Change
in a Georgia County, 1850-1880." Ph.D. diss., Yale University, 1974.
Hux, Roger Kent. "The Ku Klux Klan in Macon, 1922-1925." M.A. thesis,
University of Georgia, 1972.
Jones, Alton Dumar. "Progressivism in Georgia, 1898-1918." Ph.D. diss.,
Emory University, 1963.
Matthews, John Michael. "Studies in Race Relations in Georgia,
1890-1930." Ph.D. diss., Duke University, 1970.
Moseley, Clement C. "Invisible Empire: The History of the Ku Klux Klan
in Twentieth-Century Georgia." Ph.D. diss., University of Georgia,
1968.
Mullins, Mildred Gregory. "Home-Front Activities of Atlanta Women
During World War I." M.A. thesis, Emory University, 1947.
Patrick, Ralph C., Jr. "A Cultural Approach to Social Stratification." Ph.D.
diss., Harvard University, 1953.
Price, Margaret Nell. "The Development of Leadership by Southern
Women Through Clubs and Organizations." M.A. thesis, University
of North Carolina, 1945.
Ragsdale, Annie Laurie. "The History of Co-Education at the University
of Georgia, 1918-1945." M.A. thesis, University of Georgia, 1948.
Roth, Darlene Rebecca. "Matronage: Patterns in Women's Organizations,
Atlanta, Georgia, 1890-1940." Ph.D. diss., George Washington Uni-
versity, 1978.
Sims, Anastasia. "Feminism and Femininity in the New South: White
Women's Organizations in North Carolina, 1883-1930." Ph.D. diss.,
University of North Carolina, 1985.


--- PAGE 317 ---
282 Bibliography
Toy, Edward Vance. "The Ku Klux Klan in Oregon; Its Program and Pur-
pose." M.A. thesis, University of Oregon, 1959.
Turcheneske, John Anthony, Jr. "The Ku Klux Klan in Northwestern Wis-
consin." M.A. thesis, Wisconsin State University-River Falls, 1971.
Weaver, Norman Fredric. "The Knights of the Ku Klux Klan in Wisconsin,
Indiana, Ohio and Michigan." Ph.D. diss., University of Wisconsin,
1954.
Wrigley, Steven Wayne. "The Triumph of Provincialism: Public Life in
Georgia, 1898-1917." Ph.D. diss., Northwestern University, 1986.


--- PAGE 318 ---
Index
Abortion, 115, 165, 181
African Americans, 133; in Athens
area, 24, 39, 149-52, 185; in Atlanta,
125, 185; and Birth of a Nation,
12-13; growth of middle class,
39-40, 154; interracial relationships,
Klan opposition to, 16, 130, 132,
142-44; "New Negro," xv, 129;
northward migration of, 26, 27, 155;
and opposition to Klan, 13, 14, 171,
241 n. 8; resistance to racism, 23,
26-30, 33, 40, 125, 129, 151-52,
154-55, 164-65, 185; urbanization of,
39; veterans of World War I, 28-29;
workers, 25-27, 36, 70, 139-40, 155,
165. See also Disfranchisement; Ku
Klux Klan; Lynching; National
Association for the Advancement of
Colored People; Segregation;
Vigilantism; White Supremacy
Agriculture, 33-34, 36-37, 71; plight
after war, xv, 45, 127, 151
Aiken, S.C., 171-73
Alabama, 4, 14, 170, 205 n. 46
Alcohol. See Prohibition
Alexander, Will, 15, 17, 30
American Bar Association, 35
American Federation of Labor (AFL|,
10, 14, 70, 165
American Legion, 47
American Order of Fascisti (Black
Shirts), 180
American Protective Association, 226
n. 53
Americanism, 5, 14, 22, 78, 87, 90
Anti-Catholicism: organizations and
publications, 226 n. 53, 227 n. 55;
Protestant clergy and, 94, 95; Tom
Watson and, 12, 49. See also
Catholics; Ku Klux Klan
Anti-Communism: and anti-Semitism,
135, 137-38; in Athens mainstream,
16, 67; in Georgia, 78, 82, 226 n. 49;
Hitler and, 180, 251 n. 17; of Klan,
82-83, 92-96, 137, 140; sexual
politics of, 117-119; Tom Watson
and/49, 137. See also Bolshevism; Ku
Klux Klan; Red Scare
Anti-mask laws, 18, 169
Anti-Saloon League, 5, 18, 116
Anti-Semitism: attacks on finance
capital and, 90; competition and, 4;
in Georgia, 222 n. 4; Klan
expressions of, 135; National
Socialism and, 181-82; and petite
bourgeoisie, 67, 137-38, 237 n. 32;
Billy Sunday and, 94; Tom Watson
and, 12, 49; World War I, upsurge
after, 133, 135. See also Iews; Ku
Klux Klan
Arendt, Hannah, xiii
Arkansas, 14, 81
Army, U.S., 28
Arnold, James Willie, 61, 88, 229 n. 31
Artisanal heritage, 69-70, 74
Aryanism, 135
Atheism, 78
Athens: East, 25, 39, 59, 152; economy
of, 45-46, 62-63, 69, 225 n. 36;
impact of World War I on, 6, 15,
283


--- PAGE 319 ---
284 Index
Athens (continued)
103-4; internal divisions of, 24-25,
35-36, 38; politics in, 87-88, 93,
99-111, 116, 227 n. 55; population
of, 24, 97; schools of, 39, 89; social
change in, 24, 33, 39; West, 25, 59.
See also specific topics and names;
Clarke County
Athens and Clarke County, Ministers'
Association of, 101
Athens Banner-Herald, 19, 33, 35, 88
Athens Civil Service Commission, 109
Athens Daily Banner, 99, 104-5, 108
Athens Daily News, 102, 105, 228 n. 12
Athens Gas Light' and Fuel Company,
58
Athens Foundry and Machine Works,
57,69
Athens Free Methodist Church, 100
Athens Klan No. 5, xiv; affiliations of
members, 7-11, 202 n. 14; charity, 3;
database from, 190, 200 n. 3; decline
of, 178; founding and early
development of, 6-11; "law and
order" advocacy, 15, 107-11;
meetings and rallies, 3, 107;
membership of, 9, 54-73, 107;
opposition to, 16-17, 204 n. 35; and
politics, 17, 107-111, 136; sources for
study of, xiv; typical member of, 10,
53. See also specific topics; Ku Klux
Klan; Vigilantism
Athens League of Women Voters, 88,
105-6, 110, 116
Athens Mattress and Spring Bed
Company, 58
Athens Railway and Electric Company,
68-69
Athens State Guard, 67
Athens Teacher Training and Industrial
Institute, 155
Athens Women's Club, 30, 54
Atlanta, 14, 28, 39, 154, 222 n. 4; Klan
in, 9, 12-13, 98, 109, 114, 121, 168,
170, 238 n. 44
Atlanta Constitution, 150
Atlanta Independent, 13, 152, 179
Augusta, 27
Automobiles, 24
Ayers, Edward, 162
"Banality of evil," xiii
Banks. See Capitalism (finance);
Monopoly
Baptist Church, East Athens, 61
Baptist Church, Prince Avenue, 108
Baptist Church, West End, 9
Baptists, 8, 15, 54, 94, 126. See also
Ministry; Protestantism
Barrow County, 155
Barrow, David Crenshaw, 16, 50
Bell, Arthur, 180
Bennett, George D., 90
Bernstein, Irving, 69
Bernstein, Jake and Mose, 4
Bible, 5, 11,92, 160
Birdsong, Aaron, 151
Birdsong, Dr. Henry, 108
Birth control, xii, 116, 181
Birth of a Nation, The, 6, 12-13
Black feminists, xii
Blacks. See African Americans
Blease, Cole, 72
Bogart, Ga., 178
Boll weevil, 45, 90
Bolshevik Revolution: and anti-
Semitism, 137; as danger, 5, 78, 81,
83-84, 92-93, 96, 138; as impetus to
anti-colonialism, 129; as metaphor,
199; and shaping of era, 25, 179; Tom
Watson and, 48; and women, 118.
See also Anti-Communism,-
Communist party; Socialist party
Bonapartism, 160
Booster Club, 10
Bootleggers. See Prohibition
Boston Tea Party, 159
Boykin, John M., 17
Braden, Anne, 188
Brown, J. }., 46, 89
Brown, Joseph Mackey, 26
Bumham, Walter Dean, 44
Businessmen's Evangelistic Club, 8
Callaway, G. C, 28
Campbell, Samuel, 137
Candler, Warren Akin, 95
Capitalism, 92, 136; finance, 72, 77, 90;
and Klan criticism of, 89-91
Case study, explained, xiv
Castration, 12
Catholic World, 13
Catholics, xvi, 73, 91, 96-97, 226 n. 58;
opposition to Klan, 13, 169
Century Club, 88
Chain stores, 63; Klan opposition to,
77-79
Chamber of Commerce, 10, 44, 54, 108,
139


--- PAGE 320 ---
Index 285
Children, 89; employment of, 41, 52,
57, 60; Klan's ideas regarding,
112-13, 164; peer culture of, 41
China, 83
Chivalry: and control over women, 114,
142, 157; and defense of male
privilege, 118, 173, 243 n. 24; racial
exclusivity of, 164; women's
manipulation of, 123
Christ and Other Klansmen, 115
Christian Church, 8
Christian Church, First, 8, 106-7
Christian Endeavor Society, 8, 107
Church of Christ, 8
Citizen's Pharmacy, 58, 62
Citizens' Protective League, 77-78
City Manager Plans. See Government,
city
Civil War, 12, 36, 52, 70
Clarke County, 211 n. 49; mills of, 25,
26, 37, 52-53, 61, 72, 123, 158; as
site of study, xiv. See also specific
topics; Athens
Clarke County Equal Suffrage
Association, 30
Clarke, Edward Young: anti-feminism
of, 115; and growth of Klan, 5, 6,
hypocrisy of, 98; as spokesperson, 49,
85-86, 126
Class, 187; analysis, 65, 73-74;
formation, 71-72; and gender, 72, 74,
97, 119, 124, 143, 147; and race, 43,
51, 74, 97, 124, 127, 135, 138-39,
141, 187, 227 n. 58, 235 n. 8;
structure, 35-36. See also specific
topics; Petite bourgeoisie
Clawson, Mary Ann, 74
Clay, Herbert, 17
Coburn, W. S., 21
Collective Violence. See Lynching;
Vigilantism.
Colorado, 18, 162
Columbus, Ga., 87
Columbus Enquirer-Sun, 19
Commercial-civic elite, 44
Commission on Interracial Cooperation
(CIC): and Dorsey statement, 125-26;
and Klan, 15, 155, 163, 171; and Leo
Frank case, 50; roots of, 29-30, 40,
130, 234 n. 1
Communist party, 82, 83, 130, 140,
184-85, 254 n. 39. See also Anti-
Communism; Bolshevik Revolution
Congress of the United States, 18,
47-49
Constitution, United States, 79, 92,
166, 183, 247 n. 52
Coolidge, Calvin, 133
Costa, Joseph, 78
Cotton, 36, 45. See also Agriculture;
Clarke County
Coughlin, Father, 188
Cox, Obe, 149, 150
Crime, xiii, 101-4, 158
Curry, Leroy, 84, 86, 136
Dances, 41, 100, 102-3, 105, 186
Dearborn Independent, 135
Decade system, 17
Decatur, Ga., 130
Declaration of Independence, 133
Democratic party: divisions within, 42;
Klan involvement in, 10, 17, 88, 108,
224 n. 31; 1924 National
Convention, 16, 18, 50; regional
power of, 43, 88
Department stores, 63, 78
Detroit, 184
Dick, Rev. W. F., 100
Disciples of Christ, 8
Disfranchisement: black protest
against, 27; Klan and, 128, 141,
164-65, 169; origins in Georgia,
42-44; Tom Watson and, 43-44, 49
Division of Military Intelligence, 29
Divorce, 32-33, 113-14, 121, 233 n. 69
Dixie Defense Committee, 126-28
Dorsey, Hugh Manson, 125-26, 130,
151, 235 n. 8
Douglas, Mary, 231 n. 43
DuBois, W. E. B., xi, xiv, 129, 146
Duke, David, xi-xiii
Dunaway, Bela, 64, 108
Durham, Plato, 17, 50
Eberhart, John Lee, 150-51
Egypt, 83
Elks, 4, 7, 67, 88
Engels, Frederick, 119, 232 n. 62
England, 253 n. 28
Episcopalians, 54
Eppes, Mae, 109
Erwin, Andrew C, 18, 50, 102, 131
Espionage Act, 14
Estes, George, 96
Eugenics, 132, 133, 187. See also Ku
Klux Klan
Europe, 89, 96, 139
Evans, Hiram Wesley: on American
traditions, 80, 111; and anti-


--- PAGE 321 ---
286 Index
Evans, Hiram Wesley (continued)
Communism, 84; as Imperial Wizard,
20-21, 158, 160, 167; racial •
proclamations of, 129, 131-32, 134,
145; and religion, 92, 161; and social
issues, 86, 113, 139, 144
Evolution, Darwin's theory of, 93, 132
Extremism, and mainstream, xiii, 4, 11,
99, 186
Families, 33, 35, 40; and economic
survival, 34, 143; Klan prescriptions
for, 113-20
Farm life. See Agriculture.
Farm tenure, patterns of, 71-72
Farmers' Alliance, 42
Farmers' Union, 47, 48, 183
Fascism, 179, 186, 188
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 29
Federal Reserve Bank, 46, 48, 50, 89
Fellowship Forum, 7, 227 n. 55
Feminism, 30-31, 33, 115-16
Feudalism, 92
Filiarchy, 41
Flag, 11
Floggings. See Vigilantism
Ford, Henry, 35, 90, 135-36
Forrest, Nathan Bedford, III, 129, 131,
134, 246 n. 51
Fortson, Blanton, 101
Founding fathers, 23, 79, 92, 133
Fox, Philip, 21
France, 29, 83
Franco, Francisco, 179
Frank, Leo, 12, 50, 145
Fraternal orders, 5-8, 54, 74. See also
specific orders
Fullilove, R. E., 152
Fundamentalism, and Klan, 91-95,
135-36, 225 n. 42. See also Ministry;
Protestantism
Garvey, Marcus, 185
Gender: and American middle-class
consciousness, 187; and Klan
conservatism, xii, 186; and Klan
racism, 141; Klan's desire for sharp
demarcations, 114, 118; National
Socialism and, 181; racial
differentiation through, 164, 171. See
also Men; Morality; Sexuality;
Women
General Federation of Women's Clubs,
117
George, Walter, 17
Georgia, 165, 170-71; black life in,
125-26, 154-55, 160,- Catholics in,
97, 120; Klan in, xiv, 12, 121, 137,
145; labor in, 26,- Populism in, 42;
Prohibition violation, 106. See also
specific place names and topics
Georgia Anti-Poolroom League, 100
Georgia Baptist Convention, 16
Georgia Federation of Labor (GFL), 70,
101, 220 n. 40
German-American Bund, 180
Germany, 83, 135, 177, 184-86
Gordon, John B., 131
Gossip, 17
Gould, Charles, 81
Government, city, 44, 87-88
Government, federal: changes in, xv,
44, 47, 63, 150; hostility toward, 47
Grady, Henry, 133
Grand jury, 102, 105-6, 171
Grant, Madison, 133
Graves, Bibb, 170
Great Depression, 180, 184, 188
Great Migration, 27. See also African
Americans
Griffith, D. W., 12
Guardians of Liberty, 126, 128
Gutman, Herbert, 166
Hall, Jacquelyn Dowd, 143
Harding, Warren G., 7, 90
Hardwick, Thomas W., 18, 45, 47, 126,
170
Harlem, xv, 25, 27
Harris, Judia Jackson, 155
Harris, Julian, 19. See also Columbus
Enquirer-Sun
Harris, William J., 17, 116
Hierarchy, social, 33
Higham, John, 237 n. 32
Hill, Mary Wright, 39
Hines, James K., 178, 244 n. 33
Hitler, Adolph, 179-83, 251 n. 17, 280
n. 19
Hofstadter, Richard, 250 n. 8
Homosexuality, 181
Honor: in Klan, 114, 162, 168; in
Southern society, 146, 162-63
Hoover, Herbert, 133
House of the Good Shepherd, 120
Howard, Gus H., 17


--- PAGE 322 ---
Index 287
Iconoclast, The, 41
Immigrants: in Athens, 105; and
competition with, 78; Klan calls for
restriction of, 16, 91; Klah
complaints about radicalism of, 84,
138; and power of, 97, 141, and
morality of, 139; and labor
movement, 70, 73, 221 n. 50; visceral
agitation against, 131, 134
Imperial Night Hawk, 80, 137, 145
Independent revolt, 42
India, 83, 130
Indiana, 18, 111
Industrial Workers of the World (IWW),
69, 82, 83
Infanticide, 103, 114
Invisible Empire. See Ku Klux Klan
Iowa, 14
Ireland, 97
Italy, 83, 179, 185-86
Jackson, Helen, 233 n. 68
Jackson, Kenneth, 250 n. 6
Japan, 89
Jazz, 113, 144
Jefferson, Charles, 82, 179
Jefferson, Thomas, 70, 80, 83-84, 95,
159
Jeffersonian Magazine, 12
Jeffersonianism. See Republicanism.
Jews, 91, 226 n. 53; in Athens, 4, 78,
89, 222 n. 4. See also Anti-Semitism
Jim Crow. See Segregation
Johnson, Henry Lincoln, 13
Johnson, James Weldon, 187
Johnson, Rev. Jerry, 9, 107, 109, 111
Jones, Rev. M. Ashby, 17, 40, 50,
125-26
"Joy-riding," 41, 101-2
Junior Klan, 10
Junior Order, United American
Mechanics (JOUAM), 7
Justice Department, U.S., 14
Juvenile delinquency, 41
Kansas, 18
Kenney, Frank, 152-53, 156
Kiwanis Club, 10, 108
Knights of Columbus, 96
Knights of the Flaming Circle, 13
Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. See Ku
Klux Klan
Knights of Labor, 42
Knights of Mary Phagan, 12
Knights of Pythias, 7
Knox Institute, 30
/Courier, The: and anti-Catholicism, 95;
and League of Nations, 89; and
popular culture, 113; and Prohibition,
115; and racialism, 129, 130, 133,
135, 140, 145
Ku Klux Klan: African Americans,
attitude toward, xii, 5, 125-34,
139-44 (see also Vigilantism; White
Supremacy); anti-Catholicism of, xii,
5, 16, 78, 89, 95-97, 105-6, 119-20,
124, 126, 140, 233 n. 68, 238 n. 44;
anti-democratic attitudes of, 80, 97,
130-31, 141, 147, 164; anti-
rationalism of, 93-94, 131, 133; anti-
Semitism of, 4, 5, 78, 89, 91, 105-6,
124, 135-38, 144-47; blackmail by,
17; boycotts by, 78; and charity,
85-86, 108; class basis of, xii, 4,
53-79, 141, 217 n. 7-8; corruption
and hypocrisy of leaders, 98, 178;
cross-burning by, 3, 5, 161, 243 n. 30;
decline of, xv, 177-78, 184-86;.
demand for absolute loyalty, 20, 167; ,
as "direct action expression" of
common prejudices, 186-88;
economic individualism of, 62, 69,
71, 74, 80, 85, 92; and electoral
politics, 17-18, 95, 170, 178, 215 n.
86; establishment and early years,
4-5, 12; fascist movements,
similarities with, 179-82, 250 n. 10,
and differences from, 182-83; in
Georgia, xiv, 9, 12, 17-18, 178;
hierarchy in, 108; historiography of,
xiii, xvi, 165-66, 178, 184, 197 n. 4;
imperial palace of, 7, 9, 98, 126, 177;
internal dissension, 178, 183; internal
structure and functioning of, 10, 19;
international setting of, 178-79;
klannishness, 87, 91; membership,
size of, xi, 9-10, 197 n. 2, 218 n. 11;
middle-class consciousness of, 81,
141, 147, 159-60, 179,- militarism of,
11, 20-21, 134, 161-63, 179; mutual
aid in, 11; and organized labor, xii,
81, 83, 96-97, 140, 160, 165, 182;
participation of law enforcement and
military men in, 18, 21, 170, 172;
platform of, 5-6, 16, 139; private
paternalism of, 86, 99, 114-15,
119-20, 150, 156-57, 162; pro-
natalism and eugenics of, 116, 132,


--- PAGE 323 ---
288 Index
Ku Klux Klan (continued]
147-48; racialism of, xvi-xvii,
127-28, 132-35, 138-39, 141, 181,
228 n. 13; reactionary populism of,
49, 77-79, 88-97, 99, 139, 145, 158;
and reconciliation of North and
South, xv, 6; of Reconstruction-era,
12, 130-31, 140, 159, 166, 198 n. 6,
236 n. 16, 243 n. 24; requests from
non-members to, 85, 121-24, 261 n.
70; ritual and symbol, 6, 93, 134,
157, 161, 168, 236 n. 16; sadism in,
163; secrecy of, 3-4, 20, 167; and
social activities, 10-11; social change
and rise of, 24, 33, 40-41, 45, 50-51,
74, 86, 125-28, 136, 157; strategy of,
98-99; uniforms in, 21, 167;
weddings in, 11; welfare, hostility
toward, 85. See also Anti-
Catholicism; Anti-Communism,-
Anti-Semitism; Athens Klan No. 5;
Junior Klan; Men; Morality;
Opposition to Klan; Sexuality;
Vigilantism; Women; Women of the
Ku Klux Klan
Labor: and craft unionism, 14, 69-70;
divisions within, 26, 38, 60-61, 70,
182, 227 n. 58; hazards of, 37; and
industrial unionism, 14, 83; and
Klan, 67, 70, 182, 246 n. 47;
organizing, 25-26; rural, 34-35;
suppression of, 14, 35, 46, 160, 165,
170, 187; unrest, xv, 23, 25-27, 33,
70, 72, 82, 188; value as counter to
Klan, 188; weakness in 1920s, 184; in
World War 1, 25, 67-68. See also
specific organization names;
Agriculture; Anti-Communism;
Textile Mill Workers
Law Enforcement League, 108, 152
League of Nations, 23, 50; Klan
opposition to, 16, 89, 138
League of Women Voters, 54, 88
Leisure, commercial, 24-25, 41, 113,
139, 144
Liberalism, economic, Klan use of, xiv,
79
Liberalism, racial, 33, 40, 131. See also
Commission on Interracial
Cooperation; Dorsey, Hugh Manson
Lincoln, Abraham, 133
Lions Club, 10, 54, 108
Lippmann, Walter, 13
Long, Huey, 188
Lower middle class. See Petite
bourgeoisie
Lowman, Bertha, Clarence, and Damon,
171-73
Lucy Cobb Institute, 31
Lynching: in Birth of a Nation, 12; and
divisions in white society, 241 n. 9;
figures on, 34; of Leo Frank, 12; in
Georgia, 125-26, 149-52, 160; and
Klan, 171-73; rape and, 142. See also
Vigilantism
Macon, Ga., 126
Macon Telegraph, 19
MacPherson, C. B., 79
Male dominance. See Men
Mammon. See Capitalism,- Monopoly
Manifest Destiny, 133, 187
Mann, Thomas, 177
Manufacturing, 25, 37. See also specific
industries
Marriage: companionate, 78, 114;
interracial, 143, 145-46. See also
Divorce; Families,- Men; Women
Marx, Karl, 119, 232 n. 63
Masons, 7-8, 108
Mast, Elaine, 145
Mayer, Arno, 66, 179, 251 n. 17
McClusky, Asbury, 153-54
Mell, J. D., 16
Men: desertion of families by, 33, 114,
164,- and domestic violence, 35,
114-15, 121-22; dominance as
household heads, 35, 73, 80, 143,
162; Klan prescriptions for, 114-15,
153, 156-57, 161-62, 164;
nineteenth-century small producer
ideal of, 24, 74, 136, 143; power
threatened, 23, 40-41, 51, 99-100,
121-24, 141-47
Menace, The, 227 n. 55
Methodist Church, First, 8, 88, 106,
108
Methodist Church, Young Harris, 9, 94
Methodist Episcopal Church, South, 4,
95
Methodists, 8, 15, 54, 61-62, 94, 154.
See also Ministry; Protestantism
Michael, Mose Gerson, 4, 89, 113
Migration, black. See African
Americans; Great Migration
Militarism, 21. See also Ku Klux Klan
Mill villages. See Textile mills


--- PAGE 324 ---
Index 289
Mill workers. See Textile mill workers
Miller, Rev. M. B., 9, 107-11
Mincey, S. S., 165
Ministry, Protestant, 93, 100, 102, 161;
pro-Klan, 8-9, 15-16, 94, 148. See
also specific denominations
Miscegenation, 147
Mississippi, 49, 140
Missouri, 165
Mob violence. See Lynching;
Vigilantism
Modernism, 41
Moncrief, Rufus, 149
Monopoly, criticism of: and anti-
Semitism, 136-37; campaigns
involving, 77-78, 86; in population at
large, 48-49, 86
Montgomery Bus Boycott, 127
Morality: campaigns to uphold by Klan,
xii, 94, 98-112, 162, 163-64, 229 n.
21, 244 n. 33; changing among young
people, xv, 41, 73, 99-103, 147
Morgan, }. P., 46, 47
Moslems, alleged threat from, 130
Motion pictures, 25, 93, 98, 113, 144,
186
Mussolini, Benito, 179, 183
Napier, George M., 17
National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP): and Birth of a Nation, 13;
complaints received by, 34, 151; Klan
assertions about, 128, 130, 142; and
opposition to Klan, 13, 129; and
postwar activism in South, 27-28,
165, 172-73, 185
National Fanners' Magazine, 47
National Guard, 14
Nationalism, 92, 129, 138, 161, 181.
See also Americanism
New Jersey, 180
New South, 42, 133
New York City, 142, 144, 180
New York Times, The, 46
New York World, 5, 16
Newby, I. A., 133
Newspapers, 18, 169. See also specific
titles
Nightriding. See Lynching; Vigilantism
North Carolina, 140, 171
Oconee County, 150, 151-52
Oconee River, 24
Odd Fellows, 7, 108
Office work, rationalization of, 68
Ohio, 13, 173, 174
Oklahoma, 14, 162, 169, 179
"Onward Christian Soldiers," 161
Opposition to Klan: elite, 15-16,
18-19, 50, 58, 69, 108, 170, 183, 185;
popular, 13-14, 105, 169-70, 179,
188
Orangemen, 7
Oregon, 18
Palmer Raids, 15
Paris Peace Conference, 23
Patriarchalism, 34, 35; threatened, 41,
50. See also Ku Klux Klan; Men
Patrick, Joseph Kenneth, 10, 62
Patriotism. See Americanism
Pelley, William Dudley, and Silver
Shirts, 188
Pennsylvania, 13, 14, 145, 159
People's Party, 12, 42, 45, 48, 137, 213
n. 67
Peters, Odessa and Willie, 153-54
Petite bourgeoisie: and attraction to
Klan, 73, 79, 141, and to other right-
wing movements, 188; as a class,
65-67; and conflict with elites, 128;
craftsmen and, 69; and fascism, 182,
186, 252 n. 19; mill workers' ties to,
71. See also Respectability
Phagan, Mary, 12
Piedmont, 26, 36, 45, 71, 220 n. 32
Planters, 42, 44, 182
Police, 18, 151, 169, 182
Politics, 41, 169. See also specific
issues and parties
Pollution ideas, 113, 141, 231 n. 43
Poolrooms, 25, 100
Populism, 72, 78, 250 n. 8. See also
People's Party; Reactionary populism
Presbyterians, 54
Producerism, 84-85, 237 n. 32
Progressive reform, 72, 87-88
Prohibition, 94, 116, 186; class tensions
over, 100-101, 228 n. 8; Klan support
for, 16, 115, 139; violation of, 17,
100-102, 105-7
Property rights, 17, 23, 79, 141
Prostitution, 17, 98, 99, 102, 105, 112,
119
Protestantism, 111, 187; denominations
less likely to support, 8; as field for
Klan recruitment, 6, 8; higher


--- PAGE 325 ---
290 Index
Protestantism {continued}
biblical criticism in, 91; Klan's
enthusiasm for, 11, 79, 91-97,
160-61, 183, 225 n. 42; social gospel
in, 91, 93, 226 n. 49. See also specific
denominations; Ministry
Protocols of the Elders of Zion, 137
Pseudonyms, rules followed for, 189
Race-coding, xiii, 187, 199 n. 7
Race relations. See specific groups and
topics
Race riots, 23, 29
Railroads, 24, 36, 70
Rape, 142, 144, 146, 148, 149
Reactionary populism, xii, 49, 79, 180,
188; defined, xiii. See also Ku Klux
Klan
Read, B. Postell, 9
Reconstruction, 12, 24, 41, 131
Red Knights, 13
Red Scare, 14, 46, 184, 187
Red War on the Family, 117-19
Republican Party, 16, 42, 224 n. 21
Republicanism: and concentrated
power, 47; and fear of proletariat, 38;
and issues of gender and family, 111,
119; and liberalism, 199 n. 9; Klan
appropriation of, xiv, 79-83, 95-96,
132, 136, 139-40, 159, 162
Respectability, 187, 220 n. 40; and
Klan, xiii, 70, 97, 99, 108, 117, 124,
157, 164
Revivals, 3, 11, 94, 102
Ridley, Rev. Caleb: and chivalry, 114,
145, 180; and Dixie Defense
Committee, 126, 128, 235 n. 8;
hypocrisy of, 98
Rivers, E. D., 77, 82, 90, 114
Robinson, Jo Ann Gibson, 127
Rockefeller, John D., 36, 90
Roosevelt, Theodore, 206 n. 57
Rotary Club, 54 .
Rowe, Hugh, 16, 25, 29-30
Royston, Ga., 156
Rucker, Lamar, 108
Russell, Richard B., Sr., 17
Russell, Richard B., Jr., 78
Russian Orthodox Church, 96
Russian Revolution. See Bolshevik
Revolution.
Saloman, Samuel, 112, 117-19
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 135
Scapegoating, 66, 90, 135-36, 147. See
also specific groups
Schools: corporal punishment in, 35,
112-13; Klan and, 16-17, 97, 136
Searchlight, The: anti-Catholicism of,
120; anti-Communism of, 82; and
banking, 90; and elite reform, 87; and
family-related themes, 112-13,
115-16; as Klan organ, 7, 9, 62, 106;
and Mussolini, 179; racialism of, 132,
138, 145; and vigilantism, 158
Secret societies. See Fraternal orders
Sedition Act, 14
Segregation, 43-44, 94, 142, 170
Self-defense, black, 28, 29
Sexuality, xii, 118, 163, 186; changing
mores among youth, 99-103, 112-14;
and racism, 141-48, 233 n. 68
Shriners, 7
Simmons, William Joseph: and anti-
feminism, 116; and farmers, 80; as
founder and first Imperial Wizard of
revived Klan, 4-5, 12; hypocrisy of,
98, 113; and labor unrest, 82, 138;
and Mammon, 86; and nativism, 78,
138; overthrown, 21, 110; and
racism, 130, 132-33, 134, 141; and
vigilantism, 158-59, 160, 167, 170
Simon, Called Peter, 93
Sims, Walter A., 17, 180, 238 n. 44
Single Tax, 47
Slavery, xv, 128, 166
Smith, Alfred E., 116, 131, 144, 177-78
Smith, Hoke, 43, 48, 205 n. 46
Smith, Lillian, 94, 142
Smoking, 32
Social Darwinism, 84, 132, 134, 187
Social Gospel. See Protestantism
Socialist party, 48, 184, 254 n. 39
South, The, 90; distinctive features of
region and Klan in, xv, 128, 169;
reconciliation with North, xv, 12, 44
South Carolina, 171-73
Southeastern Baptist Convention, 8
Southern Publicity Association, 5
Southern Tenant Farmers Union, 254 n.
39
Standard Oil, 47
Stanton, E. F., 86, 112, 115
State Teachers' College, 32
States' rights, 128, 166
Stoddard, Lothrop, 129, 133
Stone Mountain, 5
Strikes. See Labor (unrest)


--- PAGE 326 ---
Index 291
Students, 30. See also University of
Georgia
Sunday, Billy, 94
Texas, 19, 163
Textile mills: difficulties of, 45;
paternalism of, 35, 46
Textile mill workers, 221 n. 50, 252 n.
28; antagonism with "uptown," 25,
37-38,58,67, 71, 101, 217 n. 3;
connections to countryside, 71—72;
and Klan, 71-73, 152-53; living
conditions of, 34; unions among, 26,
38. See also Labor
Thomas, George C., 102
Tilly, Charles, 50
Tindall, W. R., 87, 116
Traditional values. See Morality
Tumulty, Joseph, 23
Turkey, 130
Tyler, Mary Elizabeth, 5, 6, 98
Underground railroads, 28
Unions. See American Federation of
Labor; Labor; United Mine Workers
of America
United Brethren, 8
United Mine Workers of America
(UMWA), 14, 69
United States Army. See Army, U.S.
United States Congress. See Congress
of the United States
University of Georgia, 16, 24, 62, 204
n. 38; admission of women, 31-32;
Prudential Committee, 16; student
activism, 30, 41, 105, 229 n. 21
Upshaw, W. D., 17, 116
Vagrancy laws, 25, 85, 223 n. 22
Vagts, Albert, 21
Venable, James R., 180
Versailles, 23, 25
Vice. See Morality; Prohibition;
Prostitution
Victorianism, 41
Vigilantism, 125-26; built-in bias of
documentary record of, 165—73;
ideology supporting, 109-110, 150,
158-63, 166—67; immunity from
prosecution, 18, 20, 152-53, 169-70,
187; Klan cover-ups of, 109-111,
168-69, 241 n. 7; Klan-related, 4, 5,
12, 51, 102, 104, 126, 139, 144,
149-50, 152-58, 162-73, 225 n. 38,
270 n. 12, 244 n. 33, 245 n. 38;
opposition to, 15-16, 19, 104,
182-83; prior to second Klan, 14, 35,
50-51, 67, 159, 187-88, 252 n. 24,
252 n. 25; reasons for, 51, 150,
155-56, 163-65, 173, 245 n. 41; roots
of, 50; women's appeals for, 121-24.
See also Lynching
Vonderleith, C. A., 7
Voter turnout, 28, 42, 44, 169
Wade, John, 16
Walker, Clifford: and anti-
Communism, 82; as governor, 18; as
Klan member, 17; and vigilantism,
109, 142, 170
War Department of the U.S., 29
Washington, D.C., 47, 171
Wasson, Rev. S. E., 106
Watson, Tom, 47-48, 90; and anti-
Catholicism, 119-20; and JOUAM, 7;
and Klan, 12, 17, 49-50, 89; and
People's Party, 42-43, 72
Wayeross, Ga., 165
Welfare, xiii
West Virginia, 13
Whipping, 34, 35, 166. See also
Vigilantism
White, Alma, 83, 120, 147
White, Arthur Corning, 179
White Caps. See Vigilantism
White supremacy: defenses of, 125-30,
134-35, 141, 161; and labor issues,
140; means used to bolster, 34;
postwar challenges to, 23, 152
White, Walter, 28, 142, 172-73, 186
Wilmer, C. B., 17, 50
Wilson, Woodrow, xv, 23, 44, 46, 50, 92
Winder, Georgia, 154
Wisconsin, 112
Woman suffrage, 23, 44, 116
Women, 143; abuse of, 146; control
over, 143, 156-57, 162, 233 n. 63,
240 n. 61; criticized as mothers,
101-3, 106; employment of, 31, 33,
40, 73; involvement in interracial
work, 30, 155; Klan prescriptions for,
113-7, 147-48, 156, 164; new
standards of dress among, 31; as
"New Women," 32, 156, 181, 186;
and prohibition, 106; self-assertion
of, 32, 115, 121-24, 147; votes of, 44,
116; vulnerability of, 114-15. See


--- PAGE 327 ---
292 Index
Women (continued]
also specific organizations; Families;
Feminism,- Men; Morality; Sexuality
Women of the Ku Klux Klan: activities
and ideas of, 17, 84, 92, 112; in
Athens, 9, 11; origins of, 10, 117
Women's Christian Temperance Union
(WCTU), 40, 106, 110, 116
Wood, J. O., 7, 120, 180
Woodmen of the World, 4, 7, 88, 108
World Court, 16, 89
World War I, 36, 45, 108, 136; and
origins of Klan, 5, 170, 179, 182; and
race relations, 26-30, 130; and
resentment of veterans after, 47;
suppression of dissent in, 14
World WarU, 179
Young Men's Christian Association
(YMCA), 16, 30
Young Women's Christian Association
(YWCA), 40

