=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Benjamin Banneker~ Surveyor, Astronomer, Publisher, Patriot.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 272
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:01:29.702786
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without
permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 2 ---
Benjamin Banneker
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 3 ---
Benjamin Banneker. (Library of Congress collection)
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 4 ---
Benjamin Banneker
}
Surveyor, Astronomer,
Publisher, Patriot
Charles Cerami
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 5 ---
This book is printed on acid-free paper. ∞
Copyright © 2002 by Charles Cerami. All rights reserved
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New Y ork
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopy-
ing, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107
or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4744. Requests to
the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Depart-
ment, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 605 Third Avenue, New Y ork, NY 10158-
0012, (212) 850-6011, fax (212) 850-6008, e-mail: PERMREQ@WILEY.COM.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that
the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional
advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent pro-
fessional person should be sought.
ISBN: 0-471-38752-5
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 6 ---
to my long-time and valued friend
James C. ( Jimmy) Littlejohn
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 7 ---
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 8 ---
vii
Contents
}
Preface ix
Acknowledgments xiii
1 The Prince and the Convict 1
2 Lessons, Precious and Painful 19
3 The Lurking T error 33
4 A Door Opens Wider 45
5 The Great Unknown 57
6 Enter the Ellicotts 67
7 T urning Night into Day 82
8 The Unfinished Revolution 91
9 Attracted to the City 103
10 Meanwhile, at Mount Vernon 113
11 Astonishing Choices 124
12 Back Home to Plant . . . and Publish 144
13 A Declaration of Indignation 155
14 A Founder’s Crafty Response 168
15 A Place Among the Greats 176
16 The Sage’s Y ears of Glory 185
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 9 ---
17 Living Off the Land Again 198
18 Ennobled by Flame 209
Appendix I: The Dogon Ancestors 217
Appendix II: A Significant Similarity 221
Sources 229
General Source Notes 231
Bibliography 243
Index 247
Contents
viii
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 10 ---
ix
Preface
}
Why, I had long wondered, was the name of Benjamin Banneker
so little known? For a black man of the late eighteenth century
to have had a leading role in surveying the new capital city of
Washington, D.C., surely was a feat to recall and celebrate. Y et
even in Washington, his name on one school building is the
main memorial—and its students have no idea who he was.
When I began learning more about this brilliant man, I was
astonished to find that the Washington survey was far from his
chief accomplishment, a revelation that deepened the mystery
of his relative obscurity. One of the finest minds of the age and
surely one of the greatest untutored scientists of all time has
been passed over with minimal attention. Only after research-
ing Banneker’s contacts with the Founding Fathers and their
reactions to this African American did I realize that his rare tal-
ents and sterling character were quite consciously obscured by
his white “colleagues.” Having become dependent on him with-
out knowing his race, they clearly feared the political backlash
if Southern leaders suspected a move to demonstrate that blacks
were capable of more than manual labor and should not be con-
sidered mere chattel. It would be misleading to say that there
was a “cover-up” in the modern sense, but with the limited press
coverage of that time, the lack of even minimal recognition ac-
complished much the same result.
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 11 ---
The man we meet here was actually the mental superior
when he found himself among the Founding Fathers. Most of
them were brilliant men and some multifaceted, but unlike Ban-
neker, they were not geniuses with the rare innate ability to dis-
cover truths for themselves and then make them seem obvious
to others. Among the founders, only Benjamin Franklin was on
that level, but he was older than the others and died at about
the time Banneker moved beyond his tobacco farm.
In a perfect world, the subject of race would occupy no
more than a single line in this book, like a description of height
or weight. It would be simply the biography of a great scientist.
But if that were the case, he would have been world-famous for
two centuries and the subject of many biographies. The insights
he had—with hardly any education or equipment—make it
likely that adequate schooling and a normal place in society
would have enabled him to accelerate the history of astronomy
itself. But in the real world, it would be incomplete and unfair
to assess Banneker’s deep wisdom and his accomplishments as
scientist, philosopher, and publisher without recognizing that
all this was done while scratching out a living as a tobacco
farmer and thinking himself lucky to be a free black. As a per-
sonal accomplishment, Benjamin Banneker’s life story surpasses
the careers of later scientists whose image of the cosmos was
formed among brilliant colleagues in the world’s great universi-
ties. And perhaps it is a greater lesson in living for all, a sharper
perspective on the distorting role of ethnic background.
From the time he was five, it had been obvious that young
Benjamin had a remarkable mind. With little or no formal
schooling, he made the most of help from his loving grandpar-
ents and books borrowed from a Quaker teacher to achieve an
elegant writing style and an acquaintance with the classics. But
it was in science that he truly excelled. Even before he had help
of any kind, he was fascinated by astronomy and developed
Preface
x
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 12 ---
some amazing intuitions. When he finally had access to a tele-
scope and two books on the subject, he reached independent
conclusions far in advance of his time. On his own, too, he mas-
tered such science-oriented skills as watchmaking and survey-
ing—which made him ready to assist in the planning of Wash-
ington, D.C., when the call came.
T oday, when every difference of origin or complexion puts
us on the shaking tightrope of race, it requires a mental feat to
imagine how a mind with such cosmic interests saw itself in a
frozen world where blacks were supposed to behave deferen-
tially. His own ancestry was probably the most unusual in the
history of this country. For sixty years, he lived a divided life,
doing his expected duty as a freeborn farmer on his own acre-
age while thinking great thoughts in his off-hours. Through a
few patrician neighbors who could share his scientific interests,
he had one foot in the white world, often as the leader in solv-
ing any technical problem they discussed. He probably had at
least three sharp encounters with the kind of terror that could
strike a black person at any moment. One of these may have in-
volved his only adventure in love and a tragic ending, although
I question the truth of that story. Because these incidents were
spread over an otherwise tranquil lifetime, even friends and
neighbors thought he lived an exceptionally peaceful life. Indeed,
for those first six decades, he was outwardly little affected by
the horrors his enslaved black brethren were experiencing.
Then, when he had come to know Thomas Jefferson per-
sonally, Banneker struck. T o the author of the Declaration of
Independence, he wrote a blistering letter that can stand with it
proudly in reasoning and style—similarly audacious, coura-
geous, and potentially explosive. The mores of early American
society were at least civil enough to make Secretary of State Jef-
ferson refrain from punishing Banneker for the raging insult.
He hushed it up instead. It was more than half a century before
Preface
xi
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 13 ---
the great black leaders we have come to know as pioneers of
civil rights began to make themselves heard. But Banneker had
taken the first risk—and the greatest, because he could not
know how Secretary Jefferson and the whole white world might
react.
The fact that other, more venomous enemies burned down
the scientist’s cabin and all his papers at the moment of his
funeral makes it daunting to attempt a full and responsible
biography. The lost journals of his youthful years would have
helped to pierce the obscurity that cloaked all black persons in
that day. As it is, the series of early snapshots we are able to see
helps to intensify his emergence as a vibrant person when all his
gifts come into view. Indeed, many white persons became great
admirers and sought him out for his wise counsel. The chal-
lenge of making this most remarkable early American known to
today’s more enlightened readership is exhilarating. And the
fact that his life ran a course opposite that of most human sto-
ries, gathering force and joy as he grew older, adds to the plea-
sure of describing it.
Preface
xii
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 14 ---
Acknowledgments
}
Well beyond the usual pro forma bow to one’s editor, I have
been struck by Hana Umlauf Lane’s rare ability to note the
smallest details while also relating every sentence to an overall
plan. Not many editors read with such interest that they can
pencil a reminder on a late page, saying, “Slightly repetitious?—
see Chapter 2.” I am tired, but very grateful. Hana surely joins
me in gratitude to my friend and agent, Bob Silverstein. He is
truly a collaborator who frequently drives me into rewriting
before the editors do, and we all benefit from his judgment.
While every person or organization shown in my list of
sources was genuinely helpful to me, and some of the libraries
named are much larger, I want to single out the Howard County
(Maryland) Historical Society for the special interest shown by
its librarians and even some of its members who came forward
to suggest new places to look.
It was less of a surprise, because of long experience, to find
that the Washingtoniana Room of the Martin Luther King
Memorial Library in Washington, D.C., gave generous personal
attention and brought forth old books and papers of great interest.
Of all the persons I talked with, Sam Hopkins made me feel
most as if I were spending hours in the eighteenth century. And
Ann Ryder, with fingers on the pulses of Ellicott City and How-
ard County, repeatedly pointed me in new directions.
xiii
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 15 ---
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 16 ---
1
1
}
The Prince
and the Convict
T
he hunt for ancestral talent or character that might ex-
plain the birth of a genius is usually futile. In the case of
Benjamin Banneker, however, it has intriguing aspects
that refuse to be ignored. It is as though God were saying “Stir
and mix my people as you will, some of each new generation
will try to follow old paths, a few will seek new ways, and in
every ten million there will be one who astonishes you.”
As a young woman, Banneker’s maternal grandmother, Molly
Welsh, worked as a dairymaid for a great family near Devon,
England. Hers was a hard, unbending master who moved to
punish the girl to the full extent of the law when, one day in
1682, she spilled an entire pail of milk. He refused to believe
her stammered excuse that the cow had moved suddenly and
made her jump. No, the master insisted, the evidence did not
show that any such accident had occurred. She had clearly stolen
and probably sold the milk, he claimed. He turned her over to
the constabulary for prosecution, knowing that a guilty verdict
for any theft could result in the death penalty. Even if this
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 17 ---
enterprising young woman had actually been selling a little
milk on the side, the prescribed sentence would now seem
unthinkable.
The court paid no more attention to Molly’s protestations
than her master had, and she was pronounced guilty. But before
giving the sentence of death, the judge turned to a provision of
the law that could moderate the judgment. If the convict could
read (presumably showing a little more excuse for existence), the
punishment could be reduced to forced “emigration,” meaning
shipment to one of England’s colonies where the miscreant
could spend a certain number of years of unpaid servitude with
a colonist. So the order to “Bring the Book!” was given, the
Bible was put before Molly Welsh, and she read it with a flour-
ish, for she was a religious girl and a daily reader of the Good
Book.
A sentence of seven years’ servitude in the Maryland colony
was pronounced. Many Marylanders of that day deeply resented
the use of their beautiful area as a penal colony. The idea that
seven years in Maryland was considered an appropriate alterna-
tive to death by hanging was a sort of sick joke at the time. T o
the life-loving Molly, it was a blessed escape, and she sailed off
determined to make the most of her new existence. She landed
at the port of Annapolis (which was then called Providence)
in 1683.
There is no record of who became her master in this new
world. He had to pay the price of her passage, and in return, he
bought seven years of her life. It is clear that he was a tobacco
planter, as most of the area’s farmers were. Some historians feel
that he must have been one of the Quakers who were infusing
a greater spirit of justice into the colony. In any case, Molly was
undoubtedly fortunate in finding a fair-minded employer, for
her spirit was unbroken and her health good when the term was
finished. Also, this master was punctilious in fulfilling his duty
benjamin banneker
2
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 18 ---
to give the released convict everything required by the remark-
ably detailed rules ordained in the law: a specific number of
blouses, skirts, shoes, and other pieces of apparel, an ox, a hoe, a
gun, fifty acres of arable farmland, and a small amount of cash
to make a new start as a farmer. The law, in short, was rather
enlightened in providing for an ex-convict to become a future
colonist. But if that person was a woman with no help, the tran-
sition was, nevertheless, arduous.
}
With her new belongings in hand, Molly reached her property,
land worth only a dollar or two per acre in that day, situated on
the northern side of the Patapsco River, the substantial west–
east waterway that flows fifty-two miles, right past Baltimore,
and empties from its wide mouth into the Atlantic Ocean. Her
small farm was far upland from the more valuable riverfront,
and on a slight slope. But with just a few tree stumps, it was
land that could be made productive. As an experienced farm
worker, she would have had more than a little notion of what
needed to be done, but also would have known that she alone
could not accomplish it. For the construction of a shelter had
first priority, and that was beyond her abilities. The next steps—
the preparation of the land and the planting of a crop—all
would have needed at least one man, preferably two, to do the
heaviest work.
The feistiness and determination of this young woman, well
into her twenties by this time, are already clear. Now she
demonstrated a degree of ingenuity far beyond the ordinary. As
her own story has been handed down through generations of
neighbor families, Molly first arranged to stay with her old
employer a little longer in order to avoid sleeping out in the
elements. But one morning, after hearing that an incoming
The Prince and the Convict
3
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 19 ---
slave ship had docked, she rose and went to the nearby harbor.
There, with burly colonists all around her, this diminutive
woman who had so recently achieved respectability joined in
looking over the black men who were being offered for sale.
With a decisiveness that was to be a lifelong trait, Molly settled
on two whom she thought would do. One was a plain-looking,
brawny man who struck her as friendly and trainable. The
other was tall and lean, almost disinterestedly looking down on
the colonists who stared at him. It was hard to imagine him as
a farmhand, but she was somehow reluctant to leave him be-
hind. Because he was priced lower than her first choice—appar-
ently the other colonists didn’t see him as a good worker,
either—she was able to buy both of them out of the cash her
master had given her, leaving dangerously little for building
materials, tools, and food to live on until a salable crop could be
raised.
Other accounts of this transaction that have passed down
over the generations are slightly different. One suggests that
free land was not normally part of an indentured servant’s exit
package and that Molly had to rent land from a neighboring
farmer, paying from the proceeds of her crops until she could
buy her own land. Other historians also believe that the high
cost of good young slaves would have made such a purchase
impossible unless Molly somehow had more money than the
usual payoff from her former master. Perhaps she had penuri-
ously saved cash that she had earned by working extra hours
during those seven years. Or she might have won her employer’s
trust enough to get a loan for these starting expenses. Which-
ever version is accurate, it underscores the firmness of her char-
acter and the saving ways that later helped build her family.
As she turned to farming with her two slaves, Molly soon
discovered that her judgment of the two helpers had been
exactly right. The heavier man was very good-natured, a willing
benjamin banneker
4
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 20 ---
worker, and amazingly sanguine about making far more effort
than the other. Although her words meant nothing to him, he
strained cheerfully to understand and respond to her panto-
mime signals. When Molly grew exasperated that her other
choice often lay on the ground, propped on an elbow, watching
while the heavy labor went on, the one who bore the brunt of
this lassitude managed, with facial expressions and hand gestures,
to make her realize that the reclining man was not supposed to
work because he was the son of a king. She came to understand
that “Banneka,” as he called himself, was the eldest son, destined
to succeed his father until he was captured in an enemy raid
and sold to slave traders. (Some scholars believe that his given
name was simply Banne and that Ka was a family name.) And
while Banneka’s dignity made him less eager to engage in pan-
tomime communication, a special understanding developed be-
tween him and Molly. People forced to live and work together
in such circumstances very often invent a simple private lan-
guage in a remarkably short time, with each quickly learning
the relatively few words that the other uses repeatedly. Just such
a blending of sounds and cultures, stirred by sheer necessity,
must have made this trio of castaways into a viable little com-
munity within weeks.
In time, this tale took a romantic turn, and here the histor-
ical evidence is firm. As soon as the small farm was established—
a matter of several years—Molly gave Banneka his papers as a
freed man, and married him. Nothing is known of their
courtship or which one of them proposed to the other, but
there are enough hard facts to establish that they were married
and had four daughters. A favorite one, called Mary, was prob-
ably the second child and was born in 1700. They were a re-
markably devoted couple until Banneka’s death before age fifty.
Molly referred to him as “The Prince,” and the family always
called her “Big Ma-Ma.”
The Prince and the Convict
5
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 21 ---
Although her husband’s aversion to work had remained a
constant, Molly understood that it might have been linked to a
serious physical reason, for Banneka had never fully recovered
from the inhuman conditions of the slave ship nor adapted to
the winter months in Maryland. In any case, while he lived he
more than made up for his laboring lapses by using certain
higher skills that a chief’s son would have learned in order to
lead his people in the harsh African environment. One was a
great hunting ability, which enabled him to return from forays
with meats of inestimable value in the early lean years. Even
more striking, after tobacco was selected as the crop of choice,
was Banneka’s astonishing ability to foretell the weather. The
neighboring farmers came to look enviously at the way this
family always seemed to plant its heaviest crop when there was
going to be fine weather and to cut back when conditions
turned out to be less favorable. It was even said that Banneka
foretold the direction of prevailing winds long enough in
advance to locate his plantings with uncanny precision. He was
inventive, too; he devised a way of channeling water from a
small spring to parts of their acreage, and this irrigation made
the farm flourish in a way that none of the surrounding proper-
ties could match.
Such skills are of interest because of their probable link
with the astronomical intuitions and clever craftsmanship that
his grandson would have. They also shed some light on a ques-
tion that has never been definitively answered: Exactly where in
Africa did Banneka come from?
It is important to avoid the Euro-American tendency to see
Africa’s people as an undifferentiated mass with skin color as a
chief characteristic. Africa’s communities are every bit as diverse
as those of the Western world, and each unwilling immigrant
who came to America in chains was at least partly shaped by his
or her place of birth and tribal upbringing. In Banneka’s case,
benjamin banneker
6
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 22 ---
some authorities believe he was a native of Senegal, with one of
his parents having been from the Wolof tribe and the other
from the Fulani. That view deserves respect, but there are
stronger reasons to think Banneka’s lineage traces to an area
adjacent to Guinea now known as Mali. And while there are
several distinct peoples within Mali’s present boundaries, it is
likely that one small group called the Dogon (now numbering
about 200,000) are Banneka’s ancestors. That would not rule
out the possibility that his mother was, indeed, a Fulani, as that
tribe also extended into the territory of present-day Mali and
has had a long relationship with the Dogon.
It is a distinguished and intriguing heritage. For one thing,
it has long been said that the Dogon people, many centuries
ago, charted the stars with astonishing accuracy. Whether this
is truth or myth is a subject of controversy among researchers,
but there is no doubt at all about the superior skills of the
Dogon in other technical fields, especially irrigation and farm-
ing. The fact that precisely these talents underlay Banneka’s
success in Maryland and were passed on to a descendant must
be considered as much more than coincidence, for numerous
other Dogon characteristics and character traits are detectable
in what is known of Banneka and then equally pronounced in
the talents of Banneka’s remarkable grandson. The Dogon’s ab-
sorption with the cosmos and with numerology, their reserved
manner and dedication to work, and their pleasantly noncon-
frontational manner—all exactly foreshadow the interests and
manner that Banneka passed along to the descendant who indi-
rectly inherited his teachings. 
After his capture, the two likeliest places that Banneka would
have passed through on his way to America are an old fort
along the coast of present-day Ghana or another of the infa-
mous “slave castles” on Gorée Island, off the shores of Senegal.
The conditions were such that some forty million people are
The Prince and the Convict
7
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 23 ---
believed to have died in captivity over more than three centu-
ries. T o endure that and the added horror of crossing the ocean
on a slave ship left many of the survivors physically maimed or
blighted by disease, and Banneka was clearly one of these vic-
tims, never fully well again and destined to have a foreshort-
ened life.
History doesn’t tell us how this mixed marriage almost
three hundred years ago was perceived. It is no cause for sur-
prise that Molly had no prejudice against such a match, for her
own harrowing experiences would have made her realize what
unfair judgments and punishments blacks had to endure. But
was the marriage frowned on by other Marylanders? Was it
benjamin banneker
8
Stowing the cargo on a slaver at night. Believed to be from a mid-nineteenth-
century book showing slaves being packed into place for the night, with the
pretense that each is positioned on his or her right side for health reasons.
(Library of Congress collection)
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 24 ---
9
An official British plan for slave stowage. Some consider this the most appalling
picture of human savagery ever made, for it is not an artist’s imagining, but
a government document, indicating that this represents a humane move to
reduce total cargo on this ship from 600 slaves to a maximum of 454 slaves.
Even this impression of sardines in a can fails to capture the horror inflicted
on some slaves by placing them on shelves with little air space. 
(Library of
Congress collection)
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 25 ---
even legitimate? Surprisingly, there was no law at all on the
subject. That came later. And the attitudes around them seem
to have been quite relaxed. With all that has transpired since, it
might be assumed that whites would have thought it scandalous
for a white woman to have married a slave. It is too often
believed that the distant past had a monopoly on crude racism
while the passage of time has always eased it, but there is no
such simple chronology. In this case and many others, people
living in relatively primitive conditions had not had time to
develop the many prejudices that grew when life became more
secure. While The Prince and Big Ma-Ma were struggling to
set up a viable way to live, their neighbors were occupied with
daunting problems of their own. Even the officials who ran the
colony and the wealthiest landowners were risking much of
their capital on the massive tasks of building new roads and set-
ting up mills and plants to make products that had not yet
found a market. Fires that wiped out such uninsurable assets
were common; unforeseen competition that created sudden
bankruptcies cropped up over and over. Every person was a
pioneer, and pioneers set up social rules mainly in their retire-
ment years. It is likely that white neighbors had less contact
with Banneka and Molly than they did with other whites. But
even that would be a conjecture filtered through modern
glasses. There is nothing in the old documents to prove it as
a fact.
}
When the couple’s daughter Mary reached a marriageable age,
she was a tall, copper-toned beauty. T o marry her to a slave
from a nearby farm was flatly ruled out, for the law had tight-
ened, and anyone who made such a marriage was automatically
condemned to slavery, too. One popular account has it that her
benjamin banneker
10
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 26 ---
mother, Molly, used her own old method to procure a suitable
husband who could be freed before marriage. T ogether, they
supposedly went to meet an incoming slave ship, looked over
the newcomers, and made another life-altering decision. They
are said to have bought a young slave who seemed alert, sensi-
ble, and gave a sign of pleasure on seeing Mary. 
An alternate version seems likelier. The young man had
arrived on a slave ship some years earlier, was bought by a
colonist, and proved to be fiercely independent. He escaped
twice, and may have lived with Indians for a time. But then he
had the good fortune to be sold to an unusual planter who
admired the slave’s spirit and was especially impressed by his
desire to be baptized a Christian. He felt that this man had too
much dignity to be a slave, and he freed him.
The young man’s pleasure at the sight of Mary, at least,
must be counted as a very accurate part of either account, for
despite his independent spirit, he gladly accepted the name
Robert Bannaky and became another vital part of this family
who demonstrated character and ability that few in the white
world thought these unwilling arrivals from Africa possessed.
Robert Banneky’s character was such to raise the question of
how many other African Americans might have emulated the
successful career paths of immigrants from Europe if they had
found a reasonable amount of respect in America, rather than
the numbing embrace of slavery.
Not only was Robert to become a fine father to his four
children with Mary, but he also managed the farm superbly. As
he prospered, he bought a twenty-five-acre nearby farm, nam-
ing it Timber Poynt. While Mary, widely admired as a lady of
great beauty, was also becoming well known in the area for spe-
cial skills with herbal medicines, Robert helped Molly to save
and reinvest so well that their combined landholdings eventu-
ally quadrupled.
The Prince and the Convict
11
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 27 ---
}
On November 9, 1731, Robert and Mary had a son whom they
named Benjamin. Those inclined to see mystical or divine pat-
terns in historical happenings have pointed out that this man
who may have been the rarest human being born in that year
happened to come into a colony that was surpassing its neigh-
bors in making steps toward a new spirit of freedom and com-
passion. Although the intellect of Benjamin Banneker would have
been a great one regardless of his birthplace, he might have
groped in vain anywhere else for ways to satisfy his great thirst
for knowledge. He might never have found the conditions to
facilitate his self-education or the neighbors who would recog-
nize his qualification for a high place in the world if Maryland
had not had some startling early champions of egalitarianism.
In 1634, Lord Baltimore, a man who never crossed the
ocean to visit his American properties, had made Maryland the
first colony to have full religious freedom. A Religious T olera-
tion Act was adopted in 1649, although it was blighted by years
of anti-Catholic laws dictated from Britain. Puritans and Quak-
ers began moving to Maryland to escape the insistence on con-
formity in other colonies. A most important move came in
1660, when a tightening of religious laws in Virginia caused
three hundred Quakers to move to Maryland. Following up on
this, Quaker leaders from England, including the Society’s
founder, George Fox, visited Maryland in the 1670s and began
to preach about the inconsistency of slaveholding by people
who professed to be Christians. In 1688, five years after Molly
Welsh’s arrival as a convict, Quakers who had emigrated from
Germany made the first written protest against slavery the
American colonies had ever seen. And in the early part of the
eighteenth century, State Senator Charles Carroll, brother of
the Jesuit who founded Georgetown University, proposed a law
benjamin banneker
12
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 28 ---
13
Cecil Calvert, the second Lord Baltimore, shown with his grandson and
holding a map of the Maryland Colony. Although he never crossed the
Atlantic to visit the great property he governed, his relatively enlightened
rule made this colony a place where Benjamin Banneker’s father could buy
his own land and see his son gain more respect than most other Southern
colonies would have allowed. 
(Enoch Pratt Free Library, Baltimore, Maryland)
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 29 ---
to abolish slavery in Maryland. It lost by a vote of 35 to 20, but
considering the fact that large slave owners had a dispropor-
tionate voting power, a one-man-one-vote count would have
made it a winner; in other words, a growing sentiment among
the people for abolition of slavery was clear.
“All these steps, culminating in a time when Benjamin Banne-
ker would be pointed to as an example of the African-American’s
mental abilities, formed a very real part of the movement that
brought about the Declaration of Independence,” says Samuel
Hopkins,* a Maryland historian whose own family has multiple
links to the subject of social justice. “The American people did
not go to war just because of tea and taxes. They were trying to
form a new society that gave people far more freedom from
harsh control. Molly Welsh went from an England that nearly
executed her for spilling milk to a colony that gave her a second
chance. And while it was no Garden of Eden even for free black
persons, it was moving toward a time when Benjamin Banne-
ker’s role was to have great significance.”
This analysis is supported by numerous modern social and
anthropological observations on how progressive changes in
communities come about. While the changes are usually pio-
neered by a handful of independent thinkers who seem out of
step at first, these risk-takers may flourish when a critical mass
of people around them begins to relax its opposition to the
changes and then makes hesitant moves to adopt the new polit-
ical correctness.
Much as he was loved by his parents, young Benjamin was
given even more attention by his grandmother. She made the
benjamin banneker
14
* Hopkins is a descendant of the Senator Carroll named here and also a great-
nephew of Johns Hopkins, who founded Baltimore’s renowned medical insti-
tution. But nothing in his lineage seems as significant to him as his direct
descent from George Ellicott, who became Banneker’s closest white friend
and scientific collaborator.
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 30 ---
amazingly bright boy her first interest in life. Although local
lore has long held that Benjamin, as a young boy, acquired a
great deal of wisdom from his grandfather Banneka, a study of
the calendar shows that this pleasant story could not have in-
volved a face-to-face meeting between the two. Banneka must
have been born in 1672 or earlier in order to seem an attractive
young man to the older Molly when she bought him in 1690.
He would therefore have been at least fifty-nine years old when
his grandson Benjamin was born in 1731 (which is a verified
date). But every recollection and book, including an unques-
tioned contemporary account, says that the grandfather died
before age fifty. So there is no way young Benjamin could have
known his grandfather.
It is a fact, however, that Benjamin knew farm methods,
weather wisdom, and astronomical facts that appear to have
come from the Dogon. These remarkable Africans had—and
have to this day—thoughts that astonish their neighbors in Mali
and occasionally others of the wider world. Some of Benjamin’s
Dogon ways were probably inherited traits, but much of the
lore had to be learned by word of mouth. His father, Robert,
was not a Dogon. So it must be that grandmother Molly, who
had such respect for Banneka’s princely background, had lis-
tened to her husband’s words so carefully that she could pass on
this kind of information to her adored grandson. After all,
Molly herself had done much of the actual farming work in
earlier days. It was not as though she had been a pampered
woman with no thought of men’s subjects. From the time she
married, she had firmly embraced the black side of her family as
her own. So it now appears clear that this astonishing woman—
who had begun life as a lowly milkmaid—could not only give
Benjamin a grounding in good English and fine handwrit-
ing, but was equally able to pass along African wisdom that he
never turned away from, even when he learned more modern
science.
The Prince and the Convict
15
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 31 ---
Molly must often have recalled the day the Bible had saved
her life when she used the same book as a manual of literacy for
little Benjamin. Y et it did not make him quick to join any orga-
nized religion when he was grown. On that subject, he would
always have a mind of his own. But by learning to read the Old
and New T estaments and even memorizing biblical passages at
a remarkably young age, he came to develop the style of speech
and even of writing that gave him an ability to communicate on
a level far beyond that of a simple tobacco farmer.
When Benjamin was six, in 1837, Robert Bannaky acquired
a separate hundred-acre site not very far away from the original
farm, bartering 7,000 pounds of tobacco to pay for it. For a
time, he owned both Timber Poynt and this larger farm, called
“Stout.” The name of young Benjamin appears on the deed to
that property, for his foresighted father wanted to be sure his
firstborn would have a firm claim to it. Although they remained
in close contact with Molly, this now became the site of the
Bannaky family’s new cabin, and other cabins were later added
as each child became an adult. Benjamin would live in his cabin
alone until his death.
Banneker’s hometown has been given as Elkridge in most
accounts. That is generally correct as an indication of the area.
But research has now proved that both Molly’s farm and the
larger one where Banneker spent most of his life were in an
unnamed area that was later incorporated as the tiny mill town
of Oella only in 1808, after his death.
T oday, all of these residences are gone, but they are to be
rebuilt as part of a Banneker Memorial that already features a
modern marble museum building behind an imposing stone
gateway and drive. Walking over the site, one is surprised to
find it an attractive piece of property on a high rise that over-
looks much of the surrounding area. At first sight, it seems too
desirable for a small farmer to have afforded, but in 1737, the
benjamin banneker
16
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 32 ---
climb was a hard one. The costlier land was far below, where
the city life was centered and the riverside provided transporta-
tion facilities. As in most parts of the world, the poorer folk had
to move uphill to do their farming and transporting under
harder conditions. Tired muscles were a price the poor often
paid for the better views they enjoyed.
}
Around the time of this move, when Benjamin was between five
and six years old, the family and much of the neighborhood
began to talk of him as a phenomenon. He was a quiet boy,
showing no sign of wanting attention, most often walking rather
than running or jumping. Even at that young age, he seemed
to show a trait inherited from his grandfather, The Prince. Odd
as it is to say about a small boy, he was dignified. He had a
graceful, compact way of moving, and an engaging charm. His
large bright eyes seemed to be seeing a wider landscape than
others saw, and they had a glow of instant understanding when-
ever anyone spoke to him. His responses were those of an edu-
cated, courteous adult. Most of the nearby small farmers—some
black, some white—were unlettered folk. T o hear a small boy
answer a question with a quotation from the Bible, to see him
write with a flowing hand, made their mouths fall agape. But
it was his total domination of numbers that made him seem
a being apart. Even when he was six, they began to ask him
to check their uncertain financial figures. And their astonish-
ment grew when he not only sorted them out instantly, but
could later talk from memory about each person’s array of
numbers. His sense of logical reasoning was so precise that
everything seemed to fall into place in his mind. And his recall
was photographic. He would never lose that trait to the day of
his death.
The Prince and the Convict
17
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 33 ---
So Benjamin Banneker grew up with the sense of being a
special person, much as a Mozart or a Menuhin, also prodigies,
might have felt during childhood. Amazingly, it seemed to give
him a premature sense of responsibility, rather than a spoiled
child’s egotism. His care about the little hilltop community
sounds much like the account of Chicago’s beloved Cardinal
Bernardin, whose sister recalled that at age five he seemed to
feel that any neighbor family’s loss or trouble was something he
had to think about and try to heal.
Benjamin does not seem to have let this precocious role
interfere with a healthy view of reality. His grandmother’s steady
attention was his main source of information for some years,
but Molly was too tough-minded to give a child impractically
grand thoughts. His lamented grandfather, far from forgotten,
was summoned by Molly to give him occasional glimpses of
how the skies and clouds and winds relate to life on earth, but
those were things that he would save in a corner of his mind
and use over the years as an intuitive base for weighing the sci-
entific facts he would learn from books. His parents, Robert
and Mary, were the main programmers, and their no-nonsense
attitude toward what had to be done built an underlying foun-
dation. No prodigy ever had wiser parents, for although they
probably didn’t know his thoughts, they respected the mind
that produced them. They also made sure he knew that arith-
metical skills and beautiful handwriting did not make tobacco
grow or put food on the table. As he grew a little older, he went
out digging and planting with his father, an African whose
superb managerial skills Benjamin recognized as another of the
family’s crown jewels. Robert taught discipline by example, but
Benjamin was never cowed or coerced. He could study and he
could go to a quiet corner and think—but only after the neces-
sities of survival had been completed. That sense of priorities
would never vary.
benjamin banneker
18
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 34 ---
19
2
}
Lessons, Precious
and Painful
T
he development of a home-schooled mind is totally dif-
ferent from the course that most educated individuals fo-
low as they mature. For the normal child, daily attendance
at a school, conversations with companions, and exchanges with
teachers contribute bits of information that will coalesce almost
imperceptibly into knowledge, attitudes, opinions. If the influ-
ences are generally good ones, the result is said to be a “well-
rounded” mind.
It was much different for Benjamin. He knew that his mother
and father laid down the rules, but Mary and Robert were so
totally occupied with farm work and ways to earn a little extra
cash that they could not act as educators. The main learning
input was from Molly and from what she could pass along of
Banneka’s African wisdom, but neither with any academic edu-
cation of the kind that Benjamin was clearly hungering for.
Molly provided him with the simple, basic literacy and logic
of the Western world. Banneka’s thoughts gave the feel for
nature that derived from his African heritage. Beyond that, the
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 35 ---
boy would have to find and open other doors for himself. After
learning basic reading skills while very small, he had no plan of
instruction beyond further study of Molly’s Bible, for there was
no other book in the house.
It is certain that he was constantly schooling himself about
the workings of the world around him, for entries from a diary
that he began to keep later show that such observations came to
his mind almost effortlessly. But history has left scant evidence
of how this proceeded when he was five, six, or seven years old.
No milestones were put in place to record his development, no
report cards left behind to mark progress as new semesters went
by, no childhood letters to relatives exist to show the progress
of his thoughts. Instead, changes were marked only by chance
happenings that introduced a new influence into his life.
One early lesson involved Banneker’s first experience with
racist terrorism and the “street smarts” that could only be
learned from surviving a real-life test. In this case, it was so sear-
ing that the emotion he underwent during a matter of moments
apparently obscured his usual precision about dates. Here, for
one of the few times in his life, the superhuman memory he had
on most subjects blurred. When he mentioned this incident in
later life, he could only refer to the date as “sometime during
my childhood years.” Most of the surrounding facts, such as the
apparent age of siblings and the time of a separate event that
occurred later, would point to about age eight.
Although young Benjamin had never realized it before, his
parents and grandparents knew that blacks, even free blacks,
were facing an increasingly terrifying situation. Because of the
South’s growing demand for workers, healthy black persons
were being bought and sold for higher and higher prices. That
was an open invitation to lawless ruffians to invent a lucrative
racket. A few tough whites would band together, calling them-
selves patrollers and pretending to be legally empowered to
benjamin banneker
20
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 36 ---
catch runaway slaves. They were really bounty hunters, with no
legal status beyond the fact that neither citizens nor authorities
did anything to stop them. As soon as they caught sight of a
black person, especially one walking alone, they pounced with-
out being particular about his status. Pretending to recognize
him as an escapee, they would lay hands on him and demand to
see his papers. If he produced sufficiently impressive documents
showing that he was free or was on an errand for some person
of substance, they might decide to let him go. But if there was
any weakness in his position—missing papers or a suspicious,
frightened look—they would ignore all protestations and hustle
him away. In most cases, the unfortunate person would soon be
spirited southward and sold to a planter who gladly paid a good
price without asking questions. Even children sometimes disap-
peared in this way.
Many property owners who considered themselves model
citizens tolerated these abuses without complaint. Of slavery’s
many weird faces, one of the most revolting was that it made
otherwise decent people numbly accept a prisonlike world,
where even their own free lives were surrounded by the ugli-
ness that wardens and guards see around them. Because they
lived in fear of a slave uprising or a great wave of escapes, they
welcomed anything that might terrify blacks enough to keep
them in line. The terror these patrollers (or patterolers, as the
word was commonly pronounced) created was acute enough to
win a place in black folklore, with rhymes like:
Run, nigger, run, patteroler’ll ketch yer,
Hit yer thirty-nine and swear he did’n tech yer.
When the Patapsco River valley had been little more than a
backwater, its blacks had been safer from illicit slave-catchers
than those in many other areas. But as its property values and
population increased, the thugs had begun to move in. 
Lessons, Precious and Painful
21
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 37 ---
One day, Molly had taken all her grandchildren and one or
two neighbors’ youngsters to a fair in the nearby port town of
Elkridge Landing, which was some miles downriver from their
home. At one point there was a commotion, and Molly spied
four burly white men bearing down on her little group. She saw
them quickly surround the children, stretching their arms wide
to keep them from running.
Following their usual practice, they probably screamed,
“Where are you from? Who do you belong to?” at the fright-
ened children. The doughty little Molly later admitted that she
was trembling, but she walked into the center of the group,
pulled herself up grandly, and asserted something to the effect
that these were “my slaves’ children, of course.” The thugs fell
back awkwardly and touched their hats. T o be a white woman
with slaves was something that made sense to them, something
worthy of respect.
The incident was over in seconds, and the younger children
may hardly have realized that anything was amiss, beyond being
puzzled by Molly’s clever falsehood about “my slaves.” Ben-
jamin did understand, and it would prey on his mind during all
the decades when he gave to many who knew him the impres-
sion of being serenely above the fray. It may have contributed
to the tumultuous dreams, in full color, that troubled his nights
throughout his life. This was not the last nor the worst of his
encounters with horror, but it gave him his first understanding
of what it meant to be black—and the power of simply being
white—from which his quiet farm life had shielded him.
Although Benjamin Banneker was known as a free black all
his life and clearly insisted on thinking of himself as free, he
probably harbored a secret fear in a corner of his mind. The
scrambled laws of that day may have technically jeopardized
Molly’s own freedom, for one ruling provided that a white
woman who married a slave took on her husband’s status. Molly
benjamin banneker
22
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 38 ---
insisted that she had given Banneka his freedom before she
married him, but some feel that this arrangement might have
been struck down if there had been a legal test, robbing the
whole family of its freedom. Fortunately, nothing of the kind
ever intruded, but the precariousness of his own liberty must
have played a part in Benjamin’s long tendency to avoid the
spotlight.
Shortly after the terror incident had made him so aware of
black–white issues, this mere child began thinking often about
the plight of Native Americans. Already, at a very young age, he
had caught on to a fact that most adults never grasped: that
Indians could differ from each other as much as whites, blacks,
or members of any other ethnic group. It was quite tragic that
the Piscataway Indians of the Patapsco region, who wanted to
be settled farmers and who went out of their way to befriend
whites, were caught up in violence that was started by the burly
and often warlike Susquehannock.
As far back as 1634, Father Andrew White, an early Jesuit
missionary who had landed with the first Maryland settlers,
wrote that the Piscataway showed “temperance and constancy
in great affairs,” adding that “. . . if they were once christian,
they would doubtlesse be a vertuous and renowned nation.” But
the settlers were baffled by the twisted tribal politics and the
occasional incidents of individual violence that made all the
Native Americans seem menacing to them. A short-lived and
complex alliance between the two tribes (trying to fend off the
powerful Iroquois and Seneca) had confused the settlers and
made them treat the friendliest Indians unfairly. The people of
every colony still vividly remembered the past massacres of
whites, especially the great Indian Massacre of 1622, which
killed 350 whites—one-fourth of the Virginia colony’s popula-
tion. That had created a furor, even in England, leading King
James I to end the private commercial venture known as The
Lessons, Precious and Painful
23
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 39 ---
Virginia Company and to make Virginia a Royal Colony. So
now, although neighboring Maryland had no such local memo-
ries, the slightest sign of violence brought on the formation of
defensive militias that massacred a great many Indians and sent
more of them out of the area. There were even horrendous
instances of Indians who had gratefully taken refuge with set-
tlers in a time of chaotic disturbances being slaughtered by
angry lynch mobs.
Most of this had happened years before Benjamin’s birth,
but when he heard the stories, he quickly formed his own
impression that good and bad people alike had been wrongly
treated, that potential friends had been made into foes. In
doing this, Benjamin focused with his usual pinpoint accuracy
on the key point that underlies all racism—the mistaken idea
that the behavior of a few is a way to evaluate a whole group.
Here, clearly, was a mind that would always have its own opin-
ions, forming them with a judgment that matured early and
then went on refining itself.
Just the reverse of his first terrifying experience came at
about the same time in Benjamin’s life, somewhere between
eight and nine years of age. He met his first great friend outside
the family, one who would influence his entire life, a Quaker
schoolmaster who is thought to have been called Peter Hein-
rich. Although he depended on farming for a living, Heinrich
had the intention of starting a school in the neighborhood.
Benjamin had gone on an errand for his mother one after-
noon and was walking along a narrow dirt path toward his home
when he encountered the young teacher. Heinrich was quite new
to the area, having come as a volunteer because his church lead-
ers thought this part of the Patapsco River region was growing
fast enough to need education for young persons whose fathers
were not rich enough to employ and house private instructors.
The number of Quakers in Maryland had been climbing since
benjamin banneker
24
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 40 ---
George Fox had come over from England in the late 1600s and
had pinpointed Maryland as a state that would be receptive to
Quaker ideas of equality and justice. Some Quakers had even
moved to Maryland from their Pennsylvania base, for the latter
state’s religious freedom had a minimum requirement of belief
in the T rinity, while Maryland had no limiting stipulations at
all. It was also a state that had a number of “islands” of free
black communities. The 1790 census showed about 8,000 free
blacks in the state, but the number was probably only about
4,000 in the years of Benjamin’s childhood.
The idea of a school was welcomed by the area’s mayors.
Once the subject was broached, in fact, these leaders realized
that even more public schooling was going to be needed. Their
eagerness to have him start a small school had enabled Peter
Heinrich to insist on his own terms, which included the under-
standing that he had the sole right to decide whom he might
admit to his school, with no restrictions. He had foreseen the
possibility that any racial mixture in his classes might cause
objections, and he had rebutted it in advance.
Something in Benjamin’s eyes as they passed caught Hein-
rich’s notice. It may have been a combination of the confident,
steady look this young person had always had and the slight
uncertainty about whites that had come over him since the inci-
dent with the patrollers. In any case, Heinrich saw something
different from the downcast eyes that the children of slaves
often thought it best to show when passing a white person. The
schoolmaster spoke a gentle greeting and paused, introducing
himself. He was startled at the eager way Benjamin responded
on hearing that teaching was this man’s business. Heinrich
asked if the boy would like to come to his school, but Benjamin
reluctantly said he didn’t think he could take time away from
the farm. The conversation was prolonged, with the Quaker
finding it hard to tear himself away from this well-spoken lad
Lessons, Precious and Painful
25
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 41 ---
whose accent sounded like that of an English person, yet with a
different, foreign note. How could he have learned all these
words, this fine language? Accounts tell us that Benjamin
explained simply, “From reading the Bible.”
Before they parted, it was agreed that at the very least
Heinrich would lend Benjamin some books to expand his read-
ing. At this point, there is a fork in the story: Over the years,
most accounts related that Banneker never went to school a day
in his life. But that assumption has been shifting a little in the
course of continued research. It is now clear that one Joseph (or
Jacob) Hall, another free black who said he lived in the same
Elkridge area at that time (circa 1740), spoke of having been to
the Quaker school rather briefly with Benjamin. “He was never
fond of play or light amusement,” one account quotes Hall as
having said. “All he liked was to dive into books.” Hall had no
apparent motive for fabricating this story, except possibly the
frequent tendency some people have to pretend to know a
prominent person. His description of Banneker’s studiousness
sounds true. This supports the strong possibility that Benjamin
did have a year or at most two in a classroom, but surely not
more, because the need for help on the farm soon would have
taken priority. In any event, it does not markedly change the
widely believed fact that his formal education was exceedingly
sparse, for it has long been acknowledged that he did have
advice from a local teacher and that he was loaned a succession
of important books over a period of several years. The essential
fact that Benjamin was largely self-taught is unaffected. The
most vital help was in the availability of great books, but there
was very little time for actual tutoring, so he extracted and
developed most of his knowledge on his own.
It is clear that Benjamin became familiar with many of the
classics in this way, always astonishing the schoolmaster by
returning them in a very short time and making a great many
benjamin banneker
26
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 42 ---
insightful remarks on the contents. From simple primers, he
seems to have vaulted into volumes that were on the university
level. Among the books were some from Heinrich’s own library,
far advanced beyond what he used in his schoolroom, including
the works of Plato and Epictetus, histories of ancient Rome,
and Newton’s Principia, which Benjamin devoured in a few all-
night readings, as if he had anticipated Newton’s reasoning and
was only skimming it to learn the proper words.
Heinrich realized he was dealing with a true genius. More
than once, he told Benjamin that he hoped he could one day
get him into the hands of a superior teacher, for he saw that the
boy’s mind was well above his own, frequently grasping points
that Heinrich had not thought of. Before Peter was called away
on another assignment, the two became more like friends than
teacher and pupil, even though their ages were so far apart.
This disregard for age differences would be a permanent trait
in Banneker.
Through Heinrich’s friendship and the exposure to so many
fine books, Benjamin’s speech began to be less biblical and closer
to that of a well-educated gentleman. Some people can read the
greatest works and remain unaffected in their own word choices.
Most start to draw on their reading as a source of vocabulary
enhancement. Only a few—Banneker among them—go on to
develop a superior speaking and writing style.
Since Banneker remained a great favorite with his sisters
and nephews all his life, he probably used family language when
he was in that circle, just as many highly educated black persons
say they consciously use “black talk” when they visit less culti-
vated relatives or childhood friends. That practice, in fact, is no
different from what happens in many other cultures. Italian
Americans who speak elegant English may slip into a Sicilian or
Neapolitan dialect when they talk with older relatives. Only
persons who are not really confident of their own status fail to
Lessons, Precious and Painful
27
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 43 ---
recognize that this is a courtesy to the elders and not a cause
for embarrassment.
Incidentally, it was Peter Heinrich who proposed Benja-
min’s adoption of the spelling “Banneker” that has been known
as his last name ever since. Oddly, the three generations of the
family used three slightly different spellings: Banneka, Bannaky,
and Banneker. Heinrich’s choice of the third one apparently
struck him as being more in the mainstream of the upscale
Americans among whom he thought Benjamin was destined to
belong.
}
Once he had formed the habit of devouring books, Benjamin
continued to read voraciously all his life, to the full extent of
what he could buy or borrow. And he balanced the reading
experience with the less costly act of writing constantly. Once
he adopted the habit of making entries in a daily diary, he held
to it religiously, except for a mysterious period later in his life.
However late it might be when his other duties were done, he
would set about recording things he had learned from the day.
These were mainly new observations and conclusions, includ-
ing his nighttime study of the stars, rather than simply events.
The loss of most of these diaries after his death was a tragedy,
for the astronomical thoughts alone would doubtless have
formed several volumes.
He often lay on the ground outside the cabin in those late
hours, looking up into the million points of light that came
through so dizzyingly at a time when there was no city bright-
ness to dim them. He pictured other solar systems and other
inhabited worlds, somehow conceiving of planets much like our
own. And he imagined that those other people, returning his
own stare, would see our sun as one more star and go on think-
benjamin banneker
28
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 44 ---
ing themselves the center of all things. How he could have gen-
erated such concepts even before he acquired his own first rudi-
mentary spyglass, we cannot imagine. But his own later writings
make it clear that he did. T o see mere specks of light and to
reason—in the 1700s—that other intelligent beings might be
looking back at our earth was a staggering exercise in pure
thought. If the diaries had not been destroyed by arson, we
would doubtless learn that he somehow found time to make
hundreds of science-oriented entries even when his greatest
years with finer instruments were decades away. This is docu-
mented by Banneker himself and some of his neighbors, who
told of his untiring commitment to the regular diary entries. A
small part of the contents has survived because Banneker later
quoted some entries in the almanacs that he published in the
idyllic last years of his life.
}
As he moved through his teens, it must have been frustrating
for a mind that longed for time to read and learn and think to
find that the farm duties pressing upon him multiplied. The
death of grandfather Banneka had brought sadness and a reali-
zation of how much soul and thought the family lost, but it
had not much changed the work routines, for Banneka had not
taken real part in them for some years. Now, however, his
father, Robert, was also growing frail at an early age, and that
did alter the distribution of work. When he was little more than
twelve, a full half of the farmwork fell on Benjamin’s slender
shoulders. There is no sign in anything he wrote to the end of
his life that he resented this enough to consider rebelling. He
saw the world, and his duty, for what it was. But he was human
enough, as we know from a few incidents, to shed tears. And
the deprivation of his precious thinking time may have created
Lessons, Precious and Painful
29
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 45 ---
more inner rage than he ever showed, for later in life he did all
he could to reduce and then almost eliminate the farmwork.
This clash between physical labor and mental effort may, in
fact, have been responsible for one curious period of apparent
depression in his late twenties and thirties.
But a very real threat that he could not ignore began to
weigh on Benjamin’s mind long before he should have been
burdened with adult responsibilities. This was the deteriorating
condition of the soil on which his family and the whole Patap-
sco region depended. By planting tobacco year after year, they
had been killing the land since before Benjamin was born.
Nobody had a solution, for the whole region was geared to
raising and exporting that one crop.
The entire river area, the basin, branches, and harbor site,
had suffered mightily from the arrival of settlers since Captain
John Smith first explored it in 1608. With its fish and other
food sources, it had provided a balanced and healthy means of
survival for the humans and animals of the region. But the
decline in schools of herring and shad caused by dam construc-
tion, noticed in Benjamin’s day, was to go on worsening decade
after decade as waste was dumped.
The adjacent land areas naturally suffered from the sicken-
ing of the river. T obacco planters with great tracts in the Patap-
sco region had begun to grow wealthy from world demand for
their products even before the eighteenth century began. There
were large landholders with names that would become nation-
ally famous, and lesser settlers scattered all over the state. But
the small town of Elkridge (originally called the Ridge of Elk
and later Elk Ridge, named for a ridgeline that stretched to the
west and south) became the acknowledged transport center
around the turn of the eighteenth century because its location at
a wide point on the river made shipments overseas easy and in-
expensive. About this time, an anonymous British traveler wrote,
benjamin banneker
30
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:37 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 46 ---
“This village does not deserve noticing on account of its size, as
it contains only about 15 houses, 2 stores, and a few shops, but
for being a place of business long before Baltimore was inhab-
ited. Here all the business was conducted on a large scale, it
being the deposit of all the tobacco raised for a considerable
distance, where it was inspected and went to Europe.”
By the time Banneker was born in 1731, most of the good
land had been put to use for raising tobacco, and the surround-
ing area was thriving. The nearby town of Elkridge Landing
had its own customshouse and inspection office, and the mer-
chants who lived off this trade were building great homes.
The iron industry became second in importance to tobacco
during Banneker’s lifetime. Captain John Smith had first noticed
red clay in the hills near the river, and the commercial exploita-
tion of that started in 1755, when Caleb Dorsey established Elk
Ridge Furnace. T o encourage this added source of wealth, the
General Assembly of Maryland ruled in 1719 that a person
could acquire one hundred acres of uncultivated land along a
river, but must start an operation within six months and com-
plete it within four years. Dorsey’s iron business would thrive
into the nineteenth century, and the Ellicott family would add
this to its holdings in 1820. But the furnace played no part in
Banneker’s thoughts and plans, as it was only for those who had
major capital to invest.
Benjamin’s grandfather, with the wisdom of his upbringing
in an African area where farm mistakes could be critical, had
told the family long since that planting the same crop over
and over could be bad for the land. What he would not have
learned in Africa is that tobacco is even harder on the land than
most other crops. It leaches nutrients from the soil. Ideally, it
should be planted for only two consecutive years, then the land
rested for ten years. Clearly, a single small farmer could not live
with such a schedule, nor could he turn away from the only
Lessons, Precious and Painful
31
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 47 ---
product that could rely on established marketing facilities nearby.
Banneker’s family had no choice but to keep replanting tobacco
while taking the greatest possible care of its own soil. The Ban-
neker crop was always among the best in its neighborhood, but
the specter of a general fall in quality was a worry that gnawed
at the soul. Any talk of the future brought on silence, as every-
one wondered whether there was to be a future at all. What
would they do if there were no crop to sell? Or if they had a
crop, but others didn’t—and the whole area lost its links with
the tobacco-buying world?
There were community meetings and talk of planting wheat,
but it was always overridden by the majority. “How can we
gamble our prosperity on a crop that we have never even tried
in Maryland?” planters shouted at meetings when the issue was
raised. “And even if it grows well, what are we to do with it,
send it hundreds of miles to be made into flour? We’ll all be-
come poor. No, it’s only tobacco for us!” Banneker only heard
about those meetings. He had no part in them. But he could
look at his own soil and see that the steady growing of tobacco
was ravaging it. Only the wise ways passed down from old Ban-
neka and the steadiness of his unusual son-in-law and grandson
combined to keep the farm viable and the family afloat.
This life-and-death issue would prey on Banneker’s mind
for almost another half-century. We know that he kept writing
letters to his sisters with instructions on care of the farm when
he had to be away.
Y et his power of concentration was so great that none of
this prevented him from thinking about the cosmos with the
same wonder he had in childhood. “The soil I work with and
the stars up there are all part of the same thing,” he said. “They
were both made for a purpose, and the purpose was good.”
benjamin banneker
32
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 48 ---
33
3
}
The Lurking Terror
L
ike many persons of his time, Benjamin never really had
any youth. But while many other young colonists who
were put to work before reaching their teens probably had
at least an inner feeling of rebellion against parental rules and
demands, that was not Banneker’s way. He had a streak of
maturity from infancy, an adult’s understanding from age five.
He made family problems his own before he was twelve.
Neighbors now thought of him simply as a fine, hard-
working young man—not as noticeably a prodigy as when he
was small. But he was, in fact, very unusual in the unique way
that he managed the burden of work and suited it to his needs.
Wasting no time or energy in fighting against the inevitability
of work, Banneker nonetheless lived a life of contemplation for
most of his waking hours. Because the nature of farmwork was
mostly solitary, we know from diary entries that he could com-
bine his physical labor with the deep thinking that was his
greatest amusement. He kept at it as steadily as if he had an
assignment, a timetable for how many unknowns would be ex-
plored each day or week. But because quality of thought was
even more important than speed, he was forever reviewing things
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 49 ---
around him with the innate precision of a scientist in his labo-
ratory. The soil he touched was a microcosm of the wider
world; he examined its makeup and texture. The acres around
him were part of the Patapsco River valley below and then of
the whole earth that dropped away beyond his horizon. The
planet itself was, in his mind, a sample that could lead to con-
clusions about the great sea of outer space. It takes someone
with a unique mentality to look down at the soil he stands on
and to picture what it would be like to set foot on the moon.
For an unschooled young person to have done that in a day
when only the most educated persons even knew there was a
solar system, the word genius is clearly applicable.
This dual absorption with abstruse thought and practical
labor may have caused Banneker to be less than normally inter-
ested in the opposite sex at that time. Or it could be that he had
a very low sex drive. In any case, he moved into his twenties
with little apparent interest in the young girls who looked ad-
miringly when he passed them on an errand to the town below.
His dutiful concentration on the growing of tobacco seems to
have allowed no time for dalliance.
At twenty-two years old, he was a very confident young
man whose features and physique seemed to come mainly from
his father and grandfather. He had grown tall for that day—
probably 5 /H110329/H11033when the male average was 5 /H110327/H11033—straight as a
spear, and good looking, with regular features. His complexion
was rather dark. His own description—“I am of the deepest
dye”—may have been a slight exaggeration, for some observers
described him as only moderately dark, but it showed that he
was proud of his African background and not at all anxious to
minimize it. The unusual head of hair—the loose curls that
doubtless stemmed from his mixed heritage—was almost as
striking as it would be years later when people remarked on the
“mass of white ringlets.” Benjamin’s dominant feature, however,
benjamin banneker
34
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 50 ---
was uniquely his own and not easily traceable to any known an-
cestor. It was a look of placid intelligence that seemed to belong
to a person three times his age, more like an all-knowing old
bishop than a bright young farmer. That look—more benign
than yearning—must have been a deterrent to any young girls
whose eyes had noticed his fine figure.
In 1753, the year he turned twenty-two, he was especially
absorbed with the farm because there had been a beautiful sum-
mer and the family’s tobacco crop had flourished well beyond
the norm. It was not only plentiful, but of the very highest
quality—a tribute to the wise legacy of his late grandfather and
his ailing father, and also to Benjamin’s prudent way of putting
their farming wisdom to the maximum use. It was a very close-
knit family and usually a harmonious one. His beautiful mother,
Mary, made major contributions to their income by raising
chickens, selling eggs and the many scents and spices that she
had a special flair for concocting. Because there was only one
general store, and that was in the town far below, the people
who lived up on Oella’s high ground were glad to learn of any
new product she created. It took a whole day’s journey to Joppa
and back to buy more important equipment or supplies, such as
a rake or a new plow. The same was true of the rare times when
finer purchases were needed, such as shoes, brocades, glassware,
or a book for Banneker. T o limit such travel time, this clan—
like most farmers in the area—had its own little workshop and
mended implements, even shod its own two horses.
Because Robert was ailing, it was now grandmother Molly
Welsh, the redoubtable Big Ma-Ma, who had quietly begun to
take the lead again. Her daughter Mary had proved to be a
capable and active woman and would be a great influence on
Benjamin later in her life, but while her mother was alive, she
very willingly let her have control. Without any words being
said on the subject, it was Molly to whom Benjamin looked for
The Lurking T error
35
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 51 ---
decisions or for ultimate approval of whatever he decided on his
own. And she had special plans for how this year’s crop would
be used to further expand their holdings.
A very exciting story about how that strategy played out
gained currency when Shirley Graham, a black journalist and
novelist, wrote a book about Banneker that has been called “a
romanticized biography.” She herself wrote that it was “con-
structed within the framework of little-known true facts,” indi-
cating that it was rounded out with considerable imagination.
Because Graham was closely connected with civil rights acti-
vists through her marriage to W.E.B. Du Bois and was thought
to have special insights about black history, this story gathered
some adherents in Banneker’s old neighborhood, and the details
were further embellished. Significantly, the curator of the Ban-
neker Memorial and some members of its governing board
have been divided about using the Graham book for official
purposes. What follows reflects accounts from all the known
sources, eliminating what seems most improbable in order to
come to what might have actually happened. The dialogue,
based on what these sources have given, is obviously no more
than an approximation of what might have transpired. Here and
in another story we will come to further along, the use of
unconfirmed accounts at least conveys the nature of events that
Banneker faced, despite differences in detail. Fortunately, the
great experiences he had later in life are supported by excellent
documentation.
Here, the story is that Big Ma-Ma was looking forward to
the tobacco proceeds to buy additional land. T o maximize the
gain, Banneker had proposed the adventurous idea of taking the
crop to Baltimore for sale. His grandmother had protested that
such a trip would be hazardous and had pointed out the obvi-
ous alternatives. A simple trip down the hillside to Elkridge
Landing would have been the first thought. At this time, the
benjamin banneker
36
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 52 ---
town had no more than two hundred inhabitants and some
twenty-five houses, but it did have one small finger pier that
was used almost exclusively for tobacco exports, giving it signif-
icance in the tobacco trade. The next nearest possibility for
selling the tobacco crop was the once-dominant port of Joppa.
But its role as a marketplace was declining, and even its status
as a county seat was endangered, which would have had a
depressing effect on the number of bidders and the prices that
were paid for commodities. By contrast, the aggressive surge of
Baltimore, which would play a major role in Banneker’s future,
held the promise of premium prices. “Baltimore T own,” as it
was called when first incorporated in 1729, a scant two decades
earlier, was thriving under the management of more aggressive
merchants. Their daring had brought an aura of excitement and
gathering prosperity. Just the year before, a brig from Balti-
more had made a trip to Barbados, carrying tobacco, iron, flour,
and other foods. This even prompted one Dr. John Stevenson
to drop his medical practice and start sending shiploads of grain
across the Atlantic. All the while, the city fathers had been very
cleverly deploying the strategy of “non-importation” in concert
with Annapolis and other major eastern cities. It was a form of
resistance to the British policies, including the Stamp T ax, that
infuriated the colonists. The Baltimoreans manipulated their
role in ways that often seemed more self-serving than patriotic,
but their tactics expanded trade and helped to aggrandize the
city, making Benjamin’s proposal hard to resist.
The low-key family debate went on for several days. Unusual
as he was, Banneker could be as headstrong as any young man
his age, and in the end, he had won Molly over to the idea of
letting him make the daunting trip. Because the roads were too
crude to permit use of a wagon, the precious tobacco, bundled
in the form of “hogsheads,” 32 inches in diameter, was pulled
by packhorses, two of his own, two borrowed from neighbors.
The Lurking T error
37
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 53 ---
On the morning of departure, the excitement was more like
a sendoff to Europe rather than a trip of some twenty miles.
Grandmother, father, and mother hovered apprehensively
around the ever-confident Banneker. Three adoring sisters
hopped around him and the horses, half wishing that girls could
do such things, but shuddering at the risks their brother was so
quietly about to undertake. And all were grateful that a senior
person was joining him. This was an older family friend who
was not really related to them, but who had always been called
Uncle Ned. He was not quite as steadying an influence as they
might have wanted, for he was given to sudden tempers and
rashness. But they counted on Benjamin’s firm hand to control
this mercurial friend, while they somehow benefited from Uncle
Ned’s ten- or twelve-year age advantage.
Stories passed down about this three-day trip, however, tell
of a disastrous beginning—owing precisely to Uncle Ned’s
carelessness. Just an hour after they set out, the pair was way-
laid by a gang of “paterollers” out to corral slaves for resale at
prices that had risen more than 100 percent since that day
when Molly had routed a similar gang of thugs by pretending
that the black children with her were her slaves. When five of
these ruffians surrounded the two men and demanded to see
their papers, Banneker quickly pulled out the documents prov-
ing that he was a free person. But he felt a terrible cold chill
descend on him when he heard Uncle Ned mumbling excuses.
The old friend had come away on this risky trip without re-
membering to take the identification that no black could afford
to be without.
Banneker spoke up, assuring the men that he had known
Uncle Ned all his life, that he positively knew him to be a free
man, that they could all turn and go back together to the home
where Ned would show his papers. The self-styled enforcers
would not be put off. Ned was a strapping male who would
benjamin banneker
38
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 54 ---
fetch a great price with no questions asked. Moving rapidly,
because they realized that this smooth-talking younger black
might come forward with arguments that would hamper their
plan, they quickly threw a lassolike rope around their prisoner
and hurried the screaming Ned away.
Horrified, Benjamin made a brief attempt to follow, but
with the heavily laden packhorses lashed to his own mount, it
was hopeless. He felt as if he were watching a murder commit-
ted. He knew his family would never see Uncle Ned again, be-
cause he would never submit to captivity. He would struggle
and be beaten. He would fight back and be subdued by force.
In the end, he would try to escape—in some erratic, poorly
planned way—and die in the attempt.
All the confidence that Banneker possessed drained out
of him. Lobbying for the trip to Baltimore had been a great
The Lurking T error
39
The kidnapping of a free Negro. An unknown artist shows a free Negro of the
era being subjected to the kidnapping that even a landowner like Banneker
had to fear. (Library of Congress collection)
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 55 ---
mistake. Why had he not checked carefully on Ned’s prepara-
tions as well as his own? For the first time in his life, he had to
admit to himself that he had blundered. Not even the hubris of
youth could rid him of a raging wish to be dead. He slid off his
horse, fell to the ground, and lay there panting and sobbing.
benjamin banneker
40
Warning to Boston blacks. Conditions continued to worsen, so
even midway into the nineteenth century and in a major city
far to the north, blacks had to fear slave-catchers. (Library of
Congress collection)
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 56 ---
After a few minutes, he had an impulse to remount and turn
rapidly for home, but he tried to think rationally about the
right thing to do before acting. T o go back and report the loss
of Uncle Ned would do no good. A white person might go to
the authorities, report the theft of a slave, and reasonably hope
for a possible restoration, but for a black to make the report—
in effect, to charge white persons with abduction—was un-
thinkable. Even several decades later, when Benjamin Franklin
founded a Society for the Rescue of Persons Held Illegally in
Bondage, the number of such rescues was negligible. But in
1753, there was not even the pretense of a mechanism for re-
porting these brutal events. Going home would have no effect
except to calm Benjamin himself.
On the other hand, coming home a few days from now with
the money Big Ma-Ma hoped for would at least be a mission
accomplished. His every instinct argued against it. He wanted
to go home more than anything in life. Mounting his horse and
moving on toward Baltimore seemed unbearable. But his mind
said it was the right choice. So he remounted and set out in the
original direction.
}
Because of the interruption, it was late in the day before he
arrived in Baltimore—too late to do any business. The rule, he
knew, was for tobacco to undergo a quality inspection and be
graded by British customs officials. These men had great power,
for their decision actually determined the price as the tobacco
was moved to a pier and sold for export to the mother country.
Banneker pushed on to the harbor area, located the customs
office, and tied up his horses near it in order to make the earli-
est possible start the next morning. But he spent a most uncom-
fortable night, trying to sleep a little on a pad of blankets that
The Lurking T error
41
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 57 ---
cushioned him against the hard paving stones, yet waking every
few minutes for fear that his precious load of tobacco might be
stolen in this world that had turned so harsh and unrelenting.
When the customshouse opened in the morning, Banneker
soon learned that broad daylight could be more dangerous than
darkness. A single British customs officer was on duty—a cor-
rupt official who had to assess the goods before a buying agent
made payment. The customs man was appalled to see so much
fine tobacco being offered by a black, for it would surely infu-
riate the great planters who doubtless made payoffs to him for
holding down the quantity of goods that would compete with
their own. He must not let this black youth ruin his own repu-
tation with the wealthy shippers. Sneering at Banneker, mock-
ing his attempt to seem confident, he looked at the fine, lush
tobacco leaves, beautifully cured, and asked, “Where did you
get this? Probably stole it all, eh?”
The soft reply was “I raised it all, sir.”
“Raised it where? Who do you belong to, anyway?”
“I belong to my own family. I’m a free person.” T rembling,
he showed his papers, holding them tightly with one hand.
The man looked briefly, paused hesitantly, but still insisted
on protecting his own interests by getting rid of the threat. He
reached across to the loads, fingered the leaves carelessly, mak-
ing a disapproving face. “Well, I’d say less than a third of this is
good tobacco. Y ou’ll get ten pounds for it, nothing more. The
rest is not good enough to ship. It’s confiscated.”
Unaccustomed anger welled up in Benjamin, almost over-
whelming the knowledge that he must not appear to quarrel
with a white official. “Sir, I’m sure it’s worth much more than
that, even in Elkridge. I’d rather take it back there.” He began
to back his horses away.
“Not so fast there,” the officer commanded. “Y ou can’t come
in here trying to cheat the Crown, then pull out when you’re
benjamin banneker
42
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 58 ---
caught at it.” The man put a firm restraining hand on one of
the packhorses.
“I have not tried to cheat, sir. I don’t want to sell this here.”
“Well, you won’t sell it anywhere. It’s confiscated.”
Benjamin struggled to hold his tongue, but he glared with a
steady look that startled the corrupt official. Luckily, a few other
traders had begun to line up with their loads, and the officer
saw that the conversation might be overheard. He tried to make
a slight compromise that would still not enrage his wealthier
patrons. “Look, you,” he growled in a low voice. “I can confis-
cate this whole thing, because too much of it is bad goods. But
I’ll condemn only part of it and the agent will let you have
fourteen pounds for the rest. T ake that or take nothing!”
Even if this is more an account of Banneker’s fears than an
incident he actually suffered, it is highly significant, for he
recorded many dreams that show how much he was haunted by
the great danger surrounding all blacks. However factual the
abduction of Uncle Ned may have been, such things were in
every black person’s mind every time he or she went out, fear-
fully clutching proof of identity. It was a subhuman condition,
even for a free black. Here was a property owner whose life was
that of a nonperson, almost unrecorded until he began a friend-
ship with a white family years later. Even then, he had no mail-
ing address of his own. When he went on to deal with white
leaders, to question scholarly journals, and to be mentioned as
a role model in the British Parliament, a letter to him would
have had to be addressed through a white person. The account
of his treatment at the hands of a customs official, therefore, is
totally true to life and at least reflects what came to be the tone
of his increasingly turbulent dreams.
Whatever Banneker actually suffered at the hands of the
customs inspector in Baltimore, it was almost certainly a real
robbery that was made all the more galling because he had to
The Lurking T error
43
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 59 ---
accept it wordlessly. T o argue would have meant risking a total
loss. In the end, he left with only that small fraction of what Big
Ma-Ma had hoped to see him bring home. The money would
allow them to get by until the next season, but there would be
nothing to buy those extra acres they had dreamed about. All
the youthful self-assurance that had made him so confident of
turning a fine deal in this city had drained out of him, and his
head slumped onto his chest as he watched workmen hastily
setting flames to most of the beautiful tobacco he had labored
so hard to produce. He moved slowly away with the empty
packhorses, his face flooded with tears.
benjamin banneker
44
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 60 ---
45
4
}
A Door Opens Wider
I
t is said that a stout Baltimore merchant named William
Qualls had been standing near enough to witness young
Banneker’s misfortune in the Baltimore customshouse.
Almost like a deus ex machina, Qualls came and spoke a few kind
words to the shattered young man. As soon as he heard them,
Benjamin recognized that this man was a Quaker, for he ad-
dressed him as “thee,” and that was the language of Peter Hein-
rich, the Quaker schoolmaster who had first recognized the
boy’s genius and fed his mind with great books. William Qualls
now talked soothingly to Benjamin, gradually quieting the hor-
ror within him. They spoke together about Peter Heinrich, and
Benjamin felt as though the evil world of these last twenty-four
hours was being pushed aside by the purifying recollection of
how fair-minded some persons could be. Within a few minutes,
Qualls had been struck, as people had been before, by Banne-
ker’s fine language and obvious high intelligence. He asked if
Benjamin had time to come to his home and meet a friend who
was staying with him. There could be only one answer to that.
Benjamin’s horses were stabled by Qualls’s groom just as at-
tentively as if they belonged to a noble visitor. This was a world
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 7:52:38 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 61 ---
Banneker knew and loved, not because the house was tasteful
and he was well treated, but because here respect was a currency
that had only one rate of exchange—its value never fluctuated.
The introduction that took place in Qualls’s drawing room
was to be one of the high points of Banneker’s life. Qualls pre-
sented him to a small, dark-haired man who radiated alert intel-
ligence. There was a mutual excitement in his meeting with
Joseph Levi, a trader and investor who was extending his Euro-
pean interests to dealing with the New World. With the same
talent Peter Heinrich had for understanding minds greater than
his own, William Qualls had been prescient in bringing these
two men together. For Levi, a man of the world who was at
home in every capital of Europe, and Banneker, who had never
been more than a few miles from his tobacco farm, shared a
love for discovering and discussing abstract ideas. They were
not satisfied with merely polishing what was already known.
They loved things that were only half imagined or, better yet,
ideas that seemed to be emerging for the first time.
The subjects they talked about that afternoon were not at
all new to Joseph Levi. He had been passionate about the sci-
ences for years, but it was the discovery of a young man like
Banneker that engrossed him. He saw in Benjamin a mind that
was leaping just as his own had once done to tame and embrace
the unknown. No years or sophistication or command of many
languages could blur the similarity between them in this one
greatest trait. And as Levi’s astonishment at Benjamin’s intelli-
gence increased, he introduced more and more subjects.
And so they talked of astronomy, gravitation, celestial navi-
gation. One of William Qualls’s servants brought them bev-
erages, which they sipped unthinkingly, with no pause in the
conversation. Benjamin was almost panting for breath as he
sprinted to catch as many facts as possible. He was using Levi’s
words as a climber uses footholds and handholds, pulling him-
benjamin banneker
46
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:52 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 62 ---
self up to new conclusions, new uses for each principle, new
ways to invert an equation. When Levi brought up calculus, he
was amazed to realize that Benjamin had learned and nearly
mastered it—on his own—almost as if he had independently
reinvented Isaac Newton’s mathematical discovery.
At one point, Levi took a watch from his pocket to check
the hour, for he knew that others would soon be waiting for
him. Benjamin stared at the bright face of the watch and heard
the tick it was producing. He had heard of clocks but never
seen one. Now he was seeing his first watch, and he knew at
once that this was something he had waited for all his life.
The very word “time” had been magical to Benjamin from
early childhood, and this fascination had intensified over the
years. A sundial he had made stood in the yard outside his
cabin. His musings on time seem to have prefigured some of
the intuitions of Planck, Einstein, and Bohr by more than a
century and a half. Was time there if no one was observing it?
he had wondered. Did it change when observed? Did it change
if someone was running fast? Was it related to light? Levi had
been startled when he spoke of the ratios between the watch’s
wheels and found that Benjamin knew about diameters, degrees,
minutes, seconds, meridians. But when the young man’s ques-
tions ranged to the texture of time, whether it had substance
and weight, Levi knew that here was an investigative power he
had scarcely seen before.
On that day in 1753, Benjamin’s excitement made him feel
faint when Joseph Levi, reluctantly moving to leave, said he
wanted Benjamin to keep the watch, wind it every day to make
it run, and think about how it related to the positions of the
whole solar system and the stars beyond it. Benjamin protested
that he could not keep anything so valuable. “Hold it while I
am away,” Levi said. “Then we can decide what to do with it
when I return.”
A Door Opens Wider
47
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:52 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 63 ---
Levi never came back. He was killed in a shipwreck on his
next voyage. When Benjamin heard about it months later, it was
the greatest sadness he had ever experienced. He felt sure—
wrongly—that he could never know a greater unhappiness.
Indeed, although he would have another great and long friend-
ship, there would never again be an encounter like the two
hours he and Levi had spent together.
He went home with two terrible pieces of news to tell his
family. Y et his mind was absorbed with all the new worlds that
he was determined to explore. The happiness of such adventure
somehow made loss and disappointment shrink, just as perspec-
tive makes parts of a picture grow smaller. His analytical mind
even studied this reaction, studied itself, considering the guilt it
should be feeling for experiencing happiness while poor Uncle
Ned was a captive. But he was orderly about putting each part
of the equation in its place, refusing to beat himself over what
could not be helped.
}
Long after the report to his family had been made and wept
over, what dominated Benjamin’s thoughts was the watch he
was guarding, wrapped in a clean towel and hidden under a
floorboard in his cabin. He longed to take it apart so he could
see exactly why it ticked and moved with such precision. Joseph
Levi had only told him to keep it and wind it, not to risk
destroying it. What if opening the case made it fly into bits that
could never be put back? He was supremely confident of his
ability to analyze anything he could see, but he wondered if
there was not a chance that this little mechanism contained
pieces too small for unaided eyesight to see properly. Or that
the almost lifelike nature of this invention would never recover
from being opened and exposed.
benjamin banneker
48
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:52 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 64 ---
Days passed—he never said how many—with the watch
being taken out, wound, and considered from every angle. He
must have known from the start that he would finally open the
precious object, but there was a point to this long delay. With
each new reexamination, he knew a little more of what to
expect, or thought he did. So when, late one night, he finally
put a large white cloth over his worktable and began to pry
open the back cover, he was not as nervous as he had expected
to be. T wenty minutes later, he was becoming much more dis-
tressed. Nothing was flying apart, but the wonderful consis-
tency of the escapement was craftmanship of such fineness that
his hope of learning to reproduce such a thing had disappeared.
He saw at once that someone had used tiny tools made just for
this purpose and undoubtedly had magnification to facilitate
every move. Humbly and with a sense of defeat, he thought
how foolish he had been—a poor farmer whose best possessions
were primitive had somehow thought he could reproduce a
man-made jewel that must surely be worth more than his entire
farm earnings amounted to in five years. He was only glad-
dened and grateful for the fact that no one, especially Joseph
Levi, knew what foolish thoughts he had harbored.
The fit of depression didn’t last long. It wasn’t a jewel-like
watch he had particularly wanted to make, he reminded him-
self. Rather, it was the concept he longed to understand. Just
how did this collection of little wheels reproduce the timekeep-
ing properties of a sundial? That was it! Time was the elusive
element without which there would be no universe. It was the
moment-to-moment movement called time that seemed to
keep all of creation’s atoms in alignment. Without time’s con-
stant sequencing, time’s meticulous way of arranging things in
order, everything that is or appears to be would be a collection
of frozen atoms, of random inert objects and corpses. Now, he
reasoned, if one understood why this watch’s action could be so
A Door Opens Wider
49
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:52 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 65 ---
precisely in lockstep with time, might one not begin to know
the nature of time itself?
T rue, the ability to make a watch would have brought him
closer to such understanding, he thought. But did it really have
to be a small watch, with parts so tiny that the whole process
was made far more difficult? Suppose he could capture the
essence of this timekeeping principle in a larger and more man-
ageable form . . .
And so the idea for what would become Banneker’s wooden
clock was born. After drawing a careful design of how the
watch’s parts fitted together, then taking it completely apart and
studying the mathematical ratios of the gearwheels to each
other, he had his strategy for making a large clock whose sec-
onds, minutes, and hours exactly paralleled those of the watch.
It would all be made from wood, the one material to which he
had easy access and that he could fabricate without the prob-
lems caused by miniaturization. Banneker never knew that
another wooden clock had been made in 1713. John Harrison,
the great British watchmaker who eventually revolutionized
seamanship by devising a timepiece accurate enough to help
sailors in finding their longitude, made one of his first clocks
chiefly of wood. In the splendid book Longitude, published in
1995, Dava Sobel wrote about her subject’s early pendulum
clock: “Aside from the fact that the great John Harrison built it,
the clock claims uniqueness for another singular feature: It is
constructed almost entirely of wood.” She did not know that
Banneker ended that “uniqueness” only four decades later. Har-
rison’s selection of material was made in order to avoid rust and
the need for lubrication. Banneker’s choice was dictated by
sheer necessity; wood was all he had.
The work went on for several months. During that time, no
one was allowed in his cabin—any cleaning was done by Banne-
ker himself. He gave only minimal attention to the farm, and his
benjamin banneker
50
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 66 ---
father was not too understanding of the project. But when it was
finished and moving and regularly striking each hour, all the
neighbors came to marvel. The old feeling that he was a super-
human prodigy—which had flourished when he was a small boy,
but then ebbed as he appeared to be no more than an estima-
ble young man—took hold in everyone’s mind again. Banneker
would always remember with pleasure that his father had lived
to see this moment. Practical-minded as Robert Bannaky was, it
was not lost on him that half the people of the Patapsco area
seemed to know what his son had made, and scores of those
wanted to come into his cabin and see with their own eyes the
great wooden clock that ran and ran and ran, the clock that was
always exactly right in telling how much of the day had gone by,
when the sun would dip, and when all the light would be gone.
Everyone marveled except Banneker. He was pleased to
have proved to himself that his understanding of the gear ratios
was correct. He was glad to have reassembled Joseph Levi’s
watch to perfection, and he went on dreaming, even after hope
had really died, that his friend would somehow show up to
reclaim it. It was good to feel, too, that he could take up watch-
making as a trade with very little more study. That, however,
was not what he wanted. Understanding the clock was supposed
to bring him a greater grasp of time itself, but it had not. Cre-
ating a clock had taught him a little more about the math
involved and a lot more about woodworking. But now what?
The concept of time would continue to be a subject for future
study and meditation. Joseph Levi would have been quick to
believe if some intuition had told him that later in life, this
Banneker would be writing profound thoughts about time,
writing these deep ideas with a simple clarity that made great
concepts easily understandable to thousands of people.
The fact that his wooden clock became part of Banneker’s
legend, always prominently mentioned in any description of the
A Door Opens Wider
51
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 67 ---
man, is actually an indication of the tendency to underrate him
by focusing on his lesser skills, as if his color made them more
surprising. Discovering the principle of the watch and then
translating that to a large wooden mechanism was brilliant be-
cause he had done it alone, but it was not new. Making the
clock itself represented analytical ability, persistence, and crafts-
manship—but not genius. It demeans the memory of a true
intellectual to think a piece of clockwork was his pinnacle.
What counts most is Banneker’s investigation of time itself in a
day when few colonists even kept track of time on an hourly
basis. Important hours of the day were usually marked by
church bells or occasionally by the blast of a town cannon. Y et
here was a farmer who, even when he studied the raising of
tobacco, related every step of the process to time. In Philadel-
phia, David Rittenhouse had made numerous elegant time-
pieces for wealthy families, and several other Americans had
made clocks, but none of them is known to have thought about
the nature of time. That was where Banneker stood alone.
}
The account of Qualls and Levi is another part of Banneker’s
early life that is only half seen through the mists of time, but in
this case there is much stronger confirmation that an event of
this magnitude occurred.
For one thing, the intervention of a Quaker like William
Qualls has a certain credibility when seen against the tapestry
of Banneker’s life. If it is true, as Samuel Hopkins has pointed
out, that Benjamin Banneker’s career was part of the early colo-
nial trend leading toward the American Revolution of 1776 and
all our subsequent ideas of human rights, there should be
greater recognition of the Quaker contribution to the whole
saga. Banneker knew that one of the most tireless and effective
abolitionists was a Quaker preacher named Anthony Benezet,
benjamin banneker
52
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 68 ---
who wrote books opposing slavery, traveled throughout the
colonies speaking out for his cause, and never abated in the face
of harsh opposition and physical threats. His success in operat-
ing a night school for blacks led him to make a simple state-
ment that was considered startling in that day: “With truth and
sincerity, I declare that I have found among them as great a
diversity of talents as among an equal number of whites.” It has
already been noted that the first Quakers came to Maryland
because they felt that this colony’s rules and rulers were most
consonant with their own idea of justice for all. Then their
presence and influence in the state kept working to turn high
principles into practical reality. And although there may have
been other occasions, we know of at least three times when a
Quaker appears to have behaved toward Benjamin Banneker in
a way that made a major difference in his life.
Significantly, the three-and-a-half-century history of the
Quaker movement has been replete with examples of followers
who acquired wealth while minimizing the importance of
money. George Fox, the sect’s founder, told his people in 1652
to “beware the deceitfulness of riches.” They followed his les-
sons, yet somehow were spectacular successes in business. In
England, they founded such great institutions as Barclays and
Lloyd’s, and they were behind the rise of iron production that
accompanied the Industrial Revolution. Despite being a small
sect and suffering persecution after the restoration of King
Charles II, they ranked high among the eighteenth-century
families with more than 100,000 pounds in wealth. Not only
because they had helped him, but also because their ways made
so much sense to him, Banneker was naturally attracted to the
Quakers. He was drawn to their example of how it was possible
to prosper while holding fast to their discipline, their principles
of nonviolence and absolute honesty. He was attracted to the
fact that Friends lived frugally, gave each other loans and mutual
A Door Opens Wider
53
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 69 ---
54
Quaker opposition to slavery. Title page of a 1760 book by renowned
Quaker writer and preacher Anthony Benezet, titled Observations on
the Inslaving, Importing and Purchasing of Negroes. (Rare Book Division,
Library of Congress)
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 70 ---
help as a matter of course. However, there was a streak of inde-
pendence in Banneker that made him slow to join this sect. But
the likelihood—not firmly established—that he eventually chose
the Quaker faith lends a touch of confirmation to the idea that
a Baltimore gentleman like Qualls may well have added his name
to that of Peter Heinrich among Benjamin’s happiest memories.
Whether there was really a Joseph Levi or not is another
question that calls for deduction rather than assertion. Though
there is no recorded evidence of the name, it is certain that a
new outside influence made a major difference in Banneker’s
life at that stage. T wo things are fact beyond doubt: the exis-
tence of a watch on which he based his celebrated wooden
clock and the inspiration to push ahead with an even greater
passion for astronomy and thoughts about the cosmos. T wo
decades later, another great friendship would provide finer tel-
escopes and other instruments, but those only facilitated the
studies and thoughts that began to consume Banneker in his
twenty-second year—at about the time of that Baltimore trip.
That he made a wooden clock in 1753 has never been in
any doubt. It was seen and remarked on by numerous reliable
persons. More than forty years after Banneker made it, a visitor
to his cabin spoke of seeing it—with all its systems operating
perfectly. This was Susanna Mason, of Harford County, who
wrote of being in his home when the clock was forty-three
years old and still running well. Although that is the only
account at such a late date, there is absolute verification from
many sources that the clock was running well in 1773, twenty
years after it was made. There had to be an original watch from
which Banneker learned the inner workings of his clock. And a
watch, in that day, would have been far too costly an item for
this young man to purchase. That means it was surely given or
loaned to him by someone sufficiently impressed to hand him a
thing of great value. (A loan that he returned is likelier, for it is
A Door Opens Wider
55
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 71 ---
known that Banneker purchased a watch for himself toward the
end of his life. He would not have gone to such an expense if,
as the story goes, Levi’s watch remained as a permanent posses-
sion.) But whether or not the donor’s or lender’s name and
description are exact, there was almost certainly a meeting and
discussion of this kind, and it was a milestone in the life of Ben-
jamin Banneker.
Much more than the timepiece, it was the excitement over
astronomy that made such a difference. It would seem that the
fateful talk stirred Banneker to find money for a small tele-
scope, for he began to look more seriously at the stars night
after night. The magnification could not have been at all satis-
factory, probably not very much better than the naked eye. But
the focusing effect helped to identify different objects, and the
attempt to see became a habit. When the temperature permit-
ted, he would lie on his back outdoors and often stay there until
the first light of dawn began to wash away the starlight (pos-
sibly contributing to the premature rheumatism that would
plague him later). At other times, he would look from a cabin
window. Either way, he was recalling Levi’s or somebody else’s
account of the constellations, meticulously collecting and
assembling data that he would later refine to become a superb
astronomer. And above all, when he looked at a star, he was
conscious of literally seeing the past, because the light that
reached his eyes was a picture of what had been there many
years before. He had begun to think about time and the cosmos
in a way that would not become part of humanity’s general con-
sciousness until the twentieth century.
benjamin banneker
56
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 72 ---
57
5
}
The Great Unknown
S
omething mysterious and terrible happened to Banneker
in 1759.
Several years of contentment had followed the making
of the clock and the heightened interest in science. Benjamin
had applied himself equally to thinking about time, pondering
the cosmos, and the more practical issue of raising tobacco.
Applying his conceptual power, he analyzed the whole process
of farming and broke it into thirty-six distinct steps. There is
no record of what purpose this was supposed to serve or
whether it made a difference in the next season’s crop. Nor is it
known whether his father found it a source of pride or a some-
what excessive application of his brilliant son’s scientific ways.
In any case, Banneker’s analytical farming methods produced
crops that were the envy of the neighborhood. 
But when Banneker was twenty-eight years old, he some-
how lost the intellectual energy that had been a vital part of
him, and this void lasted for well over a dozen years. Some his-
torians believe there was a romantic episode with a tragic end-
ing that virtually destroyed him. Whatever the cause, it is cer-
tain that something life-altering happened to Banneker in 1759,
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 73 ---
something of a kind that had never before disturbed the even
tenor of his existence. Outwardly, life on the family’s farm was
unchanged. They planted tobacco, orchard crops, and vegeta-
bles with good success. They had beehives and a variety of live-
stock. By supplying their own meats and vegetables, they were
largely self-sufficient. Banneker himself had become the owner
and manager of the entire property the year before. His father,
Robert, had died prematurely but not unexpectedly in 1758,
another victim of the abuses he had suffered in his early slave
days and the difficulty many Africans had in adapting to Mary-
land’s winters. Although the death of a parent can sometimes be
a reminder of one’s own mortality, the loss of his father was not
a jolt, as it had been expected for several years. Nor was the
burden of work enough greater to have brought on the myste-
rious collapse of his mental vitality.
He went on working to keep the farm operating, for noth-
ing would make him abandon the other family members who
depended on him, but he became a hollow shell. All his interest
in science, in the world around him, in the cosmic subjects that
had always dominated his thoughts, evaporated. Even the disci-
plined habit of keeping his journal was abandoned for more
than twelve years.
The only evidence of anything other than farmwork are a
few stories about purported dreams he had. He wrote these as
if he were recording his own dream experiences, but they are
long and detailed accounts that read more like fictitious moral-
ity tales. They may have been written in the hope of being pub-
lished, but this was long before he had any idea of how to go
about writing for profit or of taking up any form of livelihood
other than farming, and nothing came of them. There may
have been more of these than the three known ones, but if so,
they probably perished along with so many of his belongings in
the fire after his death.
benjamin banneker
58
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 74 ---
One such dream story that did survive, a very long one, was
written in October 1762, a typical product of this period of
apparent distraction. Although there is no evidence that Dante’s
Inferno was among the books loaned to him by Peter Heinrich,
the idea of a visit to the netherworld by a living person makes
that seem a possible source. This early story differs in mood
from the distresses of the real dreams in his last years. It is also
interesting as evidence of the considerable growth of Banne-
ker’s writing skill between this 1762 date and his 1790s efforts.
By the latter date, regardless of color, education, or working
background, he would show himself to be one of America’s fine
writers, with a complete mastery of every detail and a flawless
style. But here, in an excerpt from the dream story he wrote at
age thirty-one, although he shows high imagination, a large
vocabulary, and great descriptive ability, there are still occa-
sional grammatical errors and awkward phrases:
I thought I was dead and Beheld my Body lay like a corps,
there seemed to be a person in the appearance of a Man his
Raiment somewhat of a sheep skin or bright fawn colour,
who said follow me. He ascended a Hill on the T op of which
was a Large Building. The outside appeared strongly built, of
large rough stone. I followed my guide into the House, but
did not at first see the beauty of it to the full. It seemed white
and bright, and a Large Company sitting, such a number as I
never beheld. The farther we went in, the Brighter it ap-
peared, and more like the reflection of the Sun . . . There
appeared a sweetness & composure in every countenance, far
beyond what I ever seen in any person while in the Body . . .
I looked to see if I could Distinguish Men from Women
but could not . . . I looked to see from whence the Light
came, but could not discern either window or opening. I then
asked my guide what is this place. He answered Heaven.
Then I looked to see what they sat on, but could not discern
The Great Unknown
59
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 75 ---
either seats or form. The more I looked, the more I admired
and wanted to sit with ’em, but could not tell how. My
guide turned about to go out and look’d at me and said
follow, but I was so much delighted that I was unwilling
to follow . . .
Then the guide turned on the left hand . . . until we
were at a lofty grand arch of great width where we entered a
Large Room . . . which appeared grandly wainscoted and
beautifully painted with different colours. The first sight of
this beautiful room abated my sorrow, which was very great,
while we came down the descent, from leaving the other. I
had but just time to take a view of this fine place before a
number of persons richly dressed passed us who smelled so
strong of Brimstone, that I seemed allmost suffocated. All of
them were talking to themselves, and before they came to us
they looked well, but when they came near, there appeared
a blackness on their lips and seemed to mutter to themselves
. . . I was seized with horror and asked my guide what is this
place and what are these. He answered this place is Hell and
them are Miserable forever . . . as I looked round there
appeared in my view a Woman Friend, plainly dressed in a
green apron, whom I remembered well when I was young. I
often took notice of her for the Solidity of her Deportment,
particularly in Meeting. I eagerly made up to her and said
what art thou among the Miserable, tell me, tell me what
brought thee hither. She wept and said, no wrong that I have
done between Man & Man, but unfaithfulness and disobedi-
ence to my God brought me hither . . . We met many like
the other, in appearance and smell, that I seemed allmost suf-
focated with Brimstone, I then in great bitterness of spirit
said to my guide, tell me am I to remain here forever. I
thought a little time past if I had died I had secured an Inher-
itance among the first we saw. My guide stood and looking
steadfastly at me said thou art not to remain here, but to
return to the World again. If thou art faithful to thy God,
benjamin banneker
60
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 76 ---
thou mayest have an inheritance among the first, but I have
something else to show thee. He went a little farther, when
another arch appeared . . . wherein abundance of people
were assembled, to worship and saying Amen, Lord have
mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, these appeared
more plane in their dress and looked whiter. I said to my
guide these are not Miserable too, and he said these are Mis-
erable, these are they who thought to be saved by a profes-
sion of Religion, but have not the white robes of Righteous-
ness . . . I thought I knew many of these who allso looked at
me, as if they knew me . . . I again entreated my guide to let
me go, he walked gently out of this place and came again into
the entrance of this House which is wide with a Large Gate,
here stood a number in Black or dark Clothes . . . I saw an
Intimate Friend whom I much loved (this friend died in
About a Month after) coming towards the Gate and two per-
sons conducting him he looked very Sorrowful on me,
and I on him. I asked him art thou going amongst the Miser-
able, what is thy offence, what has thou done, T ell me. He
answered beware of Covetousness, and the love of Money,
that brought me hither, we both wept much and were greatly
troubled . . . my guide had me to a place, where there was
just room to go Out, he stood and look’d at me, and earnestly
said thou are now going into the World again. Remember
what thou hast seen, it is not enough to be honest to Man,
thou must be honest and faithful to thy God . . . then I
awoke, but the horror and distress I felt on my mind I am not
capable of Expressing. I seem as if I fetched my breath in a
room where Sulfur & Brimstone were burning. . . Thought
I could not live many Hours if the Almighty in the Extend-
ings of his Boundless Goodness had not Reguard to me a
poor unworthy Creature and caused that Suffocating smell to
pass from me . . . and enabled me to vent my sorrow in
many T ears, after which my toss’d mind was favoured with a
Calm.
The Great Unknown
61
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 77 ---
Assuming that this is an invented story, not a true dream,
some of the things he writes of having seen can be considered
indicators of principles that he believed humans should live by.
The fact that in Heaven he “could not distinguish men from
women,” for example, appears to show how wrongly we exag-
gerate the distinction between the sexes. Also, the composure
and the lack of seats seem to describe a world where neither
tension nor gravity exist, making for perfect mental and physi-
cal comfort without having to seek repose. The second room,
seeming as beautiful as the first, may well demonstrate that
appearance is not everything and that one fine line separates
Heaven from Hell, largely created by the dead themselves if
they know they have disobeyed their God. And the third room,
full of people who are mouthing religious words and phrases,
shows that they failed to realize what God really wanted from
them, and that their former confidence about being saved by
displays of religiosity does them no good in eternity. This last
thought might even be related to Banneker’s long reluctance to
join any of the established faiths that held some appeal for him,
perhaps questioning the sincerity of the fellow parishioners he
would be associated with.
Were it not for these dream stories, there would be no sign
whatever that Banneker did any significant thinking or writing
between 1759 and the early 1770s. It was as if the great mind
that had always been captivated by the beautiful logic of all cre-
ation now rebelled against a world that had become ugly or
irrational. Even though the dream is recounted with vivid
imagery, the religious points it makes are somber, octaves lower
in tone than the soaring views of creation that either the young
Banneker or the Banneker-to-come could conjure up.
What could have caused this aggressive thinker to shift into
low gear? T rue, there was the ongoing worry about the condi-
benjamin banneker
62
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 78 ---
tion of the land. There were occasional poor crop years, but
nothing of that sort seemed capable of turning such a balanced
mind away from its intellectual interests. So the limited coterie
of “Banneker watchers” turned to another of the unconfirmed
accounts that writer Shirley Graham considered “convincingly
probable.” It was the tale—or perhaps more accurately, the the-
ory—of a chillingly tragic romance.
In 1759, the story goes, Banneker was attracted to a slim,
vivacious young woman whom he encountered in a marketplace
near Elkridge Landing. She is said to have been rather exotic
in appearance, possibly from one of the Caribbean islands.
Although she was a slave, she had an unusually independent
manner and quickly agreed to see Benjamin again. He suggested
times when they might meet, and just a few brief conversations
were enough to stir his quiet spirit to strong emotion. For the
first time in his life, he understood why the subject of love had
such a powerful effect on so many people. He was deeply in
love and certain that this was to be a lasting attachment. Her
name, Anola, kept singing in his mind without letting up. She
returned his affection and was delighted with his plan to buy
her from her master, set her free, and then make her his wife.
Banneker went to see the master and was staggered by the
man’s rudeness and furious response to his proposal. It was
the first of several attempts. Banneker even called on his Balti-
more Quaker friend, William Qualls, to intervene. He increased
the amount of his offering price to a sum that was far beyond
the norm. But the owner’s anger only mounted. He seemed out-
raged that this black had the arrogance to negotiate with him,
and the fact that he was a free black made no impression at all.
There was no such thing, as he saw it: All blacks should be
slaves, and none should be allowed to come and bargain with a
white man. (One version of this story includes the overheated
The Great Unknown
63
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 79 ---
twist that Banneker offered to become the man’s slave himself if
he would promise to let him marry Anola and never part them.
Predictably, this roused the master to new heights of fury. Even
allowing for the irrational behavior that love can produce, it is
unthinkable that Banneker would have wounded his own family
in that way.) 
Each time he left with a negative answer, Banneker became
more worried that Anola would somehow suffer for having
helped to create this deeply resented situation. And he was
right, for the master took revenge by shooting Anola dead, and
as one account tells it, he ended by turning the gun on himself.
However, there is no public record of any such happening. All
the versions of what happened would seem to indicate that the
master was sexually obsessed with the girl and was enraged to
learn that she preferred a black man. In that case, poor Banne-
ker would have been desolate, not only over his own loss, but
over the guilty feeling that he had brought about Anola’s death.
For that reason the story has had a certain appeal because it
would appear to give a possible cause for the despondency that
created the long void in his life.
But the search for a reasonable theory for this fallow period
in his life could turn, with greater probability, to the chance
that Banneker was homosexual. His gentle manner, which was
mentioned repeatedly by Martha T yson and by other acquain-
tances, although a totally unscientific indicator of sexual orien-
tation, might make some more inclined to believe this. If such
were the case, he would have known the truth about himself
long before his twenty-eighth year, but considering the incon-
sistency of human emotions, it is possible that the constraints of
the era would have made him put off facing the fact. He would
not have been able to simply “come out of the closet” and go
on with his life. In his day, such an admission would have made
him a pariah or a convict. It is easy to imagine a person in such
benjamin banneker
64
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 80 ---
a dilemma delaying a resolution, working doggedly at his farm
and his scientific thoughts. Then, at age twenty-eight, an inner
urge might have compelled him to confront the issue, perhaps
attempting a homosexual relationship and being disastrously
rebuffed. Consequently, he might have been left to face a long
lifetime of solitude ahead, suddenly seeing the world as an
ocean of loneliness, making all his other interests seem insipid
and hard to bear.
Considering the nature of his solitary life and the lack of
firm evidence that any woman ever entered it, this alternate
view appears somewhat likelier than the story of a heterosexual
romance. But, although plausible, there is no historical evidence
to support it.
Under the circumstances, a third possibility is more viable.
Instead of the sex-based causes, suppose that here, instead, was
a person with a low sex drive, regardless of orientation. In his
case, the powerful urges are cerebral ones, pure thought and a
hunger to know more and more. The simple, rather primitive
sources at hand to feed this quest may have seemed sufficient
for a while, but then his eager mind found itself facing a blank
wall. After coming to suspect that those specks of light in the
sky hid whole other worlds, he would have had no way of see-
ing more with a tiny telescope and no hope of ever buying the
costly equipment that whites of a certain class used in their
studies. His mind would have been like that of a bright child
who is locked in a closet for years and goes nearly mad with the
need to know more—or who vegetates, knowing the crack of
light under the door will never allow him to see more. Less
dramatically, Banneker may have simply tired of making notes
about thoughts that he had no way to substantiate. His intel-
lect, finding nothing more that it could profitably explore, was
facing a void. He might have been like one of the examples in
Thomas Gray’s “Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard,” a
The Great Unknown
65
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 81 ---
poor peasant whose innate capacity for great good or great evil
is smothered by his meager circumstances. If this part of his
history must be deduced without absolute proof, this seems a
likelier—and in some ways more intriguing—explanation than
any Freudian scenario. And it makes it easier to understand why
the coming of the Ellicott family to the Patapsco region would
bring a new dawn for Benjamin Banneker.
benjamin banneker
66
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 82 ---
67
6
}
Enter the Ellicotts
T
he agricultural and commercial awakening that the Elli-
cotts created in the Patapsco area affected the whole of
Maryland and eventually the nation. In the course of
that, they were able to rouse the dormant intelligence of what
may have been the finest mind in the region. Their arrival and
the technologies they introduced brought an end to Banneker’s
twelve-year mental hibernation and revived his old curiosity
about science and the world around him.
This remarkable Quaker family never owned a single slave,
proving the falseness of the notion that farming could not pros-
per without slave labor. Although most of their success was
achieved in industry, they did also have extensive farm opera-
tions, using free, wage-earning workers, that were profitable.
Having originated in Devonshire, England, the first Andrew
Ellicott had prospered as a wool maker for a time, but was hit
by financial reverses that made him look to the colonies in
North America. He selected Bucks County, Pennsylvania, as
the place for a new start.
Because the family reused the same few given names, con-
fusing most accounts of the Ellicotts who eventually came to
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 83 ---
Maryland, it is important to keep the generations straight. The
son of this first Andrew was named Andrew II. He married a
local Pennsylvania girl, and had five sons—Joseph, Andrew III,
Nathaniel, Thomas, and John. They were in such poor circum-
stances for a time that they had to work as laborers and some
of their children had to live with other relatives. But in 1766,
eldest son Joseph came into an inheritance, a very large prop-
erty in Cork, Ireland. He went back only long enough to sell
the estate and returned to America as a wealthy man. At that
point, the brothers conferred on how to make the most satisfy-
ing use of the fortune. They found both religious and commer-
cial reasons to move to Maryland, which they thought to be
more progressive and fairer in its insistence on human equality.
The next big decision was to make the relatively sparsely
populated Patapsco region their base. They investigated the
region with numerous trips and surveys in 1771 and 1772.
They bought land called “The Hollow,” cheaply priced, yet
within ten miles of the very promising port of Baltimore. All of
them were inventive, adventurous, and willing to put their
shoulders into the physical work of developing their holdings.
They even did their share of manual labor in extensive road-
building that made their lands more accessible. These Ellicotts
were serious people who could stay the course, and it gradually
became known that they had actually purchased much more
land than anyone realized. It was a two-mile stretch of river-
front property upriver, and two of the brothers had hacked
their way through dense brush to survey and prepare for a road
connecting their lands with Elkridge. There is no surer way of
raising the value of isolated land than by opening a transport
link to a busy population center.
A series of coincidences, ranging from slight to amazing,
linked the Ellicotts to Banneker. Devonshire, where they origi-
nated, happened to be in the part of England where Molly Welsh
benjamin banneker
68
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 84 ---
had been born. The eldest brother and leader, Joseph Ellicott,
was an inventive man who made clocks as a hobby, and one of
his clocks came to involve Banneker. In an even more signifi-
cant way, brother Andrew III (also known as Major Ellicott
after his service in the Revolutionary War) was to impact Ban-
neker’s life in 1791, some two decades after coming to the Pat-
apsco, when he became the surveyor of the nation’s capital. 
The happiest coincidence of all was that Andrew Ellicott
and his brothers had a young nephew, George, who was a
prodigious amateur scientist and astronomer. George’s daugh-
ter later said he was such an enthusiast that he would lecture on
astronomy to anyone in the neighborhood who was willing to
listen. This same young George was to become Banneker’s
great friend and collaborator in years of scientific thought and
experimentation.
}
The relationship with the Ellicott family began in the early
1770s, when Banneker heard that interesting new buildings
were being erected and fascinating new machinery installed
down by the river. It was as if an alarm clock had sounded in his
brain. He went to take a first look, was soon intrigued enough
to make notes on what he had seen, and then began taking time
for the long trip down to the riverfront every few days.
It seemed that an old hope of Banneker’s finally had a chance
of being realized. He discovered that a family with enough cap-
ital and energy to make a great change was urging the farmers
of the area to begin what had long been discussed—to shift to
wheat as a principal crop. But now it was more than mere words
or angry meetings. At huge financial risk, the Ellicotts were mak-
ing this an attractive alternative. In a remarkably short time,
they were constructing a mill and having success in convincing
Enter the Ellicotts
69
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 85 ---
the people of the area that they could create a much better
future by raising wheat instead of tobacco and selling it to the
Ellicotts for making flour.
Banneker did not immediately make the switch from tobacco
to wheat on his own farm, for he was always very conservative
about tinkering with the fundamentals of his livelihood, but he
began making visits to the new flour mill the Ellicotts were
about to open. His inventive mind was being roused by the
sight of special devices they had created to make their mill
more efficient. It was, in fact, a harbinger of the Industrial Rev-
olution, a foretaste of automation. He was often seen inspecting
the gears and sprockets of the mill machinery with as much fas-
cination as he had once looked at the first watch he ever saw.
He admired the simple “hopper boy,” a large rake-like machine
that could push ground meal from the loft to a chute without
the presence of a workman. And he quickly saw that the “eleva-
tor”—a belt with scoops—could move grain in a variety of ways
that had previously required many men.
On these visits, Banneker also began to patronize the Elli-
cott Company’s store, where there were refreshments and con-
vivial conversation. On one afternoon there he found that the
young man he was chatting with was George Ellicott. George
was his junior by more than twenty years, but his bright scien-
tific mind was quickly drawn to the brilliant black man. George
invited him to the Ellicott home, began to lend him books and
journals on astronomy, and soon realized that Banneker was his
superior, despite a lack of formal training. He marveled at the
things Benjamin had achieved without even owning an ade-
quate telescope, and it was not long before he gave him such an
instrument. But it is said that for a time what drew them clos-
est together was a handsome tall clock that Joseph Ellicott had
made. It had four separate faces: One told the hours, minutes,
and seconds; one showed the earth, moon, and other planets re-
benjamin banneker
70
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 86 ---
volving around the sun; one had twenty-four musical tunes and
played one each hour; and one showed the clock’s internal
wheelworks. According to neighborhood tales, it had only one
slight defect: while each beautifully ornamented face did its
own job perfectly, the four could never be made to work at the
same time. Joseph had tinkered with it for years and had now
almost lost interest in making it work properly. There are dif-
ferent accounts among descendants about who first suggested
that Banneker take a hand in attacking the problem. Some
think Banneker himself dared to suggest this to the patrician
Joseph. Others believe young George and Benjamin, looking at
Enter the Ellicotts
71
Joseph Ellicott’s clock with
different faces on its four
sides. From the Smithsonian
Institution’s show “T aking
the Measure of Time.”
(The Smithsonian Institution)
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 87 ---
the clock pensively, both burst forth with the happy idea of
working together to find the answer.
In either case, three months of ardent labor followed. Ban-
neker came to the house several times each week and took the
problem home in his head at night. It is not unlikely that the
farmwork was given short shrift on some days. At last, he came
to George Ellicott one day saying that he thought he had the
answer. They rushed to try this new arrangement and there was
a triumphant scene among all the principals when it proved
successful.
Joseph would not have been at all jealous if he was indeed
trumped by this younger team. The Ellicotts didn’t think that
way. This was a family that did not even try to obtain patents
on its inventions—the ones that were revolutionizing the flour-
milling industry—because in one case, they felt that an employee
of theirs really deserved credit for the idea, and in another case,
they thought their device was merely an improvement of some-
one else’s previous invention. There was no U.S. Patent Office
at that time, but they could easily have obtained a valuable
patent from the Maryland government. Instead, their basic feel-
ing was that inventions should be extended freely to anyone
who wanted to put them to good use—that they themselves
would benefit enough from the general increase in prosperity
the devices promoted. Somehow, this open-handed philosophy
made them richer. And with that same mentality, Joseph and
George would have exulted over Banneker’s contribution, and—
as in the parable of the loaves and fishes—there was more than
enough joy to go around.
What is certain is that as their collaboration increased,
George and Benjamin studied books written by the two most
famous astronomers of the day. Those two professors seemed
to disagree with each other on the rules for determining what
solar and lunar positions are needed to create an eclipse of the
benjamin banneker
72
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 88 ---
moon. After taking home the books by James Ferguson and
Charles Leadbetter and making his own calculations, Banneker
came back and told George—in his usual humble style—that
both these great men appeared to have miscalculated. Again,
George was determined that Benjamin should be recognized—
neither because he was black nor in spite of it, but simply
because he was right. It took some convincing by George to
make Banneker write a clarification, which he wanted to pass
around to learned friends. Benjamin thought it might appear
rude or unseemly. But at last he did write a short piece, which
can be found in his own journal and was also discovered and
reprinted in the January 1863 issue of The Atlantic Monthly,
then, as now, a leading intellectual magazine:
Commenting on Ferguson’s An Easy Introduction to Astron-
omy, he wrote: “It appears to me that the wisest men may some-
times be in error; for instance, Dr. Ferguson informs us that
when the sun is within 12 of either node at the time of full, the
moon will be eclipsed; but I find that according to his method
of projecting a lunar eclipse, there will be none by the above
elements, and yet the sun is within 11 46 /H1103211/H11033of the moon’s
ascending node. But the moon being in her apogee prevents the
appearance of this eclipse.”
And referring to the second volume of Leadbetter’s Com-
pleat System of Astronomy, a separate Banneker memorandum
pointed out a series of complicated “Errors that ought to be
corrected . . .” (Later study showed that the two great astrono-
mers were not entirely wrong. They had caused the conflict
because one of them had made his calculation as seen from the
earth, while the other, strangely, had done it as it would be seen
from the sun.) The author of The Atlantic Monthly article, a very
respected writer named Moncure Daniel Conway, added, “Both
Ferguson and Leadbetter would have been amazed had they
been informed that their elaborate works had been reviewed
Enter the Ellicotts
73
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 89 ---
and corrected by a negro in the then unheard-of valley of the
Patapsco.”
Later, George Ellicott and Banneker went on to master the
more advanced Ferguson book, Astronomy Explained Upon Sir
Isaac Newton’s Principles.
}
Banneker’s comeback was complete. His old good spirits had
returned. His family found him ready to play with his little
nieces and join in singing and playing his violin, though not too
well, they chided. (Note that in a later century, Albert Einstein’s
enthusiastic fiddling drew similar mixed reviews from his col-
leagues.) There was not a sign of the mental letdown Benjamin
had suffered. His original personality had reemerged for good.
At the same time, the material conditions of his life were
improving. Banneker had been working to complete his own
separate cabin, and now it was done. Robert J. Hurry, an archae-
ologist who has headed the quest for evidence of Banneker’s
home and lifestyle, tells of finding traces of two log homes on
the site, with Benjamin’s personal cabin (which he is believed to
have erected himself ) having been much better built than the
earlier home that dated back to the family’s first days there. It
seems to have been worked on over a period of several years.
His house rested on a continuous stone foundation, roughly 14
by 16 feet, and there was a relatively large storage cellar. Frag-
ments found show, among other things, that the cabin’s occu-
pant used ceramic ware of the most modern type for its day.
Hurry’s findings also indicate that Banneker had a more
varied diet than first presumed, and that more of it was pur-
chased rather than farm-raised. Until the mid-1770s, neither
Benjamin nor Mary, his mother, bought much meat from any
store. It is clear that Mary was an industrious and saving per-
benjamin banneker
74
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 90 ---
son, and while she lived, the farm produced pork, beef, chicken,
eggs, honey, vegetables, and grain. Later on, as Banneker dedi-
cated himself more to astronomy (and when his mother was no
longer alive to press him), he frequently bought pork from the
Ellicott store, while still doing enough farming to raise some
corn, vegetables, and fruits. The archaeological findings also
showed pipe smoking to have been an intensive activity, but this
tapered down as the years went on. The time around 1750,
when his father was still alive, showed smoking to be at its
height. Perhaps even his grandmother, Big Ma-Ma, was a pipe
smoker. Later on, although tobacco purchases were moderate, a
total of several hundred kaolin pipe fragments were found in
the ground under the old cabin site.
}
Banneker’s spirit was now so high that one of the great ambi-
tions of his life took shape in his mind: to write and publish an
almanac. He had some idea of how astronomers created the
principal pages, which were called an “ephemeris”—an old
word that was much more common then than now. It is a chart
showing where the moon, planets, and other astral bodies will
be in the coming months. Naturally, this was of special value to
sailors as a way of determining their own positions, which was
a life-and-death part of the seagoing life. While reading the lat-
itude was relatively simple, the way to determine longitude was
a deadly puzzle at that time. As international trade and, conse-
quently, long-distance sailing kept increasing, hideous accidents
were proliferating. In 1771, a British flotilla misjudged its posi-
tion and ran aground with a loss of four ships and two thousand
lives. Almost every sailor remembered narrow escapes when his
life had depended on pure guesswork. The crown offered a
huge prize for any invention that would solve the longitude
Enter the Ellicotts
75
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 91 ---
problem, and it was finally won by John Harrison, maker of
that “other” wooden clock many years earlier. Improved time-
pieces and the reflecting quadrant were gradually narrowing the
problem, but they were still too costly to be used on most ships.
Meanwhile, the primitive methods that sea captains had to use
were utterly dependent on reading the heavens. So the ephem-
eris was a vital part—in fact the real centerpiece—of any publi-
cation that was courageous enough to label itself an “almanac.”
It was courageous because anything short of great accuracy
could have had serious repercussions for some readers and been
potentially fatal for those at sea. The weather forecasts that were
included were not expected to be perfect, but the ephemeris had
to be impeccable.
Benjamin had not the slightest idea of how one went about
getting all the information or processing it in a way that would
make it usable. He realized that he would probably need an
even stronger telescope and other instruments to take the nec-
essary readings. In other words, this hope of his would have to
be called childish and of no account, except for the one aston-
ishing fact that trumps all others: He actually went on to turn it
into reality. Fanciful as it seemed at that time, distant as he
knew it would be, he thought seriously of one day publishing
his own almanac. T o appreciate the enormity of this ambition,
it is necessary to know what a daunting venture it represented
even when some of the wealthiest and most educated persons in
society attempted it.
Banneker had learned that almanacs were highly profitable
because the potential audience went far beyond the sailing pro-
fession. They were a leading form of publication at that time,
when the amount of reading matter was limited. For many fami-
lies, these annual editions were the only form of printed material
in the house. But he also knew that only a few talented persons
even dreamed of producing one. Creating an almanac required
benjamin banneker
76
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 92 ---
a thorough knowledge of the complex relationship between the
Earth, planets, and constellations. One had to compute the hun-
dreds of entries for the basic ephemeris, include extensive details
about the tides, try for intelligent guesses about clouds, rain,
snow, and winds, and then make the whole publication enjoy-
able with original writing. Apart from the seafarers who bought
almanacs for sailing information, farmers bought them for long-
term weather forecasts, and many other people bought them
for their interesting essays on a variety of subjects, homey or
philosophical. Sometimes an almanac also included humor and
even poetry. Consequently, only learned persons with an unusu-
ally wide collection of scientific and literary skills tried to write
such an all-purpose manual. The ones that caught the public’s
fancy and sold year after year made their authors financially
well off. It was Poor Richard’s Almanac that had turned its cre-
ator, Benjamin Franklin, into an independently wealthy man at
an early age.
Benjamin Banneker was possibly the only person of his race
who ever aspired to publish an almanac. As humble as he was in
manner, he was highly confident of his own abilities. Even with
his rudimentary equipment, he was developing enough feeling
for the relationships among celestial bodies to form the first
tempting idea that was to become one of his steadiest aspira-
tions. And although he felt unready to prepare an ephemeris at
that middle point in his life, he had no doubt at all that he
would one day master the art. What joy he must have felt to
dream of freedom from the everlasting chore of raising tobacco.
He had no wish to leave the farm, but rather imagined that he
might earn enough income as an almanac publisher to let him
hire two good farm workers. He had no thought of changing
his frugal ways, only to be independent enough to have all his
hours free for his own thoughts. T o earn his living by studying
the stars, forecasting the weather, and writing philosophical
Enter the Ellicotts
77
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 93 ---
essays seemed so much like being paid to play that he didn’t yet
dare to tell anyone about this. He thought of it as his guilty
secret.
}
None of these exciting thoughts should be taken to mean that
Banneker’s world was wholly satisfactory. The changes he saw
around him brought both joys and problems, in the way that
innovations so often create overlapping tides and turbulence.
So it was when the Ellicotts came to the Patapsco region.
They were a model family in nearly all respects—fair and even-
handed, creative in the world of business, inventive at finding
new ways to tackle old problems, and wealthy enough to put
their ideas into action. By proposing new crops to replace
tobacco, they were bringing hope to Banneker and his neigh-
bors that their ongoing concern about the condition of their
land might be solved. But as so often happens, forces that bring
prosperity to a community bring unwanted consequences as
well.
Banneker saw that while life was better for him, a bad trend
was at work in society. The conditions of life for a free black
were declining. Decades earlier, when there had been only a
few hundred blacks in the area, most decent whites had re-
spected them, and many volunteer efforts to improve their edu-
cation had been under way. The proportion of free blacks grew
from one in a dozen around the middle of the eighteenth cen-
tury to one in three about sixty years later. In other words, less
than 10 percent of blacks had been free earlier, and in sixty
years that changed to over 30 percent. Recent research also
indicates that a considerable number of “East India Indians”
had appeared in Maryland during this late colonial period, and
the whites probably regarded them all as “black.” One might
benjamin banneker
78
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 94 ---
expect these numbers to add up to political heft and better con-
ditions. But, of course, free nonwhites had no political role at all
and, as their numbers grew, their treatment began to worsen.
The main reason was fear, which is at the base of most arrogant
or cruel actions. White people pictured these free blacks as
becoming more and more uncontrollable. When they heard of
a few incidents of drunkenness or violence, they imagined that
their whole social structure was crumbling and would soon be
dominated by such unruly people. They rushed to make harsher
rules that might stop the trend, just as crime statistics today
cause politicians to win votes for proposing that more jails
be built.
Always evaluating the various religions, as he did for most
of his life, Benjamin noticed that even the Methodists, who had
once joined with blacks in building churches where there was
no color bar, began to turn away from mixed congregations.
The number of schools and societies for the relief of the poor
also diminished. Some did sound a warning. A Presbyterian
minister named Samuel Knox was especially brilliant in pin-
pointing what would happen if some people were left in “slav-
ish ignorance . . . while the sons of fortune and affluence go to
one or two sumptuously endowed schools.” But such voices
were drowned in a surge of popular feeling that, strangely
enough, was a perversion of something that had a well-meaning
origin. With more and more talk of independence, long before
the Revolution of 1776, people became more aware that good
citizenship was going to be essential to maintaining orderly
self-government. Instead of making sure that as many blacks
as possible were given the upbringing that would make them
part of the structure, they thought only of new restrictions—
passing tough vagrancy laws, limiting blacks’ right of assembly,
even requiring them to have a permit in order to own a gun or
a dog.
Enter the Ellicotts
79
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 95 ---
Also, within a few years, another negative trend emerged.
Eli Whitney’s 1783 invention of the cotton gin hugely increased
the demand for slaves in the Deep South. Up to that time, the
process of separating cotton fiber from the seeds had made the
crop just barely profitable. But suddenly the gin made cotton
such a bonanza that every planter wanted to increase his output
to the maximum, and that meant a need for more slaves. The
prices offered for them soared.
Banneker saw these ominous signs and worried about them.
But his thoughts were now full of the wider interests that came
with his new friends and greater access to books and equip-
ment. He was not ready—yet—to turn his mind to the war on
injustice that was bound to come.
Banneker has been called an “Uncle T om,” thinking mainly
of himself, playing up to white people, and unwilling to use his
talents to do anything for his fellow blacks. Based solely on the
early part of his life, that would not be entirely untrue. But it
might be somewhat unfair, for we are talking of a time when
rebellion and outspoken attacks on the system were rare. The
fact that a person is less than a superhero does not mean that he
is a coward or a turncoat. As for the great friendship he struck
up with the Ellicotts, two things must be remembered: first,
that the Ellicotts were a family so devoted to the cause of equal-
ity that only a bigot would have shunned them because of their
race; second, Benjamin was first and foremost a scientist. In
George Ellicott, he had found someone with common interests.
He did not befriend George because he was white, but because
they spoke the same language. No one in his family or in the
farm community around them could have known about these
subjects.
That said, however, the truth is that Banneker long seemed
uncommonly anxious to avoid being involved in the contro-
versy over race. Abolitionist societies that had learned of his tal-
benjamin banneker
80
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 96 ---
ents wanted to publicize him as an example that blacks were
capable of more than physical labor. Banneker at first refused to
be thrust into that role. Much as he abhorred the evil of slavery
and scorned any form of racism, there was probably something
in his Dogon makeup that made him reluctant to be involved in
confrontational matters. This inborn feeling was even stronger
than his respect for the Ellicotts; he stoutly resisted their urg-
ings to let his accomplishments stand out publicly. One solid
reason for this attitude could be that Banneker was realistic
enough to know his ability was of an uncommon order; he may
have thought it would distort the picture if clumsy publicity
made it seem that all black people had his talents and were
capable of being scientists. That could not be said of any race,
and it would promote a form of reverse racism. But even with-
out such a reason, it seems fair to say that Benjamin Banneker
was, for a good half-century, quite reluctant to stand up in
opposition to slavery. He was afraid of white hostility at the
idea of a black genius, and especially of one who was widely
publicized. He saw that as a dangerous—a potentially suicidal—
part to play. It would take a nearly miraculous set of occur-
rences to push him into the front line.
Enter the Ellicotts
81
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 97 ---
7
}
Turning Night into Day
W
hen the successive eras of history or furniture are tied
to the reigns of kings or queens, some of them are
labeled “transitional.” In France, a commode with
graceful curved panels in the upper part that are reminiscent of
Louis XV might have the straight tapered classical legs that
seemed to foretell the coming of Marie Antoinette and her hus-
band. In that case, an antiques expert would call it “Louis
XV–Louis XVI T ransition.” If the periods of Benjamin Banne-
ker’s life were named in that way, the years from the mid-1770s
to 1790 might be called “Farmer–Scientist T ransition.”
During those years, he could also have been described as a
“gentleman farmer” in the sense in which that term was used in
Britain, where a number of the great landholders or London
social figures were also scientists of the first rank. They were
amateurs, for they had not studied the sciences in the course of
formal education, nor did they pursue this interest for mone-
tary gain. But some—the immortal Sir Isaac Newton among
them—made major discoveries and became members of the
Royal Academy. If Benjamin Banneker’s mind and soul had
been born in the England of that day, he would have fitted per-
82
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 98 ---
fectly into that superb group. Or if born in modern America, he
would be called a multi-aptituder or a Renaissance man.
Examples of that kind simply reinforce the plain fact that
Banneker was qualified in every respect for a far fuller life and
a greater exposure to fame. In reality, as is true of so many per-
sons, the accident of birth made it impossible for his remark-
able makeup to flourish for a full four decades. And then it
required something of a miracle to bring about the transition to
farmer-scientist in his forties.
It might seem that a person who spent all but a few months
of his existence in a cabin on one single farm must have had a
seamless life, not at all subject to such arbitrary subdivisions.
But in fact, even if no breakdowns are made into the separate
years of his studies with Peter Heinrich or the influence of
someone like Joseph Levi, five very distinct periods marked his
life: Childhood, until he began to have substantial responsibility
for the farm; Young Manhood, until a tragic romance or total
boredom created a mental crisis; Hiatus, when he was slogging
wearily through his duties; Transition, when work with the Elli-
cotts brought a great surge of new interests; and finally Grand
Old Man, when new ideas and activism brought him recogni-
tion and a respite from farm duties, although he was shadowed
by the threat of physical danger.
With the transition wrought by the Ellicotts, Banneker had
gone back to keeping a diary, and later he even titled one of his
record books his “Astronomical Journal.” This is one of the few
documents which, by a lucky accident, escaped the fire that oblit-
erated his cabin and its contents after his death. It was found in
1852 by a Quaker philanthropist named Moses Sheppard, who
had the book bound in leather. He also had parts reproduced
and distributed. Although earlier diaries were lost, it is clear
from the entries of the 1780s and 1790s that the pages usually
served multiple purposes—thoughts on astronomy and life in
Turning Night into Day
83
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 99 ---
general, collections of humorous stories, shopping lists that care-
fully noted the prices paid for each item, a number of the arith-
metical problems that he liked to compose all his life, and a
great deal more. It is a touching experience to see that a page
partly taken up with a very complex equation or a trenchant piece
of philosophy would then be divided by a bold pencil line and
followed by an almost childlike problem, such as the following:
A gentleman sent his servant with £100 to buy 100 cattle with
orders to give £5 for each bullock, 20 shillings for cows, and
one shilling for each sheep. The question is to know what
number of each Sort he bought for his master.
Answer:
19 Bullocks at £5 each £95
1 Cow at 20 shillings 1
80 Sheep at 1 shilling each 4
100 proof 100
One possible impression on seeing these schoolboy-level
problems is that a man who had been so deprived of normal
schoolroom experiences—however mature and advanced his
thoughts might have become—had somewhere in his mind a
longing to make up for what he had missed. A more prosaic
possibility is that simple problems of this kind were representa-
tions of the unusual clarity with which he pictured cosmic hap-
penings, and this, too, is typical of some great mathematicians
in all eras. Apart from formulas and jargon, their tastes and lan-
guage often seem overly simple because their thought processes
may go straight to core answers when an ordinary mind would
be using more words and flourishes while groping its way. And
a genius may sometimes notice a significant principle in what
others see as an elementary calculation. The ubiquitous name
of Albert Einstein serves as an example again, for he said it was
benjamin banneker
84
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 100 ---
only because he was thinking as a child does that the theory of
relativity occurred to him.
Like the traditional British gentleman-scientists whom Ban-
neker resembled, he included biological observations in his
writings. Rather late in his life, he recalled his youthful experi-
ences with seventeen-year locusts in this way: “The first year I
remember was 1749, when I was about seventeen years of age,
when thousands of them came to eat and destroy the fruits of
the earth . . . I therefore began to kill and destroy them, but
soon saw my labors were in vain. I therefore gave over my pre-
tension. Again in the year 1766, which was seventeen years
after the first appearance, they made a second and seemed to
me to be as numerous as the first. I then being about 34 years
of age, I had more sense . . . knowing that they were not so
pernicious to the fruits of the earth as I did imagine. . . . ”
Going on to mention other visits up to 1800, he wrote that
“they, like the comets, make but a short stay with us,” and
therefore he counseled accepting their brief presence without a
struggle. Besides, he said, with a burst of nature loving that not
many would feel, “they must be very merry, for they are singing
from the time they come on this earth until they die.” In all of
this, there is more than a touch of the injunction, often attrib-
uted to St. Francis of Assisi, to distinguish carefully the differ-
ence between what can be changed from what should be left
alone. It helps to illuminate the sharply criticized part of Ban-
neker’s character that was discussed in the last chapter, namely,
the appearance of quietly enduring America’s mindless racism
for the greater part of his life.
Being a regular beekeeper, he made a number of original ob-
servations on the ways these creatures organized themselves or
behaved under duress. For example, he wrote, “On a pleasant
January day, I observed some of my honey bees to be out of
their hive. Upon examination, I found that they had evacuated
Turning Night into Day
85
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 101 ---
the hive and left not a drop of honey behind them.” This mys-
tery had to be investigated and thought out for the possible
information it would yield about the lives and habits of the
departed bees. Whether correctly or not, his finding ended this
way: “Then on the 9th day of February, morning, I killed the
neighboring hive of bees on a special occasion and found a
giant quantity of honey, considering the reason, which I imag-
ine the stronger had violently taken from the weaker, and the
weaker had pursued them to their home, resolved to be bene-
fited by their labour or die in the contest.” The last passage is
noteworthy as evidence that Banneker was hardly ever content
to record an observation without drawing from it some conclu-
sion about how the world works. The arsonists and other ene-
mies of freedom who would later try to obliterate all signs of
this man were right in fearing that he might serve as a role
model to prove the abolitionists’ conviction that blacks were
“capable of intellectual effort.” Using his intellect in the most
complete way possible was the be-all and end-all of his life.
The practical items covered in the journal, although often
on the same pages as astronomical findings, were mere nota-
tions, clearly separated from the subjects that demanded
thought. They were in the same book because journals or even
sheets of paper were costly and there was no room for waste in
the Banneker budget. In one instance, he wrote in the journal:
“I saw some condensed particles of the atmosphere of divers
colours gathered round the moon, and that which was foremost
near to the center appeared white, the second of an orange, the
third blue, and the fourth red, nearly coloured like the rain
bow. This small circle was in width about seven times the
moon’s apparent diameter.”
Then, because there were a few lines left on the page under
that, a line was drawn, and the following practical note was
inscribed: “November 30th, Planted 170 pare tree sprouts.”
benjamin banneker
86
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 102 ---
On the next page, there was a long list of purchases from
Ellicott & Co., with prices shown in pounds, shillings, and
pence. T ypical items are:
Thread
Flannel
Linden
2
1⁄2 yards of sheeting @ 3⁄9 per yard
A pair of shoes 1 shilling, 3 pence
There was nothing haphazard or scatterbrained about this
apparently casual journal. The items were all carefully sepa-
rated and clearly identified. And the entries dealing with the
sun, moon, planets, and stars far outnumbered all the rest.
Moreover, the journal provides evidence of a disciplined strat-
egy for studying certain astronomical subjects in sequence, tak-
ing up aspects of the moon intensively for a time, then shifting
to a different part of the heavens. As late as 1800, when he was
nearly seventy, he wrote in a New Y ear’s entry, “This year, in
obtaining the planets places, I shall keep with the addition of 12
days, according to the method prescribed by Ferguson, but I
had like to forget the Sun and Moon had only 11 days added to
the old stile.”
The cryptic lines and occasionally incomplete sentences
should not be seen as evidence of imperfection in Banneker’s
writing. Many of these jottings were hastily made for his own
purposes, and they are useful in showing the span of his daily
interests. But they are not at all typical of his epistolary style,
which became beautifully polished in his middle years.
Among other things, these journal entries add up to a sure
sign of how firmly Banneker’s thoughts were fixed on his long-
term ambition to publish an almanac one day. When that time
came, he would have to include humor, wise sayings, and even
Turning Night into Day
87
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 103 ---
such homely items as prescriptions for curing common ailments.
All these came naturally to him, as if his life had been a prepa-
ration for the multi-aptitude task of almanac writing that lay
ahead.
Mary, his mother, the neighborhood expert on scents,
essences, and home remedies, was one of her son’s main sources
for practical advice. She earned extra money for the family by
charging small sums to those who could afford to pay. Banne-
ker, always absorbing knowledge from every source, had made
notes on her “Recipes for Curing Worms in Children and for
Whooping Cough.” And those would appear in his almanac.
The jokes he entered in his journal seem simple now. That
is almost invariably true of humor from past eras, which seems
to show that the onset of sophistication as a civilization ages
requires people to work harder in order to achieve the laughter
that came easily in an earlier century. Banneker’s levity was well
received when he tried it on the reading public some years later.
Here is one example found in his journal:
A very melting sermon was presented one day which caused
all the Congregation to weep, but one man. This attracted
the notice of people, and after the sermon they inquired why
he did not weep as well as the rest of the Congregation. He
pertinently responded, “I do not belong to the parish.”
}
But it was astronomy that dominated Banneker’s thoughts and
the journals that he kept for the rest of his life. Every month in
all those years includes information on lunar phases and
eclipses. On that latter subject, he often indicated where they
would be visible and especially how they affected the Baltimore
area, no doubt because that city was going to be a big market
benjamin banneker
88
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 104 ---
for him if he ever got to publish an almanac. The phrase “This
will not be visible in Baltimore” occurred frequently. On one
occasion, the entry read, “Four [eclipses] in number during the
year,” then added, “one is invisible in Baltimore, while another
[will be seen] from the Meridian of Baltimore and Latitude 49
South.”
Along with such relatively routine observations are com-
ments referring to cosmic thoughts he had enjoyed turning
over in his mind for many years. Few pages from the past are as
beguiling as Banneker’s memoranda that mingle shopping lists
with thoughts that deserve a place in the history of astronomy.
And the sense of his increasing dedication to the world of ideas,
as opposed to the routine, comes through forcefully.
However, he did not stop being a farmer at this point. He
was a firmly practical man who was only temporarily distracted
from the need to keep control over the farming activities, for he
always remembered his father’s admonitions. He had long since
accepted the help of his sisters and their husbands whenever
they could take time to lend a hand, but they were living in sep-
arate homes of their own, and their help was sporadic. Besides,
Benjamin was the sole owner and always thought of the farm as
his own primary responsibility. But there was a real change in how
he approached this and even the kind of work schedule he kept.
It led to one humorous side effect. He worked at his tele-
scopic observations much longer into the night and the early
morning hours than he had ever done in his youth. And be-
cause his energies were somewhat diminished, he intentionally
slept on much later into the following day. Consequently, there
was more than one occasion when a white neighbor came call-
ing to consult him on a crop question, found his door locked,
and saw through a window that Banneker was still asleep when
the sun was high in the sky. Some snide comments began to
make the rounds of the neighborhood: “I never thought it of
Turning Night into Day
89
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:53 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 105 ---
Benjamin, but he’s just another lazy black—lying there asleep
when I’ve been working my acres for three or four hours.”
The truth was that when Banneker rose late, he would then
stay at his farm toil several hours later than usual to make up
for the tardy start. It was far from an ideal arrangement, but
especially in summer, he could do that until the light had faded,
have time for some supper, and then turn to astronomy when
the darkness was intense enough for five or six hours of good
viewing.
His wiser visitors made it plain that he always seemed to be
at work. “I never came to see him that he wasn’t either laboring
on the farm or standing inside the cabin, bent over the work-
table that was covered with books, instruments, and lots of
papers,” said one person from Ellicott & Co. who often came
with a message from George Ellicott or sought his opinion on
a technical problem.
Probably Banneker’s fear of getting into an even harder
work schedule was what made him delay a shift from tobacco to
wheat in his crop selection. Because of the friendship that had
formed, it must have been embarrassing for him to keep plant-
ing tobacco while the Ellicotts were strongly urging area farm-
ers to change to grain and so many were being won over. He
was convinced that it was the right thing to do but uncertain of
how much time the conversion might steal from his precious
astronomy. Also, his innate conservatism made him wary of the
financial hole he might dig if his inexperience with wheat
caused a crop failure for a year or two. He did make the great
shift a little later, but it was for a reason far greater than farm
economics.
benjamin banneker
90
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 106 ---
91
8
}
The Unfinished Revolution
F
or a good many months before the middle of 1776, Ben-
jamin Banneker was taking a rapt interest in the possibil-
ity that the colonies would try to break away from En-
gland. Such talk and the fervor that went with it was somewhat
lower key in Maryland than in neighboring Virginia, but Ban-
neker’s newspaper reading and frequent conversations with the
alert Ellicotts made him far more informed than average. Nei-
ther of these sources, however, was correct in its opinion of
what the rupture of transatlantic ties would mean to African
Americans.
Perhaps this intellectually brilliant man was still politically
immature and naive at that time. Or it may have been that un-
duly optimistic thoughts on the part of the abolition-minded
Ellicotts had unbalanced Banneker’s judgment. Whatever the
cause, nothing about his life is clearer than that as 1776 ap-
proached, he genuinely believed the American Revolution would
bring freedom for the slaves and a new status for all blacks.
There could be no other rational explanation for the attempts
that Banneker made to take part in the war effort.
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 107 ---
As soon as he read the Declaration of Independence and
learned that the colonies had come together in military rebel-
lion against the British crown, he began trying to learn whether
he could serve in the military. The negative answer he received
was based on his age—he was about forty-five—rather than his
color. It was probably a dishonest answer, or at least an ambigu-
ous one, for Maryland’s law on the subject was unclear, while a
nearby state such as Virginia ordered free black men between
twenty-six and fifty years of age to join the militia. The truth
was that nobody knew what to do when a black person offered
to serve in the military. Everybody in a leadership role, from
state governors to the lowliest member of a city council, was in
a near panic about how the blacks, slave or free, were going to
react to the war.
There was a genuine fear of slave insurrection, for one thing.
It was not at all imaginary. The belief that Africans accepted
their humiliation and subjugation with very little opposition is a
bad distortion of history. Because most Africans were normally
good-natured, retained an inherited instinct for courtesy, and
often gave affection to whites who showed themselves to be rel-
atively kind, there has been too little notice of the courageous
resistance mounted by some even in the face of ghastly punish-
ments. A violent outbreak in New Y ork, which was suppressed
only after considerable bloodshed, had made an impression all
over the country. The message it sent to people in government
was that ever more stringent rules were needed to suppress and
discipline these violence-prone blacks, whether slaves or free.
The stark message for individual white slave owners was that
they could be living on a powder keg.
These African people were theoretically mere property, like
any other chattel, yet they were property that could move, have
a sudden rush of anger, steal a gun and use it against a master,
or drop poison into the food of a mistress. What kind of life
benjamin banneker
92
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 108 ---
was it to be surrounded and dependent on people who had good
reason to hate you? Or at least good reason to resent the rela-
tionship, even when the master was actually kind? Such a decisive
personage as George Washington was baffled and conflicted
over the problem. As he confided to one of the few friends he
trusted totally, Henry Knox, he genuinely believed that slaves
should be gradually freed, educated, and integrated into society.
He and Knox—who had done “impossible feats” for him in
wartime—were trying to devise a way to start a model commu-
nity of that kind with some of Washington’s own slaves, but his
tangled financial affairs never permitted it. He felt guilty when
he freed some of the slaves, knowing the provisions he made for
their support couldn’t ensure as good a life as they had been
used to. Worst of all, partly because Washington’s mental facul-
ties were slipping in his last years (by his own admission), he
was unable to work out the financial tangle that left Martha a
deadly legacy—some 150 slaves to be freed after his wife’s death.
He has been unfairly targeted for this, but in fact he did try
desperately to avoid leaving her with servants who might have
had a powerful reason to want her dead. How could she know
whether there might be one among these pleasant people who
would make the guaranteed freedom come true in short order?
She didn’t wait. Except for aged slaves who begged to stay,
and some who legally belonged to relatives, Mrs. Washington
wisely, and at great personal expense, quickly freed them all.
If whites had to be that frightened in peacetime, what did
slavery mean to them in wartime? Each state tried to find its
own answer, but often the many localities within a state took
different courses. Even where there was no great fear of black
insurrection, some whites were concerned about losing their
“property” if slaves escaped and ran to the British forces, for
the enemy had issued a proclamation promising full freedom to
fugitive slaves.
The Unfinished Revolution
93
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 109 ---
The dilemma brought many diverse experiences. Interestingly
enough, the first American casualty of the pre–Revolutionary
War period was probably a black man named Crispus Attucks.
In what came to be known as the Boston Massacre, Attucks was
one of a boisterous crowd that encountered eight men from the
British 29th Regiment in March 1770, on an evening when
resentment was already brewing. He is believed to have swung
a stick in a way that knocked a grenadier’s gun out of his hand.
The soldiers panicked and began firing, killing five civilians and
wounding six others. Attucks was the first fatality. While this
may have been an incident of little significance, the first mili-
tary engagement of the Revolution, the battle of Lexington and
Concord, on April 19, 1775, included a black man whose im-
portant role is well documented. This was Peter Salem, who
served in the Framingham company of minutemen, having been
given his freedom by the Belknap family so he could enlist. He
went on to fight at Bunker Hill, along with several other blacks.
Another African American whose heroism was attested to in a
petition signed by fourteen Massachusetts officers was Salem
Poor. They said he behaved not only as an excellent soldier, but
“like an experienced officer, and the reward due to so great and
distinguished a character, we submit to Congress.”
This early use of blacks did not set a consistent pattern. In
all, it is believed that about 5,000 black soldiers served in the
army of the Revolution, chiefly because the Northern states
were beginning to show more anti-slavery sentiment in the
midst of a fight for liberty. That was not the case in the South.
There was fear that the army would prove to be a refuge for
runaway slaves, for one thing. Most masters did not want to
give up their valuable “property,” even when the military lead-
ers were desperate for soldiers of any race. This conflict was
sharpest in Southern areas where there was a real shortage of
soldiers, and yet plantation owners resisted Northern entreaties
benjamin banneker
94
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 110 ---
to let male slaves serve. At the outset, George Washington took
little interest in the issue, but he became increasingly anxious to
see blacks recruited as the shortage of troops became acute.
By March 1779, Congress recommended to South Carolina
and Georgia that they “take measures immediately for raising
three thousand able-bodied negroes.” Congress even named a
brilliant young officer, John Laurens, who was an aide-de-camp
to General Washington, to go to South Carolina and enlist local
support for the recommendation. He was the son of Henry
Laurens, president of the Continental Congress, and he had
written to his father from Valley Forge, “A well-chosen body of
5,000 black men, properly officer’d to act as light troops . . .
might give us decisive success in the next campaign.” But even
though British troops were menacing the lightly defended state,
South Carolina rebuffed Laurens’s repeated pleas. By 1781,
Nathanael Greene, one of Washington’s best generals, warned
South Carolina that she would never forgive herself for the loss
of her lands if they remained in British hands because of a
refusal to let slaves take part in the defense. When that failed,
Laurens wrote to Washington saying that the voice of reason
had been “drowned by the howlings of a triple-headed monster,
in which prejudice, avarice, and pusillanimity were united.”
The people of Georgia reacted just as negatively as the South
Carolinians did.
Many thousands of blacks took the opportunity to flee, as
the enemy British were urging them to do. Some blacks were
employed by the British as laborers and found that the prom-
ises of freedom were honored. The British General Alexander
Leslie felt obligated to take them along on shipboard when his
troops were forced to evacuate, and as many as 14,000 may have
been taken to England in this way. But for many who chose this
means of escape, it was an unhappy decision. Some were enslaved
again by new British masters, especially officers who went to
The Unfinished Revolution
95
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 111 ---
serve in other parts of the world. Those blacks who got to En-
gland and avoided a new enslavement too often ended as miser-
able panhandlers on the streets of London, where the status of
slavery was very vague, perhaps intentionally so. (There had
been a legal case in 1772 wherein Lord Mansfield freed a slave
on the narrow issue that his master could not force him to go
into a foreign country. Mansfield thought this weakening of a
master’s rights was akin to ending slavery, but opinions on his
interpretation were divided and there was no hurry to enforce
it.) Estimates of the number of slaves in England at the time of
the American Revolution range from only 3,000 to 15,000, and
except for the limited number of dedicated abolitionists, few
saw it as a pressing problem.
In America, meanwhile, the large number of black persons
who might have affected the course of the conflict made black
attitudes a major concern. In the chaos of war, the combined
total of slaves who escaped to the British or went to live with
the Indians devastated the labor supply for some plantations.
When some rebellious slaves took up stolen arms, it became all
the more questionable to consider trying to mold such men
into an anti-British fighting force. Even in the cases where a
former American colony considered ordering free blacks to
form a militia, a county sheriff sometimes refused to let arms
be put into the hands of men who had no good reason to be
“patriotic” or “trustworthy.”
Banneker harbored no ideas of turning against the Ameri-
can side—just the opposite, in fact. For the first time in his life,
as far as we can tell, he saw a light at the end of the racist tun-
nel, saw a movement run by leaders who spoke of equality in
the way Banneker had always thought of it. The practical nature
that had prevented him from striking out against slavery when
such opposition had seemed utterly pointless now was ready to
fight because he thought a real chance was on the horizon.
benjamin banneker
96
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 112 ---
Patient endurance had seemed the only appropriate way before.
Now it appeared that the best chance for concrete action was
at hand. This most peaceful of men was asking for a chance to
fight. When that was denied, he looked for other ways to take
part.
Banneker learned that the armed forces had a great need for
more clocks and watches. In one more sign of his commitment
to a cause that he thought would free the slaves, he actually left
his precious farm in the care of his sisters and went to Philadel-
phia, where a leading watchmaking firm—one report says it was
a shop owned by Esop Hernandes—employed him for a brief
time. It is believed that only a few months passed before he
heard a fellow worker say the war effort required food more
than anything else, with grains heading the list.
According to one account, he asked himself, “What am I
doing here? I could convert my farm’s plantings to wheat, just
as the Ellicotts have been urging me to do, and that would be
more of a contribution than timepieces.” Joseph Ellicott and his
sons had expanded their operations to bustling Baltimore,
which had broken away from reliance on Annapolis and now
had its own customshouse. Their wagons made daily runs, car-
rying not only flour, but also a stream of information between
their Patapsco base and the waterfront wharf they had erected
in Baltimore. They were supplying French and Continental
troops with flour along much of the East Coast. The supplies
of wheat they received from nearby farmers had increased dra-
matically, but they would, indeed, welcome more—and cer-
tainly from their friend Banneker. So he quickly returned to the
Patapsco Valley and began a hasty round of digging and replant-
ing a new and unfamiliar crop.
Is it likely that Banneker did all this to help sustain a home-
based tyranny that would keep some blacks in slavery and even
the freed blacks in a second-class and insecure condition? It is
The Unfinished Revolution
97
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 113 ---
surely right to think he was absolutely convinced that the stir-
ring words “all men are created equal” meant just what they
said. T o imagine that the leaders who signed on to those
words—at the risk of their own lives—were frauds would have
seemed truly absurd. Or to think, in a more subtle way, that
those leaders might become conflicted men who saw the
dilemma they had created, but feared that trying to free the
blacks would wreck their new nation before it had a chance to
gain strength—this would have taken a political prescience that
Banneker lacked. Nor, in all candor, could even the most ad-
vanced political scientist have foreseen what a group that
included such diverse characters as Thomas Jefferson, James
Madison, Thomas Paine, Patrick Henry, and Alexander Hamil-
ton might do, for some of them went on to be intense political
enemies. 
What actually happened during those years was the chaotic
jumble that generally characterizes war. Over 100,000 slaves are
thought to have left the thirteen states during and after the war,
including a fraction who were allowed to join the army. The
South lost about 65,000, two-thirds of the total number, and
the region, of course, was severely damaged by the loss of so
many slave laborers—a damage it would feel far more strongly
eighty-five years later when the Civil War ended. But the slaves
themselves suffered the worst, for the hazards were daunting.
Most who fled into the western wilds died from hunger or dis-
ease. Many who escaped to Canada froze or starved to death. A
great many thousands went to the Caribbean, mainly to Jamaica,
but many of those were snatched by new British masters.
Some slaves who had lived in the North had been promised
their freedom if they enlisted in the Continental Army, and that
promise was largely kept. Some, however, had to keep petition-
ing for up to ten years before getting satisfaction. Some states
gave bounties to black veterans, and some gave pensions of up
benjamin banneker
98
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 114 ---
to $100 a year, which was significant money at the time. But
most benefits required knowledge of how and where to file
applications, and many never learned how to collect. Virginia
gave some of its ex-slaves grants of land in Kentucky and Ohio,
but only a few accepted the offer, preferring to live in a state
they knew.
The horrid plight of blacks in general, so far worse than his
own situation, had been gnawing at Banneker for some time. In
his four decades of life, their condition had worsened dramati-
cally as the growth of the black population kept leading to
increasingly drastic laws intended to formalize slavery and keep
stricter control of its victims. Maryland in particular had gone
from being one of the more moderate states to one of the harsh-
est. It had been settled twenty-seven years later than Virginia,
and initially its relatively small plantations, growing mostly
tobacco for export, had few slaves. In the mid-seventeenth cen-
tury, only 3 percent of its people were black. By the time of
Banneker’s birth in 1731, many large plantations had been
formed. Blacks had been brought from the West Indies at a
great rate, and slaves were about a quarter of the population.
The demand was so great that a young, able-bodied black man
could be worth 8,000 pounds of tobacco (more than Banneker’s
father would pay for one hundred acres of good farmland six
years later).
The white fears of black revolt had reached a high point at
just the time when the colonists’ fury against England was
growing. That doubtless added to the fervor of Banneker’s in-
terest in the Revolution and his hopes that it would cleanse the
colonies of this evil. But when the war ended in victory and the
horror grew even worse, this became the one ugly stain that
permeated the truly pleasant world of his scientific meditations.
History does not record it, but it may be that he threw himself
into measurements of the cosmos with even more energy as a
The Unfinished Revolution
99
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 115 ---
way to escape the horrors he was hearing about. What had
begun with a rule that a black person could move around only
with a pass from his owner had become a set of laws about pun-
ishments that masters could inflict on an unruly slave or even
on one who simply shirked his work. These laws escalated to a
ruling that no slave could travel to visit another plantation, lest
there be a conspiracy to start an insurrection; and it was
decreed that any person who saw such a visiting slave could
“inflict corporal punishment as he sees fit.” Although there
were laws that sought to keep a measure of balance in the rise
of terror—rules about the number of hours worked and having
free days on Sundays and holidays—these were dwarfed by
legalization of punishments that disfigured the person, such as
branding and cutting off ears. These were not rarities—they
were commonplace, in fact. In the nation created to institution-
alize equality and justice, many men and women who had dared
to show a little spirit were missing one or both ears. Some, usu-
ally after an accusation of rape, had been castrated. A master
could go as far as to inflict torturous punishments that caused
the death of a disobedient slave—legally. Hearing of these bar-
barities doubtless played a big part in causing some of the vio-
lent dreams that Banneker described in his journal.
He was too fair-minded to think these excesses represented
the views of all whites. He recognized that there were many
people who thought totally differently in his state and even
more in states to the north. State and local anti-slavery groups
had sprung up from Massachusetts to Virginia. A Maryland
Abolition Society had successfully petitioned the state legisla-
ture to soften certain laws for masters who wanted to free their
slaves. T wo other Maryland groups, the Chestertown Society and
the Choptank Society, had a variety of projects to educate black
children and teach useful trades and well-mannered behavior to
adults. In Waltham, Massachusetts, a slave named Felix Cuff
benjamin banneker
100
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 116 ---
who had served in the armed forces during the Revolution took
the Massachusetts constitution literally where it read “all men
are born free and equal.” He got a group of slaves to join him
in declaring that they were all legally free. They fled from their
masters’ homes and hid in a cave called Devil’s Den under
Snake Rock. When chased and attacked by a posse headed by
one Lieutenant Hastings, they beat the posse back, then raced
to the village and managed to present the court with a paper
asking for the prosecution of Hastings for having violated the
state constitution. Astonishingly, popular sentiment turned out
to be sympathetic to the rebels, and the court ruled in their
favor. The state as a whole did not immediately outlaw slavery,
but Cuff and all his associates retained their freedom.
Points of light like these helped greatly to prevent Banne-
ker from becoming totally embittered or from falling into
depression again. But he was reluctant to join with abolitionist
groups that wanted to publicize him for their laudable pur-
poses. As a sensible man, he knew the limitations and risks for
one person living alone in a cabin and subject to fatal attack if
his existence appeared to threaten the whole institution of slav-
ery. There were several times in his life when his journal men-
tioned strangers firing what he took to be warning shots outside
his windows.
Banneker’s belief at this time, in the aftermath of a revolu-
tion, was that no crusade could have much effect on the wild
trend that was being spurred by economics, supported by poli-
tics, and exacerbated by fear. (In fact, the strong-arm ways of the
anti-abolitionists caused all three of the well-meaning Mary-
land societies to collapse suddenly between 1798 and 1800.)
Although he had been naive about politics during the war, he
soon began to think more clearly about the tangled affairs
of the new nation and its differing views of slavery. While tak-
ing into account the problems the leaders would have faced in
The Unfinished Revolution
101
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 117 ---
tackling the issue head-on, he thought they had missed the best
moment for declaring an end to slavery. It would really have
been easier, he felt, to abolish the hideous practice immediately
at the time of victory, while a glow of satisfaction might have
softened the anger of the slave owners. As the victory of 1781
became nearly a decade old, he recognized that his belief in the
founders had been betrayed. But he tried not to give way to his
furious disappointment too soon, still hoping that a great deci-
sion on the issue would finally emerge.
T o any observer, even his loving sisters, Molly and Minta,
or the ladies of the Ellicott family who admiringly noted and
later wrote about his “noble and gentle manner,” he seemed
perfectly placid. They didn’t suspect his anger and disgust at
the realization that his race, instead of sharing in the new
nation’s great victory, was in for even worse times. Nor could
they have known about the descriptions of violent dreams that
have been found in his journal, dreams that must have been
reflecting the barbarities he was not yet in a position to protest.  
benjamin banneker
102
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 118 ---
103
9
}
Attracted to the City
S
ome of Banneker’s admirers think the Ellicotts are given
too much credit for his accomplishments, as if having re-
ceived help from whites would lessen the great signifi-
cance of his amazing career. Such a conclusion would never
have clouded a mind as balanced as Banneker’s. Like any person
who keeps his thoughts focused on real objectives, this man
knew that using whatever advantages present themselves is
common sense. And he was well aware that he had had far
fewer opportunities than a well-born white person would have
had;  getting assistance, at last, when he was in his forties and
fifties was only a small recompense for what he had missed ear-
lier. It might have been called destiny’s own “affirmative
action.”
On the other side of the coin, detractors have implied that
Banneker’s abilities were slight and that his reputation de-
pended on being “puffed up” by the Ellicotts. Even if there
were only the example of the wooden clock, this would clearly
be false. For although the clock was a minor accomplishment
compared with his thoughts on the universe, it was stupen-
dously inventive of Banneker to have converted the principle of
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 119 ---
a watch into the dimensions of a clock (and then to have used
wood as the material without knowing that such a thing had
ever been done). All this took place more than two decades
before the Ellicotts came to Maryland.
The idea that “no man is an island” applies to education
more than any other aspect of life. Benjamin Banneker was,
indeed, what we casually call a “self-made man” if ever there
was one. He showed this by having the innate wisdom to learn
from his grandmother, his parents, the Quaker schoolteacher,
and the very few other contacts that brought new knowledge
into his very restricted life. The Ellicotts noticed and admired
him only because he had already made himself an outstanding
person long before they came to his region. He would seem less
wise if he had let any form of prejudice bar this friendship.
}
For the normal life spans of his day, Benjamin Banneker was
verging on old age in the 1780s. Y et his zest for learning was
greater than ever. Gifts from George Ellicott—along with the
massive old table that became his treasured workplace, new
books on astronomy, and a number of fine instruments that
included an improved telescope—made the cosmos as new to
him as it was for twentieth-century astronomers when they
began to see the astonishing pictures taken by the Hubbell
space telescope.
One book from England, Gibson’s Treatise of Practical Sur-
veying, which was considered the finest text on that subject, en-
grossed him for weeks. At the end of that time, with no hands-
on surveying experience other than simple practice around his
own area, he felt that he had mastered still another skill. No
experienced surveyor would have agreed with him, for this was
a craft that was normally learned by tramping through virgin
benjamin banneker
104
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 120 ---
fields under the guidance of a veteran. But Banneker’s unique
study methods and fantastic memory enabled him to imprint
the contents of a fat volume almost perfectly in his mind. Then,
because he was able to quickly envision the key points and
overall geometry of a practical problem, he could superimpose
his book learning onto the situation before him. Just as he had
once studied a watch and envisioned a large clock, he imagined
that he could take Gibson’s surveying lessons and apply them to
almost any challenging piece of land. That assumption would
never be fully tested, but whatever tests he did encounter, he
passed.
There were many examples of the Ellicotts’ great role in his
development—and of Banneker’s own unprecedented way of
turning the raw materials they provided into pure gold. With-
out the new technologies the Ellicotts brought to Elkridge, Ban-
neker might not have come out of his long depression. Without
the telescopes and books on astronomy they made available, he
could never have gone beyond his intuitive feelings and become
an astronomer of professional stature. Without the surveying
book, he would have known nothing about the subject and
could not have gone on to the new future it opened for him.
In an encounter that typifies the Banneker–Ellicott inter-
action, George once gave him some new instruments that Ban-
neker knew nothing at all about. The younger man came by
with the package and, finding his friend away, left it with a note
promising that he would soon return to explain all the intrica-
cies. It was a busy period for George, and several weeks elapsed
before he got back. When he did, he found something that he
told his family was “unbelievable,” even for Ben, as he usually
called him. Banneker had mastered the whole apparatus and
was already routinely putting it to use.
The huge effect that the Ellicotts had on Banneker’s life can
only be understood by realizing the extent of their energies and
Attracted to the City
105
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 9:27:54 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 121 ---
their operations. The many mechanical innovations they were
putting into their buildings were a revelation to a person who
had suspected all his life that the outside world had marvels he
had never seen or heard of. Now the Ellicotts had brought
glimpses of that wider world right into the Elkridge neighbor-
hood. Unlike the farming life, where it took several seasons to
assess the results of an improved technique, every corner of a
mill or a factory held an invitation to suggest ways of speeding
this process or improving that product. Arrange a few pieces of
metal or a pair of wheels in a new way, start the motion, and
presto—the result was visible. If it was a failure, well, change
the angle, add two more bolts, and try it again. Just as the tele-
scope George had given him showed Banneker an entirely dif-
ferent cosmos, the mills opened a new world that he could visit
at will, touch the machinery itself, talk about with others.
For the first time in his life, Banneker was neglectful of his
farm—not flagrantly, but in stealing several hours, two or three
times a week, when an afternoon that should have been devoted
to clearing, digging, or planting was spent in the mill area,
watching new construction under way or talking about it with
others. It was also the first time he socialized with anyone out-
side his family and a few black friends who lived nearby. White
neighbors had usually been “friendly” when they waved in pass-
ing or when they wanted Banneker’s help in reading a letter,
but they were not really friends. A few words about the weather
might be exchanged, not much more. T alk in the Ellicott store
was different because construction watchers in all times and
places are the same. The activity, its newness, its excitement,
are great levelers. Anybody can give an opinion, and everybody
noticed that Banneker’s opinions were some of the most inter-
esting, most of all to the Ellicotts themselves. Even the rather
patrician Joseph Ellicott invited Banneker to his huge home to
see the four-faced clock again, and more recent creations. Some
benjamin banneker
106
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 122 ---
still had bugs in their operation, and he was always happy to
hear Benjamin’s thoughts on how to eliminate them.
Friendliest of all, quite naturally, was young George Elli-
cott, a blend of youthful enthusiasm and mature responsibility.
His daughter, Martha T yson, recalled when she was very old
that “There was an especial empathy between one of the younger
members of the Ellicott family and Banneker. That was my
own father, George Ellicott.” And she did not want it to be
thought that his extreme youth was the only reason for his easy
rapport with the black man, for George, as his family recog-
nized, was no ordinary young man. She said, “That he had
much energy and capacity we may know from the fact that the
present road from Frederick to Baltimore was surveyed and laid
out by him when he was seventeen years old.” George Ellicott,
in short, was something of a prodigy as Benjamin had been in
his early years, the kind of person who can easily be on an equal
footing with elders.
Although astronomy was obviously the main interest that
Banneker shared with George, there were others. English liter-
ature, in fact, had been one of the first subjects that made each
of them feel that finding the other was a real delight. In that
area, Benjamin was more like the student, while George was his
mentor, for George had a great library, while Benjamin’s expo-
sure to literature had been terribly limited. Just as George had
been almost disbelieving when he realized what a feel for the
heavens Banneker had—with none of the advantages of his own
reading and fine instruments—he was touched and endlessly
admiring when he noticed how much vocabulary, sense of style,
and depth of ideas this phenomenal older man had somehow
distilled from the few books he had read. T o George, who some-
times tried to share his knowledge with reluctant friends and
neighbors—and even gave lessons on astronomy to the girl he
courted (successfully, at that!)—the friendship of a person with
Attracted to the City
107
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 123 ---
Benjamin’s appetite for learning was precious. When George’s
increasing duties in the family business got in the way of fre-
quent meetings with Banneker, they exchanged more and more
notes on their thoughts and experiments. Banneker would come
home and find a new science book on his table, with a comment
that raised a question about some chapter. He would usually
attack the subject at once, pore over it until late into the night,
then compose a return message to be delivered without delay.
It must be said, however, that the relationship between the
two men was not totally equal. Just the fact that Banneker
seems never to have addressed this youth as anything but “Mr.
Ellicott,” while George soon began calling him Benjamin and
even Ben, is enough to tell us that they did not see themselves
as equals. Whether this stemmed from a racial consciousness, it
is certain that class or status made a difference. Maybe this is
inevitable when one man lives in a mansion and is in a position
to give great gifts that the other cannot possibly reciprocate.
This does not denigrate the Ellicotts, but must be recognized
in order to understand Banneker’s situation during most of his
life. Even men who freely admitted that he had a greater intel-
lect than their own talked with him as if they were standing
on a little higher ground than he was. That they genuinely
respected him cannot be doubted (for bear in mind that Martha
T yson said she wrote her own book partly because “My father
had long projected writing a memoir of Benjamin Banneker, but
because he was always burdened by so many business duties, he
died before he got to it”). Y es, there was genuine respect on
both sides, but theirs flowed slightly downhill. All his life, even
after he became nationally known, Banneker would accept this
with no sign of rancor. He knew he was superior; this other
matter he really regarded as “their problem.”
}
benjamin banneker
108
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 124 ---
As the improvements at the Ellicott mill continued at a great
rate, Banneker, in a sense, found himself at the cutting edge of
the Industrial Revolution. The operations at Ellicott’s Lower
Mills had a frame coal house, a sawmill, a stone mill house, and
a stone storage house. By using the advanced ideas of Delaware
inventor Oliver Evans, who had authored an acclaimed hand-
book on mill building, they had automated their own mills in a
way that sharply reduced costs. The effort helped to make Bal-
timore, which became their shipping port, a leading center of
the flour industry. They soon had the largest and most auto-
mated mill in the country, all powered by a waterwheel. And a
visit to this model operation became a regular stop for Euro-
pean businessmen who came to America. “Patapsco Flour” was
a trademark known the world over.
Along with industrial development came the creation of a
new town called Ellicott’s Mills. The reputation for success had
attracted more industries—ironworks, wagon parts and brakes,
furnaces, wrought-iron utensils. Banneker was especially de-
lighted to see that immediately after constructing housing for
their workers, the planners set up a splendid school for the
children of the entire area. The finest teachers were brought in
to staff it, and there was no limitation at all on attendance.
Nothing exists to show that the stiffening attitude of whites
against free blacks had any echo in this case. In a very modern
way, the local property owners were billed to share in the costs,
and the children of the poor were as welcome as any others.
The contrast with his own meager education might have given
Banneker a pang, but there is no evidence of it. Among the
ideas that he and the Ellicotts had in common was a genuine
delight in progress. Banneker saw the school not only as a great
thing for the children, but as a major step into the future. In his
mind, he was still as much a student as the youngsters in the
classrooms, and his enjoyment of the town’s increasing tempo
Attracted to the City
109
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 125 ---
was genuine. That pace increased further when Ellicott’s mod-
est store became a general store of such size and reputation that
shoppers from as far as Baltimore and Washington made excur-
sions to see its shelves filled with fine imported products.
The birth and expansion of Ellicott City, as it came to be
known, was a godsend in Banneker’s life. His mother, Mary, had
died in the late 1770s. She had expanded her activities beyond
compounding herbal medicines and fine scents to running the
boardinghouses that the Ellicotts and other new companies had
set up for their workers until permanent homes could be com-
pleted. Even in her last years, neighbors marveled that Mary
had retained the fleet-footed ability to race after a chicken and
catch it without assistance. Now the death of all that vitality left
a vacuum in the community, and it made a hole in Benjamin’s
heart. While still in his late forties, Banneker was hit by the
feeling of old age that comes when all parents and grandparents
are gone. He saw his sisters and their offspring regularly, and at
least one of his nephews went to work for the Ellicott Com-
pany and stayed with it all his life. But his greatest solace, apart
from his own studies and solitary thoughts, came from the
vibrant town life that had sprung up so near him.
Seeing the well-preserved historic center of Ellicott City in
the present day makes it easy to imagine how exciting the lively
town must have seemed to a man who had so long looked down
from his hilltop home and seen only a handful of houses and a
general store. T oday, even when most of the population has
moved out to far-flung houses and apartments, and when the
usual scattering of malls and fast food shops are mostly away
from this center, the narrow old main street still bustles with
activity. Stores, offices, and the gaggle of cars fighting for
metered parking make it easy to imagine what it was like when
horses and wagons went through the same exercise and then to
benjamin banneker
110
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 126 ---
think how that attracted the lonely man in his cabin some 1,500
feet above.
That elevated location of the Banneker farm is now called
Oella, Maryland. But Oella was not incorporated until 1808,
two years after Benjamin’s death. In his day, it really had no
official name. If asked where he lived, he would have said, “Oh,
around Elk Ridge” or “Above Elkridge Landing.” But it always
needed a preposition, because neither of those town names
applied. With the coming of Ellicott City, although this name
still didn’t extend up to Banneker’s little mountaintop, its mag-
netic attraction certainly did. Even when his friend George was
increasingly busy, entrusted with more of the family’s manage-
ment duties, Banneker was tempted to mount a horse and go
down the road leading to the bustling city.
Everyone who saw him on such forays remarked on his
excellent appearance. His looks were very much altered from
the slim spear-like figure of his youth. He looked a bit older
than the upper forties of his real age, heavier-set, with a very
short neck and his head seemingly set right on his shoulders,
causing one Ellicott employee who saw him often in the store
to say that he looked very much like the revered Benjamin
Franklin. Ladies often spoke of him as a fine-looking man, with
his graying curly locks always carefully combed and his dress
more formal than that of most of the men, as neat as if he were
going to church.
His purchases grew more sophisticated—more shoes, finer
fabrics, glass, and tableware. His diet included more meats pur-
chased in Ellicott City, in contrast with the self-sufficiency that
he and his mother had formerly maintained. Being busy with
astronomy, he did far less livestock farming and bought even
more pork. Archaeological exploration around the area of his
old cabin shows that the diet of corn, vegetables, and fruits was
Attracted to the City
111
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 127 ---
fortified with considerable amounts of purchased fish and meats.
In addition to being a customer of the Ellicotts, Banneker also
had two other types of business affairs to talk over with them.
First, he was one of their suppliers, as his farm produced
respectable amounts of wheat for sale to their flour mill. Sec-
ond, using his instinctive adeptness with numbers, he began
discussing the possibility of trading bits of his land for cash at
appropriate times when he might get a good enough price to
afford more purchases at the increasingly attractive store.
Recent studies show that he did later make some land trades of
this kind, but always very cautiously, for he was conscious of
how much land he would need to provide for his own upkeep,
however long his life might be.
As he moved toward playing a larger part in the business
affairs of the community, it now appears that he had a greater
political interest than had been previously imagined. His sister,
Minta Black, testified in court a few years after her brother’s
death that he had been accorded many of the rights of a free
man, beyond merely being a property owner. Unlike most free
blacks, she said, he had been allowed to give evidence in court
cases even where white citizens were concerned. And she swore
that he had voted in elections. The surprising degree of respect
that was accorded to him at a time when the attitude of many
Maryland whites toward free blacks was decidedly suspicious or
antagonistic leaves an enduring portrait of Banneker’s natural
dignity and its effect on those around him.
benjamin banneker
112
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 128 ---
113
10
}
Meanwhile,
at Mount Vernon
H
e was fifty-nine years old, thinking of Ellicott City as
the outer limit of his excursions into the world, when,
in July 1790, the Congress of the United States took an
action that would give Benjamin Banneker a challenge and a
prestige that no other black American had ever known. Almost
exactly fourteen years after the start of the Revolution that had
disappointed Banneker so sorely, Congress handed George Wash-
ington the sole power to choose and create a permanent national
capital. The general made the most of it. He hardly needed to
consult anyone. Within weeks, he announced the choice of a
site that can virtually be called his and his alone—a choice that
would lead to the dramatic turn in Benjamin Banneker’s life. 
It would be an understatement to say that President Wash-
ington’s decision about location was not popular. Indeed, there
were moments when a groundswell against the revered leader’s
choice seemed possible. The Constitution specified the size of
the projected federal city, but not the location, for there was
too much disagreement on that point. Most Northern political
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 129 ---
leaders, even while knowing the capital had to be outside of any
state, hoped that the necessary land could be carved out within
easy reach of some cosmopolitan center, such as Philadelphia,
New Y ork, or Boston. The sounds of surprise and dismay that
came from all those who now faced periods of trying to live on
the chosen site on the Potomac and Anacostia rivers were only
partly genuine. The area was swampy and humid, but that was
part of the generally accepted wish to have a capital very close
to waterways and to the sea. Another frequent complaint re-
ported in historical accounts, that this was a deserted area, did
not stand up to scrutiny either. No state would have allowed a
developed part of its territory to be amputated for separate fed-
eral use. And in a country with many wide-open spaces at that
time, what sense would it have made to build a new city in a
spot that would require massive clearance of existing properties?
Actually, there were a good many houses around the chosen
area, but they were widely separated by open fields and ditches.
The fact that residents were few greatly lessened the cost of
buying up private landholdings, a key consideration, since the
government’s funds for this purpose were truly meager.
It is understandable that the new nation’s officials and their
families were disappointed at the idea of moving to a fledgling
city so far from the established centers, but they should not
have pretended to be startled, for they might have guessed that
something in the neighborhood of this little peninsula between
Maryland and Virginia had been in the general’s mind for a
very long time, perhaps for decades. And once he was given the
authority to choose, no one was capable of seriously challeng-
ing his decision. 
There are reasons to believe that long before the states had
united to the point of having a Constitutional Convention,
before others had decided that a separate federal capital, inde-
pendent of any state, would one day be needed, George Wash-
benjamin banneker
114
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 130 ---
ington had secretly fixed on this specific location as the place
where he hoped to see a new city. The first President himself
appears in an entirely new light when viewed as the subtle
planner who worked for years to situate the national capital
where he wanted it. And there is firm evidence of a campaign to
make this into a reality as early as 1785. How he positioned
himself to accomplish it shows that beyond being a courageous
and farsighted military leader with an iron will, he was a patient
and adroit strategist of the first rank.
T o work toward winning his way, he used an array of talents
that are seldom combined in one human being—a keen judg-
ment of other men and the approaches that might appeal to
each one, a sharp sense of money’s role in most human affairs,
an ability to keep his thoughts close to the vest while listening
patiently to the contrary arguments of others, a well-veiled
killer instinct for turning their inconsistencies into deal-makers,
and even the employment of social graces and small interludes
of good fellowship to soften or mislead the opposition. It is
clear that he used his temper to intimidate anyone who might
be thinking of crossing him, but it is less well known that he
was sometimes willing to use an engaging friendliness if it were
needed to win others over.
Not quite as accidentally as it seemed at the time, Wash-
ington had arranged to be in several brief meetings with lead-
ing merchants and landowners of Maryland and Virginia in the
years following the Revolutionary War victory. While he was
being hailed in every one of the former colonies, he devoted
most of his time to being a Virginian and to his near neighbors,
prefiguring the modern dictum that “all politics is local.” At
one of these postwar gatherings, the general surprised half a
dozen men of varying prominence by suggesting that they come
to Mount Vernon for a few days to discuss matters of common
interest. All were surprised, and the two youngest were stunned
Meanwhile, at Mount Vernon
115
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 131 ---
by the honor. Because Washington’s aloofness had long been a
trait that kept others in awe, when he chose to lift the barrier
briefly, the result was seductive. Now he used a show of warmth
and informality to ignite a positive glow. When the group,
casually assorted as it seemed, arrived at his home on March 28,
1785, their mood could not have been more receptive.
Adding to their amazement as they arrived, what they saw
was not the imposing giant whose majestic bearing alone
inspired compliance. They found the general in coarse farm-
worker’s clothing, standing in a field to one side of the home as
a soft rain fell. His shoes were mud-caked, and water dripped
from his broad straw hat. Welcoming them warmly, he told
them to go in and find Mrs. Washington, while he would go
and get properly dressed.
He must have felt considerable irritation that Robert Mor-
ris, one of the richest men in America, had sent word that he
couldn’t come, for Morris’s holdings in Pennsylvania, New Jer-
sey, and Delaware would have meant that an even greater region
was represented. But he didn’t betray his chagrin at all. T o the
five who were there, he gave the impression that nothing could
please him more than spending a few days in their company.
They were Colonel George Mason and Alexander Henderson,
both of Virginia, and three Marylanders, Samuel Chase, Thomas
Stone, and Major Daniel Jenifer. The last two were younger
men of promise, unused to such elevated company, and a little
awkward at first. And while the short, plump Chase, a wealthy
Annapolis merchant who was known for his stormy ways, would
have been ready to start talking business at once, even he went
docilely into the drawing room to take tea and make polite
small talk.
As the days went on, the other five men meeting around a
table on the second floor could not have been oblivious to the
fact that General Washington, at 6/H110323/H11033, was a head taller than any
benjamin banneker
116
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 132 ---
of them. But he was so gentle a discussion leader that Chase
occasionally stomped a big foot to emphasize a point, and the
much younger Stone, Henderson, and Jenifer found the courage
to speak their minds. As for George Mason, he was invariably
direct and plainspoken, a trait Washington prized. In the end,
they all found themselves pretty much in favor of what seemed
just a set of general ideas about trade in the region and how the
waterways should be used. Simple as it appeared, they were
doing no less than laying out a development plan that would
govern investments and population movement far into the
future. In a period when each state was jealous and suspicious
of every neighbor, such thinking was revolutionary. Since it just
so happened that all five of the visitors were members of their
states’ Houses of Delegates, one of them proposed that their
thoughts be put on paper as the informal draft of an agreement.
Washington, almost diffidently, said that in order to have it
done by three persons from each state, he wondered if they
would like to count him as a third Virginian representative. All
the others were overcome at this graceful condescension and
one said, “Every state would be honored to have the Hero of
our nation speak for it in such a way.”
And so it was that six relaxed comrades, sipping ale together
in a cozy Mount Vernon room, agreed on a virtual treaty of
trade and navigation for a big part of the mid-Atlantic region.
The key element was the Potomac River. In a day when states
(and even some private owners) thought of waterways as prize
possessions, with travel and fishing subject to tolls, this agree-
ment proposed that the Potomac would belong to no state,
would be a toll-free highway and open to fishing by all. (When
it came time to choose a national capital years later, should it
have been any surprise that a site on this unique river came first
to mind?) Samuel Chase, in fact, saw it as being a model for all,
saying, “The truth is that making everything open and free is
Meanwhile, at Mount Vernon
117
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 133 ---
the way to build this nation. I’m a merchant, and I can tell you
that we only tie our hands when we try to charge fees and
duties every time some goods go from here to there. The more
we share and trade, the more good fortune we promote for our-
selves.” It was to take Europe 165 years to start experimenting
with this bumptiously American route to growth—the idea of a
Common Market that enabled a few colonies to populate a
continent in a matter of decades.
There was no dissent from that, either. In fact, General
Washington said—and it’s fair to imagine that he had a faraway
look in his eyes—“There is so much business and new interest
in this region that I have heard land prices up and down the
river are rising every day.” Was he thinking, even then, of where
the money would come from if a new nation burdened with
massive debt from the recent Revolution had to find sufficient
cash to buy land for a new federal city? It would be difficult
enough if all thirteen states were willing contributors to the war
debt. But the southerners denied that they owed any part of it;
the Northern states had made the decision to go to war, and the
debt was largely theirs, as the South chose to see it.
T wo years later, at the 1787 Constitutional Convention in
Philadelphia, came the discussion that greatly displeased three
major cities—Boston, New Y ork, and Philadelphia itself. At one
time, they had taken it for granted that one of these three
would become the nation’s permanent capital. But they were
undercut by the memory of a frightening incident. Y ears before,
while Philadelphia was serving as interim capital, troops of the
Pennsylvania militia had menacingly surrounded a meeting
where the early national fathers were debating controversial
issues, including the matter of back pay for men in uniform.
These soldiers thought they would get their money by holding
the lawmakers hostage. It had been a comic-opera scenario, and
the founders had escaped to a New Jersey site. They came back
benjamin banneker
118
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 134 ---
only three months later, after Pennsylvania’s legislature prom-
ised that such mutinous behavior would never be repeated. But
the nation-builders had learned a lesson: There must be a fed-
eral capital located outside of any state.
At the Constitutional Convention, a size of three miles
square was first proposed. But South Carolina’s Charles Pinck-
ney kept pushing to triple that figure, explaining privately to
some of his colleagues, “The big northern cities are sure to
keep trying to get the capital back if we set up just a small fed-
eral city. It’s got to be big enough to show it is permanent.”
And in the end, Pinckney won his way. “T en miles square” was
written into the Constitution.
Fortunately, less successful was one founder’s suggestion
that the Constitution should impose a limit of no more than
3,000 men to defend the federal area. George Washington, on
hearing it, whispered to a young member of the Convention, “I
will make no remark on that. But you should move to amend
the motion to say, ‘No foreign enemy may invade the United
States with more than 3000 troops.’ ”
But there was no agreement whatsoever about the capital’s
location. The North continued to feel that its undisputed sen-
iority in urban matters must certainly bring the capital its way.
For that very reason, the South was equally determined that such
arrogance must be put down. Consequently, the U.S. Constitu-
tion had to be finalized without naming the whereabouts of the
federal capital. It was left open to further discussion. The im-
passe continued for three years more, until June 1790, when
three men of great prestige—Secretary of State Thomas Jeffer-
son, T reasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, and James Madi-
son—met with several key congressmen in New York City. The
clever compromise they worked out used another problem—
the old war debt dispute that George Washington had worried
about five years earlier—as a lever to move the location question
Meanwhile, at Mount Vernon
119
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 135 ---
one step nearer to solution. No one could doubt that they
had President Washington’s prior approval when they struck
the “dinner-table bargain,” basically agreeing that a Southern
location would be chosen for the national capital provided the
Southern states would assume a share of the Revolutionary
War debt.
Now came the question of just what “Southern location” it
was to be. In only a month, the Congress passed the Residence
Bill of July 16, 1790, naming George Washington the agent of
Congress to choose the site—anywhere along a sixty-seven-mile
reach of the Potomac—for a permanent seat of government. He
was to acquire the necessary land and appoint commissioners to
oversee construction. He had won full power to turn his old
dream into a living capital city, to mold it with his own hands.
Washington pretended to be almost reluctant to accept so great
a responsibility alone, but he quickly overcame this hesitation,
for was this not the moment he had planned for years? Only
weeks elapsed before he announced his choice of a site. It was
obvious that he could, in fact, have done so the next day, for
within hours, he had a group of prechosen assistants fanning
out over the area, posing as private buyers and paying cash for
the land before its future federal use drove up the prices.
The area of destiny—the new Federal District—was that
small peninsula next to both Maryland and Virginia, between
the Potomac and Anacostia rivers, that Captain John Smith had
seen while sailing the Potowamacke in 1608.
The announcement was a bombshell. Not because it was
truly remote, for it was adjacent to the neat tobacco port of
George T own, Maryland, and quite near Alexandria, Virginia,
which was then the nation’s third largest port, but because it
was far from cities where the future officials wanted to spend
any substantial part of their year. They would go on complain-
ing about the “primitive conditions” for many years, but it was
benjamin banneker
120
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 136 ---
nonsensical to have agreed on the need for a new city and then
pretended that it should have been born fully developed.
Fortunately, the Father of the Nation could seem unper-
turbed by the complaints. With all he had done to create a
country, he need not—and did not—feel the least bit apologetic
if his choice was unpopular. He appeared sure of being right.
This man who, when learning to be a surveyor at age sixteen,
had once told his diary that “the bed as they call’d it was noth-
ing but a Little Straw—matted together and one Thread Bare
blanket with double its Weight of Vermin such as Lice and
Fleas” was hardly sympathetic with those who found the new
capital’s accommodations distasteful. Having pushed his way
through so many overgrown and marshy areas while learning
his trade, he saw nothing daunting about the site. Moreover, it
was not many miles from his own Mount Vernon estate, which
he was continuing to improve. He had, in fact, often ridden
near the selected land on his way to George T own to clear his
tobacco shipments through the customshouse. That very famil-
iarity and proximity, of course, created scandalous tales, tales he
probably never heard—of how rich he would now grow by hav-
ing used his power to select a spot certain to increase the value
of his own nearby properties. The rumors found an eager audi-
ence, but they had little or no impact. Most Americans really
felt that there would have been no United States if George
Washington had not put every bit of his mind and body into
such a desperate cause. In all the ways that really counted, their
faith in him was total.
Washington made the official proclamation of the new Dis-
trict of Columbia on January 24, 1791 (with no mention yet of
the city’s name), and he directed the survey of the ten-mile-
square area to go forward. At the same time, he also appointed
three commissioners to oversee the design of the city: Daniel
Carroll, Thomas Johnson, and Dr. David Stuart.
Meanwhile, at Mount Vernon
121
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 137 ---
The usually taciturn President was uncharacteristically
wordy about the new city and its prospects, perhaps as a safe-
guard against the continuing efforts of Boston, New Y ork, and
Philadelphia to win reconsideration for their own dwindling
claims to become the federal capital. Even such a grim event as
the yellow fever epidemic of 1793 was used by some promoters
as evidence that the chosen capital was ill placed, citing a figure
of 6,000 dead there—clearly spurious, since the capital under
construction had a population only in the hundreds, and the
deaths were few. Health records for the time are very inexact,
but historians of the Centers for Disease Control say that
Philadelphia, the temporary capital, was hardest hit that year,
losing over 5,000 persons, or more than 10 percent of its pop-
ulation—and a third of the population fled the city. The Presi-
dent feared that he might cause even greater panic if he left
Philadelphia for a planned vacation at Mount Vernon, and Mrs.
Washington refused to leave without him, so they stayed on
heroically, but quite safely, because a temperature drop had
killed off the mosquitoes that, unknown to medical science,
were the carriers of the disease.
Even after this, Washington was soon writing letters like
this one to Arthur Y oung, a British agricultural reformer, on
December 12, 1793: “The Federal City is increasing fast in
buildings and rising in consequence; and will, no doubt, from
the advantages given to it by Nature and its proximity to a rich
interior country and the Western T erritory, become the empo-
rium of the United States.” More than once, he roundly pre-
dicted that the new city would “quickly rival the great capitals
of Europe.” That turned out to be very far from the mark, for
the city’s population stayed well below expectations for a full
half-century.
George Washington would, of course, not live to see how
slowly the city of his dreams would move toward the global
benjamin banneker
122
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 138 ---
position he envisioned. In the immediate aftermath of his choice,
he had less grandiose and more irritating matters to plague
him. He hated the office of President, made that plain more
than once, and was so infuriated by the political maneuverings
of others that he secretly began to question his own abilities for
the first time in his life. This dislike for the office probably
contributed to his lackluster performance as an administrator.
T wo of the presidential decisions he soon made in an uncharac-
teristically offhand way regarding the building of the capital
city—although they were not of great national consequence—
were embarrassing examples of his declining effectiveness.
Meanwhile, at Mount Vernon
123
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 139 ---
11
}
Astonishing Choices
A
fter so much strategic brilliance in winning the right to
choose a location for the capital city, George Washington
put himself into a box when it came to getting it planned
and built. He hastily chose a quarrelsome Frenchman to design
it, which created animosity on the part of many American
architects and Northern political leaders who backed them.
Then, trying to calm those critics, he chose a fine surveyor with
perfect American lineage to lay out the city’s basic lines, but
failed to scent a possible surprise when he went along with the
man’s insistence on selecting his own staff. In both cases, he was
employing a great talent, but creating situations that would
haunt him.
In choosing Pierre L ’Enfant as chief architect, the President
took on an impossibly difficult man who laid out a magnificent
plan for the new capital. But it was far too grand for the city’s
role at the time and hopelessly beyond what the young govern-
ment was able to afford. L ’Enfant had a feeling for the city’s
destiny and a dedication that justify calling him a great early
Washingtonian, but his vision was a full century ahead of his
time. Only George Washington himself shared it, and it is said
124
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 140 ---
that his eyes sparkled whenever the young architect spoke. Y et
this junior person was one of the very few whom Washington
found hard to handle, and L ’Enfant eventually made the Presi-
dent miserable.
The small Frenchman’s daring and unflinching courage
were what had appealed so much to General Washington dur-
ing the war years. More than anyone else, he became a protégé
of the great man. As the son of a court painter in the time of
Louis XV , Pierre L ’Enfant had studied under his father at the
Academy of Art at the same time that he was being trained as
an engineer. He was the quintessential multi-aptituder, with a
splendid future before him in his own country. But he was cap-
tivated by the new nation being born across the ocean, and at
age twenty-three he came to America as a volunteer and was
commissioned a lieutenant in the Continental Army. He was
absolutely fearless, a glorious wartime trait that proved self-
destructive when carried over to civilian operations. He had
survived the terrible Valley Forge winter with the general, was
wounded at Savannah, captured by the British at Charleston,
then released in 1782. The admiring General Washington saw
to it that L ’Enfant was honored by the Congress and made a
Major of Engineers before his discharge into peacetime life.
In that same year, L ’Enfant began to use his artistic talent to
good advantage, creating stage sets for a Philadelphia pavilion.
But with his usual flair for making quick moves, he was at-
tracted to New Y ork City and soon began to get commissions
for private architectural projects. He was earning good money
from these and from a number of memorials and church build-
ings that he planned.
By 1788, when New Y ork celebrated its adherence to the
new U.S. Constitution, he had designed a massive domed ban-
quet hall to seat six thousand guests. That feat made him the
natural choice to convert New Y ork’s old City Hall, making it
Astonishing Choices
125
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 141 ---
into the first Capitol of the United States. It was renamed Fed-
eral Hall, and George Washington was inaugurated President
there on April 30, 1789.
That proved to be the apogee of L ’Enfant’s thriving career.
In the next year, soon after the President had chosen the site for
Washington, D.C., L ’Enfant wrote to his old commander and
offered his services in planning the new capital city. No one
could have known how badly he was overreaching in his notion
of what was expected of him. Although his greatest fame was
just ahead of him, his life went downhill from then on. Perhaps
the thrilling grandeur of his letter to President Washington
should have sounded a warning note, but instead, his old gen-
eral was enthralled by it. L ’Enfant had written: “T o change a
wilderness into a city, to erect and beautify buildings . . . to that
degree of perfection necessary to receive the seat of govern-
ment of so extensive an empire.” Except for that last word, the
President was thinking along similar lines at that time, so much
so that some think he had once been tempted to accept a crown
and make the new nation a constitutional monarchy. He had
the good sense to suspect that those who urged this were inter-
ested mainly in the titles of nobility it might mean for them.
But Washington always found L ’Enfant’s dynamism infectious,
and he answered the letter promptly, making him the chief
architect of the city.
In doing this, Washington committed an oversight that
might seem astonishing for a military man accustomed to pre-
cision about chains of command. In truth, Washington not only
hated the office of President, but felt he lacked the skills needed
to be a civilian administrator, and was subject to the whims and
jabs of politicians around him. Before taking office, he had
written to his trusted friend Henry Knox, “My movements to
the chair of government will be accompanied with feelings not
unlike those of a culprit who is going to the place of his execu-
benjamin banneker
126
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 142 ---
tion.” He found it worse than he had feared, and his hair went
from a mixture of chestnut brown and gray to all white in less
than a year. There were times when he lost his temper and
ranted while several others were in the room. In a typical out-
of-control moment, he shouted that, “by God, I had rather be
in my grave than in my present situation.”
In the case of L ’Enfant, Washington had failed to make it
clear that the chief architect would report to and be account-
able to the city commissioners, not to the President of the
United States. That was a fatal mistake for, incredibly, this gen-
eral before whom the greatest and richest Americans became
tongue-tied with awe was never able to make the younger man
understand his place. Repeatedly, L ’Enfant would run to the
President with ideas or complaints about routine problems.
And Washington could not bring himself to give the firm put-
down that was clearly needed. This unique partiality that no
one else ever had was so well known and even talked about
among members of the inner circle that it would not be sur-
prising if some of them made remarks about an improper rela-
tionship. But not the slightest evidence of that exists. A much
likelier explanation would be that Washington had a touch of
the francophilia that was current at the time. In most cultural
matters, the French were being copied by the rulers and the
elite of other nations. Americans have always pretended to dis-
dain such a notion, but the more elevated an American was, the
likelier he was to be touched by it. Given how Washington
admired and was influenced by the Marquis de Lafayette, it is
possible that even a mind as independent as his was not
immune. Add to that a generous amount of gratitude for young
L ’Enfant’s services, a warm feeling for his nearly filial attitude,
and genuine amazement at his total lack of awe in Washington’s
presence—all possible factors in making a man who had no son
of his own reluctant to destroy this charmed relationship.
Astonishing Choices
127
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 143 ---
For his part, L ’Enfant apparently thought that as a friend of
the President—who had shown himself to be highly favorable
to the proposed plans—he had no reason to waste time arguing
with other creatures who understood nothing of his elevated
goals. His opinion of the feeble intelligences in this primitive
land must have taken another dip when the newspapers referred
to him as “Mr. Longfont.”
Even before L ’Enfant dug his own grave, President Wash-
ington was again encountering complaints from leading North-
ern cities about the preference that had been given to this for-
eigner. There were frequent reminders that since this was to be
the federal capital for the Northern states, too, the fine archi-
tects of places like Boston and Philadelphia should be given at
least an equal chance to contribute their ideas. The President,
therefore, prudently hoped he might quiet this xenophobia by
appointing someone from a respected old American family to
handle the daunting job of chief surveyor, the one who would
mark out the boundaries within which L ’Enfant would create
streets and suggest the locations of major buildings. This was,
in fact, the easiest of choices for the President. As an old sur-
veyor himself, George Washington judged Andrew Ellicott to
be the finest surveyor in the country, and he handpicked him to
define the boundaries of the city that would come to bear his
name. Ellicott was a fast worker, which accorded perfectly with
Washington’s strong wish to see the new city take shape as rap-
idly as possible. He was from a fine Maryland family, which no
Northerner could sneer at, and he had an excellent war record.
In naming him, the President was sure he had picked a winner,
and he saw no reason to cavil when Ellicott insisted on the
right to choose his own staff.
Andrew Ellicott did prove to be a fortunate choice, for he
was even forced to complete much of the work of the capital’s
original designer when the erratic and intemperate L ’Enfant
benjamin banneker
128
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 144 ---
had to be fired. Ellicott went on to be the surveyor who ex-
tended the Mason-Dixon Line westward and marked out the
Georgia–North Carolina boundary, and the line that separated
Spanish Florida from the United States.
What makes Ellicott a key person here is that he coura-
geously—some would have said outrageously—named Ben-
jamin Banneker as a principal assistant in the historic survey of
Washington, D.C. This was a truly startling choice for Ellicott
to have made. He might well have expected a backlash of anger
from other elite leaders. If challenged, he could not even have
proved that the black man he chose was an experienced sur-
veyor. He was simply going on his assessment of Banneker’s tal-
ent and character. It happened that Banneker had studied the
finest textbook on surveying; and with Banneker, one good book
constituted a course. But Ellicott would not know whether his
decision was a good one until they actually started work. Presi-
dent George Washington must have been thunderstruck to find
an African American on the team, but he had promised Major
Ellicott that he could choose his own staff, and he kept his word.
The task that Ellicott accepted was a tremendous one. Every
other major city in the country had grown up naturally, gen-
erally from a few farmhouses leading to a general store and
then other venturesome farmers and businesspersons clustering
in the area until it grew from village to town to city. The Dis-
trict of Columbia would be totally different. Its four ten-mile
lines had to be created from scratch, aligned and physically
forced through woods, underbrush, rocks, and depressions—
over swamps and even across rivers. And all this had to be done
without taking any land from Maryland or Virginia beyond the
exact amount they had agreed to.
Though he was self-confident, the major felt the need of a
first-class assistant who could help him to resolve the myriad
problems that were sure to arise and also be a strong right hand
Astonishing Choices
129
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 145 ---
with all the highly technical questions. The caliber of person he
wanted was shown by the fact that he first asked his nephew
George to fill the job. Now thirty-four years old, Banneker’s
close friend George Ellicott was entrusted with much of Elli-
cott & Co.’s top-level management. His stature can be judged
from the fact that anxious as he was to take part in his Uncle
Andrew’s historic project, George had to say no because he was
heavily engaged in the expansion of several mills and did not
dare take leave at just that time. But he had a firm recommen-
dation to make, and one account says he quickly suggested,
“T ake Benjamin Banneker as your assistant. There’s not a bet-
ter man for the job anywhere.”
It has been said that the major quickly agreed. But in fact,
there were a few minutes of hesitation for discussion of a sub-
ject that has been touched only skimmingly, if at all, in most
previous accounts. Quite surprisingly, in view of his moderation
in all things, it seems that the Ellicotts thought Banneker had
an alcohol problem. There is a memorandum written by the
major indicating that he asked George Ellicott, “What about
the drinking? Have you taken that into account?” And Ellicott
is said to have replied, “I don’t think that will be any problem.”
The fact that this was an issue gains credence from a line
that Banneker himself wrote in his journal at the time he
accepted Andrew Ellicott’s offer of the survey job: “I resolved
that I would do no drinking at all during this time.”
This subject of alcohol is touched on lightly in a few other
comments by acquaintances, but it does not seem to have been
a serious problem for Banneker. Drinking was probably not a
lifelong habit, but one that he started only in later years when a
little more leisure and a little more affluence had brought a
relaxed attitude. The fact that his detailed lists of purchases
make no mention of buying either wine or hard spirits seems to
weigh against any sweeping assertion that he had a major prob-
benjamin banneker
130
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 146 ---
lem with alcohol. But since the Ellicotts were so well disposed
toward Benjamin in every way, the mere fact that this was dis-
cussed seriously at such an important time has to be taken as evi-
dence that they had occasionally seen him showing the effects
of overimbibing, as a few other friends had. Looking back at his
life now, this comes, perhaps, as a surprise, but also provides a
little relief at finding a small chink in the almost-too-perfect
facade that he presented to the world. Maybe George and An-
drew Ellicott felt that way about it, too, and only took it seri-
ously at the moment when he was going to be entrusted with a
historic responsibility.
At any rate, the Ellicotts made the decision in Banneker’s
favor rather quickly. Martha T yson, the impeccable contempo-
rary source, has mentioned this moment in a way that attempts
to recall the dialogue as vividly as possible. In that version,
Andrew Ellicott went at once to Banneker’s cabin and told him,
“Get your clothes together for a great trip. We’re leaving in
three days to help President Washington build a new federal
city. My job is to survey the entire site before any building
begins, and I would like you to be my assistant. Can you leave
your farm for a few months?”
Even though he tried to appear outwardly calm as usual,
Banneker’s high excitement is evidenced by the fact that he
thought of asking a woman’s advice about preparing for the
adventure. George’s wife (and Martha T yson’s mother), Eliza-
beth, was the Ellicott woman he knew best, and one who held
him in very high esteem. She wisely stressed warm things,
which probably saved his life in some of the arduous months of
primitive living ahead. Her selection was what he had with him
when he and the major left on horseback on February 7, 1791.
Their first stop was Alexandria, Virginia, the port city outside
the appointed federal territory. It was the point from which
they would begin to survey the area.
Astonishing Choices
131
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 147 ---
}
It might be said that a black man’s historic participation in the
building of his nation’s capital city in the eighteenth century
was an example of fate’s totally haphazard ways. But a better
argument could be made for the moral that destiny’s dice usu-
ally favor the person who is well prepared whenever and how-
ever the game is played.
There is no doubt that others could have been found to
handle Banneker’s role in the survey of Washington, D.C., but
his combined knowledge of surveying and astronomy would have
been hard to match on short notice. The independent-minded
Ellicott wanted Banneker as an assistant because of his compe-
tence, precision, and high sense of responsibility, regardless of
what most whites might have thought. George Washington, as-
tonished as he was, kept his promise and let Ellicott have his
way, for he wanted to see the survey begun without delay.
The unique nature of the Ellicott–Banneker partnership
was highlighted almost immediately when they stopped at a
leading hostelry called Wise’s Fountain T avern. It was a proud
old establishment that had long been called Fountain T avern,
and its recent new owner, Wise, was determined to maintain its
reputation. The innkeeper was surprised to see this imposing
man of military bearing riding up to his door with, as he
thought, a fine-looking Negro “servant,” not trailing behind,
but riding side by side. Recording a conversation after more
than two centuries is hazardous and should be considered only
a verbal sketch of what transpired, but it is said that when Elli-
cott asked for two of his best rooms, Wise responded, “I have
an excellent room for you, sir. But your servant will have to
occupy a place in another part of the inn, of course.”
“He is not my servant,” Ellicott is believed to have said.
“We are on an official mission for the government of this coun-
try, and we’ll need rooms close together.” As he usually did,
benjamin banneker
132
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 148 ---
Major Ellicott got his way. Whether those words are correct or
imprecise, the thought deserves an early and honored place in
the spotty history of civil rights in the United States. As late as
the mid-twentieth century, only a few white persons of strong
character refused to dine at a Southern restaurant if it would
not also seat a black fellow traveler. In this case, even if we have
seen previous indications of a subtle line that made Andrew and
even George sometimes talk to Banneker with a touch of con-
descension, the major was not about to allow anyone else to
disrespect him. He was Major Ellicott’s subordinate, as anyone
else on his staff would have been, and thus a comrade whom
the confused Mr. Wise would have to treat as an equal.
In the days ahead, as they set up a base camp, much as a
mountain-climbing expedition might do, Banneker was regret-
tably forced to give up his comfortable quarters at the inn and
move to a tent on the cold, damp campsite. The reason was
that one of his indispensable duties was to take full charge of
the astronomical clock, a device that ensured consistent time
and positioning. Banneker understood now why he and George
Ellicott were the first people Andrew Ellicott turned to in his
search for an assistant. He may have recalled the afternoon
when, as a very young man, he had stared in wonder at the first
watch he ever saw. Now, uniquely skilled as he was in both
watchmaking and astronomy, he could study this state-of-the-
art device for a half-hour and understand the part it would play
in establishing the precise outline of the District of Columbia,
as set forth in the Constitution of the United States. It is not
hard to imagine what turmoil, what endless arguments among
politicians, could have been set off by some deviation that gave
either Virginia or Maryland a reason to claim that one of the
capital’s boundaries had been slightly awry at one point and
then, when extended for ten miles, robbed the state of hun-
dreds of square miles of land.
Astonishing Choices
133
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 149 ---
T o one who has never attempted surveying, it may seem
superfluous to consult the stars before establishing lines here on
Earth. But in Major Ellicott’s case the challenge was almost like
locating positions at sea. The area he was to set apart was
largely in a wilderness where there were few established start-
ing points. Staring out over brush and swamp, where so much
looked alike, the danger of error was very high. The project’s
leader had to be a woodsman as well as a surveyor. And there
had to be an astronomer working with him. Sightings that had
been recorded on a previous afternoon could be taken up accu-
rately on the following morning only if the exact placement on
Earth was confirmed by the angles between those points and
certain known stars. And since Earth’s motion constantly altered
those angles, the precise time of the measurement was vital.
Since this could have been thrown off by small temperature
changes, a delicate arrangement of several thermometers all
around the equipment was also required. It was helpful that
Benjamin had studied surveying. Although it was book learning,
never strengthened by practice, it enabled him to understand
everything that the rest of the team had to do. But his skill in
astronomy was still more important. Not even Andrew Ellicott
was as competent to make sure that each day’s work would
begin with points that had been confirmed by the heavens.
So Banneker often had to check the clock, with readings of
the sky every hour throughout the night. He also had to keep
watching and moving the several thermometers that ensured a
steady temperature for the clock. Then, just when he was about
to settle down for a little more rest, Ellicott, who pushed him-
self as hard as he drove the whole team, usually arose before
dawn and rushed to the camp to begin consultations with his
assistant. The cold ground and sleeplessness affected Banneker
so much that he complained of feeling poorly in the frequent
letters he wrote to his sisters.
benjamin banneker
134
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 150 ---
His relations with the rest of the team were apparently
excellent. The engineer corpsmen invited him to join them at
their common table at mealtime, but he politely declined. It is
plain that the invitation was wholehearted on the part of the
other men, but Benjamin apparently thought it prudent not to
risk any possible appearance of a wish to contest the color line.
In keeping with the delicate sensibility that he may have inher-
ited from Dogon ancestors, Banneker was particularly anxious
to avoid anything that might make problems for Andrew Elli-
cott in the course of this historic mission. So he requested that
a separate small table be set for him, but always in the same
room or tent in which the others dined, and there seems never
to have been a whisper of complaint on anyone’s part. Inciden-
tally, even when wine was being served at the main table, Ben-
jamin declined the offer and held firmly to his resolution to
avoid alcohol for the duration of the survey.
No account mentions actual encounters between Banneker
and the President. It seems likely that Washington asked for
these to go unreported, which must have been a most irritating
position to find himself in—wanting to be recognized as a
hands-on observer of the survey, yet pretending not to know
the man who was doing one of its most meticulous jobs. It is
virtually certain that Washington and Banneker were in the
same meetings on many occasions. The President came to the
Alexandria site repeatedly, staying at Suter’s, another well-
known Alexandria inn. And each time he arrived, Washington
went quickly to the work area, checking the progress in detail.
Banneker’s technical part in the project would have made the
old surveyor wish to question him personally. But although
President Washington had approved (or rather, had not disap-
proved) Banneker’s appointment, he seems to have wanted to
avoid the kind of racist scuttlebutt that would certainly have
caused astonishment in the North and anger in the South.
Astonishing Choices
135
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:58 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 151 ---
Washington limited himself to statements proclaiming that the
work was going splendidly and that he was very satisfied.
The only newspaper known to have mentioned Banneker’s
race was the George T own Weekly Ledger, which called him “an
Ethiopian, whose abilities as a surveyor and astronomer clearly
prove that Mr. Jefferson’s conclusion that this race of men were
void of mental endowments was without foundation.” The
wording and the slap at Jefferson show that the liberal tenden-
cies of our press go back a long way, even though the political
leaders could more easily ignore its jibes then than they could
as the media grew to giant proportions. There is evidence that
a reporter from this same George T own newspaper asked the
President about Banneker on one of his visits to the survey site.
And, the story goes, George Washington turned on his heel
and walked away without a word. He reacted in this way, from
what is now known of George Washington, not because he
objected to the man himself, but because he feared the South’s
reaction if the Banneker story was publicized.
}
Thomas Jefferson, who was often mercurial in his thoughts
about race, was different from Washington in this regard. He
had written publicly about blacks’ lack of intellectual ability. At
one point, he pronounced them definitely inferior. But typi-
cally, he also wrote opinions casting doubt on that. In his capac-
ity as Secretary of State, but also because he was the recognized
authority on all matters of architecture and taste, Jefferson had
been consulted about the appointment of Major Andrew Elli-
cott and had specifically given approval to his choice of an assis-
tant. One account, in fact, says that “Jefferson encouraged Elli-
cott to employ Banneker for the preliminary survey.” The term
“negro” was not used, however, and it is likely that most lead-
benjamin banneker
136
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 152 ---
ers in either the North or the South, ready to pounce as they
might have been, had no idea of who Ellicott’s assistant was.
For over two solid months, Banneker was at work or on call
virtually twenty-four hours a day. Many men on the project had
harsher work to do, clearing trees and pushing through the
underbrush. But all of them were free to rest when darkness
fell. Only Banneker had to jump up after a few hours’ sleep and
make his astronomical observations. Then, after conferring with
Andrew Ellicott at daybreak, he could try for a little more rest.
But he was almost invariably called for more consultations all
through the day as the chains were moved and new sightings
had to be established. He didn’t have to be told that he must re-
main in touch and ready at any hour. He knew it, for he under-
stood perfectly what Ellicott’s objectives and problems were. It
would be a great mistake to underestimate Banneker’s contribu-
tion to the survey of the new capital city just because he was
on the job for only a few months. During that time, the basic
Astonishing Choices
137
Banneker and Major Ellicott in the field.
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 153 ---
layout was set. His role might be compared to that of the navi-
gator on a large aircraft. He might not fly the plane, but his
early calculations would affect the course of the entire flight.
}
Meanwhile, Pierre L ’Enfant was accumulating enemies at a
great rate. His disdain for almost anyone who ventured to ad-
vise or caution him on any subject caused head-shaking on all
sides. For the most part, he simply ignored them all and went
directly to President Washington to get differences settled. It is
hard to imagine George Washington being timid, but on this
subject he was really embarrassed, time after time, for he knew
that L ’Enfant’s detour around proper channels should not have
been tolerated.
Naturally, such a person would clash more than once with
the strong-willed Andrew Ellicott, and he would have been
especially dismissive of Banneker—not because of color, for the
French have not usually been given to anti-black racism, but
because he would think an assistant was beneath his notice.
Banneker’s renowned gentleness might have made him a useful
intermediary, but there is no firm evidence of such a role. In
any case, the disturbances between architect and surveyor did
not lead to serious explosions because L ’Enfant seemed to sense
Washington’s real admiration of Ellicott. Amazingly, that kept
the Frenchman from pushing their disagreements too far.
Aside from the President, Thomas Jefferson was the only
leader whom L ’Enfant was willing to converse with almost as an
equal. Here, he felt, was a person whose love of France showed
at least a modicum of taste. He did not realize that Jefferson,
for all his fascination with fine architecture, had become wary
of the great plans L ’Enfant was proposing. Jefferson could be so
devious in conversations and correspondence that his true feel-
benjamin banneker
138
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 154 ---
ings were hidden from others. In this case, he warned the Pres-
ident that L ’Enfant seemed to be projecting huge expenditures,
far beyond anything the new country could afford. But at the
same time, he tried to appear helpful to the young architect,
even procuring detailed maps of the greatest European cities
for him and models of beautiful buildings that might be used in
making choices for the American capital city.
The one most openly concerned about L ’Enfant’s impracti-
cal ideas (and Jefferson’s dual position) was Alexander Hamilton,
the Secretary of the T reasury. Hamilton even contrived cleverly to
interrupt L ’Enfant’s District of Columbia work by diverting his
attention to a New Jersey project. But that, too, was a failure, and
the delay was brief. The truth, however, was that President Wash-
ington’s favoritism was well known, and the others could not
shake L ’Enfant’s position. Not until L ’Enfant did it to himself.
Constantly going over everyone’s head and troubling Presi-
dent Washington had become an accepted fact of life. It is
uncertain how long that might have gone on if L ’Enfant had
not committed one unforgivable piece of destructive arrogance.
A home belonging to an important city official was being con-
structed on a site that the architect strongly coveted. It was
blocking an avenue that he was determined to extend through
that very spot. He kept insisting that the half-completed house
be destroyed. The official, however, had powerful friends who
turned down the architect’s demand. This so enraged L ’Enfant
that when the family was out of the city, he had the place
demolished. That was too much for George Washington, for a
reason that will shortly become clear. L ’Enfant was dismissed.
This story has been told before, but the importance of the
victimized official, Daniel Carroll, has not been brought out.
Carroll was first among the city’s three commissioners and
technically L ’Enfant’s direct boss. That alone would show that
the destruction was “worse than a crime—it was a mistake,”
Astonishing Choices
139
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 155 ---
as an old French phrase puts it. But there was more to it than
that.
The capital city did not yet have a name. The District of
Columbia or the Federal District—these were designations, not
true names. The question had come up but had never been
answered. The three commissioners had been directed by the
President to decide on a name for the capital city, but he was
loath to press for a decision, lest it give the appearance that he
was especially anxious about what name it was to be. Ironically,
it was Pierre L ’Enfant who had pushed them to make a choice.
He contacted the commissioners (an odd act, since he seldom
seemed to notice their existence) to ask what the name was to
be. They met on September 9, 1791, and wrote him a response
that should have been no surprise. It said in part:
Sir: We have agreed that the Federal District shall be called
“The T erritory  of Columbia,” and the Federal City the “City
of Washington”. 
The City of Washington. Of course. George Washington
would never have proposed his own name for the capital. But
the commissioners he had appointed could hardly have called it
anything else.
So the person whose home L ’Enfant had destroyed was not
only his boss, not only the city’s leading official, but the person
whom President Washington was counting on to see that his
old dream of an American capital located in his own area would
be capped by bearing his name. Even in his ambitions, even in
his political strategies, Washington was no ordinary man.
Whatever he did was monumental, and he never looked for
cheap or easy honors. This one, like all the others, was fully
earned by hard and patient work dating back to the informal
talks at Mount Vernon nearly a decade earlier. 
benjamin banneker
140
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 156 ---
}
More pliable and lesser persons took over L ’Enfant’s job, and
some of his most exciting original ideas were quietly pushed
aside. The man was never able to overcome the shock and
depression this caused. For years after that, he was seen walking
around town alone, sometimes nostalgically picking up bricks
or pieces of lumber at a construction site, then looking into the
distance, as though seeing the mirage of a great avenue or vista
that should have been there. L ’Enfant made a few attempts to
restart his architectural practice, but they failed, some because
rich persons who were about to give him a commission got
warnings of how difficult and expensive he would be. The
money he had made in his best years lasted for a time. At one
point, he made a petition to Congress for $95,000 as compen-
sation for the Washington plan he had created; after some
years, he was awarded $3,800. But as he lived on to the age of
seventy-one, he existed mostly on the charity of others. And
when he died at a friend’s home in nearby Prince Georges
County, he was penniless. Some of the vistas he imagined and
sketched are there now, arousing gasps of pleasure from foreign
tourists and pride from Americans, for a century and a half later
many of his concepts were revived by a much richer nation that
had finally caught up with his vision.
The names of L ’Enfant and Banneker have sometimes been
coupled, as if they were co-workers or equal contributors in the
building of Washington. Attempts to equate their roles are mis-
guided. The former played a creative part in which he let his
unfortunate personality overwhelm his brilliance. Benjamin
Banneker, on the other hand, had a technical job that he did
perfectly. It was far from being the pinnacle of his great career,
but it perfectly illustrated how his lonely studies had made him
ready for great opportunities when the moment came, and it
Astonishing Choices
141
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 157 ---
opened his life to more accomplishments. It is unfortunate that
his role was partly distorted and largely hushed up. He has
existed in dim memory mainly on mangled ideas about his
work, and even utter falsehoods that are unwise attempts to
glorify a man who needs no such embellishment. Indeed, some
Washington leaders of recent times—knowing almost nothing
about the real Banneker—have made up sheer myths, especially
whenever Black History Month has brought on a search for
sound bites on radio or TV . A former member of the District of
Columbia City Council once said on a leading radio station,
“T oo few people realize that Benjamin Banneker built the city
of Washington brick by brick and stone by stone.” Of course,
he built absolutely nothing except his own cabin in Maryland.
There is also a much-repeated story that Banneker, having
seen L ’Enfant’s original design for the city just once, saved
Washington by recreating it all from memory after the moody
Frenchman refused to let anyone have the original. This is less
egregious than the brick-by-brick building story, because Ban-
neker’s memory was probably equal to the task. But thoughtful
historians question the belief that there was really only one
copy and that the whole plan could have been lost. It is cer-
tainly true that L ’Enfant might have been spiteful enough to
deny anyone the right to see his plan. In fact, there is a letter
written by Andrew Ellicott on February 23, 1792, in which he
stated, “In this business we met with difficulties of a very seri-
ous nature. Major L ’Enfant refused us the use of the original!
What his motives were, God knows.” But then he continued,
“The plan which we have furnished, I believe will be found to
answer the ground better than the large one in the Major’s
hands.” 
It is believed that this substitute “plan which we have fur-
nished” was made up from small separate renditions or drafts of
the overall plan. There is no sign that continuance of the work
benjamin banneker
142
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 158 ---
was seriously endangered, and it is highly unlikely that anything
had to be done from memory. Ellicott and the new designers
who replaced L ’Enfant had a series of wrangles, but the project
went on reasonably well. The letters that he and Banneker wrote
home told of hardships, but they were mostly about health
problems caused by the grueling conditions. The absence of the
overbearing little Frenchman was such a relief that there was
little worry about the shelving of his great ideas.
As Surveyor General of the United States, Andrew Ellicott
received $5 per day. Benjamin Banneker was paid at a rate of $2
per day, which was not a handsome sum for those twenty-hour
days he struggled through. But it was not at all racially moti-
vated, for this was the stipulated rate for an assistant surveyor
on this project. It worked out to the most he had ever earned
for such a short period, but he was looking forward to much
better paydays to come, plus something that meant more than
money. He knew then, as he had known all along, that the
doubts about a black person’s capacity for intellectual effort
were totally wrong. Still, as an old farmer, what a warm satis-
faction there would be if he could prove the point by making
his pen earn more than his plow had ever produced.
Astonishing Choices
143
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 159 ---
12
}
Back Home to Plant . . .
and Publish
A
fter more than two months on the Washington survey,
Banneker began to feel that he could leave the team with-
out jeopardizing the work. They had been hard at it all
this time, working seven days a week. By late April, the basic
lines establishing the new city’s external boundaries were well
along. The great accuracy of the astronomical clock was no
longer a prime requirement, so Banneker’s specialty and his
greatest contribution to the effort could be dispensed with.
The capital city, as established by Ellicott and his team, was
not going to be quite the exact square that the Constitution
called for. It would be more like a trapezoid, with its southwest
side having a length of ten miles plus 230.6 feet, its northeast
side 10 miles plus 263.1 feet, its southeast side ten miles plus
70.5 feet, and its northwest side ten miles plus only 63 feet.
That was as close to square as the topography permitted. But
notice that all were 10 plus. None was minus. As minor as the
differences may seem, it took the word of a person with Andrew
Ellicott’s prestige to make sure that any challenges to the deli-
144
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 160 ---
cate judgments he had to make could be rebutted. Sixty or sev-
enty or 230 feet, when extended for ten miles, translated to a
substantial amount of extra territory being taken from the two
adjoining states.
Banneker was well aware that his role in laying out the
nation’s capital could have symbolic importance of value to the
anti-slavery societies in many states. Up to that time, he had
been disinclined to see himself used in such a way. In notes he
wrote about his projected almanac, there were signs that his
feelings about this were changing. He mentioned the possibility
that such a publication could be used to support the abolition-
ists’ cause, but he continued to be more concerned with practi-
cal work than with symbolism. In any case, the last quarter of a
year had adequately taken care of both aspects. He was both a
symbol and a practical example of what an African American
could accomplish.
His own concerns, however, made him anxious to go home.
It was a real feat for him to have lasted so long. At age sixty, he
was suffering badly from rheumatic pains that may have re-
sulted from the many nights during which he had lain for hours
on damp ground outside his cabin, looking up into the sky
through his first primitive telescope. Now he had been forcing
this same aching body to rise before 5:00 a.m. in the chilly
humidity of the D.C. area because he was the only man who
was capable of operating the astronomical instruments. He was
far from being the only sufferer in the group. Major Andrew
Ellicott, although he was hardy and much younger, had written
repeatedly to his wife that severe bronchitis was almost laying
him low. And the harsh conditions were underscored by Elli-
cott’s added reports of casualties among the men who had to
clear underbrush and trees for a forty-foot lane along the whole
forty-mile length of the new city’s boundary lines. Within that
lane, stone posts serving as markers had to be sunk a mile
Back Home to Plant . . . and Publish
145
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 161 ---
apart—or as close to that as possible in cases where one of them
would have been in a swamp. Not surprisingly, “Another of our
men has been killed by a falling tree,” wrote Ellicott in one of
his letters home.
Apart from the oppressive conditions, other reasons im-
pelled Benjamin to take leave of his historic mission. The main
consideration was caring for his farm. Banneker was not one to
let prestigious work jeopardize his livelihood. Vividly aware as
he was of the great honor it was to serve on this project, he had
been writing regularly to his sister Minta, reminding her of the
steps that had to be taken to clear and ready the ground for the
1791 crop. He knew she was a conscientious person who would
do all she could. She let him know that she was pressing her
husband, their other sisters, and their children to lend a hand.
But they all had their own family chores to take care of, and the
long-established custom of expecting Benjamin to bear the main
responsibility for his acreage made it questionable whether they
were really doing all that was needed. Even if there were no
indications from persons who knew him, which there are, Ban-
neker’s diary entries that record his work schedule and other
living habits indicate that he was always conscious of the words
his no-nonsense father had said long ago: “Remember, it’s the
crop that puts food on the table. Do all the thinking you want,
but only after the farmwork is taken care of.” In a sense, Ban-
neker was going through the pressures that all the country’s
farmer-politicians, even those as highly placed as Washington
and Jefferson, felt when they let national duties keep them away
from their estates. They, too, often complained in letters to
friends that the crops were smaller and poorer when they could
not be overseeing the work in person. But unlike them, Banne-
ker would not let national duties threaten his finances, and he
got Major Ellicott to agree that his services could now be dis-
pensed with.
benjamin banneker
146
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 162 ---
He headed happily back to his farm. All his aches seemed to
have been lifted from him on the day he got back. Martha
T yson’s nearly firsthand account, mostly gleaned from her
mother, Elizabeth Ellicott, tells of his exquisite courtesy in
making an immediate friendly call at their home, bearing a per-
sonal message from Major Ellicott, assuring the ladies that he
was well and very happy with the progress of the work. “Mr.
Banneker appeared to be full of joy at being back in his own
community,” she said. Later, when she was quite old, she
repeated this to her own daughter, who was helping her to
write her memoir, not about “Ben,” but about “Mr. Banneker.”
}
The farm turned out to be in better condition than Banneker
had anticipated. That added to his high spirits, for it meant he
could quickly complete the planting and turn his mind to the
old ambition he had nurtured for so long. It was time to see if
he could really be the first person of his race ever to prepare his
own almanac.
The ephemeris of celestial computations had been started
months earlier, before Banneker had left for the survey. This
scientific part of the work was near enough to completion that
Banneker had asked two Baltimore printers if they would wish
to publish his almanac. They had turned him down, but politely
and giving a credible, not race-related reason. He then tried a
third printer named John Hayes, the only other one in Balti-
more. An Englishman who had come south from Philadelphia,
he was of abolitionist sentiments. He made an encouraging re-
sponse, mentioning that before making a commitment, he
would ask Major Andrew Ellicott for an opinion on the accu-
racy of the work. The final answer was delayed for so long that
Banneker wrote a quite touching letter asking Ellicott to give a
Back Home to Plant . . . and Publish
147
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 163 ---
favorable opinion before it became too late in the year for the
1791 computations to be saleable. But Ellicott, too busy to even
continue with an almanac of his own, seems never to have sent
back any word on this.
When news came that Hayes had decided not to publish
the almanac, it appeared that all his effort had been for nought,
and Banneker felt, as any first-time author would, crushed. But,
in fact, his luck had turned. Some totally unexpected good for-
tune was on its way to him from across the ocean. A young
Quaker who had gone from Philadelphia to London and orga-
nized an abolitionist center there somehow heard about Banne-
ker’s almanac and alerted his old Pennsylvania friends to this
opportunity for favorable publicity. The news came to James
Pemberton, who had recently taken over the presidency of the
Pennsylvania anti-slavery society from the dying Benjamin
Franklin, and it was a timely reminder of the great propaganda
value of an almanac written by a black man. Pemberton had
already heard of the subject and had corresponded with a Balti-
more businessman, Joseph T ownsend, who had helped to found
a Maryland society to promote abolition. In both states, there
were a number of these dynamic leaders who took real risks and
put their cause ahead of all personal considerations. In fact, one
Marylander, Elisha T yson, had become famous for personal
bravery in rescuing captured blacks from slave ships.
T ownsend assured Pemberton of his cooperation and put
his business affairs aside to check the facts about Banneker’s
work. His hasty inquiries to the Ellicotts and to John Hayes led
to a firm decision that they would all cooperate to ensure pub-
lication of the almanac. By then, it was already too late to have
the work published for the 1791 season. A complete revision
would be needed to get a 1792 edition prepared. But, of course,
when the Washington survey project intervened, everything
had to be left in limbo. All this, in addition to worry about his
benjamin banneker
148
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 164 ---
farm, had been on Banneker’s mind when he went off to assist
in planning the new capital city.
Now, back from the Washington survey, he began a very
methodical program of getting facts and figures ready for a
1792 almanac, which would have to be ready for sale late in
1791. Consequently, even this version had to be done rapidly.
Fortunately, Banneker had a new sense of confidence. The
months in Washington being part of a professional team had
made him much surer of his approach. He had learned a great
deal from Major Ellicott about work methods and orderly proj-
ect management. He even splurged to purchase a beautiful
journal from the Ellicott store to keep his records, both celes-
tial and terrestrial.
Final touches to the ephemeris were added within weeks,
during which time he held to a new schedule—spending part of
each night on studies of the sky and part of the next day on put-
ting his findings into the new journal. Next, he began trying his
hand at the essays, humor, and practical information that would
round out the publication and give it the stamp of his own per-
sonality. It had to give readers a feeling of knowing and trusting
the writer. He had long been able to fascinate listeners with
his words of wisdom. Could he convey that same warm comfort
to the printed page? Would the words of a black farmer appeal
to an almost entirely white reading audience? What on earth
could he and his readers have in common? Only when the work
went on sale would that vital question be answered. But now,
at least, he could proceed on the knowledge that he had many
citizens in two states who would help with the great effort of
finding printers willing to produce and distribute his little
book. 
Some of the printers who took an interest in the job had to
back away because their regular clients let it be known that they
would stop dealing with them if they were going to be in league
Back Home to Plant . . . and Publish
149
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 165 ---
with a black man. Now, however, the balance of power was on
Benjamin’s side. Those abolitionist societies that Banneker had
tended to regard with mixed feelings were also good  customers
of the print shops. If James Pemberton or Joseph T ownsend
wanted them to print this African American’s work, they would
not turn away. Pemberton wanted just one more word of assur-
ance that these calculations for 1792 were of good quality. He
asked one of the most respected scientists in all the colonies,
David Rittenhouse of Philadelphia, to review Banneker’s ephem-
eris calculations. He could not have devised a sterner test.
Rittenhouse was old and near the end of his life. But there
was no weariness in his answer. His response was meant to
be enthusiastic: “I think the papers I herewith return to you a
very extraordinary performance, considering the colour of the
Author.” It was more than good enough to delight Pemberton.
Banneker was less easily pleased. He showed once again that
despite his gentle and humble manner, he had a clear, calm
confidence in himself. “I am annoyed to find that the subject of
my race is so much stressed,” he remarked. “The work is either
correct or it is not. In this case, I believe it to be perfect.”
In any case, the work that had nearly died unseen was quickly
put into print. There were exciting moments when William
Goddard, Baltimore’s finest printer but a notably quirky man,
first insisted on being the exclusive publisher. But he dropped
the demand and then amazed everyone by sending a very coop-
erative and helpful letter to the Philadelphia printer who was
preparing to publish. More excitement came when another
handwritten copy of the whole work was needed at once in
Philadelphia, and Banneker, who happened to be ill at the time,
was only able to work slowly. But when it was done, heroic
measures prevailed, with George and Elias Ellicott running a
relay race to get the copy into the hands of a visiting business-
man who conveyed it personally to Philadelphia.
benjamin banneker
150
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 166 ---
Another providential turn of fortune helped to set the stage
for a triumph. A Baltimore physician named George Buchanan
addressed the Maryland Historical Society on the subject of great
blacks who helped to prove how wrong it was to treat this race
as inferior. The talk was a huge success, and it pointed to Igna-
cio Sancho, a writer, Phillis Wheatley, a poetess, and astronomer
Benjamin Banneker as examples of persons of color who were
Back Home to Plant . . . and Publish
151
Cover of Banneker’s 1793 Almanack. (Rare Book Division,
Library of Congress)
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 167 ---
advancing the entire humanrace. The speaker was specially com-
mended by the Society, and his words were published, pre-
paring the ground for the almanac as an event worthy of notice.
Just in time, in the last weeks of 1791, Banneker’s 1792
almanac was on the market, announced to the public as “ . . . a
greater, more pleasing and useful Variety than any work of the
kind and price in North America.” It was distributed far more
widely than anyone had expected: printed and sold in Baltimore,
wholesale and retail, by William Goddard and James Angell at
their printing office in Market Street; sold in Philadelphia by
the printing firms of Joseph Crukshank and Daniel Hum-
phreys; sold in Alexandria by the printers Hanson and Bond.
The sales were large, and word-of-mouth enthusiasm kept them
rolling. The identity of the writer, far from being hidden, was
stated emphatically. The printers had long since stopped worry-
ing about the supposed disadvantage of a work authored by a
black man; they had increased the number of copies in their
first run, wisely concluding that the racial angle would turn out
to be a bonus.
“What on earth could he and his white readers have in
common?” had been a question. And the warm answer came
back: “Almost everything.” Many persons bought it as a curios-
ity, and then marveled at its quality and told their friends that it
was simply a fine almanac, regardless of who composed it.
Beyond the calculations, they liked the reading matter and the
personality of the man behind it. The spirit of celebrity worship
was not yet as great as it came to be in later centuries, but for
the time he lived in, Benjamin Banneker had become a well-
known figure.
The total circulation achieved is not known, but it was far
enough into the thousands to be a solid commercial success.
Most important of all was the satisfaction of those who had
bought it, for that would indicate whether new editions could
benjamin banneker
152
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 168 ---
be assured of a profitable sale in the years to come. The letters
that flowed in were enough to make that point clear. Each of
the printers who had taken part in the distribution had profited
handsomely. And, of course, Banneker had a solid financial re-
turn that made another old dream of his come true. He reduced
the amount of acreage planted with commercial crops, may have
Back Home to Plant . . . and Publish
153
Benjamin Banneker—although the name is misspelled, this is
said to be the only portrait of him made from life. The present
copy, taken from the Maryland Historical Society, has been
clarified with a computer process devised by Dr. James G.
Huckenpahler, making it perhaps the most accurate depiction
of Banneker in existence. 
(Maryland Historical Society)
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 169 ---
hired a worker who would do most of the physical labor, and
limited his own efforts to a kitchen garden, a few fruit trees,
and the beekeeping that he regarded as a form of pleasurable
study. His schedule was an inversion of the program he had
been forced to keep during the Washington survey, and now it
was for an enterprise of his own: studying the stars late into the
night, sleeping very late in the morning, and then having ample
time to meditate and to prepare his future editions without
pressure or haste. The transition period of his life had passed;
the tobacco farmer had become a writer.
But a few months before this publishing triumph, one highly
significant reader had seen an advance copy of the almanac.
Benjamin Banneker had taken great pains to write a special
copy in his own hand, and he had sent it to Secretary of State
Thomas Jefferson with what is surely one of the most explosive
covering letters ever composed.
benjamin banneker
154
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 170 ---
155
13
}
A Declaration
of Indignation
I
t was in August 1791, four months before his first almanac
would appear publicly, that Banneker sent the advance copy
to the second most important man in America. And the
accusatory anti-slavery letter that went with it should rank as a
pivotal document in the nation’s history.
Three things made 1791 the defining year of Banneker’s
life—the survey of Washington, the publication of his first
almanac, and his letter to Jefferson—and it is arguable that the
last was what made it truly an annus mirabilis, his miracle year.
Launching a verbal attack on the country’s founders and put-
ting himself in the potential line of fire from many vicious pro-
slavery adherents went against his inherited traits and his
upbringing. His Dogon ancestors and his own parents and
grandparents were stouthearted people whose disciplined cour-
age told them to keep a low profile. Knowing how small they
were in numbers, how easily overpowered by the hordes around
them, they used their intelligence to survive, avoiding con-
frontation. That was not only Banneker’s heritage; it was his
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 171 ---
personality. For such a person to write to Jefferson as he did
was like a deer turning to attack a lion. Astonishingly, this
quiet-living man whom some have criticized for his long appar-
ent indifference to social injustice suddenly challenged the sys-
tem and its leaders with blazing words.
Banneker, who had once looked askance at abolitionist
societies for fear they might cause him to be a target of white
wrath, had undergone a hazardous change of heart. He had for-
merly questioned the wisdom of using a few individuals like
himself as role models, fearing it would be misunderstood to
imply that all blacks have equally fine minds. He knew that this
process, called “synecdoche”—pretending that one person or
event can typify a whole class—is irrational and can actually
promote a form of racism. Now he had moved one hundred
and eighty degrees to the conviction that publicizing his success
might do more good than harm if it awakened the country to
the senselessness of slavery. Even his premonition of physical
danger was suppressed in a sudden determination to use his
new stature as a surveyor and his almanac as platforms for
declaring war on injustice.
The year 1791 was more than half a century before the
words of black scholars and activists began to appear as a part of
our national picture. Y et Banneker’s sudden fiery reproach sum-
marized everything that could have been said by an army of
protesters. And it was all the more telling because it was virtu-
ally a personal attack on the man whose Declaration of Indepen-
dence fifteen years earlier had set a world-acclaimed standard,
asserting that the founders had failed to live by that standard
and were making no visible effort to put it into practice.
Banneker’s inactivity up to this point probably doesn’t
deserve either blame or praise. There was no precedent for a
black person to become what would now be called an “activist,”
and it is understandable that a quiet person like Banneker had
benjamin banneker
156
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 172 ---
been reluctant to let white abolitionists use him as a role model
for their cause, given the obvious potential dangers. But to go
from that bland posture to the attack he made calls for a new
assessment of Banneker’s true nature. 
It is clear that his career achievements were essentially his
own, not the result of the Ellicotts’ influence. He had shown
genius long before their arrival, and their help was the kind of
contribution that many persons, regardless of color, receive when
fortunate contacts facilitate their advancement. There can be no
question that Banneker had a great mind, independent of the
Ellicotts. Now, the explosive turning point of 1791 may provide
grounds for rethinking his inner strength. The decision to write
Jefferson and the letter itself shed light on his true character.
Clearly, it was the change in his own circumstances that
made Banneker take an action he had so firmly avoided before.
It might have been expected that he would feel more cautious
than ever, so as not to endanger the fruits of his accomplish-
ments, and yet he took exactly the opposite course. Banneker
grasped this success as the key to a stage door that must be
opened, regardless of risk. For one thing, he suddenly had ac-
cess to the men who had produced the play and were continuing
to direct it badly. He now knew some of the leaders personally.
If he mounted the stage, they would not wonder what obscure
little farmer was making these sounds. They would know where
the cries came from, recognize the name and the voice. Such an
act might still prove self-destructive, but it would not necessar-
ily be a wasted effort. In assessing his action, however, the ques-
tion arises whether the astonishing thought of writing a ration-
ally indignant letter to the Secretary of State occurred first to
him, or whether the abolition-minded Ellicotts originated the
idea. And once the thought had been mentioned, did the Elli-
cotts press their friend Benjamin to put his life and his new-
found success on the line, or did he make the decision freely?
A Declaration of Indignation
157
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 173 ---
It is known that Banneker pondered long and hard before
deciding to send the letter, but that would be no more than
common sense. T o compose and send it without a great deal of
reflection would have been more foolish than heroic. History,
however, has tended to hint that the Ellicotts were at his elbow,
pressuring him to take the great leap. It was a dangerous deci-
sion for them, too, for their close ties to Banneker were so well
known that many of the political leaders would think them
responsible. But with their wealth and standing, they would be
risking only unpopularity or loss of status, not life and limb.
Banneker might have been risking everything. A black slave
suspected of talking conspiratorially to a friend on a nearby
plantation could be thrashed or have an ear cut off. What might
be done to a black man who suggested a complete overthrow of
the slave system—and put it in writing? Might some of Jeffer-
son’s great friends think up legal charges to bring against a
black person who accused the nation’s leaders of base behavior?
If the letter was publicized, as it came to be, might he be
charged with libel or blasphemy and fined enough to lose at
least his property? No one could know, because no black person
had ever tried such a thing. In an era when a black person was
usually barred from even being a witness in a legal case involv-
ing a white person, how could an African American contem-
plate launching an accusation against the greatest white patri-
ots? This level of daring towered above even the risks taken by
later civil rights leaders.
There is no way to know who first uttered the idea aloud. It
could certainly have been the creative George Ellicott, and one
can hear him saying, “Y ou know, Ben, now that Jefferson knows
who you are, you should write to him, send him a copy of your
ephemeris, and ask whether he still thinks that negroes are
incapable of mental effort, as he wrote in that essay of his called
benjamin banneker
158
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 174 ---
Notes on Virginia. Ask what he was thinking of when he said,
‘All men are created equal.’”
But it is at least equally conceivable that Banneker, as he
often did when he had an interesting idea, left a note at
George’s home, asking if he thought a copy of the almanac
should be sent to Jefferson and wondering whether it seemed
appropriate to include some sentences on the subject of slavery.
What is much more fathomable, however, is the nature of
what transpired in the weeks between that original thought and
the moment on August 19, 1791, when Banneker read his own
carefully and beautifully handwritten words for one last time and
consigned them to the mails. Some scholars have begun to back
away from the historical supposition that the Ellicotts master-
minded the letter, citing indications that Banneker showed a
real wish to make his points. In fact, a careful look at the per-
sonalities of the men involved, aided by some inductive reason-
ing, can justify a much firmer position on this.
The nature, the organization, and the word choices of the
letter itself proclaim it to be a Banneker product. Strangely
enough, the more formally educated Ellicotts were not in Ban-
neker’s class as writers. George, brilliant and devoted to English
literature as he was, wrote hasty letters with occasional mis-
spellings and pedestrian words. Andrew, military man and mathe-
matician, wrote straightforward facts with little sign of nuance.
Even allowing for the likelihood that either man would have
exerted his best powers in writing to the Secretary of State,
their contributions would have been easily detectable in the
pages signed by Banneker. Those pages are the work of a born
writer, one with the same flair for pace, meter, and tone that
Jefferson himself had.
The organization of the letter, the precise buildup and se-
quence of the arguments, made it worthy of study by future
A Declaration of Indignation
159
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 175 ---
generations—as other masterpieces of clear reasoning have been.
Edmund Burke’s two long addresses to Parliament in 1774 and
1775 in defense of the American colonists, for example, have
been studied and even parsed by high school and college stu-
dents because they were not just oratory, but surgically precise
proofs that Britain was on the wrong side of history in thinking
it could dominate these other Englishmen. And Burke demon-
strated why nothing England might gain by war could match
the rich revenues and power that she already enjoyed from these
colonies. A similarly compelling logic and irresistible momen-
tum are at work in Banneker’s letter.
We are entitled to wonder whether these thoughts had been
in Banneker’s mind since the American Revolution ended with
no sign that slavery would be abolished—or even since his ear-
liest days, when he deplored the unjust treatment of Native
Americans. What could such a bright mind have thought about
his place in this society and the unspeakably worse place of the
enslaved blacks? Some historians have pointed out that he was
not confronted with day-to-day reminders of injustice. After all,
the neighboring white farm families he had known all his life
were mainly pleasant. Even the few nearby whites who owned
two or three slaves are said to have been good bosses who
treated these blacks much the same as other hired hands. Day-
to-day reminders, perhaps not, but he must have noticed that
they invited each other for social occasions without including
their black neighbors. That was accepted as routine, never
talked of as a slight, but it surely entered into people’s minds
and certainly into a mind as bright as Banneker’s. It would be
nonsense to think that racial inequality was not seared into his
very rational brain as behavior that was utterly without a logical
basis.
The precocious little Benjamin who, at age six, was advising
neighbors of whatever race on how to balance their accounts
benjamin banneker
160
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 176 ---
would hardly have accepted any notion of inferiority. Nor
would he have failed to notice that the white Quaker school-
master who befriended him had more knowledge than anyone
he had known, yet took no notice of race. Benjamin also knew
that his beloved grandmother, the redoubtable Big Ma-Ma, was
a white who took great pride in her alliance with a black of
noble heritage. The love and respect he had for her was one of
the strongest ties in his early life—and her sense of status was
based on character rather than color. The lesson didn’t have to
be told to him; it was there for him to see. It can be presumed
that Banneker grew up with a remarkably evenhanded view of
the world, judging persons mainly on the basis of how they
judged others.
If so, it is more than likely that the young Benjamin had
been silently disapproving of the skewed world he had been
born into since his years as a precocious little boy. And the man
who would grow from that child would never have accepted the
failed promises of political leaders in the casual way that ordi-
nary people do. Only when he was nearly middle age did the
fresh words of the Declaration of Independence make him
think briefly that a new and sane world was dawning at last.
From the moment this one bright hope had begun to dim in
1781, the disgust expressed in his letter to Jefferson must have
been fermenting in his mind. What was he to think now of the
United States of America or of the leaders who spoke and
wrote so finely while holding millions of innocents—even the
newborn—in captivity? If he continued to think that the found-
ing fathers were truly superior to the society around them, their
failure would have seemed even worse, and he must have gone
over and over in his mind the words “how pitiable it is . . . that
you should at the same time be found guilty of that most crim-
inal act,” and perhaps dreamed of being able to say it to one of
their number.
A Declaration of Indignation
161
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 177 ---
The thought of taking action against this bitter disappoint-
ment must have kept growing within him as the 1780s passed
and hope dwindled. Banneker had seen that there were more
cases of manumission, but the masters who freed slaves usually
had an economic reason. The plantations that needed even
more slaves were moving in the opposite direction. Private abo-
litionist groups were sincere, but quite small and lacking in
clout. Governments, state and national, made few moves to
heed them. Now he was actually acquainted with the man who
was most responsible for those precious words “created equal.”
Whoever originated the idea of writing to Jefferson, Banneker
must have considered it a great inspiration.
Even at that, it seems unlikely that he planned from the
start to write a ringing protest. More plausibly, the sequence of
events was much as he so candidly stated near the end of his
letter. In his words, this “enlargement” of the letter “was not
originally my design.” That is, he first thought that just sending
a copy of his almanac would be a good way to make his point.
Thomas Jefferson had talked and written inconclusively about
the mental abilities of the races. Here, at last, would be the
resounding proof that a black—and one with almost no formal
education—had actually mastered a subject that only a handful
of scholarly whites could tackle. Sending this proof that the
work was entirely his meant so much to him that he took the
great trouble of handwriting the entire forty-eight-page publi-
cation rather than waiting to send the printed version. He then
probably began to write a simple letter of transmission, but,
although there is no way to prove this, his days of considering
the project had made him more and more fearful that Jefferson
would brush it off by having an aide send a simple letter of
thanks. In that case, the whole opportunity would have been
lost. The construction of the letter makes it likely that Banne-
ker started writing additional paragraphs, trying to outline his
benjamin banneker
162
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 178 ---
plea for justice in a brief way, then adding more and more as it
became apparent that there were so many arguments to be
made. In the end, these pages could have seemed so powerful
that he decided to reverse the order, making the letter the main
communication, rather than simply a cover letter, and turning
the almanac into Exhibit A.
There were at least two weeks of indecision—editing, re-
writing, consulting with George Ellicott. There were certainly
moments of doubt about the wisdom of the whole idea. Possi-
bly Banneker held back and may have had to be reassured. But
the historic chance to make a declaration such as no black man
had ever made before, to send it to the most appropriate target
of all, and to accompany it with a prepublication version of the
greatest piece of anti-racist evidence ever produced up to that
time—all these made it a virtual certainty that the letter was
going to be sent, enthusiastically on Banneker’s part. It read:
Maryland, Baltimore County
Near Ellicott’s Lower Mills, August 19, 1791
Thomas Jefferson, Secretary of State
Sir, I am fully sensible of the greatness of that freedom
which I take with you on the present occasion, a liberty
which seemed to me scarcely allowable, when I reflected on
that distinguished and dignified station in which you stand;
and the almost general prejudice and prepossession which is
so prevalent in the world against those of my complexion.
I suppose it is a truth too well attested to you to need a
proof here that we are a race of beings who have long labored
under the abuse and censure of the world, that we have long
been looked upon with an eye of contempt, and that we have
long been considered rather as brutish than human, and
scarcely capable of mental endowments.
Sir, I hope I may safely admit, in consequence of that
report which hath reached me, that you are a man far less
A Declaration of Indignation
163
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 179 ---
inflexible in sentiments of this nature than many others; that
you are measurably friendly and well disposed towards us,
and that you are willing and ready to lend your aid and assis-
tance to our relief from those many distresses and numerous
calamities to which we are reduced.
Now, Sir, if this is founded in truth, I apprehend you will
readily embrace every opportunity to eradicate that train of
absurd and false ideas and oppinions which so generally pre-
vail with respect to us, and that your sentiments are concur-
rent with mine, which are that one universal Father hath
given being to us all, and that he hath not only made us all of
one flesh, but that he hath also without partiality afforded us
all with the Same Sensations, and endued us all with the same
faculties, and that however variable we may be in society or
religion, however diversified in situation or color, we are all
of the Same Family, and Stand in the Same relation to him.
Sir, if these are sentiments of which you are fully per-
suaded, I hope you cannot but acknowledge that it is the
indispensable duty of those who maintain for themselves the
rights of human nature, and who profess the obligations of
Christianity, to extend their power and influence to the relief
of every part of the human race from whatever burthen or
oppression they may unjustly labour under, and this I appre-
hend a full conviction of the truth and obligation of these
principles should lead all to.
Sir, I have long been convinced that if your love for
yourSelves and for those inesteemable laws which preserve to
you the rights of human nature, was founded on Sincerity,
you could not but be solicitous that every Individual of what-
soever rank or distinction might with you equally enjoy the
blessings thereof, neither could you rest satysfied, short of
the most active diffusion of your exertions, in order to their
promotion from any State of degradation, to which the un-
justifyable cruelty and barbarism of men may have reduced
them.
benjamin banneker
164
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 180 ---
Sir, I freely and Cheerfully acknowledge, that I am of the
African race, and, in that colour which is natural to them of
the deepest dye*; and it is under a Sense of the most pro-
found gratitude to the Supreme Ruler of the universe, that I
now confess to you, that I am not under that State of tyran-
nical thralldom and inhuman captivity, to which too many of
my brethren are doomed; but that I have abundantly tasted of
the fruition of those blessings which proceed from that free
and unequalled liberty with which you are favored and which
I hope you will willingly allow you have received from the
Hand of that Being from whom proceedeth every good and
perfect gift.
Sir, suffer me to recall to your mind that time in which
the arms and tyranny of the British Crown were exerted with
every powerful effort, in order to reduce you to a State of
Servitude; look back I intreat you on the variety of dangers to
which you were exposed, reflecting on that time in which
every human aid appeared unavailable, and in which even
hope and fortitude wore the aspect of inability to the Con-
flict, and you cannot but be led to a Serious and grateful
Sense of your miraculous and providential preservation. Y ou
cannot but acknowledge, that the present freedom and tran-
quillity which you enjoy you have mercifully received, and
that it is the peculiar blessing of Heaven.
This, Sir, was a time in which you clearly saw into the
injustice of a State of Slavery, and in which you had just
apprehensions of the horrors of its condition, it was now, Sir,
that your abhorrence thereof was so excited, that you pub-
lickly held forth this true and invaluable doctrine, which is
worthy to be recorded and remembered in all succeeding
ages. “We hold these truths to be self evident, that all men
are created equal, and that they are endowed by their creator
A Declaration of Indignation
165
* My father was brought here a Slave from Africa
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 11:03:59 AM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 181 ---
with certain inalienable rights, that amongst these are life,
liberty and the persuit of happiness.”
Here, Sir, was a time in which your tender feelings for
your selves engaged you thus to declare, you were then im-
pressed with proper ideas of the great valuation of liberty,
and the free possession of those blessings to which you were
entitled by nature; but Sir how pitiable it is to reflect, that
although you were so fully convinced of the benevolence of
the Father of mankind, and of his equal and impartial distri-
bution of those rights and privileges which he had conferred
upon them, that you should at the same time counteract his
mercies, in detaining by fraud and violence so numerous a
part of my brethren under groaning captivity and cruel
oppression, that you should at the same time be found guilty
of that most criminal act, which you professedly detested in
others, with respect to yourselves.  
Sir, I suppose that your knowledge of the situation of my
brethren is too extensive to need a recital here; neither shall I
presume to prescribe methods by which they may be relieved,
otherwise than by recommending to you, and all others, to
wean yourselves from those narrow prejudices which you
have imbibed with respect to them, and as Job proposed to
his friends “Put your Souls in their Souls’ stead,” thus shall
your hearts be enlarged with kindness and benevolence
towards them, and thus shall you need neither the direction
of myself or others in what manner to proceed herein.
And now, Sir, altho my sympathy and affection for my
brethren hath caused my enlargement thus far, I ardently
hope that your candour and generosity will plead with you in
my behalf, when I make known to you, that it was not origi-
nally my design; but that having taken up my pen in order to
direct to you as a present, a copy of an Almanack which I
have calculated for the succeeding year, I was unexpectedly
and unavoidably led thereto.
This calculation, Sir, is the production of my arduous
study, in this my advanced stage of life; for having long had
benjamin banneker
166
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:29 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 182 ---
unbounded desires to become acquainted with the secrets of
nature, I have had to gratify my curiosity herein thro my own
assiduous application to Astronomical Study, in which I need
not to recount to you the many difficulties and disadvantages
which I have had to encounter.
And altho I had almost declined to make my calculation
for the ensuing year, in consequence of that time which I had
allotted therefor being taken up at the Federal T erritory by
the request of Mr. Andrew Ellicott, yet finding myself under
several engagements to printers of this state to whom I had
communicated my design, on my return to my place of resi-
dence, I industriously apply’d myself thereto, which I hope I
have accomplished with correctness and accuracy, a copy of
which I have taken the liberty to direct to you, and which I
humbly request you will favourably receive, and altho you
may have the opportunity of perusing it after its publication,
yet I chose to send it to you in manuscript previous thereto,
that thereby you might not only have an earlier inspection,
but that you might also view it in my own hand writing.
And now Sir, I shall conclude and subscribe my self with
the most profound respect,
Y our most Obedient humble Servant
Benjamin Banneker
N.B. any communication to me may be had by a direction to
Mr. Elias Ellicott merchant in Baltimore T own.
B.B.
Another postscript was added below, asking Jefferson to
avoid having this manuscript published or giving it to any
printer, since Banneker already had it in the hands of other
printers. A telling touch, indeed. A few months earlier, he had
been unable to find anyone willing to print his work. Now, far
from needing any assistance from the great Jefferson in helping
to publicize it, Banneker was letting him know that his earlier
engagements had priority.
A Declaration of Indignation
167
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:29 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 183 ---
14
}
A Founder’s
Crafty Response
T
o his credit, Jefferson swallowed the rebuke and did noth-
ing to punish the letter writer in return. Although Ban-
neker suffered numerous threatening incidents in the
remaining years of his life and a very destructive attack on his
property after his death, they were very likely the work of
racists or anti-abolitionists who wanted to stifle his potential as
a role model for black liberation. There is no evidence what-
soever that they were inspired by Jefferson in any way.
The Secretary of State, who became a very successful two-
term President some years later, received Banneker’s letter on
August 26 and sent an apparently appreciative reply within four
days, reading as follows:
Philadelphia, Aug. 30, 1791
SIR, I thank you sincerely for your letter of the 19th instant
and for the Almanac it contained. No body wishes more than
I do to see such proofs as you exhibit, that nature has given
to our black brethren, talents equal to the other colors of
168
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:29 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 184 ---
men, and that the appearance of a want of them is owing
merely to the degraded condition of their existence, both in
Africa and America. I can add with truth, that nobody wishes
more ardently to see a good system commenced for raising
the condition of both their body and mind to what it ought to
be, as fast as the imbecility of their present existence, and
other circumstances which cannot be neglected, will admit.
I have taken the liberty of sending your Almanac to M.
de Condorcet, Secretary of the Academy of Sciences at Paris,
and member of the Philanthropic Society, because I consid-
ered it a document to which your color had a right for their
justification against the doubts which have been entertained
of them.
I am with great esteem, Sir, your most obedient humble
servant.
Thomas Jefferson
Mr. Benjamin Banneker
Near Ellicott’s Lower Mills, Baltimore Co.
Several mindless mistakes that have often been made about
this correspondence and about Jefferson should be quickly
brushed aside. For one thing, Banneker has been criticized for
having signed his letter “Y our most obedient humble servant.”
It will be noted that Jefferson responded in much the same way,
for that was the common usage of the day. It had even less
meaning than our use of “Y ours sincerely,” for we may some-
times feel sincerity, while no one in the eighteenth century was
expressing the slightest sense of humility or servitude. Banne-
ker was showing that he knew the gentlemanly style, and Jef-
ferson was returning the courtesy, which some whites of that
day would have refused to do.
Second, Jefferson has been excoriated by many for ever
having questioned the equal intelligence of black persons and
for having continued to own slaves until his death, despite his
A Founder’s Crafty Response
169
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:29 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 185 ---
apparent relationship with Sally Hemings. He was certainly
confused and conflicted on the subject, but the tendency to
judge persons of earlier times as if they should have known
what the future would teach is unfortunate. Only a very few
persons of two centuries ago firmly believed that Africans had
equal intellects, simply because blacks were seldom able to
learn enough or do enough to overcome the hideous handicap
they labored under. The few whites who saw through the cur-
tain of obscurity should be honored as exceptionally thoughtful
persons. But others—assuming that they were not cruel in their
actions—should not be judged on that comparison. Jefferson’s
continued ownership of slaves was largely due to his dreadful
failure in managing his property. He kept borrowing more and
more money from banks because his absence from Monticello
allowed the farm production to fall, and the times when he was
at home brought far too many guests who wanted to stay with
the great man. The bank loans he took out to cover the exces-
sive expenses finally put him in such debt that it would have
been impossible to free the slaves and provide them with
enough money to ensure a good life. His best financial move
would have been to sell the slaves, but that would have left
them in slavery, and he genuinely seemed to fear that they
would not be as well treated as they were at Monticello.
After giving him the benefit of the doubt, however, it must
be said that Jefferson’s ambivalent nature made it virtually cer-
tain that he would prove to be an unsatisfactory correspondent
for Banneker. His duality on the subject was particularly marked,
as shown repeatedly in his writings. The Jefferson Memorial in
Washington, D.C., has an inscription about the immorality of
slavery that sounds like the thinking of an enlightened modern
person: “Can the liberties of a nation be secure when we have
removed a conviction that these liberties are the gift of God?
Indeed I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just,
benjamin banneker
170
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:29 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 186 ---
that his justice cannot sleep forever. Commerce between master
and slave is despotism. Nothing is more certainly written in the
book of fate than that these people are to be free.”
But while the chiseled words at the memorial end there,
Jefferson’s collected papers went on to say, “Nor is it less cer-
tain that the two races, equally free, cannot live in the same
government. Native habit, opinion has drawn indelible lines of
distinction between them.” Not a vicious thought, perhaps, for
blacks as well as whites have often felt that same way, even
though they are being proved wrong. But Jefferson’s apparently
genuine belief that the two races represent totally different
kinds of human beings made it impossible for him to see Ban-
neker as a complete intellectual.
Even if the sincerity of this opinion is allowed, some very
unfavorable traits in Jefferson were hidden in this apparently
friendly reply to Banneker, as well as in subsequent events.
First, there is great duplicity in the wording of Jefferson’s
response to Banneker. The Secretary of State was a smooth
writer, a nuanced writer, but here he was a slick writer. By point-
edly mentioning the degraded condition of the blacks’ existence
“both in Africa and America” he makes it seem that they were
as badly off before as they came to be in the slave system. Next,
“the imbecility of their present existence” would appear to be a
condemnation of the imbecilic system. But is it? It could also be
taken to mean that for all he knew, perhaps most of the slaves
themselves were imbeciles. Further on, “other circumstances
which cannot be neglected” is surely a parenthetical reminder
by Jefferson that the great financial investment in all the slaves
was a quite natural barrier that made abolition a distant goal.
And the overall impression is that Jefferson welcomes the
almanac as one piece of affirmative evidence, but is definitely
on the fence about whether there are enough intelligent black
persons to bring about the improvements that he would wish to
A Founder’s Crafty Response
171
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 187 ---
see. In other words, the short letter consists almost entirely of
two-edged statements.
Jefferson was not at all wrong in thinking he needed to be
very cautious with every word if he wished to go on with a
political career. This reply, veiled as it is, caused him trouble
years later when he was campaigning for the presidency. A col-
umn written by William Longton Smith was repeatedly quoted:
“What shall we think of a Secretary of State thus fraternizing
with negroes, writing them complimentary epistles . . . con-
gratulating them on the evidence of their genius, and assuring
them of his good wishes for their speedy emancipation?”
Not all his devious ways with this correspondence can be
explained as mere political prudence. He did send the almanac
to the Marquis de Condorcet, as he told Banneker. But his let-
ter of transmittal showed him to be so eager to let his French
friend see him as a champion of black advancement that he
stooped to boasting of having personally arranged to use Ban-
neker in the survey of Washington. His exact words were: “I
procured him to be employed under one of our chief directors
in laying out the new federal city on the Potowmac.” The claim
is a small point, a mere reminder that the author of one of the
world’s noblest documents could also descend to a petty un-
truth. Then he went on as if proclaiming Banneker’s merits,
telling Condorcet, “I have seen very elegant solutions of geo-
metrical problems by him. Add to this that he is a very worthy
and respectable member of society. I shall be delighted to see
these instances of moral eminence so multiplied . . . ”
Clearly, Jefferson was willing, even eager, to say things over-
seas that he would never say at home. Sadly, the marquis may
never have seen the almanac, or if he did, there was probably
no opportunity to make it better known in France, for it would
have arrived just about the time that the continuing terror of
benjamin banneker
172
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 188 ---
the French Revolution caused him to be seized by the police.
He died mysteriously in prison.
The petty boast to Condorcet would be minor if it did not
contrast and conflict with another sequel that is seriously dis-
illusioning. In a letter to a friend, Joel Barlow, Jefferson ques-
tioned whether Banneker could really have produced an alma-
nac “without the suspicion of aid from Ellicott, his neighbor
and friend.” The slur was carelessly stated and totally without
foundation. Andrew Ellicott, who had done his own calcula-
tions of this sort, was not a neighbor and had been no help at
all to Banneker with his almanac. George Ellicott, the actual
“neighbor and friend” of Banneker, had no experience of this
kind. Worst of all, Jefferson went on to tell Barlow, “I have a
long letter from Banneker, which shows him to have had a mind
of very common stature indeed.”
That remark, even if we generously assume that Jefferson
knew nothing of Banneker’s lack of formal education, is shock-
ing when applied to a person of supposedly inferior race who
had raised himself to a professional level as a mathematician-
astronomer-watchmaker-surveyor. His literary style might not
have pleased Jefferson, but any fair observer would declare it to
be elegant, and his almanacs would soon be appealing to read-
ers in a way comparable to the famed Poor Richard’s Almanac
that had won acclaim for the peerless Benjamin Franklin. Con-
sidering how Jefferson had praised Banneker in the letter to
Condorcet, this statement of disdain is all the more inexcusable.
Scholars and biographers have not previously called Jeffer-
son to account for the clear falsehood he committed in this dis-
parity between his two opposing statements. Nor have they
pondered what could have caused his great mind to plunge to
such a foolish and mean-spirited misjudgment. T wo possibilities
occur; some have suspected that Sally Hemings was unfaithful
A Founder’s Crafty Response
173
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 189 ---
to Jefferson, perhaps with a younger member of his family, and
this might conceivably have soured the Secretary of State’s
thoughts on race. But the underlying premise is weak, for it is
said that Hemings faithfully brought flowers to Jefferson’s grave
for the rest of her life. The more obvious possibility is that
Banneker’s indignant letter to Jefferson, so determinedly skew-
ering him for continuing to keep slaves in total disregard of his
own fine words, had infuriated him far more than he let on.
In that sense, Banneker’s letter had one flaw. If he really had
hoped to turn Jefferson’s thoughts in his favor, its accusatory
tone had doomed it to failure. A plea to a one-man jury has no
chance if it accuses that person of being a party to “guilt,”
“fraud,” and “criminal acts.” The words were justified, but hurl-
ing them at a lone juror was bound to fail, unless that man were
a saint. Jefferson, of course, should have seen that Banneker’s
points were exactly right, but not for the first time, a great mind
preferred to despise the attacker rather than admit its own error.
On the other hand, Banneker’s letter was perfectly crafted
for the great public jury that would later read it. When the first
almanac was about to be printed, Banneker’s supporters and the
printers urgently discussed whether to include the correspon-
dence. It was left out of the first run, but both Banneker’s letter
and Jefferson’s reply were included in some later printings. And
the exchange was quoted many times over the next half-century
as the argument over abolition heated up.
Perhaps neither Jefferson nor the entire leadership of the
United States could have done much to meet Banneker’s de-
mands, regardless of their inclinations; to have challenged the
institution of slavery would have split the new country, leaving
one free nation in the North and a slave nation in the South.
No one can say for certain what would have resulted if the
great minds that had united to create the United States of
America had concentrated their mental, financial, and strategic
benjamin banneker
174
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 190 ---
firepower as determinedly on liberty for all as they had once
concentrated on freedom from England. Or, alternatively, they
might have refrained from an immediate challenge to the
Southern states on this issue, but made it absolutely clear that
they despised slavery and would not go on for long with the
growing addiction to it. They could have presented proposals
for a step-by-step process to reduce the reliance on slave labor
and make provisions for the education and training that would
have turned the freed persons into citizens.
There were people who said these things all along, people
who worked and took risks in the furtherance of such ideas.
There were even Americans who, sometimes with good motives,
contributed large sums of money to impractical and wrong-
headed schemes for repatriating slaves to Africa. The problem
was that there were far too few persons who felt any responsi-
bility at all on the subject. And hardly any of the men who had
been willing to fight in the cause of national freedom now
wanted any part of the risks involved in making personal free-
dom a goal. The same persons who had been daring young men
with a sense of mission had become cautious older men with a
love of prudence. T om Paine, whose fighting words had kept
the Revolution alive in its darkest days, was now shunned as a
troublemaker by the leadership. Hardly any of his old comrades
wanted to be seen talking to him. In this young nation with an
already graying government, to have spoken for Banneker
would have been politically incorrect.
A Founder’s Crafty Response
175
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 191 ---
15
}
A Place Among
the Greats
A
single thought that he expressed in less than a hundred
words, and at least a century and a half before modern
telescopes could confirm it, should place Banneker among
the immortals of astronomy. Other scientists have said they had
only one real idea in their entire lives, a lightning flash—a
totally new thought that was a leap from accumulated findings
of the past. In Banneker’s case, this was an inspiration that took
his mind far beyond the solar system to theorize very positively
that each of the stars was a central sun and that many of them
had planets circling them. This idea appeared in print in his
almanac of 1792, which he actually worked on in 1790. It was
worded as such an established fact that it seems likely to have
come to him much earlier, perhaps in the 1750s, when time and
space held a major place in his thoughts.
Almost as astonishing as the concept itself is the fact that it
has been reprinted a number of times, but simply accepted as
one more interesting point, never singled out as the historic
176
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 192 ---
event it was. The entire essay is reprinted near the end of this
book, but the key lines should be noted here:
This sun, with all its attendant planets, is but a very little part
of the grand machine of the universe; every star, though in
appearance no bigger than the diamond that glitters upon a
lady’s ring, is really a vast globe, like the sun in size and glory;
no less spacious, no less luminous, than the radiant source of
the day: So that every star is not barely a world, but the cen-
tre of a magnificent system; has a retinue of worlds, irradiated
by its beams, and revolving round its attractive influence, all
of which are lost to our sight in unmeasurable wilds of ether.
Here Banneker was expressing almost matter-of-factly (and
in words that are nearly accurate to this day) the existence of
extra-solar planets, a concept that only a few scientists would
touch on in the century after his death and that astronomy
would turn to with fascination only in the twentieth century.
Banneker did not “discover” these planets, which remain invis-
ible, but are now provable by several other means. Banneker’s
insight was an intuition that was bolstered by his observation
that every design and pattern found in nature tends to be re-
peated throughout the known universe. He felt, therefore, that
it was unthinkable for the creative force to have made one suc-
cessful solar system and none other like it.
T wo other thinkers are known to have mentioned such a
possibility before: Thomas Wright, an Englishman who was not
widely read or influential, suggested in a 1750 volume, A New
Hypothesis of the Universe, that the nebulae are really galaxies
and that our solar system is only one of many galactic structures,
implying that there could be many “suns” with unseen planets.
And much earlier, in the sixteenth century, the monk Giordano
Bruno was killed by the Inquisition for having challenged church
A Place Among the Greats
177
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 193 ---
teaching by voicing a similar theory. There is no evidence that
Banneker ever knew of either thinker, but the possibility has to
be taken into account. Even if he had somehow read about such
a hypothesis or heard of it from his friend George Ellicott,
Banneker’s feat in grasping this as a defining principle of the
cosmos and expanding on it as he did would have been remark-
able. Just as modern research often leads to parallel scientific
discoveries in a number of countries—and all sometimes be-
come Nobel laureates—the least that could be said of Banneker
would be that he was apparently one of only three persons who
had expounded such a theory up to that time, a great feat even
for a professional astronomer with a distinguished résumé.
It would also be reasonable, however, to go beyond that and
say that Banneker actually stood alone, as he was the only one
whose theory was based on reason, on an examination of facts,
rather than faith. Both Bruno and Wright cited faith-based
convictions for their insistence that multiple worlds exist. Gior-
dano Bruno, seeing things more as a monk than as an astrono-
mer, said there must be an infinite number of worlds because
God is within and through all things, which led some observers
to call his system pantheistic. Thomas Wright was a clockmaker
by trade, whose speculation that the Deity could be found in
the center of the universe led him to conclude that the nebulae
are other “abodes of the blessed.”
Partly because these hypotheses seemed to be more religion
than logic, the science of astronomy had failed to react to them.
No leading astronomer up to Banneker’s day—neither Coper-
nicus, nor Galileo, nor any major scholar—had expressed defini-
tive thoughts on what lay beyond our solar system. They knew
that the stars must be distant bodies, but not at all that they
replicated the relationship of our sun and its planets. For one
thing, they were misled by the fact that the most powerful tel-
escopes showed no sign of planets beyond our own system; they
benjamin banneker
178
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 194 ---
failed to reckon with the possibility that dark objects might
simply be invisible from many light-years away. Even among
the few who took any interest in extra-solar planets before the
twentieth century, hardly any thought it worthwhile to consider
the chance that they might contain life. Since the planets in our
solar system clearly become less and less habitable as their dis-
tance from the sun increases, they reasoned that surely nothing
even farther from the sun could harbor life, ignoring the fact
that those more distant planets might have suns of their own, as
Banneker asserted so positively. Banneker alone, although he
had a strong faith in the existence of a Creator, was thinking
as a modern scientist does—preferring to experiment with tan-
gibles whenever possible or at least to reason on the basis of
observations, wherever that reasoning might lead.
Banneker not only fixed on this new thought, but he went a
giant step farther and anticipated the twentieth-century belief
that some of those myriad planets must, as a matter of statisti-
cal probability, be capable of supporting life. As he looked at
stars in the night sky, he even imagined that an intelligent being
on one such extra-solar planet was looking back at him, seeing
our sun as just one of the bright specks in his sky, and, just as
naively as a watcher on Earth, continuing to suppose that the
whole cosmos had been created solely to make his own planet
the only home of thoughtful life. Banneker was saying—as no
one said with such an air of certitude until the era of the Hub-
bell telescope was almost at hand—that this is probably the uni-
verse full of communities and beings, prevented by distance
from imagining how much company they have, much as a tribe
of early cave dwellers might have thought itself alone before
venturing to explore the terrifying wilderness that separated it
from other such communities.
Not even the leading scientists of Banneker’s own day, closer
to our time than to Galileo’s, with the finest equipment known,
A Place Among the Greats
179
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 195 ---
had yet come to this idea. And it is puzzling that no review of
Banneker’s writings has noted how high a place he deserves in
the history of astronomy. Compared to this, nothing else in his
life can compete in importance. There would be practical accom-
plishments that the world of affairs and commerce might hold
in higher esteem, but they would be measuring by an inferior
yardstick. Banneker’s mental excursion outside our solar system
declares that the simple tobacco farmer should long since have
been singled out by the encyclopedias of astronomy. Note the
following great names that have been recorded on this subject—
and how far behind Benjamin Banneker they have all been:
In 1761, Johann Heinrich Lambert speculated, as Thomas
Wright had, that groups of stars like our sun made up the
Milky Way, but offered no thought that those stars might have
planets around them. T wo full generations later, Sir William
Herschel worked on Lambert’s idea. He was a German-born
musician and scientist who became such a favorite in English
society that he anglicized his name from “Wilhelm” and was
knighted for several scientific findings, including the discovery
of the planet Uranus. Because his sister Caroline was a great
lens grinder, the brother–sister team could see far more in
space than anyone else, and in 1823, seventeen years after Ban-
neker’s death, Herschel was able to confirm visual evidence that
the stars are indeed like suns, and he told the Royal Society in
a lecture that they might also have planetary systems. This was
the first modern step in the direction of Banneker’s eighteenth-
century assertion. But it was more than a century after that, in
1943, before the Dutch American Peter van de Kamp, working
at Swarthmore College, was able to prove that some stars are
accompanied by planets. Because these planets were and remain
invisible from Earth, since they are not luminous, their existence
had to be proved by measuring how their central star wobbles
benjamin banneker
180
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 196 ---
due to their gravitational effect. This positive confirmation of
planets outside our solar system was considered mind-boggling
and finally led German scientists to theorize more emphatically
that some of those planets might well be inhabited.
On this subject of extraterrestrial life, Banneker’s intuition
was one and a half to two centuries ahead of the scientists with
fine educations, equipment, and opportunity for collegial dis-
cussion. If his station in life had given his thoughts a place in
the scientific journals, the world might have taken these revolu-
tionary ideas into account a century and a half earlier. The prac-
tical value of this can be disputed, since theories cannot be put
to work if they come long before there is technology to test
them. But as another indicator of mental ability, Banneker’s
lead is compelling.
The last few decades have brought leaps in astronomy that
make one forget how modest the ideas about life on other plan-
ets were until quite recently. In the mid-nineteenth century, a
renowned mathematician named Carl Friedrich Gauss was con-
sidered very avant-garde for ruminating about the possibility of
life on the moon, but nothing beyond that. Then came specu-
lation about the possible habitation of our neighbor planets, es-
pecially Mars. But since it was known that Jupiter, Saturn, Nep-
tune, and Uranus were definitely uninhabitable, it was assumed
that objects much farther away had to be ruled out entirely.
The notion of making a mental leap to far more distant planets
did not come into the picture.
How Banneker’s mind could have made that leap with such
assurance, even if it had been triggered by someone else’s com-
ment, is unknowable. Why did he ignore the daunting evidence
of our own outer planets, lock on the more distant idea, and
develop it as he did? It is important to realize that he was not
casting about for novel ideas as a science fiction writer might
A Place Among the Greats
181
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 197 ---
have done. His words about the mutual looks between an earth-
ling and the resident of some extra-solar planet were more than
mere daydreaming. He was calculating what the patterns of
nearby celestial objects might tell about the structure of outer
space, assessing all the lessons of nearby astronomy before rea-
soning that the pattern of movement obeyed by Earth and its
neighbor planets must be replicated in the far reaches of the
cosmos. Those distant suns must be circled by planets. By that
same comparative logic, he concluded that the laws of probabil-
ity make it likely that some of those planets are the homes of
beings who look toward us as sightlessly, yet wonderingly, as we
look toward them. The thought was as stupefying in the 1700s
as it is intriguing today.
The reason for Banneker’s self-assurance on this point was
probably his love of Creation’s design and order. However and
whenever the idea occurred to him, it must have immediately
seemed to make good sense and caused the seed to take root.
The perfect grace of objects circling a nucleus seemed too great
an invention to be tried once and discarded. Using this pattern
to make many duplicate solar systems fitted his concept of
a natural order. If it appeared to diminish Earth’s position in
the scale of things, it would not have disturbed Banneker in the
least. He knew all about lessons in humility and the counter-
vailing thought that the humblest shall be exalted.
}
Banneker must have had many other fascinating things to say
about the cosmos in the early journals that went up in smoke
when he died. For the occasional nugget, there are only later
chance remarks that recall thoughts from his youth or the
memoirs of other persons. A leading example relates accounts
of his interest in a star named Sirius, also called the Dog Star
benjamin banneker
182
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 198 ---
because it is in the constellation sometimes called Canus Major.
It is not surprising that Banneker took notice of it, for Sirius is
one of the brightest stars in the night sky, but it is noteworthy
that he felt a special affinity for this mysterious star, probably
without knowing that it had fascinated the ancients of many
lands. It was called Al-Ghul by Arab astronomers, because
its name in Arabic means “ghoul,” and its occasional shadowy
look gives it a ghostly quality. What had long captivated astrono-
mers was its changeable appearance—often called a “wavy”
look, sometimes bright, but occasionally dull and clouded. This
seemed to defy Aristotle’s dictum that heavenly bodies are
changeless. T oday it is known that Sirius is, in fact, two stars,
each with a different brightness, that circle around each other.
These “disk-stars” have become even more interesting to astron-
omers as powerful telescopes make them more discernible.
But the fact that Banneker believed Sirius was actually two
stars—before the world of astronomy knew this to be so—is
eerily important because in this case, he may have had help, not
from the scientific world, but from his African ancestors. In
that case, it gives further confirmation of Banneker’s Dogon
heritage, for these people are said to have learned of the star’s
double life in some mysterious way centuries before. Banneker
seems to have had his special interest in Sirius long before the
brilliant English astronomer John Goodriche, a sickly deaf-
mute who died at age twenty-two, would be the first person in
the Western world to suggest the two-star theory in 1782, at
the age of eighteen. It was 1890 before Hermann Vogel proved
Goodriche right by showing how an invisible companion star
circles around the main star and sometimes eclipses Al-Ghul’s
brightness. Banneker never had any equipment that could have
discovered this. Some think he may have been drawn to Sirius
because it represented the mood swings that he knew himself to
have, despite his studied attempt to appear always placid and
A Place Among the Greats
183
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 199 ---
consistent. But what first called his attention to it? Some hint
of this from Grandfather Banneka to Molly and from her to
Benjamin seems a likelier explanation than any other. But that
only increases the mystery, for there is no known explanation of
how the Dogon people could have learned the star’s secret with-
out telescopes (see appendix I).
benjamin banneker
184
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 200 ---
185
16
}
The Sage’s Years of Glory
I
t was not at all in Banneker’s makeup to exult or gloat about
the success of his almanac, but he did take a genuine pride
in his triumph. Even before the publication was arranged,
when he was being turned down by the printers, he was almost
in awe of what he had accomplished in calculating a twelve-
month ephemeris that he knew to be accurate. All his life, he
had been as devoid of false modesty as he was of hubris or
puffery. As a child who helped neighbors to straighten out their
finances, he had recognized that he had an unusual mind.
When he learned to handle scientific instruments that baffled
highly educated persons, he was genuinely grateful to his Maker
for the gifts he had been born with. But the feat of completing
calculations that only the finest astronomers and mathemati-
cians even attempted actually astonished him. Whether they
were published or not, he felt that nothing could take away that
satisfaction.
One additional bit of probable delight he never made men-
tion of was a victory over Major Andrew Ellicott, his boss on
the great survey project and a professional of such stature that
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 201 ---
he later became Professor of Mathematics at West Point Mili-
tary Academy. Ellicott had calculated and written almanacs of
his own, and they were solid successes, but “Ben’s” consistently
outsold his former superior’s less lively product. While Banne-
ker’s gratitude to the Ellicotts for all their favors would have
made him wish the major the best of luck with his competing
almanac, coming out on top in this friendly rivalry could not
have failed to be a great feeling. 
The printers of the almanacs soon saw that they had been
right to make a merit of the writer’s race and of their wish to
show the mental qualities that blacks were capable of. The first
edition included this message: 
The Editors of the PENNSYL VANIA, DELAWARE, MARY-
LAND, and VIRGINIA Almanacks feel themselves gratified
in the opportunity of presenting to the Public, through the
medium of the Press, what must be considered an extraordi-
nary effort of Genius—a COMPLETE and ACCURATE
EPHEMERIS for the year 1792, calculated by a sable Descen-
dant of Africa who, by this specimen of ingenuity, evinces to
Demonstration that mental Powers and Endowments are not
the exclusive Excellence of White People, but that the Rays
of Science may alike illumine the Minds of Men of every
Clime . . .
The favorable comments from readers grew to a very re-
spectable number, large enough to show how many people were
ready to accept this kind of precedent-shattering initiative. The
one most noticed and quoted came from Maryland Senator
James McHenry, a distinguished person who had been in the
federal government and even in a presidential cabinet. He
wrote an introduction to the 1792 almanac, which was also
reprinted in several newspapers, flatly eliminating any suspicion
benjamin banneker
186
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 202 ---
that the work was not Banneker’s or that it had been done with
great help from others. The senator said, in part:
I have been the more careful to investigate these particu-
lars and to ascertain their reality, as they form an interesting
fact in the history of man . . .
I consider this Negro as fresh proof that the powers of
the mind are disconnected with the colour of the skin . . .
Let the issue be what it will, I cannot but wish on this occa-
sion, to see the Public patronage keep pace with my black
friend’s merit.
The Sage’s Y ears of Glory
187
Portrait of Senator James McHenry. (Library of Congress collection)
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 203 ---
The senator’s hopes were amply met. Not only did the
public buy the almanac actively, but very soon Banneker began
to experience one of the happy burdens that popularity entails.
The considerable number of letters from readers and his cour-
teous attempts to answer them personally took much of the
free time that he had expected to hoard for his own medita-
tions. And he was stunned when visitors began appearing at his
cabin door, wanting to see “the black sage in his own sur-
roundings,” as one visitor put it. He was sufficiently pleased by
the compliment to enjoy the experience. And he seldom failed
to ask a visitor to come in and stay for a bit. But being a rather
enthusiastic conversationalist himself, he often allowed the
talks to run on more than he expected. As the years of success-
ful new editions continued, readers who had begun to feel like
friends even at a distance were more and more likely to show
up whenever they were in the Patapsco area. Banneker finally
disciplined himself to tell any new arrival at the start that he
had only a few minutes to spare. But it pained him to do that,
for he had lived a rather lonely life, and the coming of an ad-
mirer who usually wanted to express agreement with the advice
and philosophy in the Banneker almanac brought far more joy
than aggravation.
Long-term weather forecasts were, of course, part of every
almanac, and American astronomers had introduced slightly
more conscientious methods than the English, who often used
ludicrous exaggerations. There was an art to making most
prognostications deliberately vague, using words like “variable
winds” and “periods of unseasonable warmth.” Banneker did
his share of this, but he made a genuine attempt to include
some of the proven wisdom he had learned from his African
father and grandfather, along with observations of his own. One
thing he explored carefully was the theory that phases of the
moon might have an effect on weather in various localities, but
benjamin banneker
188
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 204 ---
this proved to have no merit. On the whole, his forecasts, which
differed greatly from those of Andrew Ellicott, were some of
the better attempts in this chaotic field. Also, Banneker’s tide
tables for the Chesapeake Bay area were considered by pilots
and fishermen to be unusually fine and very useful.
Just as modern magazines often appear in separate regional
versions, the Banneker almanac came to have separate editions
for Baltimore, the Wilmington-Philadelphia area, and Virginia.
This was done, in part, because it enabled some of the statisti-
cal data—such as tides and coastal conditions—to be custom-
ized for each area. But it was also because writers customarily
made separate deals with printers in different cities, rather than
giving one printer rights for all the states. As a result, at least
twenty-eight separate editions are known to have been pub-
lished over a seven-year period. Most of these varied from
thirty-two to forty-eight pages in length.
The successive editions also had variations in their covers
and opening words, in their essays, and, of course, in their com-
putations. Because he had always been inclined to consider how
the world worked and think of ways to improve it, Banneker
was amazed to realize how easily his once solitary thoughts
were now reaching thousands of people. He privately thought it
rather amusing that he had become a celebrity after six decades
of living unknown—and he actively enjoyed it.
He even ventured into poetry, usually on a theme that cou-
pled his wonder at the majesty of the universe and the naturally
pious feelings that this evoked in him. The 1794 almanac, for
example, contained these lines:
View yon majestic concave of the sky!
Contemplate well those glorious orbs on high—
These constellations shine, and comets blaze;
Each glitt’ring world the Godhead’s pow’r displays!
The Sage’s Y ears of Glory
189
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 205 ---
Banneker’s verses are like the solidly good efforts that might
come from the pen of a highly educated gentleman of his time
whose talent did not rise to that of a great natural poet. His
obedience to meter, which was then much more of a require-
ment than it is now, has his usual precision. Especially note-
worthy, however, is that his poetry shows the same talent for
word choice that has previously been noted in his best prose
writing. For instance, in the above lines, his use of the word
“concave” as a noun—although most persons know it only as an
adjective—is an unusual touch. As a rule, persons of average
language ability know only one use for each word, and only the
highly educated enrich their vocabularies by finding uncom-
mon ways to use a common word.
Each year, he imagined he had included all he had to say.
“Maybe there will be nothing to use next year,” he once jotted
in his journal. But invariably, all he had to do was sit quietly
and consult his encyclopedic memory for new material, recall-
ing his own thoughts or the family talk he had heard, especially
from his talented mother, and he would come up with many
more recipes, cures, helpful hints, and paragraphs of elevated
wisdom before the next edition went to bed. The printer’s cover
would again justifiably describe him as “An American Sage” and
promise “Several Useful T ables and Valuable Recipes” or “A
Variety of Instructive and Entertaining Matter in Prose and
Verse.”
Some of the essays were printed with quotation marks
enclosing the paragraphs, which has led to speculation that they
were simply copied from some unnamed source. This is
unlikely, because Banneker would not have been at all reluctant
to mention important sources for his material. In one sense,
given his limited access to research facilities, he probably would
have felt that citing other prominent thinkers was a greater
cause for pride than making his own arguments. Because most
benjamin banneker
190
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 206 ---
of the ideas in these quotation-marked passages reflect thoughts
that Banneker had recorded in his journal at various times,
it seems likely that he used the quotation marks in a different
way from our modern usage—perhaps as an indication that the
material included thoughts culled from a variety of sources.
In one sense, his vignettes of wit and wisdom could be con-
sidered a more notable accomplishment than the scientific cal-
culations. That he was a mathematical wizard was a gift of
nature. But the fact that what he had to say on so many subjects
and the way he phrased it appealed to thousands of mostly
white readers should have been an even greater proof of how
much blacks and whites had in common—how much they could
commune and converse if only they would try. This was the
unspoken subject that was confirmed by so many of the visitors
who sought him out. It was the unexpected range of his inter-
ests that made so many refer to him as a sage. They found that
his concerns and his advice were very relevant to their own
lives. What they had gleaned from his almanac they saw veri-
fied in person—that they were one people when they left their
fear at the door.
Among the many letters Banneker received, a few were
rude, questioning how much of the publication was his own and
how much help from whites had been needed to create his
almanac. But on the other hand, virtually all the visitors were
abolitionists, who came hoping to find a man who validated
their convictions. If there were any who came with a negative
turn of mind, Banneker gave no sign of suspecting any such
thing, and his manner and surroundings must have disarmed
them. Not one person ever went off to write an unfavorable
comment. His cabin was small and rustic, but the evidence of
scholarship was on his large table and in every corner. Often, he
moved to bring refreshments, and he talked in an engaging,
unhurried way. A few of the visitors felt as if they had become
The Sage’s Y ears of Glory
191
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 207 ---
friends, and began a correspondence with him as soon as they
returned home. One of these, Susanna Mason, was among the
persons referred to earlier who attested to having seen his
wooden clock. Although her importance is more as a witness
than as a poet, the lines she addressed to Banneker after a re-
peat visit in 1796 give an indication of the adulation—and per-
haps unwanted advice—that he grew accustomed to receiving:
An African astronomer.
Thou need’st to have a special care,
Thy conduct with thy talent square,
That no contaminating vice,
Obscure thy lustre in our eyes,
Or cast a shade upon they merit,
Or blast the praise thou might’st inherit;
For folly in an orb so bright,
Will strike on each beholder’s sight;
Nay, stand exposed from age to age,
Extant on some historian’s page,
Now as thy welfare I intend,
Observe my counsel as a friend.
Let fair example mark thy round
Unto thine orbit’s utmost bound.
“The good man’s path,” the scriptures say,
“Shines more and more to perfect day.”
Could all the strictures about his “conduct” possibly have
meant that Mrs. Mason’s visit happened to come at a time when
Banneker had sipped too much wine? Some of the words are so
strong—talk of “contaminating vice” that might “cast a shade”
upon his merit—that they invite concern about some serious
trait of Banneker’s that has been overlooked. The few com-
ments from others who knew Mrs. Mason make her sound like
a well-meaning prude, and she may have enjoyed giving out
benjamin banneker
192
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 208 ---
finger-wagging strictures as a precaution against vices that had
not really surfaced. It will be noted that the sentiments are
arranged much like the progression often found in a sermon,
with warnings against the prevalence of sin phasing into a tri-
umphal ending. Whatever the explanation, it didn’t blight the
relationship, for she continued to correspond with Banneker
enthusiastically.
After the success of the 1792 Banneker almanac, the print-
ers took it for granted that this was to be a yearly staple. It did
continue for five more lucrative years, 1793 through 1797. The
preparation and printing of the almanacs went smoothly for
the most part, although there was considerable discussion and
decision-making on one questionable item in the second alma-
nac, which went on sale in 1792 for the year 1793. The issue, as
mentioned briefly earlier, was whether to include Banneker’s
correspondence with Jefferson. Banneker himself felt particu-
larly conflicted about it, knowing as he did that the powerful
words could have a great effect, yet wondering about the pro-
priety of publicizing private letters. Also, it is a tremendous
testimony to this man’s capacity for honest self-examination
and perfectionism that he was rather dissatisfied with his own
letter whenever he reread it. He felt that it sounded stultified
and pompous. And with an astonishing capacity for empathic
thought, he often wondered what Jefferson felt on first reading
his words. In the end, his hope of influencing other minds in
the right direction won out, and he authorized Pemberton and
Goddard & Angell to include the two letters in the next almanac.
Banneker now repeatedly returned to the injustice of slav-
ery as one of his themes in the almanacs and in his personal
writing. He knew that he was putting his life in danger with
every one of these essays, and he recorded several more fright-
ening incidents in his journal. But every such scare, which he
did not take at all lightly, only gave him proof that his words
The Sage’s Y ears of Glory
193
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 209 ---
were having an effect. Now that he had a platform from which
to make himself heard, he raised his voice repeatedly. Some-
times this was done in highly competent, if not the most musi-
cal, verse. One more example of such an effort, written in late
1791 and then used in an almanac, reads this way:
Behold ye Christians! and in pity see
Those Afric sons which Nature formed free.
Behold them in a fruitful country blest.
Of Nature’s bounties see them rich possest.
Behold them herefrom torn by cruel force,
And doomed to slavery without remorse.
This act, America, thy sons have known
This cruel act, relentless they have done.
Equally consistent was his unique way of combining scien-
tific observations, put into simplified words that all could under-
stand, with moral precepts. In these passages, he showed his
own deep faith—his certainty that a single great Creator had
carefully prepared a wonderful system for our comfort and had
also set out clear guidelines for us to live by. This was exempli-
fied by one essay called “Remarks on the Swiftness of Time.” It
began this way:
The natural advantages which arise from the position of the
earth we inhabit, with respect to the other planets, afford
much employment to mathematical speculation, by which it
has been discovered that no other conformation of the system
could have given such commodious distributions of light and
heat, or imparted fertility and pleasure to so great a part of
the revolving sphere.
It may be perhaps observed by the moralist, with equal
reason, that our globe seems particularly fitted for the resi-
dence of a being, placed here for only a short time, whose
benjamin banneker
194
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 210 ---
task is to advance himself to a higher and happier state of
existence by unremitted vigilance of caution and activity of
virtue . . .
T o this end all the appearances of nature uniformly con-
spire. Whatever we see on every side, reminds us of the lapse
of time and the flux of life. The day and the night succeed
each other, the rotation of seasons diversifies the year, the sun
rises, attains the meridian, declines and sets; and the moon
every night changes its form. . . .
He that is carried forward, however swiftly, by a motion
equable and easy, perceives not the change of place but by the
variation of objects. If the wheel of life, which rolls thus
silently along, passed on through undistinguishable unifor-
mity, we should never mark its approaches to the end of the
course . . . If the parts of life were not variously coloured,
we should never discern their departure or succession, but
should live thoughtless of the past and careless of the future,
without will, and perhaps without power, to compute the
periods of life, or to compare the time which is already lost
with that which may probably remain . . . 
Because he was such a dedicated pacifist, Banneker devoted
several pages of the 1793 almanac to an essay on pacifism. He
might very well have written on this subject himself, consider-
ing the strong Quaker influences in his life. But its poor quality
shows that a guest writer must have been at work, and it is usu-
ally said to have been written by Benjamin Rush, a Philadelphia
doctor and anti-slavery advocate. This is questionable because
Rush was highly regarded by some of the wisest Founding
Fathers, including the tough-minded John Adams. Because this
was only Banneker’s second almanac, and the joy of being able
to put his own ideas into writing was one of the glories of this
new field, it must have been an enormous sacrifice to let any-
one else play so great a role in it. In any case, the words were
The Sage’s Y ears of Glory
195
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 211 ---
so naively impractical that Banneker was fortunate his almanac
did not lose readers because of this poor piece. The article was
titled “A Plan for a Peace Office for the United States.” The
rather sophomoric approach was signaled when it began, “It is
to be hoped that no objection will be made to the establishment
of such an office while we are engaged in a war with the Indi-
ans, for as the War Office of the United States was established
in time of peace, it is equally reasonable that a Peace Office
should be established in time of war.”
It then proceeded to outline how a Secretary of Peace would
establish and maintain free schools in every city in the United
States and would be responsible for finding schoolmasters who
would instruct the youth of the country in reading, writing, and
arithmetic, and in the doctrines of some religion, preferably
Christianity. Considering the fact that the states had just barely
been convinced to join a loose-knit union that left their states’
rights intact, the nonsense of thrusting a federal school system
on them (which the federal government would not dare to try
even today) is clear. And to ignore the fact that separation of
church and state was another dominant principle made this a
piece of sheer nonsense. The article went on to stipulate that
“militia laws should everywhere be repealed and military dress
and titles be laid aside,” and ended by suggesting the kinds of
pictures to be shown on the walls of schools, including: “A
group of French and Austrian soldiers dancing arm in arm” and
“A lion eating straw with an ox and an adder playing upon the
lips of a child.” But the result of all this excess is that readers
may have regarded it as an intentional bit of comedy, for when
the following year’s almanac came out, the sales were even
greater.
Whatever the true cause, 1794 proved to be the peak of
Banneker’s almanac career, with the highest sales he had ever
known. The number of regular buyers had built up consider-
benjamin banneker
196
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 212 ---
ably, and it was also a time when abolitionism was at a high
point, making a dual reason for buying this particular almanac.
This success even brought on the idea of selling the publication
in England, and Banneker went to the trouble of preparing an
ephemeris for the purpose. Even though the anti-slavery acti-
vists in England were keen on everything dealing with Banne-
ker and passages from his works were read in the House of
Commons, the financial arrangements were never worked out,
and the almanac was not published abroad.
After 1794, although there would be three more reasonably
profitable years for the regular American editions, the liveliest
sales were past. More competitors had entered the field, for one
thing, but, also, the abolitionist societies proved, sadly, to have
been more of a fad than a crusade. Some actually went out of
existence, and nearly all saw waning interest. The extra sales
that had resulted from that source of enthusiasm were lost.
Banneker was not unduly distressed by his decision to retire
from the almanac market. His health was declining, and the
chore of preparing more editions was a tiring one. After the last
edition, of 1797, was published, he continued to calculate the
ephemeris year after year, well into the nineteenth century, but
only as a mental exercise for his own satisfaction.
The Sage’s Y ears of Glory
197
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 213 ---
17
}
Living Off the Land Again
T
he early 1800s saw Benjamin Banneker’s talent for inge-
nuity, arithmetical skill, and prudent management in full
flower. Now in his early seventies (which was then consid-
ered a great age), he was surprisingly inventive in working out
ways to make his late years into good ones.
With the revenues from the almanacs at an end, he needed
to create a regular income in order to go on living comfortably.
What he thought of, a little guiltily, as extravagances were al-
most pitifully small items—a few food specialties, tobacco for
his pipe, a little wine or brandy to lend life to very simple meal-
times, an occasional pair of new shoes, and, above all, reading
matter. Along with books to feed his insatiable mind, he now
regularly scoured the local newspaper to search for signs of the
path his state and country were taking. Such lavish living would
be impossible without somehow earning eight to ten dollars per
month. His only asset was his land, most of which was now
lying unused. Going back to the uncertain rewards of active
farming—even with the help of hired hands—would have taken
too much time away from the pleasure of contemplation. He
decided to use his land in another way. His first thought was to
198
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 214 ---
rent parcels of it to neighbors, and he actually made several
such deals, but fortunately on a short-term trial basis, for this
proved to be a disaster.
It soon became clear that being a landlord was not at all
suited to his temperament, for he found that it involved the
irritating task of trying to collect rents. He had thought of the
arrangement as if his tenants were much like himself, punctual
in meeting their obligations and therefore a steady source of
income. Instead, they proved unreliable and even prone to
show resentment toward a person who expected cash in return
for unused acres. Rent collection dates became very painful.
Within a year, he had heard most of the excuses that any expe-
rienced landlord would recognize—the crop that failed, the
impossible weather, the pests that had taken control, the family
illnesses, all delivered with shifty looks or sullen stares. The old
neighborly feeling suffered in the process. Indeed, he even had
to wonder whether some of the quasi-terrorist threats that he
recounted in his journal could have been mounted by angry
tenants rather than racist rogues. “Better to die of hunger than
of anger,” Banneker concluded in one of his journal entries, and
he gave up on the rental scheme.
He turned, instead, to an ingenious form of annuity, based
on a deferred sale of land to the Ellicotts. He calculated that
about three-fourths of his land was worth $1180. Next, he con-
sidered the rather short lifetimes of his father and grandfather,
and he estimated that he would certainly not live more than
another decade. He proposed that the Ellicotts agree to pay him
$112 a year for up to fifteen years, with the right to take pos-
session sooner in the event of his death. This meant they might
be overpaying a little, or underpaying if his life ended quite
soon. They agreed, and also gave him a charge account at the
Ellicott store, where his purchases could simply be deducted
from what they owed him. In a sense, he felt, this would be like
Living Off the Land Again
199
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 215 ---
collecting some of his money just by making necessary pur-
chases. It turned out that the Ellicotts had to pay less than $800
before Banneker’s life ended. But for those last years, the deal
gave him peace of mind, and it even facilitated one momentous
purchase—a fine pocket watch of his own, carrying with it the
memory of that borrowed watch that he had once taken apart
and reassembled in the course of learning to make his cele-
brated wooden clock.
One hidden price he paid for this peace was a nagging sense
of guilt at letting go of land that the family had won with such
effort. He wrote defensively in his diary, pointing out that his
sisters, Minta Black and Molly Morten, were comfortably mar-
ried and their children were well started in life, and they had no
great need of an inheritance from him. In fact, it is believed
that the daughters of these sisters did eventually divide what
was left of the old Timber Poynt property. And one mitigating
fact made Benjamin feel a little better about his decision to sell:
His nephew Greenbury Morten, who was Molly’s son, bought
twenty acres of the land around the time of the “annuity” deal
with the Ellicotts. This young Morten, incidentally, was a bright
young man who went on to work a good many years at Elli-
cott’s Mills. He also had considerable initiative and took an
active part in the affairs of the community. His Aunt Minta
once said that Greenbury had asserted his rights as a free black
so effectively that he had even dared to step up and vote in
elections. If she was right about that, his status as a free black
landowner and his general character apparently made him so
respected that no one was inclined to challenge him. On the
other hand, since Minta had once said similar unusual things
about Banneker’s access to civil rights, it is possible that she
habitually stated what she fondly preferred to believe. 
Banneker now had the pleasurable existence of a person
who no longer has to work, yet does not actually retire because
benjamin banneker
200
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 216 ---
his main interest is a solo activity that never ceases to absorb
him. Although he suffered arthritic pain that hampered move-
ment, it did not prevent him, on most days, from taking long
walks with the aid of a cane. And he continued to study the
heavens through his telescope, which he had mounted next to a
window, allowing him to work indoors on almost every cloud-
less night. The modern discoveries that astonish even the most
advanced cosmologists would have been new to him, of course,
but by no means hard for him to believe or to incorporate into
his notion of the universe. He had always assumed there were
spaces and distances and objects out there that dwarfed anything
man could imagine. It is not hard to understand why many
human beings find it daunting and even terrifying to contem-
plate the awesome space through which our little Earth hurtles.
Banneker was one of those who got just the opposite sensation
from looking upward. The more we learned, he felt, the smaller
we would seem in terms of our own relative size; but this, by
proving the Creator to be ever more majestic, he believed,
should give us an increasing sense of trust and security.
More and more of his time was devoted to reading, and he
had been able to buy several books of his own, while still rely-
ing on the many that were loaned to him by the Ellicotts. But
he specially treasured the first book he ever bought for himself,
a fine edition of the Holy Bible that he had acquired at age
thirty-two. It is not known whether Molly Banneka’s Bible, the
one she had used in teaching little Benjamin to read, had some-
how been lost or had gone to another family member. The idea
of having a family Bible must have been very important to Ban-
neker in his early thirties, for it had been a costly purchase, and
he soon started inscribing important dates into it. He also loved
the common sense in it, especially some of the Old T estament
teachings. He was no “fundamentalist,” in the modern sense,
for he would never have imagined that any human being knew
Living Off the Land Again
201
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 217 ---
how the Creator made the world or peopled it. But he thought
it to be a guide to living that could make this a much finer exis-
tence if the lessons were applied.
With all that, he kept resisting affiliation with any estab-
lished church. For a time, he thought seriously that he should
align himself with one of the great faiths, and he began a series
of visits to various houses of worship with the intention of per-
haps making a choice. It was like him to do this kind of
methodical research, even though he had been inclined to favor
the Quakers all along. Not only was he grateful for the many
times when persons of that persuasion had shown him the
greatest courtesies, but he also found in their beliefs the logic
and justice that he imagined the Creator wished to see. It is not
clear, however, whether he ever formally joined the Quakers. It
has been suggested that his reluctance to take up any formal
affiliation was due to an attachment to the faith of his African
forebears. This is possible, of course, but seems unlikely, for it
was never mentioned in anything he wrote. Thoughts he ex-
pressed make it likelier that the very idea of becoming part of
any group, be it a church or a political party, seemed to him to
swallow up an individual’s free intelligence, obligating him or
her to surrender the right of dissent from whatever the com-
munity mind might dictate on any given subject.
Along with thoughts that reached out to the vastness of
time and space, Banneker was now keeping up with community
activity in the relatively small Patapsco region, the recently
activated capital of Washington, D.C., that he had helped to
create, and the states around it. He had read a great deal about
the memorable visit of the French duc de La Rochefoucauld,
whose views about the new nation were incisive enough to still
be quoted today. Noting the speculative scramble to make prof-
its by buying up lots around the Washington area, the French-
man laughed off the rampant criticism of the new capital and
benjamin banneker
202
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 218 ---
predicted a great future for it. On the other hand, La Roche-
foucauld was much less sanguine when he learned that the
adjoining town of Upper Marlboro, the seat of Prince Georges
County, Maryland, had more slaves than free persons—12,000
in an overall population of 22,000. Strangely, Banneker thought,
some wise foreign travelers were quick to see anomalies that
America’s own leaders, once so foresighted, were now choosing
to overlook.
Another of these distinguished tourists was Baron Alexan-
der von Humboldt, a young Prussian scientist and explorer who
came after making a geographical survey of Latin America. He
was lionized by society and adored by all the ladies, but the
attention never distracted him from observing how great this
new land could become. In 1804, Europeans were inclined to
think themselves to be at the true center of the world, fascinated
but not at all rivaled by the vastness of America. Humboldt,
however, foresaw that a glorious capital city would grow from
the “vast Serbonian bog” with a population of only 4,500 at
that time. What impressed Banneker most was that this young
visionary, after saying, “I have come not to see your great rivers
and mountains, but to become acquainted with your great
men,” was reported by a newspaper to have spent several days
with “the famous astronomer-cartographer, Andrew Ellicott.”
Banneker’s leisurely existence was sporadically troubled by a
succession of physical threats and disturbing dreams that he
recorded in more and more detail. His journal pages for those
years contain numerous examples of instances when unknown
persons were heard outside his cabin and even when gunshots
were fired very close to his door. There is no overt mention of
fear at those times, but the incidents apparently caused him
to have a series of very disturbed dreams, showing that the risk
he was running troubled his mind more than he wanted to
admit to himself, or so the laconic tone of his accounts would
Living Off the Land Again
203
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 219 ---
indicate. One example, dated April 29, 1798, reads: “Came two
black men with a gun in my inclose and discharged it a few
[illegible] from me. I being very unwell, could not pursue them
to find who they were.” The fact that they were black proves
nothing. The tactics of his racist enemies during his late years
and after his death would indicate they were the sort of persons
who might have paid quite innocent blacks to make a threaten-
ing foray of this kind. And there was a footnote on a later page,
saying: “The night of 27 November 1802 my house was vio-
lently broken open and several articles taken out.” These were
startling experiences in the placid area he had known so long.
And he guessed them to be racially motivated, for the old anger
of neighbors who had rented land from him was a thing of the
past, whereas the hatred of anti-abolitionists he knew to be
ineradicable. Banneker made no mention of even considering
a complaint to the sheriff’s office or the Ellicott City police.
Prominent as he was, he had to wonder which side the author-
ities were on in the case of racists.
The bad dreams may have been a direct consequence of this
feeling of being threatened, although it will require study by
experts in dreams to interpret the increasing number, complex-
ity, and violence of his dreams in these later years. As noted
earlier, he had been recording dreams in his journal for a long
time, and he seemed to remember them in great detail when he
woke. But now they became so weird and often bizarre that his-
torians have speculated that they were probably fictional sto-
ries. In so concluding, they are apparently failing to note a dif-
ference between his fictitious tales about dreams when he was
in his thirties and the very real dreams of these older years.
Given the fact that he liked to earn money by writing and had
contacts with leading printers in his later years, he now had no
reason to invent wild plots if he wasn’t going to attempt to turn
benjamin banneker
204
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 220 ---
them into saleable fiction. Unlike the contrived dream stories
of younger years, these accounts have the incoherence of actual
bad dreams, recorded for himself alone. He laboriously put the
details into his journal, with no attempt to make them known
to a larger audience.
The case for believing that Banneker really had these
dreams and recorded them as he remembered them is strength-
ened by the fact that several such accounts break off with an
indication that he forgot the rest. One tells of his holding a
fawn or young deer with white hair that is “beautiful to be-
hold.” But he clips the tip of an ear, in order to recognize it if
he should ever see it again. The fawn cries like a child, filling
him with sorrow. He takes wool from a garment and wipes
blood from the wound, then is holding the fawn on his knees.
There is a short, confused sentence about getting some milk
for the fawn, but then come the words, “My dream left me. B.
Banneker.”
Another dream begins disturbingly:
Being weary holing for corn, I laid down on my bed and fell
into a deep sleep and dreamed that I had a child in my arms
and was viewing the back part of its head where it had been
sore, and I found it was healed with a hole through the skin
and Scull bone and came out at forehead, that I could see
very distinctly through the child’s head the hole being large
enough to receive an ordinary finger—
I called some woman to see the strange sight, and she put
her spectacles on and saw it, and she asked me if I had previ-
ously lanced that place in the child’s head. I answered in the
affirmative.
N.B. the Child is well as any other.
Perhaps the weirdest of Banneker’s dreams, seeming to show
the combination of mental stress and religious impulses he was
Living Off the Land Again
205
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:30 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 221 ---
experiencing, was recounted in the following entry on Decem-
ber 13, 1797:
I dreamed I saw something passing by my door to and fro.
When I attempted to go to the door, it vanished, then reap-
peared two or three [ sic]. At length, I let in the infernal spirit
and he told me that he had been concerned with a woman by
the name of Beckey Freeman (I never heard the name as I
remember). By some means we fell into a skirmish, and I
threw him behind the fire and endeavored to burn him up,
but all in vain as I know not what became of him. His feet
were circular or rather globular and did not exceed an inch
and a half in diameter. But while I held him in the fire, he
said something respecting he was able to stand it, but I forget
his words.
B. Banneker
It is not certain that the term “infernal spirit” means that
Banneker was wrestling with the devil. Since there is no capi-
talization of those two words, they could have been a generic
expression, rather than the devil himself. But the spirit’s remark
that he was able to stand the fire does indicate that he is either
Lucifer or one of his close accomplices. And Banneker’s inclu-
sion of this as an item worthy enough to be in his journal shows
that he considered it significant, for he often mentioned having
a dream without recording it in detail. It seems plausible that
Banneker felt this dream had been caused by real concerns he
was having, perhaps about the dangers he was incurring by
publishing almanacs. He knew that the pro-slavery forces re-
garded each new issue as a flagrant and provocative challenge to
the existence of slavery. Some of the six almanacs published
from 1792 through 1797 contained outspoken words about free-
dom and injustice. In particular, they aimed ridicule at the self-
benjamin banneker
206
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 222 ---
importance and pomposity of all those who saw themselves as
great personages. Banneker was not at all inclined to make a
display of bravado, and most times his lifelong prudence seemed
to win out over physical courage. But there was something
about the process of writing that stiffened his resolve, as if there
was a tonic in the act of writing as he pleased. He did not for a
moment consider stopping publication until the sales ebbed.
It is at least arguable that these bona fide dreams and their
disagreeable themes reflected the disturbed mental state of one
who knew that he had many adversaries who wished him
silenced or dead. Most of his life had been spent in obscurity, a
simple farmer whom no one feared or thought of harming.
From the moment he sent the letter to Jefferson, he had known
that he might become a marked man. Then came the publicity
promoted by the abolitionist societies, and finally the almanacs,
actually making him an activist and therefore a combatant. T rue,
the dreams seemed to grow more intense after he had discon-
tinued the almanacs. But he thought there were still enemies
who would continue to consider his very existence to be a chal-
lenge to their cause. In this, he was right, for the threatening
incidents around his cabin went on. When he realized that just
stopping publication had not ended the danger, the prospect of
being trapped in his cabin with no way out was worse than dur-
ing the days when fear was at least matched by the excitement
of action.
A nighttime visit to Oella and to the area where his cabin
had stood makes his fears seem palpable. Even today, with a few
lights along the road and a handful of dimly lit houses within
two or three hundred yards along the way, the lonely darkness
is oppressive. Looking down from his exact cabin site, the soft
lights of Elkridge and Ellicott City seem distant, underlining
how far a lone occupant would have been from any form of
Living Off the Land Again
207
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 223 ---
security or assistance. T o be a marked man in an easily entered
cabin at a time when neighbors were even farther away and
darkness was total would have frightened a Roman gladiator.
Going to bed each night in a lonely cabin that was not particu-
larly secure must always have been accompanied by the thought
of danger lurking out there in the darkness.  
benjamin banneker
208
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 224 ---
209
18
}
Ennobled by Flame
P
rovidentially, Banneker never knew a day of great suffer-
ing in his last years. More important to this man for
whom the ability to think was the main reason for living,
he never lost his mental clarity or his curiosity about the world.
When he was nearing age seventy-five, his health and physical
vigor declining, friends who accompanied him on his long daily
walks recalled his lively observations on everything they passed.
It was like seeing everything more clearly, with a brighter light
shining on it, just to hear his comments.
That was true on October 9, 1806. He and a friend were
enjoying a pleasant stroll and commenting on the beautiful fall
afternoon when Benjamin began to feel ill. They got back to
his cabin just in time, for there he collapsed. He died peacefully
within hours.
T wo days later, on October 11, his coffin, surrounded by
relatives, friends, and even more people from miles around who
had often nodded respectfully when they passed him on a road,
was lowered into the trench that awaited it at the nearby burial
ground. At that very moment—though the mourners would not
know it for a half-hour—flames suddenly erupted in his cabin
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 225 ---
and raged unimpeded, burning the little structure to the ground
and consuming nearly everything inside. Included were the
wooden clock and most of the journals and other papers that
held the thoughts of a remarkable lifetime. Just a few things
survived by sheer luck because they had been accidentally
returned to the Ellicotts along with some books and instru-
ments that Banneker had borrowed. Saved was a manuscript
journal he had kept for some years, and it was precious, even
though not from his most productive period. It is clear that
innumerable earlier ideas about astronomy and other sciences
were reduced to ashes, because Banneker had referred to them
in later notations. Most of those would undoubtedly appear ele-
mentary today; it was not a permanent loss to science, but,
based on the rather few observations we do have from Banne-
ker, it is certain that they were not at all simplistic in his day.
The real loss to human understanding was the obliteration of
additional proof that great mental ability has nothing to do
with race. All the burned notes would have strengthened the
evidence that his ideas were original and independent. They
might well have encouraged the abolitionists to publish a biog-
raphy of Banneker’s life, making such a volume an indestruc-
tible banner for their cause. But with so little material available,
no one thought of taking on such a task. This delayed, at least
by many decades, the first credible account of black mental
abilities to reach a broad public audience.
A handful of remarkable clergymen had been preaching
about this subject for years, in Pennsylvania, France, and En-
gland, but their writing was too far ahead of their time to be
widely accepted. The abolitionists who said such things were
often regarded as mere faddists in pursuit of their hobby. Some
of them were even mistrusted by blacks, who thought they had
a social or political agenda of their own. There were obituary
notices about Banneker in several newspapers, which was then a
benjamin banneker
210
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 226 ---
rare honor for a black person, and there was a laudatory article
by the faithful Senator McHenry, but these echoing reminders
of a great man soon faded. The several thousand people who
had bought Banneker’s almanac could have made a difference in
the course of time, but when the publication ceased, natural
attrition dried up the interest.
That, of course, was precisely the reason for the fire. Some
friends in Ellicott City and in the Banneker neighborhood (which
was just about to be incorporated with the name of Oella) said
in hushed tones that the fire must have been a mystical event, a
sign that the heavens were lighting a memorial in his honor,
and other emotional remarks of that nature. Benjamin Banne-
ker would have known better. He would have seen that all his
fears and eerie dreams of recent years had been based on very
real evil forces that had nothing to do with mysticism. He
would have said in his balanced way that he was fortunate that
the people who were bad enough to do this had not been quite
bad enough to burn the place while he was sleeping in it.
While political leaders who would really have preferred an
end to slavery did not feel strongly enough about the issue to
push hard against the forces that might have challenged their
power and torn the country apart, the cabin-burners were a dif-
ferent breed. They were dedicated racists, committed to slavery
as an institution. Somehow—and this was a blessing—they were
not quite bold enough to take a life that threatened to under-
mine their position. Perhaps they were clever enough to know
that creating a martyr might harm their cause. But when an un-
occupied cabin contained flammable objects with added proof
of just what they wanted to suppress, their course was clear. It
was all too easy to bury the man’s traces on the same day the
man himself was buried.
The cabin was so thoroughly razed that the area was hardly
searched. T wo attempts were made to put a small marker on the
Ennobled by Flame
211
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 227 ---
site, but it was destroyed by vandals both times. Nearly a half-
century after his death, when the feelings that led to the Civil
War were stirring, a few articles about Banneker appeared and
lectures about him were given, especially at the Maryland His-
torical Society. Very late in the nineteenth century, Martha Elli-
cott T yson, the daughter of George Ellicott, dictated her invalu-
able memoir about Banneker to her daughter. A very old lady
by that time, she had a vivid memory of the man and, as noted
earlier, was driven to tell her story by the recollection that her
father had always wanted to write this himself. Nothing else,
except Banneker’s own letters and notes, can compare with
Martha T yson’s firsthand account.
Not until the early 1970s, 165 years after his death, was
there a small public funding to memorialize Banneker’s remark-
able career. A researcher named John McGrain did extensive
work with land records and found the boundaries of his one
hundred–acre farm. In the mid-1980s, the Baltimore County
Department of Recreation and Parks purchased what had been
identified as the Banneker Farmstead, along with some forty
benjamin banneker
212
Wood-cut mural in solid walnut in the Howard County Offices, Ellicott
City, Maryland, executed by John Levering in 1977. Shows the subject
studying in his cabin, with symbols of his scientific research around him
and a view of the tobacco farm outdoors.
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 228 ---
acres of surrounding land. A Benjamin Banneker Historical Park
was established and a small marble building erected. Regret-
tably, its artifacts and other contents are few. More archaeolog-
ical digging and a search for items that may be in collectors’
hands are projected.
}
The traces of a black person’s existence were tantalizingly vague
in the eighteenth century—no mailing address, no club mem-
berships, almost no correspondence, hardly anything recorded
in public documents. There are stretches in Benjamin Banne-
ker’s life when it seems that we hardly have the subject in our
sights. But in the end, we know the real man very well—know
Banneker better than we know most modern celebrities who
show a great deal of skin but hardly a clue as to their real char-
acter. His life was a quest for a certain kind of beauty, the ele-
gance of perfect balance. He saw balance as the true and endur-
ing beauty, because imbalance was destined to cause failure.
That is why he was passionate about time, a watch, a wooden
clock, the punctual new time-saving machinery at Ellicott’s
Mills. A good many technically minded persons have this feel-
ing for the mechanisms they work with. But Banneker applied
his love of balance to the whole physical world. When he turned
one of Andrew Ellicott’s fine instruments to locate a star, he
forgot the cold and the arthritis, for he was seeing another cog
in the Great Machine, and its total reliability was breathtaking.
T o look at a balanced mechanism and relate it to a passion for
the balanced universe takes an unusual mind, though not at all
sui generis. There are other minds that see beauty in a princi-
ple and share Banneker’s ability to project the principle they
love to other spheres. What is rarest of all, however, is Banne-
ker’s way of converting this mechanical ideal into a philosophy
Ennobled by Flame
213
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 229 ---
of life. If there were an ideology called “Bannekerism,” it would
say: He saw the beauty of the perfectly balanced mechanism as
a pattern that was meant to be copied in human behavior.
It follows from this belief that the two words “peace” and
“justice” were not, to him, the banal sounds that are usually
swallowed mindlessly and left undigested. He thought of them
as literally the conditions necessary to make the mechanism of
a community or a nation function as it should. If he had heard
George S. Patton’s lurid praise of war as his idea of great beauty
and majesty, Banneker would have understood the general’s love
for the tanks and other machines of battle, but turned away as
sadly as any sensitive person who hears his own ideal mangled.
Peace—people working in harmony—was to him not just
the best way, but the only way. A democracy that works well
was, to Banneker, the epitome of beautiful organization, specif-
ically because it calls for so many “moving parts” to operate
while being conscious of how they affect each other. That was
why he could worry about how his letter to Jefferson had affected
benjamin banneker
214
A first-day cover of the Benjamin Banneker stamp, issued by the U.S. Postal
Service on February 15, 1980.
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 230 ---
the writer of such perfect words about democracy, even if the
man had fallen so far short of his own language. Banneker con-
veyed this feeling of fairness and balance so thoroughly in all
his conversations that ladies always spoke of how “gentle” he
was, men at Ellicott’s Mills called his observations (even on sub-
jects that were new to him) “damned interesting,” and both
groups’ eyes lit up when he appeared.
Ennobled by Flame
215
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 231 ---
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 232 ---
217
APPENDIX I
}
The Dogon Ancestors
The Dogon people are thought to have fled from the headwaters of
the Niger between the tenth and thirteenth centuries to escape from
pressure to convert to Islam, and the refuge of a great escarpment that
is part of the Bandiagara cliffs has kept them intact and rather iso-
lated. They live today, as they have for centuries, mainly by raising
grain, especially millet, and they trade their products with another
Mali community, the Fulani people, who specialize in dairy products.
Several things make Banneker’s relationship to the Dogon espe-
cially significant. They have a complicated theology and cosmology
that is based on an elaborate numerical formula. Even before most
other advanced peoples, they saw the structure of the world as being
related to the human body. The hand, for example, made the number
8 central to this, apparently based on the number of fingers without
the thumbs. So 8 and its multiples were basic, just as 10 and the dec-
imal system were basic for the Romans. They believe that the old
Nummo spirit, architect of the world, laid out eight covenant stones
that outlined the human soul. He also provided eight ancestors as pro-
genitors of the eight Dogon clans that would make up human society.
Very elderly Dogon say that when men began trading, they counted
in eights; and even when the French came as colonists and talked of
“hundreds” (or centaines), the Dogon considered that to mean 80.
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 233 ---
Serious researchers speak of an “indigenous literacy” among the
Dogon, a system of writing that predated the coming of Europeans.
They have also found that Dogon technology has long covered min-
ing, metal processing, cotton planting and textiles, food storage,
architecture, erosion control, and irrigation.
There are indications that the Dogon people knew long before
the Europeans that Earth orbits around the sun. Some experts in Afri-
can studies are convinced that they also knew about other planets and
even worlds beyond the solar system. Those who insist this is so have
tried to explain it by showing that the Dogon may have come upon
the Egyptians’ way of using crystals to shape lenses that could serve as
simple telescopes. There are doubters who say that even if this were
so, there is no such lens arrangement that gives enough magnification
to account for the disputed belief that Dogons were centuries ahead
in knowing that the “Dog Star” has a unique twinkle because it is
actually a double star (called Sirius A and Sirius B). They supposedly
even knew that the interplay of their two orbits took either fifty or
sixty years to be completed.
The disbelievers would appear to be the more credible—until it is
realized that in the late 1700s, Benjamin Banneker reportedly said Sir-
ius was both his favorite star and his lucky star, and called it a double
star many years before professional scientists of the advanced world
confirmed that fact. Some have used this to assert that he mystically
inherited this knowledge, as if it had been transmitted through the
DNA. But the simpler explanation would appear to be that Grand-
father Banneka had talked of certain ancient wisdom to Molly, who
had passed it along to Benjamin when he was a boy. Banneker may
later have adapted it to fit his own updated astronomical thoughts.
This finding has the multiple function of pinpointing the location
of Banneker’s hitherto-unknown African roots, for no African people
other than the Dogon are known to have had any special interest in
the star called Sirius. It does not, of course, reveal the identity of the
ancient Dogon who had the original insight about the dual nature of
Sirius. Since it is provable that the difference between these A and B
stars is invisible without magnification many times greater than any
appendix i
218
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 234 ---
African people are known to have had, the only explanation would
have to be that a great early Dogon thinker, having noted a wobbly
twinkle different from any other, simply had the astonishing insight
that two stars locked in a strange dance might be producing such an
effect. It was, after all, just such a capacity for pure reason that made
Benjamin Banneker a finer astronomer than many who had much
superior equipment.
A less exact but very telling personal trait ties Banneker to the
Dogon. Europeans who have lived among the Dogon describe them
in the very same terms that were so often applied to Banneker by con-
temporaries. Antonin Potovski, a French photographer who has worked
and taught in Mali for some years, has written, “Dogon teenagers rarely
mess around. From a very early age, they are exposed to the hard
work crucial for survival in a semi-arid environment. Since the vil-
lagers’ well-being depends on them and their involvement in a host of
daily chores, the classic problems encountered by urban teenagers are
not felt here.” He calls the Dogon “one of the world’s most extraordi-
nary cultures.” T oday, as in antiquity, they are known as particularly
dignified and orderly people. Even through the vicissitudes of colo-
nialism, this remained a constant. And other groups in Mali, including
those who have had commercial disputes with the Dogon, still speak
of them that way today. Further, they are known to dislike all forms of
disagreement, always opting to stress compromise over confrontation,
tending to gain respect by the moderation of their arguments. That is
exactly what Banneker’s acquaintances always said about him. But just
as the ancient Dogon people had a breaking point that made them
leave the Niger headwaters and move to the rocky escarpment of the
Bandiagara to protect their own beliefs, Banneker was finally prompted
to turn away from quiet living within an unjust system and to con-
front its leaders with a historic protest.
The Dogon Ancestors
219
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 235 ---
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 236 ---
221
APPENDIX II
}
A Significant Similarity
Benjamin Franklin was just twenty-six years old when he became a
national figure by compiling the first edition of Poor Richard’s Alma-
nac. Benjamin Banneker, who was only a year old at that time, did not
publish the almanac that had been forming in his mind for so long
until he was sixty-one. Y et they were brothers and virtually twins in
talents and in character. Some persons who had seen them both even
noticed that Banneker, as he aged, began to look like Franklin, with
the same portliness, very short neck, and benign expression.
It is strange that a comparison of Franklin and Banneker has never
been noted, for the similarities of their mental processes are astonish-
ing. Although they never met, both men developed a parallel manner
of analyzing problems and communicating their conclusions. Both
had a unique way of discovering scientific truths and then stating
them so simply that they came to seem “obvious” to ordinary minds;
they appeared to accomplish this effortlessly, but only because both
had such powerful minds and disciplined approaches that what others
regarded as onerous mental effort was as natural as breathing. Both
also shared a wisdom about human affairs that they could communi-
cate in a way that quickly struck others as elementary common sense.
They made distasteful medicine seem palatable.
How little race has to do with mental ability is reconfirmed by the
fact that both were universal geniuses, their rare abilities going beyond
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 237 ---
any single specialty. Franklin was the only person among the Found-
ing Fathers who deserves that title. He and Banneker combined supe-
rior intuition in the sciences with an inborn mastery of philosophical
principles and a grasp of how civilization can be advanced. Thomas
Jefferson has been spoken of as a genius, but, in fact, his array of tal-
ents would appear to have been more a matter of great intellectual
interest and facility in taking up many subjects with an amateur’s
enthusiasm.
Other leaders who fashioned the Revolution and the establish-
ment of a nation were very great men, but they were using established
wisdom as their guide. They stood in awe of the aged “Dr. Franklin,”
as he was known after receiving an honorary L.L.D. degree from the
Scottish University of St. Andrews, who could often settle a dispute
with a wise thought that had not occurred to the rest. This was a man
who, when his brother John was dying in Boston because doctors
knew no way to reach his abdominal tumor, invented a simple instru-
ment (now known as a flexible catheter) that made the operation pos-
sible; this same self-taught man was credited with saving the life of
Lord Cardross when he advised against a physician’s decision to use
“blistering” as a treatment for his fever.
The two Benjamins shared a conviction that writing was a passkey
to success, and both took justifiable pride in their own skill. That
many of Franklin’s writings were on scientific subjects written in fine
language that is accessible to any average reader is well known. Simi-
larly, there were times when Banneker used simple but elegant lan-
guage in this same way. In a memorable piece of writing in the 1792
almanac, for example, he achieved three objectives in a single essay: a
remarkable picture of the cosmos, a perceptive view of the humans
who inhabit it, and finally a shattering philosophical judgment about
their pitiful egotism. It is arguable that no unschooled, self-educated
person of any race or country ever expressed the nuances of his
thought with more perfect choice of words. Even apart from the con-
tent, the vocabulary and construction have a quality that ranks Banne-
ker with the fine American writers of any era. Part of the essay shows
how gracefully he coupled and conveyed his observations:
appendix ii
222
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 238 ---
The sun, though seemingly smaller than the dial it illumi-
nates, is abundantly larger than this whole earth, on which so
many lofty mountains rise and such vast oceans roll. A line
extending from side to side through the center of that re-
splendent orb would measure more than eight hundred thou-
sand miles: A girdle formed to go round its circumference
would require a length of millions. Were its solid contents to
be estimated, the account would overwhelm our understanding
and be almost beyond the power of language to express. . . .
This sun, with all its attendant planets, is but a very little
part of the grand machine of the universe; every star, though
in appearance no bigger than the diamond that glitters upon
a lady’s ring, is really a vast globe, like the sun in size and in
glory; no less spacious, no less luminous, than the radiant
source of the day: So that every star is not barely a world, but
the centre of a magnificent system; has a retinue of worlds,
irradiated by its beams, and revolving around its attractive
influence, all of which are lost to our sight in unmeasurable
wilds of ether. That the stars appear like so many diminutive
and scarce distinguishable points is owing to their immense
and inconceivable distance. Immense and inconceivable indeed
it is, since a ball, shot from the loaded cannon, and flying
with unabated rapidity, must travel at this impetuous rate
almost seven hundred thousand years, before it could reach
the nearest of these twinkling luminaries.
While beholding this vast expanse, I learn my own
extreme meanness. I would also discover the abject littleness
of all terrestrial things. What is the earth, with all her osten-
tatious scenes, compared with this astonishing grand furni-
ture of the skies? What but a dim speck, hardly perceivable in
the map of the universe? It is observed by a very judicious
writer, that if the sun himself . . . was extinguished, and all
the host of planetary worlds which move about him were
annihilated, they would not be missed by an eye that can take
on the whole compass of nature any more than a grain of
A Significant Similarity
223
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 239 ---
sand upon the sea-shore. The bulk of which they consist and
the space which they occupy is so exceedingly little in com-
parison of the whole that their loss would leave scarce a blank
in the immensity of God’s works. If then, not our globe only,
but this whole system, be so very diminutive, what is a king-
dom or a country? What are a few lordships, or the so much
admired patrimonies of those who are styled wealthy? When
I measure them with my own little pittance, they swell into
proud bloated dimensions. But when I take the universe for
my standard, how scanty is their size, how contemptible their
figure! They shrink into pompous nothings.
There is a tone and a clarity in Banneker’s serious essays that have
an astonishing kinship with some of Benjamin Franklin’s writings.
Both these men—almost entirely on their own—had acquired enor-
mous vocabularies mainly from books and then applied some innate
sense of taste and proportion to shape all those thousands of words
into discourses that could appeal to many levels of society. They never
made the kind of mistake that so often betrays uneducated persons
who use great words inappropriately. On the contrary, their word
selection is absolutely meticulous. Franklin, simply because of his
race, had far more sources, for he was able to glean and hone infor-
mation by aggressively seeking out and listening to the leading people
of the age. Banneker was, if anything, the more remarkable because
he lacked this opportunity. But it is amazing how similarly both Ben-
jamins crafted words that appealed to simple farmers or housewives,
yet could make many an intellectual pause, reflect, and take their
thoughts to heart.
From a very early age, both had grasped for more learning, also
on their own, charting programs for self-improvement, one skipping
meals to buy books and skipping sleep to practice his writing style
(Franklin, in his teens), or setting himself the goal of discovering at
least one new principle of physics for himself each day (Banneker, in
his youth). They seemed very different in their ambitions, yet both
appendix ii
224
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 240 ---
valued financial independence very highly, and both held prudence,
the classical idea of moderation, to be one of the greatest virtues.
Although Franklin had the worldly advantage of being white, he
was a poor boy who worked as a lowly apprentice after less than two
years of schooling. Banneker may have had one year in a schoolroom,
or perhaps he had only a friendly teacher who loaned him books.
Franklin was once youthfully naive in believing the empty prom-
ises of Pennsylvania’s governor, Sir William Keith, about a financial
opportunity he would arrange for him in England. Upon arrival there,
Franklin found himself both jobless and penniless, but the need to use
his printing abilities urgently in order to earn a living gave him no time
to be depressed. Banneker is thought to have made his own youthful
travel blunder when he was misled by loose talk about the chances for
great tobacco prices in Baltimore, and allowed rashness to win over
his usual good judgment. In his case, it was the discovery of new sci-
entific facts that quickly overcame his despair. But both Benjamins
learned their lesson so well that prudence became a lifelong trait.
Where the similarity becomes most visible is in the tendency to
think about and to write down bits of advice for living, which they
first intended for themselves, but then went on to offer for publica-
tion. At a very young age, Franklin was dashing off such homey dog-
gerel as:
For age and want
Save while you may. 
No morning sun
Lasts the whole day
Banneker said almost exactly the same thing in prose form. One
of the many treatises on the subject of time published in his own
almanac revealed a thought he had cherished since his youth. He
interrupted the scientific aspects of time to point out: “Many who
accurately mark the course of time appear to have little sensibility of
the decline of life. Every man has something to do which he neglects;
A Significant Similarity
225
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 12:58:31 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 241 ---
every man has faults to conquer which he delays to combat . . . Let
him that desires to see others happy make haste to give while his gifts
can be enjoyed . . . and let him who proposes his own happiness
reflect that while he forms his purposes the day rolls on and ‘the night
cometh when no man can work.’ ”
Both of these men impressed women with their personable charm
and speech. In Franklin’s case, it was courtly sophistication; in Banne-
ker’s, it was gentleness. Both men were very sociable and fine conver-
sationalists. There was one difference in that Franklin was a sexual ad-
venturer at times, though he quickly developed a cautious streak about
his relationships after a wild youthful fling in London. There was a
great deal of flirtatious talk, especially in Paris, but apparently no real
liaisons.
Although very successful with spoken language, both men held
their tongues and thought at great length before speaking when any
issue was at stake. Thomas Jefferson said long afterward, “I served
with General Washington in the legislature of Virginia before the
Revolution and during it with Dr. Franklin in Congress. I never heard
either of them speak ten minutes at a time, nor to any but the main
point which was to decide the question.” Just a brief remark by the
aged Franklin when the Declaration of Independence was being dis-
cussed brought about the great phrase, “We hold these truths to be
self-evident . . . ” He once dashed off a bombastic letter to a friend
in the British government whose policies were bad for the American
colonies, but held it for weeks, then rewrote it in less heavy-handed
form. Banneker deliberated for days before venturing a criticism of a
famous astronomer’s error in calculation. And he thought even longer
and harder about the accusatory letter that he finally sent to Thomas
Jefferson.
But they both were to undergo great changes when their lives
went on to the phase of maximum recognition and excitement. It is
almost uncanny how the two Benjamins—some fifteen years apart—
both discarded their cherished prudence and uncapped a well of risk-
taking courage that put principle above every other consideration.
appendix ii
226
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:15 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 242 ---
“Men of seventy seldom make revolutions,” as Franklin’s greatest
biographer, Carl Van Doren, wrote. But it might equally be said that
an elderly black man who was reveling in his new prominence and the
success of an amazing publishing venture was acting in a revolution-
ary way when he risked his all on a quixotic challenge to the powers
that be. Franklin, although almost a full generation older than most of
the other political leaders, became an all-out supporter of vigorous
protest against British policies toward the colonies—protest plus mil-
itary preparedness in order to be ready for war if the Crown refused
to heed American demands. Thought to be the man who told other
patriots, “We must all hang together, or we shall surely hang sepa-
rately,” he knew that he was risking everything, including his life, in
the stand that he took. Banneker, when he was in the seventh decade
of a cautiously lived life, may have taken an even more frightening
risk when he suddenly called the Founding Fathers frauds over the
slavery question. Since no prominent black person had ever taken
such an overt step against the white establishment, he could have no
idea whether he would ultimately “hang alone.”
These are not even half the parallels that could be made in com-
paring the two persons. It is as if they had been born nonidentical
twins, with an extroverted one raised in a cool northern climate and a
quiet-living one browned by an equatorial sun.
And carrying that fanciful analogy a little further, the white north-
ern twin was a slave owner early in life. But as early as 1751, long
before his Southern twin lashed out against such infamy, Benjamin
Franklin had turned sharply against slavery. He suggested establishing
a school for blacks in Philadelphia in 1758, then took over the presi-
dency of the Pennsylvania Society for Promoting the Abolition of
Slavery in 1787. In his last years, he also headed a new and much-
needed Society For the Relief of Free Negroes Unlawfully Held in
Bondage.
Of course, it might be said, Benjamin Franklin could change in
that way because he was long past any role in practical politics. Wash-
ington, Jefferson, and the other leaders would have thought it a grave
A Significant Similarity
227
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:15 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 243 ---
threat to the existence of the young nation to let the example of Ben-
jamin Banneker demonstrate how very capable of mental effort a
black person could be. But the argument is not valid. Franklin had
turned against slavery during the years when he was politically active.
And even in his last years, it was not because he had lost interest in
the survival of the United States that he took up and publicized his
anti-slavery attitude. Just the reverse. He did not believe that political
expediency in a bad cause is either expedient or good politics. He
broke with his own son, who had become governor of New Jersey,
because they disagreed on the policies that certain issues called for.
And, like Banneker, he opposed injustice to Native Americans as well
as to blacks. He wrote, “It has appeared to me that almost every war
between the Indians and whites has been occasioned by some injustice
of the latter towards the former.”
appendix ii
228
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 244 ---
229
Sources
}
Archives of the State of Maryland, Annapolis, MD
Banneker-Douglass Museum, Annapolis, MD
Benjamin Banneker Memorial, Oella, MD
Ms. Beulah Buckner, student of local history, Ellicott City, MD
Ms. Wylene Burch, Founder-Director of the Howard County Center
of African-American History, near Ellicott City, MD
Enoch Pratt Free Library, Baltimore, MD
Free Library of Philadelphia, PA
Historical Society of Howard County (Mary Mannix, Library Direc-
tor), Ellicott City, MD
Historical Society of Maryland, Baltimore, MD
Historical Society of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
Historical Society of Washington, D.C. (Gail Redman, Librarian)
Mr. Samuel Hopkins, Baltimore, MD, historian, descendant of George
Ellicott
Howard County T ourism Council (Melissa Arnold, Coordinator), Elli-
cott City, MD
Dr. James Huckenpahler, historian, Washington, D.C.
Ms. Victoria Huckenpahler, writer, Washington, D.C.
Ms. Gwen Marable, descendant of Minta Bannaky
Ms. Alice McGill, author, Columbia, MD
New Y ork Public Library, New Y ork, NY
Professional Surveyors Association, Frederick, MD (Mark Cheves,
Jackie Cheves)
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 245 ---
Ms. Ann Ryder, Coordinator, Howard County Offices, Ellicott City,
MD
The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, affiliated with
the New Y ork Public Library, New Y ork, NY
U.S. Naval Observatory, Washington, D.C.
Geoff Chester, Public Affairs Officer
Steve Dick, Historian
Ms. Jean Walsh, Catonsville, MD, student of local history 
Washingtoniana Room, Martin Luther King Memorial Library, Wash-
ington, D.C.
Sources
230
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 246 ---
231
General Source Notes
}
1 The Prince and the Convict
Extended talks with Mr. Samuel Hopkins of Baltimore and with Ms.
Beulah Buckner and Ms. Ann Ryder of the Ellicott City area were
especially valuable in preparing this and other early chapters that
cover the part of Banneker’s life for which precise information is
scarce and a great deal of informed deduction is required.
T ruly invaluable in this and several other chapters was Martha
Ellicott T yson’s personal memoir of Banneker. Hers is the only writ-
ten account that has memories dating back to Banneker’s own life-
time, as Mrs. T yson had childhood experiences of the great friendship
between her father, George Ellicott, and Banneker. Her own remem-
brance, dictated to her daughter when Mrs. T yson was very old, was
further enhanced by the reminiscences of her mother, Elizabeth Elli-
cott, who had also been an admirer of Banneker and an adviser to him
on some important occasions. In her own right, Mrs. T yson had been
one of the founders of Swarthmore College and of the Patapsco
Female Institute. Frederick Douglass later wrote to Anne T yson Kirk,
Mrs. T yson’s daughter, complimenting her for the memoir she had
written for her mother, saying, “We need such examples of mental
industry and success, as I believe the life of Banneker furnishes.”
Especially helpful, too, in these early chapters were Silvio Bedini’s
painstakingly researched biography, Benjamin Banneker, and two useful
studies of Banneker’s probable ancestors, Dogon, by Chukwuma
Azuonye, and Africa Counts, by Claudia Zaslavsky.
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 247 ---
2 Lessons, Precious and Painful
Further discussions with Mr. Hopkins and Ms. Ryder continued to
be of great value here, and they can be assumed to apply to many of
the early chapters. T alks with librarians and board members of the
Historical Society of Howard County and Ms. Gwen Marable, a direct
descendant of Banneker’s sister Minta, gave helpful insights into the
mists that envelop his youth, as did Shirley Graham’s book titled Your
Most Humble Servant. (See the “Special Note” below for important
facts about Ms. Graham and her work.) Also, A Salute to Black Scien-
tists, from the Black History Publications Series, and other such brief
works mentioned in the bibliography were useful in supplying an
occasional fact that reinforced the evidence on a questionable point.
3 The Lurking Terror
Discussions about the episodes in this chapter were held with the
persons cited above, with Ms. Jean Walsh, a student of the history of
her Maryland area, and with Ms. Wylene Burch, Founder-Director of
the Howard County Center of African-American History, near Elli-
cott City, Maryland. Also, the uncertain points made in the Shirley
Graham book were carefully discussed with my sources, and weighed
to elicit as much valuable information as possible, noting that the
abduction of an older companion may or may not have actually hap-
pened, but was a useful indication of the kind of terror that lurked in
Banneker’s mind. At the same time, some clearly fictitious material
was eliminated. It should be made clear that these early chapters are
not without hard facts. Banneker’s ancestry, the family’s land acquisi-
tions, the young Benjamin’s name on the title to the property, his
early brilliance, and the help he received from a Quaker schoolmas-
ter—these and other points are fully credible, and they are recon-
firmed by the way they connect with his known later life.
4 A Door Opens Wider
Microfilms of Banneker’s diary and notes, supplied by the Historical
Society of Washington, D.C., and additional microfilms from the His-
General Source Notes
232
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 248 ---
torical Society of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland, began to put me on
entirely solid ground. The firm evidence that Banneker constructed a
remarkable wooden clock at this point in his life makes it clear that
some anecdotes, such as the disastrous Baltimore trip and the fortu-
nate meeting with a person who introduced him to ideas that fired his
thoughts, had some basis in fact.
5 The Great Unknown
Later diary entries obtained from the historical societies noted above
gave evidence that Banneker was returning to diary writing after a
long lapse. These also showed that his only writing during those lost
years had been the long and apparently fictional accounts of dreams
like the example given in this chapter. This departure from scientific
interest, and its replacement with imaginary dreams, seems to have
been the basis for Shirley Graham’s lurid tale of a tragic romance.
And the modern local sources who express belief in such a romance
appear to be merely recalling Ms. Graham’s account, rather than bas-
ing their support on any tangible evidence. Weighing these reasons
for disbelief against the fact that there was, indeed, a “great unknown”
period, I have been left to conclude that there was nothing romantic
or homosexual to account for it and that Banneker was more likely to
have been seriously depressed by the frustration of an intellectual
curiosity that had no apparent hope of ever being satisfied.
6 Enter the Ellicotts
The background of the Ellicott family, its coming to the Patapsco
region, and its sterling record of refusing to own slaves is amply sup-
ported by the various historical societies, but especially by the Histor-
ical Society of Howard County. Joseph Ellicott’s beautiful clock is a
documented fact; its role in bringing Banneker and George Ellicott
together is less certain, even though it is quite firmly believed by
some of the local historians. What is absolutely sure, as told by Elli-
cott’s own daughter, Margaret T yson, and also by many notes that the
two men exchanged, is that George Ellicott was quickly struck by
General Source Notes
233
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 249 ---
Banneker’s brilliance and that a genuinely close and lasting friendship
formed. The many gifts Banneker received—including astronomical
instruments and the large worktable he used until the end of this
life—are additional proofs.
7 Turning Night into Day
Banneker’s new astronomy-oriented daily schedule is indicated in his
own journal pages and also by accounts of stories exchanged among
neighbors about Banneker’s tendency to stay abed late each morning.
Banneker’s own written words show how avidly he was beginning to
turn his celestial observations into early attempts to compose an
ephemeris. His journal also shows that he was already entering arith-
metical puzzles and jokes that he would later use in his almanacs.
8 The Unfinished Revolution
I have had to employ a certain amount of deduction in asserting that
Banneker definitely believed the Founding Fathers planned to abolish
slavery if the Revolutionary War was won. There is nothing in writ-
ing to prove this, but both he and his sister asserted that he tried to
volunteer for military service, and he did finally convert his farm from
tobacco to wheat, even though he had considered it a financial risk,
after hearing that wheat flour was badly needed for the military effort.
A good many other blacks volunteered to bear arms, but most of them
did it after being promised freedom and, in some cases, a grant of land.
Banneker was already free and a landowner. What motive other than
abolition for others could have made him so anxious to see an Amer-
ican victory is hard to imagine. Finally, with foreknowledge of the
letter he would write to Thomas Jefferson ten years after the war
had ended, his indictment of the Founders for having been so eager
to save their own freedom and then continuing to keep others in cap-
tivity seems to me to be the burning words of a man who felt
betrayed.
General Source Notes
234
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 250 ---
9 Attracted to the City
Here again, Banneker’s own journal entries, including his notations
dealing with purchases from Ellicott’s store, become a running docu-
ment of his new life. Not only he, but also some of the Ellicott em-
ployees have left behind written words about how often they saw him
in Ellicott City and how interesting they found his comments on the
new machinery in Ellicott’s Mills.
10 Meanwhile, at Mount Vernon
Some of the account of the Mount Vernon meeting was suggested by
material in three books mentioned in the bibliography: Colonial Amer-
ica, Contest for a Capital, and George Washington. It was then verified by
consulting microfilms on Washington, Jefferson, and George Mason
at the Historical Society of Washington, D.C. T apes dealing with pro-
ceedings at the Constitutional Convention were also viewed at the
same Society.
11 Astonishing Choices
The books Contest for a Capital and Washington: The Indispensable Man
played a role in parts of this chapter dealing with Major L ’Enfant.
Microfilms and very old records of the Washington Historical Society
(tied with ribbons) from the Washingtoniana Room of the Martin
Luther King Library, Washington, D.C., gave a graphic picture of
how the early Washingtonians felt about their city’s progress. The
biographies of Banneker by Martha T yson and Silvio Bedini were
consulted in preparing the parts of this chapter dealing with Banne-
ker’s role in the survey. An article by Victoria Huckenpahler, “George
Washington Dances,” provided an unusual way to sense how the
stresses of the presidency appeared to cause Washington’s rapid
decline from an enthusiastic dancer whom Jefferson termed “the most
graceful figure that could be seen” to the suddenly aged man who
answered an invitation with “Alas! Our dancing days are no more.”
General Source Notes
235
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 251 ---
12 Back Home to Plant . . . and Publish
After beginning with Martha T yson’s account of Banneker’s return
from the survey and then discussing that experience in detail with Mr.
Samuel Hopkins, I was able to see extensive news clippings from the
Library of the Historical Society of Howard County and the Howard
County Center of African-American History. These were augmented
by old letters from and to Banneker found in Collection Boxes of the
Free Library of Philadelphia, including Leon Gardiner Box 5-G f 16,
HSP #154 (John Cox to Banneker) and a Banneker letter to the firm
of Cox, Parrish, and Wharton.
13 A Declaration of Indignation
Who originated the idea of Banneker’s letter to Thomas Jefferson?
There is no written note that shows whether it was Banneker himself
or perhaps one of the Ellicotts. I do not presume to know the answer,
because Banneker was with George Ellicott so often that either of
them might well have uttered the thought. I feel very sure, however,
that it immediately appealed to Banneker and then went on growing
in his mind. It is made clear in the letter itself that he first planned to
write a simple covering letter, making the almanac the centerpiece of
the mailing. Then the letter took on a life of its own, with one argu-
ment after another being added, until it overtook the almanac in
importance, making the latter just an all-conquering piece of evi-
dence. The full text of Banneker’s letter to Jefferson has never been
questioned, and I have seen it in a great many places, since all the his-
torical societies named earlier have it on microfilm. In addition, the
entire letter and Jefferson’s reply were printed a year later in some
editions of Banneker’s almanac.
14 A Founder’s Crafty Response
Each person can have his or her own opinion about Jefferson’s re-
sponse to Banneker. I do not think I am being harsh in calling it crafty,
General Source Notes
236
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 252 ---
for there is not a sentence in it that lacks a double meaning. This judg-
ment is not, however, intended to be unfavorable, for I go on to show
that the mere fact of sending a courteous answer caused Jefferson real
political problems. It was his later personal letter to a friend, deriding
Banneker’s intelligence, that seems unfeeling and mean-spirited.
Everything in this chapter is based on documentary evidence, clearly
shown in papers and microfilms in the historical societies that have
been previously named.
15 A Place Among the Greats
That Banneker was one of a very small group of astronomers who
made any mention of extra-solar planets is made clear by the virtual
omission of this subject in each of the books on astronomy named in
the bibliography. The same glaring omission occurs in every leading
encyclopedia and in histories of astronomical sciences found in the
Library of Congress, the Free Library of Philadelphia, and the T ech-
nology Division of the Martin Luther King Library, Washington,
D.C. A talk with the U.S. Naval Observatory’s public affairs officer
Geoff Chester and historian Steve Dick brought the reminder that the
seventeenth-century Italian monk Giordano Bruno had been burned at
the stake for having mentioned the many other worlds that exist in
God’s universe. They also confirmed that an English writer, Thomas
Wright, had published a book in 1750 with a similar thought. Oddly,
Wright’s theory got most of its attention from the fact that philoso-
pher Immanuel Kant, who never read Wright’s book, wrote and
talked about it simply on the basis of a press story. Even the most cau-
tious judge of Banneker’s accomplishment on this point would, I feel,
grant that Banneker’s 1791 writings about extra-solar planets (which I
believe he had thought about some forty years earlier) made him one
of only three persons who had seriously advanced this idea before
astronomers with superior equipment gave firmer evidence of it in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. In this chapter, however, I have
also shown why Banneker may be said to have a superior claim among
persons who are thinking purely as scientists. If earlier mentions of
General Source Notes
237
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 253 ---
extra-solar worlds were all faith-based, Banneker’s conclusions were
apparently the first assertion about multiple worlds based on more
modern scientific reasoning.
16 The Sage’s Years of Glory
Here again, I am indebted to the historical societies of Maryland and
Howard County for access to microfilms of Banneker’s own journal,
which was saved from the flames only by a fortunate accident, and to
comments from persons who had visited his cabin or had seen him at
events he attended in his late years.
17 Living Off the Land Again
Information about Banneker’s disappointments as a landlord, his sales
of land parcels, and his successful “annuity” arrangement with the
Ellicotts is based on his journal and on letters found in the historical
societies and in the Free Library of Philadelphia.
18 Ennobled by Flame
This final chapter is clearly my own assessment of Banneker’s person-
ality after having read so many of his own words that could not all be
included in this narrative. I concluded that while many of his thoughts
are proof of genius, his character was every bit as important as his
intellect. In his case, the two seem to have been so nearly identical
that they meet Aristotle’s standard: “The life according to intellect is
best and pleasantest, since intellect more than anything else is man.”
Although some of his years are obscured by mist, there are enough of
his own words to build a rock-solid image of a man who found the
right road to take at every critical intersection of his life. Thought and
reasoning and intellectual discovery were his amusement, but he knew
that survival, being essential to the others, held the highest priority.
So, as a Dogon, he tried to arrange his life in a way that would let him
enjoy the mental delights that were a joy until the end. But the fact
General Source Notes
238
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 254 ---
that his last fifteen years were lived in a most un-Dogon-like duel
with deadly enemies shows how deeply he cared for the freedom of
his race and, indeed, of all his fellow Americans.
Appendix I The Dogon Ancestors
The books Africa Counts and Dogon, included in the Bibliography,
were a principal source of information about the group that I have
identified as Banneker’s probable ancestors. I have also had the good
fortune to meet a number of persons from Mali—one at Sacred Heart
Adult Education Center, Washington, D.C., where I am a volunteer
teacher of writing—and others whose jobs in Washington have brought
us into contact. Several of these have brightened when I asked them
about the Dogon, not only confirming what I had read in books, but
telling me how much the Dogon continue to be admired in Mali.
Appendix II A Significant Similarity
My comparison of Benjamin Franklin’s character to Banneker’s began
with a long interest that I have had in Franklin and continued with a
rereading of Carl Van Doren’s great biography, Benjamin Franklin.
Among other accounts in which I found additional points of interest
was The Private Franklin, by Claude-Anne Lopez and Eugenia W.
Herbert.
Special Note
Shirley Graham (Du Bois)’s book on Banneker has been generally dis-
missed as a “romanticized biography,” because it contains dialogue
and dramatic scenes that no twentieth-century author could conceiv-
ably have known. She herself hinted that she had considerably embel-
lished certain situations “within the framework of facts that I believe
to be true,” as she stated it. The fact that her book features many
imagined dialogues is evidence that she was not even aiming for a
standard biographical format. On closer examination, however, I have
General Source Notes
239
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 255 ---
found that Ms. Graham did a great deal more research than her
detractors have believed. Most of the sources she cites are verifiable,
and most of the conclusions she has drawn from them are reasonable.
She was a skillful writer who turned the facts into a very readable
story, inexact in detail, but probably conveying correct impressions.
Her marriage to W.E.B. Du Bois late in that activist’s life showed that
she might have heard word-of-mouth accounts, which can be enlight-
ening, even if not precisely factual. The close family relationship that
developed is perhaps shown by the fact that Ms. Graham’s son by a
previous marriage later changed his own surname to Du Bois, as an
adult, because of his admiration for his stepfather.
While it does seem that Ms. Graham’s imagination prevailed too
forcefully in her book about Banneker, this should not obscure the
valuable aspects of her overall work.
It is important to realize that applying the usual standards of bio-
graphical writing to the lives of black persons of the eighteenth cen-
tury would leave them very little known indeed, and we would be the
poorer. Blacks of Banneker’s era were treated as nonpersons and pro-
duced hardly any public records or regular correspondence, while their
white counterparts left mountains of records. If the words or thoughts
of a black subject are limited to what can be proved beyond a doubt,
the person will be silenced forever, just as his or her adversaries would
have preferred. So in two cases, the ill-fated Baltimore trip (Chapter
3) and the fatal romance (Chapter 5), I have cited incidents that were
based on Ms. Graham’s writings—not because I believe them to be
accurate in detail, but because the very fact that those tales have cir-
culated is in itself a part of the Banneker story.
The following additional background on Ms. Graham after her
second marriage is of interest, even if not highly relevant to this biog-
raphy: Mr. and Mrs. Du Bois showed a partiality for the Soviet Union
that caused their passports to be revoked in the 1950s, when U.S.
reactions to leftist thinking were decidedly abrupt. When they finally
were allowed to travel, they were given a great reception in Moscow,
but then went on to visit China, which was illegal at the time. Their
passports were again cancelled. Mr. Du Bois reacted adversely to these
General Source Notes
240
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 256 ---
pressures, finally declaring himself officially a communist and accept-
ing Kwame Nkrumah’s invitation to spend the rest of his life in Ghana,
where he held court for many visitors from America. Whether he
truly espoused Marxism or was merely fighting back, it is noteworthy
that Shirley Graham, before marrying him, had told an interviewer at
the National Association of Colored Women in 1947 that “Commu-
nism offers no solution to the negro in his search for freedom from
racial intolerance.”
General Source Notes
241
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 257 ---
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 258 ---
243
Bibliography
}
Books
Allen, William G. Wheatley, Banneker, and Horton. Freeport, NY: Self-
published, 1970.
Appiah, Kwame, and Henry Louis Gates, Jr. Africana Encyclopedia.
New Y ork: Perseus Books, 1999.
Azuonye, Chukwuma. Dogon. New Y ork: Rosen Publishing Group,
1998.
Banks, William M. Black Intellectuals. New Y ork: W. W. Norton, 1996.
Barck, Oscar T . Colonial America. New Y ork: Macmillan, 1968.
Bedini, Silvio. Benjamin Banneker. Rancho Cordova, CA: Landmark
Enterprises, 1972.
Beyer, Steven L. The Star Guide. Boston: Little, Brown, 1986.
Brandt, John, and Stephen Maran. New Horizons in Astronomy, 2nd ed.
San Francisco: W. H. Freeman & Co., 1972.
Brugger, Robert J. Maryland—A Middle T emperament: 1634–1980.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1988.
Conley, Kevin. Benjamin Banneker: Scientist and Mathematician. New
Y ork: Chelsea House Publishers, 1989.
Durham, Frank, and Robert D. Purrington. Frame of the Universe.
New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 1983.
Fermi, E. Galileo and the Scientific Revolution. New Y ork: Basic Books,
1961.
Flexner, James T . Washington: The Indispensable Man. Boston: Little,
Brown, 1969.
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 259 ---
Foner, Philip S. Blacks in the American Revolution.Westport, CT: Green-
wood Press, 1975.
Franklin, Joseph, and Loren Schweninger. Runaway Slaves: Rebels on
the Plantation. New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Graham, Shirley. “Your Most Humble Servant.” New Y ork: Julian Mess-
ner, 1949.
Grégoire, Bishop Henri. De la littérature des Negres, ou Recherches sur
leur facultés intellectuelles, leurs qualités morales et leur littérature [On
the literature of blacks, or research on their intellectual abilities,
their moral qualities, and their literature]. Paris: Maradan, Libraire,
1808.
Hathaway, Nancy. The Friendly Guide to the Universe. New Y ork:
Viking/Penguin Group, 1994.
Ley, Willy. Watchers of the Skies. New Y ork: Viking Press, 1963.
Loftin, T . L. Contest for a Capital. Washington, D.C.: J. T . Loftin Pub-
lishers, 1989.
Lopez, Claude-Anne, and Eugenia W. Herbert. The Private Franklin.
New Y ork: W. W. Norton, 1975.
McCollough, David. John Adams. New Y ork: Simon & Schuster, 2001.
Middlekauff, Robert. The Glorious Cause. New Y ork: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1982.
Moore, Patrick. The Guinness Book of Astronomy, 2nd ed. Enfield, Mid-
dlesex, England: Guinness Superlatives Ltd., 1983.
Pasachoff, Jay M. Astronomy: From the Earth to the Universe, 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders College Publishing, 1987.
Price, Fred W. The Planet Observer’s Handbook. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1994.
Quarles, Benjamin. The Negro in the American Revolution. Chapel Hill,
N.C.: University of North Carolina Press, 1961.
Randall, Willard S. George Washington. New Y ork: Henry Holt & Co.,
1997.
Reiss, Oscar. Blacks in Colonial America. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland,
1997.
Sobel, Dava. Longitude. New Y ork: Walker & Company, 1995.
Thane, Elswyth. Washington’s Lady. New Y ork: Dodd, Mead, 1960.
Bibliography
244
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 260 ---
T ravers, Paul J. The Patapsco. Baltimore, MD: Tidewater Publishers
and the Maryland Historical Society, 1990.
T yson, Martha Ellicott. Memoir of Benjamin Banneker, as told to her
daughter, Anne T . Kirk. Philadelphia: Philadelphia Friends Book
Association, 1884.
Van Doren, Carl. Benjamin Franklin. New Y ork: Viking Press, 1956.
Zaslavsky, Claudia. Africa Counts. New Y ork: Prindle, Weber, and
Group, 1980.
Articles and Lectures
Baker, Henry E. “The Negro Mathematician and Astronomer,” Jour-
nal of Negro History , vol. 3 (1918), 99–118.
Buchanan, George. An Oration Upon the Moral and Political Evil of
Slavery, at a public meeting of the Maryland Society for Promot-
ing the Abolition of Slavery, Baltimore, MD, July 4, 1791.
Conway, Moncure Daniel. “Benjamin Banneker.” The Atlantic Monthly,
vol. 11, issue 63 (January 1863), 79–84.
Ellis, Joseph J. “Jefferson’s Cop-Out.” Civilization magazine (Decem-
ber 1996), 46–54.
Huckenpahler, Victoria. “George Washington Dances.” Dance maga-
zine, July 1976.
Hurry, Robert J. “Benjamin Banneker’s Home.” Maryland Historical
Magazine, vol. 84, no. 4 (1989), 42–47.
Latrobe, John H. B. Lecture to the Maryland Historical Society,
1844. (Also published in Maryland Colonization Journal, May 1845,
68–73).
Norris, J. Saurin. Lecture (from posthumous papers of Martha E.
T yson) before the Maryland Historical Society, 1854.
Simmons, Melody. “Banneker Museum T akes Root” (Banneker Park,
Oella, MD, color layout), Baltimore Sun, February 1, 1995, p. BI.
Bibliography
245
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 261 ---
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 262 ---
247
abolitionism. See anti-slavery
movement
abolitionist societies, 80–81, 100,
162, 197, 227
Al-Ghul (Sirius), 183
almanacs, Banneker’s
ambition to publish, 75–78,
87–88, 145
anti-slavery essays in, 193–95,
206
and anti-slavery movement,
148
astronomy in, 75, 76, 77, 147,
176, 223
Chesapeake Bay tide tables in,
189
ephemeris in, 75, 76, 77, 147,
185, 197
essays in, 190–91, 193–95
Jefferson and, 166–67, 172–73
Jefferson’s correspondence in,
193
McHenry’s introduction to,
186–87
pacifism essay in, 195–96
poetry in, 189–90
and race controversy, 150, 152
of 1792, 149–54, 176, 186–88,
222–23
of 1793, 151, 193, 195
of 1794 to 1797, 193, 196–97
success of, 151–54, 185–86,
188–89, 191, 196
support for, 147–48, 150
time essays in, 225–26
weather forecasts in, 76, 77,
188–89
American Revolution, 91–92. See
also Revolutionary War
Angell, James, 152
Anola, 63–64
anti-slavery movement
abolitionist societies and,
80–81, 100, 162, 197, 227
Banneker and, 101–102, 145
in England, 197
Franklin and, 227
high point in, 197
increased activity of, 100–101
Maryland and, 12, 14, 100–101
Massachusetts and, 100–101
astronomical clock, 133
“Astronomical Journal”
(Banneker), 83–84
Index
}
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 263 ---
astronomy. See also astronomy,
Banneker’s interest in
books about, 73, 74, 177
Dogon people and, 7, 184,
218–19
Ellicott’s interest in, 69, 72–74
astronomy, Banneker’s interest in
and almanac entries, 75, 76, 77,
147, 176, 223
in childhood, 28–29
and Dogon heritage, 184,
218–19
with Ellicott, George, 72–74,
104
extra-solar planets theory,
176–82
extraterrestrial life theory,
179–80, 181, 182
grandparents’ influence on,
184
journal entries about, 83, 86,
87, 88-89
Levi’s influence on, 55–56
in old age, 201
and Sirius (Dog Star), 182–83
and telescopes, 56, 104
Astronomy Explained Upon Sir
Isaac Newton’s Principles
(Ferguson), 74
Atlantic Monthly, article about
Banneker in, 73–74
Attucks, Crispus, 94
Baltimore, Maryland
Banneker in, 37–47, 55
British customs officials in,
41–44
flour industry in, 109
rise of, 37, 109
Bannaky, Mary (mother)
and almanac, 88
Benjamin and, 18, 19, 88
birth of, 5
children of, 11, 12
death of, 110
as herbalist, 11, 35, 88
marriage to Robert, 10–11
Bannaky, Robert (father)
background of, 11
Benjamin and, 18, 19, 51, 58
children of, 11, 12
death of, 58
as farmer, 11
health problems of, 29, 35
marriage to Mary, 11
at Stout farm, 16, 17
Banneka (grandfather)
death of, 5, 15
Dogon heritage of, 7, 15, 218
farming wisdom of, 31
intelligence and skills of, 6, 7,
31, 218
marriage to Molly, 5, 8, 10, 22
mistreatment of, 8
origins of, 5, 6–7
as slave, 5, 7, 8
Banneker, Benjamin
African heritage of, 19–20,
218
alcohol use by, 130–31, 135,
192
almanacs of. See almanacs,
Banneker’s
American Revolution and,
91–92, 96–98
Anola and, 63–64
Index
248
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 264 ---
anti-slavery sentiments of, 96,
98, 99–100, 101–102, 155–57,
160–62, 193–95
appearance of, 34–35, 111
astronomy interests of. See
astronomy, Banneker’s
interest in
Baltimore trip of, 37–47, 55,
225
as beekeeper, 85–86
biological observations of,
85–86
birth of, 12
cabin of, 16, 74–75, 191,
207–12
character of, 17
childhood of, 15–22, 24–29
clock designed by, 50–52, 55,
103–104, 210
comtemplative life of, 33
conservatism of, 90
death of, 209
depression experienced by,
57–58, 62–66
diaries of, 28, 29, 58, 83–84,
85–89, 205–206, 210
diet of, 111–12
Dogon heritage of, 15, 155,
183, 184, 217–19
dreams of, 58–62, 102,
203–206, 207
and Ellicott, Andrew, 129–30,
131, 132–34, 173
and Ellicott, George, 70–74,
80, 105, 107–108, 158–59,
173
and Ellicott’s clock, 71–72,
106
Ellicotts’ influence on, 103,
104, 105–106, 157–59
faith of, 194, 201–202
fame of, 152, 188, 189, 190,
191–92, 207
as farmer, 29–32, 33, 57, 82–83,
89–90, 97, 112, 146
fear of whites by, 43, 204
and Franklin, similarities to,
221–28
health of, 145, 197, 201
Heinrich and, 24, 25–28
homosexuality theory about,
64–65
intelligence and skills of, 15, 17,
26–27, 34, 84, 157, 181,
221–22
Jefferson’s response to, 168–69,
171–74
journals of, 28, 29, 58, 83–84,
85–89, 205–206, 210
as landlord, 199
land sale to Ellicotts, 199–200
letter to Jefferson, 155–60,
162–67, 174, 193, 226
Levi and, 46–48, 55
Levi’s watch and, 47, 48–50,
55–56
literary interests of, 107
lunar eclipse calculations of, 73,
88–89
Mary (mother) and, 18, 19, 88,
110
mathematical abilities of, 17,
84, 185, 191
Molly (grandmother) and,
14–16, 18, 19–20, 35–36, 161
moves to Stout farm, 16, 17
Index
249
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 265 ---
Banneker, Benjamin (continued)
Native Americans, concerns for,
23, 24, 228
old age of, 198–209
as pacifist, 195
patrollers and, 22, 23, 38–41
portrait of, 153
Quakers’ influence on, 52–53, 55
Qualls and, 45–46, 52, 55
and racism, 23, 24, 80–81, 96,
98, 99–100, 156, 161
and religion, 53, 55, 62, 99, 202
and Revolutionary War, 91–92,
96–98
Robert (father) and, 18, 19, 51,
58
romance theories about, 63–64
as sage, 188, 189, 190, 191–92
in school, 26
as scientist, 82–83, 89, 111
self-education of, 20, 26–27,
104–105, 224–25
as “self-made man,” 104
and siblings, 27, 102, 112, 200
solitary life of, 65
speaking and writing style of,
16, 26, 27, 107, 190, 222, 224
spelling of name, 28
surveying studies of, 104–105
and survey of capital, 129–30,
131, 132–38, 141–42, 143,
144–46
threats against, 203, 204,
207–208
time, fascination with, 47–50,
51, 52, 56, 225–26
Washington and, 135, 136
as watchmaker, 97
and whites, 112
and women, 34, 63–64, 65, 226
Banneker Memorial, 16
Barlow, Joel, 173
beekeeping, 85–86
Benezet, Anthony, 52–53, 54
Benjamin Banneker Historical
Park, 213
“Big Ma-Ma” (Molly Welsh), 5
Black, Minta (sister), 112, 200
blacks
British and, 95–96
churches and, 79
fear of whites by, 40, 43
free, 78–81
laws to restrict, 79
and patrollers, 20–22, 38–41
and racism, 20–22, 99–100, 156
in Revolutionary War, 92,
94–96, 98–99
whites’ fear of, 79, 92–94,
99–100
“black talk,” 27
Boston Massacre, 94
bounty hunters, 21
British
blacks and, 95–96
customs officials in Baltimore,
41–44
Bruno, Giordano, 177–78
Buchanan, George, 151–52
Burke, Edmund, 160
burning of Banneker’s cabin,
209–11
cabin burning, 209–11
Calvert, Cecil (Lord Baltimore),
12, 13
Index
250
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 266 ---
Canis Major, 183
capital, national. See also District
of Columbia
constitutional provision for,
119
designers of, 121
location of, 113–23, 119–23
Washington and, 113–15,
119–25, 126, 127–28
Carroll, Charles, 12, 14
Carroll, Daniel, 121, 139
Chase, Samuel, 116, 117–18
Chesapeake Bay tide tables, 189
Chestertown Society, 100
Choptank Society, 100
churches, and blacks, 79
clocks
Banneker’s wooden, 50–52, 55,
103–104, 210
Ellicott’s four-faced, 70–72, 106
Common Market, 118
Compleat System of Astronomy
(Leadbetter), 73
Condorcet, Marquis de, 172–73
Constitutional Convention of
1787, 118–19
Conway, Moncure Daniel, 73–74
Crukshank, Joseph, 152
Cuff, Felix, 100–101
Declaration of Independence,
156, 161, 226
Devil’s Den, 101
disk-stars, 193
District of Columbia
designers of, 121
Ellicott chosen as surveyor of,
128, 129
foreigners’ opinions of,
202–203
L ’Enfant as architect of,
124–25, 126, 127–28, 142
named Washington, 140
official proclamation of, 121
survey of, 129–40, 141–46
Dogon people
astronomy and, 7, 184,
218–19
Banneka and, 7, 15, 218
Banneker’s heritage and, 15,
155, 183, 184
character traits of, 7, 155
farming wisdom of, 7, 15
numerical formula of, 217
Dog Star, 182–83, 218–19
Dorsey, Caleb, 31
dream stories, Banneker’s, 58–62,
203–206
“East India Indians,” 78
Easy Introduction to Astronomy, An
(Ferguson), 73
Einstein, Albert, 84–85
Elkridge, Maryland, 16, 30–31,
111
Elk Ridge Furnace, 31
Ellicott, Andrew I, 67
Ellicott, Andrew II, 68, 69
Ellicott, Andrew III, 68
almanacs of, 185–86, 189
and Banneker, 129–30, 131,
132–34
and Banneker’s almanac, 173,
185–86
health of, 145
L ’Enfant and, 138, 142
Index
251
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 267 ---
Ellicott, Andrew III (continued)
as surveyor of capital, 69,
128–29, 132–35, 137, 142–43,
144–46
Ellicott, Elias, 150
Ellicott, Elizabeth, 131, 147
Ellicott, George
astronomy interests of, 69,
72–74
and Banneker, 70–74, 80, 105,
107–108
and Banneker’s almanac, 150,
173
and Banneker’s letter to
Jefferson, 158–59
and family business, 130
literary interests of, 107
personality and intelligence of,
107
Ellicott, John, 68
Ellicott, Joseph, 68, 69, 70, 97,
106
Ellicott, Martha (T yson), 64, 107,
108, 131, 147, 212
Ellicott, Nathaniel, 68
Ellicott, Thomas, 68
Ellicott family
arrival in Patapsco region of,
67, 68, 78
and Banneker’s letter to
Jefferson, 157–59
egalitarianism of, 80
farming ideas of, 78
and flour industry, 69–70, 72,
97, 106, 109
general store, 110
influence on Banneker of, 103,
104, 105–106, 157–59
innovations of, 106, 109
members of, 68
purchase of Banneker’s land by,
199–200
and town of Ellicott’s Mills
(Ellicott City), 109–10
Ellicott’s Mills (Ellicott City),
109–10
ephemeris, in almanacs, 75, 76,
77, 147, 185, 197
Evans, Oliver, 109
extra-solar planets, Banneker’s
theory of, 176–82
extraterrestrial life, Banneker’s
theory of, 179–80, 181, 182
Federal District, 120, 140. See also
District of Columbia
Federal Hall, 126
Ferguson, James, 73, 74
flour mill, Ellicotts’, 69–70, 72,
106, 109
Fox, George, 12, 25, 53
Franklin, Benjamin
anti-slavery sentiments of,
227
and Declaration of
Independence, 226
intelligence of, 221–22
Jefferson and, 226
Native Americans and, 228
and Poor Richard’s Almanac, 77,
221
self-education of, 224–25
similarities to Banneker,
221–28
and women, 226
writings of, 222, 224, 225
Index
252
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 268 ---
Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 181
George T own, Maryland, 120, 121
George T own Weekly Ledger,136
Georgia, and black soldiers, 94
Goddard, William, 150, 152
Goodriche, John, 183
Gorée Island, slave castles of, 7–8
Graham, Shirley, 36, 63
Greene, Nathanael, 95
Hall, Joseph (or Jacob), 26
Hamilton, Alexander, 119, 139
Hanson and Bond, printers, 152
Harrison, John, 50, 76
Hastings, Lieutenant, 101
Hayes, John, 147–48
Heinrich, Peter, 24, 25–28
Hemings, Sally, 173–74
Henderson, Alexander, 116, 117
Hernandes, Esop, 97
Herschel, Caroline, 180
Herschel, William, 180
Hollow, The, 68
Hopkins, Samuel, 14
Humboldt, Alexander von, 203
Humphreys, Daniel, 152
Hurry, Robert J., 74
Indian Massacre of 1622, 23–24
Indians, 23–24, 228
Industrial Revolution, 70, 109
iron industry, 31
Jefferson, Thomas
and Banneker’s almanac,
166–67, 172–73
Banneker’s letter to, 155–60,
162–67, 174, 193, 226
and capital’s location, 119
and Franklin, 226
and Hemings, 173–74
intelligence of, 222
L ’Enfant and, 138–39
response to Banneker, 168–69,
171–74
and slavery, 169–70, 174–75
views about blacks, 136,
157–58, 162, 169–71,
173–74, 227–28
Jefferson Memorial, 170–71
Jenifer, Daniel, 116, 117
Johnson, Thomas, 121
Joppa, Maryland, 37
Keith, William, 225
Knox, Henry, 93
Knox, Samuel, 79
Lambert, Johann Heinrich,
180
La Rochefoucauld, duc de,
202–203
Laurens, Henry, 95
Laurens, John, 95
Leadbetter, Charles, 73
L ’Enfant, Pierre, 124–29,
138–40, 141, 142
Leslie, Alexander, 95
Levi, Joseph, 46–48, 55
locusts, 85
longitude puzzle, 75–76
Lord Baltimore (Cecil Calvert),
12, 13
Lord Mansfield, 96
lunar phases and eclipses, 73,
88–89
Index
253
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 269 ---
Madison, James, 119
Mansfield, Lord, 96
marriages, mixed, 8, 10, 22–23
Maryland. See also Baltimore,
Maryland; Patapsco region
anti-slavery movement in, 12,
14, 100–101
egalitarianism in, 12, 25
Elkridge, 16, 30–31, 111
George T own, 120, 121
Lord Baltimore and, 12
Native Americans in, 23, 24
Oella, 16, 111
as penal colony, 2
Prince Georges County, 203
Quakers in, 12, 24–25, 53
religious freedom in, 12, 25
slavery in, 99, 203
tobacco industry in, 30–31
Upper Marlboro, 203
Maryland Abolition Society, 100
Mason, George, 116, 117
Mason, Susanna, 55, 192–93
Massachusetts, anti-slavery
movement in, 100–101
McGrain, John, 212
McHenry, James, 186–87
memorials to Banneker, 212–13
Methodists, and blacks, 79
mill, Ellicotts’, 69–70, 72, 106, 109
mixed marriages, 8, 10, 22–23
Morris, Robert, 116
Morten, Greenbury, 200
Morten, Molly (sister), 200
national capital. See capital,
national; District of
Columbia
Native Americans, 23–24, 228
Ned, Uncle, 38–41, 43
New Hypothesis of the Universe, A
(Wright), 177
non-importation strategies, 37
Notes on Virginia (Jefferson), 159
Oella, Maryland, 16, 111
pacifism essay, in almanac, 195–96
Paine, T om, 175
Patapsco Flour, 109
Patapsco region
agricultural and commercial
awakening of, 67, 68
Ellicotts in, 67, 68
Heinrich’s school in, 25, 26
Molly’s farm in, 3–5
Native Americans in, 23
population increase in, 21
tobacco farming in, 30
patrollers (patterolers), 20–22,
38–41
Pemberton, James, 148, 150
Pennsylvania
Philadelphia as temporary
national capital, 118, 122
Quakers in, 25
religious requirements in, 25
Pennsylvania Society for
Promoting the Abolition of
Slavery, 227
Philadelphia, as temporary
national capital, 118, 122
Pinckney, Charles, 119
Piscataway Indians, 23
planets, theory of extra-solar,
176–82
Index
254
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 270 ---
“Plan for a Peace Office for the
United States, A,” 196
Poor, Salem, 94
Poor Richard’s Almanac (Franklin),
77, 221
Potomac River, 117
Potovski, Antonin, 219
“Prince, The” (Banneka), 5
Prince Georges County,
Maryland, 203
Quakers
anti-slavery sentiments of, 52,
53, 54
influence on Banneker, 52–53,
55
in Maryland, 12, 24–25, 53
wealth of, 53
Qualls, William, 45–46, 52, 55
racism
Banneker’s concerns about, 23,
24, 80–81, 96, 98, 99–100,
156, 161
and burning of Banneker’s
cabin, 211
terrorism and, 20–22
Religious T oleration Act of 1649,
12
“Remarks on the Swiftness of
Time” (Banneker), 194–95
Residence Bill of 1790, 120
Revolutionary War
Banneker and, 91–92, 96–98
battle of Lexington and
Concord, 94
blacks and, 92, 94–96, 98–99
debt after, 119–20
Rittenhouse, David, 52, 150
Rush, Benjamin, 195
sailing, inventions for, 75–76
Salem, Peter, 94
Sancho, Ignacio, 151
schools, 25, 26, 196
Sheppard, Moses, 83
Sirius, 182–83, 218–19
slavery. See also anti-slavery
movement
almanac articles about, 193–95
Banneker’s letter to Jefferson
about, 155–60, 162–67, 174,
193, 226
in England, 96
Franklin’s efforts against, 227
Jefferson and, 169–70, 174–75
in Maryland, 99
national leaders and, 174–75,
203, 211
proposals to abolish, 12, 14
slaves
“castles” of, 7–8
demand for, 20, 80, 99
marriages of, 10, 22–23
in Maryland, 99, 203
mistreatment of, 7–8, 9, 20–22,
92, 99–100
and patrollers, 20–22, 38–41
in Revolutionary War, 94–96,
98–99
runaway, 21
and Washington, 93
and Whitney’s cotton gin,
80
slave ships, 8, 9
slave trade, 20–21
Index
255
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 271 ---
Smith, William Longton, 172
Society for the Relief of Free
Negroes Unlawfully Held in
Bondage, 227
South Carolina, and black
soldiers, 94
stamp honoring Banneker, 214
Stevenson, John, 37
Stone, Thomas, 116, 117
Stout farm, 16, 17
Stuart, David, 121
surveying, Banneker’s study of,
104–105, 134
survey of Washington, D.C.,
129–40, 141–46
Susquehannock Indians, 23
synecdoche, 156
telescope, Banneker’s first, 56
tide tables, in almanac, 189
Timber Poynt farm, 11, 16, 200
time, Banneker’s fascination with,
47–50, 51, 52, 56, 225–26
tobacco farming and industry,
30–32, 78
T ownsend, Joseph, 148, 150
Treatise of Practical Surveying
(Gibson), 104
T yson, Elisha, 148
T yson, Martha Ellicott, 64, 107,
108, 131, 147, 212
Uncle Ned, 38–41, 43
Upper Marlboro, Maryland, 203
van de Kamp, Peter, 180
Van Doren, Carl, 227
Vogel, Hermann, 183
Washington, D.C. See also District
of Columbia
foreigners’ opinions of,
202–203
naming of, 140
survey of, 129–40, 141–46
Washington, George
Americans’ faith in, 121
Banneker and, 135, 136
and black soldiers, 95
Ellicott and, 128, 129
L ’Enfant and, 124–25, 126,
127–28, 138, 139–40
francophilia of, 127
and national capital, 113–15,
119–25, 126, 127–28
personality of, 115, 116
as President, 123, 126–27
and slaves, 93
as surveyor, 121, 128
Washington, Martha, 93, 122
watch, Levi’s, 47, 48–50, 55–56
weather forecasts, in almanacs, 76,
77, 188–89
Welsh, Molly (grandmother)
arrival in Maryland, 2
Benjamin and, 14–16, 18,
19–20, 35–36, 161
children of, 5
freed, 3
marriage to Banneka, 5, 8, 10,
22
Patapsco farm of, 3–5
patroller incident and, 22
punishment of, 1–2
slaves bought by, 4–5
Index
256
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713


--- PAGE 272 ---
wheat crops, 69–70, 90, 97, 112
Wheatley, Phyllis, 151
White, Andrew, 23
Whitney, Eli, 80
Wise’s Fountain T avern, 132
wooden clock, 50–52, 55,
103–104, 210
Wright, Thomas, 177, 178, 180
yellow fever epidemic of 1793, 122
Y oung, Arthur, 122
Index
257
Copyright © 2002. J. Wiley,  All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except
fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.
EBSCO Publishing - NetLibrary; printed on 5/29/2011 2:08:16 PM via INDIANA UNIVERSITY-PURDUE UNIVERSITY-INDIANAPOLIS
eISBN:9780471387527; Cerami, Charles A. : Benjamin Banneker 
Account: 27122713

