=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Black panther newspaper.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 56
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:59:18.942850
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Home Browse Find Search Help
Anonymous Author for the Black Panther Newspaper, The Black Panther. (Black Panther Party, San Francisco, CA, 1970).in Black Panther . [Author Information] [Bibliographic Details]
Table of Contents
“THIS IS BUT AN ASPECT OF THE UNFOLDING PICTURE OF AMERICAN FASCISM” Page
CONTEMPTUOUS CONDOR Page
FASCIST A TTACKS ON THE PARTY WILL ONLY HEIGHTEN OUR RESOLVE AND CAUSE EACH PARTY MEMBER TO BECOME A MATCH FOR ONE HUNDRED Page
TELEGRAM FROM THE KOREAN DEMOCRATIC LAWYER'S ASSOCIATION Page
PALESTINIAN SCIENTISTS PRODUCE, DEVELOP ARMS Page
LONNIE FACES DEATH IN THE ELECTRIC CHAIR AT THE HANDS OF THE CONNECTICUT FASCISTS Page
TO BE OR NOT TO BE Page
WE MUST UNIFY AND MOBILIZE THE BLACK LIBERATION ARMY FOF OUR NATIONAL SALVATION Page
“…AND LET THE MADMEN OUT” Page
THE LEGAL ARM OF THIS FASCIST STATE IS ESCALATING THIS WAR! Page
ORGANIZING SELF-DEFENSE GROUPS: PART-3 TRAINING Page
GESTAPO INVADES ROXBURY HOME Page
ILLINOIS CHAPTER B.P.P. REFUTES LIE BY NEWS MEDIA Page
THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY IS A PEOPLE'S PARTY Page
ORGANIZING SELF-DEFENSE GROUPS: PART-4 RECIPES Page
RACIST-MAD PIGS SIC K9 POLICE DOG ON BROTHER Page
BOOKS CAN BE PURCHASED A T NORMOUNT ARMAMENT, BOX211 GAS: FOREST GROVE, OREGON 97116 U.S.A. Page
URBAN RENEWAL PEOPLE'S REMOVAL Page
DEARBORN SCHOOL — A SLAP IN THE FACE FOR THE BLACK COMMUNITY Page
PIG “LEADER” TURNS ON THE PEOPLE Page
FASCIST MEDICAL CLINIC IN JAMAICA Page
3:15 P .M., THURSDA Y, APRIL 9, 1970 Page
THE BIG LIE Page
BURNING OF THE PANTHER 21 DEFENSE OFFICE AND LAW PAPERS Page
A DA Y IN THE LIFE OF THE COLONY Page
HUNTER'S POINT: CLARENCE BEAVER IS BEING SOUGHT BY PIGS FOR ATTEMPTED SHOOTING OF PIG RODGERS: THE PEOPLE ESTABLISH A LEGAL
DEFENSE FUND Page
People's Free Festival In San Francisco Page
THE QUESTION: WHY DID I LIE ABOUT WEARING A WIG? Page
COMMUNITY WORKER GETS BEAT BY TWO FASCISTS Page
OPEN LETTER TO THE CONTRACT BUYERS LEAGUE Page
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS TO KIM IL SUNG Page
STOCKADE REVOLT BY MANNHEIM G.I.'S Page
G.I.'S who expose war crimes jailed… My Lai killers go free… Page
REVOLUTION 1970 Page
PREVENTATIVE MEDICAL CAMPAIGN WAGED BY PEOPLE'S MEDICAL CARE CENTER Page
Anna Louise Strong, Noted American Progressive Writer, Dies in Peking Page
THE GENIUS OF: Huey P. Newton Page
RULES OF THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY: NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA Page
October 1966 Black Panther Party Platform and Program Page
OUR PEOPLE'S Page
-- [1] --
“THIS IS BUT AN ASPECT OF THE UNFOLDING PICTURE OF AMERICAN FASCISM”
     
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
1 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 2 ---
-- 2 --
CONTEMPTUOUS CONDOR
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
2 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 3 ---
Chief of Staff and Minister of Culture
of The Black Panther Party jailed
for contempt of court!
When we say everything in a capitalist society perpetuates that type of society, then it should be understood that the courts are no exception. We in the Black Panther Party view the court
system as the apparatus that legitimatizes the criminality of the deranged ruling class. We can say that judges are ideological lackeys to the owners of the means of production. In viewing
this system from an objective point of view, it is easy to understand the inhumane treatment by the ruling oligarchy over this blood-covered land that is filled with the bones and bodies of
victims that fell prey to the contemptuous candor in the black robe. When one of these blood sucking vultures sees the opportunity to pacify his rulers, he picks the most humanitarian
person there is, and when pretext is seen through the eyes of a foul depraved creature, he expands his blood dripping claws. Such is the case with the Chief of Staff, David Hilliard, and
the Minister of Culture, Emory Douglas. When I say humanitarian person I am sighting one of the basic traits of a revolutionary which make him an enemy of the state, and when he falls
prey to U.S. fascism he becomes a political prisoner
The incident took place in New Haven, Connecticut, April 14, 1970, in the morning while attending the trial of Bobby Seale, the Chairman of the Black Panther Party. The contemptuous
condor used the pretext of a paper to incarcerate the Chief of Staff and the Minister of Culture of the Black Panther Party in an attempt to silence them from furthering the support of our
Chairman against the man eaters, the venomous vicious vipers of the black robes, the contemptuous condors, the fate-decider of mankind. So later for the court because the oppressor
has no rights that the oppressed is bound to respect and these ideological arms are no exceptions. We understand the tactic of the pigs by trying to rip off the leaders, and the members in
general. These myopic buffoon pigs don't understand that the Black Panther Party is manifested in the people. As a result of the pretext, the Chief of Staff and the Minister of Culture
received a six month jail sentence on which bail was denied; and when their lawyer put in for an appeal of the most contemptuous flagrant violation of their so-called "constitutional rights",
in a place of mediation, it was quickly denied.
To the people of New Haven, we cannot allow this madness to continue, we do the only thing that is left to do-inflict a political consequence by making it non-profitable for the power
structure in conformity with the conditions in New Haven, and we know what the owner of production owns which should constitute our primary task in furthering the people's struggle, so
that man can benefit from his own productivity, in the interest of mankind. We must free the people's warriors from the cluches of the criminals by any means necessary.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
3 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 4 ---
E. Oakland Community Center
Black Panther Party
-- 2 --
FASCIST ATTACKS ON THE PARTY WILL ONLY HEIGHTEN OUR RESOLVE AND CAUSE EACH PARTY MEMBER
TO BECOME A MATCH FOR ONE HUNDRED
Today U.S. fascism launched yet another futile suppression campaign designed to intimidate and destroy the Party and pave the road for genocide against Black people. However, the
actions of the fascist judge will bear out the fact that fascist attacks on the Party will only heighten our resolve and put each Party member to become a match for one-hundred. U.S.
imperialist the world over engage revolutionary forces in the same manner. They meet cries of freedom and liberty with prisons and bullets. Cries of hunger are met with wholesale
destruction of food stuffs, and poverty with multi-billion dollar moon-shots. These depraved traducers will meet the same fate as the old man who lifted a huge boulder above his head only
to have it come crashing down to mark the sight of his grave. We're not so foolish as to sit this round out. The rich store of theory and practice at our command makes us aware of the
plans of these fascists pigs. To first destroy the Party and then to follow up with their plan for eliminating the "undesirables" in Nixon's America. They will, of course, follow invariable the
same path as the old man, and will reap the same bitter fruit. These pigs have been blatantly violating the human rights of Black and Third World people for centuries. There's no longer
any time left us to expose the nature of U.S. imperialism and fascism. Black people in America know about the beastial preditory nature of our foe. The Party has been consistant in our
policy of dealing tit for tat-a hundred fold. Fascist pigs who run this country believe that they can do anything and get away unscaved. They believe after jailing our Chief of Staff. David
Hilliard, and our Minister of Culture, Emory Douglas, that the struggle of Black people will be contained. Chumps, stupid fascists, can only speed their descent into the river of fire. U.S.
fascism will be drowned in its own blood. The U.S. will be smothered by the depth and implacable violence of our fight for national salvation.
The insane fascist Connecticut judge has sparked all of us into action. He has turned loose the Black kamakazi. Those who will dare to struggle and dare to win against so-called
insurmountable odds. Our training clearly teaches us that these fascist pigs are not immortal and that today's pig is tomorrow's bacon, and that it is possible to turn out all the lights in
Babylon. So that we can use tactics that will set these fascist pigs up for the count.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
4 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 5 ---
The Rage has said that it is possible for the people to kick pigs behinds from the West Coast to the East, from the North to the South and back again. Counter attack by any means
necessary. Fascist America will soon dread the birthday and curse the name of the fascist pig judge in Connecticut. The Kamakazies are loose. ORDERS: Destroy the spirit of the fascist
forces seek out and annihilate them wherever they are found.
WE'LL ALL BE TOGETHER ON THE DAY OF VICTORY!
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE
Randy Williams
-- 3 --
TELEGRAM FROM THE KOREAN DEMOCRATIC LAWYER'S ASSOCIATION
1249 P PST APR & 70 PLA 176 MA390 VIA RCA M WUD9 624 MWR107 PS179 URNX BK SUMX 358 S. PYONGY ANG358 8 1900 KORG ETATPRIORITE BLACK PANTHER PARTY
3106 SHATTUCK AVE, BERKELEY, CALIF. 94705 USA
THE KOREAN PEOPLE EXPRESS SURGING INDIGNATION AT THE SINISTER PLOT OF THE US IMPERIALIST TO BRUTALLY MURDER MR. BOBBY SEALE, CHAIRMAN OF YOUR
PARTY, AFTER HAVING ARRESTED AND DETAINED HIM UNREASONABLY AND INFLICTED ALL SORTS OF MEDIEVAL
PG 2 TORTURE AND PERSECUTION UPON HIM THIS PLOT OF THE US IMPERIALIST HANGERS TO MURDER CHAIRMAN BOBBY SEALE WHO HAS FOUGHT RESOLUTELY
AGAINST THE US IMPERIALIST POLICY OF RACIALISM, AGGRESSION AND WAR AND FOR THE GENUINE RIGHTS AND LIBERATION OF THE BLACK PEOPLE IS NOT ONLY A
GRAVE CRIMINAL ACT
PG 3 AGAINST YOUR PARTY AND THE PROGRESSIVE AMERICAN PEOPLE BUT ALSO AN OPEN CHALLENGE TO THE ENTIRE PEOPLE OF THE WORLD WHO LOVE PEACE
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
5 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 6 ---
AND FREEDOM THE US IMPERIALISTS MUST STOP A T ONCE THEIR CRIMINAL PLOT TO MURDER CHAIRMAN BOBBY SEALE AND RELEASE HIM IMMEDIA TELY AND
UNCONDITIONALLY SHOULD THE US IMPERIALISTS
PG 4 CONTINUE THEIR FASCIST OPPRESSION AGAINST YOUR PARTY AND ITS LEADERS STRONG PROTEST OF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE AND THE WORLD PEOPLES
THEY WILL BE RETALIATED TEN OF THOUSANDS OF TIMES BY THE MILITANT BLACK PEOPLE AND THE ENTIRE PROGRESSIVE AMERICAN PEOPLE AND CANNOT EVADE
CURSE AND CONDEMNATION OF THE
PG5 PEACE-LOVING PEOPLES OF THE WHOLE WORLD US IMPERIALISM IS THE SWORN ENEMY OF THE KOREAN PEOPLE THESE ROGUES WHO HAVE ILLEGALLY
OCCUPIED THE SOUTHERN HALF OF OUR COUNTRY FOR 25 YEARS ARE ENGROSSED IN THEIR BESTIAL SUPPRESSION AND MURDEROUS ATROCITIES AGAINST OUR
BROTHERS IN SOUTH KOREA AS THEY ARE DOING AGAINST YOU NOW, AND ARE RUNNING AMUCK TO CHECK THE JUST STRUGGLE OF OUR PEOPLE FOR THE
INDEPENDENT PEACEFUL UNIFICA TION OF THE COUNTRY A T THE POINT OF BA YONETS AND UNLEASHING ANOTHER WAR OF AGGRESSION IN KOREA WE HIGHLY
APPRAISE YOUR STRUGGLE AGAINST US IMPERIALISM, THE
PG6 COMMON ENEMY, AND EXPRESS FIRM SOLIDARITY WITH IT ALTHOUGH YOU ARE FIGHTING IN ARDUOUS CIRCUMSTANCES NOW, YOU WILL SURELY WIN THE FINAL
VICTORY IN THE SACRED STRUGGLE ABOLISHING THE CURSED RACIALIST SYSTEM OF US IMPERIALISM AND BUILDING A FREE, EMANCIPATED NEW SOCIETY
COMMITTEE FOR THE PEACEFUL UNIFICATION OF THE FATHERLAND KOREAN DEMOCRATIC LAWYERS' ASSOCIATION APRIL 1970
THE IDEOLOGY OF THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY IS THE HISTORICAL EXPERIENCES OF BLACK PEOPLE AND THE WISDOM GAINED BY BLACK PEOPLE IN THEIR
STRUGGLE AGAINST THE SYSTEM OF RACIST OPPRESSION IN BABYLON, INTERPRETED THROUGH THE PRISM OF THE MARXIST - LENINIST ANALYSIS BY OUR MINISTER
OF DEFENSE, HUEY P. NEWTON.
ELDRIDGE CLEAVER
Minister of Information
BLACK PANTHE PARTY
-- 3 --
PALESTINIAN SCIENTISTS PRODUCE, DEVELOP ARMS
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
6 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 7 ---
Reprinted from FATEH
"A PRACTICAL APPLICATION
OF JUCHE"
Palestinian scientists and arms experts from Fateh are now producing anti-tank RBJ rockets, hand granades and other light arms and ammunitions.
They have also developed the Katyusha rockets of the type used to shell Jerusalem last August 26 and adapted their launcher pads.
On discovering a nest of 13 such Katyusha launcher pads at the time on a rocky hilside southeast of Jerusalem, the enemy had estimated that between 15 and 30 commandos must have
carried the missles up the barren slope.
Fateh's official spokesman said he was disclosing the news now that a Fateh commando has been killed in occupied Palestine and his Palestinian-made arm and rockets seized by the
enemy.
The spokesman said the Palestianian Revolution endeavors to produce part of its arms supplies, particularly that it intends to train and equip an army of 120,000 Fedayeen.
He said that basic changes have been introduced to the Katyusha rockets which were adapted in size, weight and range to suite the nature of combat on Palestinian soil.
Lauding the Palestinian scientists, the spokesman said they have also helped the commandos open daily breaches in the electronic fence raised by the enemy in the Beissan area with
plans to have it extend from the south of Lake Tiberias to the north of the Dead Sea.
These breaches, he said, helped the freedom fighters launch more than 800 operations against the enemy last December alone. More than 500 of these operations were carried out by
Fateh.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
7 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 8 ---
-- 4 --
LONNIE FACES DEATH IN THE ELECTRIC CHAIR AT THE HANDS OF THE CONNECTICUT FASCISTS
First, as a member of the Connecticut Chapter of the Black Panther Party. I would like to apologize to the people of New Haven for leaving out the picture of State Area Captain, Lonnie Mc
Lucas and not mentioning his name at all in the Center fold article of the newspaper of two weeks ago. As do the eight other Panthers held in the racist jails of Connecticut, Lonnie faces
death in the Electric Chair at the hands of the murder-crazy fascists of Connecticut.
Lonnie was born in Wade, North Carolina and as a young Black man grew up in some of the most wretched conditions that exist in this foul hell-hole called Babylon. At the age of 24,
Lonnie joined the Party and immediately displayed an unselfish devotion to the task of educating and providing the people with the leadership that we need if we are to have our freedom
and liberation.
If we are to survive the concentration camps that America has waiting for us, we have to recognize the qualities that are personified in the examples that brother Lonnie has set for us to
follow. He has shown himself to truly be a revolutionary servant of the people. He has shown us that it isn't enough to understand the problems that we, as a people, are confronted with
but that when you have the understanding, you must educate the people to that understanding and prepare the people for what we know is inevitable - the revolution, the struggle against
the oppressor, the struggle to control our own destinies. As a member of the Vanguard Party, Lonnie constantly exposed the government for what it is -- ‘evil’, ‘criminal’, a bunch of low-lifed
gansters, who do nothing but lie, steal and murder his people. He brought pride and dignity and a sense of worth back among his people. Lonnie showed the people what the best way of
dealing with the racist pigs is -- picking up the gun and dealing with the enemy.
Lonnie is a man that struck fear in the oppressor's heart. To hear me speak of Lonnie one would think that I am talking about some super-human nigger. In reality people like Lonnie, and
people like Bobby Seale and Huey P. Newton are not super-human, they are just human beings who have said no to the filth and rats and roaches that the pigs have forced us to live in,
along with the dope and alcohol that is poured into the community to "ease the pains of life". They have said no to the murder and brutality that is committed against the people constantly
at the sick hand of the pigs who run wild in our communities. Lonnie is just one of many who are rising up with a strong and constant resistance to meet the threats of annihilation that our
people are faced with at this time. And now at the very moment this man, this revolutionary sits in his cell at the State Jail in Litchfield wondering and hoping that the education and
teachings of Huey P. Newton are being picked by those of us who are still on the outside. He awaits the trial. Not the trial of the state against Lonnie McLucas; but the trial of whether we,
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
8 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 9 ---
the people will rise up or die; whether we, the people, will fight or submit; or whether we, the people will LICK THE MASTER'S BOOTS or TAKE THE MASTER'S HEAD.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE! IF THE PIGS TRY THEIR PLANS TO KILL THE STATE AREA CAPTAIN OF THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY. THERE WILL BE NO LIGHT FOR DAYS!!!
Doug Miranda
"THE TIME WHEN PEOPLE CAN SIT BACK AND VIEW PROCESSES OF INJUSTICE AND INEQUALITY HAS COME TO AN END"
-- 4 --
TO BE OR NOT TO BE
Where is the new left now that the right is on the move? Are they underground? Where is that? These questions come to my mind when I look around and don't see the so-called ‘White
revolutionaries’ in the streets demanding that Bobby Seale and the New Haven Panthers must be set Free. What I do see and hear is the sniveling of a few white mother country radicals
who could no longer hide their racism and alliance to Zionism and when the Black Panther Party released its most recent MANIFESTO. Well, like it or not that is the position that the Black
Panther Party has taken and it is the ONLY position in face of the open fascism that is moving to open genocide against Black people. Because it has been made very clear to us that
White people work in the interest of Whites -- they always have and always will. We draw these conclusions when we see Bobby Seale bound and gagged and beaten in a courtroom
without his White counter parts creating any situation that would place them in a similar position. What we saw was childish clowning on the part of children of the bourgeolsie.
Bobby Seale was sentenced to four years in prison for demanding his legal and Constitutional rights, and we heard no protest on the part of the left. Yet, when the other seven were
convicted the left was in the streets by the thousands. The streets were filled with the children of the bourgeolsie. None died because it is a fact that there is a reluctance of White's to spill
White blood. But when niggers take to the streets ‘it's shoot to kill’. When pigs go after Panther's it is destroy all, kill all. The only solution to our problem is dead pigs from the three levels
of oppression; the demogogic politicians, avaricious businessmen and the racist pig cops in the United States the three levels of oppression come only from the reactionary White ruling
class. To those who ask what about Black Capitalism, we know that the Black masses can deal with the endorsed spokesmen and bootlickers any time they so desire.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
9 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 10 ---
The ‘left’ for the most part has criticized the Black Panther Party's position on the Middle East Struggle. Being the only true Marxist-Leninist Party in America, the Party's position could only
be based on Marxist-Leninism. Anyone who would oppose that could only be a Zionist in radical disguise. The Black Panther Party sees those people in the same light as it sees Judge
Monroe Friedman and Julius Hoffman. The Party's position on class struggle in America has been based upon those same principles and we will not compromise our principles for
anything or anyone. At the same time we will not allow Bobby or any member of our Party to be put to death for his or her political beliefs or work by this fascist country. The Black Panther
Party refuses to be faked out of its position by the sudden freeze on the part of psuedo-White revolutionaires undercover Zionists, egotistical racists, anarchists or pigs. We will not back
up, we will not re-write our Manifesto and we will not apoligize for any dead pigs. That is where the Panthers are at and the left doesn't know it yet.
The Black Panther Party has been the most profound standard barrier of the need for class struggle in this country. The so-called ‘new left’ has wasted Black people's valuable time
engaging in idiotic ideological lip service which amounts to little less than murder-mouthing from books that were written over a hundred years ago. Being too cowardly to wear the jacket
of John Brown, the left chose to praise the work of Che, Mao, and Ho ChiMinhand side step the revolutionary duty of a socialist man. By refusing to act against the oppressor, the only
socialist threats we see in the left is that of national socialists (Nazis). It is not the aim of the Black Panther Party to turn off those White people who may have the guts to engage in class
struggle in America and see it through. But even to them we give this warning, please don't think you can run or dictate to Black people how to run their struggle. At the same time don't
take the position that you are supporting your favorite niggers because we are working, fighting, and suffering to make sure that Black people survive and gain their freedom in America
Period. To all others, we remind them that the weapon of criticism will never equal the criticism of weapons.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE!
DOWN WITH ZIONISM/DEATH TO THE FASCIST PIGS
Big Man
Deputy Minister of Information
Black Panther Party
"WE WILL NOT ALLOW BOBBY OR ANY OTHER MEMBER OF OUR PARTY TO BE PUT TO DEATH FOR HIS OR HER POLITICAL BELIEFS OR WORK, BY THIS FASCIST
COUNTRY."
-- 5 --
WE MUST UNIFY AND MOBILIZE THE BLACK LIBERATION ARMY FOF OUR NATIONAL SALVATION
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
10 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 11 ---
Black people as a
whole will inflict a
political consequence.
Presently, at this time we are in pre-revolution to armed struggle, but this level of struggle for national salvation is constantly escalated as the U.S. government is forever moving to higher
levels to destroy all political activists. The most savage persecution of political parties and patriots has been going under the direct control of the U.S. government and it's occupying forces
in Korea, Vietnam, and other countries of the world, as well as the Black communities here in Babylon.
Murders, tortures, repressive mass arrests, and outright kidnap have been the order of the day. The U.S. government-the so-called government built on democracy, freedom, and justice
for all-has run a con game on the people. The lying politicians ran a game so hard, cold, and slick that it made a lot of people; the very same people that it oppresses and exploits, thank
that this government is existing for the benefit ‘of the people’
The U.S. government is the most oppressive and fascist force in existence. This government has waged and continues to wage unjust wars upon people of the world who want true
freedom, justice, and peace and not just words about it. For money and power, these bands of anti-justice, anti-equality anti-human pigs imprison and murder people who refuse to take
side with them in oppressing the people of the world. Now is the time for these acts of fascism to be stopped now is the time for the railroading and pre-planned murders of Black people's
political leaders to be ended; now is the time to move from lip service against oppression, to actions against oppression. Black people must now use self-reliance to stop the force which is
oppressing us. We will be oppressed as long as we allow ourselves to be oppressed. The future of Black people lies in the hands of Black people and we must be our own salvation and
solution to the problem.
Bobby Seale the Chairman of the Black Panther Party, is now in New Haven, Connecticut, and the U.S. government had planned his death long before he was ripped off of the streets in
the Black community. In 1968 Chairman Bobby went to Chicago, to speak at the Democratic Convention Bobby spoke to the people about the unjust murders and oppression being
suffered by the people of the world, also identifying the force that is waging the acts of oppression. The Chairman along with Huey P. Newton, Minister of Defense, founded the Black
Panther Party to mobilize revolutionary actions among the people and to give to the people valid information and education about the system in which we live, a system that eats away the
very minds, eating at the freedom and dignity of men. He educated the members of the Black Panther Party so that we can property educate, serve and lead the people, so that we can
build a government under the leadership of the people….instead of this government that claims to be instituted by the people, a nd yet murders and exploits the very people who are
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
11 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 12 ---
supposedly instituting it. The facts must be faced as to why Chairman Bobby Seale is facing death in the electric chair-not because of the phony charges against him but because he is a
political leader of Black people. The fascist have very well succeeded in railroading Chairman Bobby to Connecticut-but will they succeed in murdering him? For the murders of the people
of the Black community and oppression waged upon us, we must unleash the ultimate political consequence upon this nation. And as the Minister of Information has stated: "The ultimate
political consequence that Black people have in their power to unleash is race war." There are many White people giving lip service to the fight against the genocide being waged upon
Black people, and many who sympathise with the "plight" of the oppressed, neither lip service nor sympathy will solve the problem. It's either, or …. either you are a part of the problem or
you're part of the solution-you either stand with the oppressed or against the oppressed. If you are giving a lot of lip service and sympathy to Black people's struggle against oppression
and genocide, but not actively trying along with us to stop that oppression, then you are only part of the problem, because lip service and sympathy to the struggle of the oppressed
without action is only submissiveness to the oppression waged upon the oppressed. If you submit to outright murders and imprisonments of Black people, then you are no different than
those who plan and endorse it, simply because they plan genocide and oppression and you quietly submit to it.
Oppression creates resistance, and Black people as a whole will inflict a political consequence upon this nation for every act of aggression waged upon us. The situation is very hot and
the endurance to the pain inflicted by this country is rapidly running out. We will not sacrifice Chairman Bobby Seale for the pleasure of some outright savage pigs to entertain themselves
in murdering another political leader. The kidnappings and murders of our political leaders will be stopped by any means necessary. We must unify and mobilize the Black Liberation Army
for our national salvation.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE Candi Robinson
-- 5 --
“…AND LET THE MADMEN OUT”
In two months of being incarcerated, which has been a lot less time than many of my other comrades who are in the pig stys of racist ameriKKKa, I have come to realize that the people's
warriors are incarcerated in the piggish institutions throughout this decadent country. I have been listening very closely to the different organizations, and so-called ‘white revolutionaries’
protesting against the trial of the Chicago ‘8’ (which should have been the Chicago ‘1’) and the protest against a war that is 14,000 or 16,000 miles away from home, when they should be
protesting the acts of Genocide being carried out on the Black community, and the many Black people who are incarcerated. People have failed to realize the oppression that Black people
have suffered in the pig pens of ‘Babylon’, you dig? It is time to start to rally together for these brothers; I am not only speaking about the Political Prisoners, but also the brothers who
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
12 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 13 ---
have been defined by our Minister of Defense in his article, ‘Prison Where is Thy Victory’ as the ‘illegitimate capitalists’. I am talking about the brothers who have been involved in the
‘crimes’ of robbery, theft, congames, ghetto prostitutes, right down to the ghetto ‘hustlers’ -- crimes committed for survival -- when a man steals clothes, it is because he is in need of them;
when a man steals food it is because he is hungry and when a man steals money, it is because he realizes that money is the basis of obtaining his needs. Let's get into the inner workings
of this, let's check out why Black people have to take what is rightfully theirs. The only concrete solution I can come up with, is the fact that we are subjected to life under a capitalistic
system, a system of greed for a small minority where we as a majority must seek the crumbs (you dig) -- a system that the pigs of the power structure have programmed the people to, as
the workers of the racists and capitalists, receive less no matter how much production we put out, we always receive less in return. After trying to play the straight game, Black people
come to find out that they're being ‘jammed’ and since their basic needs are not met, they have no other choice but to check out the system of crime. When caught at the ‘game’ these
people are sent to these piggish institutions for rehabilitation, while their rights have been violated from the time they're apprehended to the time they are brought before the ‘Pig Justice’.
There is no such animal as rehabilitation in these pig pens, there's more programming of the brothers' minds; the pigs even endorse homosexuality in these prisons, pairing the brothers up
with each other. I have seen brothers go to the warden and tell him they've got to have another brother, because he may look feminine…. there's no rehabilitation, but the programming of
perverts, and degenerates. You can't change a man because you can't work his mind, the only thing these pig institutions contain is the brothers' bodies they are trying to steal the
brothers' minds, this is why we must begin to rally around these brothers and sisters in this pig pen throughout racist Babylon, Now People!
In doing this you will come to realize who the real criminals are, the Political Criminals of the Pig Power Structure they are the ones who need rehabilitation, and this will only come when
Black people make Revolution, and replace the brothers who are in prisons with the real felons, you see? Because they have committed the greatest crime in history, mass injustice
against the People, crime against Humanity, and these must not go unpunished, we as people must move forth to clean up the corrupt government. I am talking about cleaning the top pig
Mill-House Nixon -- to the local fascist pig that patrols our Black communities- these are the real criminals I've been talking about!! We must give them the same choice ‘Papa Rage’ gave
them, they should take a one way ticket to Idaho, and attend the World-Wide Bar-B-Que that we have been planning for them and if the people's demands aren't answered then we shall
revoke those tickets and Bar-B-Que them on their front lawns. The brothers must be set free along with all Political Prisoners, we must begin to blow Point #8 of the Ten Point Platform
and Program, from one end of ameriKKKa to the other --" We want all Black men released from Federal, State, County, and City prisons and jails" They have not received a fair and
impartial trial! We must demand that these brothers be set free, before they contain the minds of our brothers we must make these brothers an active part in their people's struggle. We
must begin to liberate ourselves now, People, because the time has come to DEAL!
FREE THE BROTHERS!
FREE ALL POLITICAL PRISONERS!
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE!
Rolando ‘Montae’ Hearn
"ONLY WITH THE POWER OF THE
GUN CAN THE BLACK MASSES HALT
THE TERROR AND BRUTALITY
PERPETUATED AGAINST THEM BY
THE ARMED RACIST POWER
STRUCTURE."
Huey P. Newton
Minister of Defense
Black Panther Party
-- 5 --
THE LEGAL ARM OF THIS FASCIST STATE IS ESCALATING THIS WAR!
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
13 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 14 ---
The courts at the direction of Attorney General Mitchell have given the green light to open Fascism. Any acts of terrorism -- torture, brutality, and outright murder are given immediate
justification and full approval. Formally prolonged trials which have attempted to throw up a smoke screen of ‘justice’ to fool the people have been abandoned. Brothers and sisters are
now railroaded through the courts in four day fascist trials (an example being the brother, ‘Chip’, Romaine Fitzgerald, in the Southern California Chapter who within a four day period was
tried and convicted of phony murder charges.) Pig judges no longer oink apologies as they sentence the people to outrageous terms….Not only Panthers, but anyone. A 51-year old Black
man is given a 1,000 (one thousand) year sentence on a burglary charge, while White racists like Dr. Shephard (of So. Cal.) murder their wives and are out after seven years. These
judicial pirates openly laugh at the people as they snatch them from the streets and play with their lives. Judicial fascists have blown away their own smoke screen by their increasingly
overt (open) acts of racism (in the courts) and their total disregard for the rights of any people disillusioned with the system.
But these fumbling, flea-brained fascists (most of them senile) have now gone one step further. Not satisfied with the open terrorism in the streets, occupying armles in the Black
community, medleval torture chambers masquerading as ‘jails, and rehabilitation centers’, they have brought open terrorism into the courtroom. They're trying to get a piece of the action.
No longer content with being pirates of justice, they want the ‘hanging tree’ right in the courtroom. Hence, Bobby Seale, Chairman of the Black Panther Party is viciously beaten, bound
and gagged is fascist pirate Hoffman's court, as they attempt to railroad him to the Electric Chair. Judge Chavez (of L. A.) signs warrants for the arrest of the L. A. 18 explicitly (clearly)
stating that they should be ‘arrested’ in the early predawn hours, as was done in Chicago on Dec. 4, 1969 (when Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were murdered). And pigs in Judge
Murtaugh's court are allowed to run amuck in the courtroom attacking defendants as they did the N.Y. 21. With each ‘trial’ the picture becomes more clear and it is easier to see through
the haze. The maze of lies and deception confuses even the pigs themselves as they attempt to justify what is happening.
And now we come to Connecticut -- New Haven. Having failed at their attempts to railroad our Minister of Defense, Huey P Newton, to the gas chamber, they are now trying to electrocute
Bobby. These reactionary fools are ploting his political and literal execution and along with it, the rest of the Black Panther Party. In this medieval setting the New Haven witch-hunters
have also lain in wait for our Chief of Staff and Minister of Culture, who when they came to see about Bobby, were jammed in the ‘courtroom’ and charged and sentenced on the spot of
‘contempt of court’ and given six months without bail.
The ‘konstitution’ and ameriKKKa's kangaroo kourts are a mockery of justice, and are being used to ‘legally lynch Black people’ and to justify this fascist state they no longer attempt to
conceal it. The legal arm of this fascist state is escalating this war and their politics are now demanding their resolution in the highest form. They are ready to start a ‘blood bath’ if
necessary as ‘Mickey Mouse’ Reagan puts it, to maintain their fascist state. What the people must realize is that there ‘ain't gonna be no justice’, it will come only when the masses of
people rise to SEE it done. We must stop relating to the ‘kourts’ altogether; and realize that from now on, the courts will be in THE STREETS BELONG TO THE PEOPLE.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
14 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 15 ---
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE
Joan Kelly
NCCF-Bobby Seale Community Information Center
-- 6 --
ORGANIZING SELF-DEFENSE GROUPS: PART-3 TRAINING
Know the enemy. At this point the pigs have three things going for them.
Communication - C
Mobility - M
Information - I
When planning any operation, the pigs' C.M.I. must be taken into consideration in planning tactics.
Practice - Practice - Practice - Practice - Practice - Practice -
In order to perform well in your work on all levels it is necessary to practice, the more you practice the better you perform. Don't think just because you read something you can do it. You
can memorize a book on how to drive a car but until you get behind a wheel and practice you still can't drive.
The first things to understand before you ever put a round of ammo in a chamber are basic safety rules 99% of all accidental shootings happen with guns that aren't "loaded" and/or by
people that say "I'm sorry, I didn't know it was in aded." Therefore, rule #1 is; the first thing you do when you pick up a weapon is check to see if it loaded, keep your finger off the trigger
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
15 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 16 ---
and follow the following procedure. Point gun away from area where someone could possibly be shot. If it is a revolver swing out the cylinder; if it is a pistol remove the magazine and pull
back the slide. Even after you have unloaded the gun or see that it is unloaded treat the gun in the manner as if it were still loaded. Never touch the trigger unless you are practicing
trigger squeeze (explanation later), firing on training ground or dealing with the enemy. Never point a gun at anyone you don't intend to shoot. I can't stress these points enough, they seem
simple enough; however, people that generally haven't had any experience with pieces violate these rules constantly. If I am ever shot accidentally by some idiot it will be very difficult to
suppress the desire to blow his, or her head off, providing I'm only wounded.
The next step is to learn to disassemble and assemble your pieces, also care and maintenance. Due to the fact that self-defense activity will not be limited to daylight hours you should
learn to break your piece down and assemble it even in the dark. Your life depends on it. So do it.
After you've gotten this down, the next step is to learn how to aim and fire your weapons properly. All of this is to be done before you ever put your first round of ammo in the chamber, the
first thing to deal with is proper sight alignment. Sight alignment is lining up your front sight with your rear sight correctly. Your front sight lined up with your rear sight and both lined up on
the target is called the "sight picture". The correct sight picture basically is having the front not too high or too low, not to the right or to the left, but having the target resting on top of the
front sight. The sight picture will not always appear perfect, but if the correct sight picture is understood practice will bring improvement.
The next thing to get down with is trigger squeeze. That's right you squeeze the trigger, you don't pull it or jerk it, contrary to what ever you saw on t.v., trigger squeeze is a process of
putting slow steady pressure on the trigger until a shot goes off. If you try to anticipate the shot, you will jerk and mess up your aim.
One other thing to watch for is movement of your piece which comes from breathing, which also messes up your aim. One method of breath control is to take a deep breath, let out half of
it, hold the rest of it then begin your trigger squeeze.
It would be ideal if you could incorporate into your group a veteran of the pigs' military service. Veterans are of great value and assistance in helping with the above training also when you
are ready to begin practice with live ammunition. When practicing with live ammo make sure your location is where you won't be hassled by pigs. Actual combat conditions can be deadly
as a training ground. When practicing with live ammo, remember it is valuable. Don't just start popping caps for the heck of it; the whole purpose is to prepare yourself to be "a Match for
One Hundred" which will only come about as a result of correct practice.
One thing to guard against is flinching. Flinching is caused by being intimidated by the sound and kick of your weapon. With proper trigger squeeze and breath control, you won't have any
problems with flinching. If you have problems keeping all your shots in a fairly small group or if you have a problem just getting your shots on the target anywhere you are probably
flinching. Have someone watch you as you fire and they will be able to tell you whether or not you are flinching.
The basic thing in the training of members of a self defense group is to know how to handle fire arms of all types,-hand guns, rifles, shotguns machine guns, etc.
The use of different types of ammunition and explosives should be considered also. Part #4 of this series will deal with some recipes.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE D.C.
-- 6 --
GESTAPO INVADES ROXBURY HOME
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
16 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 17 ---
Pick a day, any day, and a time, any time, and you will find that the Black community is constantly under pig surveillance. You wake up in the morning (getting ready to hump that eight and
half hour job) Step out onto the street and the first two things you see are the sun and the pig in that order.
Twenty-four hours a day, our community is patroled by pigs, whose only job is to keep all the niggers in check. They proudly wear the uniform that is rapidly becoming the trademark of
fascism in America.
Not a day goes by without someone in the community coming into contact with these pigs, with the results always being the same-humiliation, abuse and unneeded court costs. These
pigs are still trying to justify the brutal slaying of Frank Lyncy, murdered in cold blood and at the same time searching for new victims to attack. They lost no time in coming up with their
target.
This time it was a mother, her four children, her brother and a friend, around seven o'clock Friday morning March 20th. Everyone in the apartment was busy preparing for their daily
activities; Roberta Carrington was fixing breakfast for her children. Ralph Carrington and Roger Carrington and Roger Williams, had not gotten out of bed. The household was functioning
in the normal manner, when Boston's fascists came upon the set-five cars two wagons and a canine unit. Over thirty pigs armed with riot pump shotguns, teargas and whatever else they
use to terrorize and murder the people. Six of them came to the door and demanded entrance, Mrs. Carrington, a Mass. Welfare Rights Organizer, has had direct experience with the pigs
before. She, therefore, being familiar with her constitutional rights, inquired as to whether the pigs had a search warrant. The pigs replied, "This is my search warrant" as he patted his
gun. Upon hearing this, Mrs. Carrington tried to shut the door, but these fools forced it open and rushed into the house. Ralph upon hearing all the commotion at the front door went to
investigate; he was met in the hallway by about five pigs, pushed up against the wall and beaten. Several more went into the room where Roger had been sleeping, snatched him from
bed, and beat him too.
After seeing so many strangers in the house, brandishing guns and beating up their uncle and his friend, Roberta's three youngest children started to cry, her fourth child (about 11 years
old) told the pigs, "You wouldn't be doing this if the Panthers were here', (Right On). This blew the pigs' minds. They began roughing the kids up and throwing things around. Roger and
Ralph were arrested and taken down to pig pen 9 (they were taken out with no clothes on) and charged with drunkenness… "Drunken ness" at 7:15 in the morning. These pigs are
madmen. Within two hours of their arrest, Roger and Ralph were in court appearing before pig judge McKinney on charges of assault and battery on a pig, resisting arrest and
drunkenness. The brothers were put in a position where it seemed like they were the criminals and the pigs were the victims. These lying pigs told the judge that Ralph "jumped up out of
bed and punched him" and that they found Roger in a stupor on the floor beside the record player-the Carringtons don't have a record player.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
17 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 18 ---
This within itself is in direct contradiction to what these pigs would have us to believe. We are told daily that freedom is obedience to the law, but they are laws which the pigs make and
break everyday. The Black Panther Party draws the line at the threshold of our doors. If one comes in the manner of a criminal, appropriate action will be taken. Niggers in the colony must
relate to the same.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE
Wayne
-- 6 --
ILLINOIS CHAPTER B.P .P . REFUTES LIE BY NEWS MEDIA
A lie recently spread by the Chicago news media, T.V . station Channel 7 in particular, is that a rift exists between the Ill. Chapter Deputy Minister of Defense, Bobby Rush, and the Deputy
Minister of Education, Billy "Che" Brooks. As was said by this T.V . station and a news columnist: "Watch for…a shakeup in the Black Panther Party. Bobby Rush may be on the way out." In
addition, they reported that the rift exists to such an extent that "Che" has decided to "take" the position of Deputy Chairman, the No. 2 spot in the Chapter, and then have Rush removed.
A press conference was held in the office of the Ill. Chapter on Friday, April 11, to refute this prefabrication invented by the strongarm men of print. Both Rush and "Che" were there to
explain the purpose of the lie. Rush said that the rumor was part of a tactic similar to one which he said led to the murder charge against Chairman Bobby Seale in Connecticut. After
setting up the rumor that there was a split in the New Haven Chapter, the pigs then killed New York Panther Alex Rackley, saying that Chairman Bobby ordered his death. Rush said he
called the press conference at the Party Headquarters, 2350 W. Madison, "so we can correct this misinformation through the same media that perpetuated it."
Che, commented on the absurdity of the accusation, nothing the relationship between the press and the police in their "joint" efforts.
The news agencies responsible for disseminating this lie stated that their information came from a "well informed, well-intentioned source." The Illinois Chapter knows that the reported rift
was not misinformation from a ‘well-intentioned’ person, but was the product of the imagination of pigs, agents, and criminals, who are aided by the press ‘disservices’ that have no
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
18 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 19 ---
intention of printing the truth.
We still say that any who stand in the way of our liberation will be dealt with, regardless of the "kill" weapons that they use, whether it be from the end of a .357 magnum or from the end of
a ball point pen. So all we have to say to you liars, murderers -- you fascists is: "WE WILL SEE YOU ON THE BATTLEFIELD!"
Illinois Chapter
Black Panther Party
Chicago, Ill.
-- 6 --
THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY IS A PEOPLE'S PARTY
The Black Panther Party is getting a bad name in the "Twin Cities" area. Several times in the last few months, people have been robbed with the thieves saying "Tell the cops the Black
Panthers did it." Only a pig would stoop to such depths to slander the Party.
Even though there isn't a Party office in the "Twin Cities" area, these robberies could be part of the nationwide attack on the Party. Here instead of physical attacks on any organization
that follows the Party line (this center) the pigs could be assaulting the Party through mental attacks on the people. The robberies would bring about hate for the Party. And when we
organize here, people will be wary, saying "They're thieves. I don't want anything to do with them." This would be a terrible consequence, because the Black Panther Party is the people's
Party.
The Martin Luther King-Huey P. Newton Community Center is trying to dispel these lies against the Party, and expose the people who are trying to slander the Party by robbing the people.
We are also explaining why they are doing it. That is important. PEOPLE OF THE TWIN CITIES AREA ATTENTION: Beware of people claiming to be Black Panthers in the act of robbery.
They are not Panthers. They are probably fools, or just plain pigs trying to slander the Party. No Panther would do such a thing. A Panther serves the people, he doesn't rob them.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
19 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 20 ---
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE
Martin Luther King-Huey P. Newton
Community Center
613 Selby Ave.
St. Paul, Minnesota 65104
612-226-1976
-- 7 --
ORGANIZING SELF-DEFENSE GROUPS: PART-4 RECIPES
I will begin by pointing out that we must not allow the racist power structure to define our struggle. What I mean is the language that we use like everything else in this society is in the
service of the racist capitalist bandits. They control the educational institutions, the news media and the means of production to turn out all the educational material. We sometimes are
trapped by the rhetoric (words) of the slavemaster. In our 400 year struggle for survival it has been the guns and force manifested in the racist pig cops that occupy our communities that
directly oppress, repress, brutalize and murder us. So for us to talk about survival we must talk about self-defense against this brutality and murder that is defined by the racist power
structure as justifiable homicide. So when a self-defense group moves against this oppressive system, by executing a pig by any means, sniping, stabbing, bombing, etc., in defense
against the 400 years of racist brutality and murder this can only be defined correctly as self defense. The slavemaster, however, through his lackeys and puppets calls it ‘terrorism’, the
work of crazed men, criminals, insane killers etc.. We must define our struggle not the pigs. Carlos Marighella, an urban guerrilla in Brazil who was assassinatted Nov. 4th 1969 just one
month before Fred Hampton and Mark Clark, says, "the accusation of assault or terrorism no longer has the pejorative (negative) meaning it used to have. It has acquired new clothing, a
new coloration. It does not factionalize, it does not discredit; on the contrary it represents a focal point of attraction."
"Today to be an assailant or terrorist is a quality that ennobles any honorable man because it is an act worthy of a revolutionary engaged in armed struggle against the shameful military
dictatorship and its monstrosities.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
20 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 21 ---
So with that, I say this, all self-defense groups must strike blows against the slavemaster until we have secured our survival as a people and if this takes shooting every pig and blowing up
every pig sty then let's get on up.
Below are some recipes that might help some of you get started.
SELF IGNITING
MOLOTOV COCKTAIL
CAUTION: POTASSIUM CHLORATE IS VERY VOLATILE. IT CAN IGNITE ALMOST SPONTANEOUSLY IN THIS MIXTURE. IT CAN BE IGNITED OR DETONATED BY A SINGLE
SPARK, OR EXCESSIVE HEAT OR MERELY BY THE FRICTION OF STIRRING THE INGREDIENTS TOGETHER. SO USE PLASTIC OR WOODEN UTENSILS FOR MIXING DO-NOT-
USE-METAL. USE EXTREME CAUTION.
Mix 3 parts of potassium chlorate with 2 parts of sugar. Add water to make a solution. Take a large sock, soak in the mixture then dry. Keep dry sock away from heat.
Away from the area or after you have thoroughly cleaned the area where you handled the above mixture take a fifth wine bottle and fill 1/5 to 1/4 full of sulphuric acid. Fill the rest of the
way up with gasoline. Pour the gas slowly, it could bubble and heat up. Cap the bottle tightly. Make sure it doesn't leak you should test it first with water. To cap the bottle it is preferable to
use a stopper with a rubber blunger because acid eats plastic and metal. Don't shake the bottle hold it upright. When ready to use, put the bottle in the sock soaked in the chlorate sugar
mix and knot the sock at the top. Throw at target. When it hits and the glass breaks it will explode as the sulphuric acid contacts the potassium chlorate and sugar mixture on the sock. The
gasoline will spread the flame. The principal behind this fire bomb is when sulphuric acid comes into contact with a mixture of potassium chlorate and sugar there is an explosion that gives
off a lot of heat. The more potassium chlorate the more explosive, the more sugar the more heat. For your information, this fire bomb will work even if the mixture on the sock is wet.
However, it is more volatile when dry.
One more warning Before placing bottle with gas and acid into sock make sure outside of bottle is clean and is not contaminated with acid.
PEOPLE,S HANDGRENADE
Take a used empty aerosol (spray) can, pull off the little plastic spray device, and with a hammer and nail pound the little plastic nipple down into the can. Widen the hole large enough so
that large shot can be inserted through the hole. Fill with 3/4 black powder and 1/4 shot, small headed nails or anything to use for shrapnel. Insert fuse well into can and leave about 1 1/2
inches outside. If fuse is too short, you will blow yourself up. If the fuse is too long, when you throw it, it could be thrown back at you. If thrown in the open, it will kill within a 25 foot radius
and main within 100 feet. I suggest that you familiarize yourself with this weapon by practicing with a sand filled dummy. Try this and see how long the fuse that you use takes. For a strictly
anti-property grenade fill can with black powder and don't use any shrapnel. The greatest advantage in this type of grenade is that you can legally buy all the ingredients needed. Buy
black powder from your local gun store reloading counter. You've probably got some spray cans around the house.
Reproduced here is a list of books available with many more recipes and technical information.
USE WHAT YOU GOT TO GET WHAT YOU NEED
D.C.
-- 7 --
RACIST-MAD PIGS SIC K9 POLICE DOG ON BROTHER
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
21 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 22 ---
On Friday night, March 27, 1970, 14 yr. old Brother John (Little Hot-Rod) Hargrove became the victim of a brutal attack inflicted by a K9 Police dog. This brother along with two other
bloods were playfully chasing each other along the sidewalk in the area of Sixth and Snyder Streets. When the brothers approached the corner, one brother ran past brushing against a
lady standing at the corner. When this happened the lady immediately grabbed the brother. The two other bloods kept running. Soon after the pig grabbed the brother, a light colored
station wagon appeared. In the station wagon were two plain clothes pigs. These pigs immediately proceeded to hand-cuff the blood, beat him in the face, and unleash a vicious police
dog that ripped the flesh off the brother's body. As the brother tried to escape the blows of the pig beating him in the face, the K9 proceeded to bite him all over his body. While the brother
was being beaten by the pig, and attacked by the dog, the other pigs who came along proceeded to chase the other two bloods. The pigs fired a shot barely missing the fore-head of one
of the brothers.
Little Hot-Rod, handcuffed, face badly beaten and suffering from dog bites all over his body, was taken to the local police station where he was booked on suspicion of pick-pocketing. He
did not receive any medical attention until several hours later at the Philadelphia General Hospital; there they gave him one tetnus shot and put a bandage on each leg. The pig who
created the vicious attack was later identified as one of Rizzo's faggot law and order boys of the GRANNY PATROL. The Granny Patrol is a special segment of piggery which employs pigs
to dress up as women so that they can arrest suspected pick-pockets.
The party conducted an interview with the bloods who were fortunate enough to get away, we also spoke with the brother's parents, and were able to visit the brother at the Youth Study
Center. We also spoke with the people in the community who witnessed the horrid incident!
Following are excerpts from the tapes which describe the incident. We cannot use names here of the bloods because it has been passed down that the pigs are trying to round up the
other brothers.
The racist pigs approached the brothers by shouting "Get them niggers, get them niggers'. They chased the bloods with butcher knives, and what appeared to be an ax. One brother was
hit with a pipe in the stomach.
People in the community responded to the arrest and attack angrily. When several people in the community demanded that the pigs call off the dog, they were met with racist remarks from
the pigs.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
22 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 23 ---
The attack was so vicious, the dog ate the underwear on the brothers body. In addition to bites on the brothers hands, legs and waist the dog also bit the brother in the back and rectum.
The brother suffered from severe beatings by the pigs, in the face.
When Little Hot-Rod was visited on Sunday at the Youth Study Center, his body was not healing properly. He related that the nurse only appliesmercurochrome on the bites. He is
suffering from soreness. He is sleeping on hard cots in the over-crowded center. The bites on his body are swollen and inflamed. The brother's first remarks to his family were, "Tell my
probation officer to get me out of here, this place is like Byberry".
Just less than two weeks ago, the brother was beaten in a cell Division. This pig beat him so bad that Methodist Hospital complained to the Police Department. His eyes were badly
damaged. The pig's name who inflicted that beating was Juvenile Aid Officer, Charles Kora. Hot-Rod identified Kora as his assailant and since then, he has been harrassed in his
neighborhood by every pig who comes through.
At 14, John Hargrove is a marked victim of Frank Rizzo's fascists, like so many other Black youths in this city. Pigs are on the loose to inflict more physical harm to our people. It is high
time that we escalate our war on the pigs and drive them out of our communities.
Seize The Time people of Philadelphia, Rizzo and all of his racist paper tigers can be rightously blown away.
Rosemari Mealy
Philadelphia Branch
Black Panther Party
-- 7 --
BOOKS CAN BE PURCHASED AT NORMOUNT ARMAMENT, BOX211 GAS: FOREST GROVE, OREGON 97116
U.S.A.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
23 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 24 ---
Japanese Infantry Weapons
German Infantry Weapons
U.S. .30 Carbines, M1, M1A1, M2 and M3
U.S. Garand Rifles M1, M1C, M1D
U.S. Springfield Rifles M1903, M1903A1, M1903A3, M1903A4
U.S. Rifle 7 .62mm M-14
U.S. .45 Pistols and Revolvers
Machineguns and Gunnery for Machineguns (U.S.)
Mortars and Mortar Gunnery (U.S.)
The Lewis Light Machinegun
The Browning Hi-Power Pistols
The Parabellum ("Luger") Pistol
The Thompson Sub-Machineguns
Use and Installation of Boobytraps
Guerilla Warfare and Special Forces Operations
Operations Against Irregular Forces
Guerilla Warfare: A Method (Che Guevara) and Special
(Nguyen Van Hieu)
Leader's Guide for Operations in Southeast Asia
Colt .223 AR-15 Semi and Fully Automatic Rifles (M-16)
U.S. Shotguns, All Types
M1917 "Enfield" Rifle
Ranger Training
Evasion and Escape
Hand to Hand Combat
Explosives and Demolitions
-- 8 --
URBAN RENEWAL PEOPLE'S REMOVAL
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
24 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 25 ---
New York City is perhaps the heart of world capitalism, and it is here that the examples are set for dealing with the poor and oppressed people that the rest of the country follows. Millions
of people live in the five bouroughs which make up New York City proper. Many of these people are Black and Puerto Rican, and because they are poor and oppressed, they live in some
of the most inhuman conditions. In order to continue the subjugation, pacification has been put into practice by way of the ‘big lie’, which has been employed in some of the most devious
ways-one such scheme was the poverty program which was designed theoretically to help the people obtain a marketable skill in order to reduce the unemployment rate so prevalent
among our people. However, in reality it proved to be a complete farce which the people are now hip to. In order to keep false promises going in the wake of a disasterous situation a new
program has come to the forefront, known as "Model Cities."
In New York City particularly there exists a very critical situation in the area of housing. The essence of the problem is: 1) there is a very serious general shortage of housing. 2) there is an
even 'greater shortage of decent housing. 3) in areas such as Brownsville, Lower East Side, South Jamacia, South Bronx, etc. housing has been allowed to deteriorate and or be
demolished. 4) the deliberate and calculated plan to allow housing to deteriorate has caused thousands of deaths due to fires, gas leaks, disease, etc…Such a plan is tantamount to
genocide and must be viewed in that light. 5) very little housing is being built to replace the deteriorated housing, instead middle and high income housing and new office and factory
buildings have been the order of the day.
From these facts the plan of the pigs is obvious. The land space in New York City proper is very unable to the capitalist; it is so valuable in terms of potential that they are willing to commit
genocide on a whole class of people who now occupy this land, because they have out-lived their usefulness to the capitalists. The pigs have a three way plan of attack in operation to
accomplish what is known in theory as "Urban Renewal" or "Model Cities" but in practice is People Removal-both temporarily through relocation or permanently through death.
Phase one: housing is allowed to deteriorate to such an extent that it causes a direct hazard to life. In this way the capitalist create the conditions which cause death -- lack of heat, falling
ceilings, poor wiring, poor sanitation conditions, etc. Phase two: housing is just out rightly demolished, either because it has deteriorated to such a point where they are forced to or it is
removed under the pretense of building some other much needed construction. Phase three: to cover up this outlandish plot of genocide the capitalist pigs have put operation model city
into all the communities where these removal programs are going on. Model Cities leads the people to believe that all the deteriorated and demolished housing will be replaced with new
low income housing fit for the shelter of human beings. However, reality indicates that this is not the case. The conditions are worsening daily especially in the areas like the Lower East
Side and Brownsville-both areas resemble war torn zones and the new housing built to replace the massive destruction (can be practically counted on two hands).
The people must realize that Model Cities Programs are nothing but a guise to make them think conditions will change when in reality the people's living conditions become increasingly
critical daily. Just as the people saw through the live poverty programs they will also see that its replacement "Model Cities" is even more live and deadly if the people allow it to continue.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
25 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 26 ---
It is becoming crystal clear to poor and oppressed people that this piggish government has never and will never do anything to aid them in their struggle to survive. Black and other people
of color's 400 years of rape, brutality, arrest, and murder are even today a living testimony of their experience in racist, fascist America.
Thus the Black Panther Party has come forth to deal with this problem in a revolutionary way -- a way that will ensure change. Point No. 4 of the Black Panther Party's Program and
Platform states: "We want decent housing fit for shelter of human beings. We believe that if the White landlord will not give decent housing to our Black community, then the housing and
the land should be made into cooperatives so that our community with government aid can build and make decent housing for its people."
The Black Panther Party has instituted a housing coordinator to deal with obtaining decent housing fit for shelter of human beings for the people of their area. We along with the people
are determined to obtain decent housing by any means necessary and that includes talking to the landlord and if that doesn't work, liberating the building from them as the tenants of 1378
and 1374 College Ave. in the Bronx did. We are also trying to form a People's Repair Service, which will consist of individuals who have various skills in home repair who can deal with
fixing up a house. Thus once we take over these houses we can depend on our own resources to make the house decent. People interested in working with the People's Repair Service
or who have housing complaints can contact your nearest Black Panther Party Branch or information Center.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE
Brenda Hyson
N.Y . 21 Black Community Information
Center
BLACK PANTHER PARTY
-- 8 --
DEARBORN SCHOOL -- A SLAP IN THE FACE FOR THE BLACK COMMUNITY
The Dearborn School, or the "prison" as the children in Orchard Park housing call it, has been a thorn in the side of the people in Roxbury for many years. Most of the attempts at
changing the conditions of the school have been futile, and that which did take place - such as fixing the roof which leaked for a couple of years and fixing the filthy toilets - disrupted the
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
26 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 27 ---
classrooms. The work began in the middle of last August, instead of July, and carried through into early October. A close examination of the "prison" reveals numerous deficiencies which
could and should have been corrected years ago. Because of these conditions, the Dearborn School does not educate, but murders, daily, by stifling and crushing the hopes and
aspirations of both school children and their parents.
To begin a listing of the "prison" faults:
1. The Dearborn School has no gymnasium. Once a week some of the children are taken to the Boy's Club, about 1/4 of a mile away, to use the gym there. What happens in the winter
when after running around and playing at the Boy's Club, the children walk back to school in the cold.
2. On the day before mid-winter vacation, the school had to be closed and the children were sent home because there was no heat in the building. Other times there is no heat on the
other side. How does a parent dress her child under these conditions? How can school children learn anything either freezing or boiling?
3. The Dearborn School has no cafeteria. Lunch is fixed in the basement and taken upstairs to the rooms.
4. This is partially responsible for:
Mice Rats Cockroaches. In fact, some teachers are almost getting used to a 10 or 15 minute break in the middle of the class, in order to chase the mice out of their rooms. And visitors are
less and less shocked when they find dead mice and rats in the hallways.
5. Although the toilets were fixed this past summer, they haven't been cleaned since September. They're just about in the same conditions that they were in before they were fixed.
6. In some of the rooms on the first floor, there are no lights and doorknobs.
7. To top it off, the most common problem of schools in the Black community, apathetic, racist teachers. The Dearborn School is full of teachers who either have no control over the
children or, in one particular case, discipline (beat) the kids so hard that they become emotionally disturbed.
The Dearborn School cannot be considered-as a specific isolated case. From a perceptual observation of the decaying "prison" and the wasteland of mud which surrounds it, we begin to
become aware that the basis for the "prison" lies in the Boston School Committee (don't forget that well-known racist Louise Day Hicks and ex-member Thomas Eisenstadt, now Sheriff of
Suffolk County and the man responsible for the new pig station on Dudley Street) and the attitude of pig Mayor White and the city government.
The Dearborn School is an out-house; it's as simple as that the Dearborn School is a slap in the face for the people of the Black communities of Boston. The physical condition of the
"prison" carries with it a statement to the Black people of Boston from the Boston School Committee and pig Mayor White's city government, a statement centuries old, "NIGGERS, YOU
AIN'T GOIN' NOWHERE, YOU AIN'T LEARNING NOTHING."
The Dearborn School is an insult, because of the Racial Imbalance law. The crux of the problem lies downtown in the offices of Mayor White and the members of the Boston School
Committee.
We, the people of Roxbury, must move on this problem now. It is not just the concern for the parents in Orchard Park. Now we can understand that it is a matter of concern for the whole
community; it is all of our faces being slapped. Our children are undergoing a slow but steady process of Mental Genocide. We must act, for to hesitate is to endorse this genocide. We
must move against both the specific problem of the Dearborn School and its causes in pig White's city government.
SEIZE THE TIME
Michael Flutz
-- 8 --
PIG “LEADER” TURNS ON THE PEOPLE
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
27 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 28 ---
The Black community has always been the victim of fascist occupation by Babylon's demented, sadistic pigs. But now these vicious predators have intensified their occupation: they
anxiously wait for an opportunity to enter the Black community and brutalize the inhabitants of some of Babylon's most deplorable sections, the Black communities. As if these filthy swine
don't have enough case in entering and victimizing the Black communities every so often a rear kissing, "aspiring - to - be Negro leader" gives the pigs a green light to practice terror
tactics in their favorite playground, the colony.
Such is the case in Vallejo, California's south section of town. A one-eyed, crippled-mouthed jackal named Arthur Scott put the life of every Black resident of Vallejo in danger by calling the
pigs into south V allejo to clean up the "criminal element", the brothers and sisters on the block. This scurvy nigger. Scott, went down to the Library Board Meeting and told the Board of
racists that the people in the South Vallejo area were afraid to use the local library because of the possibility of being mugged by the lumpen. This lousy traitor wants so bad to be
recognized as a Negro leader by Vallejo's decrepit, racist mayor, that he said if Vallejo dosen't send pigs to "clean up" the area, he will seek state or federal pigs to do the work. This scary
house nigger knows that the easiest way to kiss the mayor's rear and be granted a "created" position is to sacrifice the Black community to the altar of fascism.
The area in question is one block of Lemon Street which has a liquor store, two bars, a record shop and the library on it. The only place in the area that is comfortable to lounge is the
large lawn around the library and a large parking lot near the liquor store. Instead of ‘Benedict Arnold’ Scott going to his idols and asking for decent recreational facilities, this lackey went
to them and begged them to send storm troopers to terrify the community. When the people of South Vallejo petitioned City Council to fence in a cesspool, which is supposed to be a park,
where a little boy drowned, good old bootlicking Scott vehemently opposed the people's desires. But now this insane fool claims his monstrous plot is "for the people".
‘Super Tom’ finally got his wish, at least temporarily anyway. On March 30, two fat, slimy pigs were stationed in the parking lot brandishing riot shotguns, magnum pistols, and democracy
sticks. These fascist idiots are dying to give a brother or sister a refresher course in American government if anyone stays in one spot on the block over one minute. In a few weeks Scott
will crawl into the Council Chamber with his tongue dragging the floor, begging for his reward.
Cyclop Scott, you have even a greater "reward" coming from the people. Pigs in Babylon are stepping their plot of systematic genocide of Black people and you are helping them. Just as
we have to rid ourselves of pigs practicing overt facism, we also have to rid ourselves of niggers like you who are practicing covert fascism. You will certainly receive what's due you.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE
Carl
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
28 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 29 ---
-- 9 --
FASCIST MEDICAL CLINIC IN JAMAICA
The main purpose of the Black Panther Party is to educate and serve the people. Our Minister of Defense Huey P. Newton, teaches us to implement programs that meet the needs and
desires of all oppressed peoples. The Panther community programs are attempting to spur the community into action -- creative action to make decisions and regain the dignity of the
people.
In Jamaica, Queens, N. Y. there is a Medical Clinic at 108-04 New York Blvd. A fascist institution run by fools that call themselves doctors but who could not in reality treat a flea with a
broken leg. These fools are subjecting the people of this community to all types of inhumane treatment. Like having them sit in a small office for long periods of time and then giving them
some pills and telling them to come back tomorrow. They are treating people for heart conditions, foot afflictions, eye, ear and nose disorders, medical examinations, dental work and
anything else people may complain of.
The avaricious ‘doctors’ only want to make a profit out of the colony. Not only do they own the medical clinic, but a drug store next door. When people are treated by the fool doctors, they
are told or almost led next door to the drug store to buy medicine, therefore the profit is even greater for these greedy businessmen. As long as they can keep you coming back the more
money they make.
The clinic is dirty and the medical instruments that are used are not sterilized. When one patient is treated, the same instruments are used without being sterilized first.
People that are treated at this so-called ‘clinic’ almost always come back because the medicine that is given to them does no good.
One sister from the community reported to me on April 6, 1970, that she went to the dentist at this ‘medical clinic’ to have a tooth pulled. So she went to Jamaica Hospital and was told that
whoever pulled her tooth did not know what he was doing, because her mouth was in bad shape -- gumstorn, mouth infected, she was told to go back to the dentist that did the work. The
sister also reported this incident to the board of health, which did nothing.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
29 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 30 ---
The people of the community must be made aware and know through practice that the services in the medical area are totally inadequate to meet even the most basic problems. In
capitalist America, medicine, like all facets of life, operates on the basis of profit, meaning that medical clinics', hospitals', doctors' and pharmaceutical companies' first interest is making
money and the well being of the people is second or obsolete.
Pig doctor Portegay, the owner of the medical center and all his piglets must be exposed for the fascist, avaricious, greedy, dogs that they are. For too long we have let these exploiters-
robbers steal from the people and kill the people with their phony medical centers and medicines. No longer will we stand by while these egg-headed fools make a profit at the expense of
and not in the interest of the masses of the people.
Since most of the people that attend the medical clinic in Jamaica are on medicaid and the government backs medicaid. We know that the government knows what is happening in all the
medical clinics or most of them because the treatments have been reported to the board of health, and they are lying punks if they say that they do not know.
The Black Panther Party has gone forth to set up free community health centers all over America to serve the interest of all oppressed people, to give medicine back to the people which
means that medicine will serve the people instead of the greedy medical institutions.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE!
FREE HUEY
FREE CHAIRMAN BOBBY
John Thomas
Jamaica N.C.C.F.
-- 9 --
3:15 P .M., THURSDAY, APRIL 9, 1970
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
30 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 31 ---
Three young brothers, Carlos Jackson, age 14, ‘Stickey’ Dwayne McCain, age 14, and Adolph Booth, age 12, were riding their bicycles east on Bissell Avenue. When they reached 7th
Street, Adolph asked Peter, a 9 year old Chicano brother, for a nickle. Peter said he didn't have one, so Adolph said "I can dig it", and kept on going. At this point Carlos, Stickey and
Adolph were still standing there and an old ‘lady’ came out of her house, stared at the brothers for a moment, turned and went into her backyard and returned with a stick. Feeling armed
enough, the little old lady began to threaten the brothers saying. "You better not fall in my bushes or I'll kill you." The brothers started to explain that they were sorry if they had done
something to her. The racist little old lady retorted. "I don't give a care if you do say sorry, it ain't gonna help me none. Do you know how old I am?, I'm eighty (80) years old. I'll beat your
butts, you Black NIGGERS." She then hit Adolph with the stick. Stickey couldn't just stand by and see his brother beat like he was a dog, so Stickey grabbed the stick and told the little old
lady. "Don't be hitting us ‘cause we didn’t bother you." The brothers, fed up with all this madness, went across the street to the basketball court in order to prevent those well known
occupying forces (pigs) from jacking them up for something that wasn't their fault.
At 3:30 p.m. the brothers were playing around in the court, two ‘men’ approached them and asked which one hit the lady. Stickey explained that no one touched her, but that he would
apologize if it would make her feel any better. At that time -- up pops the fascist pigs|
Acting in the manner of true red, white and blue fascists, they jumped out of their cars and dashed over to the little old lady and the brothers discussing the incident. Ray Edmerson was in
front of the Black Panther Party office, located on 6th and Bissell Avenue, and could see the trouble developing. Ray walked up to 7th and Bissell to investigate. Joe Cuba went with him.
When Joe and Ray arrived on the set, Ray began to expose the pigs and their occupation of the Black community. These racist pigs couldn't stand it -- they went crazy.
First they snatched Ray and bent his arm up behind his back (all the way to his neck), handcuffed him and then viciously choked him. The people there could easily see that Ray could
hardly breathe as the crazy pigs dragged him off to the car. On seeing this act of fascist brutality, Joc, not being a member of that silent majority, attempted to pull the pig off Ray. The pig
threw Ray in the front seat and smashed his head on the steering wheel.
Having gotten rid of one of them ‘crazy niggers’, both pigs combined their efforts and vamped on Joe. In a continuous cycle, the pigs began beating Joe all about the head and body with
their sticks. They threw Joe in the back seat and with the same viciousness, the pigs turned on brother Stickey, who was standing, saying "Isn't someone going to help?" -- they drew their
sticks back and hit Stickey very hard on the head. By the time the pigs quit hitting the brother, he was almost unable to stand up and they literally threw him in the back seat. Stickey's
sister, Debra, was also arrested for telling the little old lady not to hit her brother.
At this point, everyone sort of broke up, frustrated and angry, and walked down to the People's office (Black Panther Party office). We could see that the pigs had completely blocked off
the entire area and had other cruisers in the area riding rough-shod on the people. One of the ‘cruising’ pigs pulled around the corner just as Adolph picked up his bat and showing his true
pig nature, the pig stopped. This foolish pig thought he could throw Adolph into the car right in front of the People's office. The people were already angry at these obscene pigs and
everyone had massed together and because of their united front, the buffoon pig had to let Adolph return to his people.
How much longer are we going to allow these intruders, full of hate and practicing fascism, to ride around our communities, feeling safe and free to attack us whenever they see fit? The
fascist pigs are racist fools, evil ‘men’, that must be dealt with by the armed people. There is no other way for us to rid ourselves and all of humanity of those ‘people’ that have no respect
for the rights of human beings.
We're tired of these fascist dogs kicking down our doors, murdering our children in the streets, assaulting women with unborn life in their stomachs. All the atrocities that we, as a people
have suffered and yet survived, for four-hundred years, can no longer be allowed to continue -- "WE'LL HAVE TO GET GUNS AND BE MEN."
WE HA VE TO FIGHT TO LIVE
Richmond Branch
Black Panther Party
IF THE CHAIRMAN IS
BOUND UP TIGHT WE'LL
HOLD BACK THE NIGHT
AND THERE WON'T BE
NO LIGHTS FOR DAYS
-- 9 --
THE BIG LIE
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
31 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 32 ---
It is and always has been the interest of the Black Panther Party to work for and with the people for the best that human technology can produce. Along with the people here in Mount
Vernon, we are on the move for decent housing fit for shelter of human beings. If the landlord of this community will not give to our people decent housing, then they (the houses) should
become the people's and the people can move on getting government aid, so that the community can build decent housing for the people.
The government has this big lie called Urban Renewal, but we know it to be "Nigger Removal". It has been proven through-out Westchester county, and across this country, that the
government's only interest is to build up big businesses so that they can keep the economy going. They promise the people decent housing and in return give them nothing but a few
high-rise buildings that in no way meet the needs of the people for decent housing, in order to keep the niggers pacified while they hide behind the ‘big lie’ of improving the city to make it
more livable and rid it of the slums and poverty.
But the people are beginning to wake up and are getting hip to the big lie that this racist government has been running down on Black poor and oppressed people for all its history. The
people understand that the government is not moving in their interest and that they are moving to put them out of the rich suburban cities into pig pens, known concentration camps, if they
move to demand decent housing. But the people must realize that they have the power to put a stop to the existing "Big Lie". It is their human right to have the best that humanity can give
and if this racist government won't give it to us then we will have to take what is rightfully ours.
Here in Mount Vernon, the city government has planned to build only 200 units - which added to the 150 units that have already gone up, will in no way meet the basic needs for housing.
Under the different housing programs that the government has on the books, they could build enough houses for the people across this country, but they wouldn't gain or profit too much
from these types of programs. For example there is a program called the "rent subsidy program", which would mean that the government would pay up to 80% of your rent and that a
tenant would only pay 25% of his salary. Another program called "CO-OP" (cooperative housing) would mean that the tenants would have a share of the total building. So we can see from
this that the government's only interest is to build housing from which they can profit.
The people, the masses of oppressed people, can not allow this peek-a-boo game to continue…… decent housing is a basic necessit y. The pigs have proven their unwillingness to deal
with the basic needs of the people and now all the underhanded fools who have been involved and/or supporting the oppression of the masses of people -- the FBI, CIA, mayors and
housing authority officials -- had better face the reality of death as the oppressed rise up and destroy all those who aided in inflicting the centuries of pain which were suffered in silent
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
32 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 33 ---
indignation until the day of days -- the time of revolutionary retribution.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE!
Nat Turner Community Information
Center
Mount Vernon, New York
Rivera States
-- [10] --
BURNING OF THE PANTHER 21 DEFENSE OFFICE AND LAW PAPERS
The contradictions in the American system of justice around the N.Y . Panther 21 frame up have been too much for the N.Y. fascist pigs to stand. For over a year now the racist courts in
N.Y . have been trying to railroad the now 13 members of the Black Panther Party who are accused of the ridiculous "Bomb plot" off into jail forever. Now that the battle in the courts has
reached a degree of higher and more intense reaction on the part of the judge, the prosecution and the Bureau of Special Services, the latter, (B.O.S.S.) has decided to strip the Black
Panther Party of any cohesive and strong defense around the N.Y. Panther 21 case.
In the early morning hours of Sunday, April 12th, 1970, the office housing the Black Panther Party Defense Committee to free the N.Y . 21, and the Law Commune, where the lawyers for
the 21 have their headquarters, almost completely destroyed by fire. Almost all of the Panthers lawyers' legal papers, transcripts and upcoming testimonies were consumed in the flames
set by the fascist pigs. What is even more insidious is that there is good reason to believe that the files containing the real defense were stolen by the pigs before the fire and/or bombing
started.
Extensive damage was reported by Black Panther Party observers on the scene, especially towards the rear of the office, where the Defense Committee was housed. Sound equipment
was destroyed, but not totally; very few items could be salvaged from the building. The fire was so extensive that it was necessary for a four alarm call to be issued before the blaze was
brought under control. Even before all the firemen arrived on the scene, the area cornered off was swarming with B.O.S.S. and F.B.I. pigs. (B.O.S.S. headquarters are across Herald
Square and 14th Street, opposite the Panther Defense Office).
This attempt to sabotage the defense of the N.Y . 21 and thereby limit considerably their ability to combat the forces of the fascist racist state in its attempt to railroad the 21 off into jail did
not succeed. It is true that now our lawyers are deprived of just about all important papers, information painstakingly gathered and equipment, but the Black Panther Party Committee to
Defend the Panther 21 was in the process of moving to a new location; therefore though all of their equipment and books were lost, they at this point at least have a roof over their heads
and space to start anew.
It cannot be glossed over how important it is that we understand the reasons for this slimy attack. The basic reason is that the racist courts in an attempt to implement and enforce the
railroading of the Panther 21 have seen that it is not an easy thing to do when everyone is watching the contradiction in the court room. In order to move these contradictions out of the
courts and into the internal defense of the 21, the pigs have stolen the Panther 21's up and coming defense, and have hidden their foul deed in the smoke of what the fire department
terms "not a suspicious" fire. The implications of this latest attack are tremendous and far reaching, and we do not for one minute doubt that the mass media and the pig police will blame
everyone but the pawns of B.O.S.S. who are responsible for this craven sabotage.
The lawyers for the N.Y. 21 were allowed in the office only after a pig ran around, and one lawyer, Fred Cohn (not on the 21 staff but working out of that office) reported that some of the
files appear to have been sabotaged.
When the 13 Brothers and Sisters returned to court last week, they had creatively illustrated to Black people and generally all the people that their activities in the fascist courts were
disciplined and directed towards the perpetrators of injustice against Black people and geared to expose the pigs' game.
The racist dogs who have consistantly violated the People's rights and have sought to distinguish that violation by separating Panthers from Black people in the 21 case, have seen for
themselves that the only trial that can wholly be in the benefit of the Pig Power structure is one where the Panthers are not present in the court room to protest their railroading. Realizing
this, the 21 have moved in a Revolutionary fashion to educate Black People about American justice and its racist nature. Because the Black Panther Party has sought to mobilize people
around these contradictions in the Black community, the contradictions in the courts had to be clear and direct. It is for this reason the Brothers and Sisters jailed have allowed the pigs
enough rope to hang themselves. But in this particular slimy incident in a whole chain of events surrounding the 21 case, the fascists groveling dogs who function in the machinery of
-- [11] --
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
33 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 34 ---
repression have directed their activity towards the White radicals who have sought to organize and mobilize various levels of the racist mother country around the same contradictions-the
issue of Black Political Prisoners and the war being waged against Black people by the fascist racist reactionary government. If the recent fire bombing of the Black Panther Party's
Defense Committee and the legal office were not totally successful, it is because of the utter stupidity on the part of the pigs as to the Revolutionary self-dependability of the People's
struggle. We will not sit quietly by and be railroaded, nor will we allow the foul degenerate hyenas who seek to create ripe conditions to do this get away with their treatment of all political
prisoners. This is but a small aspect of the unfolding picture of American Fascism, but if the pigs persist we will put the Panther 21 defense in the streets of Babylon and set ourselves free.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE Dharuba
"The dignity and beauty of man rests in the human spirit which makes him more than simply a physical being. This spirit must ne ver be suppressed for exploitation by
others. As the people recognize the beauty of their human spirits and move against suppression and exploitation, they will be c arrying out one of the most beautiful ideas
of all time. Because the human whole is much greater than the sum of its parts. The ideas will always be among the people."
HUEY P. NEWTON
-- 12 --
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF THE COLONY
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
34 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 35 ---
Date: April 8th, Wednesday
Time: night-time
CHARACTERS INVOLVED:
NIGGER ………youthful Ricardo Smacks (Carlos)
pig #1: ……………White  racist pig
pig #2: ……………Whi te racist
pig #3: ……………American nigger pig
…and the over-familiar scene again unfolds, like a movie where you can easily guess the ending. Where the cats in the White hat s run rings around the hairy, filthy, onery ‘Black barts’ in
the cowboy flicks……
Only this is for real.
Carlos is another nigger on a South Philly block where the gestapo plays their games - "GENOCIDE" (made in U.S.A.).
Why must it be said that he is 16? Where is the importance? Would a world of difference be made if I said he was an ebony elder, an old Black man, of 61, or 37? We Black people having
been faced with countless cases of legal murders, street executions, by the racist pig police and their lackies, know that things will get a lot worse before they get better. And that the only
insurance that we have is the blackprint of self defense. That every Black home equip itself with 12-gauge shotgun security, and 45 self defense. We remember the Joey Brooks'; the
Harold Brown's, even if you appear to have forgotten.
We will either rewrite the racist script, or we will blow up/burn down, the decadent theatre which insists upon showing that murderous flick. We intend to put the Indians where the
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
35 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 36 ---
Cowboys were.
The scales have been tipped, in fact, tugged, against us from way back. White racist America must not for a single moment believe that the manifesto (about Chairman Bobby) relates only
to Bobby. Every Black man is our Bobby, and the pigs must suffer the same relentless rebuttal from us for executing him as for any of us.
The Philly fascist faggots have, after Harold Brown and Joey Brooks, found it easier to slide into the colony with "nigger tickets", Black pigs, thinking that the brothers and sisters wouldn't
get uptight if it was a "brother". Well, pain is pain, torture is torture, and murder is murder, a pig is a pig. And the bullets that await the night raiders will effect the Black nigger bootlickers,
the endorsed spokesmen, in the same meaningful manner.
A people who have suffered so much for so long at the hands of a racist society, must draw the line somewhere. We believe that the Black communities of America must rise
up as one man to halt the progression of a trend that leads inevitably to their total destruction.
Huey P. Newton Minister of Defense Black Panther Party
‘What do we do?’ is the major 1619 -to- 1970 question, which we can no longer ask Malcolm. The answer lies in doing what we wish to do, what we must do…doing it! For Joey Brooks,
Harold Brown, and Ralph Feather stone and all our Black dead-
"Upwards to 20,000,000 Black people, knowing you for the rotten, racist, murdering nation of White thievish hypocrites that you are, are no longer interested in explaining anything to you,
America. Indeed, we understand that you already know what it's about. We know that your investigations into the disorders are just a bunch of maneuvers designed to give you time while
you multiply and perfect your machinery of repression, which you have already unleashed upon us. In fact, your investigators themselves are amongst your chief and shrewdest criminals."
To you, the House of Babylon, the international rapist, and universal criminal, our promise is "Bigger and better fires, one flame for all America, an all American flame."
Quotes by Eldridge Cleaver, Minister of Information.
In the base of Ricky Smacks, a nigger "Guardian of the Law" and "Peace Officer', Owens, pulled the trigger that now leaves Carlos hospitalized in critical condition.
Read the 7th point of the 10 Point Program of our Party written in the back. Then read "WHA T WE BELIEVE."
The fateful list of fascism grows longer. How many more Black names need be added?
I for one, feel like putting down the pen……
LET'S WRITE EPITAPHS, FOR
PIGS.
Mumia
Philadelphia Branch
BLACK PANTHER PARTY
-- 12 --
HUNTER'S POINT: CLARENCE BEAVER IS BEING SOUGHT BY PIGS FOR ATTEMPTED SHOOTING OF PIG
RODGERS: THE PEOPLE ESTABLISH A LEGAL DEFENSE FUND
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
36 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 37 ---
The people of Hunter's Point Bayview area have come together to try to find methods of dealing with some of the acts of fascism that are being practiced on the people of the area.
The Bay view area has been under attention of the city fathers, who since the 1967 ‘riot’ have been putting money, lackey niggas specifically, in the area; finally they have resorted to their
last hold-gestapo pig forces. The Bayview Hunter's Point area is a small community of potential revolutionaries and the pigs know this. All of their methods of persuasion have failed and
the people are now getting hip to their games - they are desperate to maintain control. In recent months there have been several shootings, arrests and general harrassments….the most
recent being the death of Miles Beaver by an off duty policeman. This was compounded by the attempted killing of one Adam Rogers, who is the mayor's spokesman in the area. Rogers
accused Beaver's brother and brother-in-law, who was shot to death on an airplane with mystery surrounding that so-called accident. Clarence Beaver is being sought by the pigs now for
supposedly taking part in this attempted shooting of Rogers.
All of this was too much for the people of the Hunter's Point area and they have now set about moving on getting some of their questions answered and taking positive action to inform and
involve all of the people of the area into getting the gestapo police forces and some of these nigga lackeys, out of their community.
The organizing of a small group of interested people is now in progress to help gather funds if Clarence Beaver is caught and legal defense is needed. Now the group has enlarged to get
together a Hunter's Point - Bayview legal defense fund for the people in their community.
The points that were discussed at the meeting last Thursday dealt with things the people have been confronted with by the police, such as: 1, off duty policemen with guns 2. the use of
the tactical squad in the area 3. the report of certain ex-cons with guns and their being friends with Mayor Alioto(namely Adam Rogers) 4. the uncle toms and traitors in the community 5.
most important of all, to establish a legal defense fund.
The meetings are open to the public and all are welcomed to come out on Thursday nights at 7:30 PM to Double Rock Baptist Church at Lane and Shafter Streets. These people are in
need of money, materials and most important your support and turn outs at the meetings.
The Black Panther Party has always worked with any progressive people of the communities to help educate and exchange knowledge. We welcome these people of the Hunter's Point
Bayview area for their courage to step into the struggle for liberation. There will be many things developing from this group and some of these things will be in line with certain programs
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
37 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 38 ---
we in the Party have been working on for some time: community control of police and not just the hiring of Black guards to patrol the streets, a legal defense fund for the people, and
another group to work against fascism.
We urge others to organize and form such groups in the country, for only with the strength in numbers can we begin to fight, at first perhaps at a community level, but then, city, state and
nation wide. It is necessary that we get out information to the people about what is happening in the community for too many brothers and sisters are being taken from us every day and no
one knows about it until it is too late to effectively help them. So look around and find someone to work with, there are problems wherever Black people are on the face of this earth, B.C.
Hunter's Point Community Center
-- 12 --
People's Free Festival In San Francisco
On Saturday, April 11, the people of the Black community of San Francisco came out to take part in the "People's Free Festival" which was sponsored by the Black Panther Party.
The festival began at 11:00 a.m. with an art exhibit of revolutionary art by the Minister of Culture of the Black Panther Party, Emory Douglas. Countless people - mothers, fathers, sisters,
and brothers-stopped by the office to view the exhibit.
As the morning progressed some members of the Party were engaged in moving equipment and materials from the office onto Kimble Field where the second part of the Festival was to
take place. Brothers and Sisters from the community joined in with preparing the park, as well as cooking, serving and anything else that needed doing. A truck was needed to help move
stage equipment onto the field; a brother gladly volunteered himself and his truck to help with getting the People's Free Festival together.
At 1:00 p.m. the second part of the Festival began, which included local Black entertainers bringing a musical message to their people. There were also "Off The Pig" games for the
children and of course, FREE FOOD. The people started pouring into Kimble Field like a magnetic force was drawing them there.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
38 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 39 ---
One of the things that blew my mind was the youth; the young brothers and sisters who were boiling over with enthusiasm as they participated in the "Off The Pig" games. There were
cartoon pictures of local and national pigs glued onto empty milk cartons, the children would be given tennis balls as ammunition, when they knocked off a local pig, they got a small bag of
cookies, but if they knocked off a national pig like Richard (pig) Nixon they got a whole cake.
There were also tables set up with boxes of free clothing for the people. Brothers and sisters from the community without being asked manned the tables and passed out free clothing to
the people. The food hit the tables about 2:00 and sisters from the community just walked up and started serving the people, without having to be asked. I know because I was in charge of
the food operation and I didn't pick them out to serve, they selected themselves, and it was beautiful. There was a kind of ‘picnic feeling’ in the air. The people knew it was their festival and
they acted like it.
Granny Goose and the Soul Chips (a local entertainment group) was jamming hard and heavy as two beautiful Black sisters ‘got down’ on stage the latest dances in the Black community.
The people were jammed around the stage, as well as in small groups talking, greeting old friends and meeting other people for the first time. As the day got older it became increasingly
clear that the festival was not only a success but that this was only the beginning, that this type of approach to closing the communications gap in the Black community is very functional
and that it should continue. For the People's Free Festival manifested "socialism" in every sense of the word. When the Black Panther Party speaks of socialism it simply means a state
where the masses of people actively take part and share in all functions and programs and projects in the community rights even to the functions and policies of the people's government.
It is one of the tasks of the Vanguard Party to create programs that the people can actively take part in by furthering the development of their consciousness and guiding them on the path
of revolutionary struggle and victory. As the Chief of Staff, David Hilliard said one day, "Every program or gathering sponsored by the Black Panther Party will be in essence a P.E. (political
education) class for the people." And the subject of the P.E. class on April 11th
-- 13 --
at Richard Kimble Field was socialism.
After the field events had concluded the people disassembled the stage, loaded the parts on the truck and took them back to the office. They took the tables down, picked up the garbage
and loaded and unloaded until the field was cleared. There were three sisters who worked hard all day in the kitchen of the Black Panther office keeping food hot for the people at the
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
39 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 40 ---
park.
At 6:00 p.m. revolutionary movies were to be shown a half-block from the office. The people were on hand, the youth in particular, and the festival came to a close with a strong voiceful
"ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE", by the youth.
The Black Panther Party will continue to meet the basic needs and desires of the people. There is no power on the face of the planet earth strong enough to seperate the Party from the
people. Because the Party is one with the people. Black people will have their freedom or the earth will be leveled by our attempts to gain it.
CHAIRMAN BOBBY MUST NOT BE KILLED
SEIZE THE TIME
Wilbur Powe
-- 13 --
THE QUESTION: WHY DID I LIE ABOUT WEARING A WIG?
I've had a chance to think about things since the question arose, mostly about what I was doing before I got into the Party, why I joined, whatever changes I went through while I was in the
Party and the prospect of being out I've read and re-read Cet's (Michael Tabor's) article on "Capitalism Plus Dope Equals Genocide'. There's something Afeni once told me about the "21"
when I was going through pressure changes back in New York; She said that when she got into the Party she was a fool, she'd searched and searched for a long time for a way to help
her people but she was a fool. The "21" taught her how to love.
I'm a fool, I admit it. If I wasn't I never would have lied about a thing as foolish as a wig (it didn't seem foolish before-it was on my head I considered it my hair-at least until my own hair grew
out and I couldn't understand why people continued to ask me about it). I didn't even like to think that I had one on. It reminded me of unsolved contradictions between myself and my
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
40 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 41 ---
mother that bothered me since I didn't have the nerve to go back home, listen to her talk me down for an entire night and then not listen to anything I had to say. I was in the hospital for
three weeks after that operation for blood clots resulting from knots on the head given me by her and once by my father. I didn't have to be there for three weeks-I complained and got to
stay longer for I didn't want to go home. It made no difference -- she was at the hospital nagging me daily, saying that I was lucky that she was coming everyday because if she didn't, the
nurses would just let another nigger die.
So I didn't like to think about the wig. Panther members who knew me well in New York watched me go through a lot of changes since I first joined niggers made fun of the way I talked, (I
tried talking different but it only made my comrades laugh more). The words "petty bourgeosie" were really taken out of context, and I really didn't learn the correct way of using it in regard
to people's behavior until I came out here. When T.C. ran up to me and asked me about that wig, he told me that I was bourgeois for wearing one I jumped reactionary and said that it was
my hair.
I wish that June would have told me that he wanted to know for serious reasons; people knew back in New York, but I was constantly getting teased about it, especially by Zayd.
I love the Party. Cet says in his article that Black people in this society are "self-destructive". I could relate to that well. I graduated high school at fifteen only by trying to kill myself
studying. I've been on this break neck course trying to beat the tracking system since the age of three-yes three. I learned to read when I was 2 1/2 and I've been going through hard times
in the educational system ever since. When I got to college and was exposed to some decent political education I couldn't deal with the contradiction. Here I was busting my head trying to
succeed in a system thinking that all Black needed was a good education and everything would be alright. Ha, Ha, Ha! Armed struggle and revolution dawned on me - while I was reading
French literature I should have been reading the Catechism of the Revolutionist, while I was taking up Karate (which was only to impress my boyfriends) I should have been learning how
to deal with the pigs. My head couldn't deal with all this revolutionary theory. I saw that the student "rebels" at Cornell weren't sincere and I dropped out of school on a leave of absence
and tripped. I tripped through a job, being super hip, and two Black psychiatrists who told me to go back to school and marry a "nice middle-class Black professional". I was a "blippy", and
this era ended in a suicide attempt. I couldn't take the pressure. My mother, my so-called ‘friends’ and the fact that repression was coming down hard on my people and I wasn't doing
anything about it made no sense to be a peace loving little "V-sign" hippy. LSD wasn't changing the world and neither was a lot of talk. I had read about the Black Panther Party before in
the White Media but I was really impressed by an article written by the Minister of Defense, Huey P. Newton, in the August '69 issue of Ebony. All other so-called "Black Power"
organizations seemed to be a lot of Dashikis and hot air. I didn't trust them since the murder of Bunchy and John: I didn't know much about the US organization then-only about LeRoi
Jones since we'd had his works read in school and Grove Press who I was working for at the time published his books but but my first reaction was - how can one Black group murder
members of another? We're all Black (I was really naive-unaware) I couldn't understand so I chalked up all dashiki fools as Uncle Toms and I never went on a culture thing, also because I
couldn't see hating Whites and loving Blacks indiscriminately. The Party was and is the only avenue open to anyone who wants to make this decaying society into a people's society.
There's nothing else to belong to from Y.S.A. to the Communist Party. I've been trying hard not to mess up since I know that the Panther Party has the correct line. The first week I was a
nervous wreck because I got sick and missed a Political Education class. I knew that P.E. classes were mandatory and I thought I'd get kicked out. I was going through very heavy changes
during the two week period before I got here. Why? Because I was not handling information properly -- I didn't know what I was doing, and it was blowing me very badly. Personal things
were creeping in and out. I do need help. I've been too liberal with myself to just come out to the Central Committee and ask questions about socialism and comradely behavior. I had
planned to find this all out when I came here in order to become a better Panther and really appreciate the Party as my family since it's the only one I can relate to. ALL POWER TO THE
PEOPLE! Stephania Tyson
-- 13 --
COMMUNITY WORKER GETS BEA T BY TWO FASCISTS
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
41 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 42 ---
On March 27, 1970, at about one o'clock in the afternoon, Ronald Hester was standing on the corner of 8th and 7th Avenue selling the Panther Newspaper.
In Ronald's own words this is what happened:
"I went over to this man and asked him if he wanted a Panther paper: the man said, "No, I don't want that shit". So I walked away. Then I started talking to a woman and the same man
came over again and told me I couldn't talk to the woman. When I continued to talk, he stepped in front of me and hit me. I defended myself, and we started fighting. Then another man
came up behind me and grabbed me. The first man then hit me in my face, then they both ran. The police finally came, but they didn't bother about looking for the two men, even after
people in the crowd offered to tell them where the men went. Although the hospital (St. Vincents) in New York on 11th Street and 5th Avenue) is only four or five blocks away from where I
was, it took the ambulance quite a while to get there. When the ambulance did get there, the police were grabbing on me and handling me very roughly (showing they could care less, how
hurt I was). The two men who beat me up looked like they beloaged to the mafia."
The brother has a busted lip and had to have some stitches in his upper lip; his left eye is swollen. But being the strong brother he is, he was back out among the masses by that same
afternoon.
This kind of brutality is not unusual in this fascist city of New York or in this racist fascist country of America. As long as the people refuse to face objective reality and pretend these things
aren't happening, then they'll go on. These racist pigs will go as far as the people will let them go. The people are going to have to get hip to the fact that these fascist racist pigs are
committing genocide on the Black people; if Black people don't unite as one Black mass and come together to let these fools know that we will not tolerate any more of these unjust
murders, like Fred Hampton: that we will not tolerate any more of this railroading of our brothers and sisters through court as they are doing the New York 21, with our Chairman Bobby
Seale, the Milwaukee 3 and all the other brothers and sisters who were working to show the people, the correct way, then there will be no end to these atrocities.
Only as a united force of one will the people be able to stop what is happening here in America, only as one great force can the people change the American system of ‘for a few, by a few,
of a few’, to ‘for the people, of the people and by the people’ -- ALL THE PEOPLE!!
Do it now, cause tomorrow may be too late!
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
42 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 43 ---
Lauryn Williams
Information
Harlem Branch
Black Panther Party
-- 13 --
OPEN LETTER TO THE CONTRACT BUYERS LEAGUE
The Contract Buyers League is a group of Black homeowners who have been wit holding payments from the avaricious sellers, Universal Builders, for more than 6 months. They have
now been evicted by Sayers Woods and his gestapo forces.
Brothers and Sisters:
In more than a week, more than 20 of your members have been invaded and seized by the same occupying, terroristic, military forces that have embarked upon missions of aggression
and war against members of the Black Panther Party and their families. As a result of one of these missions, our Deputy Chairman, Fred Hampton and Defense Captain, Mark Clark were
murdered. These vicious, fascist, murdering pigs, under the camouflage of "law and order", denied you the basic right of having a home.
It is time for you to recognize the relationship between the oppressor and the oppressed: The oppressed are at war with the oppressor: therefore, the rules or laws that the oppressors
spout do not relate to the oppressed in any manner. The avaricious, greedy businessmen, Universal Builders, the demagogic, lying politician, the Richard J. Daley's, and the racist,
murdering pig cops, Judge Jacob Woods, have carefully drawn up the battle plans for the attack upon your homes. Each time there are pigs at your doorstep, armed with the tools of war
and ready for battle, we must recognize this fact. The "seek and destroy" missons have forced you to the point of decision. You must defend your doorstep.
You have worked many years, sacrificed many privileges, shed many tears so that you might have a home of your own. You have been gypped. Now you must fight many battles, kill many
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
43 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 44 ---
troops, die many deaths.
We, Black people, have been systematically denied a rewarding, fruitful life; therefore, for our dignity, we will die a meaningful death -- the death of the oppressed, rising up with guns to
annihilate the oppressor.
Bobby Rush
Deputy Minister of Defense
Illinois Chapter
Black Panther Party
-- 14 --
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS TO KIM IL SUNG
There are two basic reasons why an individual's birthday is commemorated; one, that the person is close to you, being a relative or dear friend, and the other, that you have come to
admire this person from afar because of his great work and service to the people of the country and/or the world. If this closeness or admiration does not exists, then that individual's
birthday really will mean little. Black Americans have chosen to celebrate the birthday of Malcolm X, as our slain leader and as the beginning of our long journey from mental slavery to
thoughts of freedom and liberation, and the birthday of Huey P. Newton, the Minister of Defense of the Black Panther Party, as the man who stepped forward, picked up a gun putting
Malcolm's philosophy into effect and bringing Black people in this country to a new level, a point in time where freedom and the struggle to gain that freedom became the obsession of the
broad masses of people. We, as a people, have chosen to celebrate the birthdays of these two brothers who have given up everything in their tireless service…they are close to us,
related to us, but they are also loved for their service.
It has been only of late that we have come to know the truth about the 40 million Korean people and their illustrious leader, Comrade Kim Il Sung, However, in this short period of time, we
have developed a strong feeling of comradeship and profound respect for the people of the Democratic Republic of Korea and their leader. We have come to respect and feel the bonds of
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
44 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 45 ---
revolutionary love for the nation of people who have met and defeated U.S. imperialism on the battlefield, and have gone forth further to complete feats that could be considered
miraculous in the short period of time that they have undertaken the work of socialist construction. Our enemy is the same: the imperialist forces that oppress the people of the world. We
have since our "discovery" come to realize the beauty and complicity of the revolutionary Marxist-Leninist theory advanced by the leader of the Democratic Peoples Republic of
Korea…theory that has given us insight and added to the body of Marxist-Leninist theory for the revolutionary peoples of the wo rld. The concept of Juche advanced by Comrade Kim Il
Sung has added new dimensions to our understanding and knowledge of revolutionary theory and tactics. Armed with the revolutionary concept of juche, we can advance more confident
and assured of the correctness of our position.
Then it is with an admiration for his work and the closeness of spirit that exists between revolutionaries that we bring attention to the birthday of the courageous leader of the 40 million
fighting people of Korea. We salute this great man, the Sun of the Republic of Korea, on his birthday. We send our heart-felt greetings and our wishes for long years of continued victories
against the treacherous American foes and all their lackeys…our two peoples fighting together, the people of America from within and the heroic people of Korea from the outside, will
along with all progressive peoples of the world see an end to the reign of terror that America has enjoyed at the expense of the world and all its citizens.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE
ALL ANTI-IMPERIALIST FORCES OF THE WORLD UNITE TO BRING DEATH TO THE BLOOD SUCKING DOGS THAT LIVE OFF THE PEOPLE OF THE WORLD
WE WILL TRIUMPH
BLACK PANTHER PARTY
-- 15 --
STOCKADE REVOLT BY MANNHEIM G.I.'S
MANNHEIM, West Germany (LNS) -- Another Army stockade has broken out in rebellion. About 100 GI inmates of the Mannheim. West Germany. U.S. Army stockade broke out of their
cell blocks on March 13, set fire to stockade buildings -- demolishing a number of cell blocks, the stockade chapel and some administrative offices and fought a two-hour battle with MPs
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
45 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 46 ---
and confinement officers.
While one group of prisoners fought with MPs, another ran through cells blocks A and C with keys they had taken from an overpowered guard, releasing the long-term prisoners confined
there. Out in the stockade yard, the rebels built a barricade out of overturned bunks and defended it for hours against MPs and German Army troops -- sent in as reinforcements by the
brass -- before they were finally subdued.
The Army has tried its best to put a news blackout on the rebellion. When this became impossible, they released a statement admitting that there had been a "disturbance" in the stockade,
but refused to give any details. Establishment media coverage of the rebellion has been almost nonexistent.
The Army has not yet pressed charges but, as in previous stockade rebellions, they are trying to pick out some scapegoats. Army Criminal Investigation Division (CID) agents are
questioning participants. GIs inside the stockade tell us that prisoners who "cooperate" with the Army, making statements incriminating their brothers, are allowed to return to their normal
cell blocks while others are sent to "the box" -- a six-foot-square cage with six or more men in each. Word from inside the stockade is that most of the GIs are not succumbing to this tactic.
One GI told of CID's efforts to threaten him into naming one person responsible for the revolt. "I told the ‘Man, I was evacuating a burning building.’"
Another GI participant in the rebellion managed to smuggle out the following account of the events:
On Friday the 13 of March, a group of turnkeys, taking part in their nightly recreation, pulled a brother out of his cell and beat him brutally. In another cell-block turnkeys were hassling
brothers trying to go on medication call. Five months ago, a brother was dragged out of his cell and the next morning he was found dead. The officials claim he hung himself. His cellmates
know otherwise. The guy had 36 hours left in the pound and his friends heard him scream out for help.
This time the GIs at Mannheim were not going to let his happen. With bunk adapters, sticks, and clubs taken from the pigs, we seized the time and over 90 Black and White GIs were out
of their cells, liberating our brother cellmates. THE PEOPLE WERE SWINGING AND THE PIGS WERE SWAYING.
We ripped down the tear gas cannisters from our cells and tossed them at the pigs. Anything we could find -- shoes, cans, chairs, desks, fire extinguishers, cell-doors. Four times the
turnkeys came back down the halls and four times they picked up tails and oinked back to cover. We set afire barricades of bunks and mattresses and then outside reinforcements came --
Germanriot squads with tear gas, MPs with guns, firemen with hoses -- and drove us out into the courtyard.
We were made to stand at attention for two hours. One brother collasped and the pigs went in on him with more brutality. Finally they had to take this unconscious brother to the
dispensary. All others standing were denied medical attention, which some needed badly. Finally the pigs threw everyone into solitary confinement blocks. Blocks 5x8x8, with more than six
men in each block. All of us were stripped and watered down and afterwards they threw garbage on us. The MPs opened the windows and turned off the radiators, so we had to stay in
the wet and cold all night and day. They estimated over $45,000 worth of damage was done to the stockade. The stockade chapel, some offices, and military files were destroyed.
The turnkeys had a difficult time getting outside reinforcements. At 2 a.m. they attempted to round up guys to help "protect the stockade." One GI who was alerted shouted, "If you don't
want another riot right here, you'd better get out. I'm not gonna put down my brothers!"
The Mannheim stockade rebellion follows similar outbreaks at Fort Dix, NJ (where 150 took part); Presidio, Calif.; Fort Carson, Colo; Fort Riley, Kansas; Long Binh stockade in Vietnam
(affectionately referred to as LB Jail by GIs) and Nuremburg, Germany where last month over 50 of the 100 prisoners revolted.
-- 15 --
G.I.'S who expose war crimes jailed… My Lai killers go free…
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
46 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 47 ---
The Brass have jailed four of our brothers for attempting to expose the crimes of the Pentagon pigs against the Vietnamese people.
On January 12, Ft. Gordon GI's, PFC Larry Czaplyski, PFC Dick Horner, PFC Tim Johnson and PFC Terry Kline, issued a leaflet announcing the formation of a ‘GI War Crimes
Commission,’ which intends to collect, screen and document evidence of U.S. war crimes in Vietnam for eventual presentation to the War Crimes Tribunal in Paris. The main source of
evidence will come from the experiences of Vietnam veterans.
The purpose of the Commission, according to the leaflet, is "to get across the fact that Songmy wasn't an isolated incident and that genocide against the Vietnamese people is an
everyday occurrence."
After they appeared at a Jan. 13 radio interview, they were harassed by Military Intelligence and physically threatened by the lifer pigs in their units. On Jan. 16, the Brass arrested the four
and filed charges against them alleging promotion of "disloyalty and disaffection among the troops' and "unauthorized distribution of printed matter."
We plan to fight this as far as necessary," said PFC Horner. "It is our right to do what we have done and the fact that the Army has moved so swiftly to smash us indicates that they have
quite a bit to hide and are afraid that our Commission will uncover something."
reprinted from The Bond
-- 15 --
REVOLUTION 1970
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
47 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 48 ---
We are a group of active-duty GI's - Black, White, Brown, and Red. We are organized to fight for our rights in the military and also for oppressed people all over the United States and the
world. We are a movement called MDM. What is MDM? It is a Movement for a Democratic Military. And we are going to win the battle against the racist and fascists that control the
government and the military today.
These pigs call themselves leaders. Can you call these pigs leaders when all they do is rob the people of their rights, cause unrest in our Black and White communities, pay the people
skimpy wages, and then take a large part of this for their stupid and unjust war in Vietnam? That pig that calls himself the President of the United Stated sits on his big behind all of the
time and then the fool has nerve enough to take a long weekend at the Florida White House. Why does he take these vacations? Because he is tired of telling the nation lies, and has to
take a rest to think up more promises of peace which he has no intention of bringing.
People are starting to wake up to reality. They are forming a people's army because they are sick and tired of being harassed. They are going to destroy the ruling class.
People of all races should stop the violence among themselves and think for a while about who their real enemy is….the pigs in Washington.
That is the civilian side of MDM.
This is a message to all shuffies on Camp Pendleton. The Marine Corps says it builds men in body, mind, and spirit, but it is not for your good or safety but for theirs. Who gets the profits
out of war? The lifers and pigs do. But it is your blood that is spilled not their's, to keep these pigs in power.
OFF THE PIG
How the Marine Corps builds men….Here's how it really is:
1. They build your body into that of a slave…working to keep their war machine going. And as long as this keeps up, they will b e able to continue the war in Vietnam so they can feed their
piggish faces with all the profits. If they succeed, you can forget the word "peace."
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
48 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 49 ---
2. They say they build men in mind.
They brainwash you telling you that you are the world's finest fighting men. Yes, they do make you the world's best fighting man…to fight amongst yourselves in racial wars that they
instigate. They really build a mind for you not a good mind, but a racist and sadistic one.
3. They say they build men in spirit.
After they get through brainwashing you, you don't have a spirit. You are like a robot that they tell what to do. We don't want to do what they say. We want to do what we, the people, think
is right.
PUT THE PIGS IN THE BRIG!
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE!
Zekchial
Reprinted from ATTITUDE CHECK
-- 15 --
PREVENTATIVE MEDICAL CAMPAIGN WAGED BY PEOPLE'S MEDICAL CARE CENTER
The Spurgeon "Jake" Winters Medical Care Center, 3850 W 16th, initiated a "Preventative Medical Campaign" Saturday 2 weeks ago. Initially the campaign is being waged in the area
around the medical center, on Saturdays. Medical teams, consisting of lab technicians, nurses, doctors, and persons from the community, leave the medical center going from door-to-door
taking urinanalyses and blood pressures. The purpose of such tests is to detect at early stages sugar in urine, lead poisoning, and body deficiences. Other tests are run to give people the
benefit of services in their homes.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
49 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 50 ---
These medical services are free of course, unlike the usual medical attention rendered, but since the opening of the People's Medical Care Center, people in Chicago have experienced
socialistic health service, i.e., medical service at no cost to patients. Regardless of the injunctions placed against the Center, Chicago will continue seeing health service of a socialistic
nature. The People's Medical Care Center is just the embryo that will eventually develop into national health measure of this nature. All concerned and progressive people are being asked
to help speed this development.
ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE
Ill Chapter
Black Panther Party
Chicago, Ill.
-- 15 --
Anna Louise Strong, Noted American Progressive Writer, Dies in Peking
Anna Louise Strong, noted American progressive writer, died of arteriosclerotic heart disease in the evening of March 29 in Peking at the age of 34, after she failed to respond to long
medical treatment.
During her illness, Chou En-lai, Premier of the State Council, Kuo Mo-jo, Vice-Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, as well as comrades and friends
from the United States and other countries who are in Peking had gone to see her at the hospital.
-- 17 --
THE GENIUS OF: Huey P. Newton
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
50 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 51 ---
"Huey P . Newton's thoughts, like his action is clear and precise, cutting always to the very heart of the matter."
Eldridge Cleaver
Minister of Information
Black Panther Party
"Our People's Army should be built up into a revolutionary force equipped with the unfatigable spirit of fighting through thick and thin for the Party, the working class and for the fatherland
and the people, into an iron army each member of which is a match for one hundred enemies, capable of smiting any reckless adventure of the enemy."
Comrade Kim Il Sung
"Drug addiction is a monstrous symptom of the malignancy which is ravaging the social fabric of the capitalist system."
Michael Tabor
N.Y . 21
"This means all of us have this power. But the power only belongs to all of us, not just some or one, but all. And that was the trick. That was the thing we never understood. And that is
what statement these songs make."
Elaine Brown
"We have to use the only power that we have left and that's the power to destroy, the power to disrupt, the power to throw a nigger - wrench into the machinery."
Eldridge Cleaver
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
51 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 52 ---
Minister of Information
Black Panther Party
-- 18 --
RULES OF THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY: NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS BERKELEY , CALIFORNIA
Every member of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY throughout this country of racist America must abide by these rules as functional members of this party. CENTRAL COMMITTEE
members, CENTRAL STAFFS, and LOCAL STAFFS, including all captains subordinate to either national, state, and local leadership of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY will enforce these
rules. Length of suspension or other disciplinary action necessary for violation of these rules will depend on national decisions by national, state or state area, and local committees and
staffs where said rule or rules of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY WERE VIOLATED.
Every member of the party must know these verbatum by heart. And apply them daily. Each member must report any violation of these rules to their leadership or they are counter-
revolutionary and are also subjected to suspension by the BLACK PANTHER PARTY.
THE RULES ARE:
1. No party member can have narcotics or weed in his possession while doing party work.
2. Any party member found shooting narcotics will be expelled from this party.
3. No party member can be DRUNK while doing daily party work.
4. No party member will violate rules relating to office work, general meetings of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY, and meetings of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY ANYWHERE.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
52 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 53 ---
5. No party member will USE, POINT, or FIRE a weapon of any kind unnecessarily or accidentally at anyone.
6. No party member can join any other army force other than the BLACK LIBERATION ARMY.
7. No party member can have a weapon in his possession while DRUNK or loaded off narcotics or weed.
8. No party member will commit any crimes against other party members or BLACK people at all, and cannot steal or take from the people, not even a needle or a piece of thread.
9. When arrested BLACK PANTHER MEMBERS will give only name, address, and will sign nothing. Legal first aid must be understood by all Party members.
10. The Ten Point Program and platform of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY must be known and understood by each Party member.
11. Party Communications must be National and Local.
12. The 10-10-10-program should be known by all members and also understood by all members.
13. All Finance officers will operate under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Finance.
14. Each person will submit a report of daily work.
15. Each Sub-Section Leader Section Leader, Lieutenant, and Captain must submit Daily reports of work.
16. All Panthers must learn to operate and service weapons correctly.
17. All Leadership personnel who expel a member must submit this information to the Editor of the Newspaper, so that it will be published in the paper and will be known by all chapters
and branches.
18. Political Education Classes are mandatory for general membership.
19. Only office personnel assigned to respective offices each day should be there. All others are to sell papers and do Political work out in the community, including Captains, Section
Leaders, etc.
20. COMMUNICATIONS -- all chapters must submit weekly reports in writing to the National Headquarters.
21. All Branches must implement First Aid and/or Medical Cadres.
22. All Chapters, Branches, and components of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY must submit a monthly Financial Report to the Ministry of Finance, and also the Central Committee.
23. Everyone in a leadership position must read no less than two hours per day to keep abreast of the changing political situation.
24. No chapter or branch shall accept grants, poverty funds, money or any other aid from any government agency without contacting the National Headquarters.
25. All chapters must adhere to the policy and the ideology laid down by the CENTRAL COMMITTEE of the BLACK PANTHER PARTY.
26. All Branches must submit weekly reports in writing to their respective Chapters.
-- 19 --
October 1966 Black Panther Party Platform and Program
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
53 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 54 ---
What We Want
What We Believe
1. We want freedom. We want power to determine the destiny of our Black Community.
We believe that black people will not be free until we are able to determine our destiny.
2. We want full employment for our people.
We believe that the federal government is responsible and obligated to give every man employment or a guaranteed income. We believe that if the white American businessmen will not
give full employment, then the means of production should be taken from the businessmen and placed in the community so that the people of the community can organize and employ all of
its people and give a high standard of living.
3. We want an end to the robbery by the CAPITALIST of our Black Community.
We believe that this racist government has robbed us and now we are demanding the overdue debt of forty acres and two mules. Forty acres and two mules was promised 100 years ago
as restitution for slave labor and mass murder of black people. We will accept the payment in currency which will be distributed to our many communities. The Germans are now aiding the
Jews in Israel for the genocide of the Jewish people. The Germans murdered six million Jews. The American racist has taken part in the slaughter of over fifty million black people;
therefore, we feel that this is a modest demand that we make.
4. We want decent housing, fit for shelter of human beings.
We believe that if the white landlords will not give decent housing to our black community, then the housing and the land should be made into cooperatives so that our community, with
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
54 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 55 ---
government aid, can build and make decent housing for its people.
5. We want education for our people that exposes the true nature of this decadent American society. We want education that teac hes us our true history and our role in
the present-day society.
We believe in an educational system that will give to our people a knowledge of self. If a man does not have knowledge of himself and his position in society and the world, then he has
little chance to relate to anything else.
6. We want all black men to be exempt from military service.
We believe that Black people, should not be forced to fight in the military service to defend a racist government that does not protect us. We will not fight and kill other people of color in
the world who, like black people, are being victimized by the white racist government of America. We will protect ourselves from the force and violence of the racist police and the racist
military, by whatever means necessary.
7. We want an immediate end to POLI CE BRUTALITY and MURDER of black people.
We believe we can end police brutality in our black community by organizing black self-defense groups that are dedicated to defending our black community from racist police oppression
and brutality. The Second Amendment to the Constitution of the United States gives a right to bear arms. We therefore believe that all black people should arm themselves for
self-defense.
8. We want freedom for all black men held in federal, state, county and city prisons and jails.
We believe that all black people should be released from the many jails and prisons because they have not received a fair and impartial trial.
9. We want all black people when brought to trial to be tried in court by a jury of their peer group or people from their black  communities, as defined by the Constitution of
the United States.
We believe that the courts should follow the United States Constitution so that black people will receive fair trials. The 14th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution gives a man a right to be
tried by his peer group. A peer is a person from a similar economic, social, religious, geographical, environmental, historical and racial background. To do this the court will be forced to
select a jury from the black community from which the black defendant came. We have been, and are being tried by all-white juries that have no understanding of the "average reasoning
man" of the black community.
10. We want land, bread, housing, education, clothing, justice and peace. And as our major political objective, a United Nation s-supervised plebiscite to be held
throughout the black colony in which only black colonial subjects will be allowed to participate, for the purpose of determinin g the will of black people as to their national
destiny.
When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political hands which have connected them with another, and to assume, among the powers of
the earth, the separate and equal station to which the laws of nature and nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the
causes which impel them to the separation.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness. That, to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed ; that, whenever any
form of government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish it, and to institute  a new government, laying its foundation on
such principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness . Prudence, indeed, will dictate that
governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes; and, accordingly, all experience hath shown, that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are
sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But, when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object,
evinces a design to reduce them under absolute despotism. it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such government, an d to provide new guards for their future
security.
-- [20] --
OUR PEOPLE'S
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
55 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM


--- PAGE 56 ---
"OUR PEOPLE'S
ARMY SHOULD BE
BUILT UP INTO A
REVOLUTIONARY
FORCE EQUIPPED
WITH INDEFA TIGABLE
SPIRIT OF FIGHTING
THROUGH THICK AND
THIN FOR THE PARTY AND
THE PEOPLE INTO AN IRON
ARMY EACH MEMBER OF
WHICH IS A MATCH FOR
  ONE HUNDRED ENEMIES…"
Produced in collaboration with the University of Chicago.
Send mail to 
Editor with questions or comments about this web site.
Copyright © 2009 Alexander Street Press, LLC. All rights reserved.
PhiloLogic Software, Copyright © 2009 The University of Chicago.
Black Thought and Culture http ://solomon.bltc.alexanderstreet.com.proxy2.ulib.iupui.edu/cgi-bin/asp/...
56 of 56 7/2/2011 10:00 AM

