=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Black-Sexual-Politics-African-Americans-Gender-And-the-New-Racism.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 385
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T17:02:52.690870
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
BLACK
SEXUAL
POLITICS


--- PAGE 3 ---



--- PAGE 4 ---
BLACK
SEXUAL
POLITICS
AFRICAN AMERICANS, GENDER,
AND THE NEW RACISM
PATRICIA HILL COLLINS
Routledge
New York & London


--- PAGE 5 ---
Published in 2004 by
Routledge
29 West 35th Street
New York, New York 10001
www.routledge-ny.com
Published in Great Britain by 
Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane
London EC4P 4EE
www.routledge.co.uk
Copyright © 2004 by Routledge
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or here-
after invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage
or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Collins, Patricia Hill.
Black sexual politics : African Americans, gender, and the new racism / Patricia
Hill Collins.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-415-93099-5 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. African Americans—Social conditions—1975- 2. African American men. 3.
African American women. 4. Sex role—United States. 5. African American—Sexual
behavior. 6. African American—Race identity. 7. Racism—United States. 8. United
States—Race relations. 9. Sexism—United States. I. Title.
E185.86.C58167 2004
306.7'089'96073—dc22 2003022841
ISBN 0-203-30950-2 Master e-book ISBN
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2004.


--- PAGE 6 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS vii
INTRODUCTION: NO TURNING BACK 1
PART I
African Americans 
and the New Racism
1 WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS? 25
2 THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT: RECOGNIZING
THE NEW RACISM 53
3 PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR
OUR MINDS: RACISM, HETEROSEXISM, 
AND BLACK SEXUALITY 87
PART II
Rethinking Black Gender 
Ideology
4 GET YOUR FREAK ON: SEX, BABIES, AND IMAGES
OF BLACK FEMININITY 119
5 BOOTY CALL: SEX, VIOLENCE, AND IMAGES OF
BLACK MASCULINITY 149
6 VERY NECESSARY: REDEFINING BLACK GENDER
IDEOLOGY 181
CONTENTS


--- PAGE 7 ---
PART III
Toward a Progressive 
Black Sexual Politics 
7 ASSUME THE POSITION: THE CHANGING
CONTOURS OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE 215
8 NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE: HOW RACE AND
GENDER MATTER 247
9 WHY WE CAN’T WAIT: BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
AND THE CHALLENGE OF HIV/AIDS 279
AFTERWORD: THE POWER OF A FREE MIND 303
NOTES 309
GLOSSARY 349
BIBLIOGRAPHY 353
INDEX 367
vi


--- PAGE 8 ---
I begin by thanking students from the University of Cincinnati
for their support of this project. Special thanks go to the 
students who enrolled in “Seminar in Black Sexual Politics”
and in “Introduction to Black Gender Studies,” two new
courses in which I explored many of the ideas in this book. The
issues in their lives convinced me of the need for this book.
Undergraduate students also greatly helped my thinking about
contemporary hip-hop culture. Several University of
Cincinnati undergraduate student majors and minors in
African American Studies assisted me as student researchers on
various parts of this project. Adetra “Quay” Martin and Tanya
Walker helped me to complete research on films and popular
culture. Special thanks also go to Eric Styles, Kyle Riddle, Terri
Holland, Erin Ledingham, Keith Melson, Khalila Sanders, and
Torrie Wiggins for their insights. 
Graduate students in Women’s Studies and Sociology also
provided important help. Valerie Ruffin made invaluable con-
tributions to this project, both as my research assistant when
she was a student at the University of Cincinnati and as a keen
editorial eye concerning early drafts of this project. Special
thanks also go to Stephen Whittaker for his thorough research
in the literature of masculinities and for reading early drafts of
some of the chapters. Jennifer Gossett, Sarah Byrne, and Jamie
McCauley also shared ideas that improved the final quality of
this manuscript. Vallarie Henderson and Tamika Odum
assisted me with final manuscript preparation.
My University of Cincinnati colleagues also provided
much-needed support for this project. I want to thank Patrice
L. Dickerson for assistance with demographic material and
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


--- PAGE 9 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
William Jackson for his suggestions and critical eye concerning Black film.
I also enjoyed co-teaching “Introduction to Black Gender Studies” with
Marla Frederick and benefited from the insights of Regina Langley. Both
helped me think through ideas concerning race, gender, and religion.
Sharing the ideas in this project with colleagues greatly strengthened
this book. I especially appreciate being invited to participate in two excit-
ing conferences on Progressive Black Masculinitiesheld in 2001 and 2002 at
the Baldy Center at the University of Buffalo Law School. Organized by
Professor Athena Matua, these conferences helped me think through
issues of Black masculinity. Teresa Miller and John Calmore greatly stim-
ulated my thinking on the prison industry and the treatment of African
American men within it. Special thanks to Devon Carbado, Kendall
Thomas, Thomas Glave, Mark Anthony Neal, Beverly Guy-Sheftall,
Bahati Kuumba, and many other conference participants whose thinking
greatly enriched my own. I also want to thank colleagues at other institu-
tions who invited me to present chapters from this manuscript. A partial
list includes Rebecca Walter at George Mason University, Tom Greaves at
Bucknell University, Jeff Schulz at Arcadia University, Diane Vaughn at
Boston College, Gerald Early at Washington University at St. Louis,
Tukufu Zuberi at the University of Pennsylvania, and Tariq Modood at
the University of Bristol, U.K., where I spent a total of four weeks as a vis-
iting professor in January and June of 2002.
In 2002–2003, I spent a year as a visiting professor at the University of
Kentucky, Lexington. The intellectual stimulation that I encountered
there enabled me to finish the manuscript. The support that I received
from everyone was wonderful. My deep thanks go to Mike Nietzel from
the Provost’s Office, Joan Callahan and Debra Harley in Women’s Studies,
and Gerald Smith in African American Studies. University of Kentucky
graduate students read parts of this manuscript and gave me helpful com-
ments. In this regard, special thanks go out to Yaphet Bryant for her edi-
torial comments on chapters dealing with Black popular culture and to
John Youngblood for his insights concerning the Black Church as well as
issues that face gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered Black people. I
also want to thank Rachel Clark, my phenomenal graduate research assis-
tant for the year who gave new meaning to the term “stealth feminist.”
The University of Kentucky and the University of Cincinnati both
helped defray costs associated with this book. The Provost’s Office at the
viii


--- PAGE 10 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
University of Kentucky provided support that helped with the costs of
manuscript preparation. At the University of Cincinnati, the support pro-
vided by the Taft Fund for costs of travel and manuscript preparation has
been invaluable over the years. I also wish to thank Provost Anthony
Perzigian for his tireless support of my scholarship during lean financial
times. The three deans of the College of Arts and Sciences who held
tenure while I completed this project—Joseph Caruso, Chuck Groetsch,
and Karen Gould—also provided encouragement and support.
Administrative and secretarial support also made my life much easier. I
wish to thank Josephine Wynne for her professionalism and her ability to
manage the Department of African American Studies during my tenure as
chair of the department. 
This project would not have come to fruition without the support of
the terrific team at Routledge. Ilene Kalish, my tireless editor at Routledge,
has been with me through this entire project and her enthusiasm (and
energy!) has not waned throughout. I would also like to thank the entire
editorial team who worked on the manuscript, with special thanks to
Kimberly Guinta, Mark Lerner, and Danielle Savin for their invaluable
contributions during the production process. I would also like to thank
Tricia Rose, who read and gave helpful suggestions on the final manu-
script, as well as the anonymous reviewers provided by Routledge.
I also wish to thank my family for their continued backing. My spouse,
Roger and my father, Albert Hill, have been among my strongest and most
consistent supporters. I also want to acknowledge the unconditional love
offered by my two senior cats who kept me company as I wrote.
Finally, I dedicate this book to Valerie, my beautiful and talented
daughter. May the world come to see her and others of her generation as
the hope of our future.
ix


--- PAGE 11 ---



--- PAGE 12 ---
INTRODUCTION
NO TURNING BACK
The spring of 1964 held great promise for African Americans.
On August 28, 1963, a crowd estimated at between 200,000 and
500,000 Americans of all races had marched on Washington,
D.C., petitioning the federal government to make good on its
commitment to equal and fair treatment under the law. As the
largest mass demonstration at that time ever organized by
African Americans, the march made it clear that Black people
were not turning back. Despite the bombing of Birmingham’s
Sixteenth Street Baptist Church that killed four young girls just
two weeks after the march, and the assassination of President
Kennedy the following November, the tide of history was turn-
ing. The passage of momentous civil rights legislation that, for
African Americans, was designed to redress the devastating
effects of slavery and racial segregation was on the horizon. 
That spring, I was a sixteen-year-old high school student in
a college preparatory public high school in Philadelphia. Because,
along with other Black people, my parents had been denied edu-
cational opportunities, they recognized the importance of educa-
tion for African American empowerment. I was one of the many
Black kids who benefited from our parents’ personal sacrifices as
well as broader civil rights struggles. Schooled in this philosophy,
I tried to do everything that I could to be personally excellent.
Almost every day I carried home a pile of heavy textbooks and
almost every night I worked my way through hours of home-
work. School was tough, but I believed that it would be worth the


--- PAGE 13 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
effort. Just like the White girls who attended school with me, I was promised
a bright future, and I wanted to be prepared. 
One day that spring, I took a break from an endless round of studying
and went to the movies. As I sat in the theater waiting for the film to begin,
I could see two twelve- or thirteen-year-old African American boys seated
about three rows ahead of me. Like me, they too had paid their money and
were anxious for the film to begin. But unlike me, they just could not sit still.
One opened the side door of the theater, beckoned to his friend, and both
laughed as they ran back and forth through the theater door. Finally, they
closed the door and sat down. All seemed to be well until a White male usher
who was barely older than me seemed to appear from nowhere. Barreling
down on the two boys, he grabbed each by their shirts, pushed open the side
door of the theater, and threw both of them into the alley. From where I was
seated, I could see into the alley and I watched in amazement as he threw one
boy to the ground and kicked him while shouting, “That’ll teach you not to
sneak in!”
I was shocked by this brutality. How could I sit still and pretend that
nothing had happened? I headed to the back of the movie theater to find
the manager. When I arrived, I found that at least six African American
adults, some older than my parents, had gotten there before me.
Buttonholing the middle-aged White male manager, they began to com-
plain. They too had been watching the boys and vehemently testified that
the boys had done nothing wrong, and certainly nothing that merited that
level of physical and verbal assault. Ignoring them, the manager turned to
his teenaged employee and asked him what had happened. Red-faced and
stammering, the usher denied hurting the boys and, if that were not
enough, claimed that he had seen the boys sneak into the theater. After
hearing his employee’s testimony, the manager turned back to the adults.
“You must have been mistaken,” he flatly stated. He turned his back on all
of us and simply walked away. 
I was shocked yet again. If these Black adults were disbelieved, clearly
I would be too, no matter what my credentials. On that day I learned that,
in some situations, gender, age, social class, and education do not matter if
you are Black. The usher and the movie theater manager could see only
race and their perceptions of race clouded their judgment. I also began to
see how differences among African Americans caused by these very same
factors could lead to differential treatment. The boys were harmed because
2


--- PAGE 14 ---
NO TURNING BACK
they were young, Black, and male—the usher would not have dared to grab
in the same fashion the irate middle-aged Black woman complaining about
the assault. I saw how, in that situation, being young, Black, and female also
meant that my testimony would be routinely ignored, no matter how
impressive my elite high school credentials. Each Black person in that the-
ater had a common struggle, but the form it took differed greatly as well as
our responses to it. As disheartened as I was by the outcome, I’m glad that
I joined the group in the back that complained. Most of the African
Americans in the theater sat quietly by, trying to ignore the confrontation
in the rear of the theater, diligently munching on their popcorn instead. 
That event was one of many that taught me that while good ideas and
solid evidence certainly matter (the kind that I was studying in school), power
relations that elevate some groups over others can matter even more in deter-
mining whose view of truth will prevail. In short, knowledge and power are
deeply linked, and achieving social justice requires attending to both. 
Over the years, in my work as a scholar I have tried to place my work
in service to social justice. For me, this has meant mapping differences in
penalty and privilege that accompany race, class, and similar systems of
social injustice and trying not to elevate one group’s suffering over that of
another. In my first book, Black Feminist Thought, I aimed to foster Black
women’s empowerment by identifying and legitimating Black women’s
intellectual production.
1 I believed then as I do now that people become
empowered when they think and speak for themselves (even if, as was the
case in the theater, they are ignored or disbelieved). Ideas matter greatly in
this struggle for empowerment, and Black women’s intellectual production
(Black feminist thought) has been essential to the progress and sanity of
African American women. Because ideas do matter, they remain targets of
criticism, cooptation, and silencing. In Fighting Words, I cast a critical eye
on Black feminist thought itself and revisited this question of how knowl-
edge and power are interrelated.
2 I wanted to know what standards we
might apply to seemingly progressive social theories to see whether they
maintained their oppositional purpose. In both works, I argued that it is
not enough to imagine empowerment for Black women in isolation from
deep-seated changes in the social structure overall. Black women can never
become fully empowered in a context of social injustice. 
But what about Black men? Little did I know that what I observed in
that movie theater in 1964 was an example of a much-larger pattern that is
3


--- PAGE 15 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
carried out every day in schools, streets, workplaces, and the mass media.
Ushers, assistant principals, security guards, and the police subject Black
men to varying levels of verbal and physical violence that leave them fear-
ful, angry, and far too often, dangerous to others and to themselves. Black
women often take up the slack, enduring low-paying jobs, endless hours of
childcare, lonely nights without love, and a sense of powerlessness that
things will never change. In the movie theater, we could see how American
race relations that conceptualized race in terms of family bound the man-
ager and usher together. They were part of the White family and we were
disadvantaged because we did not belong. The manager believed the son
within his racial family and disbelieved the Black people who he felt were
no kin to him. We could see how America’s racial family drama generated
benefits for its White sons (in this case, being believed) and fostered phys-
ical punishment for its Black ones. Race certainly mattered, but the theater
episode was also about masculinity, social class, age, and the power that
they conferred. The invisible authority that took tangible form in the man-
ager’s and usher’s actions also worked to silence us. We were in the
metaphorical theater of race together, and we could see then how young
Black boys (and girls) were harmed by racial discrimination. We had few
illusions that we owned the theater or that we might be allowed to manage
it. In 1964, Black people knew that, despite our differences, we shared a
common problem. 
Much has changed since then. In the post–civil rights era, the power
relations that administer the theater of race in America are now far more
hidden. Ironically, the protests of Black boys are circulated in mass media
within a celebrated global hip-hop culture, yet the substance of that protest
continues to be ignored. Middle-class Black people may manage the the-
aters of academia, city hall, and the military, yet many seem far less willing
than the folks in the movie theater to defend the interests of the one out of
every three Black youth who live below the poverty level. Ironically, movie
theaters themselves have disappeared from Black inner-city areas, leaving
Black boys and girls marooned in neighborhoods where basketball seems to
provide the best way out. Wondering whether they are “black enough,”
assimilated upper- and middle-class Black youth growing up in White
neighborhoods and attending private schools play video games and social-
ize in suburban multiplex theater complexes, often paying top dollar to see
the latest film that features authentic “ghetto” Black hip-hop artists. 
4


--- PAGE 16 ---
NO TURNING BACK
As a result of these changes, it is increasingly difficult to see how rela-
tions of race, class, gender, and sexuality that framed my 1964 study break
drama are remarkably intact today. Recognizing that racism even exists
remains a challenge for most White Americans and, increasingly, for many
African Americans as well. They believe that the passage of civil rights leg-
islation eliminated racially discriminatory practices and that any problems
that Blacks may experience now are of their own doing. Violations against
Black men and women continue to occur, but one-third of African
Americans have moved into the middle class and Black people are more
visible in positions of authority in schools, companies, hospitals, and gov-
ernment. Many Black people have difficulty seeing their connections to
other Black people, let alone rushing to the back of the theater in defense
of Black boys whom they do not even know.
In the post–civil rights era, gender has emerged as a prominent feature
of what some call a “new” racism. Ironically, many African Americans
deny the existence of sexism, or see it as a secondary concern that is best
addressed when the more pressing problem of racism has been solved. But
if racism and sexism are deeply intertwined, racism can neverbe solved
without seeing and challenging sexism. African American men and women
both are affected by racism, but in gender-specific ways. Those African
American boys were attacked by the usher because they were Black and
male, not simply because they were Black. 
The gender-specific contours of racism are even more pronounced
today. This was painfully clear to me one week when I taught my book Black
Feminist Thoughtto two very different classes. The first consisted of college
undergraduates and was disproportionately filled with young Black women
who, because they were single parents, routinely asked whether they could
bring their children to class. They were the lucky ones. Unlike their friends
relegated to dead-end jobs and a punitive social welfare bureaucracy, they
had made it to college. For the other class, I visited a college program in a
local prison to talk about the exact same subject matter. This time, the class
was disproportionately filled with young Black men who rarely got to see
their children. Students in both classes were denied sexual partners. Both
were harmed by experiences such as these that alienated Black women and
Black men from one another and from themselves. Education, housing,
jobs, and health care—African American men and women have gender dis-
parate experiences in all of these areas. What sense does it make to talk
5


--- PAGE 17 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
about “Black people” as if all Black people are male when gender differ-
ences are so pronounced? 
Talking about gender does not mean focusing solely on women’s
issues. Men’s experiences are also deeply gendered. Thus, gender ideology
not only creates ideas about femininity but it also shapes conceptions of
masculinity. Regardless of race, ethnicity, social class, citizenship status,
and sexual orientation, all men and women encounter social norms about
gender. These norms influence people’s sense of themselves as men and
women as well as perceptions of masculinity and femininity. For African
Americans, the relationship between gender and race is intensified, pro-
ducing a Black gender ideology that shapes ideas about Black masculinity
and Black femininity. This Black gender ideology is not simply a benign set
of ideas affecting individual African American women and men. Instead, it
is used to justify patterns of opportunity and discrimination that African
American women and men encounter in schools, jobs, government agen-
cies, and other American social institutions.
This Black gender ideology also draws upon widespread cultural beliefs
concerning the sexual practices of people of African descent. Sexuality is not
simply a biological function; rather, it is a system of ideas and social practices
that is deeply implicated in shaping American social inequalities. Because
ideas about sexuality are so integral to understandings of Black gender ide-
ology as well as broader gender ideology in the United States, neither Black
masculinity nor Black femininity can be adequately understood let alone
transformed without attending to the politics of sexuality.
3
Black sexual politics occur at the particular intersection of gender,
race, and sexuality that African Americans face. But African Americans are
not the only ones who grapple with issues of sexual politics. A wide con-
stellation of social groups, for example, White women, Latino men, gay
and lesbian Asian immigrants, wealthy Americans, older indigenous peo-
ple, and young married Asian mothers, encounter distinctive sexual poli-
tics based on their placement in systems of gender, race, and sexuality.
Sexual politics can be defined as a set of ideas and social practices shaped
by gender, race, and sexuality that frame all men and women’s treatment of
one another, as well as how individual men and women are perceived and
treated by others. Because African Americans have been so profoundly
affected by racism, grappling with racism occupies a prominent place
within Black sexual politics. 
6


--- PAGE 18 ---
NO TURNING BACK
Black sexual politics consists of a set of ideas and social practices
shaped by gender, race, and sexuality that frame Black men and women’s
treatment of one another, as well as how African Americans are perceived
and treated by others. Such politics lie at the heart of beliefs about Black
masculinity and Black femininity, of gender-specific experiences of
African Americans, and of forms that the new racism takes in the post–civil
rights era. To confront social inequality, African Americans need an analy-
sis of Black masculinity and Black femininity that questions the links
between prevailing Black sexual politics, their connection to Black gender
ideology, and struggles for African American empowerment in response to
the new racism. Taking into account the new challenges of the post–civil
rights era, such an analysis would strive to point the way toward a more
progressive Black sexual politics within African American communities.
This politics in turn might both catalyze a more effective antiracist politics
and contribute to a broader social justice agenda.
Toward these ends, Black Sexual Politics: African Americans, Gender,
and the New Racismanalyses how relations of gender and sexuality within
contemporary African American communities reproduce and/or resist
new forms of racism. Poverty, unemployment, rape, HIV/AIDS, incarcer-
ation, substance abuse, adolescent pregnancy, high rates of Black children
in foster care, intraracial violence (especially by young Black males as both
victims and perpetrators), and similar issues have a disproportionate
impact on African Americans. All of these social problems take gender-
specific forms, and none will be solved without serious attention to the pol-
itics of gender and sexuality. Black women can never become fully
empowered in a context that harms Black men, and Black men can never
become fully empowered in a society in which Black women cannot fully
flourish as human beings. Racism is a gender-specific phenomenon, and
Black antiracist politics that do not make gender central are doomed to fail
because someone will always be left behind. If either women or men
remain subordinated, then social injustice persists. 
The need for a progressive Black sexual politics has always existed, yet
the gender-specific social problems of today make this need even more
pressing. Not only has developing a progressive Black sexual politics
become more needed, contemporary intellectual and/or political trends
have created new possibilities for success. Over thirty years of Black femi-
nist advocacy has produced a corpus of work that continues to challenge
7


--- PAGE 19 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
prevailing gender relations. 4 During this same period, the majority of
African American men have been highly resistant to any discussions that
they perceived as being critical of them, and some have loudly criticized
Black feminism.
5 Recently, however, many African American men have
demonstrated an increased willingness to analyze Black masculinity. In
part, this new receptivity reflects the willingness of many Black men to see
that African American women and others who advocate on behalf of Black
women are not necessarily againstBlack men. If gender and sexuality have
been such important features in explaining African American women’s
realities, then gender and sexuality are equally important in explaining the
realities of African American men. The success of social movements in
challenging historical ideas and practices concerning sexuality also creates
new intellectual and political space to revisit questions of race and sexual-
ity. Moving from an exclusive focus on Black women to a broader one that
encompasses how the politics of gender and sexuality frame the experi-
ences of women and men alike creates new questions for investigation and,
perhaps, a new antiracist politics that might follow.
6
KEY FEATURES OF THE VOLUME
Black Sexual Politics: African Americans, Gender, and the New Racism has
several distinguishing features. First, this is a volume of critical social the-
ory.
7 Critical social theory consists of bodies of knowledge and sets of insti-
tutional practices that actively grapple with the central questions facing
groups of people differently placed in specific political, social, and histor-
ical contexts characterized by injustice. For example, because African
Americans face social injustices within American society, critical social the-
ory for this group would engage questions of racism and economic
inequalities. In the specific political, social, and historical context of the
post–civil rights era, rethinking the meaning of gender and sexuality for
antiracist political action constitutes a central question facing this group.
As a work of critical social theory, Black Sexual Politicsuses a conceptual
framework concerning the intersections of race, gender, and sexuality to
raise questions that might help African American women and men and
their supporters craft a more progressive Black sexual politics. This book
is neither an empirical social science study of current conditions within
African American communities nor a manifesto for government officials or
8


--- PAGE 20 ---
NO TURNING BACK
community organizations to follow. Because this book does not put forth
rules that, when followed, promise to produce the ideal romantic partners,
it is not a how-to book on how to fix Black love relationships.
8 Black Sexual
Politicsdoes not tell readers what to think. Rather, it examines what we
might think about.
To some, Black Sexual Politicsmay appear to be heavy on problems and
short on solutions. This is because this book is a diagnostic project. It does
not aim to be prescriptive but instead is analytical. In fact, being overly pre-
scriptive and giving African American women and men new rules to follow
is a large part of the problem itself. Take, for example, the cottage industry
of Black self-help books that sprang up in the 1990s, all designed to help
African Americans cope with strained love relationships. These books pop-
ulate local bookstores, crowding out more thoughtful, scholarly treatments,
and yet come as close as many African Americans get to serious discussions
of gender and sexuality. Long on advice and short on analysis, many of
these books can be dangerous, some even going so far as to counsel Black
men to handle an unruly Black woman by “soundly slapping her in the
mouth.”
9 Black Sexual Politics rejects this prescriptive approach, arguing
instead that becoming empowered means learning how to think for our-
selves and making decisions that are in our own best interests. 
I think that failing to address questions of gender and sexuality will
compromise antiracist African American politics in the post–civil rights
era. What good is the empowerment of African American women if it
comes at the expense of Black men? Black college women who look around
their classrooms and see the shrinking numbers of Black men can either
gloat that they have less competition or they can become outraged by this
situation and begin strategizing about what to do about it. What good is the
empowerment of African American men if it comes on the backs of Black
women? Black male ministers whose congregations are usually 70 percent
Black female can either enjoy the Sunday dinners, presents, and other ben-
efits that can accrue to men in such situations or they can minister to the
daily struggles of Black women who put money in the collection plate by
becoming champions for Black women’s rights. 
What makes a progressive Black sexual politics “critical” is its commit-
ment to social justice, not exclusively for African American men and women,
but for all human beings. In this sense, a more progressive Black sexual pol-
itics is one specific site of a broader, global struggle for human rights. It is
9


--- PAGE 21 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
important to stress that although this particular book is about African
Americans, this specific project of developing a more progressive Black sex-
ual politics resembles other social justice projects that grapple with similar
issues. For example, women and men of African descent in South Africa,
Brazil, Nigeria, and Great Britain face similar challenges in obtaining habit-
able housing, good nutrition, literacy, high-quality jobs, effective health care,
and stopping the spread of HIV/AIDS. African Americans’ struggles in
these areas resemble those of people of African descent globally. Yet because
these important social issues also transcend the particular forms they take
among Black populations, they also constitute the foundation of social jus-
tice projects in a global context. Intersecting oppressions of race, class, gen-
der, ethnicity, and sexuality touch everyone’s lives and social justice projects
occur across societies and among very different types of people. Because
Black Sexual Politics examines one local manifestation of a more general,
global phenomenon, I invite non–African American readers to consider how
the questions raised here might inform their own social justice projects. 
Second, this book treats race, class, gender, and sexuality as intersect-
ing versus competing frameworks for developing a progressive Black sex-
ual politics. Deeming race to be more important than gender or class as
more valid than sexuality can compromise the social justice core of a pro-
gressive Black sexual politics. Take, for example, how models that rank
oppressions can harm a Black political agenda regarding cancer. Under
models that view race as primary and gender as secondary, higher rates of
some cancers among African Americans than Whites would be seen as an
important issue for African Americans because Black people as a group are
harmed by these racial differentials. But cancers do not affect men and
women in the same way. For example, differential incidence and mortality
rates for prostate cancer in African American men and breast cancer in
African American women constitute gender-specific differences within
this racial consensus.
10 Because the vast majority of men will never get
breast cancer and it is impossible for African American women to get
prostate cancer, these two cancers present a potentially divisive crosscut-
ting issue in setting an African American agenda for challenging cancer.
What sense would it make to identify either prostate cancer or breast can-
cer as the typical Black experience around which to organize antiracist pol-
itics? A Black political agenda on cancer that did not take gender into
account would effectively ignore the issues of half of the Black population,
10


--- PAGE 22 ---
NO TURNING BACK
distort our understanding of the racial effects of cancer on African
Americans, and hamper the effectiveness of antiracist politics. 
To avoid this type of ranking, Black Sexual Politics uses a theoretical
framework of intersectionality. Intersectional paradigms view race, class,
gender, sexuality, ethnicity, and age, among others, as mutually construct-
ing systems of power. Because these systems permeate all social relations,
untangling their effects in any given situation or for any given population
remains difficult. I have consistently tried to theorize intersectionality in
the overall corpus of my work and Black Sexual Politics constitutes yet
another piece of this larger theoretical project. In this volume I emphasize
intersections of race, gender, and sexuality. Doing so does not mean that I
think that class, nation, age, and/or ethnicity are less important for
antiracist initiatives. I have done my best to analyze these other systems of
oppression, especially social class. However, moving race, gender, and sex-
uality into the center of analysis should highlight their interaction within
African American communities as well as reveal new angles of vision on
how these systems interconnect.
Although Black Sexual Politics draws upon the intersectional para-
digms developed in my earlier work, gender and sexuality are also more
visible here because developing an intersectional analysis of Black sexual
politics has tangible political ramifications for antiracist scholarship and
activism. This project breaks with earlier gender scholarship (including my
own) that equates sex with male and female biology and gender with
socially constructed ideas of masculinity and femininity. Rather, as pre-
sented here, biological sex, the social construction of gender, and sexual
orientation constitute distinct yet interconnected phenomena that, in turn,
interconnect with race. Because discussions of sexuality always attract def-
initional difficulties, I do not offer a definition here because I feel that stan-
dard dictionary definitions are far more conservative than the meanings
suggested here.
11 At the same time, it is important to clarify the three inter-
related meanings of sexuality that I use in Black Sexual Politics.12 Sexuality
can be viewed as an entity that is manipulated within each distinctive sys-
tem of race, class, and gender oppression, for example, the importance of
rape to patriarchy, child prostitution to contemporary global sex work, or
lynching to racial subordination. Sexuality also can be seen as a site of
intersectionality, a specific constellation of social practices that demon-
strate how oppressions converge. For example, not only did the institu-
11


--- PAGE 23 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
tionalized rape of enslaved Black women support racial domination, it
potentially produced children who would profit slaveowners, and it rein-
forced a gender regime. Sexuality also can be analyzed as heterosexism, a
freestanding system of oppression similar to racism, sexism, and class
oppression, which shares similar goals and social practices. 
Third, I focus on African American communities because I fear that
the rush to abandon the black/white paradigm of race in the United States
in favor of other seemingly more universal paradigms potentially distorts
the uniqueness of African American struggles and can also support new
forms of racism. Some would suggest that in the context of the changing
racial/ethnic composition of the United States, studying African
Americans is passé. They suggest that rejecting the historical specificity of
studying African Americans and replacing the black/white race relations
paradigm with more abstract theories of race and racism can fix this seem-
ing provincialism within African American intellectual production.
Everyone must be represented for racial theory to have merit. Studying
race and racism on this level of abstraction enables racial theory to move
away from the kinds of social issues that have long been important to
African Americans and that have catalyzed Black freedom struggles. For
example, while accurate, eloquent arguments about how “race” is a social
construction have virtually no merit in addressing issues such as the denial
of voting rights to African American citizens in Florida during the 2000
presidential election or the continued high rates of Black infant mortality
in inner-city neighborhoods. This move also redefines Black intellectual
production that focuses on social issues that are of concern to Black peo-
ple as being myopic and reflecting special interests. One important dimen-
sion of the new racism is to cover over the harm done to victims and to
mute their protest. Telling African Americans to take a number and wait
their turn in a long line of special interest groups vying for recognition in
an oppression contest rewrites the specificity of American race relations in
an especially pernicious way.
13
I recognize how much African Americans share with many other
groups, both in the United States and globally. For example, I think that
many of my arguments also apply to Puerto Ricans, indigenous peoples,
Chicanos, Vietnamese, Cambodians, Haitian immigrant populations, and
poor and working-class White Americans, albeit through the historical
specificity of their distinctive group histories. Issues of poverty, poor
12


--- PAGE 24 ---
NO TURNING BACK
health, homelessness, poor education, joblessness, and family disruption
that face African American women and men also affect these groups,
groups throughout the African Diaspora, and formerly colonized peoples
in general. Moreover, there is no clear line roping off African Americans
from these and other groups—there are Africans Americans who are Black
andPuerto Rican, who have relatives among indigenous peoples, who are
immigrants, and who are biracial and/or live in multiracial families. At the
same time, examining the particularities of African American experience in
its own right is inherently valuable, especially in analyzing Black sexual
politics, the topic under consideration here. In fact, because the specificity
of African American issues can be lost in categories such as “people of
color,” “race relations,” “minority groups,” or “people of African
descent,” placing the experiences of African Americans within other par-
adigms may actually harmthe project of developing a progressive Black
sexual politics that might work in the United States. 
African American experience simultaneously reflects the problems
faced by other groups of oppressed people; yet, it is also a unique history
that must be explained in its own right. Black Sexual Politics recognizes
that African Americans constitute a distinctive group that, according to the
2000 census, numbered approximately 36.4 million people.
14 Within the
race relations framework of the United States, African Americans remain
a “minority group.” But 36.4 million people constitute a large population.
For example, Black Americans outnumber the population of Ghana (20
million), Kenya (32 million), and Senegal (10 million) and most other
African nations. There are more African Americans than the population of
Belgium (10 million), Switzerland (7 million), Iraq (24 million), and Israel
(6 million). In fact, African Americans constitute one of the largest
national populations of people of African decent, following Nigeria (134
million), Congo-Kinshasa (56 million), and Brazil.
15 Beyond sheer size,
there is the matter of history. Unlike Hispanics and Asian Americans,
terms used since 1965 by the federal government to classify new immigrant
populations from widely heterogeneous backgrounds, African Americans
constitute a distinctive ethnic group or “people” whose history in the
United States is prolonged and unique. African Americans now have close
to a 400-year history in America, and North American slavery and racial
segregation (apartheid) constitute a specific history that has affected no
other group in the United States in the same way. The social institutions
13


--- PAGE 25 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
and belief structures of African Americans reflect African and European
influences, and they have evolved continually over time in response to
migrations of people of African descent from continental Africa, the
Caribbean, and Latin America into the group itself as well as cultural bor-
rowing and sharing with indigenous peoples, Latinos, Asians, and
European immigrant groups. Moreover, because African Americans live
within the borders of the remaining world superpower and are citizens of
the United States, this group is strategically placed to see the workings of
contemporary global politics. For example, African Americans have expe-
rienced multiple migrations—from the forced migration of the Atlantic
slave trade, to the great migration from the rural South to the cities of the
North in the early twentieth century, to the current reverse migration back
to the South in search of opportunities. African Americans demonstrate
the possibilities and limitations of migration as a strategy for addressing
poverty and powerlessness. The global spread of hip-hop from the streets
of the South Bronx through global mass media reflects the continued sig-
nificance of African Americans to both American and global culture.
African American experiences are indicative of economic processes of
global capitalism, the larger political patterns of transnationalism, and the
growing importance of global mass media. 
For African Americans, claiming the theoretical space to raise issues
that concern Black people in ways that deviate from the paradigms
advanced by more powerful groups remains difficult. Given the demo-
graphic, historical, social, and political significance of African Americans
in both American and global contexts, I ask why it remains so unfashion-
able in the United States for Black people to talk about issues that concern
us on our own terms? Why is this choice routinely criticized as reflecting
special interests as opposed to being yet another lens that can be used to
examine universal issues that join us all? Why can I not use the specificity
of African American experience to investigate important, universal themes
without running the risk of having this book marginalized as representing
Black “special interests”? 
A fourth distinguishing feature of Black Sexual Politicsconcerns how
heterogeneity within African American populations fosters a distinctive
political history concerning class, gender, sexuality, age, color, and ethnic-
ity. I am fully aware of how different 36.4 million Black people are from
one another and am frequently surprised when others so forcefully argue
14


--- PAGE 26 ---
NO TURNING BACK
that not all Black people are alike. Any person who has grown up in the
United Stated with even rudimentary access to African American organi-
zations and communities knows that Black Americans come in all shapes,
colors, sizes, and political persuasions. Racial segregation, however, has
created large numbers of White Americans who lack sustained, personal
experience with African Americans. This group routinely must be con-
vinced of Black humanity, a task that requires that they jettison racial
stereotypes and learn to see and value Blacks as individuals. For me, evi-
dence for the humanity of Black people lies in the beauty of Black indi-
vidualism. In all of my work, this has been my starting point, not my
destination. 
My concern lies less with recognizing differences among Black people
than in the recent rush to study differences to the point of virtually ignor-
ing unemployment, infant mortality, HIV/AIDS, domestic violence, racial
profiling, and other important social issues that disproportionately affect
African Americans as a group. In this volume, I remain focused on the col-
lective struggles for social justice that have long lay at the heart of African
American culture and communities. I argue that these struggles must be
reframed through a prism of difference, in this case, gender and sexuality,
in ways that do not become overly preoccupied with the question of dif-
ference itself. Unfortunately, so much attention within American scholar-
ship is lavished on differences among Americans, or on a race relations
paradigm that compares African Americans and other groups (often a
requirement for publication), or in excising out a segment of African
Americans and reinserting them within some other category (sexual
minorities, or women’s organizations) that it is difficult to find forums to
address the very real social issues that confront allAfrican Americans as a
group, regardless of age, region, gender, sexual orientation, or social class. 
Sexual politics is one such issue, yet the various threads needed for
analyses of gender and sexuality, for example, marriage and family rela-
tions, violence, unemployment, reproductive rights, prison reform, and
school performance are scattered in many places. Because some themes
primarily affect men, they are not even seen as being part of an overarch-
ing Black sexual politics agenda. Addressing the myriad issues discussed
here requires hard-hitting dialogues and new behaviors among African
Americans that take into account differences of class, gender, age, sexual-
ity, nationality, ability, and appearance among African Americans. In this
15


--- PAGE 27 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
volume, I emphasize these internal issues. But I also recognize that bring-
ing about social change needs serious conversations and action strategies
betweenAfrican Americans and all individuals, organizations, and social
groups engaged in a variety of social justice initiatives. Ideally, we need
projects that examine the interactions among Black and Latino sexual pol-
itics, or those of Blacks and new immigrant groups, especially how differ-
ent forms of sexual politics influence one another. Clearly dialogues need
to occur between conservative Black Christian churches that advance one
stance on homosexuality and movements for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgendered (LGBT) rights that advance another. African Americans
will learn much about charting a new course when armed with information
about how Jewish men and women confront similar yet different issues, or
how urbanization shapes the sexual politics of many groups in cities
around the world. Developing a progressive Black sexual politics that fos-
ters social justice requires engaging people who are positioned inside and
outside of African American communities. 
A fifth dimension of Black Sexual Politics concerns my choices con-
cerning language. This volume synthesizes the main ideas of fields as
diverse as critical race theory, feminism, sociology, political economy, queer
theory, and cultural studies. These fields can produce multiple languages,
many of which talk past one another. Despite the richness of the ideas
expressed, arcane jargon can impoverish these very same areas of inquiry.
As of this writing, the major works in many academic fields are virtually
unreadable to academics outside those fields, let alone undergraduate stu-
dents and the educated lay public. Because this book is interdisciplinary, I
have included a glossary of terms used in this volume in order to help read-
ers understand ideas from many fields. The definitions are cast in simple
language, and they are designed to help readers navigate through more dif-
ficult sections of the text. I also include a glossary because some academic
conventions do more to turn off readers than turn them on to the ideas
expressed. For example, despite good intentions, the current fashion of
putting quotation marks around the term “race” can be seen as yet another
example of exclusionary language available to the privileged (and morally
superior) few. My students routinely ask me why the term racehas quotes
around it because they honestly do not know. However well intentioned,
this usage typically signals that the author realizes that “race” is socially
constructed and that the author does not wish to reify “race” by treating it
16


--- PAGE 28 ---
NO TURNING BACK
as real. I reject this position on two grounds. First, why select “race” for
quotation marks and not “gender” or “sexuality”? What is it about “race”
that makes it more constructed than other systems of power? Second,
despite its constructed nature, the effects of “race” remain real for millions
of people. As the experiences of the two boys in the movie theater illus-
trate, one can experience the effects of racism, no matter how it is justified.
No matter that by 1964, biological theories of “race” had been largely dis-
credited. The usher who threw them out of the theater simply did not care. 
The use of language in Black Sexual Politicsalso reflects the ongoing
capitalization problem that has dogged the terms Negro and Black.
Following conventions in the 2000 U.S. census, I capitalize the term Black
when it serves to name a racial population group with an identifiable his-
tory in the United States. For African Americans, the term Blackis simul-
taneously a racial identity assigned to people of African descent by the
state, a political identity for petitioning that same state, and a self-defined
ethnic identity. Because some African Americans use some variant of the
terms Black people, African Americans, Black Americans, and people of
African descentas self-definitions, I capitalize all of these terms.
16
My reliance on Black popular culture and mass media as important
sources of evidence for the arguments presented here constitutes a final dis-
tinguishing feature ofBlack Sexual Politics. I rely heavily on discourse analy-
sis. As used here, a discourse is a set of ideas and practices that when taken
together organize both the way a society defines certain truths about itself
and the way it puts together social power. This means that race, gender, and
sexuality have ideological dimensions that work to organize social institu-
tions. In the post–civil rights era, Black popular culture and mass media have
both grown in importance in creating ideologies of inequality. Black popular
culture consists of the ideas and cultural representations created by Black
people in everyday life that are widely known and accepted. In contrast, mass
media describes the appropriation and repackaging of these ideas for larger
audience consumption. Black popular culture as examined here is indicative
of larger political and economic forces on the macro level that in turn influ-
ence the micro level of everyday behavior among African Americans.
Conversely, everyday behavior becomes the cultural stuff that is mined by
Black popular culture and a mass media with an insatiable appetite for new
material. In the spirit of doing interdisciplinary scholarship, I felt it neces-
sary to incorporate as many examples as possible from Black popular culture
17


--- PAGE 29 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
and mass media because I see their significance for global youth cultures and
African American youth in particular. Given this book’s subject matter of
Black masculinity and Black femininity in the context of the new racism, and
the significance of African American youth within hip-hop culture, includ-
ing Black popular culture seemed especially important. 
This decision to incorporate Black popular culture and mass media
also speaks to the question of audience. I have found that the undergradu-
ates I teach, especially African American students, gain much of their
sense of the world not solely from books but also from films, music, videos,
and the Internet. Despite the significance of a range of forms of Black
popular culture to Black sexual politics, this project relies heavily on film,
especially popular films that are readily available on video. These films
enter into this project in two ways. For one, I have found that Black popu-
lar culture generally and videos in particular catalyze critical thinking and
lively classroom discussions among students from diverse backgrounds.
Film lends itself to rich discussions of gender and sexuality because stu-
dents can use these films as jumping off points to analyze difficult topics.
Despite its value, because the mega-star of today can be forgotten tomor-
row, one drawback of relying too heavily on Black popular culture con-
cerns its fleeting nature. Given this caveat, I tried to identify selected
well-known examples within Black popular culture that illustrate the the-
oretical arguments concerning race, class, gender, and sexuality. I encour-
age those grounded in media studies who agree with me and/or who take
issue with my arguments to generate better examples. Hopefully, more
complex analyses of gender and sexuality will follow.
In Black Sexual Politics, I also use selected films as exemplars of trends
in Black popular culture. Films and videos provide social scripts that show
people appropriate gender ideology as well as how to behave toward one
another. Despite the protests by defenders of the media who claim that
sounds and images have little effect on consumers, the billions spent on
advertising dollars suggests otherwise. Certainly images and representa-
tions do not determinebehavior, but they do provide an important part of
the interpretive context for explaining it. Social scripts suggest how to
behave. Despite the power of mass media, I remind readers that being
given a script of how to behave as a Black man or woman in no ways means
that one must follow it. For African Americans, rejecting what is expected
is often the first step in resistance.
18


--- PAGE 30 ---
NO TURNING BACK
OVERALL ORGANIZATION OF THE VOLUME
Each of the three parts of Black Sexual Politics: African Americans, Gender,
and the New Racism stresses different dimensions of Black sexual politics.
The three chapters in Part I, “ African Americans and the New Racism,”
provide a conceptual and historical foundation for understanding contem-
porary Black sexual politics. The challenges of the new racism require sev-
eral progressive agendas, not just the one examined here. For example, a
more progressive analysis of social class that takes new forms of global cap-
italism into account might enable African Americans to see the strengths
and limitations of affirmative action, reparations, Black entrepreneurship,
and other current economic development strategies. Similarly, a more
nuanced analysis of how other immigrants from areas of the Caribbean,
Latin America, and continental Africa are influencing the contours of
African American ethnicity and of Black organizations, cultures, and com-
munities might catalyze a more dynamic antiracist African American poli-
tics. Developing a more progressive Black sexual politics concerning issues
of gender and sexuality constitutes one important piece of a broader
antiracist, social justice project. 
Chapter 1, “Why Black Sexual Politics?” builds on this Introduction
by examining why African Americans need to develop a political agenda
that takes gender and sexuality seriously. Chapter 2, “The Past Is Ever
Present: Recognizing the New Racism” examines issues of Black political
economy that underpin contemporary African American gender relations.
Rejecting a view of history in which one type of racial formation gives way
to another, the chapter argues instead that remnants of several past racial
formations affect patterns of class and gender within contemporary
African American communities. Chapter 3, “Prisons for Our Bodies,
Closets for Our Minds: Racism, Heterosexism, and Black Sexuality” uses
the prison and the closet as complementary and competing metaphors for
understanding oppressions of race and sexuality in order to examine how
racism and heterosexism draw strength from one another. Of race, class,
gender, and sexuality as systems of oppression, for many people, hetero-
sexism remains the most difficult to understand and, in many cases, to even
see as being a system of oppression. The approach taken here conceptual-
izes heterosexism as a system of power that suppresses heterosexual and
homosexual African American men and women in ways that foster Black
subordination. 
19


--- PAGE 31 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
The three chapters in Part II, “Rethinking Black Gender Ideology”
examine how the interconnections of race, class, gender, and sexuality take
ideological forms, especially within contemporary Black popular culture
and/or global mass media, and how this ideology increasingly influences
public life. Under the new racism, representations of Black masculinity
and Black femininity become important in explaining class relations within
African American communities, within U.S. society, and, because these
images now travel, within a global context. These ideologies take gender-
specific forms and become deployed in defending the treatment of African
Americans within contemporary social institutions. 
Chapter 4, “Get Your Freak On: Sex, Babies, and Images of Black
Femininity,” and chapter 5, “Booty Call: Sex, Violence, and Images of
Black Masculinity,” examine how past-in-present ideas about sexuality and
violence influence contemporary Black popular culture that in turn is com-
modified, displayed, and sold by a powerful mass media. Both chapters
examine how class-specific representations of African American women
and African American men that now circulate throughout global mass cul-
ture help structure the new racism in the United States. Not only are sex-
uality and violence part of representations of Blackness, these mass media
images circulate in a climate where social institutions are increasingly sat-
urated with relations of sexualized violence. Chapter 6, “Very Necessary:
Redefining Black Gender Ideology,” analyzes how prevailing gender ideol-
ogy uses a framework of “weak men, strong women” to advance trouble-
some notions of Black masculinity and Black femininity. Unpacking this
ideology should enable African American men and women to see the range
of choices that they actually have in becoming the kinds of Black men and
women they want to be. 
The three chapters in Part III, “Toward a Progressive Black Sexual
Politics,” examine three important sites where change needs to occur in
moving toward a more progressive Black sexual politics. Chapter 7,
“ Assume the Position: The Changing Contours of Sexual Violence,” takes
a closer look at the changing contours of violence as an important form of
political control that has emerged within the new racism. Lynching and
rape as forms of sexual violence historically visited upon African American
men and women have been linked within U.S. sexual politics. However, the
chapter questions whether these constructs remain adequate for explaining
the violence visited upon African Americans in the post–civil rights era.
20


--- PAGE 32 ---
NO TURNING BACK
Rather, institutionalized rape and institutionalized lynching constitute dif-
ferentexpressions of the sametype of social control that is especially suited
to the new racism. Chapter 8, “No Storybook Romance: How Race and
Gender Matter,” examines the dissonance between ideologies of love rela-
tionships within mass media and the rules that govern such relationships
within the context of everyday life. How people treat one another in every-
day life, especially within intimate love relationships, is ground zero for a
progressive Black sexual politics. Chapter 9, “Why We Can’t Wait: Black
Sexual Politics and the Challenge of HIV/AIDS,” examines how the
global spread of HIV/AIDS might serve as a catalyst for developing a
more progressive Black sexual politics. How does developing a more pro-
gressive Black sexual politics move antiracism forward? 
I end Black Sexual Politicswith a short afterword titled “The Power of
a Free Mind.” As comforting as it may be to try to turn back the hands of
time and retreat into an imagined Black past where men and women knew
their place, this simply is not an option. African Americans cannot relive
the events of 1964, pining for the civil rights days when, despite their dif-
ferences, the cluster of vocal Black people in the back of the theater saw
social injustice through a common lens and complained en masse. The new
racism is far more slippery and grappling with its contradictions requires
new tools. What will it take for African Americans to develop a progressive
Black sexual politics? How can all people who work for social justice imag-
ine a future that is different? There are no easy answers to these questions,
only the conviction that the power of a free mind might forge new paths
that we might all follow. When it comes to struggles for social justice,
there’s no turning back.
21


--- PAGE 33 ---



--- PAGE 34 ---
PART I
AFRICAN AMERICANS 
AND THE NEW RACISM


--- PAGE 35 ---



--- PAGE 36 ---
ONE
WHY BLACK 
SEXUAL POLITICS?
2001: The career of Jennifer Lopez skyrockets. A Puerto
Rican woman, Lopez’s rise to fame came after her fea-
ture film appearance as Selena, the first Chicana super-
star. News of J-Lo is everywhere; especially her much
discussed love relationship and subsequent break-up
with hip-hop artist Puff Daddy (aka P Diddy). One spe-
cial feature of Lopez’s routinely makes the news—her
seemingly large bottom. From late night American talk
shows to South African radio programs to Internet 
websites, J-Lo’s butt is all the rage. Recognizing its
value, it is rumored that Lopez insures her buttocks for
1 billion dollars, as one website mischievously described
it, 500 million dollars per cheek. 
2000: The photo insert for Survivor, Destiny’s Child
third CD, shows the three African American women
standing legs akimbo, holding hands, and dressed in
animal skin bikinis. Selling over 15 million albums and
singles worldwide, Survivor’s success reflects a savvy
marketing strategy that promoted the song
“Independent Woman” as part of the soundtrack for the
hit movie Charlie’s Angels and foreshadowed the success
of group member Beyoncé Knowles. Survivor’s message
of female power also fuels its popularity. Counseling
women to be resilient and financially independent,


--- PAGE 37 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Destiny’s Child proclaim, “I’m a survivor, I’m gonna make it.”
Survivor suggests sexual independence as well. In their highly popu-
lar song “Bootylicious,” written by Beyoncé, they refer to their
butts as “jelly” and ask, “Can you handle it?” The term bootylicious
proves to be so popular that, along with hottie and roadrage, it is
added to the 2002 edition of Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate
Dictionary.
1925: Born in a poor community in East St. Louis, Missouri, African
American entertainer Josephine Baker moves to Paris. She becomes
a sensation in the American production ofLa Revue Nègre.
Performing bare-breasted in a jungle setting and clad only in a short
skirt of banana leaves, Ms. Baker’s rump-shaking banana dance
becomes an instant hit with Parisian audiences. When asked whether
she will return to the United States, Ms. Baker replies, “they would
make me sing mammy songs and I cannot feel mammy songs, so I
cannot sing them.” Instead, in 1937 Ms. Baker becomes a French citi-
zen and garners lifelong accolades as the “Black Venus” of France.
Upon her death in 1975, she receives a twenty-one-gun salute, the
only such honor given by France to an American-born woman.
1
1816: After several years of being exhibited in Paris and London as
the “Hottentot Venus,” Sarah Bartmann, a Khoi woman from what
is now South Africa, dies. In the London exhibit, she is displayed
caged, rocking back and forth to emphasize her supposedly wild and
dangerous nature. She wears a tight-fitting dress whose brown color
matches her skin tones. When ordered to do so, she leaves her cage
and parades before the audience who seems fascinated with what
they see as her most intriguing feature—her buttocks. Some in the
audience are not content to merely look. One eyewitness recounts
with horror how Bartmann endures poking and prodding, as people
try to ascertain for themselves whether her buttocks are real. In the
context of popular London shows that display as forms of entertain-
ment talking pigs, animal monsters and human oddities such as the
Fattest Man on Earth, midgets, giants, and similar “freaks of
nature,” these reactions to Bartmann’s exhibition are not unusual.
Upon Sarah Bartmann’s death, George Cuvier, one of the fathers of
26


--- PAGE 38 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
modern biology, claims her body in the interests of science. Her
subsequent dissection becomes one of at least seven others com-
pleted on the bodies of women of color from 1814 to 1870. Their
goal—to advance the field of classical comparative anatomy.
2
Contemporary sexual politics in the United States present African
American women and men with a complicated problem. From the display
of Sarah Bartmann as a sexual “freak” of nature in the early nineteenth cen-
tury to Josephine Baker dancing bare-breasted for Parisian society to the
animal-skin bikinis worn by “bootylicious” Destiny’s Child to the fascina-
tion with Jennifer Lopez’s buttocks, women of African descent have been
associated with an animalistic, “wild” sexuality. Expressed via an ever-
changing yet distinctive constellation of sexual stereotypes in which Sarah
Bartmann’s past frames J-Lo’s present, this association of sexuality with
Black women helps create ideas about racial difference. Black men have
their own variety of racial difference, also constructed from ideas about vio-
lence and dangerous sexuality. African American heavyweight boxer Jack
Johnson certainly sparked controversy when, in 1910, he fought the for-
merly unbeaten White champion Jim Jeffries. During the fight itself, over
30,000 men stood outside the New York Times’ offices, waiting to hear the
outcome. Johnson’s bloody victory sparked race riots in every Southern
state. Johnson’s predilection for White women only fueled the fires of
White reaction. When authorities discovered that Johnson was having an
affair with an eighteen-year-old blonde from Minnesota, they charged him
under the Mann Act with engaging in white slavery. Johnson’s ability to
wield violence and his seeming attractiveness to White women made him
threatening to White middle-class men.
3 For both women and men,
Western social thought associates Blackness with an imagined uncivilized,
wild sexuality and uses this association as one lynchpin of racial difference.
Whether depicted as “freaks” of nature or as being the essence of nature
itself, savage, untamed sexuality characterizes Western representations of
women and men of African descent.
4
For their respective audiences, the distinctive sexualized spectacles per-
formed by Bartmann, Baker, Destiny’s Child, and Lopez invoke sexual
meanings that give shape to racism, sexism, class exploitation, and hetero-
sexism. Each spectacle marks the contradictions of Western perceptions of
African bodies and of Black women’s agency concerning the use of their
27


--- PAGE 39 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
bodies. Together they frame an invented discourse of Black sexuality.5 For
French and British audiences, Sarah Bartmann served as a sign of racial 
difference used to justify the growing belief in the superiority of White 
civilization and the inferiority of so-called primitive peoples necessary for
colonialism. Her treatment helped create modern Black sexual stereotypes of
the jezebel, the mammy, and the welfare queen that, in the United States,
helped uphold slavery, Jim Crow segregation, and racial ghettoization.
6
Illustrating through stark historical example how common sense under-
standings of race and gender flow smoothly into those of biology, medicine,
and Western science itself, her body marked the intersection of entertain-
ment, science, and commerce. Sarah Bartmann could be enjoyed while alive
and, upon her death, studied under the microscope for the burgeoning field
of comparative anatomy. As South African writer Yvette Abrahams and film-
maker Zola Maseko’s video recording on the life of Bartmann point out, we
know little about Bartmann’s agency in this arrangement.
7 What Bartmann
lost by being displayed as a “freak” is far clearer to us through our modern
sensibilities than what she might have gained for herself and her family.
Bartmann may not have been aware of the power of the sexual stereo-
types that were created in her image, but women of African descent who
followed most certainly were.
8 Black women struggled to exercise agency
and self-definition concerning these images and the social practices that
they defended. Evidently aware of the sexual stereotypes applied to women
of African descent, Josephine Baker played the part of the “primitive,” but
for her own reasons.
9 Baker entertained the French with her openness
about her body, an important example of how an imagined, uncivilized,
wild sexuality remained associated with Blackness within Western social
thought and continued as a sign of racial difference. But was Baker really
sexually liberated, or was her performance a carefully planned illusion that,
in the African American trickster tradition, was designed to titillate and
manipulate the tastes of her European audiences? Baker’s biography sug-
gests a level of sophistication that enabled her to move far beyond her ini-
tial depiction as a bare-breasted “primitive.” Baker may have initially done
banana dances, but from her point of view, she escaped performing the
ubiquitous “mammy songs” assigned to Hattie McDaniel, Ethel Waters,
and other talented African American women then performing in the
United States. In France, Baker ensured that she was well compensated for
her performances.
28


--- PAGE 40 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
The work of contemporary artists such as Destiny’s Child also invokes
the contradictions of sexualized spectacle and Black women’s agency or
self-determination. Transported from the immediacy of live stage per-
formances, Destiny’s Child perform in the intimate yet anonymous terrain
of CDs, music videos, movies, Internet websites, and other forms of con-
temporary mass media. Here each consumer of “Independent Woman” or
“Bootylicious” can imagine a one-on-one relationship with one, two, or all
three members of Destiny’s Child, whose images and artistry are pur-
chased, rented, or downloaded under the control of the consumer. Under
conditions of racial segregation, mass media provides a way that racial dif-
ference can safely enter racially segregated private spaces of living rooms
and bedrooms. Destiny’s Child may not be like the girls next door, but they
can be seen on home theater and heard via headphones within the privacy
of individual consciousness. In this new mass media context, Black sexual
stereotypes are rendered virtually invisible by their ubiquity; yet, they per-
sist through a disconnected mélange of animal skins, sexually explicit
lyrics, breast worship, and focus on the booty. Destiny’s Child may enter-
tain and titillate; yet, their self-definitions as “survivors” and “independ-
ent women” express female power and celebration of the body and booty.
The women in Destiny’s Child are also wealthy. Just who is being “con-
trolled” in these new arenas? For what purpose? Their message contains a
defiance denied to Bartmann and Baker—“It’s my body, it’s my booty, and
I’ll do what I want with it—can you handle it?”
What are we to make of Jennifer Lopez? As a Latina,
10 where does she
fit in this story of Western constructions of “wild” Black sexuality, the
social construction of racial difference, and Black people’s reactions to
them? Like Josephine Baker before her, Jennifer Lopez is celebrated and
makes a considerable amount of money. Elevating Jennifer Lopez’s but-
tocks to icon status invokes historical meanings of Black female sexuality
and takes the politics of race and sexuality to an entirely new plane. In this
case, a Latina brushed with the hint of Blackness and not clearly of African
descent carries the visible sign of Black sexuality. In order to be marketed,
Black sexuality need not be associated solely with bodies that have been
racially classified as “Negro,” “mulatto,” or “Black.” Western imagina-
tions have long filled in the color, moving women from Black to White and
back again depending on the needs of the situation. In antebellum
Charleston, South Carolina, and New Orleans, Louisiana, White men
29


--- PAGE 41 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
desired quadroons and octoroons as prostitutes because such women
looked like White women, but they were actually Black women, with all
that that implied about women’s sexuality.
11 J-Lo’s fluid ethnicity in her
films, from the Chicana in Selenato the racial/ethnic ambiguity in subse-
quent roles, illustrates the shifting contours of racial/ethnic classification.
When it comes to “hot-blooded” Latinas, one might ask which part of
their “blood” carries the spice of sexual looseness?
12 This all seems to be a
far cry from the commodification of Sarah Bartmann’s buttocks—or is it? 
The fact that these examples involve women of actual or imputed
African descent is no accident because the racial difference assigned to
Black people has often come in gender specific forms. In the nineteenth
century, women stood as symbols of race and women from different races
became associated with differentially valued expressions of sexuality.
During this period marked by the rise of European nationalism, England,
France, Spain, Portugal, Germany, the Netherlands, and Italy all jockeyed
with varying degrees of success to define themselves as nation-states. Each
followed its own distinctive path in constructing its own national identity
and that of its colonies. Yet they shared one overriding feature—the treat-
ment of women within each respective nation-state as well as within the
colonies were important to national identity.
13 Ideas of pure White wom-
anhood that were created to defend women of the homeland required a
corresponding set of ideas about hot-blooded Latinas, exotic Suzy Wongs,
wanton jezebels, and stoic native squaws. Civilized nation-states required
uncivilized and backward colonies for their national identity to have mean-
ing, and the status of women in both places was central to this entire
endeavor. In this context, Black women became icons of hypersexuality.
14
Men of African descent were also seen as hypersexual beings that have
generated similar icons.15 During the era of live entertainment, and until 
the onset of the technologies that made mass media possible, men were
objectified differently from women. The West African slave trade and
Southern auction blocks treated both Black women’s and men’s bodies as
objects for sale, yet women participated in sexual spectacles to a greater
degree than did men, because Western ideas about women and femininity
itself have long been more tightly wedded to ideas about women’s physical
beauty and sexual attractiveness. Even today, men are far more likely to stare
at and comment upon women’s breasts, buttocks, legs, face, and other body
parts than are women to subject men’s bodies to this type of scrutiny. Like
30


--- PAGE 42 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
all women, Black women were objects to be seen, enjoyed, purchased, and
used, primarily by White men with money. African women’s sexuality may
have piqued the prurient interest of Western audiences, but African men’s
sexuality was seen as dangerous and in need of control. Live expressions of
Black male sexuality needed to be hidden from White spectators, especially
audiences that might contain White women. Until recently, the very tenets
of female respectability made it impossible for a female audience to cheer on
a live male sex show, especially a White female audience viewing Black men
as sexual beings. Assumptions of heterosexuality also inhibit males viewing
other males as sexual objects. A situation in which White men view Black
male bodies as sexual objects potentially creates a homoerotic space that is
incompatible with ideas of straight White masculinity. 
Mass media technologies profoundly altered this reliance on face-to-
face spectatorship and live entertainment. Television, video, DVD, and the
Internet enabled images of Black women and men to enter living rooms,
bedrooms, family rooms, and other private domestic spaces. Black male
images could now enter private White spaces, one step safely removed
because these were no longer live performances and Black men no longer
appeared in the flesh. These technological advances enabled the reworking
of Black male sexuality that became much more visible, yet was safely con-
tained. Take, for example, the stylized music video performances of hip-hop
artists. Camera angles routinely are shot from a lower position than the rap-
per in question, giving the impression that he is looming over the viewer. In
real life, being this close to young African American men who were singing
about sex and violence and whose body language included fists, angry ges-
tures, and occasional crotch-grabbing might be anxiety provoking for the
typical rap and hip-hop consumer (most are suburban White adolescents).
Yet viewing these behaviors safely packaged within a music video protects
consumers from any possible contact with Black men who are actually in the
videos. Just who are these videos for? What are the imagined race, gender,
and sexual orientations of the viewers? Black men have long given per-
formances that placed sexuality center stage—Elvis Presley, Mick Jagger,
and rapper Eminem all recognized and profited from this reality—but the
sexual implications of viewing Black men in the flesh rarely made it out of
African American settings where such performances had a different mean-
ing. It is one thing to visit a Black nightclub to hear singer Millie Jackson’s
live performance of raunchy blues or gather in a neighbor’s living room to
31


--- PAGE 43 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
listen to Redd Foxx records. It is entirely another to sit in an interracial
audience and listen to comedian Eddie Murphy’s uncensored boasting con-
cerning Black male sexual prowess; or to count the times within a music
video that the camera hones in on rapper Ja Rule’s crotch.
Western perceptions of the sexuality of men of African descent also
became central to the national identities of European nation-states engaged
in colonial projects. England, France, and other colonial powers constructed
their national identities by manipulating ideas about men in the home coun-
try and in their colonies. The United States followed a similar path, with
ideas about race and masculinity intertwined with ideas about American cit-
izenship.
16 Like their female counterparts, men of African descent were also
perceived to have excess sexual appetite, yet with a disturbing additional fea-
ture, a predilection for violence. In this context, the “White heroes” of
Western Europe and the United States became constructed in relation to the
“Black beasts” of Africa.
17 Moreover, both were used to signal the hierarchi-
cal relationship between colonizers and colonies. Overall, colonialism, slav-
ery, and racial segregation relied upon this discourse of Black sexuality to
create tightly bundled ideas about Black femininity and Black masculinity
that in turn influenced racial ideologies and racial practices. 
As these systems of racial rule recede in the post–civil rights era, what
if anything is taking their place? Over one hundred years ago, African
American intellectual William E. B. DuBois predicted that the problem of
the twentieth century would be the presence of the color line. By that,
DuBois meant that the policies of colonialism and racial segregation were
designed to create, separate, and rank the various “races” of man. Until
legally outlawed in the 1950s and 1960s, the color line policies of Jim Crow
racial segregation kept the vast majority of African Americans from qual-
ity educations, good jobs, adequate health care, and the best neighbor-
hoods. In contrast, the problem of the twenty-first century seems to be the
seeming absenceof a color line. Formal legal discrimination has been out-
lawed, yet contemporary social practices produce virtually identical racial
hierarchies as those observed by DuBois. By whatever measures used in the
United States or on a global scale, people of African descent remain dis-
proportionately clustered at the bottom of the social hierarchy. The effects
of these historical exclusions persist today under a new racism.
18
It is important to note that the new racism of the early twenty-first
century has not replaced prior forms of racial rule, but instead incorpo-
32


--- PAGE 44 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
rates elements of past racial formations. As a result, ideas about race, gen-
der, sexuality, and Black people as well as the social practices that these
ideas shape and reflect remain intricately part of the new racism, but in
changed ways. The new racism thus reflects a situation of permanence and
change. Just as people of African descent were disadvantaged within prior
forms of economic organization, a similar outcome exists today. On a
global scale, wealth and poverty continue to be racialized. This is perma-
nence. At the same time, racial hierarchy is produced in a context of mas-
sive economic, political, and social change that organizes racial hierarchy
differently. The processes used to maintain the same outcome are also dif-
ferent. In a similar fashion, ideas about sexuality and gender that were very
much a part of prior forms of racial rule remain as important today. They
too are differently organized to produce remarkably similar results.
First, new forms of global capitalism frame the new racism.
Globalization itself is certainly not new—it was a core characteristic of
former patterns of racism. The African slave trade had a global reach and
its legacy created the contemporary African Diaspora. The colonial wealth
of Europe was based on a global system of racial subordination of people
of color. Yet the increasing concentration of capital in the hands of fewer
and fewer corporations distinguishes the contemporary global capitalism
from its nineteenth-century counterpart. Today, relatively few transna-
tional corporations are driving the world economy and their decisions
affect the global distribution of wealth and poverty. These new forms of
global organization have polarized world populations. On one end are elites
who are wealthy beyond the imagination, and who have the freedom to
come and go as they please, wherever and whenever they want. The locals,
the people who are stuck in one place, without jobs, and for whom time
seems to creep by, populate the other end.
19
People of African descent are routinely disadvantaged in this global
economy in which corporations make the decisions and in which “the com-
pany is free to move; but the consequences of the move are bound to stay.”
20
Within a global context, Black people and other people of color are those
more likely to lose jobs in local labor markets. They are the ones who lack
control over oil, mineral wealth, or other natural resources on their land;
who lose their land to global agribusiness; and who are denied basic services
of electricity and clean water, let alone the luxury goods of the new infor-
mation age. The benefits of telecommunications and other new technolo-
33


--- PAGE 45 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
gies have had a far greater impact on Whites than on people of African
descent and other people of color. For example, though Europe and North
America constitute 20 percent of the world’s population, two-thirds of all
televisions and radios are owned and controlled in these two regions.
21
The new racism is also characterized by a changing political structure
that disenfranchises people, even if they appear to be included. In the
United States, for example, people may vote, but corporations and other
propertied entities wield tremendous influence in deciding the outcome of
elections because they fund campaigns. All levels of government have been
affected by a growing concentration of economic power that has fostered
corporate influence over public policy. This same process operates in a
transnational context. Global corporations increasingly dominate national,
regional, and local governance. This concentrated economic power erodes
the authority of national governments and has created unprecedented
migrations of people and jobs both within and between nation-states. The
ineffectiveness of transnational governance and domestic policies of racial
desegregation in reducing Black poverty suggests an important link join-
ing the experiences of people of African descent with postcolonial gover-
nance and the experiences of African Americans in the United States with
racial desegregation. The outcome is reconfigured social hierarchies of
race, class, gender, and sexuality, with people of African descent clumped
at the bottom. Patterns of desegregation and subsequent resegregation of
African Americans in the United States resemble the decolonization and
recolonization that characterizes the global context.
22
The new racism also relies more heavily on mass media to reproduce
and disseminate the ideologies needed to justify racism. There are two
themes here—the substance of racial ideologies under the new racism and
the forms in which ideologies are created, circulated, and resisted. Ideas
about Black sexuality certainly appear in contemporary racial ideologies.
But the growing significance of Black popular culture and mass media as
sites for creating and resisting racial ideologies is also striking. The films,
music, magazines, music videos, and television shows of global entertain-
ment, advertising, and news industries that produce superstars like
Jennifer Lopez help manufacture the consent that makes the new racism
appear to be natural, normal, and inevitable.
23
The challenges of the new racism have been especially pronounced for
African American women and men, the subjects of this book. The issues
34


--- PAGE 46 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
associated with the politics of the new racism and with the manipulation of
ideologies within them, in the case of African Americans, the discourse on
Black sexuality, affect everyone. But the specific form that race and gender
politics take for African Americans can serve as an important site for exam-
ining these larger issues. Moreover, the African American community con-
tains a crucial subpopulation in these debates. A generation of young
African American men and women who were born after the struggles for
civil rights, Black power, and African nation-state independence has come
of age under this new racism. Referred to as the hip-hop generation, this
group has encountered, reproduced, and resisted new forms of racism that
continue to rely on ideas about Black sexuality. Expecting a democratic,
fair society with equal economic opportunities, instead, this group faced
disappearing jobs, crumbling schools, drugs, crime, and the weakening of
African American community institutions. The contradictions of the
post–civil rights era affect all African Americans, yet they have been espe-
cially pronounced for Black youth.
24
AMERICA—A SEXUALLY REPRESSIVE SOCIETY?
Sexualized Black bodies seem to be everywhere in contemporary mass
media, yet within African American communities, a comprehensive under-
standing of sexual politics remains elusive. In a social context that rou-
tinely depicts men and women of African descent as the embodiment of
deviant sexuality, African American politics has remained curiously silent
on issues of gender and sexuality. As a result, African Americans lack a
vibrant, public discussion of the complex issues that the prevailing dis-
course on Black sexuality has raised for African American men and
women. In more candid moments, however, some African American
thinkers stress how damaging the absence of a self-defined Black sexual
politics can be. As African American cultural critic Cheryl Clarke pointed
out over twenty years ago:
Like all Americans, black Americans live in a sexually repressive cul-
ture. And we have made all manner of compromise regarding our sexu-
ality in order to live here. We have expended much energy trying to
debunk the racist mythology which says our sexuality is depraved.
Unfortunately, many of us have overcompensated and assimilated the
35


--- PAGE 47 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Puritan value that sex is for procreation, occurs only between men 
and women, and is only valid within the confines of heterosexual 
marriage. . . . Like everyone else in America who is ambivalent in these
respects, black folk have to live with the contradictions of this limited
sexual system by repressing or closeting any other sexual/erotic urges,
feelings, or desires.
25
Given the saturation of American mass media with sexual themes, and the
visibility of sexualized spectacles that include men and women of African
descent within movies, music videos, and popular music in particular,
Clarke’s comments may seem to be odd. How can American culture be
“sexually repressive” when sexuality seems to be everywhere? White
actresses routinely play roles that include graphic sex scenes. Moreover,
Black women are not downtrodden rape victims, but instead, also seem to
be in control of their own sexuality. Director Spike Lee’s African
American leading lady Nola Darling seemed to be calling the shots in She’s
Gotta Have It, Lee’s groundbreaking film about Black female sexuality.
Destiny’s Child and J-Lo certainly do not seem “repressed.” How can
African Americans be sexually “closeted” when Black sexuality itself
serves as an icon for sexual freedom?
For African Americans, these questions are crucial, especially in the
context of the post–civil rights era in which Black popular culture and
mass media are increasingly important for racial rule. Sexual regulation
occurs through repression, both by eliminating sexual alternatives and by
shaping the public debates that do exist. In order to prosper, systems of
oppression must regulate sexuality, and they often do so by manufacturing
ideologies that render some ideas commonsensical while obscuring others.
The expanding scope of mass media makes this process more visible and,
more important, in the United States, does seem to have produced a “sex-
ually repressive culture.”
The treatment of human sexuality in American society reflects a curious
combination of censorship and excessive visibility (e.g., hypervisibility), of
embarrassed silences and talk-show babble. On the one hand, since colonial
times, selected groups within U.S. society have striven to suppress a wide
range of sexual ideas and practices.
26 American colonists paid close attention
to the sexual behavior of individuals, not to eliminate sexual expression but to
channel it into what they thought was its proper setting and purpose, namely,
36


--- PAGE 48 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
as a “duty and a joy within marriage, and for purposes of procreation.” 27
More recently, the election of conservative Republican Ronald Reagan in
1980 emboldened the Christian Right to advance a fundamentalist family val-
ues discourse. Resembling the colonial discourse from the 1600s, the con-
temporary family values position argues (1) all sexual practices should occur
only within the confines of heterosexual marriage; (2) the fundamental pur-
pose of sexuality is procreation; and (3) children should be protected from all
sexual information with the exception of abstinence as the preferred form of
birth control before marriage. 
This historical and contemporary agenda that has suppressed and
often censored a range of ideas concerning human sexuality has made it
difficult to have open, candid, and fact-based public debates. This censor-
ship not only affects public dialogues but it also influences research on
human sexuality.
28 Heterosexism, with its ideas about what constitutes nor-
mal and deviant sexuality holds sway to the point where significant gaps
exist in the social science literature on human sexuality. Despite the con-
servative thrust since 1980, the suppression of a range of ideas about
human sexuality is not new. Research done in the 1950s by Alfred Kinsey
and his colleagues at Indiana University provides a textbook case of sexual
censorship. Kinsey’s work treated all sexual practices, including homosex-
uality and bisexuality, as inherently “normal” and defined the array of sex-
ual practices reported by study participants as benign indicators of human
difference. But Kinsey’s work virtually ground to a halt when funding for
this line of scientific research dried up. 
It has taken the field some time to recover from this censorship. In
essence, heterosexism and its accompanying assumptions of heterosexuality
operate as a hegemonic or taken-for-granted ideology that has influenced
research on human sexuality. Societal norms that install heterosexuality as
the only way to be normal still hold sway
.29 For example, the term sexuality
itself is used so synonymously with heterosexuality that schools, churches,
and other social institutions treat heterosexuality as natural, normal, and
inevitable. Studying sexual practices that stray too far from prevailing
norms, for example, sex outside of marriage, adolescent sexuality, homo-
sexuality, and formerly taboo sexual practices such as anal and oral sex,
become situated within a social problems framework. This approach not
only stigmatizes individuals and groups who engage in alternative sexual
practices but it also reinforces views of human sexuality itself as being a
37


--- PAGE 49 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
problem that should not be discussed in public. Alternately, research on
human sexuality is often annexed to bona fide social problems, for exam-
ple, adolescent pregnancy and people living with HIV/AIDS. Sexuality
seems to be everywhere, but research that investigates variations in human
sexuality outside of a social problems framework has only recently come to
the forefront. 
The treatment of sex education in American public schools illustrates
how a sexually repressive culture strives to render human sexuality invisi-
ble. Sex education remains a hot topic, with students receiving spotty
information at best. Topics that are important to adolescents have been dif-
ficult to include within sex education programs. Despite high student
interest and a growing recognition that comprehensive sex education
might save lives, programs tend to shy away from discussing sexuality
before marriage, the use of contraception, homosexuality, and other con-
troversial topics. Ironically, the checkered pattern of research on human
sexuality offers a good case for how heterosexism operates as a system of
power that negatively affects straight and lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans-
gendered (LGBT) students alike. Because adolescents of all sexual orien-
tations are in the process of forming sexual identities, they are especially
affected by heterosexism. For example, despite a high adolescent preg-
nancy rate, worrisome increases in the rate of HIV infection among
American adolescents, and emerging research demonstrating that high
school students grappling with LGBT identities are more prone to depres-
sion and suicide, the reluctance to talk openly about human sexuality
within U.S. schools places students at risk. Similarly, a special report on
adolescent sexuality points to the difficulties of collecting data on adoles-
cent conceptions of abstinence.
30 Anecdotal reports suggest that many ado-
lescents who engage in oral sex think that they are practicing abstinence
because they are refraining from genital sexual intercourse. These prac-
tices may protect them from pregnancy, but they also expose adolescents to
risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV .
31
Despite these repressive practices, on the other hand, sexual ideas and
images within contemporary U.S. society enjoy a visibility that would have
been unheard of in Kinsey’s 1950s America. Recognizing that sex sells,
corporations increasingly use it to sell cars, toothpaste, beer, and other con-
sumer goods. This media saturation has made sexual spectacles highly vis-
ible within American popular culture. Soap operas, prime time television,
38


--- PAGE 50 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
billboards, music videos, movies, and the Internet all contain explicit sex-
ual material. Making sex highly visible in marketplace commodity relations
becomes important to maintaining profitability within the U.S. capitalist
political economy. The goal is neither to stimulate debate nor to educate,
but to sell products. 
In the absence of other forums, talk shows on network television pro-
vide one important public medium for gaining sexual information.
Unfortunately, such shows foster the commodification of sexuality.
Stressing sexually explicit conversations that titillate rather than instruct,
talk shows illustrate how marketplace relations profit from sexual specta-
cles. By the early 2000s, this market had segmented into a variety of shows,
each carving out its specific identity, often based on distinctive norms
regarding race, class, gender, and sexuality.
32 For example, The Montel
Williams Showroutinely trumpets the benefits of the heterosexual family,
primarily by extolling the role of fathers in their children’s lives. By itself,
this message is fairly innocuous. However, the show’s format creates sex-
ual spectacles that function as modern-day morality plays about race, gen-
der, and sexuality. Mr. Williams, an African American, routinely conducts
paternity tests for women who are not “sure” who fathered their babies.
The potential fathers are invited to hear the results of the paternity test on
the air, with a stern talk by Mr. Williams concerning their “responsibility”
to those branded as fathers by DNA evidence. This family drama is played
out repeatedly, with Mr. Williams readying himself to deliver the message
to wayward young men—if you take it out of your pants, you need to take
care of your babies. Moreover, as an African American man married to a
White woman, on his show Mr. Williams repeatedly brings on working-
class, interracial couples in which young White mothers try to get their
sexually irresponsible Black boyfriends to claim paternity. If this weren’t
enough, Mr. Williams also devotes shows to the pain experienced by bira-
cial children in search of their wayward parents.
The Maury Povich Show also trades in this racial family drama, but
with more emphasis on race and sexuality. Not only does Mr. Povich, a
White American, present shows in which White women seek paternity
tests for their Black male partners, Mr. Povich presents Black women and
Black men in an especially stark light. One show, for example, featured a
Black woman who brought on nine Black men as candidates for her six-
month-old daughter’s “baby daddy.”
33 All nine failed the paternity test.
39


--- PAGE 51 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
After the revelation, with cameras rolling in search of the all-important
“money shot,”34 Mr. Povich followed the distraught young mother back-
stage, and volunteered to keep working with her until she had tracked
down the Black deadbeat dad. Like Mr. Williams, Mr. Povich delivers a
message about responsibility to the DNA-branded fathers. Via the choice
of topic, and showing the African American woman whose sexuality was so
out of control that she had no idea who had fathered her child, Mr. Povich
panders to longstanding societal beliefs about Black sexuality. 
The crying and raw emotion solicited on Mr. Williams’s and Mr.
Povich’s shows pales in comparison to the staged sexual spectacles of The
Jerry Springer Show. Reminiscent of the London freak shows of Sarah
Bartmann’s time, Mr. Springer’s shows routinely combine sexuality and
violence, two sure-fire audience builders. Here participants are invited to
come on the air and reveal “secrets” to seemingly unsuspecting spouses,
lovers, and friends. The “secrets” routinely involve cheating, lying, and
false paternity. By his choice of guests, Mr. Springer’s show also takes sex-
ual spectacles to an entirely new level. Morbidly obese women parade across
the stage in bikinis, verbally taunting the audience to comment on their
appearance. In a context in which women’s bodies are routinely sexualized,
displaying seemingly hideous female bodies is designed to shock and solicit
ridicule. These confessional talk shows also routinely conduct paternity
tests, show pictures of babies who lack legal fathers, discuss sexual infi-
delity, and display audience members in sexually explicit clothing (or lack
thereof). For many Americans, these shows substitute for public discussions
of sexuality because few other outlets are available. 
African Americans are well represented in the public spectacles pro-
vided by Mr. Williams’s, Mr. Povich’s, and Mr. Springer’s talk shows.
Guests on all three programs are clearly working-class, with many of them
Black and Latino. These shows are not just about sexuality; they also sig-
nal clear messages about race and class. They depict the challenges of
explaining a new, interracial class structure that can no longer rely on bio-
logical notions of race to differentiate poor people (assumed to be Black)
from middle-class people (assumed to be White). In the new multicultural
America, Blacks can be middle class (the hugely popular Cosby Show broke
that barrier in the 1980s) and, in fact, a certain degree of Black middle-
class visibility is needed to buttress arguments of equal opportunity
(Oprah Winfrey and Montel Williams both exemplify this need for visible,
40


--- PAGE 52 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
accomplished Blacks). But how does one explain the persistence of poverty
among WhiteAmericans if poverty has long been attributed to Black bio-
logical inferiority? They are not biologically Black, but their poverty and
downward mobility can be explained if they are seen as being culturally or
socially Black. Whites who embrace Black culture become positioned
closer to Blacks and become stigmatized. In the context of the new racism,
cultural explanations for economic success and poverty substitute for bio-
logical arguments concerning intelligence or genetic dispositions for
immorality or violence. 
Viewing stories about historically taboo interracial sexuality between
White women and Black men becomes the new sexual spectacle, where
working-class White women become “darkened” by their sexual relation-
ships with irresponsible working-class Black men.
35 When accused of
paternity by these “trashy” White women, Black men are depicted as
proud of their irresponsible sexual behavior. Certainly White men are
given paternity tests on these shows, but typically these are working-class
or poor White men who are hauled in by working-class White mothers of
their alleged children. In contrast to the White women who point the fin-
ger of paternity at both Black and White men, Black women rarely iden-
tify White men as the potential fathers of their babies. Given the history of
interracial, institutionalized rape of Black women by White men, White
fathers of Black children would hardly be newsworthy. Instead, Black
women are presented as being so reckless that they do not know who
fathered their children or, sharing a common fate with their White sisters,
they point the finger at irresponsible Black men. Despite similarities that
link all three shows, they do offer different scripts for solving the problems
of these sexual spectacles. Part of the appeal of The Montel Williams Show
lies in his role in this family drama—Williams plays the part of the caring
yet stern Black patriarch who provides the fatherly discipline that so many
of his guests seemingly lack. In contrast, Mr. Povich presents himself as a
kindly White father, showing concern for his emotional albeit abnormal
guests. Mr. Springer is merely a ringmaster—he doesn’t get near his
guests, preferring instead to watch the cursing and chair throwing from a
safe distance. Discipline them, listen to them, or dismiss them—all three
solutions apply to working-class and poor guests. Apparently, middle-class
Americans (even Black ones) have little difficulty identifying which sexual
partner conceived their children. Affluent, thirty-something White women
41


--- PAGE 53 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
awaiting the results of paternity tests for their biracial babies just do not
appear on any of these shows. 
Much more is at stake here than the accuracy of the depictions of
African American women and men within talk shows and other forms of
mass media. African Americans and Black culture are highly visible within
the American movies, music, sports, dance, and fashion that help shape
contemporary ideologies of race, gender, sexuality, and class in a global
context. Sexual spectacles travel, and they matter. Historical context dis-
appears, leaving seemingly free-floating images in its wake that become the
new vocabulary that joins quite disparate entities. Terms such as “primi-
tive,” “backward,” “jungle,” “wild,” and “freak” uncritically cycle
through contemporary global culture, leaving undisturbed the pejorative
historical meanings associated with this vocabulary. But history hides in
the shadows of these terms, because these concepts are incomprehensible
without a social context to give them meaning. For example, the pervasive
use of animal imagery persists within some expressions of contemporary
Black popular culture, as suggested by the decision to clothe Destiny’s
Child in animal-skin bikinis on their album cover. These depictions eerily
resemble past practices of associating Africans with animals, particularly
apes, monkeys, and chimpanzees. The choice of animal may change—no
longer apes, Black men have taken on new identities as “dogs” energetically
engaged in chasing the (kitty) “cat”—but associating Black men and
women with lusty, animal sexual practices apparently has not. Although
different meanings may be associated with animal imagery, Snoop Doggy
Dog, Little Bow Wow, and the classic phrase “you my main dog” all invoke
this same universe of animal imagery. Moreover, representations of Black
men as “dogs” who have replaced the cool “cats” of prior eras of African
American jazzmen, as well as the video “hos” who populate rap music
videos suggest the emergence of an increasingly sophisticated gender-
specific expression of ideas about Blackness sold in the global marketplace.
Josephine Baker’s banana dance and Destiny’s Child’s “bootylicious”
would be meaningless without this history, even if those enjoying the
images do not consciously see the connections.
African American theorist Cornel West identifies the paradox of a sex-
ually repressive culture that, on the one hand, seems saturated with sexu-
ality, but that, on the other hand, suppresses education and open dialogue
concerning human sexuality. To West, race matters: “the paradox of the
42


--- PAGE 54 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
sexual politics of race in America is that, behind closed doors, the dirty,
disgusting, and funky sex associated with Black people is often perceived
to be more intriguing and interesting, while in public spaces talk about
Black sexuality is virtually taboo.”
36 Black sexuality is routinely invoked
within American society, namely, the alleged sexual prowess of the Black
men accused of fathering babies with White women, but analyzing it is dis-
couraged. The result is a society fraught with contradictions. For example,
well-off White teenagers can drive expensive cars to racially segregated
high schools and college campuses that admit only a few handpicked
African Americans, all the while booming the latest sexually explicit lyrics
of their favorite Black hip-hop artist. American viewers can sit in their liv-
ing rooms viewing talk shows that censure the African American man
accused of fathering three out-of-wedlock children with two different
White women, yet still be intrigued by his sexual prowess. Legions of
young American men can wonder what it would be like to get Beyoncé
Knowles from Destiny’s Child or Jennifer Lopez in bed.
Like other Americans, African Americans must make sense of this
curious sexual climate that accompanies the new racism. This task is made
even more difficult by the fact that African Americans are included in these
debates, often serving as examples of what notto be or, alternately, as icons
of sexual freedom served up as the antidote to American sexual repression.
As part of the color-blind racism that has accompanied the erasure of the
color line, the ubiquitous inclusionof images of Black sexuality that per-
meate contemporary movies, television shows, and music videos can repli-
cate the power relations of racism today just as effectively as the exclusion
of Black images did prior to the 1960s. Thus, Cheryl Clarke’s observation
that African Americans live in a sexually repressive culture speaks less to
the prominence of representations of Black sexuality within an increas-
ingly powerful mass media than to the functionof these images in helping
to construct a “limited sexual system.”
GENDER, SEXUALITY, AND AFRICAN AMERICAN POLITICS
African Americans typically think that gender relations are a private con-
cern, mainly reflecting the love relationships between heterosexual men
and women. Those who see the harmful effects of gender oppression on
African Americans still wish to define issues of gender and sexuality solely
43


--- PAGE 55 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
within the context of Black community politics, a domestic issue among
Black people. Place the “public” issue of race first, they counsel, and leave
the more “private” issues of gender and sexuality for us to work out among
ourselves. Relying on ideas about family to construct ideas about race, this
approach sees African Americans as participating in a large, imagined
racial family. In service to the race, each individual African American
should put on a good face for the critical White public that sits in judgment
outside African American communities. The adage “don’t air dirty laun-
dry in public” speaks to this African American community norm of keep-
ing these and other family problems hidden.
37 
What these approaches fail to grasp is that commonsense notions
about differences of gender and sexuality that allegedly distinguish Whites
(carriers of “normal” gender ideology and sexual practices) from Blacks
(carriers of “deviant” gender ideology and sexual practices) have long
served as the fulcrum for constructing racial difference. Within
white/black binary thinking, ideas about racial normality and deviancy
draw heavily upon ideas about gender and sexuality for meaning.
Moreover, because racial normality has been defined in gender-specific
terms, African American progress or lack thereof in achieving the gender
norms attributed to Whites has long been used as a marker of racial
progress. Stated differently, African Americans have been evaluated within
the context of a sex role theory that by its very nature disadvantages Black
people.
38 Within a Western sex role ideology premised on ideas of strong
men and weak women, on active, virile masculinity and passive, dependent
femininity, the seeming role reversal among African Americans has been
used to stigmatize Black people.
39 This ideology not only identifies a
reversed, damaged gender ideology as a sign of racial difference, it further
claims that flawed ideas concerning Black masculinity and Black feminin-
ity reflect equally problematic conceptions of sexuality. 
Because African Americans are in many ways quintessentially American,
individual African Americans as well as African Americans as a collectivity
can have just as much difficulty as everyone else in understanding these
broader U.S. sexual politics. But, because African Americans have histori-
cally been harmed by these contradictory sexual politics, the stakes are much
higher to develop a critical consciousness. The refusal to discuss in publicthe
profound influence of Western constructions of a deviant Black sexuality on
African American men and women leaves a vacuum in contemporary African
44


--- PAGE 56 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
American politics. Major Black civil rights organizations, for example, the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and
the Urban League continue to skirt issues associated with gender and sexu-
ality.
40 Black Christian churches constitute the most important African
American community organizations, and yet they continue to preach a con-
servative gender ideology, and shun controversial topics, especially sexuality.
41
Gender politics that deny African American women the pulpit when close to
70 percent of churchgoing members are female speak to the need for engage-
ment on these issues. Louis Farrakhan, the head of the Nation of Islam
(NOI), called a very successful Million Man March on Washington, D.C. in
1995, yet the NOI’s gender politics are grounded in the bedrock of the patri-
archal nuclear family and, in many ways, are indistinguishable from those of
mainstream Black Christian denominations as well as the sexually repressive
culture discussed earlier.
42
African American politics of the post–civil rights era seems to be
between a rock and a hard place. Racial segregation as the legal mechanism
for racial oppression has been struck down and the racial ideologies that
justified it have been forcefully challenged. Few would offer biological
explanations for African American joblessness, poor school performance,
higher rates of pregnancy out of wedlock, and higher rates of incarcera-
tion. But the changing legal climate and the muting of racial theories
rooted in biology neither means that new forms of racism are absent nor
that cultural arguments are replacing biology as the reason given for
African American disadvantage.
43 
This new racism does present some formidable puzzles for African
American politics. In prior periods in which biological theories were used
to justify racist practices, racism and antiracism had a seemingly organic
and oppositional relationship. One could either be forracism by believing
that Blacks were biologically inferior and deserved the treatment that they
received or one could be againstit by rejecting these beliefs and pointing to
racial prejudice and institutional discrimination as more important in
explaining Black disadvantage. These distinctions no longer hold for many
White and Black Americans. Under the new color-blind racism that erases
the color line, racism itself seems to have disappeared. As French sociolo-
gist Michel Wieviorka points out, “this clear-cut polarity between racists
and anti-racists no longer exists.”
44 With the exception of largely discred-
ited right-wing groups, few American organizations openly advocate theo-
45


--- PAGE 57 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
ries of Black inferiority based on outdated racial biology. As a result,
groups holding vastly different perspectives on what constitutes antiracist
political activism can claim that they are the true antiracists. 
Taking Martin Luther King, Jr.’s advice to heart that “people should
be judged by the content of their character, and not by the color of their
skin,” for example, one group believes that treating everyone the same,
regardless of color, moves American society toward equality. Within this
assimilationist, color-blind version of antiracism, recognizing racial differ-
ences, or, in some versions, even using the term race, fosters racism. In
contrast, another group argues that recognizing racial differences is an
essential first step in unpacking racial meanings that continue to shape
social relations. They see a color-conscious, multicultural diversity as the
future of American democracy. Ironically, individuals and groups holding
these disparate views can now accuse one another of perpetuating racism
itself.
45 Both appropriate the symbols of the civil rights and Black power
movements for their own ends. In this context, it becomes possible for con-
servative Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas and Black Nationalist
filmmaker Spike Lee bothto admire and to claim the legacy of Malcolm X.
If all of the actual racists in the United States have curiously disappeared,
it becomes much more difficult to argue that racism persists. After all, if
George W . Bush, Louis Farrahkan, Bill Clinton, Colin Powell, and Molefi
Asante can all claim the mantle of being antiracists, how does one recog-
nize racism?
46
African American politics is buffeted by the same trends that afflict
antiracist practices overall. In the context of new U.S. racial formations and
of conflicting approaches to Black empowerment and social justice, African
American antiracist politics seems stuck between two ineffective ideological
options. On one side stands a threadbare civil rights agenda that continues
to preach racial integration to an African American population so incarcer-
ated in extensive inner-city ghettos that few Whites are left to integrate
schools, neighborhoods, and public facilities.
47 Whites have voted with their
feet and their pocketbooks, and few attend the annual Martin Luther King
Day rally anymore. On the other side stands a largely symbolic Black
Nationalist agenda that shapes the gender politics of controversial organi-
zations such as the Nation of Islam. Black nationalist ideology also appears
as a faux radical politics in some hip-hop culture, for example, in the work
of Public Enemy or Ice T , primarily because African American youth quite
46


--- PAGE 58 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
rightly perceive few other options. Neither choice has been especially effec-
tive in addressing the social problems of the inner cities or in fostering a
broader social justice agenda within the United States.
Black Americans must figure out how to deal with the contours of the
new racism and must do so with an increased sensitivity to issues of gen-
der and sexuality. In this regard, political theorist Cathy J. Cohen’s schema
of consensus and crosscutting political issues provides a useful model for
understanding current African American antiracist politics. Consensus
issues affect all identifiable group members, in this case, all who claim or
are assigned a Black identity. Consensus issues may affect all group mem-
bers, but they may not take the same form for all group members. In con-
trast, crosscutting issues disproportionately and directly affect only certain
segments of a group. Cohen suggests that current African American poli-
tics treat race as a consensus issue while assigning gender and sexuality a
secondary status as crosscutting issues. Within this thinking, Black women
are affected by gender and Black men are not, and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgendered Black people are affected by sexuality and heterosexual
Blacks are not. 
The new social relations of the post–civil rights era mandate new
understandings of how race, class, gender, and sexuality operate as con-
sensus and crosscutting issues within African American politics and how
they might be differently configured for what lies ahead. Race continues to
be a compelling consensus issue for African Americans because the vast
majority of Blacks are either directly affected by racial discrimination or
know someone who is or has been affected. For most, middle-class Black
achievement is only one generation away from the racism of the past, and
its effects are still felt. This racial consensus has political effects in that
African American voting behavior demonstrates a commitment to racial
solidarity. Despite the growth of a new Black middle class, African
Americans are more likely to vote as a racial bloc than they are to vote their
social class interests.
48 Claims from William Julius Wilson notwithstand-
ing,49 most African Americans recognize that class differences among
African Americans are now more pronounced. But when it comes to elec-
toral politics, they continue to choose race over class, that is, when they
perceive that they have a choice at all. 
Both gender and sexuality have historically been crosscutting issues
within the framework of an overarching antiracist political project. This has
47


--- PAGE 59 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
been a problem because, within Black political arenas, crosscutting issues are
often deemed to be secondary to the greater good of the group.50 In a context
in which gender has been associated with Black women and in which sexu-
ality has been the province of Black (LGBT) people, these groups have often
been encouraged to take a back seat for the greater good of racial solidarity.
Many have not gone willingly. The explosion of Black feminism since the
1970s has been spurred on, in large part, by the refusal of Black women
activists to take a back seat to men within both the civil rights and the Black
Nationalist political movements. Similar catalysts stimulated the increasing
visibility of Black lesbians and gays. These groups point out that, without
serious attention to contemporary Black sexual politics, African Americans
may uncritically circulate ideas about race, class, gender, and sexuality that
bear striking resemblance to those long advanced by White elites.
An antiracist politics that does not reframe the consensus issue of race
in terms of class, gender, sexuality, and age will remain incapable of
responding to the complexities of the new racism. Take, for example, the
pressing issue of violence that confronts people of African descent.
African Americans are all affected by violence, but by different manifesta-
tions. Regardless of social class, Black men are more likely to encounter
state-sanctioned violence at the hands of police whereas Black women are
more likely to experience intimate violence of battering and rape at the
hands of fathers, brothers, spouses, boyfriends, and men in their neigh-
borhoods. Black youth and children witness this violence and are pro-
foundly affected by it. Black LGBT people encounter hate crimes of verbal
and physical harassment that stem from homophobia. Young Black men
often kill one another, a form of internecine violence that reflects the sig-
nificance of age. Poor and working-class Black people are more vulnerable
to certain types of violence than their more affluent counterparts. Violence
represents a potentially divisive issue if one form of violence is deemed to
be more important than others because the segment of Black people who
experience it are deemed more worthy of attention and help. Rather than
viewing violence as a crosscutting issue, each group member would recog-
nize the importance of all forms of antiviolence political action, even if
particular forms of violence, for example, police harassment or wife bat-
tering or rape, did not directly affect him or her. 
The issue for African American political agendas is to see the inter-
connectedness of consensus and crosscutting issues in crafting African
48


--- PAGE 60 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
American political agendas. Gender, sexuality, class, and age need not be
crosscutting issues within the consensus issue of race but instead are cru-
cial for developing effective racial politics. As the discussion of crafting
antiviolence initiatives suggests, the real consensus issue is how to keep
race, class, gender, sexuality, and age in dialogue with one another in craft-
ing an antiracist African American politics. Not only are gender, sexuality,
and class critical for internal African American politics, developing a more
complex analysis creates possibilities for coalitions with other groups who
are engaged in similar social justice projects. For example, African
Americans cannot address violence alone because the violence against
Black women also affects women in a global context. The forms of state
violence that concern African American men also affect Latino men and
poor and working-class White American men. State violence is not unique
to the United States, as numerous cases of state-sanctioned violence in
Central and South America and in Africa, Eastern Europe, and Asia sug-
gest. The environmental justice movement pays attention to violence
against children from dumping, pesticides, and pollution. These are all
broad-based social justice projects, and a robust Black politics would be
prepared to engage in coalitions such as these.
Given these challenges, it is vital that the notion of antiracist politics
be expanded beyond more traditional notions of political parties, social
movements, and grassroots political organizations. Political anthropologist
James C. Scott uses the term “infrapolitics” to describe the hidden behaviors
of everyday resistance. Despite appearances of consent, people challenge
inequalities of race, class, gender, and sexuality through conversations,
jokes, songs, folklore, theft, foot-dragging, and a multitude of everyday
behaviors.
51 As African American historian Robin D. G. Kelley points out,
“the political history of oppressed people cannot be understood without
reference to infrapolitics, for these daily acts have a cumulative effect on
power relations.”
52 Everyday life contains many opportunities for resist-
ance, if individual thoughts and actions can be conceptualized in this fash-
ion. Infrapolitics provide important insights concerning the political pos-
sibilities for oppressed groups that seemingly lack political options. For
example, within African American communities, men and women have dif-
ferent degrees of access to formal power. Men are more likely to engage in
traditional politics of officeholding whereas women have been more
involved in the day-to-day infrapolitics of community organizing.
49


--- PAGE 61 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Moreover, because infrapolitics and traditional politics are interdependent,
neither is sufficient as the sole form of political resistance. 
In a new global context, both the organizational politics of formal
political arenas and the infrapolitics of everyday African American life are
ground zero for issues that go far beyond the happenings in Black inner-
city neighborhoods, city politics, or within the United States itself. Given
the visibility of African Americans within a global popular culture, African
American reactions to these new social relations are highly important. In
mapping Black responses to the new racism with an eye toward developing
a progressive Black sexual politics adequate for broader antiracist initia-
tives, African Americans respond in often contradictory ways. Twenty
years ago, Cheryl Clarke saw silences and self-censorship. Now, however,
these silences are being supplemented by growing numbers of African
American men and women who seem ever ready to replicate these images
in full public view. Discourses such as the references to Jennifer Lopez’s
butt sell because they allude to a certain kind of sexuality long associated
with people of African descent. Seemingly unaware of this history, or per-
haps exploiting it, some African American artists capitalize on a situation
in which everyone knows on some level what gives ideas about Black sexu-
ality their meaning but no one is ultimately responsible. It’s one thing if
Jennifer Lopez and Beyoncé Knowles from Destiny’s Child profit from
their own images and present themselves in performance as “bootylicious.”
It’s entirely another if adolescent girls tap into this message of female
power and head off to their eighth grade classrooms decked in the same
“bootylicious” apparel, all the while purchasing the clothes required to
achieve this image with money they don’t have. The theme here is not cen-
sorship of Black girls, but rather to question whether they can “handle it”
if they are so woefully uninformed about the legacy of Sarah Bartmann. 
Contemporary forms of oppression do not routinely force people to
submit. Instead, they manufacture consent for domination so that we lose
our ability to question and thus collude in our own subordination. Images
of J-Lo, Destiny’s Child, and Montel Williams are all part of this process
of reproduction and contestation. In this context of oppressions occurring
through the normal structures of society, within contemporary nation-
states such as the United States, oppression becomes expressed as a rou-
tinized violence or normalized war within one society. Within the United
States, oppression now takes a new form, one where society itself is satu-
50


--- PAGE 62 ---
WHY BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS?
rated with the relations of warfare against selected members of society
itself. Routinized violence can break through into open conflict (1992 in
Los Angeles and 2001 in Cincinnati), but more often, this normalized war
also operates through the infrapolitics of everyday life, through a series of
mini-assaults that convince each one of us to stay in our place.
53 Black peo-
ple are under assault, and the racial and gender meanings assigned to Black
bodies as well as the social meanings of Black sexuality in American soci-
ety overall constitute sites of contestation in an uncivil civil war against
Black people. 
DEVELOPING A PROGRESSIVE BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
African Americans express quite diverse and often contradictory responses
to the challenges raised by prevailing Black sexual politics. How can
Jennifer Lopez and Destiny’s Child be independent women and bootyli-
cious at the same time? If Sarah Bartmann, Josephine Baker, Destiny’s
Child, and Jennifer Lopez can be convinced to perceive themselves solely
in terms of the value of their bootys in marketplace relations, then oppres-
sion may be complete. If African American men accept the images of
themselves as sexually irresponsible boys as depicted on the Montel
Williams, Maury Povich, and Jerry Springer shows, then they too partici-
pate in structuring their own oppression. But is anyone ever without
agency to this degree? 
The antidote to a gender-specific racial oppression that advances con-
trolling images of deviant Black sexuality does not lie in embracing a 
conservative politics of respectability that mimics the beliefs of those
responsible for the sexually repressive culture in the first place. Rather, in
the context of a new racism, men and women who rescue and redefine sex-
uality as a source of power rooted in spirituality, expressiveness, and love
can craft new understandings of Black masculinity and Black femininity
needed for a progressive Black sexual politics. When reclaimed by individ-
uals and groups, redefined ideas about sexuality and sexual practices can
operate as sources of joy, pleasure, and empowerment that simultaneously
affirm and transcend individual sexual pleasure for social good. 
Black feminist poet Audre Lorde certainly knew this when, almost
thirty years ago, she identified the power of the erotic as an important
source of energy for resisting gender oppression.
54 Lorde redefined the
51


--- PAGE 63 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
erotic as the deep feelings within each of us in search of love, affirmation,
recognition, and a spiritual and/or physical connection to one another.
Lorde argued that impoverished notions of love of self and others lie at the
heart of oppression. Reclaiming the erotic as a domain of exploration,
pleasure, and human agency is thus vital to individual empowerment.
Lorde associated erotic power with women and with female sexuality. But
the power of the erotic need not be reserved for women, nor is it synony-
mous with physical sexual expression. Such power is available to all human
beings. 
For women and men alike, and for individuals from diverse racial, eth-
nic, sexual, age, and national backgrounds, claiming such power remains
easier said than done. Expressing individual agency and challenging the
Black sexual politics that shape everyday life is complicated; linking the
individualagency expressed in these social locations to a collectivegroup
politics may seem unattainable. The dialectical relationship between
oppression and activism makes all politics difficult, including this one. A
fundamental contradiction lies at the juncture where intersecting oppres-
sions grounded in dominance confront a resistance nourished by expansive
notions of care, eroticism, spirituality, and politicized love. On the one
hand, perverting the power of the erotic by manipulating ideas about sex-
uality has been and continues to be an important dimension of oppressions
of race, gender, class, and sexuality. For African Americans, these manip-
ulations take myriad forms and continue to affect contemporary Black sex-
ual politics. On the other hand, because deeply held feelings, especially
those that have bodily expression, constitute one of the most important
sources of energy available to human beings, people who are able to reclaim
the power of the erotic gain a crucial weapon in resisting these intersecting
oppressions. Despite these challenges, for African Americans, the struggle
is essential. 
52


--- PAGE 64 ---
TWO
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
Recognizing the New Racism
It’s just me against the world, baby, me against the world.
I got nothin’ to lose—it’s just me against the world.
—Tupac Shakur
Black youth born after the great social movements of the 1950s
and 1960s should have faced a bright future. Social movements
of the past fifty years celebrated victories over historical forms
of racism, perhaps naively believing that they were creating a
new foundation for this new generation. The end of colonialism
and dismantling of racial apartheid within the United States
and in South Africa signaled the possibilities for antiracist,
democratic societies in which Blackness would no longer serve
as a badge of inferiority. Yet the actual social conditions that
confront this global cohort and their responses to it have turned
out to be quite different. When it comes to Black youth, poor
housing, inferior education, precarious health status, and dwin-
dling job prospects reoccur across diverse societies. Whether in
newly democratic nation-states such as South Africa, African
nation-states that have had formal independence for over thirty
years, advanced industrial societies such as the United States,
Great Britain, France, and Germany, or historically independ-
ent states of the Caribbean and Latin America, youth who are
noticeably of African descent fare worse than their lighter-
skinned counterparts. For many, Tupac Shakur’s words, “I got
nothin’ to lose—it’s just me against the world,” ring true.


--- PAGE 65 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Victory over one form of racism has not, apparently, ensured triumph
over others. How is it that social conditions can change so dramatically yet
still relegate Black youth to the bottom of the social hierarchy?
1 As hip-hop
social critic Bakari Kitwana points out, “now more than ever . . . divided
generations must begin to understand the ways that the new Black youth
culture both empowers and undermines Black America. As brilliant a
moment in history as the civil rights and Black power eras were, the older
generation must realize they cannot claim any real victory if the hip-hop
generation cannot build significantly on those gains.”
2 The emergence of
new Black youth culture in the United States that simultaneously empow-
ers and undermines African American progress signals a new phase in the
contours of racism itself as well as antiracist initiatives that will be needed
to counter it. 
What’s new about this new racism? First, new patterns of corporate
organization have made for an increasingly global economy. In particular,
the concentration of capital in a few corporations has enabled them to
shape many aspects of the global economy. One outcome is that, on a global
scale, wealth and poverty continue to be racialized, with people of African
descent disproportionately poor.
3 Second, local, regional, and national gov-
ernmental bodies no longer yield the degree of power that they once did in
shaping racial policies. The new racism is transnational.
4 One can now have
racial inequality that does not appear to be regulated by the state to the
same degree. For example, the legal support given racial segregation in the
United States has been abandoned yet African Americans remain dispro-
portionately at the bottom of the social hierarchy. Third, the new racism
relies more heavily on the manipulation of ideas within mass media. These
new techniques present hegemonic ideologies that claim that racism is
over. They work to obscure the racism that does exist, and they undercut
antiracist protest.
5 Globalization, transnationalism, and the growth of
hegemonic ideologies within mass media provide the context for a new
racism that has catalyzed changes within African, Black American, and
African-Diasporic societies. From one society to the next, Black youth are
at risk, and, in many places, they have become identified as problems to
their nation, to their local environments, to Black communities, and to
themselves.
6
This new racism reflects the juxtaposition of old and new, in some cases
a continuation of long-standing practices of racial rule and, in other cases,
54


--- PAGE 66 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
the development of something original. In the United States, the persist-
ence of poor housing, poor health, illiteracy, unemployment, family
upheaval, and social problems associated with poverty and powerlessness all
constitute new variations of the negative effects of colonialism, slavery, and
traditional forms of racial rule. The new racism reflects sedimented or past-
in-present racial formations from prior historical periods.
7 Some elements
of prior racial formations persist virtually unchanged, and others are trans-
formed in response to globalization, transnationalism, and the proliferation
of mass media. Each racial formation reflects distinctive links among char-
acteristic forms of economic and political exploitation, gender-specific ide-
ologies developed to justify Black exploitation, and African American men’s
and women’s reactions both to the political economy and to one another.
Each also generated distinctive African American political responses that
aimed to provide a better life for each generation of Black youth.
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF CHATTEL SLAVERY 
Chattel slavery was crucial to the founding of U.S. capitalism because the
buying and selling of human beings of African descent formed a template
for the economic and racial oppression of Black Americans. Under chattel
slavery, people of African descent occupied a particular place in class rela-
tions—their bodies and all that was contained in those bodies (labor, sexu-
ality, and reproduction) were objectified and turned into commodities that
were traded in the marketplace. Dehumanizing Black people by defining
them as nonhuman and as animals was a critical feature of racial oppres-
sion. Enslaved Africans who were owned, traded, and sold as part of capi-
talist marketplace relations were clearly exploited. Once held as slaves,
Black people gained no income from their labor. The objectification of
people of African descent as chattel, the commodification of objectified
Black bodies as property, and the exploitation of Black people as property
and as workers are all closely linked.
8 
Chattel slavery also relied upon gender oppression. Within the politi-
cal economy of chattel slavery, this process of objectification, commodifi-
cation, and exploitation took different forms for African American women
and men. Black women were workers like men, and they did hard manual
labor. But because they were women, Black women’s sexuality and repro-
ductive capacity presented opportunities for forms of sexual exploitation
55


--- PAGE 67 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
and sexual slavery (ultimate submission of the master/slave relationship).
Barbara Omolade describes this gender-specific commodification as one in
which the White master used “every part” of the enslaved African woman:
“to him she was a fragmented commodity whose feelings and choices were
rarely considered: her head and her heart were separated from her back
and her hands and divided from her womb and vagina.”
9 To mask these
relationships, supporters of slavery created controlling images whose
effects persist even today. For example, objectifying Black women agricul-
tural workers as mules justified working them as if they were animals. The
institutionalized rape of enslaved Black women spawned the controlling
image of the jezebel or sexually wanton Black woman. This representation
redefined Black women’s bodies as sites of wild, unrestrained sexuality
that could be tamed but never completely subdued. The image of the
breeder woman emerged to defend the reproductive policies of slavery that
encouraged enslaved Black women to have many children. Sexuality and
fertility were neither designed for Black women’s pleasure nor subject to
their control. The system was designed to stamp out agency and annex
Black women’s bodies to a system of profit.
10
For African American men, the economic and racial oppression of
chattel slavery also took gender-specific forms. Because Black men did
hard manual labor, justifying the harsh conditions forced upon them
required objectifying their bodies as big, strong, and stupid. White elites
apparently found men of African descent to be more threatening than
women because they believed that Black men were naturally violent. Men
allegedly possessed the wildness attributed to Blacks as a race, but they car-
ried the additional characteristic of being prone to violence. This combi-
nation of violence and sexuality made Black men inherently unsuitable for
work until they were trained by White men and placed under their disci-
pline and control. To explain these relations, White elites created the con-
trolling image of the buck. Unlike images of African natives who roam
their wild homelands like beasts untamed by civilization (colonialism), the
representation of the buck described a human animal that had achieved
partial domestication through slavery. This image depicted Black men as
being intellectually inferior to Whites and reinforced the political status of
enslaved African men as chattel. Taming the beast in order to produce the
buck involved domesticating Black men’s predilection for violence, placing
their brute strength in service to productive manual labor, and directing
56


--- PAGE 68 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
their natural albeit deviant sexuality toward appropriate female partners.
In this fashion, White elites reduced Black men to their bodies, and iden-
tified their muscles and their penises as their most important sites.
11
Because the vast majority of enslaved African women and men did
agricultural labor, these controlling images of the mule, jezebel, breeder
woman and the buck justified Black economic exploitation. But chattel
slavery also produced another class of Black workers who allegedly formed
a better class of Negroes. House servants worked in close proximity to
Whites. Their exploitation not only was organized differently from those
who worked in agriculture, but the representations developed for domestic
servants foreshadowed contemporary understandings of assimilation and
the skills needed for racial integration. In essence, domesticated African
Americans were the ones who had been stripped of their predilection for
unrestrained sexuality and violence (in other words, their stereotypical
Blackness). These were the slaves who exhibited behaviors that made them
suitable to serve Whites. To justify the exploitation of domestic servants,
White elites created controlling images of Uncle Tom and Mammy as pro-
totypes of asexual, safe, assimilated, and subordinated Black people.
Whatever actual enslaved Africans felt about this pantheon of controlling
images, the distinctive sets of images used to explain differences among
African Americans also served the purpose of justifying a preliminary class
system within African American civil society.
Because chattel slavery was clearly unjust, the threat of Black resist-
ance was omnipresent, and periodic slave uprisings illustrated that this
threat was not unfounded.
12 White elites demonstrated an obsession with
fears of Black revolt and instituted practices designed to quell rebellions.
In essence, chattel slavery did not need the night riders, hooded K. K. K.,
and cross burnings that came to full fruition in the postemancipation
period that followed. Killing Black people, while it may have made bad
business sense, was legal. Enslaved African women and men alike could be
whipped, beaten, and killed with no legal recourse. As long as a master
killed his own slaves, he was within his rights. If, however, he killed the
slave of someone else, property rights came into play. Ironically, their value
in the marketplace saved many Black people’s lives—no profit could be
realized from a dead slave. With slaves seen not as human beings but as an
investment, it is easy to see why selling a recalcitrant slave was a better
option than beating one to death.
57


--- PAGE 69 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Gender also mattered among White elites. White men and women had
different rights, with propertied White men claiming a White masculinity
that granted them control over their wives and legal children as well as
their property (slaves). Masculinity became defined in patriarchal terms,
namely, their performance as “masters” at home and in public activities of
commence and government. Under patriarchal assumptions, maintaining a
family (e.g., a wife and dependent children) and having material wealth
(land and/or slaves) were essential to (White) masculinity.
13 Chattel slavery
marked the emergence of a hegemonic White masculinity rooted in a dual
relationship of the White gentleman/White lady so celebrated in Southern
folklore, and in a racialized master/slave relationship. Violence was central
for maintaining this hegemonic White masculinity. It also laid the founda-
tion for forms of masculinity that installed propertied White men at the
top of the social hierarchy, Black men at the bottom, and landless working-
class White men somewhere in between. The ability of White men to whip
and kill Black men at will and force them to witness violence against their
female partners and children served not just as a tool of racial control, but
violence also became deeply embedded in the very definition of masculin-
ity. Because enslaved African men were denied the patriarchal power that
came with family and property, they claimed other markers of masculinity,
namely, sexual prowess and brute strength. Foreshadowing contemporary
images of Black masculinity that celebrate hypersexuality and athletic abil-
ity, Black men were permitted dimensions of masculinity that most bene-
fited Whites.
14
Black women were also targets of violence within this system of racial
rule that relied upon violence as an important dimension of masculinity.
Black women were subject to additional violence. Institutionalized rape, a
form of sexual violence whose aim is to dominate or control its female (and
male) victims, permeated chattel slavery. Rape served the specific purpose
of political and/or economic domination of enslaved African women, and
by extension, African Americans as a collectivity.
15 Rape was not the only
attack on Black women’s bodies—medical experimentation and repeated
childbearing also took their toll.
16 Hortense Spillers describes the impor-
tance of property relations to this entire situation: “Under conditions of
captivity, the offspring of the female does not ‘belong’ to the Mother, nor
is s/he ‘related’ to the ‘owner,’ though the latter ‘possesses’ it, and in the
African American instance, often fathered it.”
17 Sexual stereotypes of
58


--- PAGE 70 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
women of African descent as jezebels not only justified rape, medical
experimentation, and unwanted childbearing inflicted upon Black women
but it covered up Black women’s protests as well.
The economic exploitation that produced a fledgling social class sys-
tem among Blacks, the gender-specific use of violence for political domi-
nation, and the use of gender-specific controlling images to justify these
practices are, by now, fairly well known. In contrast, African American
men’s and women’s thoughts and actions in response to their enslavement
and to one another remain more controversial. Clearly many Black people
chose the option of flight, and ran away when they could. A few organized
visible rebellions erupted, indicating that people of African descent have
always resisted.
18 But most could not publicly protest, and they hid their
resistance behind the mask of seeming acceptance. Did Mammy really love
her White charges more than her own? Was the buck happy in the fields
because he sang to pass the time? How did Black lovers feel about one
another in such harsh conditions that produced such distorted pictures of
Black people? 
Because there really is no way definitively to answer these questions,
scholarly evaluations of Black gender relations under chattel slavery
diverge dramatically and change over time. Prior to the 1970s, scholarship
of American chattel slavery often upheld a “weak man, strong woman”
thesis, arguing that African American men in particular had been irrepara-
bly damaged by their inability to establish patriarchy within African
American families and communities.
19 In response, revisionist scholarship
refuted this thesis of Black gender pathology. Arguing that enslaved men
and women tried desperately to marry and maintain families, such schol-
arship suggested slavery advanced a fundamental if unrecognized and
undervalued gender equality.
20 Because neither men nor women could be
installed as “masters” or “matriarchs” within Black families, Black gender
ideology was thought to be more egalitarian. Taking a cue from contem-
porary cross-cultural research on the African Diaspora that demonstrates
substantial African cultural continuities within music, dance, art, and
funeral practices, one strand of this revisionist history suggested that
African American families were not irreparably damaged by slavery.
Rather, they were organized around African-derived conceptions of Black
extended family networks that resemble those of other African-influenced
groups.
21
59


--- PAGE 71 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
More recently, some scholars have returned to the “irreparable dam-
age” thesis to claim yet again that the damage done by slavery persists into
the present. For example, sociologist Orlando Patterson, a prominent
scholar of slavery, argues that “ Afro-American gender relations, and con-
sequently their marital and familial relations, have always been in crisis”
and that “this crisis is the major internal source of the wider problems of
Afro-Americans. It is the main means by which the group ends up victim-
izing itself.”
22 After presenting a depressing array of statistics on African
American marital rates, Patterson sees contemporary economic factors as
necessary but insufficient influences on contemporary Black gender rela-
tions. Arguing that some other cause must be present, Patterson resurrects
the “weak male, strong female” thesis: “something else must be at play.
Something that runs deep into the peculiarities of the Afro-Americans’
own past. In searching for it, we are inevitably led back to the centuries-
long holocaust of slavery and what was its most devastating impact: the
ethnocidal assault on gender roles, especially those of father and husband,
leaving deep scars in the relations between Afro-American men and
women.”
23 Sadly, because he persists in elevating male suffering above that
of Black women, Patterson cannot envision a situation in which African
American women and men are differently and equally harmed by the
“holocaust of slavery.”
Because historical and social science evidence cannot definitively
gauge enslaved Black men’s and women’s perceptions of how slavery
affected their ideas about gender and one another, fictional works provide
another angle of vision. The works of Black women’s fiction constitute an
especially rich site for exploring Black women’s agency and reclaiming the
voices of the oppressed. For example, Shirley Anne Williams’s Dessa Rose
examines the complicated question of interracial sexual desire under slav-
ery and its effects of interracial women’s relationships. Toni Morrison’s
much-acclaimed Beloved directly confronts the issue of how slavery
impoverished the ability to love and how reclaiming love constituted an
essential step toward freedom.
The debates continue, but several facts remain. Chattel slavery estab-
lished the economic, political, and ideological framework for the treatment
of Black people. The rudimentary form of the Black social class system
was established under slavery, as were the gender-specific forms of its over-
all organization. The effects of being denied economic opportunities and
60


--- PAGE 72 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
citizenship rights, and of being plagued by violence and images that justi-
fied poverty and powerlessness, continue to be felt under the new racism.
RACIAL SEGREGATION AND THE RURAL SOUTH 
Racial oppression did not disappear in 1865 when chattel slavery legally
ended. Rather, African Americans encountered a new form of racism that
also economically exploited them in gender-specific ways. Landowners still
needed African American labor for Southern agriculture, and they
searched for ways to get Blacks to work for minimal compensation.
Emancipated African Americans were “free” to sell their labor and com-
pete for work, just as poor Whites had done before them or they were
“free” to starve.
24 Politically, Black men gained the right to vote. This
enfranchisement presented White elites with a new challenge. How would
they assure a supply of cheap Black agricultural workers if Black people
were no longer politically subordinate? During Reconstruction
(1865–1877), African Americans made major political gains, and they suc-
ceeded in electing Black public officials to state office. White backlash chal-
lenged this new, multiracial democracy by passing laws that mandated
racial segregation of Blacks and Whites. 
In 1892, Homer Plessy defied a Louisiana law that required railroad
companies to provide equal but separate accommodations for White and
Black Americans. Fully aware of the law and intending to challenge this
expression of the color line, Plessy took a seat in a passenger car designated
for Whites. Refusing to pass for White, Plessy announced to the conductor
that he was a Negro and refused to move to the car reserved for “coloreds.”
He was promptly arrested. In its 1896 review of Plessy’s case, the U.S.
Supreme Court upheld the Louisiana law, and by declaring the idea of
“separate but equal” acceptable, legalized racial segregation. Plessy v.
Fergusonstood as the law of the land until 1954. After many years of liti-
gation by the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, the U.S. Supreme Court
revisited the “separate but equal” doctrine and, in Brown v. Topeka Board
of Education, declared it inherently damaging to African American chil-
dren. In this changing legal context, and fully aware that she was breaking
the laws of Montgomery, Alabama, on December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks took
a seat in the White section of a Montgomery bus. Unable to pass as White,
Mrs. Parks had little need to announce her “real” racial classification. Like
61


--- PAGE 73 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Homer Plessy, she too was promptly arrested. Following Mrs. Parks’s
arrest, the African American citizens of Montgomery boycotted the bus
system for almost one year before gaining their legal rights to sit anywhere
on the bus that suited them, an event that marked the beginning of the civil
rights movement and the end of legal segregation.
During the period when racial segregation was legally sanctioned, the
political economy of racism mandated the separation of Black and White
Americans in all spheres of social interaction. Whereas all African
Americans lived under a political, legal, and social system that installed
racial segregation into the very fabric of American society, Southern states
achieved this separation through laws whereas Northern states relied more
heavily on customs.
25 Laws and customs required that Blacks and Whites
occupy separate and unequal spaces in housing, neighborhoods, job cate-
gories, schools, and, in the South, transportation, movie theaters, restau-
rants, shops, amusement parks, and other public institutions. Supplementing
earlier religious justifications for Black inferiority, scientific ideas about
race that emerged during this period used biology to explain racial differ-
ence between Blacks and Whites, and then used racial differences to justify
racial segregation. Enforcing the rigid system of segregation required
maintaining clear boundaries between racial groups to ensure that some
African Americans would not “pass” as White and thus illegally enjoy the
privileges reserved for Whites. An obsession with racial classification,
racial identity, and monitoring interracial sexual contact became central to
the edifice of racial meanings. 
Those Blacks who remained in the South during this period faced hard
times. Economically, the conditions that African Americans experienced in
the rural South, especially during the fifty-year period after emancipation,
set the stage for intergenerational Black poverty that continues to this day.
Upon emancipation, the vast majority of African Americans remained in
the South, primarily because they had nowhere else to go. Most continued
to work in Southern agriculture, but not as an undifferentiated mass of
workers. Varying combinations of landownership and education meant
that African Americans were economically exploited in different ways.
Emancipated domestic workers and skilled workers (e.g., carpenters, black-
smiths, iron workers, etc.) constituted one class of Blacks. Black agricul-
tural workers subdivided into two groups, one a class of Black landowners
who were able to establish family farms, and the other, a class of land
62


--- PAGE 74 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
renters who became the laborers for sharecropping systems. Black
landowners fared far better than landless African Americans, many of
whom continued to sharecrop well into the twentieth century. This dis-
tinction between landowners and renters was virtually impossible under
slavery. But upon emancipation, this distinction between owners and
renters would become an increasingly important dimension of Black social
class in the South. 
The effects of relationship to the land, social class distinctions, and
timing of Black migration out of the South (if it occurred at all) persist
into the present. For example, in the early 1990s, journalist Leon Dash
spent several years interviewing Rosa Lee Cunningham, her eight children,
and five of her grandchildren, all grappling with the realities of urban
poverty in Washington, D.C. Rosa Lee’s parents had migrated in the 1930s,
seeking refuge from harsh lives as sharecroppers in North Carolina. Rosa
Lee’s background sheds light on the class system among Southern rural
African Americans. Her father’s side of the family were “piney woods”
Blacks, descendents of slaves and sharecroppers who lived in the woods.
This group was able to procure some sort of education for their children.
In contrast, her mother’s side of the family was at the bottom of the Black
social class hierarchy. They were sharecroppers known as “river” or
“swamp” Blacks who were descendents of slaves who had lived and worked
on the same plantations since emancipation. Receiving virtually no educa-
tion, the swamp Blacks were cut off from the larger world. Neither group
of sharecroppers was able to leave farming because neither possessed the
education and/or skills needed. In contrast to these uneducated and/or
landless groups, better-educated African Americans who had skills but who
lacked land, typically the children of landowners or the renters who were
fortunate enough to go to school, were most likely to migrate out of the
area when urban factory jobs opened up for African Americans during
World War I.
26 
Politically, Jim Crow segregation introduced mechanisms of social
control that built upon those established during chattel slavery. Lynching
and rape emerged as two interrelated, gender-specific forms of sexual vio-
lence. Perceptions of Black hypersexuality occupied an increasingly
prominent place in American science, popular culture, religious traditions,
and state policies.
27 These beliefs in a deviant Black sexuality in turn
sparked gender-specific controlling images of African American men as
63


--- PAGE 75 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
potential rapists who deserved to be lynched, and African American
women as so morally loose that they were impossible to rape. These gen-
der-specific forms of sexualized violence were essential tools in maintain-
ing economic exploitation and the political subordination of racial
segregation. Ironically, even though Black people were also murdered and
raped under chattel slavery, these crimes were not labeled lynching or rape.
Because lynching and rape only apply to humanbeings who possess legal
freedom and citizenship rights, these terms simply did not apply to
enslaved Africans. Just as animals can be killed at will and sex with animals
is perceived as a deviant sexual practice but not rape, Africans without
rights could not be lynched or raped. In contrast, these forms of sexual-
ized violence were designed to force legally free African American men and
women into their prescribed places under racial segregation. 
Black men negotiated new understandings of Black masculinity in this
economic and political climate. On the one hand, African men were rou-
tinely denied the “40 acres and a mule” that would enable them to support
their families. Moreover, the political disenfranchisement associated with
Jim Crow meant that all Black men were placed in the position of being
unable to protect the women they loved from sexual assault. Because they
failed to “fight fire with fire” by violently resisting the rapists of their
daughters, sisters, wives, and mothers, such men relinquished claims to
hegemonic White masculinity and were relegated to a subordinated Black
masculinity. Ironically, at the same time, these seemingly emasculated men
were depicted as being naturally hyper-heterosexual. Black men were also
seen as being potentially violent, primarily a retaliatory violence against
White men. The myth of the Black rapist emerged in this context.
According to this controlling image, Black men were naturally sexually
violent, primarily through the potential use of the penis as a weapon of
violence against White women. African American men were simultane-
ously accused of having a natural sexual desire for White women that grew
in part from their now untamed buck status as sexual animals, and in part
from ideas about White womanhood as beautiful, the most desirable and
irresistible women, lacking agency in sexual matters, and in need of White
male protection from dangerous “free” Black men.
28 
This period ushered in a different set of experiences for African
American women. Although they had legal freedom, they did not possess
the vote. Black women also needed to work, and their labor in agricultural
64


--- PAGE 76 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
work and in domestic service exposed them to sexual harassment and rape
at work and in public places. Ironically, the property relations of chattel
slavery that exposed Black women to sexual assault by the males in their
master’s family also protected them from sexual assault by White men
from other families or by White males as a group. Black women were the
“private” property of their masters and, as such, enjoyed the “protections”
afforded private property in the United States. Under slavery, Black
women were raped, but similar to marital rape, their victimization was not
perceived as rape because they were chattel, not humans. In contrast,
emancipation and the gaining of individual rights ushered in a new series
of vulnerabilities because such women lacked the so-called protection pro-
vided by elite White men. No longer the property of a fewWhite men,
African American women became sexually available to allWhite men. As
free women who belonged to nobody except themselves and in a climate of
violence that meted out severe consequences for their either defending
themselves or soliciting Black male protection, Black women could be
raped. 
Social practices such as lynching and institutionalized rape that
became so deeply embedded in the fabric of American society required
powerful ideological justifications. The growth of mass media enabled
ideas about Black sexuality to spread more rapidly beyond the reading
public. In 1915, the film Birth ofthe Nation told the story of the origins of
the Ku Klux Klan through a three-hour film drama filled with now-familiar
Black stereotypes. In Birth ofthe Nation , we see a Southern, White prop-
ertied family brought to ruin after the Civil War, with hordes of unruly
Black people running through the streets of their idyllic small town, and
eventually breaking into the family “home” and destroying property. In
response to this treatment by enfranchised but clearly uncivilized Black
citizens, Whites fight back. They form the Ku Klux Klan, depicted as a
noble nationalist organization whose purpose is to save the American
nation (and its White daughters) from a reign of Black terror. To this day,
Birth ofthe Nation stands as a pivotal work in mass media, and it is used to
illustrate early cinematographic techniques to film students. Unfortunately,
Birth of the Nationalso serves as a template for representations of Black
people that also persist today.
The character of Gus, the freed Black man who cannot help lusting
after the White daughter of a prominent Southern family, is important for
65


--- PAGE 77 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
understanding how racial ideologies are created and disseminated. Rather
than submit to Gus, the White heroine protects her honor by jumping off a
cliff to her death. It is important to remember that Black men may have
been depicted as rapists, but this controlling image also depended on paral-
lel ideas about Black women. African American historian Paula Giddings
discusses how depicting Black women as immoral jezebels helped create
representations of Black men as rapists: “often overlooked is the fact that
Black men were thought capable of these sexual crimes becauseof the las-
civious character of the women of the race in a time when women were con-
sidered the foundation of a group’s morality.”
29 In his book, The Plantation
Negro As Freeman, Philip Bruce describes the thinking of the day:
The rape of a negress by the male of her own color is almost unheard
of [because the Black male] is so accustomed to the wantonness of the
women of his own race that it is not strange that his intellect, having no
perception of the personal dignity or the pangs of outraged feeling,
should be unable to gauge the terrible character of this offense against
the integrity of virtuous womanhood.
30 
In brief, jezebels couldn’t be raped.
Gaining Black male protection certainly helped defend Black women
against interracial rape. Yet in a context of state-sanctioned lynching of
Black men under the guise of protecting White womanhood from rape, the
costs were high for Black men who pursued this path to manhood.
31 The
climate of lawlessness that accompanied lynching also meant that Black
women had little recourse against Black men who raped Black women.
Until the challenges raised by the Black Women’s Club Movement in the
late nineteenth century, African American women largely suffered in
silence. The results of interracial rape were visible. After emancipation, a
period of time when Black/White interracial marriages were banned, the
number of biracial African Americans increased.
32 Under rigid rules of Jim
Crow’s de jure racial segregation, the one-drop rule categorized mulatto
children as Black. Because the children of these interracial unions were
born free and no longer benefited their White fathers, their biological
fathers refused to pay for them. Instead, the care and feeding became the
sole province of their Black mothers, often in partnership with African
American men who claimed paternity and raised the children as their own. 
66


--- PAGE 78 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
As economic opportunities shrank, political rights disappeared, and in
a context of escalating violence, many African American men and women
who had the education, skills, and/or means to do so responded by voting
with their feet. Expressing outrage with Black people’s treatment in
Memphis, Ida B. Wells-Barnett urged its African American citizens to
“save our money and leave a town that will neither protect our lives and
property, nor give us a fair trial in the courts, when accused by white per-
sons.”
33 This scenario was repeated across the South. Beginning in the
early twentieth century, many Blacks simply left the rural South, moving
to rural areas of the West, to cities of the South, and with large numbers
continuing on to cities in the North. 
During this period, many African Americans migrated from rural
areas of the South to territories in the West. Throughout African
American communities in Arkansas, Louisiana, and Tennessee, rumors
spread that Oklahoma might provide escape from the harsh conditions in
states in the Deep South. Anita Hill’s family left the Deep South in 1913
and migrated to Oklahoma. There they found “sundown” towns, White
towns with ordinances or de facto rules that prohibited Blacks from their
boundaries after dark. Southern Black migrants, especially those who were
able to acquire land, also founded all-Black townships and a rural life as
farmers that shielded them from the harshest aspects of racial segregation.
African Americans realized that the first line of defense in such harsh con-
ditions lay in renewed self-reliance and commitment to family, church, and
their African American communities. 
Anita Hill provides an important perspective on rural life among
African American landowners. Migration enabled Hill’s family to acquire
land and establish a family farm. These Southern rural families had conti-
nuity from one generation to the next. As Hill describes it, “my parents’
early lives were remarkably similar to my grandparents’. My mother, like
hers, gave birth to thirteen children. And the rural and racially segregated
conditions under which each raised her children were much the same.”
34
Work, church, school, and community all provided additional protective
layers around Black children. The youngest of thirteen children, Hill iden-
tifies her family as the center of her life: 
At home, I came into the world surrounded by family—people of all
ages—and as only a child can conceive, they all belonged to me, and I
67


--- PAGE 79 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
to them. And this marvelously rich world of human interaction more
than made up for what we lacked in cultural experience. We did not
travel, we did not take vacations or go to the movies. We were farm peo-
ple. Our family outings consisted of going to church and prayer meet-
ings, visiting nearby relatives, the yearly all-black rodeo, and the segre-
gated, until I was six fair.
35 
Within the tight confines of all-Black communities, gender operated in
distinctive ways. For one, women had many children. In the case of Hill’s
family, the children came like clockwork, every two years. Lone Tree
Missionary Baptist Church was the center of family spiritual and social
life. As Hill recalls, 
The women of Lone Tree were my role models. Most were farmers and
homemakers who came out of the fields to clean their homes and the
church building. The lessons they taught, both religious and social, are
the most valuable to me. They were not “feminists,” in the modern
sense of the word. They worshiped in a service which prohibited
women from preaching or leading. When women and men sat sepa-
rately in church, it was most likely out of this denigration of women’s
roles. Yet they were essential to the operation of the church and voiced
their opinions. Importantly, they expected just as much from the girls
in the church as from the boys. Even more important, by example, they
taught me about concern for the collective—the community.
36
Hill’s reflections provide an important window on a way of life in which
gender mattered, but in which racism mattered even more. Her retrospec-
tive allows a view of how African American landowners who remained in
Southern communities were able to carve out lives with dignity within the
belly of the beast. 
Because other African American families lacked land, education,
and/or marketable skills, they were not as fortunate as the Hill family. Like
Rosa Lee’s family, they were stuck until the growth of mechanized farm
machinery and agribusiness finally pushed many off the land in the 1930s
and 1940s. By moving to the North and trying to find jobs, they hoped to
join the Black urban working class that preceded them. Early-arriving
migrants who arrived in Northern cities before the 1930s fared much bet-
68


--- PAGE 80 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
ter than their later-arriving counterparts. Beginning in the early twentieth
century, large numbers of African Americans left rural areas of the South
and moved to Southern and Northern cities, creating new Black urban
populations in Southern cities like Birmingham, Alabama and
Washington, D.C., as well as in Northern cities such as New York,
Chicago, Detroit, and Cleveland.
37 
Collectively, these migrations set the stage for a new Black conscious-
ness that developed among migrants who were no longer living among
family and friends in small, rural communities. These waves of migration
in conjunction with ongoing shifts from agricultural work to industrial
capitalism set the stage for the growth of an industrial, urban working
class, for new forms of Black community politics, and for the reorganiza-
tion of gender and sexuality within African American communities. 
RACIAL SEGREGATION AND URBAN GHETTOIZATION 
The Northern migrations enabled two important trends to unfold. On the
one hand, cities became racially segregated and this resegregation fostered
new forms of African American economic exploitation. Racial segregation
in Northern cities routinely exploited Black people by keeping them con-
fined to the worst jobs, locked up in the worst neighborhoods, and, as was
the case with the “sundown” towns of Oklahoma, generally restricted from
movement in White areas. Black men were relegated to the dirtiest jobs in
industry, when they could get those jobs at all. The majority of Black
women remained in domestic service, this time doing day work instead of
the live-in work prevalent in the South. Wages were better than in the rural
South, but wage discrimination meant that African Americans were under-
paid. Because Black families had limited options in a context of racially
segregated housing, landlords raised rents and pushed families into over-
crowded and unhealthy housing conditions. Limited job opportunities and
residential segregation combined to produce a new form of prison, racially
segregated Black urban neighborhoods that became known as “ghettos”
and that are the precursors to the contemporary “hood.”
38
On the other hand, Black people within these new urban ghettos
gained new tools for fighting back. Despite police mistreatment and de jure
discrimination, Northern Blacks clearly had more political rights than
their Southern counterparts. African Americans from many different
69


--- PAGE 81 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
places who found themselves squeezed together in new Black urban neigh-
borhoods founded churches, fraternal organizations, social clubs, and
other new Black organizations that fostered a cross-fertilization of ideas.
Urbanization marked the emergence of major African American political
organizations. Some like the NAACP (1909) and the Urban League (1910)
became crucial elements during the civil rights era that lasted until the
1954 Brown v. Board of Education decision outlawed racial segregation.
Other organizations relied on Black Nationalist ideology that preached
self-reliance, economic development, and separate development. For
example, The United Negro Improvement Association founded by
Marcus Garvey contained a large, working-class constituency of Black
immigrants from the Caribbean and Black migrants from the rural South. 
African American antiracist politics reflected the contradictions cre-
ated by migrations to cities, the ghettoization that African Americans
encountered, and social movements that arose in response to Black politi-
cal, economic, and social disenfranchisement. The 1920s constitute a
watershed decade within Northern urban Black communities such as New
York, Detroit, Chicago, and other large cities. During this crucial period of
Black community development, one characterized by “ideological, politi-
cal, and cultural contestation between an emergent Black bourgeoisie and
an emerging Black working class,”
39 ideas about race, class, sexuality, gen-
der, and African American politics were reworked in a variety of ways. The
establishment of multifaceted urban Black communities enabled women,
gays and lesbians, and Black workers to organize and to become more vis-
ible and vocal on their own behalf. In essence, urbanization enabled for-
merly submerged Black subpopulations to emerge and fostered the
visibility of a preexisting Black heterogeneity concerning gender, sexuality,
class, and immigrant status. As a result, the complex processes of urban-
ization had gender and class specific consequences for African American
community organization, for Black cultural institutions, and for the emer-
gence of Black popular culture.
40
One of the most noteworthy effects of Black urbanization was the
migration of Black single women and its effects on African American
women and their families. Freed from the responsibilities of perpetual
childbearing and church attendance, Black women migrants found new
lives in the cities. Not everyone welcomed these changes. Resembling
postemancipation fears about Black men who had been “freed” from the
70


--- PAGE 82 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
domesticating influence of slavery, Black women who were “freed” from
the domesticity of rural Southern families were often seen as threatening
the social order. Three fears of the early twentieth century that were asso-
ciated with African American women included: (1) rampant and uncon-
trolled female sexuality; (2) fear of miscegenation; and (3) independent
Black female desire.
41 Just as Black men’s sexuality had been made the focus
of the changes brought about by emancipation in the rural South, Black
women’s sexuality became an important measure of African American
progress in Northern cities. 
Both middle-class and working-class Black women challenged the pre-
vailing ideology of Black women’s sexual immorality, yet they did so from
distinctive vantage points. Middle-class Black women, especially those in
the Black Baptist Church and within the Black Women’s Club Movement,
refuted the controlling image of the jezebel by advocating a “politics of
respectability” characterized by cleanliness of person and property, tem-
perance, thrift, polite manners, and sexual purity.
42 In this context, many
middle-class Black women viewed the behavior of Black women migrants
as socially dangerous and engaged in reform efforts to help their disadvan-
taged sisters. Black middle-class female reformer Jane Edna Hunter’s
description of the sexuality of dance halls and nightclubs draws heavily
upon Western discourses of deviant Black sexuality and eerily foreshadows
some contemporary condemnations of hip-hop culture
43: “Here, to the
tune of St. Louis voodoo blues, half-naked Negro girls dance shameless
dances with men in Spanish costumes. . . . The whole atmosphere is one of
unrestrained animality, the jungle faintly veneered with civilized trap-
pings.”
44 From the vantage point of middle-class Black reformers, the pos-
itive influence of the home and church could counterbalance the dance
halls and jazz clubs signaling the dangers of the street. By claiming
respectability through their manners and morals, poor and working-class
Black women might define themselves outside the parameters of prevail-
ing racist discourse. 
Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham describes how, in the early twentieth
century, notions of respectability for working-class Blacks were inter-
twined with perceptions of Black urban space:
The church played the single most important role in influencing nor-
mative values and distinguishing respectable from non-respectable
71


--- PAGE 83 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
behavior among working-class Blacks . . . the competing images of the
church and the street symbolized cultural divisions within the mass of
the black working poor. . . . The street signified male turf, a public
space of worldly dangers and forbidden pleasures. Churches and house-
holds, both rejecting the worldly attractions of male social space, signi-
fied fame and also sacred space. Women who strolled the streets or
attended dance halls and cheap theaters promiscuously blurred the
boundaries of gender.
45
Those who embraced a politics of respectability aimed to provide dignity
for working-class African American women migrants who led hard lives,
yet the actual programs targeted toward working-class women clearly
advised them to emulate the respectability of middle-class female role
models. Despite being embedded in racially segregated communities, the
politics of respectability basically aimed for White approval. Achieving
respectability pivoted on adhering to standards of White femininity inher-
ited from the tradition of Southern chivalry. Not only were these standards
difficult for Black female industrial and domestic workers to achieve, to the
dismay of middle-class reformers, many working-class women rejected
them. 
Working-class Black women in urban areas wanted respect but saw the
contradictions that plagued this version of respectability. Sexuality was
one of the few realms in which masses of African American women could
exercise autonomy, and thus tangibly distinguish themselves as free women
both from the sexual exploitation of slavery as well as the demands of hav-
ing thirteen babies in insular Southern rural families. In her study of Black
women’s blues, Angela Davis points out that “denial of sexual agency was
in an important respect the denial of freedom for working-class Black
women.”
46 Mammy and jezebel may have remained installed in White
minds as archetypes of Black womanhood, but working-class Black women
resisted and reworked these images differently from middle-class Black
women. Primarily through a blues culture that gave voice to their concerns,
they too rejected jezebel as the icon of a debased Black female sexuality, yet
they refused to jettison a Black women’s sexuality grounded in sensuality
and desire. Respectability was too high a price. Instead, they defined their
sexual selves in terms much closer to erotic sensibilities about Black female
expressiveness, sensuality, and sexuality. Angela Davis reports how urban-
72


--- PAGE 84 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
ization allowed a Black women’s blues to emerge that brought voice to
emergent Black working-class women’s consciousness and sexuality.
Women’s blues provided a cultural space for community-building among
working-class Black women, and it was a space in which “the coercions of
bourgeois notions of sexual purity and ‘true womanhood’ were absent.”
47
The growth of Black women’s blues paralleled another dimension of
the greatly expanded discourse on sexuality in the 1920s that also rejected
“bourgeois notions of sexual purity.” Urbanization also fostered the
increased visibility of lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) African
Americans.
48 Collectively, the demands of rural agricultural life, Jim Crow
laws, and a conservative Black church that saw homosexuality as a sin com-
bined to stigmatize all seemingly deviant sexualities, heterosexual and gay
alike. Because migration to cities enabled formerly isolated LGB African
Americans to find one another and to create a critical mass within the con-
fines of Black ghettos, urbanization catalyzed the emergence of a gay, les-
bian, and bisexual presence within urban African American communities.
Harlem, in particular, housed the development of a Black gay and lesbian,
presence that challenged the tenets of heterosexism.
49 Black artists used
their art to grapple with ideas of sex, gender, and race. Black men, many of
them like Langston Hughes, closeted gay men, sparked a Harlem
Renaissance with varying subtexts on Black sexuality. A Black lesbian pres-
ence remained closeted, but revisionist work on Black urbanization sug-
gests that Black lesbians in urban areas were also able to craft a communal,
albeit submerged, existence.
50 By their presence, gay, lesbian, and bisexual
African men and women challenged prevailing codes of Black masculinity
and Black femininity. 
Then as is the case now, heterosexual Black men found it far more dif-
ficult to challenge hegemonic ideas of femininity or masculinity than did
working-class Black women and African American gays, lesbians, and
bisexuals living in big cities. Instead, many Black men either ran away from
responsibility for their families (the precursor “migration” out of Black
domestic space that set the stage for today’s female-headed households) or
they tried to refute subordinated Black masculinity by living their own ver-
sions of a politics of respectability. Under the strictures of racial segrega-
tion, many middle-class African American men, in particular, paid a high
price for trying to show that Black men could be just like White men.
51
Unlike working-class Black women and men immersed in blues culture, or
73


--- PAGE 85 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
gay, lesbian, or bisexual Black people exploring new forms of eroticism, Jill
Nelson describes how her father lost the ability to show love as one casu-
alty of trying to be a “real” man: 
For him and many fathers of his generation, the price of navigating the
segregated road to success in the 1940s and 50s was defensiveness, a
constant, smoldering rage, the loss of the ability to communicate love in
any way but through material things. The closing of that opening, the
soft spot in the soul. That allows us to give and receive love. I know this
had much to do with being black and male, that sense that black men
have of always moving through a world that is hostile, of constantly hav-
ing to prove themselves as non-threatening, intelligent, finally worthy of
some small chance, while holding on to some sense of manhood.
52 
Nelson identifies the costs to her father and to his loved ones of his deci-
sion to hold onto widely accepted definitions of manhood that some argue
continue today as part of a contemporary politics of respectability. As
Devon Carbado points out, “the ‘innocent’ or ‘respectable’ Black male
image is considered to be essential to Black civil rights agendas,”
53 yet it is
an image that is difficult to maintain because it requires such self-censorship
and denial. Moreover, just as such a politics may provide limited relief
from being a direct target, because it fails to directly challenge the system
of ideas itself, such respectability provides only partial relief. 
Despite the strictures of limited job opportunities and racially segre-
gated housing, migration from the South to Northern cities prior to the
1960s enabled many working-class African Americans to improve their
lives. The children of Northern working-class Black families, especially
those who had access to education and who came of age in the 1950s and
1960s, were positioned to benefit from the better job opportunities and
new legislative climate catalyzed by Black political struggle. Migrants may
have been poor, but, like recent immigrants to the United States, Black
migrants still had hope that moving to cities would provide a better life, if
not for them then for their children. The struggles of the civil rights move-
ment in the South in the 1950s and 1960s and the dramatic legislative vic-
tories that changed the legal context for African Americans fostered a
belief among African Americans in the North that Black activism would
yield tangible political and economic benefits. 
74


--- PAGE 86 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
Born in 1971 to a mother deeply involved in Black Nationalist politics,
Tupac Shakur exemplified the future of Black political struggle. He was
born after the passage of unprecedented civil rights legislation and should
have benefited from the accomplishments of both the civil rights and Black
power movements. Instead, Shakur spent his childhood living in poverty and
witnessed firsthand the devastation of Black urban neighborhoods strug-
gling with drugs, crime, and violence. When, in 1995, one year before he was
murdered, Tupac rapped, “I got nothin’ to lose—it’s just me against the
world,” his words spoke to a growing recognition among African Americans
of how Black politics had failed. By 1995, Tupac was surrounded by many
highly visible media images of successful African Americans but saw little
connection between his life and theirs. In explaining this situation, African
American social critic Randall Robinson points out: “Take no comfort from
what you may see as examples of conspicuous black success. It has closed no
economic gap and is statistically insignificant. It is the children of the black
poor, the bulk legatees of American slavery, that we must salvage—or, in our
time, we will have marked time but accomplished nothing.”
54
THE CLOSING DOOR: THE POST–CIVIL RIGHTS ERA
Many accounts of the vanishing color line make little room for the Tupac
Shakurs among contemporary Black youth. Instead, they celebrate a new
multicultural America that seems bent on sweeping Tupac’s nihilism
under the rug and relegating racism to the dustbins of the past. For exam-
ple, in Love’s Revolution, Maria Root points to increased rates of interra-
cial marriage, especially for Black men, as evidence of a “revolution” in
values that is ushering in a new nonracial America.
55 Identifying the growth
of a new Black middle class as evidence of racial uplift, well-respected
social scientist William Julius Wilson argues that racism diminishes the
further up the economic ladder African Americans climb.
56 In this regard,
he joins other scholars who view the racial ideologies and practices of Latin
American nations where “money whitens” as applicable for American race
relations. All of these factors matter—mass media, marital rates, and a
changing social class structure all indicate that former patterns of racial
segregation have given way to something new. But what?
For all Americans, the political, economic, and social reorganization of
American society that began in the 1970s and took shape during the 1980s
75


--- PAGE 87 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
and 1990s suggested that a more democratic, multicultural America was at
hand. Politically, much changed in the United States. Social movements by
Blacks, Latinos, women, and gays and lesbians, among others, catalyzed a
changing legal climate in the United States. In a span of less than twenty-
five years, legal reforms set the stage for the erosion of a wide array of
mechanisms for reproducing social inequality in American society. In addi-
tion to the 1954 Brown v. Board of EducationSupreme Court decision, in
the decades that followed, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibited dis-
crimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, age, ethnicity, or
national origin; the Fair Housing Law of 1968 prohibited discrimination
against people seeking housing on the basis of race, color, religion, or
national origin; and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 repealed local discrim-
inatory practices against African American voters, an act amended in 1975
and 1982 to include linguistic minorities. The Immigration Act of 1965
removed barriers to immigration for people from primarily non-White
nations. The 1967 Loving v. VirginiaSupreme Court decision removed all
legal barriers to interracial marriage. In 2003, in Lawrence and Garner v.
Texas, the Supreme Court struck down an antisodomy law that made it
illegal for same sex partners to engage in sexual conduct that was allowed
for different sex partners. In essence, the court ruled that the sexual prac-
tices of LGBT people were covered under privacy laws. Collectively, this
new legal infrastructure provided a legal context for challenging deep-
seated customs across virtually all segments of American society.
In contrast to the victories in the legal system, the changing contours of
residential racial segregation during the twenty-year period from 1980 to
2000 suggested that, for many African Americans, this new multicultural
America would remain elusive. In 1999, African Americans (55.1 percent)
were far more likely than non-Hispanic Whites (21.7 percent) to live inside
the central city boundaries of metropolitan areas.
57 This overarching frame-
work of disproportionately Black central cities and disproportionately White
greater metropolitan areas produced new patterns of residential racial seg-
regation. While residential racial segregation declined overall, for large seg-
ments of the Black population, especially poor and working-class African
Americans, residential racial resegregation within urban areas persisted.
58
The concentration of poor and working-class Black people in racially segre-
gated neighborhoods has been so severe in metropolitan areas with large
Black populations, that it is often described as “hypersegregation.”
59 
76


--- PAGE 88 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
By the 2000 census, the African American population numbered 36.4
million people and was characterized by clear social class differences that
took geographic form within patterns of racial segregation.
60 For middle-
class African Americans and for those working-class African Americans
who were able to move into the middle class, the Black political movements
of the 1960s and 1970s delivered tangible, albeit tenuous, gains. The pro-
portion of African Americans in the middle class clearly grew in this new
legal climate, spurred by new opportunities that allowed many African
Americans to join the middle class for the first time.
61 Women and men who
acquired jobs as managers in corporations and government agencies, as
well as certain staff and line positions in these sectors, benefited from the
changed political climate. African American physicians, lawyers, teachers,
university professors, engineers, journalists, and other professionals typi-
cally procured sufficient job security, job autonomy, decision-making
power, and good salaries and benefits that enabled them to move into or up
within a growing Black middle class.
62
An increasingly heterogeneous Black middle class emerged, based in
part on the paths that they followed to get there. 63 Some well-off African
Americans were positioned to take advantage of the opportunities created
by the civil rights movement. Their families had been middle-class for gen-
erations, had participated in Black community politics, and had functioned
as a Black bourgeoisie or leadership class.
64 Far more African Americans
arrived via the route of individual social mobility from the working class.
This upward mobility typically required access to higher education; the
protections provided by strong antidiscrimination and affirmative action
programs in education and employment; the assimilation of White norms
and values, including those concerning gender and sexuality; as well as the
social skills needed to handle increasing contact with White people as col-
leagues and friends. No matter how they arrived in the Black middle class,
many well-off Blacks engaged in yet another migration, this time out of
African American inner-city neighborhoods into racially integrated urban
and suburban neighborhoods. The Census Bureau reports that from 1980
to 2000 residential racial segregation declined for African Americans
(although it was still higher than any other group).
65 Although these com-
munities routinely resegregated and often became all-Black enclaves, they
did provide better housing, schools, and facilities for African American
children.
66
77


--- PAGE 89 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Ideally, African American children growing up in middle-class neigh-
borhoods would retain the class benefits provided by their parents. There
is some evidence that passing on middle-class economic gains in the
post–civil rights era may be far more difficult than originally thought, in
part, due to the proximity of Black middle-class neighborhoods to work-
ing-class and poor Black communities. Mary Patillo-McCoy’s study of the
difficulties faced by Black youth in the fictional Chicago neighborhood of
Groveland illustrate the pressures facing middle-class Black youth. For
one, they are often mistaken for delinquents by security guards and other
officials because they mimic the dress, walk, and talk of working-class
Black youth. In this way, stylistic choices often have tangible material con-
sequences. For another, in a community in which the influences of ghetto
life permeate everyday life, embracing ghetto styles takes on different
meaning than for youth who are in predominantly White middle-class
neighborhoods: “sometimes, when you dress like a gangsta, talk like a
gangsta, and rap like a gangsta, soon enough you area gangsta.”
67 
Many poor and working-class African Americans need not assume the
trappings of gangstas—the lack of economic options in their neighbor-
hoods pressures them to become gangstas. For Black youth who feel they
have “nothin’ to lose” because they lack access to the housing, education,
health care, and jobs needed for upward social mobility, the political victo-
ries of the civil rights and Black power movements failed to produce the
promised economic development envisioned by civil rights activists. The
hope was that the opportunities for Black working-class children would
continue after the victories of the civil rights and Black power movements.
But four back-to-back recessions in the 1970s, a growing White backlash
against equal opportunity, and the ascendancy of conservative Republican
administrations under Ronald Reagan (1980–1988) and George Bush
(1988–1992) as well as the election of George W . Bush to the presidency in
2000 combined to shatter this expectation. In the 1980s, Republican
administrations set about dismantling enforcement efforts for equal oppor-
tunity, cutting funding for urban programs, incarcerating growing num-
bers of African Americans in the burgeoning prison industry, shrinking the
social welfare budget through punitive measures, and endorsing historical
labor market patterns.
68 Fearful of losing conservative White voters who
had traditionally supported the Democratic Party, party leaders shifted the
party to the right. For example, in 1996, Democratic president Bill Clinton
78


--- PAGE 90 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
signed the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation
Act, a law that, despite its lofty title, effectively shifted social welfare pro-
grams back to the states and signaled a retrenchment from federal social
welfare programs.
69
Participants in civil rights and Black Nationalist struggles saw their
activism as providing opportunities for the next generation of Black youth
to live better lives. They reasonably expected that, as did earlier genera-
tions of African Americans, Black youth living in inner-city areas might
use routes for upward social mobility to better themselves. Instead, as the
music of Tupac Shakur and other hip-hop artists reminds us, the door of
economic opportunity closed and routes for upward social mobility seem
distant memories. For far too many Black youth, inner-city neighborhoods
have become dumping grounds, as one observer describes it, “jobless,
crime-ridden ghettos [that] have become glorified, modern-day concentra-
tion camps.”
70 Within inner-city neighborhoods, public schools are dilapi-
dated, teachers are underpaid and overwhelmed, guns and the informal
drug economy have made African American neighborhoods dangerous,
and jobs have vanished.
71 Gone are the sports programs, music, debate
clubs, and other elements of public school education that helped poor and
working-class youth stay in school. 
Poor and working-class Black youth who grew up in the 1980s and
1990s, often within racially segregated, inner-city neighborhoods, encoun-
tered markedly different economic, political, and social conditions than
those that faced their parents or those provided to middle-class youth of all
races. Despite coming of age during a time of unprecedented social
change, regardless of gender, opportunities for poor Black youth eroded.
For example, for children under age eighteen the poverty rate is consis-
tently three times higher for Black children than for White children—in
1998, it was 37 percent for Black children versus 11 percent for non-
Hispanic White children.
72 When it comes to poverty among Black chil-
dren, gender did not make a significant difference. Black males under age
eighteen had a poverty rate of 36 percent and Black females a rate of 37.3
percent.
73 With over one-third of all Black youth living in poverty, mainly
in inner-city, racially segregated neighborhoods, young Black men and
women both face limited prospects for quality education, well-paid
employment, and stable family life. At the same time, poor and working-
class Black youth also face gender-specific challenges in two main areas: (1)
79


--- PAGE 91 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
eroding work and family structures within urban Black working-class
neighborhoods; and (2) the changing contours of Black working-class cul-
ture assaulted by drugs, crime, and guns. 
The most noteworthy structural changes within African American
working-class neighborhoods in the post–World War II period concern
work and family.
74 Joblessness fosters family disruption for both men and
women, and the effects on each have taken gender-specific forms. In this
regard, the rapid growth of a criminal justice system that ensnares large
numbers of young, working-class, urban African American men has sepa-
rated them from their families and left many with slim prospects for stable
family life. There appears to be no place for young Black men in urban
labor markets, but there is one in jails and prisons. Since 1980, whatever
measures are used—rates of arrest, conviction, jail time, parole, or types of
crime—African American men are more likely than White American men
to encounter the criminal justice system. For example, in 1990, the non-
profit Washington, D.C. based Sentencing Project released a survey sug-
gesting that, on an average day in the United States, one in every four
African American men aged 20–29 was either in prison, jail, or on proba-
tion/parole.
75 Incarcerating young Black men is profitable. The privatized
prison industry capitalizes on the growth of prisons. This industry con-
sists of a network of private corporations that provide every service imag-
inable to prisons and inmates, from prison construction and operation to
telecommunications services, food, clothing, and medicine. Corporations
also capitalize on cheap prison labor.
76 Jobless Blacks collecting unemploy-
ment insurance are unprofitable. In contrast, “the inroads that have been
made in privatizing the prison industry have created a profit motive for
keeping young Blacks locked up.”
77 
In this context, women are left to head families, a structural change
with great implications for African American youth and for Black working-
class neighborhoods. By 1999, less than one-half (47 percent) of all Black
families were married-couple families, 45 percent were maintained by
women with no spouses present, while only 8 percent were maintained by
men with no spouses present.
78 Families maintained by Black women are
not inherently worse than those maintained by married couples but a size-
able majority of Black families that are maintained by women live in
poverty.
79 Family income, however, is greatly affected by having a male
earner in the household, primarily because men on average earn far more
80


--- PAGE 92 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
than women when they are able to find work. Family composition affects
family income. For example, in 1998, 20.8 percent of Black families main-
tained by married couples had incomes less than $25,000. The correspon-
ding percentage for Black families maintained by men with no spouse
present was 43.1 percent and by Black women with no spouse present was
66.8 percent.
80 The lowest percentage of families with income under
$25,000 was found among married couple families (20.8), the highest
among families headed by single mothers (66.8), and the middle by single
fathers heading families (43.1). 
These structural changes in work and family affected the quality of life
in Black urban neighborhoods, and they catalyzed changes within Black
working-class culture. During the onslaught of drugs and guns in the
1980s, Black working-class neighborhoods simply became more dangerous.
Residents of working-class, urban Black communities increasingly beset by
drugs and crime used the terms “decent” and “street” families to distin-
guish stable yet vulnerable working-class families from working-class fam-
ilies in crisis.
81 In this context, the “decent” families, those where members
had some connection to traditional jobs in the formal blue-collar labor
market or the secondary labor markets, struggled to get by. Plagued by
chronic unemployment, these families confronted uncertain industrial
jobs, underpaid clerical work, and low-paid service work. Such families
may move in and out of the social welfare system and individuals within
these “decent” families may have difficulties with the police. In contrast,
“street” families, those who have largely fallen out of the formal labor mar-
ket and whose fate is linked to the informal economy of the global drug
industry, have more tenuous connections to school, employment, and other
markers of citizenship. They too may move in and out of the social welfare
and penal systems, but they hold little hope of ever being “decent” or even
wanting to become “decent.”
Gender matters in this working-class variation of the tension between
Black respectability and Black authenticity, between being “decent” and
“street.” The growth of the prison culture in the 1980s greatly influenced
African American social organization, especially for young African
American men. In particular, the arrest and imprisonment of Black street
gangs in the 1970s and 1980s fostered more pronounced and organized
gang structures within prisons that became conduits for hierarchies of
masculinity. Prison gangs inevitably became connected to their street gang
81


--- PAGE 93 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
counterparts (in fact, many join gangs while in prison, primarily for pro-
tection). As the line between street gangs and prison gangs blurred, so did
the distinctions between prison culture, street culture, and some aspects of
Black youth culture. More important, this growing interconnectedness of
prison, street, and youth culture, with the importance given to hierarchies
of masculinity, affects African American neighborhoods and families. The
valorization of thug life within Black youth culture, the growing misogyny
within heterosexual love relationships, and the increased visibility (and
some would say the increased virulence) of homophobic violence targeted
to gay, lesbian, and bisexual African Americans all seem to be casualties of
the incarceration of African American men and the ceaseless need to prove
one’s “manhood.”
82 
Black women have often found themselves on the front line in dealing
with issues that affect Black men. As girlfriends and wives, Black women
are often the ones who bear the brunt of Black men’s anger at a racism that
has and continues to operate so thoroughly through gendered practices and
ideologies. Reflecting the realities of street culture, some forms of rap
music may serve the purpose of political expression concerning racism,
but they also now operate as an important site for the spread of sexism and
homophobia. Male artists who refer to Black girls and women as “bitches,”
“hos,” “freaks,” “skeezers,” “gold diggers,” and “chickenheads” malign
Black women, “decent” and “street” alike. Protesting this misogyny in rap,
Johnnetta Cole and Beverly Guy-Sheftall contend: “We are concerned
because we believe that hip-hop is more misogynist and disrespectful of
Black girls and women than other popular music genres. The casual refer-
ences to rape and other forms of violence and the soft-porn visuals and
messages of many rap music videos are seared into the consciousness of
young Black boys and girls at an early age.”
83
Despite the misogyny that takes the form of Black women-blaming
that permeates American culture, Black mothers who struggle to retain
“decent” families remain justifiably worried about the effects of “street
culture” on their sons. Black daughters often misunderstand this concern
until they become mothers. Several African American autobiographies,
especially those written by Black women, identify this theme of Black
mothers who treat their sons differently from their daughters. For exam-
ple, in her memoir An American Story , journalist Debra Dickerson
describes her childhood as one of five siblings, four girls and one boy.
82


--- PAGE 94 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
Despite her academic achievements, her mother ignored her whereas her
brother, who routinely did poorly, was repeatedly forgiven for his mis-
deeds.
84 In her aptly titled volume, Mama’s Girl, Veronica Chambers
reports similar differential treatment: “my brother . . . was the only person
I ever met who almost flunked kindergarten. He was smart—eventually he
would test better in math than I did—but he was badly behaved. As he got
older, his behavior got worse, until it reached the point where he was
always talking back to the teachers and never bothered to do any of the
work.”
85 Chambers’s mother was so worried about her son that his actions
formed the subject of many conversations with her women friends.
Chambers felt neglected: “there was never any talk about me or what I
needed. I was just a quick rest stop in their marathon conversations.”
86
Dickerson and Chambers viewed their mothers’ behavior through the
lens of childhood, and they came to the conclusion that a certain inequal-
ity stemmed from this differential treatment. But Black mothers who
worry about the fate of their sons because they are single parents living in
dangerous neighborhoods may also be reacting to bona fide threats to their
sons’ well-being. African American women are often particularly afraid for
their sons, fearing that their son’s race and size might get them killed for
no reason. Marita Golden captures this fear for her son Michael growing
up in Washington, D.C.:
My son careened into adolescence. I heard the deepening of Michael’s
voice, witnessed the growth spurts that propelled him to a height that
echoed his father’s, saw the sudden appearance of muscles. . . . I was
flushed with trepidation. Soon Michael would inhabit that narrow, cor-
rupt crawl space in the minds of whites and some black people too, a
space reserved for criminals, outcasts, misfits, and black men. Soon he
would become a permanent suspect.
87
Golden knows that her son must leave boyhood behind, but she sees all too
clearly the costs of doing so. She does not want to join the legions of Black
women who attend funerals, burying children who are far younger than
they are.
These new social relations that disrupt Black families, incarcerate young
men, leave Black women as single mothers, and foster new forms of Black
83


--- PAGE 95 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
working-class culture constitute yet another racial formation that builds
upon and changes those of the past. Chattel slavery as a distinct form of
bondage, the labor exploitation of rural Southern agriculture, and urban
industrialization and the racial segregation of Black populations through
ghettoization have all left their mark on today. These three racial forma-
tions may have peaked during specific periods of African American history,
but now they overlap, draw strength from one another, and continue to
contribute to the new racism. For example, reflecting this past-in-present
racism, pockets of rural poverty in the contemporary American South are
a direct consequence of sharecropping and other agricultural policies and
technologies of the postemancipation South. Similarly, African American
hyper-ghettos in Baltimore, Philadelphia, Detroit, Chicago, and other large
metropolitan areas as well as urban/suburban housing patterns that make
many cities de factoBlack ghettos, are direct descendents of policies of de
factoracial segregation developed during the height of urban industrial-
ization. Even slavery persists, but not in the form of chattel slavery expe-
rienced by enslaved Africans in the American South. If one defines slavery
as “the total control of one person by another for the purpose of economic
exploitation,”
88 children and young women and men involved in prostitu-
tion and the situation of illegal immigrants held in debt bondage to pay off
the cost of their passage constitute reworked versions of slavery. 
Just as emerging structures of the new racism constitute a reformula-
tion of former racial formations, the closing door of racial opportunity of
the post–civil rights era also invokes ideas and practices about class, gen-
der, and sexuality associated with those prior periods. All three past-in-
present racial formations have effects that endure into the present and are
likely to persist, regardless of changes in ideology. In The Debt, African
American social critic Randall Robinson describes the legacy of these prior
racial formations: “No nation can enslave a race of people for hundreds of
years, set them free bedraggled and penniless, pit them, without assistance
in a hostile environment, against privileged victimizers, and then reason-
ably expect the gap between the heirs of the two groups to narrow. Lines,
begun parallel and left alone, can never touch.”
89
The contemporary closing door of opportunity must be judged in the
context of prior racial formations dedicated to maintaining the “parallel
lines” of separate and unequal opportunities and outcomes. Legal changes
are necessary, but they are far from sufficient in responding to a new seem-
84


--- PAGE 96 ---
THE PAST IS EVER PRESENT
ingly color-blind racism where the past is ever present. Contemporary
ideas about race, gender, and sexuality did not drop from the sky. In this
context, neither Black men nor women can win an oppression contest,
because both face different challenges raised by the new racism. Both suf-
fer from different expressions of the disappearing hope that the closing
door of opportunity represents.
85


--- PAGE 97 ---



--- PAGE 98 ---
THREE
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES,
CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
Racism, Heterosexism, 
and Black Sexuality
White fear of black sexuality is a basic ingredient of
white racism.
—Cornel West
For African Americans, exploring how sexuality has been
manipulated in defense of racism is not new. Scholars have long
examined the ways in which “white fear of black sexuality” has
been a basic ingredient of racism. For example, colonial
regimes routinely manipulated ideas about sexuality in order to
maintain unjust power relations.
1 Tracing the history of contact
between English explorers and colonists and West African soci-
eties, historian Winthrop Jordan contends that English percep-
tions of sexual practices among African people reflected
preexisting English beliefs about Blackness, religion, and ani-
mals.
2 American historians point to the significance of sexuality
to chattel slavery. In the United States, for example, slaveown-
ers relied upon an ideology of Black sexual deviance to regulate
and exploit enslaved Africans.
3 Because Black feminist analyses
pay more attention to women’s sexuality, they too identify how
the sexual exploitation of women has been a basic ingredient of
racism. For example, studies of African American slave women
routinely point to sexual victimization as a defining feature of
American slavery.
4 Despite the important contributions of this
extensive literature on race and sexuality, because much of the


--- PAGE 99 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
literature assumes that sexuality means heterosexuality, it ignores how
racism and heterosexism influence one another. 
In the United States, the assumption that racism and heterosexism
constitute two separate systems of oppression masks how each relies upon
the other for meaning. Because neither system of oppression makes sense
without the other, racism and heterosexism might be better viewed as shar-
ing one history with similar yet disparate effects on all Americans differ-
entiated by race, gender, sexuality, class, and nationality. People who are
positioned at the margins of both systems and who are harmed by both
typically raise questions about the intersections of racism and heterosex-
ism much earlier and/or more forcefully than those people who are in posi-
tions of privilege. In the case of intersections of racism and heterosexism,
Black lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered (LGBT) people were
among the first to question how racism and heterosexism are intercon-
nected. As African American LGBT people point out, assuming that all
Black people are heterosexual and that all LGBT people are White distorts
the experiences of LGBT Black people. Moreover, such comparisons mis-
read the significance of ideas about sexuality to racism and race to hetero-
sexism.
5 
Until recently, questions of sexuality in general, and homosexuality in
particular, have been treated as crosscutting, divisive issues within
antiracist African American politics. The consensus issue of ensuring
racial unity subordinated the allegedly crosscutting issue of analyzing sex-
uality, both straight and gay alike. This suppression has been challenged
from two directions. Black women, both heterosexual and lesbian, have
criticized the sexual politics of African American communities that leave
women vulnerable to single motherhood and sexual assault. Black feminist
and womanist projects have challenged Black community norms of a sex-
ual double standard that punishes women for behaviors in which men are
equally culpable. Black gays and lesbians have also criticized these same
sexual politics that deny their right to be fully accepted within churches,
families, and other Black community organizations. Both groups of critics
argue that ignoring the heterosexism that underpins Black patriarchy hin-
ders the development of a progressive Black sexual politics. As Cathy
Cohen and Tamara Jones contend, “Black people need a liberatory politics
that includes a deep understanding of how heterosexism operates as a sys-
tem of oppression, both independently and in conjunction with other such
88


--- PAGE 100 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
systems. We need a black liberatory politics that affirms black lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender sexualities. We need a black liberatory politics
that understands the roles sexuality and gender play in reinforcing the
oppression rooted in many black communities.”
6 Developing a progressive
Black sexual politics requires examining how racism and heterosexism
mutually construct one another. 
MAPPING RACISM AND HETEROSEXISM: 
THE PRISON AND THE CLOSET 
We regarded the struggle in prison as a microcosm of the struggle
as a whole. We would fight inside as we had fought outside. The
racism and repression were the same; I would simply have to fight
on different terms.
—Nelson Mandela
Like Nelson Mandela’s view, when it comes to racism in the United States,
life for African American women and men can be compared to being in
prison.
7 Certainly the metaphor of the prison encapsulates the historical
placement of African Americans in the U.S. political economy. The
absence of political rights under chattel slavery and Jim Crow segregation
and the use of police state powers against African Americans in urban
ghettos have meant that Black people could be subjugated, often with lit-
tle recourse. Moreover, prisons are rarely run solely by force. Routine prac-
tices such as strip searches, verbal abuse, restricting basic privileges, and
ignoring physical and sexual assault among inmates aim to control prison-
ers by dehumanizing them. Visiting his brother Robbie, who was incarcer-
ated on a life sentence in a Pennsylvania prison, author John Wideman
describes this disciplinary process: 
The visitor is forced to become an inmate. Subjected to the same sorts
of humiliation and depersonalization. Made to feel powerless, intimi-
dated by the might of the state. Visitors are treated like both children
and ancient, incorrigible sinners. We experience a crash course that
teaches us in a dramatic, unforgettable fashion just how low a prisoner
is in the institution’s estimation. We also learn how rapidly we can
89


--- PAGE 101 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
descend to the same depth. . . . We suffer the keepers’ prying eyes, pry-
ing machines, prying hands. We let them lock us in without any guaran-
tee the doors will open when we wish to leave. We are in fact their pris-
oners until they release us. That was the idea. To transform the visitor
into something he despised and feared. A prisoner.
8
As direct recipients of the anti–civil rights agenda advanced under conser-
vative Republican administrations, contemporary African Americans living
in inner cities experienced the brunt of punitive governmental policies that
had a similar intent.
9 Dealing with impersonal bureaucracies often subjected
them to the same sorts of “humiliation and depersonalization” that
Wideman felt while visiting his brother. Just as he was “made to feel power-
less, intimidated by the might of the state,” residents of African American
inner-city neighborhoods who deal with insensitive police officers, unre-
sponsive social workers, and disinterested teachers report similar feelings.
African American reactions to racial resegregation in the post–civil
rights era, especially those living in hyper-segregated, poor, inner-city
neighborhoods, resemble those of people who are in prison. Prisoners that
turn on one another are much easier to manage than ones whose hostility
is aimed at their jailers. Far too often, African Americans coping with racial
segregation and ghettoization simply turn on one another, reflecting
heightened levels of alienation and nihilism.
10 Faced with no jobs, crum-
bling public school systems, the influx of drugs into their neighborhoods,
and the easy availability of guns, many blame one another. Black youth are
especially vulnerable.
11 As urban prisoners, the predilection for some Black
men to kill others over seemingly unimportant items such as gym shoes,
jewelry, and sunglasses often seems incomprehensible to White Americans
and to many middle-class Black Americans. Privileged groups routinely
assume that all deserving Americans live in decent housing, attend safe
schools with caring teachers, and will be rewarded for their hard work with
college opportunities and good jobs. They believe that undeserving Blacks
and Latinos who remain locked up in deteriorating inner cities get what
they deserve and do not merit social programs that will show them a future.
This closing door of opportunity associated with hyper-segregation creates
a situation of shrinking opportunities and neglect. This is the exact climate
that breeds a culture of violence that is a growing component of “street
culture” in working-class and poor Black neighborhoods.
12 
90


--- PAGE 102 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
Given this context, why should anyone be surprised that rap lyrics
often tell the stories of young Black men who feel that they have nothing
to lose, save their respect under a “code of the street.”
13 Ice Cube’s 1993
rap “It Was a Good Day,” describes a “good” day for a young Black man
living in Los Angeles. On a “good” day, he didn’t fire his gun, he got food
that he wanted to eat, the cops ignored him and didn’t pull him over for an
imaginary infraction, and he didn’t have to kill anyone. Is this art imitating
life, or vice versa? Sociologist Elijah Anderson’s ethnographic studies of
working-class and poor Black youth living in Philadelphia suggests that,
for far too many young African American males, Ice Cube’s bad days are
only too real.
14 Just as male prisoners who are perceived as being weak
encounter relentless physical and sexual violence, weaker members of
African American communities are preyed upon by the strong. Rap artist
Ice T explains how masculinity and perceived weakness operate:
You don’t understand anyone who is weak. You look at gay people as
prey. There isn’t anybody in the ghetto teaching that some people’s sex-
ual preferences are predisposed. You’re just ignorant. You got to get
educated, you got to get out of that jail cell called the ghetto to really
begin to understand. All you see is a sissy. A soft dude. A punk.
15
Women, lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered people, children, people
living with HIV , drug addicts, prostitutes, and others deemed to be an
embarrassment to the broader African American community or a drain
upon its progress or simply in the wrong place at the wrong time become
targets of silencing, persecution, and or abuse. This is what prisons do—
they breed intolerance.
The experiences of people in prison also shed light on the myriad forms
of African American resistance to the strictures of racial oppression. No
matter how restrictive the prison, some prisoners find ways to resist. Often
within plain sight of their guards, people who are imprisoned devise ingen-
ious ways to reject prison policies. Nelson Mandela recounts the numerous
ways that he and his fellow prisoners outwitted, undermined, tricked, and,
upon occasion, confronted their captors during the twenty-seven years that
he spent as a political prisoner in South African prisons. Craving news of
the political struggle outside, prisoners communicated by writing in milk on
blank paper, letting it dry to invisibility and, once the note was passed on,
91


--- PAGE 103 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
making the words reappear with the disinfectant used to clean their cells.
They smuggled messages to one another in plastic wrapped packages hid-
den in food drums.
16 In the case of solitary confinement where an inmate
could be locked up for twenty-three hours a day in a dark cell, just surviv-
ing constituted an act of resistance. As Mandela observes, “Prison is
designed to break one’s spirit and destroy one’s resolve. To do this, the
authorities attempt to exploit every weakness, demolish every initiative,
negate all signs of individuality—all with the idea of stamping out that
spark that makes each of us human and each of us who we are.”
17 Mandela
and his fellow prisoners recognized the function of actual prisons under
racial apartheid and of apartheid policies as an extension of prison.
Recognizing that their everyday lives resemble those of prison inmates
often politicizes individuals. Autobiographies by African Americans who
were imprisoned because of their political beliefs, for example, Angela
Davis and Assata Shakur, or who became politicized during their impris-
onment, for example, Malcolm X or George Jackson, point to the signifi-
cance of actual incarceration as a catalyst for resistance. In the 1980s, many
poor and working-class African American youth who were locked up in
urban ghettos and facing the closing door of opportunity refused to turn
their rage upon one another. Instead, many chose to rap about the violence
and intolerance around them and, in the process, created an influential hip-
hop culture that reached youth all over the world. Crafted in the South
Bronx, an urban landscape that had been abandoned by virtually everyone,
African American, Latino, and Afro-Caribbean youth created rap, break
dancing, tagging (graffiti), fashions and other cultural creations.
18 Ice
Cube’s rap about his good day represents the tip of an immense hip-hop
iceberg. With few other public forums to share their outrage at a society
that had so thoroughly written them off, Black youth used rap and hip-hop
to protest the closing door of opportunity in their lives and to claim their
humanity in the face of the dehumanization of racial segregation and ghet-
toization. Without strategies of noncooperation such as those exhibited by
Mandela and his colleagues and without developing new forms of resist-
ance such as hip-hop, Black people simply would not have survived. 
What is freedom in the context of prison? Typically, incarcerated peo-
ple cannot voluntarily “come out” of prison but must find a way to “break
out.” Under chattel slavery, the history of the Underground Railroad cer-
tainly reflected the aspirations of enslaved Africans to break out of the
92


--- PAGE 104 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
prison of slavery and to flee to the quasi freedom offered by Northern
states. But just as gender, age, skin color, and class affect the contours of
oppression itself, these very same categories shape strategies of resistance.
As African American women’s slave narratives point out, men and young
people could more easily break out by running away than women, mothers,
and older people. Then as now, African American women are often reluc-
tant to leave their families, and many sacrifice their own personal freedom
in order to stay behind and care for children and for others who depend on
them. Under Jim Crow segregation, very light-skinned African Americans
faced the difficult choice of “passing” and leaving their loved ones behind.
More recently, as prime beneficiaries of the antidiscrimination and affir-
mative action policies of the civil rights movement, many middle-class and
affluent African Americans have moved to distant White suburbs. Such
actions certainly reflect a desire to escape the problems associated with poor
and working-class Black neighborhoods. If one can “buy” one’s freedom,
as Nike ads proclaim, why not exercise personal choice and “just do it”?
In other situations, African Americans have recognized the confines of
the prison and, through unruly, spontaneous uprisings or through organ-
ized political protests, have turned upon their jailers. A series of urban
uprisings in cities such as New York, Detroit, Miami (1980), Los Angeles
(1992), and Cincinnati (2001) typify the explosive reactions of many poor
and working-class African Americans to bad schools, terrible housing, no
jobs, little money, and dwindling prospects. The catalyst is usually the
same—police brutality against unlucky African American citizens. More
organized Black protests also reflect this process of turning upon the jail-
ers of racism and refusing to cooperate with unjust laws and customs.
Historically, social formations that kept African Americans impoverished
and virtually powerless—chattel slavery, labor exploitation of the Jim
Crow Southern agriculture, and the continuing growth of urban ghettos—
all sparked organized African American political protest. The abolitionist
movement, the formation of the NAACP (1909) and the Urban League
(1910), the size of Marcus Garvey’s Black Nationalist United Negro
Improvement Association (1920s), the many organizations that partici-
pated in the civil rights and Black Power movements, and the increased vis-
ibility of Black youth through hip-hop culture reflect resistance to racism.
Racism may be likened to a prison, yet sexual oppression has more
often been portrayed using the metaphor of the “closet.”
19 This metaphor
93


--- PAGE 105 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
is routinely invoked to describe the oppression of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgendered people. Historically, because religion and science alike
defined homosexuality as deviant, LGBT people were forced to conceal
their sexuality.
20 For homosexuals, the closet provided some protection
from homophobia that stigmatized LGBT sexual expression as deviant.
Being in the closet meant that most hid their sexual orientation in the most
important areas of their lives. With family, friends, or at work, many
LGBT people passed as “straight” in order to avoid suspicion and expo-
sure. Passing as straight fostered the perception that few gays and lesbians
existed. The invisibility of gays and lesbians helped normalize heterosex-
uality, fueled homophobia, and supported heterosexism as a system of
power.
21
Because closets are highly individualized, situated within families, and
distributed across the segregated spaces of racial, ethnic, and class neigh-
borhoods, and because sexual identity is typically negotiated later than
social identities of gender, race, and class, LGBT people often believe that
they are alone. Being in the private, hidden, and domestic space of the
closet leaves many LGBT adolescents to suffer in silence. During the era
of racial segregation, heterosexism operated as smoothly as it did because
hidden or closeted sexualities remained relegated to the margins of society
withinracial/ethnic groups. Staying in the closet stripped LBGT people of
rights. The absence of political rights has meant that sexual minorities
could be fired from their jobs, moved from their housing, have their chil-
dren taken away in custody battles, dismissed from the military, and be tar-
gets of random street violence, often with little recourse. Rendering
LGBT sexualities virtually invisible enabled the system of heterosexism to
draw strength from the seeming naturalness of heterosexuality.
22
Since the 1980s, gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered people have
challenged heterosexism by coming out of the closet. If the invisibility of
sexual oppression enabled it to operate unopposed, then making hetero-
sexism visible by being “out” attacked heterosexism at its core.
Transgressing sexual borders became the hallmark of LGBT politics. The
individual decision to come out to one’s family or friends enabled formerly
closeted LGBT people to live openly and to unsettle the normalization of
heterosexuality. Transgression also came to characterize one strand of gay
group politics, moving from the gay and lesbian identity politics of the first
phase of “gay liberation” to more recent queer politics.
23 Gay pride
94


--- PAGE 106 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
marches that embrace drag queens, cross-dressers, gay men who are flam-
boyantly dressed, individuals with indeterminate gender identities, and
mannish lesbians push the envelope beyond accepting the LGBT people
who are indistinguishable from everyone else, save for this one area of sex-
ual orientation. Through public, visible, and often outrageous acts, “queer-
ing” normal sexuality became another hallmark of LGBT politics. The
phrase, “we’re queer, we’re here, get used to it” embraces a clear stance of
defiance. At the same time, another strand of gay politics strives to be seen
as “good gay citizens” who should be entitled to the same rights as every-
one else. Practices such as legitimating gay marriages and supporting
adoptions by gay and lesbian couples constitute another expression of
transgression. By aiming for the legitimacy granted heterosexual couples
and families, gay and lesbian couples simultaneously uphold family yet
profoundly challenge its meaning.
24
Racism and heterosexism, the prison and the closet, appear to be sep-
arate systems, but LGBT African Americans point out that bothsystems
affect their everyday lives. If racism and heterosexism affect Black LGBT
people, then these systems affect allpeople, including heterosexual African
Americans. Racism and heterosexism certainly converge on certain key
points. For one, both use similar state-sanctioned institutional mechanisms
to maintain racial and sexual hierarchies. For example, in the United
States, racism and heterosexism both rely on segregating people as a mech-
anism of social control. For racism, segregation operates by using race as
a visible marker of group membership that enables the state to relegate
Black people to inferior schools, housing, and jobs. Racial segregation
relies on enforced membership in a visible community in which racial dis-
crimination is tolerated. For heterosexism, segregation is enforced by pres-
suring LGBT individuals to remain closeted and thus segregated from one
another. Before social movements for gay and lesbian liberation, sexual
segregation meant that refusing to claim homosexual identities virtually
eliminated any group-based political action to resist heterosexism. For
another, the state has played a very important role in sanctioning both
forms of oppression. In support of racism, the state sanctioned laws that
regulated where Black people could live, work, and attend school. In sup-
port of heterosexism, the state maintained laws that refused to punish hate
crimes against LGBT people, that failed to offer protection when LGBT
people were stripped of jobs and children, and that generally sent a mes-
95


--- PAGE 107 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
sage that LGBT people who came out of the closet did so at their own
risk.25
Racism and heterosexism also share a common set of practices that are
designed to discipline the population into accepting the status quo. These
disciplinary practices can best be seen in the enormous amount of atten-
tion paid both by the state and organized religion to the institution of mar-
riage. If marriage were in fact a natural and normal occurrence between
heterosexual couples and if it occurred naturally within racial categories,
there would be no need to regulate it. People would naturally choose part-
ners of the opposite sex and the same race. Instead, a series of laws have
been passed, all designed to regulate marriage. For example, for many
years, the tax system has rewarded married couples with tax breaks that
have been denied to single taxpayers or unmarried couples. The message is
clear—it makes good financial sense to get married. Similarly, to encour-
age people to marry within their assigned race, numerous states passed
laws banning interracial marriage. These restrictions lasted until the land-
mark Supreme Court decision in 1967 that overturned state laws. The state
has also passed laws designed to keep LGBT people from marrying. In
1996, the U.S. Congress passed the Federal Defense of Marriage Act that
defined marriage as a “legal union between one man and one woman.” In
all of these cases, the state perceives that it has a compelling interest in dis-
ciplining the population to marry and to marry the correct partners.
26
Racism and heterosexism also manufacture ideologies that defend the
status quo. When ideologies that defend racism and heterosexism become
taken-for-granted and appear to be natural and inevitable, they become
hegemonic. Few question them and the social hierarchies they defend.
Racism and heterosexism both share a common cognitive framework that
uses binary thinking to produce hegemonic ideologies. Such thinking relies
on oppositional categories. It views race through two oppositional cate-
gories of Whites and Blacks, gender through two categories of men and
women, and sexuality through two oppositional categories of heterosexu-
als and homosexuals. A master binary of normal and deviant overlays and
bundles together these and other lesser binaries. In this context, ideas
about “normal” race (whiteness, which ironically, masquerades as raceless-
ness), “normal” gender (using male experiences as the norm), and “nor-
mal” sexuality (heterosexuality, which operates in a similar hegemonic
fashion) are tightly bundled together. In essence, to be completely “nor-
96


--- PAGE 108 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
mal,” one must be White, masculine, and heterosexual, the core hegemonic
White masculinity. This mythical norm is hard to see because it is so taken-
for-granted. Its antithesis, its Other, would be Black, female, and lesbian, a
fact that Black lesbian feminist Audre Lorde pointed out some time ago.
27
Within this oppositional logic, the core binary of normal/deviant
becomes ground zero for justifying racism and heterosexism. The deviancy
assigned to race and that assigned to sexuality becomes an important point
of contact between the two systems. Racism and heterosexism both require
a concept of sexual deviancy for meaning, yet the form that deviance takes
within each system differs. For racism, the point of deviance is created by
a normalized White heterosexuality that depends on a deviant Black hetero-
sexualityto give it meaning. For heterosexism, the point of deviance is cre-
ated by this very same normalized White heterosexuality that now depends
on a deviant White homosexuality . Just as racial normality requires the
stigmatization of the sexual practices of Black people, heterosexual nor-
mality relies upon the stigmatization of the sexual practices of homosexu-
als. In both cases, installing White heterosexuality as normal, natural, and
ideal requires stigmatizing alternate sexualities as abnormal, unnatural,
and sinful. 
The purpose of stigmatizing the sexual practices of Black people and
those of LGBT people may be similar, but the content of the sexual
deviance assigned to each differs. Black people carry the stigma of promis-
cuityor excessive or unrestrained heterosexual desire. This is the sexual
deviancy that has both been assigned to Black people and been used to con-
struct racism. In contrast, LGBT people carry the stigma of rejectinghet-
erosexuality by engaging in unrestrained homosexual desire. Whereas the
deviancy associated with promiscuity (and, by implication, with Black peo-
ple as a race) is thought to lie in an excessof heterosexual desire, the pathol-
ogy of homosexuality (the invisible, closeted sexuality that becomes
impossible within heterosexual space) seemingly resides in the absenceof it. 
While analytically distinct, in practice, these two sites of constructed
deviancy work together and both help create the “sexually repressive cul-
ture” in America described by Cheryl Clarke.
28 Despite their significance
for American society overall, here I confine my argument to the challenges
that confront Black people.
29 Both sets of ideas frame a hegemonic dis-
course of Black sexuality that has at its core ideas about an assumed
promiscuity among heterosexual African American men and women and
97


--- PAGE 109 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
the impossibility of homosexuality among Black gays and lesbians. How
have African Americans been affected by and reacted to this racialized sys-
tem of heterosexism (or this sexualized system of racism)?
AFRICAN AMERICANS AND THE RACIALIZATION 
OF PROMISCUITY 
Ideas about Black promiscuity that produce contemporary sexualized
spectacles such as Jennifer Lopez, Destiny’s Child, Ja Rule, and the many
young Black men on the U.S. talk show circuit have a long history.
Historically, Western science, medicine, law, and popular culture reduced
an African-derived aesthetic concerning the use of the body, sensuality,
expressiveness, and spirituality to an ideology about Black sexuality. The
distinguishing feature of this ideology was its reliance on the idea of Black
promiscuity. The possibility of distinctive and worthwhile African-influenced
worldviews on anything, including sexuality, as well as the heterogeneity of
African societies expressing such views, was collapsed into an imagined,
pathologized Western discourse of what was thought to be essentially
African.
30 To varying degrees, observers from England, France, Germany,
Belgium, and other colonial powers perceived African sensuality, eroti-
cism, spirituality, and/or sexuality as deviant, out of control, sinful, and as
an essential feature of racial difference.
31 
Western religion, science, and media took over 350 years to manufac-
ture an ideology of Black sexuality that assigned (heterosexual) promiscu-
ity to Black people and then used it to justify racial discrimination. The
racism of slavery and colonialism needed ideological justification. Toward
this end, preexisting British perceptions of Blackness became reworked to
frame notions of racial difference that, over time, became folded into a
broader primitivist discourse on race. Long before the English explored
Africa, the terms “black” and “white” had emotional meaning within
England. Before colonization, white and black connoted opposites of
purity and filthiness, virginity and sin, virtue and baseness, beauty and
ugliness, and God and the devil.
32 Bringing this preexisting framework
with them, English explorers were especially taken by Africans’ color.
Despite actual variations of skin color among African people, the English
described them as being black, “an exaggerated term which in itself sug-
gests that the Negro’s complexion had powerful impact upon their per-
98


--- PAGE 110 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
ceptions.”33 From first contact, biology mattered—racial difference was
embodied. European explorers and the traders, colonists, and settlers who
followed were also struck by the differences between their own cultures
and those of continental Africans. Erroneously interpreting African cul-
tures as being inferior to their own, European colonial powers redefined
Africa as a “primitive” space, filled with Black people and devoid of the
accoutrements of more civilized cultures. In this way, the broad ethnic
diversity among the people of continental Africa became reduced to more
generic terms such as “primitive,” “savage,” and “native.” Within these
categories, one could be an Ashanti or a Yoruba, but each was a savage,
primitive native all the same. The resulting primitivist discourse redefined
African societies as inferior.
34
Western natural and social sciences were deeply involved in construct-
ing this primitivist discourse that reached full fruition in the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries.
35 Through laboratory experiments and field
research, Western science attempted to understand these perceived racial
differences while creating, through its own practices, those very same dif-
ferences. For example, Sarah Bartmann’s dissection illustrates this fascina-
tion with biological difference as the site of racial difference, with sexual
difference of women further identified as an important topic of study.
36
Moreover, this perception of Africa worked with an important idea within
nineteenth-century science, namely, the need to classify and rank objects,
places, living things, and people. Everything had its place and all places were
ranked.
37 With its primitiveness and alleged jungles, Africa and its peoples
marked the bottom, the worst place to be, and a place ripe for colonial con-
quest. Yet at the same time, Africa was dangerous, different, and alluring.
This new category of primitive situated Africans just below Whites and
right above apes and monkeys, who marked this boundary distinguishing
human from animals. Thus, within Western science, African people and
apes occupied a fluid border zone between humans and animals. 
With all living creatures classified in this way, Western scientists per-
ceived African people as being more natural and less civilized, primarily
because African people were deemed to be closer to animals and nature,
especially the apes and monkeys whose appearance most closely resembled
humans. Like African people, animals also served as objects of study for
Western science because understanding the animal kingdom might reveal
important insights about civilization, culture, and what distinguished the
99


--- PAGE 111 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
human “race” from its animal counterparts as well as the human “races”
from one another. Donna Haraway’s study of primatology illustrates
Western scientists’ fascination with identifying how apes differed from
humans: “the study of apes was more about humans. Moreover, the close
proximity to apes and monkeys that Africans occupied within European
derived taxonomies of life such as the Great Chain of Being worked to link
Africans and animals through a series of overlapping constructs. Apes and
Africans both lived in Africa, a place of wild animals and wild people. In
both cases, their source of wildness emerged from their lack of culture and
their acting out of instinct or bodily impulses.”
38 This family resemblance
between African people and animals was not benign—viewing Africans
and animals alike as embodied creatures ruled by “instinct or bodily
impulses” worked to humanize apes and dehumanize Black people. 
In this context, studying the sexual practices of African people and
animals took on special meaning. Linking African people and animals was
crucial to Western views of Black promiscuity. Genital sexual intercourse
or, more colloquially, the act of “fucking,” characterized animal sexuality.
Animals are promiscuous because they lack intellect, culture, and civiliza-
tion. Animals do not have erotic lives; they merely “fuck” and reproduce.
Certainly animals could be slaughtered, sold, and domesticated as pets
because within capitalist political economies, animals were commodities
that were owned as private property. As the history of animal breeding
suggests, the sexual promiscuity of horses, cattle, chickens, pigs, dogs, and
other domesticated animals could be profitable for their owners. By being
classified as proximate to wild animals and, by analogy, eventually being
conceptualized as being animals (chattel), the alleged deviancy of people of
African descent lay in their sexual promiscuity, a “wildness” that also was
believed to characterize animal sexuality. Those most proximate to animals,
those most lacking civilization, also were those humans who came closest
to having the sexual lives of animals. Lacking the benefits of Western civ-
ilization, people of African descent were perceived as having a biological
nature that was inherently more sexual than that of Europeans. The prim-
itivist discourse thus created the category of “beast” and the sexuality of
such beasts as “wild.” The legal classification of enslaved African people
as chattel (animal-like) under American slavery that produced controlling
images of bucks, jezebels, and breeder women drew meaning from this
broader interpretive framework.
39
100


--- PAGE 112 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
Historically, this ideology of Black sexuality that pivoted on a Black
heterosexual promiscuity not only upheld racism but it did so in gender-
specific ways. In the context of U.S. society, beliefs in Black male promis-
cuity took diverse forms during distinctive historical periods. For example,
defenders of chattel slavery believed that slavery safely domesticated
allegedly dangerous Black men because it regulated their promiscuity by
placing it in the service of slave owners. Strategies of control were harsh
and enslaved African men who were born in Africa or who had access to
their African past were deemed to be the most dangerous. In contrast, the
controlling image of the rapist appeared after emancipation because
Southern Whites’ feared that the unfettered promiscuity of Black freed-
men constituted a threat to the Southern way of life. In this situation,
beliefs about White womanhood helped shape the mythology of the Black
rapist. Making White women responsible for keeping the purity of the
White race, White men “cast themselves as protectors of civilization, reaf-
firming not only their role as social and familial ‘heads,’ but their paternal
property rights as well.”
40
African American women encountered a parallel set of beliefs con-
cerning Black female promiscuity. White Americans may have been
repulsed by a Black sexuality that they redefined as uncivilized “fucking,”
but the actions of White men demonstrated that they simultaneously were
fascinated with the Black women who they thought engaged in it. Under
American slavery, all White men within a slave-owning family could treat
enslaved African women within their own families as sexual property. The
myth that it was impossible to rape Black women because they were already
promiscuous helped mask the sexual exploitation of enslaved Black women
by their owners. Using enslaved Black women for medical experimentation
constituted another form of control. As individuals who are trained to
watch, dissect, and cast a critical eye on biological and social phenomena,
scientists became voyeurs extraordinaire of Black women’s bodies. For
example, between 1845 and 1849, Marion Sims, now remembered vari-
ously as the Father of American Gynecology, the Father of Modern
Gynecology, and the Architect of the Vagina, conducted surgical experi-
ments on slave women in his backyard hospital in Montgomery, Alabama.
Aiming to cure vaginal fistulas resulting from hard or extended childbirth,
Sims discovered a way to peer into Black women’s vaginas. Placing Lucy, a
slave woman into knee-chest position for examination, Sims inserted a
101


--- PAGE 113 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
pewter spoon into her vagina and recounts, “introducing the bent handle
of the spoon I saw everything, as no man had ever seen before. The fistula
was as plain as the nose on a man’s face.”
41
The events themselves may be over, but their effects persist under the
new racism. This belief in an inherent Black promiscuity reappears today.
For example, depicting poor and working-class African American inner-
city neighborhoods as dangerous urban jungles where SUV-driving White
suburbanites come to score drugs or locate prostitutes also invokes a his-
tory of racial and sexual conquest. Here sexuality is linked with danger,
and understandings of both draw upon historical imagery of Africa as a
continent replete with danger and peril to the White explorers and hunters
who penetrated it. Just as contemporary safari tours in Africa create an
imagined Africa as the “White man’s playground” and mask its economic
exploitation, jungle language masks social relations of hyper-segregation
that leave working-class Black communities isolated, impoverished, and
dependent on a punitive welfare state and an illegal international drug
trade. Under this logic, just as wild animals (and the proximate African
natives) belong in nature preserves (for their own protection), unassimi-
lated, undomesticated poor and working-class African Americans belong
in racially segregated neighborhoods. 
This belief in Black promiscuity also continues to take gender-specific
forms. African American men live with the ideological legacy that con-
structs Black male heterosexuality through images of wild beasts, criminals,
and rapists. A chilling case was provided in 1989 by the media coverage of
an especially brutal crime that came to be known as the “Central Park
Jogger” panic. In this case, a White woman investment banker jogging in
Central Park was raped, severely beaten, and left for dead. At the time, the
police believed that she had been gang-raped by as many as twelve Black and
Latino adolescents. The horror of the crime itself is not in question, for this
attack was truly appalling. But as African American cultural critic Houston
A. Baker points out, what was also noteworthy about the case was the way
in which it crystallized issues of race, gender, class, and sexuality in the
mass media. The assault occurred during a time when young Black men and
hip-hop culture were becoming increasingly visible in urban public space.
Lacking spacious basement recreation rooms and well-tended soccer fields,
African American and Latino youth set up their equipment on streets and
in public parks, creating public hip-hop theaters. Graffiti, breakdancing,
102


--- PAGE 114 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
and enormous boom boxes blasting the angry lyrics of gangsta rap effec-
tively “blackened” urban spaces. Baker describes how public space became
a site of controversy: “Urban public space of the late twentieth-century
[became] . . . spaces of audiovisual contest. It’s something like this: ‘My
billboards and neon and handbills and high-decibel-level television adver-
tising are purely for the public good. Your boom boxes and graffiti are evil
pollutants. Erase them, shut them down!’”
42 
The attack in Central Park occurred in this political, social, and cul-
tural context. The “park panic” that followed the incident drew upon this
fear of young Black men in public space, as evidenced by their loudness,
their rap music, and their disrespect for order (graffiti). In doing so, it ref-
erenced the primitivist ideology of Blacks as animalistic. Media phrases
such as “roving bands” and “wolf pack” that were used to describe young
urban Black and Latino males during this period were only comprehensi-
ble becauseof long-standing assumptions of Black promiscuity. Drawing
upon the historical discourse on Black promiscuity, the phrase “to go buck
wild” morphed into the new verb of “wilding” that appeared virtually
overnight. Baker is especially insightful in his analysis of how the term
“wilding” sounded very much like rapper Tone-Loc’s hit song “Wild
Thing,” a song whose content described sexual intercourse. “Wilding” and
“Wild Thing” belong to the same nexus of meaning, one that quickly cir-
culated through mass media and became a plausible (at least as far as the
media was concerned), explanation for the brutality of the crime.
43
Resurrecting images of Black men as predatory and wild, rape and “wild-
ing” became inextricably linked with Black masculinity. 
The outcome of this case shows how deeply entrenched ideologies can
produce scenarios that obscure the facts. Ironically, twelve years after five
young Black males were convicted of the crime, doubts arose concerning
their guilt. A convicted murderer and serial rapist came forward, confessed
to the rape, and claimed he had acted alone. After his story was corrobo-
rated by DNA testing, the evidence against the original “wolf pack”
seemed far less convincing than in the climate created by “wilding” as the
natural state of young Black men. In 2003, all of the teenagers originally
convicted of the crime were exonerated, unfortunately, after some had
served lengthy jail terms.
44
African American women also live with ideas about Black women’s
promiscuity and lack of sexual restraint. Reminiscent of concerns with
103


--- PAGE 115 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Black women’s fertility under slavery and in the rural South, contempo-
rary social welfare policies also remain preoccupied with Black women’s
fertility. In prior eras, Black women were encouraged to have many chil-
dren. Under slavery, having many children enhanced slave owners’ wealth
and a good “breeder woman” was less likely to be sold.
45 In rural agricul-
ture after emancipation, having many children ensured a sufficient supply
of workers. But in the global economy of today, large families are expen-
sive because children must be educated. Now Black women are seen as pro-
ducing too many children who contribute less to society than they take.
Because Black women on welfare have long been seen as undeserving,
long-standing ideas about Black women’s promiscuity become recycled
and redefined as a problem for the state.
46 
In her important book Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction, and
the Meaning of Liberty, legal scholar Dorothy Roberts claims that the “sys-
tematic, denial of reproductive freedom has uniquely marked Black
women’s history in America.”
47 Believing the unquestioned assumption of
Black female promiscuity influences how poor and working-class Black
women are treated. The inordinate attention paid to the sexual lives of
adolescent Black women reflects this ongoing concern with an assumed
Black female promiscuity.
48 Rather than looking at lack of sex education,
poverty, sexual assault, and other factors that catalyze high rates of preg-
nancy among young Black women, researchers and policy makers often
blame the women themselves and assume that the women are incapable of
making their own decisions. Pregnancy, especially among poor and work-
ing-class young Black women, has been seen as evidence that Black women
lack the capacity to control their sexual lives. As a visible sign of a lack of
discipline and/or immorality, becoming pregnant and needing help
exposes poor and working-class women to punitive state policies.
49 Arguing
that Black women have been repeatedly denied reproductive autonomy and
control over their own bodies, Roberts surveys a long list of current viola-
tions against African American women. Black women are denied repro-
ductive choice and offered Norplant, Depo-Provera, and similar forms of
birth control that encourage them to choose sterilization. Pregnant Black
women with drug addictions receive criminal sentences instead of drug
treatment and prenatal care. Criticizing two controversial ways in which
the criminal justice system penalizes pregnancy, Roberts identifies the
impossible choice that faces women in these situations. When a pregnant
104


--- PAGE 116 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
woman is prosecuted for exposing her baby to drugs in the womb, her
crime hinges on her decision to have a baby. If she has an abortion she can
avoid prosecution, but if she chooses to give birth, she risks going to
prison. Similarly, when a judge imposes birth control as a condition of pro-
bation, for example, by giving a defendant the choice between Norplant or
jail, incarceration becomes the penalty for her choice to remain fertile.
These practices theoretically affect all women, but, in actuality, they apply
primarily to poor and working-class Black women. As Roberts points out,
“prosecutors and judges see poor Black women as suitable subjects for
these reproductive penalties because society does not view these women as
suitable mothers in the first place.”
50
AFRICAN AMERICANS AND THE WHITENING 
OF HOMOSEXUALITY 
Depicting people of African descent as symbols of embodied, natural sex-
uality that “fucked” like animals and produced babies installed Black peo-
ple as the essence of nature. Moreover, the concern with Black fertility
linked perceptions of promiscuity to assumptions of heterosexuality.
Within this logic, homosexuality was assumed to be impossible among
Black people because same-sex sexual practices did not result in reproduc-
tion: 
Among the myths Europeans have created about Africa, the myth that
homosexuality is absent or incidental is the oldest and most enduring.
For Europeans, black Africans—of all the native peoples of the world—
most epitomized “primitive man.” Since primitive man is supposed to
be close to nature, ruled by instinct, and culturally unsophisticated, he
had to be heterosexual, his sexual energies and outlets demoted exclu-
sively to their “natural” purpose: biological reproduction. If black
Africans were the most primitive people in all humanity—if they were,
indeed, human, which some debated—then they had to be the most
heterosexual.
51
If racism relied on assumptions of Black promiscuity that in turn enabled
Black people to “breed like animals,” then Black sexual practices that did
not adhere to these assumptions challenged racism at its very core. Either
105


--- PAGE 117 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Black people could not be homosexual or those Blacks who were homosex-
ual were not “authentically” Black. 52 Black people were allegedly not
threatened by homosexuality because they were protected by their “natu-
ral” heterosexuality. In contrast, Whites had no such “natural” protection
and thus had to work harder at proving their heterosexuality. By a curious
twist of logic, these racist assumptions about an authentic Blackness
grounded in a promiscuous heterosexuality helped define Whiteness as
well. In this context, homosexuality could be defined as an internal threat
to the integrity of the (White) nuclear family. Beliefs in a naturalized, nor-
mal hyper-heterosexuality among Black people effectively “whitened”
homosexuality. Within a logic that constructed race itself from racially
pure families, homosexuality constituted a major threat to the White race.
53 
Contemporary African American politics confront some real contradic-
tions here. A discourse that constructs Black people as the natural essence
of hyper-heterosexuality and White people as the source of homosexuality
hinders developing a comprehensive analysis of Black sexuality that speaks
to the needs of straight and gay Black people alike. Those African Americans
who internalize racist ideologies that link Black hyper-heterosexuality with
racial authenticity can propose problematic solutions to adolescent preg-
nancy, rape, sexual violence, and the troubling growth of HIV/AIDS
among African Americans. Such beliefs generate strategies designed to reg-
ulate tightly the sexual practices of Black people as the fundamental task of
Black sexual politics. This position inadvertently accepts racist views of
Blackness and advocates an antiracist politics that advocates copying the
heterosexist norms associated with White normality. Such beliefs also fos-
ter perceptions of LGBT Black people as being less authentically Black. If
authentic Black people (according to the legacy of scientific racism) are het-
erosexual, then LGBT Black people are less authentically Black because
they engage in allegedly “White” sexual practices. This entire system of
sexual regulation is turned on its head when heterosexual African
Americans reject promiscuity yet advocate for a Black eroticism.
In a similar fashion, visible, vocal LGBT Black people who come out
and claim an erotocism that is not predicated upon heterosexuality also
profoundly challenge the same system. The historical invisibility of LGBT
African Americans reflects this double containment, both within the
prison of racism that segregates Black people in part due to their alleged
sexual deviancy of promiscuity and within the closet of heterosexism due
106


--- PAGE 118 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
to the alleged sexual deviancy of homosexuality. The closets created by
heterosexism were just as prominent within Black communities as outside
them. For example, the Black Church, one of the mainstays of African
American resistance to racial oppression, fostered a deeply religious ethos
within African American life and culture.
54 The Black Church remains the
linchpin of African American communal life, and its effects can be seen in
Black music, fraternal organizations, neighborhood associations, and poli-
tics.
55 As religious scholar C. Eric Lincoln points out, “for African
Americans, a people whose total experience has been a sustained condition
of multiform stress, religion is never far from the threshold of conscious-
ness, for whether it is embraced with fervor or rejected with disdain, it is
the focal element of the black experience.”
56
At the same time, the Black Church has also failed to challenge argu-
ments about sexual deviancy. Instead, the Black Church has incorporated
dominant ideas about the dangers of promiscuity and homosexuality
within its beliefs and practices.
57 Some accuse the Black Church of relying
on a double standard according to which teenaged girls are condemned for
out-of-wedlock pregnancies but in which the men who fathered the chil-
dren escape censure. The girls are often required to confess their sins and
ask for forgiveness in front of the entire congregation whereas the usually
older men who impregnate them are excused.
58 Others argue that the Black
Church advances a hypocritical posture about homosexuality that under-
cuts its antiracist posture: “Just as white people have misused biblical texts
to argue that God supported slavery, and that being Black was a curse, the
Bible has been misused by African Americans to justify the oppression of
homosexuals. It is ironic that while they easily dismiss the Bible’s prob-
lematic references to Black people, they accept without question what they
perceive to be its condemnation of homosexuals.”
59 
One reason that the Black Church has seemed so resistant to change is
that it has long worried about protecting the community’s image within the
broader society and has resisted any hints of Black sexual deviance,
straight and gay alike. Recognizing the toll that the many historical assaults
against African American families have taken, many churches argue for
traditional, patriarchal households, and they censure women who seem-
ingly reject marriage and the male authority that creates them. For women,
the babies who are born out of wedlock are irrefutable evidence for
women’s sexual transgression. Because women carry the visible stigma of
107


--- PAGE 119 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
sexual transgression—unlike men, they become pregnant and cannot hide
their sexual histories—churches more often have chastised women for
promiscuity. In a sense, Black churches historically preached a politics of
respectability, especially regarding marriage and sexuality because they
recognized how claims of Black promiscuity and immorality fueled racism.
In a similar fashion, the Black Church’s resistance to societal stigmatiza-
tion of all African Americans as being sexually deviant limits its ability to
take effective leadership within African American communities concerning
all matters of sexuality, especially homosexuality. Black Churches were
noticeably silent about the spread of HIV/AIDS among African
Americans largely because they wished to avoid addressing the sexual
mechanisms of HIV transmission (prostitution and gay sex).
60
Within Black churches and Black politics, the main arguments given
by African American intellectuals and community leaders that explain
homosexuality’s presence within African American communities show how
closely Black political thought is tethered to an unexamined gender ideol-
ogy. Backed up by interpretations of biblical teachings, many churchgoing
African Americans believe that homosexuality reflects varying combina-
tions of: (1) the loss of male role models as a consequence of the break-
down of the Black family structure, trends that in turn foster weak men,
some of whom turn to homosexuality; (2) a loss of traditional religious val-
ues that encourage homosexuality among those who have turned away
from the church; (3) the emasculation of Black men by White oppression;
and (4) a sinister plot by White racists as a form of population genocide
(neither gay Black men nor Black lesbians have children under this sce-
nario).
61 Because these assumptions validate only one family form, this
point of view works against both Black straights and gays alike. Despite
testimony from children raised by Black single mothers, families headed by
women alone routinely are seen as “broken homes” that somehow need fix-
ing. This seemingly pro-family stance also works against LGBT African
Americans. Gay men and lesbians have been depicted as threats to Black
families, primarily due to the erroneous belief that gay, lesbian, and bisex-
ual African Americans neither want nor have children or that they are not
already part of family networks.
62 Holding fast to dominant ideology, many
African American ministers believe that homosexuality is unnatural for
Blacks and is actually a “white disease.” As a result, out LGBT African
Americans are seen as being disloyal to the race. 
108


--- PAGE 120 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
Historically, this combination of racial segregation and intolerance
within African American communities that influenced Black Church activ-
ities explains the deeply closeted nature of LBGT Black experiences. The
racial segregation of Jim Crow in the rural South and social institutions
such as the Black Church that were created in this context made living as
openly gay virtually impossible for LGBT African Americans. In small
town and rural settings of the South, it made sense for the majority of
LBGT Black people to remain deeply closeted. Where was the space for
out Black lesbians in Anita Hill’s close-knit segregated community of
Lone Tree in which generations of women routinely gave birth to thirteen
children? Would coming out as gay or bisexual Black men make any dif-
ference in resisting the threat of lynching in the late nineteenth century?
In these contexts, Black homosexuality might have further derogated an
already sexually stigmatized population. Faced with this situation, many
African American gays, lesbians, and bisexuals saw heterosexual passing as
the only logical choice. 
Prior to early-twentieth-century migration to Northern cities, Black
gays, lesbians, and bisexuals found it very difficult to reject heterosexual-
ity outright. Cities provided more options, but for African Americans res-
idential housing segregation further limited the options that did exist.
Despite these limitations, gay and lesbian Black urban dwellers did man-
age to carve out new lives that differed from those they left behind. For
example, the 1920s was a critical period for African American gays, les-
bians, and bisexuals who were able to migrate to large cities like New York.
Typically, the art and literary traditions of the Harlem Renaissance have
been analyzed through a race-only Black cultural nationalist framework.
But LGBT sexualities may have been far more important within Black
urbanization than formerly believed. Because the majority of Harlem
Renaissance writers were middle-class, a common assumption has been
that their response to claims of Black promiscuity was to advance a politics
of respectability.
63 The artists of the Harlem Renaissance appeared to be
criticizing American racism, but they also challenged norms of gender and
sexuality that were upheld by the politics of respectability. 
Contemporary rereadings of key texts of the Harlem Renaissance sug-
gest that many had a homoerotic or “queer” content. For example, new
analyses locate a lesbian subtext within Pauline Hopkins’s novel Contending
Forces, a homoerotic tone within the short stories of Black life detailed in
109


--- PAGE 121 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Cane, and an alternative sexuality expressed in the corpus of Langston
Hughes’s work.64 British filmmaker Isaac Julien’s 1989 prizewinning short
film Looking for Langstoncreated controversy via its association of Hughes
with homoeroticism. Julien’s intent was not to criticize Hughes, but rather,
to “de-essentialize black identities” in ways that create space for more pro-
gressive sexual politics. At a conference on Black popular culture, Julien
explains this process of recognizing different kinds of Black identities: “I
think blackness is a term used—in the way that terms like ‘the black com-
munity’ or ‘black folk’ are usually bandied about—to exclude others who
are part of that community . . . to create a more pluralistic interreaction
[sic] in terms of difference, both sexual and racial, one has to start with de-
essentializing the notion of the black subject.”
65 Basically, rejecting the era-
sure of gay Black male identities, Julien’s project creates a space in which
Hughes can be both Black and queer. 
Middle-class African Americans may have used literary devices to con-
front gendered and sexual norms, but working-class and poor African
American in cities also challenged these sexual politics, albeit via different
mechanisms. During this same decade, working-class Black women blues
singers also expressed gendered and sexual sensibilities that deviated from
the politics of respectability.
66 One finds in the lyrics of the blues singers
explicit references to gay, lesbian, and bisexual sexual expression as a nat-
ural part of lived Black experience. By proclaiming that “wild women
don’t get no blues,” the new blues singers took on and reworked long-
standing ideas about Black women’s sexuality. Like most forms of popular
music, Black blues lyrics talk about love. But, when compared to other
American popular music of the 1920s and 1930s, Black women’s blues were
distinctive. One significant difference concerned the blues’ “provocative
and pervasive sexual—including homosexual—imagery.”
67 The blues took
on themes that were banished from popular music—extramarital affairs,
domestic violence, and the short-lived nature of love relationships all
appeared in Black women’s blues. The theme of women loving women also
appeared in Black women’s blues, giving voice to Black lesbianism and
bisexuality. 
When it came to their acceptance of Black gays, lesbians, and bisexu-
als, urban African American neighborhoods exhibited contradictory ten-
dencies. On the one hand, Black neighborhoods within large cities became
areas of racial and sexual boundary-crossing that supported more visible
110


--- PAGE 122 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
lesbian and gay activities. For example, one community study of the les-
bian community in Buffalo, New York, found racial and social class differ-
ences among lesbians. Because Black lesbians were confined to racially
segregated neighborhoods, lesbians had more house parties and social
gatherings within their neighborhoods. In contrast, White working-class
lesbians were more likely to frequent bars that, ironically, were typically
located near or in Black neighborhoods.
68 In her autobiography Zami,
Audre Lorde describes the racial differences framing lesbian activities in
New York City in the 1950s where interracial boundaries were crossed,
often for the first time.
69 These works suggest that African American les-
bians constructed sexual identities within African American communities
in urban spaces. The strictures placed on all African American women who
moved into White-controlled space (the threat of sexual harassment and
rape) affected straight and lesbian women alike. Moreover, differences in
male and female socialization may have made it easier for African American
women to remain closeted within African American communities.
Heterosexual and lesbian women alike value intimacy and friendship with
their female relatives, their friends, and their children. In contrast, domi-
nant views of masculinity condition men to compete with one another.
Prevailing ideas about masculinity encourage Black men to reject close
male friendships that come too close to homoerotic bonding.
On the other hand, the presence of Black gay, lesbian, and bisexual
activities and enclaves within racially segregated neighborhoods did not
mean that LGBT people experienced acceptance. Greatly influenced by
Black Church teachings, African Americans may have accepted homosex-
ual individuals, but they disapproved of homosexuality itself. Relations in
the Black Church illustrate this stance of grudging acceptance. While cen-
suring homosexuality, Black churches have also not banished LGBT peo-
ple from their congregations. Within the tradition of some Church leaders,
homosexuality falls under the rubric of pastoral care and is not considered
a social justice issue. Ministers often preach, “love the sinner but hate the
sin.”
70 This posture of “don’t be too out and we will accept you” has had a
curious effect on churches themselves as well as on African American
antiracist politics. For example, the Reverend Edwin C. Sanders, a found-
ing pastor of the Metropolitan Interdenominational Church in Nashville,
describes this contradiction of accepting LGBT Black people, just as long
as they are not too visible. As Reverend Sanders points out: “the unspoken
111


--- PAGE 123 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
message . . . says it’s all right for you to be here, just don’t say anything,
just play your little role. You can be in the choir, you can sit on the piano
bench, but don’t say you’re gay.”
71 Reverend Sanders describes how this
policy limited the ability of Black churches to deal with the spreading
HIV/AIDS epidemic. He notes how six Black musicians within Black
churches died of AIDS, yet churches hushed up the cause of the deaths.
As Reverend Sanders observes, “Nobody wanted to deal with the fact that
all of these men were gay black men, and yet they’d been leading the music
for them.”
72 
The dual challenges to racism and heterosexism in the post–civil rights
era have provided LGBT Black people with both more legal rights within
American society (that hopefully will translate into improved levels of
security) and the potential for greater acceptance within African American
communities. As a result, a visible and vocal Black LGBT presence
emerged in the 1980s and 1990s that challenged the seeming separateness
of racism and heterosexism in ways that unsettled heterosexual Black peo-
ple and gay White people alike. Rejecting the argument that racism and
heterosexism come together solely or even more intensively for LGBT
African Americans, LGBT African American people highlighted the con-
nections and contradictions that characterize racism and heterosexism as
mutually constructing systems of oppression. Working in this intersection
between these two systems, LGBT African Americans raised important
issues about the workings of racism and heterosexism. 
One issue concerns how race complicates the closeting process and
resistance to it. Just as Black people’s ability to break out of prison differed
based on gender, class, age, and sexuality, LGBT people’s ability to come
out of the closet displays similar heterogeneity. As LGBT African
Americans point out, the contours of the closet and the costs attached to
leaving it vary according to race, class, and gender. For many LGBT
Whites, sexual orientation is all that distinguishes them from the dominant
White population. Affluent gay White men, for example, may find it eas-
ier to come out of the closet because they still maintain many of the bene-
fits of White masculinity. In contrast, in part because of a multiplicity of
identities, African American gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered indi-
viduals seem less likely than their White counterparts to be openly gay or
to consider themselves completely out of the closet.
73 Race complicates the
coming-out process. As Kevin Boykin recalls, “coming out to my family
112


--- PAGE 124 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
members, I found, was much more difficult than coming out to my friends.
Because my family had known me longer than my friends had, I thought
they at least deserved to hear the words ‘I’m gay’ from my own lips. . . . On
the other hand, precisely because my family had known and loved me as
one person, I worried that they might not accept me as another. Would
they think I had deceived them for years?”
74 Gender and age add further
layers of complexity to the coming-out process, as the difficulties faced by
African American lesbians and gay African American high school youth
suggest.
75 
Another related issue concerns the endorsement of “passing” and/or
assimilation as possible solutions to racial and sexual discrimination. Black
LGBT people point to the contradictions of passing in which, among
African Americans, racial passing is routinely castigated as denying one’s
true self, yet sexual passing as heterosexual is encouraged. Barbara Smith,
a lesbian activist who refused to remain in the closet, expresses little toler-
ance for lesbians who are willing to reap the benefits of others’ struggles,
but who take few risks themselves: 
A handful of out lesbians of color have gone into the wilderness and
hacked through the seemingly impenetrable jungle of homophobia. Our
closeted sisters come upon the wilderness, which is now not nearly as
frightening, and walk the path we have cleared, even pausing at times to
comment upon the beautiful view. In the meantime, we are on the other
side of the continent, hacking through another jungle. At the very least,
people who choose to be closeted can speak out against homophobia. . . .
[Those] who protect their closets never think about . . . how their
silences contribute to the silencing of others.
76 
Even if the “wilderness” is not nearly as frightening as it once was, the
seeming benefits of remaining closeted and passing as straight may be
more illusory than real. Because of the ability of many LGBT individuals
to pass as straight, they encounter distinctive forms of prejudice and dis-
crimination. Here racism and heterosexism differ. Blackness is clearly
identifiable, and in keeping with assumptions of color blindness of the new
racism, many Whites no longer express derogatory racial beliefs in public,
especially while in the company of Blacks. They may, however, express
such beliefs in private or behind their backs. In contrast, U.S. society’s
113


--- PAGE 125 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
assumption of heterosexuality along with its tolerance of homophobia
imposes no such public censure on straight men and women to refrain
from homophobic comments in public. As a result, closeted and openly
LGBT people may be exposed to a much higher degree of interpersonal
insensitivity and overt prejudice in public than the racial prejudice experi-
enced by Blacks and other racial/ethnic groups.
77 
Black churches and African American leaders and organizations that
held fast in the past to the view of “don’t be too out and we will accept
you” faced hostile external racial climates that led than to suppress differ-
ences among African Americans, ostensibly in the name of racial solidar-
ity. This version of racial solidarity also drew upon sexist and heterosexist
beliefs to shape political agendas for all Black people. For example, by
organizing the historic 1963 March on Washington where Martin Luther
King, Jr. gave his legendary “I Have a Dream Speech,” African American
civil rights leader Bayard Rustin played a major role in the civil rights
movement. Yet because Rustin was an out gay man, he was seen as a poten-
tial threat to the movement itself. Any hint of sexual impropriety was
feared. So Rustin stayed in the background, while Martin Luther King, Jr.
maintained his position as spokesperson and figurehead for the march and
the movement. But the question for today is whether holding these views
on race, gender, and sexuality makes political sense in the greatly changed
context of the post–civil rights era. In a context where out-of-wedlock
births, poverty, and the spread of STDs threatens Black survival, preach-
ing abstinence to teens who define sexuality only in terms of genital sexual
intercourse or encouraging LGBT people to renounce the sin of homo-
sexuality and “just be straight” simply miss the mark. Too much is at stake
for Black antiracist projects to ignore sexuality and its connections to
oppressions of race, class, gender, and age any longer.
RACISM AND HETEROSEXISM REVISITED
On May 11, 2003, a stranger killed fifteen-year-old Sakia Gunn who, with
four friends, was on her way home from New York’s Greenwich Village.
Sakia and her friends were waiting for the bus in Newark, New Jersey,
when two men got out of a car, made sexual advances, and physically
attacked them. The women fought back, and when Gunn told the men that
she was a lesbian, one of them stabbed her in the chest. 
114


--- PAGE 126 ---
PRISONS FOR OUR BODIES, CLOSETS FOR OUR MINDS
Sakia Gunn’s murder illustrates the connections among class, race,
gender, sexuality, and age. Sakia lacked the protection of social class privi-
lege. She and her friends were waiting for the bus in the first place because
none had access to private automobiles that offer protection for those who
are more affluent. In Gunn’s case, because her family initially did not have
the money for her funeral, she was scheduled to be buried in a potter’s
grave. Community activists took up a collection to pay for her funeral. She
lacked the gendered protection provided by masculinity. Women who are
perceived to be in the wrong place at the wrong time are routinely
approached by men who feel entitled to harass and proposition them.
Thus, Sakia and her friends share with all women the vulnerabilities that
accrue to women who negotiate public space. She lacked the protection of
age—had Sakia and her friends been middle-aged, they may not have been
seen as sexually available. Like African American girls and women, regard-
less of sexual orientation, they were seen as approachable. Race was a fac-
tor, but not in a framework of interracial race relations. Sakia and her
friends were African American, as were their attackers. In a context where
Black men are encouraged to express a hyper-heterosexuality as the badge
of Black masculinity, women like Sakia and her friends can become impor-
tant players in supporting patriarchy. They challenged Black male author-
ity, and they paid for the transgression of refusing to participate in scripts
of Black promiscuity. But the immediate precipitating catalyst for the vio-
lence that took Sakia’s life was her openness about her lesbianism. Here,
homophobic violence was the prime factor. Her death illustrates how
deeply entrenched homophobia can be among many African American
men and women, in this case, beliefs that resulted in an attack on a
teenaged girl. 
How do we separate out and weigh the various influences of class, gen-
der, age, race, and sexuality in this particular incident? Sadly, violence
against Black girls is an everyday event. What made this one so special?
Which, if any, of the dimensions of her identity got Sakia Gunn killed?
There is no easy answer to this question, because allof them did. More
important, how can any Black political agenda that does not take allof
these systems into account, including sexuality, ever hope adequately to
address the needs of Black people as a collectivity? One expects racism in
the press to shape the reports of this incident. In contrast to the 1998 mur-
der of Matthew Shepard, a young, White, gay man in Wyoming, no mas-
115


--- PAGE 127 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
sive protests, nationwide vigils, and renewed calls for federal hate crimes
legislation followed Sakia’s death. But what about the response of elected
and appointed officials? The African American mayor of Newark decried
the crime, but he could not find the time to meet with community activists
who wanted programmatic changes to retard crimes like Sakia’s murder.
The principal of her high school became part of the problem. As one
activist described it, “students at Sakia’s high school weren’t allowed to
hold a vigil. And the kids wearing the rainbow flag were being punished
like they had on gang colors.”
78
Other Black leaders and national organizations spoke volumes through
their silence. The same leaders and organizations that spoke out against the
police beating of Rodney King by Los Angeles area police, the rape of
immigrant Abner Louima by New York City police, and the murder of
Timothy Thomas by Cincinnati police said nothing about Sakia Gunn’s
death. Apparently, she was just another unimportant little Black girl to
them. But to others, her death revealed the need for a new politics that
takes the intersections of racism and heterosexism as well as class exploita-
tion, age discrimination, and sexism into account. Sakia was buried on
May 16 and a crowd of approximately 2,500 people attended her funeral.
The turnout was unprecedented: predominantly Black, largely high school
students, and mostly lesbians. Their presence says that as long as African
American lesbians like high school student Sakia Gunn are vulnerable,
then every African American woman is in danger; and if all Black women
are at risk, then there is no way that any Black person will ever be truly safe
or free. 
116


--- PAGE 128 ---
PART II
RETHINKING BLACK
GENDER IDEOLOGY


--- PAGE 129 ---



--- PAGE 130 ---
FOUR
GET YOUR FREAK ON
Sex, Babies, and Images 
of Black Femininity
2001: Established songwriter, producer, rapper, and
singer Missy Elliott’s smash hit “Get Your Freak On”
catapults her third album to the top of the charts.
Claiming that she can last 20 rounds with the “Niggahs,”
Missy declares that she’s the “best around” because she
has a “crazy style.” In tribute to and in dialogue with
Elliott, singer Nelly Furtado also records her version of
“Get Your Freak On.” Describing Elliott, Furtado sings
“she’s a freak and I’m a chief head banger.” In case lis-
teners might think Furtado is not as down as Elliott,
Furtado sings “Who’s that bitch? Me!” Elliott’s song
becomes so popular that a series of websites offer its
mesmerizing sitar tones as ringers for cell phones. They
ring in Burger King. “Get your freak on” . . . “Hello?”
2001: At the height of his career in 1981, the “King of
Funk” Rick James hits it big with “Superfreak.”
Describing the kind of girls who wait backstage with
their girlfriends in the hopes of landing a rock star,
“Superfreak” portrays a “very kinky girl” who is “never
hard to please.” She’s “pretty wild,” he loves to “taste
her,” but she is not the kind of girl that he can take
home to his mother. James’s hit catapults the term
“freak” into popular culture. Midnight Star sing “I’m
Your Freakazoid, come on and wind me up.” Whodini


--- PAGE 131 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
proclaims the “freaks come out at night.” In the 1990s, M. C.
Hammer samples “Superfreak” for his million-seller album Can’t
Touch This. Ironically, by the 2001 debut of Missy Elliott’s “Get Your
Freak On,” Rick James’s main claim to fame lies in his place on a
comedy website titled The Funny Pages: List of Penises. Situated in 
a taxonomy of penises that includes the “American Express Penis”
(don’t leave home without it), the McDonald’s Penis (over 8 billion
served), and the Uncle Sam Penis (we want you), there it is—the
Rick James Penis (it’s superfreaky).
1
Missy Elliott’s “Get Your Freak On” may have appeared to come from
nowhere, but the differing meanings associated with the term freakare sit-
uated at the crossroads of colonialism, science, and entertainment. Under
colonialism, West African people’s proximity to wild animals, especially
apes, raised in Western imaginations the specter of “wild” sexual practices
in an uncivilized, inherently violent wilderness.
2 Through colonial eyes,
the stigma of biological Blackness and the seeming primitiveness of
African cultures marked the borders of extreme abnormality. For Western
sciences that were mesmerized with body politics,
3 White Western nor-
mality became constructed on the backs of Black deviance, with an imag-
ined Black hyper-heterosexual deviance at the heart of the enterprise. The
treatment of Sarah Bartmann, forced medical experimentation on slave
women during gynecology’s early years, and the infamous Tuskegee
syphilis experiment illustrate how Western sciences constructed racial dif-
ference by searching the physiology of Black people’s bodies for sexual
deviance.
4 Entertainment contributed another strand to the fabric enfold-
ing contemporary meanings of freak. In the nineteenth century, the term
freakappeared in descriptions of human oddities exhibited by circuses and
sideshows. Individuals who fell outside the boundaries of normality, from
hairy women to giants and midgets, all were exhibited as freaks of nature
for the fun and amusement of live audiences. 
When Elliot sang “Get Your Freak On,” she invoked a term with sed-
imented historical meaning. But there’s more. During the twenty-year
period spanning James’s “Superfreak” and Elliott’s “Get Your Freak On,”
the term freakcame to permeate popular culture to the point at which it is
now intertwined with ideas about sexuality, sexual identities, and sexual
practices. “Freaky” sex consists of sex outside the boundaries of normal-
120


--- PAGE 132 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
ity—the kind of “kinky” sexuality invoked by Rick James and other popu-
lar artists. As boundaries of race, gender, and sexuality soften and shift, so
do the meanings of freakyas well as the practices and people thought to
engage in them. The term initially invoked a sexual promiscuity associated
with Blackness, but being freaky is no longer restricted to Black people. As
Whodini raps, “freaks come in all shapes, sizes and colors, but what I like
about ’em most is that they’re real good lovers.” James, Elliott, and other
African American artists may have led the way, but the usages offreakhave
traveled far beyond the African American experience. The term has shown
a stunning resiliency, migrating onto the dance floor as a particular dance
(Le Freak) and as a style of dancing that signaled individuality, sexual
abandon, craziness, wildness, and new uses of the body. “Get your freak
on” can mean many things to many people. To be labeled a freak, to be a
freak, and to freak constitute different sites of race, gender, and sexuality
within popular culture. 
How do we make sense of the meanings, use, and speed with which the
term freaktravels in the new racism? This term is not alone. Joining freak,
terms such as nigger, bitch, and faggotalso reappear in everyday speech.
Collectively, these terms signal a reworking of historical language of
racism, sexism, and heterosexism, all played out in the spectacles offered
up by contemporary mass media. On one level, freak, nigger, bitch, and fag-
gotare just words. But on another level, these terms are situated at an ide-
ological crossroads that both replicates and resists intersecting oppressions.
Because the new racism requires new ideological justifications, these terms
help shape changing social conditions. People also resist systems of
oppression often by taking offensive words and changing their meaning;
the case, for example, of African American men whose use of the term nig-
gerchallenges the derogatory usages of White America.
5
What seems different today under the new racism is the changing
influence of Black popular culture and mass media as sites where ideas
concerning Black sexuality are reformulated and contested.
6 In modern
America where community institutions of all sorts have eroded, popular
culture has increased in importance as a source of information and ideas.
African American youth, in particular, can no longer depend on a deeply
textured web of families, churches, fraternal organizations, school clubs,
sports teams, and other community organizations to help them negotiate
the challenges of social inequality. Mass media fills this void, especially
121


--- PAGE 133 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
movies, television, and music that market Black popular culture aimed at
African American consumers. With new technologies that greatly expand
possibilities for information creation and dissemination, mass media needs
a continuing supply of new cultural material for its growing entertainment,
advertising, and news divisions. Because of its authority to shape percep-
tions of the world, global mass media circulates images of Black feminin-
ity and Black masculinity and, in doing so, ideologies of race, gender,
sexuality, and class. 
In the 1990s, Black popular culture became a hot commodity. Within
mass media influenced social relations, African American culture is now
photographed, recorded, and/or digitalized, and it travels to all parts of
the globe. This new commodified Black culture is highly marketable and
has spurred a Black culture industry, one that draws heavily from the cul-
tural production and styles of urban Black youth. In this context, repre-
sentations of African American women and African American men became
increasingly important sites of struggle. The new racism requires new ide-
ological justifications, and the controlling images of Black femininity and
Black masculinity participate in creating them.
7 At the same time, African
American women and men use these same sites within Black popular cul-
ture to resist racism, class exploitation, sexism, and/or heterosexism. 
Because racial desegregation in the post–civil rights era needed new
images of racial difference for a color-blind ideology, class-differentiated
images of African American culture have become more prominent. In the
1980s and 1990s, historical images of Black people as poor and working-
class Black became supplemented by and often contrasted with represen-
tations of Black respectability used to portray a growing Black middle
class. Poor and working-class Black culture was routinely depicted as being
“authentically” Black whereas middle- and upper-middle class Black cul-
ture was seen as less so. Poor and working-class Black characters were por-
trayed as the ones who walked, talked, and acted “Black,” and their lack of
assimilation of American values justified their incarceration in urban ghet-
tos. In contrast, because middle- and upper-middle-class African
American characters lacked this authentic “Black” culture and were virtu-
ally indistinguishable from their White middle-class counterparts, assimi-
lated, propertied Black people were shown as being ready for racial
integration. This convergence of race and class also sparked changes in the
treatment of gender and sexuality. Representations of poor and working-
122


--- PAGE 134 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
class authenticity and middle-class respectability increasingly came in gen-
der-specific form. As Black femininity and Black masculinity became
reworked through this prism of social class, a changing constellation of
images of Black femininity appeared that reconfigured Black women’s sex-
uality and helped explain the new racism.
“BITCHES” AND BAD (BLACK) MOTHERS: 
IMAGES OF WORKING-CLASS BLACK WOMEN 
Images of working-class Black women can be assembled around two main
focal points. The controlling image of the “bitch” constitutes one repre-
sentation that depicts Black women as aggressive, loud, rude, and pushy.
Increasingly applied to poor and/or working-class Black women, the rep-
resentation of the “bitch” constitutes a reworking of the image of the mule
of chattel slavery. Whereas the mule was simply stubborn (passive aggres-
sive) and needed prodding and supervision, the bitch is confrontational
and actively aggressive. The term bitchis designed to put women in their
place. Using bitch by itself is offensive, but in combination with other
slurs, it can be deadly. Randall Kennedy reports on the actions of a 1999
New Jersey state court that removed a judge, in part, for his actions in one
case. The judge had attempted to persuade the prosecutor to accept a plea
bargain from four men indicted for robbing and murdering a sixty-seven-
year-old African American woman. The judge told the prosecutor not to
worry about the case since the victim had been just “some old nigger
bitch.”
8 
Representations of Black women as bitches abound in contemporary
popular culture, and presenting Black women as bitches is designed to
defeminize and demonize them. But just as young Black men within hip-
hop culture have reclaimed the term niggerand used it for different ends,
the term bitchand the image of Black women that it carries signals a simi-
lar contestation process. Within this representation, however, not all
bitches are the same. Among African American Studies undergraduate
students at the University of Cincinnati, the consensus was that “bitch”
and “Bitch” referenced two distinctive types of Black female representa-
tions. All women potentially can be “bitches” with a small “b.” This was
the negative evaluation of “bitch.” But the students also identified a posi-
tive valuation of “bitch” and argued (some, vociferously so) that only
123


--- PAGE 135 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
African American women can be “Bitches” with a capital “B.” Bitches
with a capital “B” or in their language, “Black Bitches,” are super-tough,
super-strong women who are often celebrated. 
They may be right. During the early 1970s, when films such as Shaft
and Superflypresented African American women as sexual props for the
exploits of Black male heroes, Pam Grier’s films signaled the arrival of a
new kind of “bitch.” As a “Black Bitch,” Grier’s performances combined
beauty, sexuality, and violence. For example, in Sheba, Baby(1975), Grier
is routinely called a “bitch” by the bad guys, a derisive appellation that
does not seem to phase her. In other places in the same film when she is
called a “Bitch” the term seems to signal admiration. She becomes a “Bad
Bitch” (e.g., a good Black woman), when she puts her looks, sexuality,
intellect, and/or aggression in service to African American communities.
By contemporary standards, the violence in most of Grier’s films seems
tame. But her films did contain violence and Grier was often the one
engaging in it. Despite her long hair, facial features, and full-figured body
that granted her femininity under Western standards of beauty, Grier’s
height made her taller than most men, a size that granted her the power of
potentially dominating them. This she did in several films, from slapping
her brother for capitulating to drug dealers in Foxy Brown(1974) to put-
ting a headlock on a Black male gangster and stuffing his face in a bucket
of flour in Sheba, Baby. Grier may have been called a “bitch,” but in
Sheba, Babyand Foxy Brownshe got revenge on the loan sharks and drug
dealers that preyed upon poor and working-class African Americans.
Moreover, her actions routinely drew admiration and praise from the
African American men in these films, as well as those who were in the audi-
ence. Film critic Donald Bogle describes audience reaction to an especially
memorable scene in Foxy Brownthat he calls “enjoyably perverse.” Prior
to the scene, Grier’s lover and brother were both killed by two drug king-
pins, a corrupt White man and his White girlfriend. Grier’s Foxy Brown
catches up with the man and has her boys unzip his pants. He is then cas-
trated. Bogle describes what happened next: 
Pam pays a visit to the man’s ladyfriend—carrying a jar that contains
the poor man’s most valuable parts. Grier then throws the jar at the
white woman; it falls on the floor, its contents apparently rolling this
way and that (mercifully, the audience doesn’t see this; it’s left to the
124


--- PAGE 136 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
imagination), all to the horror of the woman who, upon recognizing
what is before her eyes, screams out the name of the man she has loved.
It’s her poor Steve! Audiences howled over this one!
9
Apparently, in 1974, Black men were not intimidated by Grier’s depiction
of a strong Black woman, as long as she was on their side. 10 
Grier may have established a template for a new kind of “Black bitch,”
but contemporary Black popular culture’s willingness to embrace patri-
archy has left the “Black bitch” as a contested representation. Ironically,
Black male comedians have often led the pack in reproducing derisive
images of Black women as being ugly, loud “bitches.” Resembling Marlon
Riggs’ protestations about the “sissy” and “punk” jokes targeted toward
Black gay men, “bitches” are routinely mocked within contemporary Black
popular culture. For example, ridiculing African American women as being
like men (also, a common representation of Black lesbians) has long been a
prominent subtext in the routines of Redd Foxx, Eddie Murphy, Martin
Lawrence, and other African American comedians. In other cases, Black
male comedians dress up as African American women in order to make fun
of them. Virtually all of the African American comics on the popular show
Saturday Night Live have on occasion dressed as women to caricature
Black women. Through this act of cross-dressing, Black women can be
depicted as ugly women who too closely resemble men (big, Black, and
short hair) and because they are aggressive like men, become stigmatized
as “bitches.” As Jill Nelson points out: 
Whatever the genre, black women are fair game. It is a tradition among
many black male comedians to dress up as black women, transforming
themselves into objects of revulsion and ridicule. From Flip Wilson in
the 1970s in drag playing loud, crass, unattractive ‘Geraldine’ . . . to the
. . . situation comedy ‘Martin,’ starring Martin Lawrence, whose drag
alter ego is an ignorant, loud, sexual predator named Sheneneh, the way
to elicit a guaranteed laugh is to put on a dress and play the unattrac-
tive, dominating, sexually voracious black woman.
11
Nelson then speculates why this situation exists: “Black male comedians
have encased black women in a negative stereotype, the basis of which is
self-hatred projected on the handiest target: black women”
12 
125


--- PAGE 137 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
In the universe of Black popular culture, the combination of sexuality
and bitchiness can be deadly. Invoking historical understandings of Black
women’s assumed promiscuity, some representations of the “bitch” draw
upon American sexual scripts of Black women’s wildness. Here, the ques-
tion of who controls Black women’s sexuality is paramount. One sign of a
“Bitch’s” power is her manipulation of her own sexuality for her own gain.
Bitches control men, or at least try to, using their bodies as weapons. In her
novel The Coldest Winter Ever, Sister Souljah presents one of the few book-
length treatments of hip-hop culture’s materialistic “bad bitch.” Souljah
tells the story of Winter Santiago, the oldest of four daughters of a New
York City drug dealer, whose three sisters bear the names Porsche,
Mercedes, and Lexus. A coming-of-age story, the novel traces Winter’s
grooming through her opulent adolescence to be a “bad bitch,” only to
learn how quickly wealth and power were stripped away when her father
was put in prison. Souljah’s depiction of Winter Santiago provides one of
the best descriptions of a “bad bitch”:
A bad bitch is a woman who handles her business without making it
seem like business. Only dumb girls let love get them delirious to the
point where they let things that really count go undone. For example,
you see a good-looking nigga walking down the avenue, you get excited.
You wet just thinking about him. You step to him, size him up, and you
think, Looks good. You slide you eyes down to his zipper, check for the
print. Inside you scream, Yes, it’s all there! But then you realize he’s not
wearing a watch, ain’t carrying no car keys, no jewels, and he’s sporting
last month’s sneakers. He’s broke as hell.
13 
Winter then continues to identify the two options that are available to a
“bad bitch” faced with this situation. She can either take him home and
“get her groove on just to enjoy the sex and don’t get emotionally involved
because he can’t afford her” or she can walk away and “leave his broke ass
standing right there.”
14 Having a relationship is out.
This theme of the materialistic, sexualized Black women has become
an icon within hip-hop culture. The difficulty lies in telling the difference
between representations of Black women who are sexually liberated and
those who are sexual objects, their bodies on sale for male enjoyment. On
the one hand, the public persona of rap star Lil’ Kim has been compared
126


--- PAGE 138 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
to that of a female hustler. Resembling representations of her male coun-
terpart who uses women for financial and sexual gain, the public perform-
ance of Lil’ Kim brings life to the fictional Winter Santiago. An exposé in
Vibemagazine describes Kim’s public face: “Lil’ Kim’s mythology is about
pussy, really: the power, pleasure, and politics of it, the murky mixture of
emotions and commerce that sex has become in popular culture. . . . She
is, perhaps, the greatest public purveyor of the female hustle this side of
Madonna, parlaying ghetto pain, pomp, and circumstances into main-
stream fame and fortune.”
15 But should we think that Lil’ Kim is shallow,
the article goes on to describe her “soft center”: “Kim’s reality, on the
other hand is about love. It is her true currency . . . the entirely of her
appeal has much to do with the fact that love—carnal, familial, self-
destructive, or spiritual—is the root of who Kim is. Pussy is just the most
marketable aspect of it.”
16 What do we make of Lil’ Kim? Is she the female
version of misogynistic rappers? If so, her performance is what matters.
To be real, she must sell sexuality as part of working-class Black female
authenticity. 
On the other hand, many African American women rappers identify
female sexuality as part of women’s freedom and independence. Being sex-
ually open does not make a woman a tramp or a “ho.” When Salt ’n Pepa
engage in role reversal in their video “Most Men Are Tramps,” they con-
test dominant notions that see as dangerous female sexuality that is not
under the control of men. Lack of male domination creates immoral
women. Salt ’n Pepa ask, “have you even seen a man who’s stupid and rude
. . . who thinks he’s God’s gift to women?” The rap shows a group of male
dancers wearing black trench coats. As Salt ’n Pepa repeat “tramp,” the
men flash open their coats to reveal outfits of tiny little red G-strings. The
video does not exploit the men—they are shown for just a second. Rather,
the point is to use role reversal to criticize existing gender ideology.
17 In
their raps “Let’s Talk about Sex,” and “It’s None of Your Business,” the
group repeats its anthem of sexual freedom. 
This issue of control becomes highly important within the universe of
Black popular culture that is marketed by mass media. Some women are
bitches who control their own sexuality—they “get a freak on,” which
remains within their control and on their own terms. Whether she “fucks
men” for pleasure, drugs, revenge, or money, the sexualized bitch consti-
tutes a modern version of the jezebel, repackaged for contemporary mass
127


--- PAGE 139 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
media. In discussing this updated jezebel image, cultural critic Lisa Jones
distinguishes between gold diggers/skeezers (women who screw for status)
and crack hoes (women who screw for a fix).
18 Some women are the “hos”
who trade sexual favors for jobs, money, drugs, and other material items.
The female hustler, a materialistic woman who is willing to sell, rent, or use
her sexuality to get whatever she wants constitutes this sexualized variation
of the “bitch.” This image appears with increasing frequency, especially in
conjunction with trying to “catch” an African American man with money.
Athletes are targets, and having a baby with an athlete is a way to garner
income. Black women who are sex workers, namely, those who engage in
phone sex, lap dancing, and prostitution for compensation, also populate
this universe of sexualized bitches. The prostitute who hustles without a
pimp and who keeps the compensation is a bitch who works for herself.
Not only do these images of sexualized Black bitches appear in global
mass media, Black male artists, producers, and marketing executives par-
ticipate in reproducing these images. As cultural critic Lisa Jones points
out, “what might make the skeezer an even more painful thorn in your side
is that, unlike its forerunners, this type is manufactured primarily by black
men.”
19 If the cultural production of some African American male artists
is any indication, Jones may be on to something. 
In the early 1990s, and in conjunction with the emergence of gangsta
rap, a fairly dramatic shift occurred within Black popular culture and mass
media concerning how some African American artists depicted African
American women. In a sense, the celebrationof Black women’s bodies and
how they handled them that had long appeared in earlier Black cultural
production (for example, a song such as “Brick House” within a rhythm
and blues tradition) became increasingly replaced by the objectificationof
Black women’s bodies as part of a commodified Black culture.
Contemporary music videos of Black male artists in particular became
increasingly populated with legions of young Black women who dance,
strut, and serve as visually appealing props for the rapper in question. The
women in these videos typically share two attributes—they are rarely
acknowledged as individuals and they are scantily clad. One Black female
body can easily replace another and all are reduced to their bodies.
Ironically, displaying nameless, naked Black female bodies had a long his-
tory in Western societies, from the display of enslaved African women on
the auction block under chattel slavery to representations of Black female
128


--- PAGE 140 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
bodies in contemporary film and music videos. Describing the placement
and use of primitive art in Western exhibits, one scholar points out,
“‘namelessness’ resembles ‘nakedness’: it is a category always brought to
bear by the Westerner on the ‘primitive’ and yet a phony category insofar
as the namelessness and nakedness exist only from the Euro-American
point of view.”
20 
Not only can the entire body become objectified but also parts of the
body can suffer the same fate. For example, music videos for Sir Mix A
Lot’s “Baby Got Back,” the film clip for “Doing Da Butt” from Spike
Lee’s film School Daze, and the music video for 2LiveCrew’s “Pop That
Coochie” all focused attention on women’s behinds generally, and Black
women’s behinds in particular. All three songs seemingly celebrated Black
women’s buttocks, but they also objectified them, albeit differently. “Baby
Got Back” is more clearly rooted in the “Brick House” tradition of cele-
brating Black women’s sexuality via admiring their bodies—in his video,
Sir Mix A Lot happily wanders among several booty swinging sisters, all
of whom are proud to show their stuff. “Doing Da Butt” creates a differ-
ent interpretive context for this fascination with the booty. In Lee’s party
sequence, being able to shake the booty is a sign of authentic Blackness,
with the Black woman who is shaking the biggest butt being the most
authentic Black woman. In contrast, “Pop That Coochie” contains a bevy
of women who simply shake their rumps for the enjoyment of the mem-
bers of 2LiveCrew. Their butts are toys for the boys in the band. Ironically,
whereas European men expressed fascination with the buttocks of the
Hottentot Venus as a site of Black female sexuality that became central to
the construction of White racism itself, contemporary Black popular cul-
ture seemingly celebrates these same signs uncritically. 
Objectifying Black women’s bodies turns them into canvases that can
be interchanged for a variety of purposes. Historically, this objectification
had a clear racial motive. In the post–civil rights era, however, this use of
Black women’s bodies also has a distinctive gender subtext in that African
American men and women participate differently in this process of objec-
tification. African American men who star in music videos construct a cer-
tain version of manhood against the backdrop of objectified nameless,
quasi naked Black women who populate their stage. At the same time,
African American women in these same videos often objectify their own
bodies in order to be accepted within this Black male-controlled universe.
129


--- PAGE 141 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Black women now can get hair weaves, insert blue contact lenses, dye their
hair blond, get silicone implants to have bigger breasts, and have ribs
removed to achieve small waists (Janet Jackson) all for the purpose of
appearing more “beautiful.”
21
Whether Black women rappers who use the term bitchare participat-
ing in their own subordination or whether they are resisting these gender
relations remains a subject of debate. Rap and hip-hop serve as sites to
contest these same gender meanings. The language in rap has attracted
considerable controversy, especially the misogyny associated with calling
women “bitches” and “hos.”
22 First popularized within rap, these terms are
now so pervasive that they have entered the realm of colloquial, everyday
speech. Even White singer Nelly Furtado proudly proclaims, “Who’s that
bitch? Me!” Yet because rap is a sphere of cultural production, it has space
for contestation. For example, in 1994 Queen Latifah’s “U.N.I.T .Y .” won
a Grammy, a NAACP Image Award, and a Soul Train Music Award.
Latifah claims that she did not write the song to win awards, but in
response to the verbal and physical assaults on women that she saw around
her, especially in rap music. As one line from her award-winning song
states, “Every time I hear a brother call a girl a bitch or a ho. Trying to
make a sister feel low, You know all of that’s got to go.”
23
Black bitches are one thing. Black bitches that are fertile and become
mothers are something else. In this regard, the term bitchreferences yet
another meaning. Reminiscent of the association of Africans with animals,
the term bitchalso refers to female dogs. Via this association, the term thus
invokes a web of meaning that links unregulated sexuality with uncon-
trolled fertility. Female dogs or bitches “fuck” and produce litters of pup-
pies. In a context of a racial discourse that long associated people of
African descent with animalistic practices, the use of the term bitch is
noteworthy. Moreover, new technologies that place a greater emphasis on
machines provide another variation on the updated bitch. In contrast to
Black female bodies as animalistic, Black female bodies become machines
built for endurance. The Black superwoman becomes a “sex machine” that
in turn becomes a “baby machine.” The thinking behind these images is
that unregulated sexuality results in unplanned for, unwanted, and poorly
raised children. 
The representation of the sexualized bitch leads to another cluster of
representations of working-class Black femininity, namely, controlling
130


--- PAGE 142 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
images of poor and working-class Black women as bad mothers. Bad Black
Mothers (BBM) are those who are abusive (extremely bitchy) and/or who
neglect their children either in utero or afterward. Ironically, these Bad
Black Mothers are stigmatized as being inappropriately feminine because
they reject the gender ideology associated with the American family ideal.
24
They are often single mothers, they live in poverty, they are often young,
and they rely on the state to support their children. Moreover, they
allegedly pass on their bad values to their children who in turn are more
likely to become criminals and unwed teenaged mothers.
Reserved for poor and/or working-class Black women, or for women
who have fallen into poverty and shame as a result of their bad behavior, a
constellation of new images describes variations of the Bad Black Mother.
The image of the crack mother illustrates how controlling images of work-
ing-class Black femininity can dovetail with punitive social policies. When
crack cocaine appeared in the early 1980s, two features made it the perfect
target for the Reagan administration’s War on Drugs. Crack cocaine was
primarily confined to Black inner-city neighborhoods, and women consti-
tuted approximately half of its users. In the late 1980s, news stories began
to cover the huge increase in the number of newborns testing positive for
drugs. But coverage was far from sympathetic. Addicted pregnant women
became demonized as “crack mothers” whose selfishness and criminality
punished their children in the womb. Fictional treatments followed soon
after. For example, in the feature film Losing Isaiah, Academy Award–
winning actress Halle Berry plays a woman on crack cocaine who is so high
that she abandons her baby. A kindly White family takes Isaiah in, and they
patiently deal with the host of problems he has due to his biological
mother’s failures. 
Representations such as these contributed to a punitive climate in
which the criminal justice system increasingly penalizes pregnancy by
prosecuting women for exposing their babies to drugs in the womb and by
imposing birth control as a condition of probation. Between 1985 and
1995, thirty states charged approximately 200 women with maternal drug
use. Charges included distributing drugs to a minor, child abuse and neg-
lect, reckless endangerment, manslaughter, and assault with a deadly
weapon.
25 In virtually all of these cases, the women prosecuted were poor
and African American. As legal scholar Dorothy Roberts points out, “pros-
ecutors and judges see poor Black women as suitable subjects for these
131


--- PAGE 143 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
reproductive penalties because society does not view these women as suit-
able mothers in the first place.”26 
Drug use is one sure-fire indicator used to create the BBM represen-
tation, but simply being poor and accepting public assistance is sufficient.
In the 1960s, when African American women successfully challenged the
racially discriminatory policies that characterized social welfare programs,
the generic image of the “bad Black mother” became crystallized into the
racialized image of the “welfare mother.” These controlling images under-
went another transformation in the 1980s as part of Reagan/Bush’s efforts
to reduce social welfare funding for families. Resembling the practice of
invoking the controlling image of the Black rapist via the Bush campaign’s
use of Willie Horton in 1988, the Reagan/Bush administrations also real-
ized that racializing welfare by painting it as a program that unfairly ben-
efited Blacks was a sure-fire way to win White votes. This context created
the controlling image of the “welfare queen” primarily to garner support
for refusing state support for poor and working-class Black mothers and
children. Poor Black women’s welfare eligibility meant that many chose to
stay home and care for their children, thus emulating White middle-class
mothers. But because these stay-at-home moms were African American
and did not work for pay, they were deemed to be “lazy.” Ironically, gain-
ing rights introduced a new set of controlling images. In a political econ-
omy in which the children of poor and working-class African Americans
are unwanted because such children are expensive and have citizenship
rights, reducing the fertility becomes critical.
27 
These images of bitches and bad Black mothers came at a time when
African American children and youth became expendable. Simply put, in
the post–civil rights era, poor Black children became superfluous as work-
ers. Under chattel slavery and Jim Crow segregation of the rural South,
the need for cheap, unskilled labor and African American political power-
lessness fostered population policies that encouraged Black women to have
many children. Since African Americans themselves absorbed the costs
attached to raising children, a large, disenfranchised, and impoverished
Black population matched the perceived interest of elites. Black children
cost employers little because children did unskilled labor and were ineligi-
ble for existing social welfare benefits. The post-civil rights era that
required a more highly educated workforce and that increased Black chil-
dren’s eligibility for social welfare benefits made them more expensive to
132


--- PAGE 144 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
train and to hire. In this political and economic context, poor and working-
class African American women were encouraged to have fewer children,
often through punitive population control policies.
28 
Beyond the efforts to criminalize the pregnancies of crack-addicted
women, a series of public policies have been introduced that aim to shrink
state and federal social welfare budgets, in part by reducing Black women’s
fertility.
29 Despite its health risks and unpleasant side effects, Norplant was
marketed to poor inner-city Black teenagers. 30 As a coercive method of
birth control, users found that they had little difficulty getting their physi-
cians to insert the contraceptive rods into their bodies but, since only
physicians were qualified to remove the rods, getting them out was far
more difficult. Depo Provera as a birth control shot was also heavily mar-
keted to women who seemingly could not control their fertility and needed
medical intervention to avoid motherhood.
31 Finally, welfare legislation
that threatens to deny benefits to additional children is designed to dis-
courage childbearing. In a context in which safe, legal abortion is difficult
for poor women to obtain, the “choice” of permanent sterilization makes
sense. Representations of Bad Black Mothers help create an interpretive
climate that normalizes these punitive policies.
32
Controlling images of working-class Black women pervade television
and film, but rap and hip-hop culture constitute one site where misogyny
is freely expressed and resisted. Given this context, African American
women’s participation in rap and hip-hop as writers, producers, and as
performers illustrates how African American women negotiate these rep-
resentations. In a sense, Black female rappers who reject these representa-
tions of working-class Black women follow in the footsteps of earlier
generations of Black blues women who chose to sing the “devil’s music.”
33
The 1990s witnessed the emergence of Black women who made music
videos that were sites of promotion, creativity, and self-expression. For
example, hip-hop artists Salt ’n Pepa, Erykah Badu, Lauryn Hill, and
Missy Elliott depict themselves as independent, strong, and self-reliant
agents of their own desire. Because rap revolves around self-promotion,
female rappers are able to avoid accusations of being self-centered or nar-
cissistic when they use the form to promote Black female power. Rap thus
can provide an important forum for women.
34 
Black women’s self-representation in rap results in complex, often
contradictory and multifaceted depictions of Black womanhood. 35 One
133


--- PAGE 145 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
study of representations of Black women in popular music videos found
that controlling images of Black womanhood occurred simultaneously
with resistant images. On the one hand, when music videos focused on
Black women’s bodies, presented one-dimensional womanhood by rarely
depicting motherhood, and showcased women under the aegis of a male
sponsor, they did re-create controlling images of Black womanhood. On
the other hand, the music videos also contained distinctive patterns of
Black women’s agency. First, in many videos, Blackness did not carry a
negative connotation, but instead served as a basis for strength, power, and
a positive self-identity. Second, despite a predominance of traditional gen-
der roles, Black women performers were frequently depicted as active,
vocal, and independent. But instead of exhibiting the physical violence and
aggression found in men’s videos, the music videos sampled in the study
demonstrate the significance of verbal assertiveness where “speaking out
and speaking one’s mind are a constant theme.”
36 Another theme concerns
achieving independence—Black women may assert independence, but
they look to one another for support, partnership, and sisterhood. Black
women’s music videos may be situated within hip-hop culture, but they
reflect the tensions of negotiating representations of Black femininity:
“what emerges from this combination of agency, voice, partnership, and
Black context is a sense of the construction of Black woman-centered
video narratives. Within these narratives, the interests, desires, and goals of
women are predominant. . . . Black women are quite firmly the subjects of
these narratives and are able to clearly and unequivocally express their
points of view.”
37 
Representations of Black women athletes in mass media also replicate
and contest power relations of race, class, gender, and sexuality. Because
aggressiveness is needed to win, Black female athletes have more leeway in
reclaiming assertiveness without enduring the ridicule routinely targeted
toward the bitch. Black female athletes provide a range of images that col-
lectively challenge not only representations of the bitch and the bad
mother but are also beginning to crack the financial gender gap separating
men’s and women’s sports. Whereas men have been able to use athletics,
most recently college and professional basketball, for upward social mobil-
ity and financial security, women lacked this social mobility route until the
passage of Title IX. This legislation helped generate opportunities for girls
and women who wish to benefit from athletics in ways that have been long
134


--- PAGE 146 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
available to boys and men. Because Black women have not typically partic-
ipated in the women’s sports of figure skating, gymnastics, and until the
Williams sisters, women’s tennis, they have not been the image of the
female athlete. The entry of Black women into basketball and tennis has
changed this situation. Black women athletes’ bodies are muscular and ath-
letic, attributes historically reserved for men, yet their body types also rep-
resent new forms of femininity. 
Take, for example, the dilemma that the tennis world faced with the
success of African American sisters Venus and Serena Williams. The
achievements of the Williams sisters are unprecedented. Standing at
6–foot-1 
1/2 inches and with a 127 mph serve that once set a women’s world
record, Venus Williams has held the Wimbledon title twice (2000 and 2001)
and at the Sydney Olympics was the first woman to win a gold medal in
singles and doubles (with sister Serena) since 1924. Winning 3.9 million
dollars in prize money, Serena Williams surged ahead in 2002, winning
three Grand Slam titles to take the number one ranking away from Venus.
In 2002, the Williams sisters were ranked number one (Venus) and number
two (Serena) in the world, a first ever for siblings. Unlike Althea Gibson,
Zina Garrison, and other African American female tennis stars whose
demeanor and style of play resembled the White women dominating the
sport, the Williams sisters basically reject tennis norms. They are excep-
tionally strong and play power games like men. They rebuff tennis
“whites” in favor of form-fitting, flashy outfits in all sorts of colors. They
play with their hair fixed in beaded, African-influenced cornrows that are
occasionally died blond. The tennis world cannot remove them because the
Williams sisters win. Their working-class origins mean that they don’t fit
into the traditional tennis world and they express little desire to mimic
their White counterparts. Yet their achievements force issues of excellence
and diversity to the forefront of American politics. 
The danger for Black women athletes does not lie in being deemed less
feminine than White women because, historically, Black women as a group
have been stigmatized in this fashion. Rather, for all female athletes and for
Black women athletes in particular, the danger lies in being identified as
lesbians. The stereotype of women athletes as “manly” and as being les-
bians and for Black women as being more “masculine” than White women
converge to provide a very different interpretive context for Black female
athletes. In essence, the same qualities that are uncritically celebrated for
135


--- PAGE 147 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Black male athletes can become stumbling blocks for their Black female
counterparts. Corporate profits depend on representations and images,
and those of Black female athletes must be carefully managed in order to
win endorsements and guarantee profitability.
With its high percentage of African American women athletes, and of
non-Black athletes who identify positively with Blackness, the Women’s
National Basketball Association (WNBA) realized that its profitability
might suffer if the league was perceived as dominated by lesbian ballplay-
ers. In order to ensure that the “mannish” label applied to lesbians, female
athletes, and Black women as a group would not come to characterize the
WNBA, the League pursued at least two strategies.
38 For one, WNBA
players are sexualized in the media in ways that never apply to men. Their
sexuality helps sell basketball, yet it must be a certain kind of sexuality that
simultaneously avoids images of the muscled woman or the sports dyke
and that depicts the women as sexually attractive to men (in other words,
as heterosexual). For example, during its first season in 1997, early mar-
keting of the league featured Lisa Leslie and Rebecca Lobo, two women
whose facial features, long hair, and body types (Leslie was a model) both
invoked traditional images of femininity. Over the years, much was made
of Lisa Leslie’s modeling career. Still struggling to contain the image of
women as dykes, during the 2002 season, one series of advertisements
focused on individual players who each gave a vignette about her life and
likes. The ads followed a common pattern—the athlete would face the
camera, often holding a basketball, and would say a few words.
Interspersed throughout her narrative were action shots of her playing
basketball, still shots of her childhood, and other visuals that presented her
accomplishments. However, the ads all shared another feature—unlike
their basketball uniforms that provide more than adequate coverage for
their breasts and buttocks, each woman was dressed in fitted sweat pants,
and in a form-fitting top that, for some, exposed a hint of their midriffs
and an occasional navel. In essence, the advertisements aimed simultane-
ously to celebrate and “feminize” their athleticism by showing women in
action and showing their navels.
The second strategy aims to feminize the women by positioning them
within traditional gender ideology concerning motherhood and the family.
For example, to strengthen the association between the women players and
ideas of motherhood and family, the league recruits children to its games
136


--- PAGE 148 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
and routinely showcases families and children on its television coverage.
Pre-taped interview segments aired during games often focus on the family
life of the players. Cynthia Cooper and Sheryl Swoops, two marquee play-
ers, both have been shown in this fashion. In some cases, television shots
show the male partner of the player cheering on his love interest, often
babysitting their child. Another strategy lies in presenting teams themselves
as “families.” Shots of teams during time-outs focus on the players’ close-
ness, showing an emphasis on hand holding and group hugs. These dual
strategies of treating the women as sexual objects and repositioning them
within domestic family settings both work to contain the lesbian sexual
threat of Black female basketball players. As one critic observes, “we can
read the familial narratives that populate discussions of the WNBA as more
than simply attempts to recontextualize muscular women within the space
of domesticity. . . . The familial discourse also helps stabilize the player’s
sexuality as heterosexuality even as it locates femininity in a muscular, phys-
ically active corporeality: tough, yes; dykes, no.”
39 
Images of working-class Black femininity all articulate with the social
class system of the post–civil rights era. Depicting African American
women as bitches; the sexual use of African American women’s bodies by
circulating images of Black women’s promiscuity; derogating the repro-
ductive capacities of African American women’s bodies; and efforts to
refashion images of Black female athletes in order to erase lesbianism all
work to obscure the closing door of racial opportunity in the post–civil
rights era. On the surface, these interconnected representations offer a
plausible explanation for poor and/or working-class African American
women’s class status: (1) too-strong, bitchy women are less attractive to
men because they are not feminine; (2) to compensate, these less-attractive
women use their sexuality to “catch” men and hopefully become pregnant
so that the men will marry them; and (3) men see through this game and
leave these women as single mothers who often have little recourse but to
either try and “catch” another man or “hustle” the government. But on
another level, when it comes to poor and working-class African American
women, this constellation of representations functions as ideology to jus-
tify the new social relations of hyper-ghettoization, unfinished racial
desegregation, and efforts to shrink the social welfare state. Collectively
these representations construct a “natural” Black femininity that in turn is
central to an “authentic” Black culture. 
137


--- PAGE 149 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Aggressive African American women create problems in the imper-
fectly desegregated post–civil rights era, because they are less likely to
accept the terms of their subordination. In this context, Black “bitches” of
all kinds must be censured, especially those who complain about bad hous-
ing, poor schools, abusive partners, sexual harassment, as well as their own
depiction in Black popular culture. They and their children must be
depicted as unsuitable candidates for racial integration. Take, for example,
the resistance to poor and working-class single mothers who aim to move
into White neighborhoods. Resistance to racial housing desegregation can
be palpable, primarily because poor and working-class Black children are
stigmatized as being aggressive, undisciplined, unruly, and unsuitable
playmates for White children of any social class. The prevailing logic sug-
gests that, in the absence of strong fathers, their too strong mothers could
not teach them properly so the children repeat the cycle of inappropriate
gender behavior. In this sense, the term bitchbecomes a way of stigmatiz-
ing poor and working-class Black women who lack middle-class passivity
and submissiveness. Their undesirable, inappropriate behavior justifies the
discrimination that they might experience in housing, jobs, schools, and
public accommodations.
The social welfare state is not alone in punishing Black women who are
deemed to be too aggressive. Within African American communities,
women who fail to negotiate the slippery border that has distinguished the
independent Black woman from the controlling Black bitch can find them-
selves ridiculed, isolated, abandoned, and often in physical danger. The
2003 murder of fifteen-year-old Sakia Gunn shows what can happen to
Black women who are seen as being out of their place.
40 But more impor-
tant, the silence of major African American organizations concerning not
just media images of poor and working-class Black women but their actual
treatment by government officials, the men in their lives, and strangers on
the street also contributes to Black women’s oppression. 
MODERN MAMMIES, BLACK LADIES, AND “EDUCATED
BITCHES”: IMAGES OF MIDDLE-CLASS BLACK WOMEN 
Images of working-class Black femininity that pivot on a Black women’s
body politics of bitchiness, promiscuity, and abundant fertility also affect
middle-class African American women. In essence, the controlling images
138


--- PAGE 150 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
associated with poor and working-class Black women become texts of what
notto be. To achieve middle-class status, African American women must
reject this gender-specific version of authenticity in favor of a politics of
respectability. They must somehow figure out a way to become Black
“ladies” by avoiding these working-class traps. Doing so means negotiating
the complicated politics that accompany this triad of bitchiness, promiscu-
ity, and fertility. 
Middle-class African American career women encounter a curious
repackaging of the controlling images generated for poor and working-
class Black femininity, now reformulated for middle-class use. Images of
middle-class Black femininity demonstrate a cumbersome and often con-
tradictory link between that of modern mammy and Black lady. The Black
lady image is designed to counter claims of Black women’s promiscuity.
Achieving middle-class status means that Black women have rejected the
unbridled “freaky” sexuality now attributed primarily to working-class
Black women. At the same time, because middle-class Black women typi-
cally need to work in order to remain middle class, they cannot achieve the
status of lady by withdrawing from the workforce. Images of the Black lady
are designed to resolve these contradictions.
Claire Huxtable’s role on the hugely popular 1980s Cosby Show(played
by actress Phylicia Rashad) helped shape the contours of the middle-class
Black lady.
41 Each week, American families tuned their sets for a glimpse
into the inner workings of the upper-middle-class, African American
Cosby family. The Cosby family consisted of a professional married cou-
ple, their five children, and grandparents who visited from time to time.
The Huxtables lived far better than the vast majority of Americans of all
racial backgrounds. Their home was filled with paintings, they demon-
strated a mastery of standard American English, and they seemed deeply
committed to their college alma maters. The Huxtables also escaped and
provided an escape from social problems then plaguing large numbers of
Americans. On The Cosby Show, drugs, crime, teenage pregnancy, unem-
ployment, discrimination happened to other people. The family itself was
immune. 
The character of Claire Huxtable exemplifies the new Black lady
invented for middle- and upper-middle-class African American women. As
a wife and mother, the character of Claire Huxtable was beautiful, smart,
and sensuous. No cornrows, gum chewing, cursing, miniskirts, or plunging
139


--- PAGE 151 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
necklines existed for the character of Claire Huxtable. Despite the fact that
she was a lawyer, the show never showed her actually at her place of
employment. Doing so would introduce the theme of her sexuality into the
workplace, and exploring these contradictions apparently were beyond the
skills of the show’s writers. Instead, she was allowed to be a sexual being,
but only within the confines of heterosexual marriage and family.
Occasionally, she and her husband would cuddle under the covers, until
they were typically interrupted by one of their five children. Despite this
commitment to hearth and home, Claire Huxtable somehow managed to
make law partner in record time.
42 Black women’s sexuality was safely con-
tained to domestic space, and within the confines of heterosexual marriage.
More recent images of Black professional women also negotiate the
slippery terrain of distancing Black women from the assumptions of
aggression and sexuality attributed to working-class Black women while
not making middle-class Black women unsuitable for hard work. To
address this dilemma, the image of Mammy, the loyal female servant cre-
ated under chattel slavery, has been resurrected and modernized as a tem-
plate for middle-class Black womanhood. Maneuvering through this image
of the modern mammy requires a delicate balance between being appro-
priately subordinate to White and/or male authority yet maintaining a
level of ambition and aggressiveness needed for achievement in middle-
class occupations. Aggression is acceptable, just as long as it is appropri-
ately expressed for the benefit of others. Aggression and ambition for
oneself is anathema. Modern mammies must be aggressive, especially if
they expect to achieve within the male-defined ethos of corporations, gov-
ernment, industry, and academia. To get ahead, they must in some fashion
be “bitchy,” often with a capital “B.” Yet because these same qualities
simultaneously defeminize Black middle-class women and mark them with
the trappings of working-class, authentic Blackness that is anathema in
desegregated settings, middle-class Black female aggression must be care-
fully channeled. 
The post–civil rights era has generated its share of representations of
modern mammies, many of who also function as Black ladies. This combi-
nation of Black lady and modern mammy seems most evident on network
television, a medium that reaches a broad audience. Unlike Claire
Huxtable, who was almost always shown at home, these modern mammies
are almost exclusively shown in the workplace. Many apparently either
140


--- PAGE 152 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
have no family life or such lives are clearly secondary to the requirements
of their jobs. These women are tough, independent, smart, and asexual.
But they are also devoted to their organizations, their jobs, and, upon occa-
sion, their White male bosses. They are team players and their participa-
tion on the team is predicated upon their willingness to lack ambition for
running the team and never to put family ahead of the team. 
Despite the pressures to depict undying loyalty to the job, several rep-
resentations of modern mammies do manage to raise but not resolve the
contradictions associated with this representation. For example, the char-
acter of Ella Farmer (eloquently played by the late actress Lynn Thigpen)
on the network television show The District, works for the Washington,
D.C. Police Department as a high-level data analyst. Ella’s commitment to
African Americans is clear—she takes in an orphaned nephew and displays
qualities of care and competence that are refreshing after decades of tradi-
tional, familyless mammies. She is clearly a Black lady. She uses standard
American English, dresses impeccably, and always has a dignified
demeanor. Her character is also staunchly devoted to the “Chief,” her
White boss. Ella is loyal, and this is an important quality in depictions of
modern mammies. One incredible episode shows the extent of Ella’s loy-
alty. Unlike other modern mammies who are destined to remain single, Ella
not only managed to meet an available professional African American man
(e.g., he had no criminal record, he had a good job, he was interested in nei-
ther men nor White women, and he had no apparent child support pay-
ments), but he asked her to marry him. The night before her wedding, Ella
receives a call from the “Chief ” that he and her coworkers are under quar-
antine because a deadly virus may have infected them. Ella leaves her
groom-to-be and her orphaned nephew and rushes to headquarters.
Apparently oblivious to putting her own life in danger, she tries to enter the
building in order to be with the Chief and other quarantined staff mem-
bers and is restrained by police officers. Even more remarkably, Ella
expressed this devotion hatless in a raging snowstorm, sporting a stylish
hairstyle that was freshly done in anticipation of her wedding. The mes-
sage is clear: job first, marriage second. 
The character of Anita Van Buren (played by S. Epatha Merkerson), a
lieutenant in the New York City Police Department on the long-running
show Law and Order, provides another image of a strong Black female pro-
fessional that is developed within the strictures of the Black lady and the
141


--- PAGE 153 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
modern mammy. Unlike the undying loyalty expected of a modern
mammy, this character reveals the cracks in the ideology. Lieutenant Van
Buren supervises two men, both of whom respect her judgment. She also
has a family. They are discussed in the workplace, but this character, like
virtually all of the characters on the show, is never shown at home. But
Lieutenant Van Buren’s troubles become apparent when she refuses to be
too subservient, a problem within a police department that is patterned on
the military. Her loyalty is questioned when she files a discrimination suit
against the department because she has not been promoted. The characters
of Ella Farmer and Lieutenant Anita Van Buren both break new ground in
depicting strong Black women who are in charge. But despite the trans-
gressive elements of their characters, neither The District nor Law and
Orderunseats one main criterion of modern mammies. Ella Farmer and
Lieutenant Anita Van Buren both remain loyal to social institutions of law
and order that are run by White men. 
Despite the considerable attention paid to Anita Hill in Black feminist
theorizing, Oprah Winfrey has had a far greater impact within American
culture than any other living African American woman.
43 Oprah is one of the
richest women in the world. In 2003, Winfrey became the first Black woman
on Forbes magazine’s list of billionaires, two years after Black
Entertainment Television’s founder Robert Johnson became the first Black
billionaire. A good deal of Winfrey’s success lies in her ability to market
herself within the familiar realm of the mammy, not violate the tenets of
being a Black lady, yet reap the benefits of her performance for herself.
Following in the footsteps of Hattie McDaniel, Winfrey’s career seemingly
echoes McDaniel’s reply to those who criticized her acceptance of stereo-
typical roles. McDaniel once said, “Why should I complain about making
seven thousand dollars a week playing a maid? If I didn’t, I’d be making
seven dollars a week actually being one!”
44 Winfrey constitutes the penulti-
mate successful modern mammy whom African American and, more amaz-
ingly, White women should emulate. Winfrey markets herself in the context
of the synergistic relationship among entertainment, advertising, and news
that frame contemporary Black popular culture. Winfrey began in soft news
reporting, a format that positioned her to assume a local Chicago talk show
and learn the ropes of delivering the all-important “money shot.”
45 Her suc-
cess in Chicago grew into the hugely popular Oprah Winfrey Show .
Winfrey’s corporate power is impressive. Her show mixes a winning com-
142


--- PAGE 154 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
bination of news and entertainment, or infotainment. She instructs and
raises general consciousness on a list of important social issues ranging from
child abuse to wife battering to rape. Almost single-handedly, Winfrey got
America to read, an impressive accomplishment in a mass-media-saturated
society that balks at funding libraries and public education. Having a book
listed on her “Oprah’s Book Club” ensured overnight success. Winfrey
entertains, makes money, and instructs, a stunning fusion of entertainment,
advertising, and news. Winfrey’s immense success provides a stamp of
endorsement to any philosophy that she might endorse that goes far beyond
any expertise she might possess on any given topic. 
Yet Winfrey reinforces an individualistic ideology of social change that
counsels her audiences to rely solely on themselves. Change yourself and
your personal problems will disappear, advises Winfrey. If we each took
personal responsibility for changing ourselves, social problems in the
United States would vanish. On the surface, this advice appears to rein-
force the themes of a changed self and personal responsibility as consti-
tuting important criteria for Black women’s arrival in the middle class.
These themes are recognizable to many Black women who struggle on a
daily basis to make ends meet (media figure Iyanla Vanzant also built a
large following among African American women with basically the same
advice). Yet Winfrey’s message stops far short of linking such individual
changes to the actual resources and opportunities that are needed to escape
from poverty, stop an abusive spouse from battering, or avoid job discrim-
ination. The organizational group politics that helped create the very
opportunities that Winfrey herself enjoys are minimized in favor of a mes-
sage of personal responsibility that resonates with the theme of “personal
responsibility” used by elites to roll back social welfare programs. Even
Law and Order’s fictional Lieutenant Anita Van Buren found that individ-
ual effort was not enough to ensure her promotion on merit. When she
sued, she was punished. 
When African American middle-class women stray too far from the
narrow confines of the Black lady and the modern mammy, the price can
be high. Anita Hill’s treatment during the 1992 Senate confirmation hear-
ings of now Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas is instructive in this
regard. Hill demonstrated all of the qualities of the assimilated, acceptable
middle-class African American woman. Hill exemplified a politics of
respectability—she stayed in school, got good grades, spoke standard
143


--- PAGE 155 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
American English, and believed in the traditional American values of fam-
ily, faith, and hard work. She never married, remained childless, and was
devoted to her job. Yet because Hill was the target of sexual harassment,
she was called upon to testify about her experiences years later. Virtually
overnight, Hill as exemplary Black career woman became derogated as a
dangerous, out of control threat to the social order. Given the lack of scan-
dal in Hill’s personal history, her demeanor as a witness, and her basic
credibility, Hill’s veracity was challenged. Her reliability as a witness was
disputed on the grounds that she was acting out a fantasy of unrequited
love for Thomas, a man who was her superior and who might be an ideal
future husband who would protect her and allow her to share in his power.
Thomas apparently rejected her and married a White woman, behavior
that sparked a deep desire for revenge. Amazingly, this version of events
actually fostered the rediscovery of erotomania, a medical disorder that first
officially appeared 1987 as a subcategory of Delusional Disorder that was
used as a political weapon against her.
46 In brief, Hill was accused of being
crazy. 
Hill’s race and gender made this fabricated story plausible. Positioning
Hill within the controlling image of the single, frustrated, ambitious Black
woman who, unlike Mammy, did not show loyalty to her boss, contributed
to the perception of Hill as crazy. Her physical appearance as a dark-
skinned Black woman, one that allegedly rendered her less attractive than
Thomas’s White wife, also added plausibility to this diagnosis of erotoma-
nia. Hill’s efforts to counter these accusations by bringing her family with
her to the hearings did not prevail. Moreover, the core idea that emerged
from this event was not solely that Black women can and will use false
charges of sexual harassment. The barrier to success for ambitious Black
men no longer consisted solely of White men (and women). A more insid-
ious enemy had appeared, namely, Black women in close proximity to
Black men who use Black men’s trust to betray them.
47 Moreover, this
theme of betrayal feeds into a broader community norm that sees inde-
pendent Black women as somehow failing to support Black men. These are
the women who “don’t know how to treat a brother.”
Hill’s story illustrates the contradictions that face middle-class African
American women who become judged within the confines of modern
mammies and Black ladies. In Hill’s case, the mammy and the lady collided
head-on, with Hill herself left as the casualty. As modern mammies, such
144


--- PAGE 156 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
women are expected to put everyone else’s wishes ahead of their own
needs; in fictional Ella Farmer’s case, her own wedding and personal hap-
piness in favor of the “Chief ’s” predicament and, in Hill’s case, Clarence
Thomas’s alleged desires for sexual favors as the cost of keeping her job.
But succumbing to his demands would have meant that Hill no longer fell
within the equally confining image of Black ladyhood. Rejecting his
demands eventually exposed Hill to the charge of aggression and bitchi-
ness. Being the ultimate corporate, academic, or government mammy
yields a lifetime of faithful service that can border on exploitation. These
representations depict Black women professionals as women alone, either
because their dedication to their careers has meant that they have not
devoted sufficient time to their personal lives or because they have some
sort of negative trait that makes them less desirable as marital partners, in
Hill’s case, a latent case of erotomania. 
More recently, the stricture of the Black lady and the modern mammy
are making room for a new image, namely, the educated Black bitch. These
women have money, power, and good jobs. But they are beautiful and, in
some ways, they invoke Pam Grier’s persona as “Bad Bitches” that control
their own bodies and sexuality. For example, in the 1992 film Boomerang,
Marcus Graham (played by Eddie Murphy) is a young, successful market-
ing executive within a Black-run firm who treats women as conquests. As
a ladies’ man, Graham has no trouble finding women until he meets
Jacqueline (Robin Givens), a powerful executive whose values concerning
power, money, and sexuality closely resemble his own. Jacqueline turns the
tables by treating Graham in the same way that he has treated others. By
the end of the film, Jacqueline has been demonized and installed as the
archetypal educated Black bitch, Graham has been humbled and human-
ized by her abuse, and he is then able to see the beauty in another educated
Black woman (played by Halle Berry), who has supported him all along.
She is educated, but, unlike Jacqueline, she is appropriately subordinate.
In a more playful and muted version of the educated Black bitch repre-
sentation, Vivica Fox’s depiction of the memorable character Lysterine in
the 1997 film Booty Call also shows an educated, middle-class Black
woman who is not searching for a committed relationship but who wants
men for the sex they can provide. In contrast to Jacqueline, who is demoted
in her job, Lysterine shows no such passion—she’s in search of good booty.
Both characters raise important questions about the migration of repre-
145


--- PAGE 157 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
sentations of working-class “bad bitches” to the terrain of middle-class
Black professional women who earned their own money. 
Together, representations of Black ladies, modern mammies, and edu-
cated Black bitches help justify the continued workplace discrimination
targeted toward many middle-class African American women. They lack
loyalty (refuse to go out in a snowstorm in their wedding night to save their
bosses), they are not ladylike enough (Anita Hill’s alleged erotomania that
surfaced when Thomas rejected her advances), or they are so cutthroat and
ruthless that they cannot be trusted (Jacqueline’s turning the tables and
Lysterine’s values concerning the booty call). These representations also
are used to explain why so many African American women fail to find
committed male partners—they allegedly work too hard, do not know how
to support Black men, and/or have character traits that make them unap-
pealing to middle-class Black men. Only rarely do the families, friendships,
and love relationships that African American women actually have find
media validation. For example, the numbers of Black women who, through
separation, divorce, or the decision to have children without male partners,
live as single parents are routinely seen as having a lesser form of family
life. Even more rarely are relationships that fall outside the scope of
acceptable societal norms validated in mass media space. For example, with
the exception of the HBO series The Wirethat debuted in 2002, represen-
tations of Black lesbians in committed coupled relationships remain rare.
This show is unusual in that, unlike the characters of Ella Farmer and
Lieutenant Van Buren who also work on behalf of law and order, the char-
acter of Shakima Greggs, an African-American/Korean-American female
narcotics detective (played by Sonja Sohn), is in an openly lesbian rela-
tionship. Culturally Black, Kima is shown on the job, often engaged in
everyday chitchat with her male colleagues about her “woman.” She is also
shown at home with all of the conflicts that were denuded from characters
such as Claire Huxtable. Kima argues with her Black lesbian partner
Cheryl, who fears for Kima’s safety on dangerous narcotics details and
wishes that she would place more emphasis on her law school studies.
Kima and Cheryl are shown in sexual situations, a rarity in mass media. On
The Wire, the committed love relationship of this Black lesbian couple is
treated as no different than any other relationship on the series. This ordi-
nary treatment thus provides a mass media depiction of middle-class Black
women that remains highly unusual. 
146


--- PAGE 158 ---
GET YOUR FREAK ON
***
In essence, the mass media has generated class-specific images of Black
women that help justify and shape the new racism of desegregated, color-
blind America. Because presenting African American culture as being
indistinguishable from other cultures is not necessarily entertaining, news-
worthy, or marketable, depictions of Black culture needed to be different
from White norms, yet still supportive of them. This media constructed
Blackness took class-specific forms that mirrored changes in actual social
class formations among African Americans. The arrival of middle-class
“Black” respectability, as evidenced by the strictures of the Black lady and
the modern mammy, helped shape a discourse about racial integration and
African American women’s place in it. For example, the Cosby family was
definitely “Black” because they had Black cultural referents in their home
(artwork, they listened to jazz, etc.), yet their values allegedly matched
those of White middle-class Americans. Such images participated in an
“enlightened racism” whereby Whites could claim that they were not
racist, primarily because they would welcome Black families like the
Cosbys as neighbors, despite data on patterns of urban migration suggest-
ing that Whites actually preferred racially homogeneous neighborhoods.
48
New patterns of color-blind racism needed a few acceptable, assimilated
Blacks who could meet the high standards set by the Cosby family and, for
Black women, those of modern mammies and Black ladies. 
Working-class Black authenticity also became reworked in the context
of color-blind racism. During this same era, the allegedly authentic Black
culture associated with working-class and poor African Americans also
populated mass media. Working-class Black culture also depicted ideas
about difference from assumed White norms using gender-specific images;
only, in this case, commodified Black culture contained elements of danger
and excitement. Black hip-hop culture, with its images of urban neighbor-
hoods as wild, out-of-control, criminal havens, its rap artists as self-
proclaimed gangstas, and its rejection of conservative family values via
young mothers with babies and no husbands also entered American homes.
Invoking historical stories of Black promiscuity, depictions of Black
women’s sexuality were central to this sense of excitement and danger.
Television enabled viewers to simulate the excitement and sense of adven-
ture that prior groups of Whites accessed by going on African safari, visit-
ing the naughty Harlem jazz clubs of the 1920s, or reading the travelogues
147


--- PAGE 159 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
of survivors of these exploits. Identifying the actual “dangers” and
“excitement” of working-class Black youth culture as authentic Black cul-
ture, and selling it to audiences in a global context, satisfied the demands
of the global marketplace. Gender-specific images of Black bitches and
bad mothers flourished in this climate. 
In this context, it is important to remember that ideologies of gender,
race, class, and sexuality that produce the controlling images of Black fem-
ininity discussed here are never static. Rather, they are always internally
inconsistent, reflect the experiences of the people who agree with and
refute them, and thus are constantly subject to struggle.
49 As the work of
Black female artists within rap and the broadening of images of Black pro-
fessional women on television suggest, contemporary images of Black fem-
ininity reflect these contradictions. How do those of Black masculinity fit
within this new racism? Moreover, how do gender-specific images of Black
femininity and Black masculinity work together?
148


--- PAGE 160 ---
FIVE
BOOTY CALL
Sex, Violence, and Images 
of Black Masculinity
1997: The film Booty Call joins the ranks of a series of
Hollywood romantic comedies that explore sexuality,
love, and commitment in the 1990s. By following the
exploits of four African Americans on a double date, the
film examines the intricacies of the booty call, namely,
the act of calling or contacting a person for the sole
purpose of having sex. Rushon and Bunz, two men with
conflicting views on commitment, differ on how Black
men should treat Black women. Bunz believes in mak-
ing booty calls and sees women as good for little else.
Rushon has long followed Bunz’s advice. But now that
Rushon has been dating Nikki, his girlfriend of seven
weeks, he questions the logic of the booty call. Nikki
and Lysterine, the potential sex partners of the two
men, both insist upon safe sex, yet they also differ in
their perceptions of sexuality, love, and commitment.
Nikki’s search for a commitment from Rushon before
having sex is far removed from Lysterine’s views that
booty calls can go both ways. During the evening,
Nikki’s resistance softens and Lysterine becomes enam-
ored with Bunz. The women are ready, but they will
only have safe sex. Thus begins the comedy—the seem-
ingly endless search by Rushon and Bunz for condoms
that turn into one disaster after another. Will these men
ever get the booty?


--- PAGE 161 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Virtually overnight, the term bootycame to permeate contemporary popu-
lar culture. Jennifer Lopez’s booty is such an important asset to her career
that she allegedly insures her buttocks. To help women who are less well
endowed, advertisements sell booty enhancement surgery. A 1992
Newsweekarticle on “Buzzwords” among teenagers identifies punk(bad,
not hip, uncool), White(someone who’s bad at basketball), and booty(sex)
as widely used teenage lingo. MTV shows an hour-long documentary
devoted to the history of the booty. Who can forget the impact of hip-hop
artist Sisquo’s “Thong Song,” the soundtrack for a fashion style that had
women in the early 2000s proudly showing hints of their thong underwear
(covering booty cleavage) under low-cut jeans? The term booty call also
entered popular vernacular well before the 1997 film of the same name. It
is now installed on many college campuses as a term for sex. Like urban
legends, stories about African American men who seek booty calls (men
who use women for sex and who reject commitment) circulate among
African American women. On one campus, an African American female
student who worked the front desk of a large dormitory regaled her class
with stories of Black men who repeatedly signed in and out on the same
night, visiting different women for booty calls. Should we erroneously
think that only men make booty calls, women engage in booty calls as well.
In this usage, a woman will call a man to come over in the middle of the
night for sex (booty). 
Two sets of meanings of the term bootyprovide an interpretive con-
text for explaining this fascination with the booty. The first set reflects
ideas about property and masculinity. This strand defines booty as plunder
taken from an enemy in times of war. The actual booty is a valuable prize,
award, or gain that cannot be given away—it must be taken. Thus, because
this usage applies to goods or property seized by force, an element of vio-
lence is part of this very definition of booty. Because men historically have
been soldiers, this characterization reflects ideas about masculinity, prop-
erty, and violence. These meanings of bootydraw upon images of con-
quest, warfare, and property that install the term bootywithin a staunchly
masculine frame.
1
The second set of meanings of bootyreflects ideas about sexuality and
race. The 2000 edition of the American Heritage Dictionary of the English
Language provides the following meanings: 1. Slang The buttocks. 2.
Vulgar slanga. The vulva or vagina. b. Sexual intercourse. Moreover, the
150


--- PAGE 162 ---
BOOTY CALL
dictionary speculates on the origins of this usage of booty. Describing the
etymology of the term, it points out that booty may be from African
American vernacular English, from the obsolete Black English booty, and
perhaps may be an alternation of the term body. What an interesting series
of connections—buttocks, women’s genitalia, sexual intercourse, and the
body overall—all drawn from Western perceptions of Black people and
culture. The constellation of terms that surround the term bootynot only
suggests that women of African descent are ground zero for the meanings
associated with the term bootybut also that historical meanings of Black
promiscuity are alive and well in contemporary popular culture. A simple
Google search of the term bootyshould dispel doubts—many of the web-
sites clearly link Blackness, sexuality, and African American women.
When combined, these meanings of the term bootyform a backdrop
for contemporary mass media–generated gender ideology, with special
meaning for Black masculinity.
2 In the context of the new racism in which
miseducation and unemployment have marginalized and impoverished
increasing numbers of young Black men, aggression and claiming the
prizes of urban warfare gain in importance. Being tough and having street
smarts is an important component of Black masculinity.
3 When joined to
understandings of booty as sexuality, especially raw, uncivilized sexuality,
women’s sexuality becomes the actual spoils of war. In this context, sexual
prowess grows in importance as a marker of Black masculinity. For far too
many Black men, all that seems to be left to them is access to the booty, and
they can become depressed or dangerous if that access is denied. In this
scenario, Black women become reduced to sexual spoils of war, with Black
men defining masculinity in terms of their prowess in conquering the
booty. 
Mass media’s tendency to blur the lines between fact and fiction has
important consequences for perceptions of Black culture and Black people.
Images matter, and just as those of Black femininity changed in tandem
with societal changes, those of Black masculinity are undergoing a similar
process. As is the case for controlling images of Black femininity, repre-
sentations of Black masculinity reflect a similar pattern of highlighting
certain ideas, in this case, the sexuality and violence that crystallizes in the
term booty, and the need to develop class-specific representations of Black
masculinity that will justify the new racism. In this context, some repre-
sentations of Blackness become commonsense “truths.” For example,
151


--- PAGE 163 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Black men in perpetual pursuit of booty calls may appear to be more
authentically “Black” than Black men who study, and the experiences of
poor and working-class Black men may be established as being more
authentically Black than those of middle- and upper-middle class African
American men. 
ATHLETES AND CRIMINALS: 
IMAGES OF WORKING-CLASS BLACK MEN 
In 1997, professional basketball player Latrell Sprewell choked P . J.
Carlesimo, his coach on the Golden State Warriors. Almost overnight, this
three-time all-star became a symbol of what many saw as the worst of bas-
ketball. He instantly stood for how skewed professional sports had become,
an “indictment of a generation of jocks seen not only as too black but too
pampered, too lawless, too greedy.”
4 For many, Sprewell’s actions also sym-
bolized the contradictions of how Western ideologies depict Black men’s
bodies. The combination of physicality over intellectual ability, a lack of
restraint associated with incomplete socialization, and a predilection for
violence has long been associated with African American men. Because
Sprewell and similar “bad boy athletes” were “blackening” the sport, their
behaviors reflected changing race relations in the wider society. In some
ways, the Sprewell incident also marked a turning point in masculine gen-
der politics. Influenced by a White male military model that often defined
discipline in terms of the legitimate authority of father figures,
Carlesimo’s coaching tradition was in decline. Sprewell was at the forefront
of a generation of players who, raised on rap, “see any type of disrespect
as an assault on their manhood and a stifling of their creativity.”
5 In short,
Carlesimo was not Sprewell’s daddy, and because both were now in the
pros, the father-son coaching style of college basketball no longer applied.
Sprewell, other Black basketball players, and Black people in hip-hop
culture signal a reworking of historical representations of Black masculin-
ity, ironically, by using those very same representations in new ways.
Historically, African American men were depicted primarily as bodies
ruled by brute strength and natural instincts, characteristics that allegedly
fostered deviant behaviors of promiscuity and violence. The buck, brute,
the rapist, and similar controlling images routinely applied to African
American men all worked to deny Black men the work of the mind that
152


--- PAGE 164 ---
BOOTY CALL
routinely translates into wealth and power. Instead, relegating Black men
to the work of the body was designed to keep them poor and powerless.
Once embodied, Black men were seen as being limited by their racialized
bodies. 
In the current context of commodified Black popular culture, the
value attached to physical strength, sexuality, and violence becomes recon-
figured in the context of the new racism. In some cases, the physical
strength, aggressiveness, and sexuality thought to reside in Black men’s
bodies generate admiration, whereas in others, these qualities garner fear.
On the one hand, the bodies of athletes and models are admired, viewed as
entertaining, and used to sell a variety of products. For example, Keith
Harrison, an African American male model for the Polo clothing line,
never speaks but symbolizes a Black male body that should be admired.
Similarly, the hip-hop magazine Viberelies heavily on Black male models
and athletes to sell gym shoes, clothes, CDs, and other trappings of hip-
hop culture. On the other hand, the image of the feared Black male body
also reappears across entertainment, advertisement, and news. As any
Black man can testify who has seen a purse-clutching White woman cross
the street upon catching sight of him, his physical presence can be enough
to invoke fear, regardless of his actions and intentions. This reaction to
Black men’s bodies emboldens police to stop motorists in search of drugs
and to command Black youth to assume the position for random street
searches. Racial profiling is based on this very premise—the potential
threat caused by African American men’s bodies. Across the spectrum of
admiration and fear, the bodies of Black men are what matters.
In this context, the contested images of Black male athletes, especially
“bad boy” Black athletes who mark the boundary between admiration and
fear, speak to the tensions linking Western efforts to control Black men,
and Black men’s resistance to this same process. Athletics constitutes a
modern version of historical practices that saw Black men’s bodies as need-
ing taming and training for practical use. Given the small numbers of
Black men who actually make it to professional sports, the visibility of
Black male athletes within mass media speaks to something more than the
exploits of actual athletes. Instead, the intense scrutiny paid to sports in
general, and to basketball players in particular, operates as a morality play
about American masculinity and race relations. Black athletes, and their
varying degrees of acceptance and rejection of the types of social scripts
153


--- PAGE 165 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
held out by Carlesimo, become important visual stages for playing out the
new racism. In essence, the myth of upward social mobility though sports
represents, for poor and working-class Black men, a gender-specific social
script for an honest way out of poverty. Its rules are clear—submit to
White male authority in order to learn how to become a man. 
Spectacle is an important component of the depiction of Black ath-
letes, especially in the current climate of mass media entertainment and
advertising.
6 Boxing has long provided this type of spectacle for American
audiences. Black boxers in particular are seen as inherently violent and in
need of “trainers” who can focus their talent toward victory in the ring.
Whereas a string of seemingly violent Black men have provided brutal
spectacles for boxing fans, boxer Mike Tyson elevated the image of the
Black brute to new levels. Ironically, Tyson also became a hero within hip-
hop, representing, according to Nelson George, “a bare-chested, powerful
projection of the dreams of dominance that lay thwarted in so many
hearts.”
7 As a result of his physical prowess in the ring and because his
force and irreverence earned respect, Tyson is mentioned in scores of rap
records. At the same time, Tyson’s behavior in the ring after serving a
prison term (for biting off part of another boxer’s ear) makes him a suspect
hero. Moreover, Tyson’s history of domestic violence and his rape convic-
tion suggest that the spectacle Tyson provides for White and Black audi-
ences alike may be as much about gender and sexuality as about race.
8 
African American professional athletes reveal varying degrees of
acceptance and rejection of this morality play that constructs Black men by
their physicality and then markets images of boxers, basketball players, and
football lineman (less so, quarterbacks) to a seemingly insatiable public.
Black male athletes in high school and college sports, especially those from
poor and working-class backgrounds, often have little recourse but to fol-
low the rules. But professional players who are the focus of media specta-
cles have far more options. Not only do these athletes signal changes in
American race relations, superstar athletes are valuable commodities. Todd
Boyd describes the new social context for superstar athletes that con-
tributes to this new attitude of defiance:
It is important to understand that Black men, especially young Black
men, are held in the highest contempt by a large segment of society.
This has always been the case, and this contempt has always been
154


--- PAGE 166 ---
BOOTY CALL
exposed through sport. Yet, in modern society, these same Black men
are often entertainment for the masses. Though it is acceptable for
these men to entertain, they are held in contempt for the money they
make because of their entertainment.
9 
Black men who earn large salaries but who are deferential and appear to
uphold American values are acceptable. The problems arise when players
realize their value, their significance to the game, and try to capitalize on
their accomplishments. Then they are often held in the highest contempt.
Black male athletes playing professional sports have worked within
these politics and have used them to upset both the images themselves as
well as the financial arrangements that underlie the exploitation of Black
men’s bodies. For example, Julius Erving played professional basketball
when the NBA had an image problem. On the court, he was a model of
propriety, yet his style of play legitimated Black playground ball (primarily
dunking). Moreover, his acquisition of a Coca Cola bottling plant in the
early 1980s established him as an entrepreneur. Following Erving’s lead,
Magic Johnson became an icon in the symbolic battles between the LA
Lakers and his counterpart Larry Bird on the Boston Celtics. Their careers
marked a rivalry that persisted into the 1980s and that set the stage for a
new era in basketball.
10 Johnson was not just a player; he used his basket-
ball earnings to invest in inner-city theaters and community development. 
The rise of hip-hop and its relationship to basketball signals a new set
of social relations concerning Black athletes and their unwillingness to put
up with the political and economic arrangements of the past. Like Latrell
Sprewell, Black basketball players are often described as insolent, unruly,
and in need of punishment.
11 Sprewell has not been alone in this pantheon
of African American athletes that American sports fans simultaneously
admire and hate. Sprewell may have choked his coach, but his lucrative
contract with the Knicks and his performance on the court bought him
respect. Apparently being insolent and unruly is not a problem if a Black
man can play. In some cases, the bad boy image may enhance a player’s rep-
utation. Take, for example, how Alan Iverson’s career progressed after he
joined the Philadelphia 76ers in 1996. To Iverson’s way of thinking, he was
an entertainer, and his quick crossover dribble thrilled fans and helped
revitalize the sport. His image, however, made him an antihero. By retain-
ing his cornrows and continuing to hang out with his friends from the
155


--- PAGE 167 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
hood, his run-ins with the law provided much bad press. “He was . . . a
walking reminder that the days of culturalcrossover, when black stars such
as Julius Erving and Michael Jordan sought and won white acceptance,
were over. Iverson was leading a new generation of ballplayers, kids much
less interested in acquiescing to white, mainstream taste. . . . It is a constant
theme in rap music: Selling out and forgetting where you come from is
anathema.”
12
In this context, Black male athletes who refuse to bow down to abusive
coaches unsettle prevailing norms of race and gender. They reject the fam-
ily drama script that says that players should view their coaches as father
figures, and that fans should emulate athletes as role models. When bas-
ketball great Charles Barkley retired from the NBA in 2000 after sixteen
years of professional basketball, he left behind more than impressive sta-
tistics—more than twenty thousand points, ten thousand rebounds, and
four thousand assists.
13 Barkley became the first athlete since Muhammad
Ali and Bill Russell to question the media’s insistence on conferring role
model status on Black athletes who modeled deferential behavior. Barkley
advised youth not to use him as a role model, but to follow their parents
and teachers instead. Breaking ranks with commonsense patriarchal beliefs
that young Black men were lost without the firm hand of older men,
Barkley pointed out, “My mother and grandmother were two of the hard-
est-working ladies in the world, and they raised me to work hard.”
14 Should
there be any confusion, Barkley even made a Nike commercial in which he
proclaimed, “I am not a role model.” In one interview, he vowed, “I’m a
strong black man—I don’t have to be what you want me to be.”
15
Unfortunately, Barkley became caught up in a media-generated moral-
ity play in which he was routinely pitted against other Black male athletes
who were far more deferential to White authority. Whereas Michael Jordan
refused to condemn the exploitative labor practices used to make the gym
shoes that bore his image and from which he profited, Barkley routinely
spoke his mind. Take, for example, his comments to the press in a
Philadelphia locker room in which Barkley reputedly said: “just because
you give Charles Barkley a lot of money, it doesn’t mean I’m not going to
voice my opinions. Me getting twenty rebounds ain’t important. We’ve got
people homeless on our streets and the media is crowding around my
locker. It’s ludicrous.”
16 Barkley also injured his own cause by inadvertently
spitting on a little girl while aiming for a courtside heckler who was yelling
156


--- PAGE 168 ---
BOOTY CALL
racial epithets. As one writer points out, “in the soap opera narrative of
sports, Barkley’s ‘badness’ was set against Jordan’s ‘goodness,’” leaving lit-
tle room for the complicated, multifaceted Charles Barkley.
17
The father-figure thesis assumes that young Black men need tough
coaches who will instill much-needed discipline in the lives of fatherless
and therefore unruly Black boys. For example, an incident at Indiana
University that led to the subsequent firing of coach Bobby Knight for
physically attacking an African American player was not uniformly cen-
sured. Many believed that young Black players, lacking male role models in
their lives, need the strong hand of a coach, even an abusive one such as
Knight. The role model thesis also suggests that Black male youth in gen-
eral need images of successful, professional Black male athletes as positive
role models. Little mention is made of the fact that basketball and sports
confine young Black boys to achievements of the body and not of the
mind. Most Black American boys will never achieve the wealth and fame
of their athletic role models through sports. Keeping them mesmerized
with sports heroes may actually weaken their ability to pursue other
avenues to success. Moreover, the role-model thesis underestimates the
motivation of legions of Black boys who work hard at things for which
they think they have a future. Theses of natural Black athletic ability
notwithstanding, NBA players rarely get as far as they do without hard
work. For example, at 6'4" Charles Barkely is short by NBA standards. He
developed his skill through practice. In tenth grade he shot baskets every
night, sometimes all night if he could get away with it, and mastered his
leaping skills by jumping back and forth over a four-foot chain-link fence.
18
The summer before his senior year in college, Latrell Sprewell made him-
self into a perimeter shooter by, every day, taking nearly five hundred shots
from twelve feet. Then he’d take five hundred shots from thirteen feet, and
then fourteen feet, moving a foot at a time until he improved his three-
point shooting range.
19
The bottom line for professional Black athletes is that they can reject
people who would reject them because their wealth enables them to do so.
Todd Boyd describes the new attitude:
When you reject the system and all that goes along with it, when you
say, “I don’t give a fuck,” you then become empowered, liberated, con-
troller of your own destiny. This is certainly the case in basketball,
157


--- PAGE 169 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
because the players make enough money to be able not to give a fuck, as
money is the ultimate source of liberation in capitalist America. 20
For Boyd, athletes with money are in a position to critique the very sys-
tem that allegedly rewards them. This is one reason why figures like
Iverson, Sprewell, and Barkley are so hated and revered by Whites and
Blacks alike. 
Some Black men’s bodies may be admired, as is the case for athletes,
but other Black male bodies symbolize fear. Historical representations 
of Black men as beasts have spawned a second set of images of that center
on Black male bodies, namely, Black men as inherently violent, hyper-
heterosexual, and in need of discipline. The controlling image of Black
men as criminals or as deviant beings encapsulates this perception of Black
men as inherently violent and/or hyper-heterosexual and links this repre-
sentation to poor and/or working-class African American men. Again, this
representation is more often applied to poor and working-class men than
to their more affluent counterparts, but all Black men are under suspicion
of criminal activity or breaking rules of some sort. 
This image of Black male deviancy crystallized in criminality is far
from benign—the United States incarcerates more Black men than any
other country. Whereas Black men constitute 8 percent of the U.S. popu-
lation, they comprise approximately 50 percent of the prison population.
By any measure, the size of the U.S. inmate population is enormous—the
rate of incarceration in the United States is about 727 prisoners per
100,000 people. The vast majority of other countries incarcerate far fewer
people. Most European countries, for example, imprison fewer than 100
people per 100,000 residents, a rate more than seven times lower than that
of the United States.
21
Covering up incarceration on such a mass scale requires powerful
media images that reward poor and working-class Black youth who submit
to White male authority by using athletics for honest upward social mobil-
ity, and punish others who do not. When it comes to representations of
Black male deviance, several important variations exist. The thug or
“gangsta” constitutes one contemporary controlling image. The thug is
inherently physical and, unlike the athlete, his physicality is neither
admired nor can it be easily exploited for White gain. The “gangsta” may
be crafty, but the essence of his identity lies in the inherent violence asso-
158


--- PAGE 170 ---
BOOTY CALL
ciated with his physicality. Media representations of African American
men as thugs grew in the post–civil rights era. Alan Iverson basically took
the “thug” images out of the ghetto and inserted it onto the basketball
court. 
Mass media marketing of thug life to African American youth diverts
attention away from social policies that deny Black youth education and
jobs. It also seems designed to scare Whites and African Americans alike
into thinking that racial integration of seemingly poor and working-class
Black boys (the allegedly authentic Blacks) is dangerous. Who wants to live
next door to a thug or sit next to one in school? In this context, the phe-
nomenon in which young African Americans seemingly celebrate elements
of thug life seems counterintuitive because looking and/or acting like a
thug attracts discriminatory treatment.
22 Yet the depiction of thug life in
hip-hop remains one of the few places Black poor and working-class men
can share their view of the world in public. Raps about drugs, crime,
prison, prostitution, child abandonment, and early death may seem fabri-
cated, but these social problems are also a way of life for far too many Black
youth.
23 
In this context, the work of artists like Tupac Shakur simultaneously
affirms the realities of thug life yet critiques its existence and continuation.
Tupac symbolized the contradictions of the hip-hop generation. He is rou-
tinely pegged as a gangsta rapper, yet his work ranged over several genres
of rap.
24 Moreover, Tupac symbolized the tensions of an era. “What did it
mean to be a child of the Black Panthers, to have a postrevolutionary child-
hood?” asks cultural critic Michael Dyson.
25 Dyson’s book-length mono-
graph examines the complexities of Tupac’s life, his straddling of the
ideals of revolutionary politics, and the materialism that forms the down
side of hip-hop culture. Using Tupac’s life and death as emblematic of an
era, Dyson provides a provocative analysis of the difference between thugs
and revolutionaries. Arguing that Tupac lives the “tension between revo-
lutionary ambition and thug passion,” Dyson suggests that revolutionaries
and thugs alike share a worldview in which flipping the economic order is
the reason for social rebellion.
26 They both see problems and they both
want change. Yet thug logic undermines the society that the revolutionary
seeks to change. “Thug ambition is unapologetically predatory, circum-
venting the fellow feeling and group solidarity demanded of revolutionar-
ies,” Dyson contends.
27
159


--- PAGE 171 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
In the political economy of hip-hop culture, as a genre, gangsta rap
reflects these tensions between actual thug life and a commodified thug
persona that was marketed and sold in the global marketplace. Tupac
Shakur’s career came to an end when gangsta reality and representation
converged. Following a Mike Tyson fight, an unknown assailant gunned
him down. In contrast, other gangsta rappers keep a tight rein on separat-
ing their personal and professional lives. Take, for example, the contradic-
tions that define the career of gangsta rapper Ice Cube. Ice Cube promoted
the Nation of Islam’s ideology of self-help and self-respect but also made
a bundle “hustling St. Ides Malt liquor in the ghetto.”
28 His racial politics
seem inextricably linked with a dangerous gender ideology that profits
from the marketability of rebellious Black masculinity. His 1990 debut solo
album Amerikkka’s Most Wanted deals with racism in law enforcement, 
sexual irresponsibility, and other social issues, yet the vulgarity and misog-
yny of his subsequent work is legendary. Despite his protestations that he
only uses vulgarities to communicate with people who would otherwise
tune him out, he derogates women by counseling his listeners “you can’t
trust no bitch.”
29 Ironically, despite this ghetto persona, Ice Cube, actually
named O’Shea Jackson, lives in a wealthy White neighborhood, in a gated
home, with his wife and three children. He was raised in a two-parent fam-
ily in a middle-class residential area of south central Los Angeles, has
never been in prison, and graduated from the wealthiest high school in Los
Angeles.
30 Unlike Tupac, whose childhood poverty and ongoing problems
with the law exposed him not just to the representations but to the realities
of his gangsta persona, apparently Ice Cube knew what a convincing
gangsta performance could buy.
In a mass media context that blurs fiction and reality, the effectiveness
of attempts by Tupac, Ice Cube, and other Black men to seize the power of
the media in order to unsettle representations of Black criminality have
come under close scrutiny. Given the potential power of mass media, the
language in rap has attracted considerable controversy, especially negative
reactions to the widespread use of the term niggah. As legal scholar
Randall Kennedy points out, the term niggerhas long been featured in
African American folk humor. Before the 1970s, it rarely appeared in the
routines of professional comedians and was extremely rare in shows per-
formed before racially integrated audiences. With live shows and a string
of albums, Richard Pryor changed all of this. Pryor’s political humor
160


--- PAGE 172 ---
BOOTY CALL
defied social conventions that accepted Black comedians as clowns but
rejected them as satirists. Pryor opened the door for those who followed,
both in comedy (Chris Rock) and the now ubiquitous use of the term nig-
gahwithin hip-hop culture in ways that contest historical views of Black
men as weak and subordinate.
31 In essence, many Black men aim to do with
the term niggerwhat members of other oppressed groups have done with
similar slurs. They throw the slur back at the oppressor by changing its
meaning. They have added a “positive meaning to nigger, just as women,
gays, lesbians, poor whites, and children born out of wedlock have defi-
antly appropriated and revalued such words as bitch, cunt, queer, dyke, red-
neck, cracker,and bastard.”
32
Western traditions of presenting Black men as embodied, sexualized
beings foster another variation of seeing Black men’s bodies of sites of
inherent deviance. Because sexuality has been such an important part of the
depiction of Black masculinity, Black men’s bodies remain highly sexual-
ized within contemporary mass media. Images of Black men often reduce
them not only to bodies (the case of the athletes) but also to body parts,
especially the penis. In analyzing the depiction of Black men in Hustler
magazine, a popular periodical whose primary readership consists of work-
ing-class White men, Gail Dines found ample representations of Black
male promiscuity. Dines argues that in movies and magazines that feature
Black men, the focus of the camera and plot is often on the size of the Black
penis and on Black men’s allegedly insatiable sexual appetite for White
women. Searching for a similar pattern in Hustler, Dines found that Black
men were most often found in cartoons in which they could be caricatured,
and that a major feature of the humor presented centered on the size and
deployment of the Black male penis. Using the depiction of King Kong as
a frame of reference, Dines observes: “whereas the original Kong lacked a
penis, the Hustlerversion had, as his main characteristic, a huge black penis
that is often wrapped around the ‘man’s’ neck or sticking out of his trouser
leg. The penis, whether erect or limp, visually dominates the cartoon and is
the focus of humor. This huge penis is depicted as a source of great pride
and as a feature that distinguishes Black men from White men.”
33 In this
sense, the penis becomes the defining feature of Black men that contributes
yet another piece to the commodification of Black male bodies.
34
Hustlers or “players” constitute benign versions of the rule breaking
associated with gangstas and objectifying Black men’s bodies as sex objects.
161


--- PAGE 173 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
More refined, the hustler has one foot on either side of the law. The hus-
tler can be a simple “player,” one who uses people to trick them out of
something that he wants. Players often target women, trading sexuality for
economic gain. The image of the Black male hustler works with historical
notions of African American men as too lazy to work and in need of the
domesticating influences of slavery, sharecropping, boot camp, and prison.
Representations of hustlers suggest that African American men would
rather live off of other people, very often women, than go to work. The
theme of charisma is paramount here, the notion of style that a hustler
brings to his endeavor. The prevalence of representations of Black men as
pimps speaks to this image of Black men as sexual hustlers who use their
sexual prowess to exploit women, both Black and White. Ushered in by a
series of films in the Blaxploitation era, the ubiquitous Black pimp seems
here to stay. Kept alive through HBO-produced quasi documentaries such
as Pimps Up, Hos Down, African American men feature prominently in
these media constructions. Professional pimps see themselves more as
businessmen than as sexual predators, with slapping their sex workers
around the cost of doing business. For example, the men interviewed in the
documentary American Pimpall discuss the skills involved in being a suc-
cessful pimp. One went so far as to claim that only African American men
made really good pimps. Thus, the controlling image of the Black pimp
combines all of the elements of the more generic hustler, namely, engaging
in illegal activity, using women for economic gain, and refusing to work.
Tying the concept of Black men as sexual predators so closely with
ideas about normative Black masculinity raises the stakes dramatically
within Black heterosexual relationships. Despite the fact that the film
Booty Call is a romantic comedy with likable characters, it draws upon
these sedimented historical meanings by focusing on promiscuity as a
defining feature of Black masculinity. Moreover, it casts the struggle to
redefine Black masculinity in class-specific terms, one in which the sexual
practices of the working-class character become juxtaposed to those of the
middle-class character. The images of working-class Bunz and middle-
class Rushon serve as touchstones for a reworking of ideas about sexuality,
violence, and Black masculinity in the post–civil rights era. It’s no accident
that Bunz and Rushon are cast as originating in the same social class, but
now belonging to different ones. Bunz wears running clothes and Rushon
wears suits. When Bunz finds out that Rushon has not yet had sex with
162


--- PAGE 174 ---
BOOTY CALL
Nikki, he criticizes Rushon for failing to score. “College has got you too
sensitive,” states Bunz. “Sensitive?” asks Rushon. “You ain’t got no player
left in you,” answers Bunz. Via his ridicule, Bunz relies on dominant ideas
that associate authentic Black masculinity with a hyper-heterosexuality
thought to characterize working-class Black men. He uses these ideas to
accuse middle-class Rushon of being less authentically Black and therefore
less masculine. 
Booty Callis situated within a specific historical moment that reflects
the convergence of two meanings of booty in which men (and sometimes
women) aim to capture the booty (property or spoils of war) via sexual con-
quest. This placement, however, does not mean that it uncritically replicates
these historical meanings. On the one hand, by its very title, Booty Call
draws upon entrenched historical meanings concerning race, gender, and
sexual property. As was the case with the term freak, the film invokes ideas
about Black promiscuity and the film would be meaningless without this
history. One might ask whether this film could even be made with White
American actors cast in the starring roles? But on the other hand, Booty Call
aims to disrupt these very same historical meanings. Here, Black women
take the lead in demanding a different kind of Black masculinity from their
partners. Nikki, Rushon’s love interest, clearly rejects the prevailing associ-
ation of African American women’s bodies with perceptions of Black
female sexuality as wild and “freaky.” She is not a sexual prude, but her
demand for safe sex and commitment speaks to Black women’s agency and
self-determination. Nikki insists on using condoms because she realizes
that “unsafe” sex might leave her with a STD and/or a baby. Although
Nikki’s friend Lysterine (who is Bunz’s blind date) is sexually adventurous,
after Nikki’s prodding, she too insists upon condoms. She’s sexually daring,
but her classic line “no glove, no love” draws a line in the sand. These
women demand a new kind of Black masculinity in which sexual norms
around the booty call and around love relationships merit renegotiation.
One striking element of this film is that, despite their differences, both
Black men in Booty Calllisten to Black women. Neither tries to dominate
the women and neither resorts to threats or violence. Rushon has waited
seven long weeks to have sex with Nikki, but when she demands that he
wear a condom, he gets dressed and goes to the convenience store in search
of one. Bunz may be, in the words of Lysterine, a “hoodrat,” but when she
demands a condom, he joins Rushon in the middle of the night shopping
163


--- PAGE 175 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
trips for these essential items. The act of booty call is not a foregone con-
clusion in this film. Rather, the need to renegotiate the terms of booty calls
is debated. In a similar fashion, the reality of gender ideology and domi-
nant ideas about Black masculinity is not the issue. Rather, the terms of
Black masculinity are at stake. 
The real drama in Booty Calldoes not lie in reconfiguring Black fem-
ininity but in challenging prevailing notions of a sexualized Black mas-
culinity. Nikki and Lysterine symbolize versions of middle-class Black
femininity of the Black Lady and the Educated Bitch. Neither character
has a real internal dilemma in the course of the film. They say what they
want and stick to it. However lovable, Bunz also seems incapable of
change—he is the timeless, nonhistorical representation of Black male
promiscuity. Rushon is the character who faces the dilemma of crafting a
new form of Black masculinity that will spare him Bunz’s ridicule, but that
will also enable him to commit to Nikki. Thus, despite the association of
the term bootywith Black women, the core question of Booty Call con-
cerns which version of Black masculinity will win out? Will the working-
class version of Black authenticity symbolized by Bunz’s incessant search
for the booty triumph? Or will Rushon’s fledgling efforts to claim a mid-
dle-class politics of respectability prevail?
Poor and working-class Black men are also depicted more often as per-
petrators of violence. The use of the phrase “black-on-black” violence to
describe violence within African American urban neighborhoods invokes
images of poor and working-class Black men, not those respectable men
from the Black middle class. The phrase also illustrates how the political
economy of production, primarily the convergence of entertainment,
news, and advertising, converge to produce a racial ideology that circulates
in a global context. This phrase originated not in the United States but as
part of the end of apartheid in South Africa.
35 First used in a 1986 speech
to Parliament by then-president P . W . Botha who described “black-on-
black” violence as being “brutal murders by radical Black people,” the
term appeared in the U.S. press as a frame for reporting on the end of
apartheid. In the South African press, Zulus were repeatedly described as
“tribes” and the ANC with its Xhosa ethnicity (of Mandela) became rede-
fined as another tribe. Print and broadcast media made little use of politics
or economics to explain the violence, choosing instead to install a racial
frame of interethnic violence. The term was picked up by the American
164


--- PAGE 176 ---
BOOTY CALL
press, and it has been used in a similar fashion. As the authors point out,
“Labeling all violence among Black people as factional, internecine, and
part of ‘blood feuds’ implies a natural cohesiveness or unity among Black
people because they are black. The terms used suggest a fight among fam-
ily members, calling up a long-standing Western image of the tribe as a
naturally occurring, familial social structure.”
36 “Black-on-black” violence
is the site at which the U.S. news media reconstruct Black Africa as
“tribal,” threatening, savage, and incapable of self-government and
democracy and also Black urban neighborhoods as sites equally incapable
of controlling their children and being self-governing.
37
The arguments that recast Black people and violence as an inevitable
outcome of either biological nature or cultural backwardness are remark-
ably similar in both locations. In both the South African and U.S. media,
news of “black-on-black” violence centers on one type of perpetrator, typ-
ically a young, Black male. The struggle against apartheid or against a
punitive urban police force, then, is reduced to a “self-perpetuating” rebel-
lion of youth against bona fide authority.”
38 In an interpretation of social
change that sounds eerily reminiscent of how the end of slavery unleashed
the controlling image of the Black rapist, within media accounts of “black-
on-black” violence, it is the endof apartheid that has “unleashed the vio-
lence.” Within the South African discourse, Black male youth, inherently
violent, moving in gangs, “schooled [by the anti-apartheid movement] only
in the struggle,” are said by September 1990 to have discovered that “lib-
eration might yield few benefits for them without the education they
eschewed for the flames of revolution.”
39 The conditions under which they
live, then, are of their own choosing and are the cause, rather than the
result, of South Africa’s troubles. Black men are transformed from being
victims and heroes to being—along with the anti-apartheid movement
itself—the root cause of the violence.
40
Similarly, the gangs that have taken over African American urban
neighborhoods represent the outcome of Black youth freed of discipline,
primarily that of the punitive father, and of strong social institutions that
kept them in place. Within this interpretive context, legitimated White
state violence—in the case of South Africa, the apartheid government and
for the United States, an occasionally “out of control” police force—
although it is often condemned in media texts as “excessive” is also
redeemed by its promise to restore order.
41 News stories about violence are
165


--- PAGE 177 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
about transgressions of social boundaries, the consequences of those trans-
gressions, and the reestablishment of social order. 
Representations that reduce Black men to the physicality of their bod-
ies, that depict an inherent promiscuity as part of authentic Black mas-
culinity, that highlight the predatory skills of the hustler, and that
repeatedly associate young Black men in particular with violence converge
in the controlling image of Black men as booty call-seeking rapists.
Initially, the myth of the Black male rapist who lusted after White women
emerged during postemancipation Jim Crow segregation as a tool for con-
trolling Black men who were prematurely freed from the civilizing influ-
ences of slavery. While not as necessary to contemporary relations of rule
as those during the Jim Crow era, apparently the image of the Black rapist
can be revived when the need arises. For example, during the 1988
Republican presidential campaign, George Bush’s campaign staff made the
behavior of Willie Horton, a convicted African American male rapist who
raped a White woman while participating in an early release program, cen-
tral to his stance on crime. As George Cunningham points out, “George
Bush’s deployment of the figure of ‘Willie’ Horton as a black male rapist
helped to manufacture the majority that elected him as heir to the conser-
vative Ronald Reagan.”
42 Like Gus, the archetypal Black rapist first seen in
D. W . Griffith’s 1915 classic film TheBirth ofa Nation , Horton came to
symbolize the Black man who was freed prematurelynot from slavery but
from the necessary strictures of prison. As a result, the public needed pro-
tection from African American men like Horton whose excessive booty
calls placed society at risk.
43
SISSIES AND SIDEKICKS: 
IMAGES OF MIDDLE-CLASS BLACK MEN 
In the 1980s, The Cosby Show was one of the most popular shows on
American television. Bill Cosby played the role Heathcliff Huxtable, a
physician and father of five children, who was married to Claire, his beau-
tiful lawyer-wife. In the uncertainties of the 1980s, when African
Americans experienced increased access to schools, jobs, and neighbor-
hoods long reserved for Whites, Cosby offered a reassuring image to
Whites. He was the Black buddy, friend, or Black sidekick that everyone
wanted. Resurrecting an image of Black masculinity in service to Whites,
166


--- PAGE 178 ---
BOOTY CALL
Cosby’s image was marketable, nonthreatening, entertaining, and emi-
nently likable. In contrast to the derogated images of working-class Black
masculinity, Cosby’s squeaky clean image as America’s Black buddy or
sidekick provided one social script for the types of African American men
who would find acceptance in a desegregating America. 
The image of Cosby’s character set the template for middle-class
Black masculinity—he was friendly and deferential; he was loyal both to
dominant societal values such as law and order as well as to individuals who
seemingly upheld them; he projected a safe, nonthreatening Black identity;
and he was defined neither by his sexual prowess nor by any hint of vio-
lence. Collectively, each of these features of representations of the Black
buddy and Black sidekick intersected with changes in American society.
For one, Black buddies typically achieve acceptance through their friendly
demeanors and clear deference to White authority. In this regard, Black
buddies constitute representations of Black masculinity whose origins lie
in that of Uncle Tom, the Negro servant who was domesticated under
slavery, and in Uncle Ben, his commercial counterpart developed to sell
rice and other consumer goods. Cosby’s image drew upon both of these
traditions. His role on The Cosby Show provided White families with
images of a friendly African American who visited their living rooms to
entertain them. If the show became too controversial, that is, too closely
associated with racial issues, it could be dismissed by turning off the tele-
vision. Like Uncle Tom, Black buddies are useful only if they are clearly
committed to the American way of life. 
Within capitalist marketplace relations, just as representations of
Uncle Ben were used to sell rice, images of Bill Cosby helped sell products.
Cosby was not alone. In this commodified climate, athletes who can be
repackaged as Black buddies receive lucrative endorsement packages, make
lots of money, and join the ranks of wealthy Americans.
44 Michael Jordan’s
clear rejection of any hint of political controversy enabled him to become
one of the most successfully managed idols and icons of media culture.
Through activities such as appearing with cartoon character Bugs Bunny
in the 1996 film Space Jam, Jordan carefully constructed a kid-friendly
demeanor. At one time, he was the leading candidate on a children’s list of
the person whom they would most want to invite to a birthday party.
Golfer Tiger Woods’s mixed-race background and his rejection of a
“Black” identity contributed to his success as a marketable commodity.
167


--- PAGE 179 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Part of Jordan’s and Woods’s success in reaching so many American fans
can be attributed to the path blazed by Cosby’s image. Cosby’s role as a
spokesperson for Jello products, especially the numerous advertisements
that he made with multiracial groups of children, positioned him as non-
threatening and safe. Who could have guessed that one Jello ad could mod-
ernize images of Uncle Tom and Uncle Ben by repackaging historical
images of Black masculinity to meet the needs of a desegregating America?
Loyalty is another characteristic feature of the controlling image of
the Black buddy. As depicted in mass media, there is little danger of Black
buddies stealing the silverware, reverting to Black English, or raping the
wife. Instead, Black buddies are typically shown as stripped of the seem-
ingly dangerous parts of Blackness, leaving the useful parts as sufficient
markers of difference to satisfy the tastes of a multicultural America.
Within Hollywood films, for example, the image of the Black sidekick, a
specific rendition of the Black buddy image that characterized films in the
1980s, reflects a loyalty that resembles that depicted by the image of the
modern mammy. Often portrayed within film by an African American
actor whose loyalty to his White male friend rivaled that of the mythical
Uncle Tom, the Black sidekick typically lacked an independent Black male
identity. Instead, his sense of self stemmed from his relationship to his
White friend or work partner. A series of White heroes and their Black
sidekicks set the tone in television and film. From Bill Cosby’s stint as
Robert Culp’s buddy in the television drama I Spyto Danny Glover play-
ing Mel Gibson’s reluctant buddy in the Lethal Weapon films to Eddie
Murphy who served as Nick Nolte’s sidekick in 48 Hours as well as the
sidekick to a cadre of White police officers in Beverly Hills Cop ,
“Hollywood . . . put what is left of the Black presence on the screen in the
protective custody . . . of a White lead or co-star, and therefore in con-
formity with dominant, White sensibilities and expectations of what Black
people should be like.”
45 
Apparently, what “Black people should be like” is being physically
Black so that racial integration can be seen but not culturally Black, for
example, display any of the behaviors of an assumed authentic Blackness.
Thus, being seen as being physically Black yet lacking a racial identity con-
stitutes another feature of the Black buddy image. Michael Jordan’s phe-
nomenal success points to the lucrative benefits for those Black buddies
who manage to develop personas as “raceless” individuals. Jordan became
168


--- PAGE 180 ---
BOOTY CALL
a cultural icon and worshiped as a hero in large part because his clean-cut
image was markedly different from the cornrowed, tattooed, trash-talking
demeanor of “bad boy” ball players. Alan Iverson, Latrell Sprewell,
Dennis Rodman, and Charles Barkley cannot be mistaken as anybody’s
subordinate buddies or sidekicks—Sprewell tried to choke his coach. In
the postintegration era, Black men like Cosby and Jordan are accepted with
open arms as White America’s buddies precisely because they are not like
the bad boy athletes, criminals, or other representations of working-class
(authentic) Black masculinity. Television shows like The Cosby Show and
sports provide mass media arenas in which these ideas about race are
worked through. Race, especially Blackness, increasingly informs contem-
porary racial politics, yet, at the same time, race is rendered largely invisi-
ble within the fabric of film, television, and sports. Jordan’s appeal may be
often defined as “raceless,” yet as a Black buddy, he projects a certain kind
of race, a certain kind of Black masculinity that will be accepted.
46
Another distinguishing feature of the representation of the Black
buddy pivots on mechanisms of containing his sexuality. Like the charac-
ter of Heathcliff Huxtable on The Cosby Show, Black buddies are often
depicted as asexual Black men. Less emphasis is placed on Black men’s
bodies within representations of middle-class Black men than character-
izes representations of working-class Black men. For example, on The
Cosby Show, the ability of Cosby’s character to dance, shoot hoops, model
chiseled abs, or perform in the sack was irrelevant. Moreover, Heathcliff
Huxtable’s sexuality was safely contained within the sanctity of heterosex-
ual marriage. Occasionally, the show provided shots of Heathcliff and
Claire cuddling under the covers, hinting at a safe sexuality but never
showing it. Because Cosby’s character was presented in a family setting, his
children had a role model to emulate. The Cosby kids were not conceptu-
alized as sexual beings either. Everyone was definitely straight. 
Appearing on network television during a time of transition, Cosby’s
character not only was asexual but it was also nonviolent. But if the image
of masculinity is one that requires a combination of sexuality and violence
for “manly” men, how can one present a film with a White hero who is
masculine whose sidekick seems to be too “feminine”? Buddy films must
be careful not to emasculate the Black buddy because feminizing Black
male images to this degree would detract from male bonding and leave the
audience wondering what the White hero saw in his Black buddy. Although
169


--- PAGE 181 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
there are films in which this emasculation has occurred (Richard Pryor’s
stint as a “toy” for a spoiled White boy in the 1982 film The Toycomes to
mind), most Black buddies are not emasculated to this degree. One way of
resolving this dilemma is to eliminate all aspects of the Black buddy’s life
that would compete with the Black buddy’s loyalty to his partner. Many
Black buddies are depicted as not having families or any type of relation-
ships, sexual or otherwise, that might distract them from their main pur-
pose of being loyal to the White protagonist or to their jobs. Unlike the
Cosby image of the Black buddy who was stripped of these qualities,
images of these decontextualized Black buddies can be strong and virile on
screen, as long as these qualities are placed in service to the needs of the
White hero and, more recently, to legitimate social institutions, especially,
the criminal justice system. 
In this context, representations of Black buddies may render Black
masculinity nonthreatening because expressions of violence and sexuality
are placed under White authority. A fine line exists between using the
image of the Black buddy to tame the threat of Black male promiscuity and
violence and feminizing the Black male image to the point at which it can-
not be respected. But how does the interracial buddy drama resolve the
issue of the emotional relationships among men so that it does not trans-
form male bonding into homoerotic relationships? 
In order to resolve this tension, the Black buddy template often draws
upon the family as a frame for explaining appropriate social relationships.
This frame can be used in several ways. For one, showing either member
of the buddy team in a heterosexual relationship with a woman, especially
in a marriage with children, effectively challenges any homoerotic subtext
between the two men. Having a wife and children at home takes on special
meaning for the character of the Black buddy, for his ability to commit to
one heterosexual relationship within a family unit is a sign of his ability to
assimilate. Another use of the family frame defines the relationship
between White hero and his Black buddy. Film critic Jacquie Jones sug-
gests that, in mainstream cinema, the subordinate roles that Black buddies
accept have traditionally been the province of women, children, and/or
pets. Explaining these patterns, Jones suggests that many of these films
replicate family relations in that “the Black male assumes the role of the
boy; the Black women, the mother; and, of course, the White male, the
father.”
47 Hazel Carby takes a different view. Analyzing Danny Glover’s
170


--- PAGE 182 ---
BOOTY CALL
participation within contemporary films, Carby sees not father/son bonding,
but an imagined brother-to-brother bonding created in the White male imag-
ination. Using films in which the actor Danny Glover played Black buddies
or sidekicks, Carby analyzes the nature of support that the buddy provides to
his White hero. In films likeGrand Canyonand Lethal Weapon, Glover acts as
“father confessor and psychological counselor to white men. . . . Glover has
become identified as the one who manages to persuade white men to rec-
ognize, understand, and express the truth about themselves to them-
selves.”
48 Finally, because the men enter into a fictive kin relationship as
brothers, they are not sexual competitors for the same women. Here
American assumptions that heterosexual relationships should occur
between people of the same race effectively leave the White hero and the
Black buddy confined to White and Black women, respectively. No fights
over women as booty will tarnish the brotherhood. This theme of African
Americans having the emotions and expressiveness to help Whites get in
touch with their better selves is a recurring theme in American cinema.
Typically, this emotional nurturing was done by the mammy figure, but
selected men could also do this expressive caring function. Whatever the
family scenario, whether they are cast as immature boys or as appropriately
subordinate yet caring younger brothers, Black buddies perform the emo-
tional labor long associated with women. This placement feminizes them.
Representations of Black buddies have been joined by yet another non-
violent, asexual image of middle-class Black masculinity, namely, the
“sissy.” Standing in contrast to the seemingly authentic Black masculinity
of the criminal, the Black athlete, and even middle-class Black buddies (who
may have been subordinate, but at least they were heterosexual), represen-
tations of Black masculinity of the “punk,” the “sissy,” or the “faggot”
offer up an effeminate and derogated Black masculinity. Representations of
gay African American men depict them as peripheral characters, often in
comedic roles that border on ridicule. Often the representation of the gay
character works to support the heterosexuality of other males. For example,
Car Wash(1976) introduced Lindy, an openly gay character. Dramatized as
a “queen,” Lindy was swishy, limp-wristed, and exhibited an exaggerated,
affected feminine style. Around him, all of the other male characters were
not just heterosexual, but emphatically heterosexual. To frame Black male
heterosexuality, the other characters were married, had girlfriends, dated
women, hired prostitutes, or flirted with the women customers. As one ana-
171


--- PAGE 183 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
lyst points out, “Lindy is tolerated as part of the public world but only
because he reinforces the purity of heterosexuality by presenting homosex-
uals as defiled and deviant.”
49 Black gay men depicted in feature films con-
tinue to serve as humorous foils for the exploits of other more important
characters, background characters that lend “color” to the film. 
Analyzing contemporary media, Marlon Riggs identifies how Black
manhood has become juxtaposed to the Negro faggot in contemporary
Black cultural production:
I am a Negro faggot, if I believe what movies, TV , and rap music say of
me. My life is game for play. Because of my sexuality, I cannot be black.
A strong, proud, “ Afrocentric” black man is resolutely heterosexual, not
evenbisexual. Hence, I remain a Negro. My sexual difference is consid-
ered of no value; indeed, it’s a testament to weakness, passivity, and the
absence of real guts—balls. Hence, I remain a sissy, punk, faggot. I can-
not be a black gay man because, by the tenets of black macho, black gay
man is a triple negation. I am consigned, by these tenets, to remain a
Negro faggot. And, as such, I am game for play, to be used, joked about,
put down, beaten, slapped, and bashed, not just by illiterate homophobic
thugs in the night but by black American culture’s best and brightest.”
50
This “punk,” “sissy,” or “faggot” may have its roots in an emasculated
Uncle Tom, but it also operates as a new representation in the post–civil
rights era.
Given the virtual absence of representations of gay Black men in the
past, these new representations enjoy a visibility within contemporary
Black popular culture that is surprising. Representations of “sissies” and
“Negro faggots” suggest a deviancy that lies not in Black male promiscu-
ity but in a seeming emasculation that is chosen. Avowedly heterosexual
African American men routinely deride gay Black men, primarily through
ridicule (the running skit “Men on Film” on the popular television show
In Living Colorthat poked fun at two Black male “sissies”) or through out-
right homophobic comments (comedic routines by Eddie Murphy and
other Black male comedians that border on homophobic vitriol). A running
joke throughout movies concerns the theme in which a very large Black
male prisoner threatens a boy with rape. In one memorable scene from
House Party, a 1990 feature film by African American brothers Reginald
172


--- PAGE 184 ---
BOOTY CALL
and Warrington Huddlin, the teenaged protagonist lands in a jail cell with
a big Black man who wants him to be his girlfriend. The audience is
encouraged to laugh at the possibility of an adolescent boy being raped or
“punked” by a Mike Tyson–esque character. Within straight Black male
culture, special derision is saved for Black representations of “punks,” the
males who were sexually conquered by other men. 
In contrast to representations of Black gay men in contexts with Black
heterosexual men, images of Black gay men in settings with African
American women present a very different picture. In these films, Black gay
men become surrogate women, with the benefits and liabilities that this
implies. As opposed to the derogated “punks,” they become depicted as
nonthreatening, lovable “sissies.” For example, African American director
John Singleton’s 1993 film Poetic Justice contains the stereotypical gay
Black male hairdresser who provides comic relief for the real heterosexual
drama. This theme of gay Black buddy to women, a part that helps Black
women gain insight into Black masculinity, is a recurring theme.
51 Placing
Black gay men in female settings creates space for this stereotypical foil;
the gay Black buddy/sidekick typically helps African American women
and is routinely accepted by them and liked. 
Because images of Black gay men as “punks” often are used to justify
male violence upon identifiably gay Black men, such images do foster
homophobia and hate crimes. But this is the tip of the iceberg because the
impact of these representations goes further. Many Black men who are gay
or bisexual hide their sexual orientation, preferring to pass as straight.
There have always been Black men who passed, but what is different now
is the emergence of a new subculture among Black gay men. Benoit
Denizet-Lewis describes this phenomenon: “Rejecting a gay culture they
perceive as white and effeminate, many black men have settled on a new
identity, with its own vocabulary and customs and its own name: Down
Low. There have always been men—black and white—who have had secret
sexual lives with men. But the creation of an organized, underground sub-
culture largely made up of black men who otherwise live straight lives is a
phenomenon of the last decade.”
52 Most of the Black men who are on the
Down Low (DL) date or marry women and engage sexually with men that
they meet in bathhouses, parks, the Internet, or other anonymous settings.
Most DL men do not identify themselves as gay or bisexual, but primarily
as Black. 
173


--- PAGE 185 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
On the one hand, the sexual practices attributed to the Black “sissy”
do not constitute a credible threat to White heterosexual men because the
presence of Black gay sexuality constitutes a feminized and therefore non-
threatening Black masculinity. Representations of Black gay sexuality
operate as further evidence that Black men are “weak,” emasculated, and
“feminized” in relation to White men. Black gay sexuality is depicted as
reflecting male submission or capitulation, especially those men who are
penetrated like women. When joined to the broader theme of the Black
buddy or sidekick, “faggots, “punks,” and “sissies” constitute the exten-
sion of the seeming symbolic emasculation of middle-class Black men
associated with images of Uncle Tom and Uncle Ben. “Sissies” can be
accommodated within the norms of Black assimilation because Black bud-
dies pave the way for them. 
On the other hand, Black gay sexuality might present a threat to Black
heterosexual men for this exact same reason. Within the universe of Black
masculinity, gay Black men pose a threat to a beleaguered Black male het-
erosexuality that strives to claim its place at a table dominated by repre-
sentations of White-controlled masculinity. Within Black popular culture,
the widespread caricature of Black gay men, thus making this sexuality vis-
ible, works to uphold constructions of authentic Black masculinity as being
hyper-heterosexual. The stigma attached to Black gay sexuality is less
about depicting this form of sexuality than it is in using an emasculated
Black gay sexuality to establish the boundaries of both White masculinity
(which is assumed to be heterosexual) and Black male heterosexuality.
Thus, representing Black gay sexuality as Black male emasculation simul-
taneously threatens heterosexual African American men, upholds Black
male hyper-masculinity (the invisibility of DL Black men and their redef-
inition as Black heterosexuals), and protects hegemonic White masculinity.
Ironically, Black gay men can simultaneously gain acceptance, provide
humor, be erased, and pose a threat.
Despite considerable pressure to use the image of the faggot or sissy
for ridicule and humor, some films and television shows do dispute these
representations of Black gay men. For example, the original Showtime
movie Holiday Heart(2000) is one of the few films that try to depict gay
Black men in a nonstereotypical fashion. Directed by African American
director Robert Townsend, actor Ving Rhames plays the title character of
Holiday—a church-loving, flamboyant gay drag queen. After Holiday’s
174


--- PAGE 186 ---
BOOTY CALL
longtime lover passes away, Holiday is left alone and grieving. So when a
homeless drug addict, Wanda (Alfre Woodard), and her young daughter,
Niki (Jessika Quynn Reynolds), require Holiday’s help, he moves them into
the apartment next door to his own. The three form an unconventional
family until Wanda brings home a new drug dealer boyfriend who changes
everything for the worse. Wanda’s inability to avoid drugs threatens to fur-
ther break the trio apart. The character of Holiday helps heal the damaged
Black family. This film moves depictions of Black gay men away from
extreme stereotypes, yet it still positions Black gay sexuality within the
framework of being the emotional ballast for the sufferings of others. 
Some media contestations are more confrontational. For example,
through comedy, the four Black and Latino gay men in the 2001 play Punks
strive to disrupt the negative associations of the term itself. Because it is
less subject to the strictures of programming for a mass audience, cable tel-
evision has also broken from the stereotypical depiction of Black gay men.
For example, in its 2001 season, the HBO series Six Feet Underintroduced
the character of Keith Charles (played by actor Mathew St. Patrick), a gay
Black male cop whose White male lover David Fisher was one of the main
characters. Resisting the temptation to portray Keith as the sexual Black
“buddy” for David as White hero, the series instead focuses on their
stormy relationship in negotiating different approaches to homosexuality.
In addition to its depiction of a Black lesbian couple, the first season of
HBO’s original series The Wire introduced the character of Omar, a gay
Black male gangsta who seeks revenge on the drug dealers who brutally
murdered Brandon, his gay Black lover. Again, the treatment on The Wire
breaks with stereotypes. Omar is dark-skinned, violent, and in no way
appears to be the stereotypical “sissy.” Moreover, the gay Black male rela-
tionship is between two working-class Black men, thus challenging the
association of gay sexuality with Whiteness and/or with middle-class men.
As was the case for representations applied primarily to working-class
and poor Black men, collectively, the representations for middle-class
Black men also help justify the political economy of the new racism. All
seem designed to exert political control on those African American men
who do achieve middle-class status and to discourage far larger numbers of
African American men from aspiring for social mobility into the middle
class. The complex and narrow representational space saved for middle-
class African American men speaks to the ways in which ideas about bud-
175


--- PAGE 187 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
dies and sidekicks, punks and sissies coalesce within discourses of Black
male assimilation in the post–civil rights era. Assimilated, middle-class
Black men are somehow seen as being less manly, as subordinates. Their
place is assured at the middle-class table, just as long as they recognize
their place of serving the needs of White-run organizations. Moreover, the
deference needed to become a Black buddy takes its cues from discourses
of emasculation, the popular discourse on the sissy. 
When combined, images of the buddy and the sissy both construct
middle-class Black men as less manly—the former because he has been
emasculated by the White world, the latter because he exhibits a sexual
identity that symbolizes a chosen emasculation. When presented with this
narrow frame of images by institutions of formal education, Black boys of
all social class often reject school. In the universe of many African American
boys, studying not only identifies them as “White-identified, sellouts,”
excellent school performance is the domain of “girls” or “punks.”
Masculinity is associated with use of the body, not the mind. Girls and “fag-
gots” are the ones who submit to the will of the teacher, the principal, and
avowedly heterosexual boys. In this context and without developing some
alternative frameworks, the more educated Black boys become, the less
manly they may feel. The alternative of becoming “bad boys” in school may
seem like a more realistic option. One study of fifth and sixth grade Black
boys found that many were labeled troublemakers and written off by school
personnel as early as age ten.
53 When combined with the competing code of
the street within African American working-class urban culture, staying in
school and doing well is a real accomplishment. 
Ironically, holding up educated African American men as role models
to Black male youth may actually aggravate this situation. The thesis of
role modeling assumes that young Black men lack role models that will
show them their possibilities and how to behave to get there. Working-class
disadvantage is routinely seen as an outcome of the absence of middle-class
Black role models. But what if working-class Black boys are familiar with
these representations of middle-class Black men and simply reject them? 
Through Black working-class eyes, Black elected officials, busi-
nesspersons, corporate executives, and academics may resemble “academic
sidekicks” or “intellectual punks.” These are the men who increasingly fail
to defend African American interests because they fail to defy White male
power. Instead, they tolerate and in many cases collude in reproducing the
176


--- PAGE 188 ---
BOOTY CALL
conditions in the inner city. Staying in school and studying hard moves
them closer to images of Bill Cosby selling Jello or Michael Jordan talking
to Bugs Bunny or Tiger Woods refusing to claim Blackness at all. If the
“academic sidekick” or “intellectual sissy” becomes seen by African
American boys and young men as the price they have to pay for racial inte-
gration, it should not be surprising that increasing numbers of young
Black men reject this route to success.
54 With a vacuum of images of Black
men of whatever sexual orientation who stand up to White officials, who
take principled positions on social problems that affect African Americans,
and who clearly have the interests of African Americans at heart, why
should poor and working-class Black boys emulate middle-class Black
men? In their eyes, when Latrell Sprewell choked his coach, he stood up to
White power. In Todd Boyd’s words, “When you reject the system and all
that goes along with it, when you say, ‘I don’t give a fuck,’ you then become
empowered, liberated, controller of your own destiny.”
55 This stance may
work for rich Black professional athletes, but it is a dangerous posture for
Black boys with no degrees, no skills, and a whole lot of attitude. Charles
Barkley may not be a role model, but neither are these representations of
middle-class African American men.
CLASS-SPECIFIC GENDER IDEOLOGY 
AND THE NEW RACISM 
Under the new racism, these class-specific representations of Black mas-
culinity and Black femininity serve several purposes. First, these represen-
tations speak to the importance that ideologies of class and culture now
have in justifying the persistence of racial inequality. Within the universe
of these representations, authentic and respectable Black people become
constructed as class opposites, and their different cultures help explain
why poor and working-class Black people are at the bottom of the eco-
nomic hierarchy and middle-class Black people are not. Authentic Black
people must be contained—their authentic culture can enter White-
controlled spaces, but they cannot. Representations of athletes and criminals,
bitches and bad mothers refer to the poor and/or working-class African
American men and women who allegedly lack the values of hard work,
marriage, school performance, religiosity, and clean living attributed to
middle-class White Americans. In essence, these representations of Black
177


--- PAGE 189 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
masculinity and Black femininity assail unassimilated Black people, point-
ing out the ways in which such poor Black people are “untamed” and in
need of strict discipline. In contrast, representations of sidekicks, sissies,
and modern mammies describe the space of respectability for newly
accepted Black people. These Black people are different from middle-class
Whites, but these representations of middle-class Black people are not a
threat to power relations. Social mobility, or lack thereof, becomes recast in
terms of the unwillingness of poor and/or working-class Black people to
shed their Blackness and the willingness of middle-class Black people to
assimilate. These respectable Black people must be denuded of
Blackness—they should be seen but not necessarily heard. 
Under the color-blind ideology of the new racism, Blackness must be
seenas evidence for the alleged color blindness that seemingly characterizes
contemporary economic opportunity. A meritocracy requires evidence that
racial discrimination has been eliminated. The total absence of Black peo-
ple would signal the failure of color blindness.
56 At the same time that
Blackness must be visible, it also must be contained and/or denuded of all
meaning that threatens elites. Rejecting traditional racist discourse that
sees racial difference as rooted in biology, these representations of crimi-
nals and bad mothers, of sidekicks and modern mammies work better in a
context of desegregation in which cultural difference has grown in impor-
tance in maintaining racial boundaries. Poor and working-class African
American men are not inherentlyinclined to crime, such images suggest.
Rather, the culturein which they grow up, the authentic Black culture so
commodified in the media, creates images of criminality that explains the
failures of racial integration by placing the blame on the unassimilability of
African Americans themselves. The joblessness, poor schools, racially seg-
regated neighborhoods, and unequal public services that characterize
American society vanish, and social class hierarchies in the United States,
as well as patterns of social mobility within them, become explained solely
by issues of individual values, motivation, and morals.
Second, when combined, these class-specific images create a Black
gender ideology that simultaneously defines Black masculinity and Black
femininity in relation to one another and that also positions Black gender
ideology as the opposite of normal (White) gender ideology. Providing a
mirror image for mainstream gender ideology of dominant men and sub-
missive women, the Black gender ideology advanced by these representa-
178


--- PAGE 190 ---
BOOTY CALL
tions depicts Black men as being inappropriately weak and Black women as
being inappropriately strong. This hypothesis of weak men and strong
women takes class-specific form. For example, representations of Black
men reinforce ideas about Black male immaturity, irresponsibility, and,
until domesticated, unsuitability for full citizenship rights, yet does so in
class-specific ways. The cluster of representations for Black working-class
men deems them less manly than White men and therefore weaker.
Because these men do not participate appropriately in society (absent
fathers, criminals, etc.), they weaken it. They are also deemed less capable
of undertaking the tasks of strong men, for example, exhibiting the self-
discipline to study hard in school, work in low-paying jobs, save their
money, and support their children. Their strength lies in their violence and
sexual prowess, but only if these qualities can be harnessed to the needs of
society. In contrast to this site of weakness, representations of middle-class
Black men who may be doing well but who pose little threat to White soci-
ety present another dimension of weakness. Because they fail to confront
the new racism, the sidekicks and sissies represent emasculated and femi-
nized versions of Black masculinity. In contrast, class-specific images of
Black femininity reinforce notions of an inappropriate, female strength.
Whether working-class “bitches” who are not appropriately submissive,
bad mothers who raise children without men, or “educated bitches” who
act like men, this Black female strength is depicted and then stigmatized.
Not even the modern mammies and Black ladies escape this frame of too-
strong Black women. Such women may receive recognition for their
strength on the job, but it is a strength that is placed in service to White
power and authority. 
This Black gender ideology constructs this thesis of weak men and
strong women by drawing upon heterosexism for meaning. Representations
of the Black male “sissy” that mark the boundaries of Black male hetero-
sexuality and those of the “manly” Black lesbian that fulfills a similar func-
tion for Black female heterosexuality constitute an outer ring around the
heterosexual family drama of weak men and strong women. Unless these
ideas are challenged, they can aggravate homophobia within African
American communities. As Harlon Dalton points out: 
My suspicion is that openly gay men and lesbians evoke hostility
in part because they have come to symbolize the strong female
179


--- PAGE 191 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
and the weak male that slavery and Jim Crow produced. . . .
Lesbians are seen as standing for the proposition that “Black
men aren’t worth shit.” More than even the “no account” men
who figure prominently in the repertoire of female blues singers,
gay men symbolize the abandonment of Black women. Thus, in
the Black community homosexuality carries more baggage than
in the larger society.
57
If Dalton is correct, this excess baggage of homosexuality helps explain
patterns of homophobia within African American communities. 
Finally, this Black gender ideology helps justify racial inequality to
White Americans and suppress resistance among African Americans.
Depicting and demonizing “weak men and strong women” enables White
Americans to point to the damaged values and relationships among Black
people as the root cause of Black social disadvantage. At the same time,
when internalized by African Americans themselves, this same Black gen-
der ideology works to erase the workings of racial discrimination by keep-
ing Black men and Black women focused on blaming one another for
problems. Within this logic, class-specific gender ideology becomes a con-
venient explanation both for the persistence of Black poverty and for
deeply entrenched racial discrimination. By demonizing poor and work-
ing-class African Americans, these representations quell long-standing
political threats that African American citizenship raises for White elites.
African Americans are blamed for their poverty and powerlessness. At the
same time, representations of middle-class Blacks discourage them from
using their literacy, visibility, and money to support African American
interests. Weak Black men who are willing to accept subordinate roles and
strong Black women who place their strength in service to White-controlled
institutions become the gold standard for measuring Black middle-class
acceptability. Together, class-specific representations of Black masculinity
and Black femininity aim to counter the threats posed by Black men and
women who have too much freedom and too many opportunities in the
post–civil rights era, at least, defined as such by those in power. 
180


--- PAGE 192 ---
SIX
VERY NECESSARY
Redefining Black Gender Ideology
2002: African Americans were well represented at the
74th annual Academy Awards ceremony. Hostess
Whoopee Goldberg returned for her fourth highly suc-
cessful stint hosting the event. Winning Best Actor in
1963 for his role in Lilies of the Field, seventy-four-year-
old actor Sidney Poitier received an honorary award for
his extraordinary performances in over fifty years in the
business. But the main event came when actress Halle
Berry became the first African American woman to win
for Best Actress and actor Denzel Washington followed
in Poitier’s footsteps to become the second African
American man to win Best Actor. Despite the glitz of
the media spectacle, some lingering doubts remained
about both Berry’s and Washington’s awards. Halle
Berry’s career had included many fine films, yet she
won best actress for Monster’s Ball, a film in which
Berry engaged in a torrid interracial sex scene with
actor Billie Bob Thornton. Denzel Washington also had
impeccable credentials as an accomplished actor.
Despite his stellar performances in heroic roles in
numerous films (e.g., Malcolm X and John Q),
Washington won his Oscar for his depiction of a violent,
corrupt police officer in Training Day. No one doubted
Berry’s talent or Washington’s virtuosity as an actor.
But one lingering question remained. Of all of the


--- PAGE 193 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
actresses and films that might have been selected, why Monster’s
Ball with its depiction of Black female sexuality? Of all the films
in which Washington appeared, why did he win an Oscar for such a
violent part?
In her 1970 essay “On the Issue of Roles,” African American author Toni
Cade Bambara argued: “It seems to me you find your Self in destroying
illusions, smashing myths, laundering the head of whitewash, being
responsible to some truth, to the struggle. That entails at the very least
cracking through the veneer of this sick society’s definition of ‘masculine’
and ‘feminine.’
1 As a foot soldier in the civil rights and Black power strug-
gles, Bambara saw firsthand how damaging the uncritical acceptance of
traditional gender ideology could be. Prevailing gender norms that assign
some attributes to men and others to women see men and women as com-
plementing one another and as incomplete and imperfect without the
other. These norms of gender complementarity disadvantage many
groups, African Americans disproportionately so. Bambara not only chal-
lenged these assumptions concerning appropriate behavior for men and
women but she also linked this logic to issues of African American empow-
erment: “I am beginning to see . . . that the usual notions of sexual differ-
entiation in roles is an obstacle to political consciousness, that the way
those terms are generally defined and acted upon in this part of the world
is a hindrance to full development.”
2 Bambara laid it on the line—for
African Americans, dominant society’s ideas about masculinity and femi-
ninity were at best stifling, and, at worst, dangerous for antiracist struggles
and social justice projects.
More than thirty years after Bambara’s groundbreaking essay, African
Americans still struggle with questions of gender within African American
antiracist politics, now supplemented by a growing recognition that ques-
tions of sexuality may be equally important. Now as then, scientific dis-
course, mass media, and public policy all depict African Americans as
either less able and/or willing to achieve dominant gender ideology.
Instead, the images of Black masculinity and Black femininity in contem-
porary mass media suggest that a reversed and therefore deviant gender
ideology hinders African American advancement. The message is sim-
ple—African American communities are populated by men who are “too
weak” and by women who are “too strong.”
3
182


--- PAGE 194 ---
VERY NECESSARY
Until recently, many African American leaders have argued that Black
men and women would be just like middle-class White Americans if they
assimilated dominant values (especially those concerning gender) and pur-
sued a politics of respectability.
4 Because the Black Church, one of the
mainstays of African American resistance to racial oppression, generally
supports conservative analyses of gender and sexuality, it has upheld this
line of thought.
5 As the linchpin of African American communal life, the
effects of the Black Church can be seen in Black music, fraternal organiza-
tions, neighborhood associations, and politics.
6 From its position of
authority, the Black Church has shown strong support for the patriarchal
family, claiming that men should be the heads of the Church, that women
should not be preachers, and that men should rule their families. The
Black Church has also been particularly reluctant to challenge Western
arguments about sexuality and, instead, has incorporated dominant ideas
about the dangers of promiscuity and homosexuality within its beliefs and
practices.
7 In this context, American Americans are counseled to accept
traditional gender ideology’s prescription of complementary gender roles
for men and women (strength and weakness), and to believe that, although
these gender roles may be more difficult for African Americans to attain,
such roles are nonetheless natural and normal. 
African Americans who accept the thesis that Black men’s and
women’s failure to achieve normal complementary gender roles adequately
explains joblessness, poor school performance, poverty, poor housing, and
other social problems often point to the commonsense solution of fixing
Black heterosexual relationships and families. Black community norms
often back them up by suggesting that strengthening “weak” Black men is
the best way to fight racism and to reverse African American poverty. The
equally obvious commonsense solution is less often discussed, but lingers
under the surface. Within this logic, African American progress also
requires weakening “unnaturally strong” Black women.
8 By using Black
people’s ability to achieve White gender norms as a sign of racial progress,
upward social class mobility is increasingly hitched to the wagon of help-
ing Black men gain “strength” within African American families and com-
munities. This view establishes the goal of fixing Black masculinity in the
center of a political agenda designed to address Black masculinity’s
assumed weakness. At the same time, Black women are told that their
assertiveness is holding African Americans back, especially men. Sadly, a
183


--- PAGE 195 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
history of Black female financial independence from men and economic
contributions to Black families and communities is increasingly devalued
and recast as a problem. 
In the context of the new racism, using these arguments to explain
African American economic and political disadvantage diverts attention
from structural causes for Black social problems and lays the blame on
African Americans themselves. Pandering to misogyny within African
American communities, new versions of Black gender ideology evolve into
one of perpetrator and victim in which African American men are “too
weak” becauseAfrican American women are “too strong.” Because Black
women allegedly have too much strength, they are counseled to “let” Black
men lead. Ironically, as Hortense Spillers suggests, “the African-American
female’s ‘dominance’ and ‘strength’ came to be interpreted by later gener-
ations—both Black and White, oddly enough—as a ‘pathology,’ as an
instrument of castration.”
9 Helping to deflect attention away from the
major structural changes of the new racism, African American men and
women are encouraged to blame one another for economic, political, and
social problems within African American communities. 
In the context of the post–civil rights era in which new variations of
the “weak men, strong women” thesis have catalyzed gender conflict
among African Americans, it is important to stress that African American
women and men have a range of choices as to how to respond to dominant
gender ideology. Mass media images of Black femininity and Black mas-
culinity present but one social script among many that encourages certain
behaviors and discourages others. If Black boys and girls think that being
gangstas, athletes, sidekicks, bitches, bad mothers, and mammies are their
only options, then this Black gender ideology can foster internalized
oppression. Alternately, if African Americans design new conceptions of
Black femininity and Black masculinity that reject sexism and heterosex-
ism and that are sensitive to economic, political, and social contours of the
new racism, a new and hopefully more progressive Black sexual politics
might follow. 
In order to develop alternatives to the internal victim-blaming stance
advanced within both dominant society and antiracist Black politics,
African Americans need to critique the prevailing Black gender ideology.
But replacing existing ideas with more progressive conceptions of Black
masculinity and Black femininity will be difficult because elite groups have
184


--- PAGE 196 ---
VERY NECESSARY
a vested interest in perpetuating ideologies of Black deviancy, including
the gendered one analyzed here. Halle Berry and Denzel Washington both
won Oscars, but the parts they played drew upon a historical Black gender
ideology of Black female sexual promiscuity and Black male corruption
and violence. These are the contradictions of the new racism—images of
change (winning the Oscars) and stability (the parts they played). White
supremacy requires Black subordination, and ideologies that challenge
existing power relations will be staunchly resisted. 
HEGEMONIC MASCULINITY AND 
BLACK GENDER IDEOLOGY 
Since the 1912 publication of Tarzan of the Apes, the first Tarzan novel,
the Tarzan myth has not only been immensely popular but it has been a
central feature in disseminating ideas about White masculinity. Twenty-
four Tarzan novels in all were published, primarily from the 1910s through
the 1930s. Over fifty Tarzan films appeared after the first Tarzan movie
was released in 1917. As late as 1963, one out of every thirty paperbacks
sold was a Tarzan novel.
10 With one infamous yell, Tarzan subdued all the
beasts of the jungle and ruled fictional natives who, unlike actual colonized
Africans, appeared to welcome colonialism with a smile on their faces.
Although Tarzan was a fictional character, his image helps frame ideas
about masculinity: “Tarzan has defined himself as a ‘man’ by his difference
from the apes, from blacks, and from females. . . . He needs now to preserve
his ‘manliness,’ his aloneness, figuratively if not literally. He does this
through establishing power hierarchies in which all others—and especially
blacks and women—are subordinate to him.”
11 
Tarzan constitutes one well-known example of how mass media shapes
White masculinity within U.S. society. The construction of White mas-
culinity is not confined to fictional images. Whether the composition of
the U.S. Senate or executives of global corporations or an American liter-
ary canon that glorifies the exploits of pioneers and patriots, elite White
men run America. It doesn’t matter that, to paraphrase the title of a
Hollywood film of the same name, “White men can’t jump,” because they
can make others jump for them. Moreover, because this group so domi-
nates positions of power and authority, the view of masculinity patterned
on Tarzan, U.S. senators, corporate executives, and cowboys is well known
185


--- PAGE 197 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
and is often taken as normal, natural, and ideal. It becomes hegemonic in
that the vast majority of the population accepts ideas about gender com-
plementarity that privilege the masculinity of propertied, heterosexual
White men as natural, normal, and beyond reproach.
12 In this fashion, elite
White men control the very definitions of masculinity, and they use these
standards to evaluate their own masculine identities and those of all other
men, including African American men. 
Hegemonic masculinity is fundamentally a dynamic, relational con-
struct.
13 Because it is constantly tested by the behaviors of others, such
masculinity must always be achieved. These relations are not merely inter-
connected; they reflect the hierarchal power relations of a racialized sys-
tem of sexism that frames the multiple expressions of masculinity and
femininity available to African American men and women, as well as all
other groups. In the American context, hegemonic masculinity becomes
defined through its difference from and opposition to women, boys, poor
and working class men of all races and ethnicities, gay men, and Black
men.
14 In other words, hegemonic masculinity is a concept that is shaped
by ideologies of gender, age, class, sexuality, and race. Ideas about groups
formed within these ideologies, for example, women or LGBT people,
constitute an important benchmark for defining a hegemonic masculinity
that must constantly construct itself. Without these groups as ideological
markers, hegemonic masculinity becomes meaningless. 
In the United States, hegemonic masculinity is installed at the top of
a hierarchical array of masculinities. All other masculinities, including
those of African American men, are evaluated by how closely they approx-
imate dominant social norms. Masculinity itself becomes organized as a
three-tiered structure: those closest to hegemonic masculinity, predomi-
nantly wealthy White men, but not exclusively so, retain the most power at
the top; those men who are situated just below have greater access to White
male power, yet remain marginalized (for example, working-class White
men and Latino, Asian, and White immigrant men); and those males who
are subordinated by both of these groups occupy the bottom (for example,
Black men and men from indigenous groups). Moreover, hegemonic mas-
culinity requiresthese marginalized and subordinated masculinities. 
Men from varying races, classes, and sexualities jockey for position
within this hierarchy of masculinities. For example, like African American
men, the vast majority of Latino and Asian American men are excluded
186


--- PAGE 198 ---
VERY NECESSARY
from the category of hegemonic masculinity. Instead, they are assigned
social scripts of marginalized masculinities, the former because of dedica-
tion to family and the latter due to representations of hard work and being
a “model minority.” Those Latino and Asian American men who falter can
be demoted to the subordinated masculinity reserved for African American
men. Those who manage to approximate the norms of hegemonic mas-
culinity may enter the inner circle, often as “honorary” elite White men.
Not surprisingly, this hierarchy of successful and failed manhood matches
up to the White normality/Black deviancy framework that accompanies
racism; the heterosexual/homosexual binary that supports heterosexism;
structures of age that grant seniority to older males over younger ones; and
a class system that grants propertied individuals more power and status
than those who lack it. 
It is important to stress that allwomen occupy the category of deval-
ued Other that gives meaning to allmasculinities. Yet, just as masculinities
are simultaneously constructed in relation to one another and hierarchi-
cally related, femininities demonstrate a similar pattern. Within these
crosscutting relationships, Latina, Asian, and Black women routinely
inherit social scripts of marginalized and/or subordinated femininities.
For example, one study of representations of Latina and Black women in
fiction and of Latinas and Blacks who had careers in Hollywood films finds
similarities in treatment that illuminate how marginalized and subordi-
nated femininities are constructed.
15 Latinas are routinely presented as
members of a conquered people whereas Black women appear as slaves. In
this regard, both groups of women symbolize subordinated femininities
and share the status of sexual outlaws: “the Latina of conquest fiction is
portrayed as the half-breed harlot whose purpose is to pique the male sex-
ual appetite and whose mixed blood elicits similar behavior to that of her
Black counterpart, the mulatto.”
16 Thus, within hierarchies of femininity,
social categories of race, age, and sexual orientation also intersect to pro-
duce comparable categories of hegemonic, marginalized, and subordinated
femininities. 
Black femininity is constructed in relation to the tenets of hegemonic
masculinity that subordinates all femininities to masculinity. At the same
time, the social power granted to race and class in the United States means
that sexism is not an either/or endeavor in which all men dominate all
women. Rather, gender norms that privilege men typically play out within
187


--- PAGE 199 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
racial/ethnic and/or social class groups as well as betweensuch groups. For
example, working-class Latino men may expect obedience from working-
class Latinas, yet when both arrive at their jobs, they may be deferential to
White employers, male and female. In one sense, Black femininity is the
ultimate “other” juxtaposed to hegemonic White masculinity, with poor,
young Black lesbians such as fifteen-year-old murder victim Sakia Gunn
saddled with an intensified version of costs attached to Black femininity.
17
In contrast, George W . Bush can be a “C” student at Yale University, have
a drinking problem, and get elected president of the United States in 2000.
He benefits from an intensified version of the privileges of hegemonic
masculinity, namely, the privileges of Whiteness, family ties, heterosexual-
ity, and the power that money can buy. Varying combinations of race, class,
sexuality, and gender create intermediate positions between these two
poles for working-class Black men, middle-class Latinas, poor gay White
men, Haitian immigrants, and other groups. As a group, Black men fall
between these two poles and many of the contradictions that affect Black
manhood reflect this intermediate location. It is important to keep this
overarching frame in mind because everyday lived experience is not this
neat. Selected individual African American women such as Oprah Winfrey
and Condaleezza Rice may wield considerable power and, as individuals,
are definitely not oppressed. But for Black women as a class, the concept of
a subordinated Black femininity holds sway. Despite the massive media
attention given to African American men and women who seem to be
exceptions to the rules, Black masculinity and Black femininity thus are
both constructed in relation to hegemonic masculinity, a situation that also
shapes their relation to one another. 
Keeping It “Real”: African American Men and Hegemonic Masculinity
Hegemonic masculinity in the United States has several benchmarks. For
one, “real” men are primarily defined as notbeing like women. Real men
are expected to be forceful, analytical, responsible, and willing to exert
authority, all qualities that women seemingly lack. The use of women in
the construction of masculinity is so widespread that this dimension of
hegemonic masculinity seems hidden in plain sight. For example, boys on
American sports teams are routinely ridiculed for “playing like girls.” Boys
are discouraged from crying “like girls.” A major insult hurled at men is
188


--- PAGE 200 ---
VERY NECESSARY
that they are “soft” like women. Within this ideological framework, simply
being unlike women is not enough. For this version of masculinity to be
plausible, men require female validation as constant reminders of male
superiority. Otherwise, how would men know that they are not like women
if only in the company of men? The irony is that, whereas dependency is
typically seen as a female attribute, femininity does not dependon males
staying in their place. In contrast, men who accept this dimension of dom-
inant gender ideology require control over women (which takes many
forms) in order to know that they are “real” men.
Within this logic, men who seem too closely aligned with women, who
lack authority with the women of their racial ethnic group and/or social
class, or, worst yet, who seem to be dominated by women suffer a loss of
manhood. In other words, male dominance occurs within racial/ethnic cat-
egories and is one marker of male power. The legacy of seeing women as
property or “booty,” the spoils of warfare, establishes this theme of need-
ing to exert male authority over at least one woman, typically a girlfriend,
wife, or daughter. Representations of Black masculinity within mass media
that depict working-class Black men as aggressive thugs or as promiscuous
hustlers seem designed to refute accusations that Black men are “weak”
because they cannot control Black women. If “real” men are those who can
control women, then these representations suggest that Black men can
shake the stigma of weakness by dominating unnaturally strong Black
women. Being strong enough to “bring a bitch to her knees” becomes a
marker of Black masculinity. Moreover, trying to exert male dominance
over women places African American men and women in an adversarial
relationship. Women who do not let men be men become blamed for Black
male behavior. Abusive men routinely blame their partners for their own
violent behavior—if she had been more of a woman (submissive), she
would have let him be more of a man.
18
Another dimension of hegemonic masculinity is that “real” men exer-
cise control not just over women but also over their own emotions, in lead-
ership positions, and over all forms of violence. In other words, exercising
male authority is a vital component of masculinity. Yet men’s access to the
apparatuses of authority and violence differs depending on their social
location within race and social class hierarchies. White men exercise vio-
lence within a wide array of social settings and possess legitimate author-
ity over the mechanisms of violence. For example, elite White men run
189


--- PAGE 201 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
military and police forces—they have the authority to set policies concern-
ing the legitimate use of force while erasing their own culpability for wars
and other violent outcomes. Propertied White males also control the
forums of symbolic violence within U.S. society, for example, sports and
mass media (television, film, and music).
19 From the Revolutionary War to
the 2003 War in Iraq, poor and working-class White men have joined or
been drafted into military service. These men may carry the guns, but they
also enforce policies that often were made without their input.
In contrast, because so many African American men lack access to the
forms of political and economic power that are available to elite White
men, the use of their bodies, physicality, and a form of masculine aggres-
siveness become more important. Black men experience violence, often at
the hands of other Black men. Working-class and poor Black men have
access to street weapons and their own bodies as weapons. Rather than
expressing masculine authority by running corporations or holding high-
level government positions, Black men search for respect from marginal
social locations. Sociologist Elijah Anderson suggests that in economically
depressed neighborhoods affected by drugs and crime, interpersonal vio-
lence among young African American men reflects a desperate search for
respect. Possession of respect—an indicator of male authority and man-
hood—is highly valued. As Anderson points out, “the code of the street
emerges where the influence of the police ends and personal responsibility
for one’s safety is felt to begin, resulting in a kind of ‘people’s law,’ based
on ‘street justice.’ . . . In service to this ethic, repeated displays of ‘nerve’
and ‘heart’ build or reinforce a credible reputation for vengeance that
works to deter aggression and disrespect, which are sources of great anxi-
ety on the inner-city street.”
20 In the context of the closing door of oppor-
tunity of the post–civil rights era, the often-explosive interactions among
African American men on the street become more comprehensible.
Boys constitute yet another benchmark used to construct hegemonic
masculinity. “Real” men do not resemble or behave like immature, irre-
sponsible males (boys) who have not yet been properly socialized into the
responsibilities and benefits of adult masculinity. Physical appearance dis-
tinguishes men from boys. Men are muscular and have facial and body hair.
In contrast, boys are still hairless and physically weaker. Boys are quasi
women. Moreover, unlike men who have had sexual intercourse with adult
women, primarily by genital penetration, boys remain sexual virgins.
190


--- PAGE 202 ---
VERY NECESSARY
Sexual intercourse with a woman initiates them into manhood. Boys are
also financially dependent on others—they do not hold jobs and are not
expected to support any dependents. Moreover, just as less powerful men
are pressured to submit to dominant ones (e.g., criminals to cops and fac-
tory workers to managers), boys are expected to submit to adult male
authority, most notably, their fathers. Within this age-stratified male
drama, boys become men by submitting to adult male authority and by try-
ing to become like their fathers. Conversely, men who lack fathers or access
to male authority organized through patriarchy suffer a distinct disadvan-
tage in hierarchies of masculinity.
Viewing people of African descent as being like children has a long his-
tory within Western culture, and, within the United States, treating
African American men as boys constitutes a gender-specific manifestation
of it. The use of the term boyin the segregated South to humiliate and
demean adult Black men gave voice to this portion of hegemonic mas-
culinity that needed Black boys to give it meaning. Western colonialism
and slavery contain numerous examples of efforts to infantalize men of
African descent. The Tarzan novels and movies provide one of the most
visible and enduring examples of how ideologies of hegemonic masculin-
ity needed and were constructed on the backs of men of African descent
conceptualized as “boys” or “boy servants.” From images of Uncle Tom
and Uncle Ben to the sidekicks within contemporary popular culture,
Black men have been depicted as immature men, if not actual boys. 
Recognizing this history, African American men have responded with
various strategies, with varying degrees of success. Black men’s visibility
within basketball, rap, and hip-hop culture has provided a new and highly
visible cultural arena for reasserting an adult Black masculinity and reject-
ing the traditional “boy” status reserved for Black men. The “bad boys” of
basketball are so “bad” that they can self-define as “boys” with little fear
of being mistaken for them. The media spectacles of Latrell Sprewell
choking his coach, Charles Barkley refusing to be a role model, Mike
Tyson biting off part of an opponent’s ear, and legions of crotch-grabbing
young rappers who glare angrily at the camera, proclaiming their man-
hood, seemingly reject any efforts to treat them like children. They reject
the discourse of Black sidekicks and sissies as the route for White accept-
ance and as a path to adult masculinity and claim media space to argue that
there is another way to be Black, male, and adult.
191


--- PAGE 203 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Possessing property and the power that it commands operates as yet
another benchmark of hegemonic masculinity. There are definite social class
dimensions to hegemonic masculinity—“real” men are not financially
dependent on others, but instead support others. They take responsibility for
their families by getting married and financially supporting their wives and
children. They are neither sexual renegades running from one woman to
another nor pimps and hustlers who expect women to support them.
Historically, working-class men lobbied for an adequate “family wage” that
would enable them to support their wives and children.
21 Unemployed and
underemployed working-class and poor men who fail to meet these criteria of
masculinity are depicted as irresponsible, and the number of children they
father with their unmarried partners provides evidence for their sexual irre-
sponsibility and refusal to grow up. Talk shows operate as contemporary
morality plays to showcase and censure poor and working-class men, many of
whom are Black, who refuse to assume their financial obligations. At the same
time, shows like The Cosby Showmask how difficult it actually is for a Black
man (or woman) to become a doctor and to make enough money to purchase
a New York City brownstone and support a wife and five children in style. 
Being heterosexual constitutes another important benchmark of hege-
monic masculinity—“real” men are also notgay or homosexual. In this
construction of hegemonic masculinity, gay men mark the contradictions
that plague male heterosexuality itself: “heterosexual men must deny
desire except for the gendered Other, while making a hated Other of the
men who desire them.”
22 Gay men are belittled because they are seen as
being like women, the stereotypical view of gay men as being “sissies,”
“faggots,” or effeminate men. This relation between heterosexual and
homosexual men carries heavy symbolic weight in the context of contem-
porary Western masculinity. To many people, because “homosexuality is a
negation of masculinity . . . homosexual men must be effeminate.”
23 
Heterosexual African American men are extremely protective of this
dimension of their manhood, often resorting to violence if they feel threat-
ened. Stereotyping Black gay men as effeminate and weak, even though the
majority of Black gay men do not fit this profile, becomes an important
factor in constantly asserting Black male heterosexuality. In essence, Black
gay men become the ultimate weak men under the “weak men/strong
women” thesis.
24 Their visibility symbolizes the Black community’s collec-
tive weakness.
192


--- PAGE 204 ---
VERY NECESSARY
Finally, race itself plays an important part as a benchmark in con-
structing the hegemonic masculinity that defines “real” men in the United
States. Black men, by definition, cannot be real men, because they are Black.
The fact of Blackness excludes Black men from participating fully in hege-
monic masculinity because, if they do so, they decenter the assumed
Whiteness of those installed in the center of the definition itself. Within
the father-son family drama of American masculinity, White fathers can-
not or will not claim their Black sons. This interracial relationship violates
the basic taboo of racial purity that has long characterized American soci-
ety. The best that Black men can do is to achieve an “honorary” member-
ship within hegemonic masculinity by achieving great wealth, marrying
the most desirable women (White), expressing aggression in socially sanc-
tioned arenas (primarily as athletes, through the military, or law enforce-
ment), and avoiding suggestions of homosexual bonding. 
Work That Body: African American Women and Hegemonic Femininity
As a group, women are subordinated to men, yet a pecking order among
women also produces hegemonic, marginalized, and subordinated femi-
ninities. This ideology proscribes behavior for allwomen based on these
assumptions, and then holds all women, including African American
women, to standards that only somewomen (including many White ones)
may be able to achieve. All women engage an ideology that deems middle-
class, heterosexual, White femininity as normative. In this context, Black
femininity as a subordinated gender identity becomes constructed not just
in relation to White women, but also in relation to multiple others, namely,
all men, sexual outlaws (prostitutes and lesbians), unmarried women, and
girls. These benchmarks construct a discourse of a hegemonic (White)
femininity that becomes a normative yardstick for all femininities in which
Black women typically are relegated to the bottom of the gender hierarchy.
One benchmark of hegemonic femininity is that women notbe like
men. Maintaining an appropriately feminine demeanor invokes two stan-
dards, one physical and the other behavioral. Because women in Western
societies are judged by their physical appearance more so than men,
women should not resemble men. The appearance of women’s bodies is
subject to sustained scrutiny, and the way that women work their bodies
(adorn them, carry them, use them sexually, use them to produce children,
193


--- PAGE 205 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
or alter them through cosmetic surgery) constitutes an important criterion
for evaluating femininity. On a basic biological level, the presence of
breasts, hips, a round booty, and the absense of muscles and facial hair
become important indicators of womanhood that distinguish women from
men, boys, and girls. Women need not actively earn femininity to the
degree required of masculinity, for example, having sex with a woman,
bringing home a paycheck, or demonstrating athletic prowess. Instead,
women wait passively, depend on physical maturation, and hope that the
adult female bodies they receive will meet social approval.
25 
Because femininity is so focused on women’s bodies, the value placed
on various attributes of female bodies means that evaluations of feminin-
ity are fairly clearcut. Within standards of feminine beauty that correlate
closely with race and age women are pretty or they are not. Historically, in
the American context, young women with milky White skin, long blond
hair, and slim figures were deemed to be the most beautiful and therefore
the most feminine women. Within this interpretive context, skin color,
body type, hair texture, and facial features become important dimensions
of femininity. This reliance on these standards of beauty automatically
render the majority of African American women at best as less beautiful,
and at worst, ugly. Moreover, these standards of female beauty have no
meaning without the visible presence of Black women and others who fail
to measure up. Under these feminine norms, African American women
can never be as beautiful as White women because they never become
White. 
In this context of the new color-blind racism, the significance
attached to skin color, especially for women, is changing. In response to
the growing visibility of biracial, multiracial, Latino, Asian, and racially
ambiguous Americans, skin color no longer serves as a definitive mark of
racial categorization. Rejecting historical rules whereby an individual with
“one drop” of “black blood” was seen as Black, the new multiracial
America uses more fluid racial categories. For many Black women,
Blackness can be “worked” in various ways. For example, light-skinned
Halle Berry is biracial and projects a certain kind of beauty that is not
purely Black. She self-identifies as an African American woman but her
film career suggests that she can work her body in various ways. Berry
played many Black women before her Oscar-winning performance in
Monster’s Ball. For example, in Losing Isaiah (1995), she plays a Black
194


--- PAGE 206 ---
VERY NECESSARY
mother on crack, and in Bulworth(1998) she plays a streetwise confidant
to a White politician. In contrast, in Xmen(2000) and Swordfish(2001)
Berry plays characters in which White or Latino actresses could just as
easily have been cast. In contrast to Halle Berry, who can work her bira-
cial appearance in many ways, darker-skinned actresses such as Alfre
Woodard and Angela Bassett have far fewer options. 
Hair texture, a female feature that is far more malleable, also matters
greatly in re-creating femininity in the context of the new color-blind
racism. Because a good deal of women’s beauty is associated with their hair,
this aspect of women’s physical appearance takes on added importance in
the process of constructing hierarchies of femininity. As Banks suggests,
“the ‘good hair’ and ‘bad hair’ distinction is probably the most indelible
construction of hair that occupies the psyche of African Americans.”
26
Some authors claim that hair texture has long been more important than
skin color in racial politics. For example, in his exhaustive cross-cultural
analysis of slavery, Orlando Patterson contends that dominant groups usu-
ally perform elaborate rituals on their subordinates. Shearing of hair is a
key part of rituals of domination cross-culturally. Patterson points out, “it
was not so much color differences as differences in hair type that become
critical as a mark of servility in the Americas.”
27 To explain this pattern,
Patterson contends that hair provides a clearer and more powerful badge of
status than skin color. Differences between Whites and Blacks were
sharper in hair quality than in color and persisted much longer with mis-
cegenation. Patterson notes, “Hair type rapidly became the real symbolic
badge of slavery, although like many powerful symbols, it was disguised . . .
by the linguistic device of using the term ‘black,’ which nominally threw
the emphasis to color.”
28 Raine, one of the participants in Banks’s study,
agrees with this position, and explains how ideas about “good hair” and
“bad hair” articulate with ideas about skin color:
Blacks are judged on their hair. I think basically the long, straight hair
people are more favorable. The shorter, kinkier, nappier [the] hair, the
less favoritism is shown. I’ve lived that, coming through school as a
young girl I was dark, but I had long hair. I was put in with the little
light [skin] long-haired kids. But the ones who had the short, measly,
nappy hair, no matter what they looked like, they were always last, in
the back.
29
195


--- PAGE 207 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Hair increases in importance in a society where biracial, multiracial, and
racially ambiguous individuals become more visible within a racially het-
erogeneous society. Moreover, because hair is seen as a badge of beauty for
women, this physical feature becomes more central in constructing hierar-
chies of femininity than is the case for men.
Maintaining an appropriately feminine demeanor constitutes another
dimension of trying notto be like men. Women can also avoid the stigma
of being judged too masculine by avoiding so-called male characteristics.
Women are expected to defer to men, and those women who project a sub-
missive demeanor allegedly receive better treatment than those who do not.
This theme of female submissiveness permeates the public sphere of labor
market practices and government office-holding in which nurses defer to
doctors, teachers to principals, and secretaries to managers. Despite a new
legal structure that provides equal opportunities to girls and boys, job cat-
egories remain gender segregated. The theme of female submissiveness
also shapes private, domestic sphere activities of family and community.
Well-functioning families adhere to this allegedly natural authority struc-
ture that fosters female submissiveness. Women with the appropriate
demeanor should remain safely sequestered in private homes and commu-
nity endeavors, thus allowing men to engage in appropriately masculine
behaviors of work and leadership in the public sphere.
30
As was the case for hegemonic masculinity, there are numerous mass
media examples of White women who model the art of submissiveness.
The women need not have submissive personalities; they only need to rec-
ognize the boundaries of White male authority. For example, the depiction
of White women in Tarzan novels and films illustrates how White women
are depicted as needing (to submit to) male protection. As Tarzan’s help-
mate, the fictional character of Jane is an adventuresome, energetic White
woman. Jane has spunk—she lives in Africa among wild animals and
African natives. Jane’s formal education ties her more closely to European
civilization than Tarzan, and because she is a woman, she represents the
civilizing influence of femininity both in the home and in the jungle itself.
In the context of wild, uncivilized space, Jane keeps home and hearth func-
tioning. She also needs White male protection. The treatment of White
women like Jane in the Tarzan novels demonstrates female dependency.
White women are repeatedly abducted in the Tarzan novels, on average
three times per woman per novel. When the triple abduction occurs, the
196


--- PAGE 208 ---
VERY NECESSARY
first abductor is usually a renegade European, the second either an Arab or
an African, and the third an ape.31
Black women have long struggled with the behavioral dimensions of
femininity whereby the very characteristics of femininity were neither pos-
sible nor desirable. African American writer Gloria Naylor encapsulates
the contradictions that accompany Black women’s inability to be submis-
sive and the effects that this had on family and relationships:
We need to speak of submissiveness. That was never in the cards for 
us. . . . Whether in the cotton fields of the South or the factories of the
North, Black women worked side by side with men to contribute to the
welfare of the family. This did not mean that men were demeaned and
unloved, but it did mean that women had a voice about the destiny of
their families. That independence and resiliency were admired because
they aided in the collective survival when society made it difficult for
Black men to find work. But when we began to internalize Euro-
American values, then Black women were no longer “real” women—
and of course only a real woman would love or be loved by a man.
32
As controlling images of Black femininity, the bitch and bad Black mother
both present the unassimilated, working-class Black woman as unaccept-
able, primarily because she lacks appropriate female qualities of submis-
siveness. Mass media ideologies hold out solutions to this seeming problem
of working-class Black female assertiveness—either become more like the
middle-class modern mammies (assertive in defense of White authority
while remaining submissive to it) or aspire to become Black ladies. 
Being appropriately heterosexual constitutes another important
benchmark of hegemonic femininity. In a context of male dominance, het-
erosexual men’s access to women’s bodies as sexual partners constitutes an
important component of hegemonic femininity. Appropriately feminine
women should be married to heterosexual male partners and dedicated to
sexually pleasing them. Women’s actual sexual behavior within the sanctity
of heterosexual marriage is less important than adhering to male-defined
norms about who controls women’s sexuality. Sex workers, women who
control their own sexuality and who take money for sexual favors, and les-
bians, women who reject heterosexual male partners, are judged as being
less feminine women. When it comes to the male prerogative of access to
197


--- PAGE 209 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
women’s bodies and sexuality, sex workers and lesbians both behave like
men because they (and not men) control their own sexuality. 
African American women have been stigmatized with both dimensions
of seemingly deviant sexuality. Historically, Black women have been con-
structed as sexually immoral women, with the recurring image of the Black
prostitute and, more recently, that of the Black lesbian serving as anchors
for a deviant Black female sexuality that defeminizes Black women. Take,
for example, how Black women are routinely typecast as prostitutes in con-
temporary mass media. From network television to feature films, when
prostitutes are depicted, typically one or more are African American. By
depicting Black lesbians as “mannish,” mass media representations also
show lesbians as being less feminine Black women. Queen Latifah’s por-
trayal of Cleo in the film Set It Off exemplifies the “mannish” Black les-
bian who exudes qualities of dominance. In the film, Cleo is big, muscular,
dominates her female partner, and is physically threatening. This depiction
of the “mannish” lesbian flows into perceptions of dark-skinned, big-
boned Black women as being less feminine and more “mannish.”
33 
Another marker of hegemonic femininity concerns the significance of
work and marriage in accessing income and wealth. The higher the status
of a woman, the less likely she is to work, and the more likely she is to be
married and have access to income generating property. Her job is to run
the family. Moreover, the behavioral norm of female submissiveness coun-
sels married women to become mothers. Motherhood within family and
male authority not only becomes another behavioral marker of whether a
woman is appropriately submissive to male authority, it becomes essential
to the economic survival of the heterosexual, nuclear family. Women may
not earn salaries, but they produce legitimate heirs for the intergenera-
tional transmission of property. There are definite class dimensions of
hegemonic femininity—women should seek out good marriages that will
provide them with economic security. Therefore, women’s true femininity
remains contingent on their legally sanctioned relationship to men. 
Black women have had great difficulty “catching” wealthy men to
marry, sharing their marital assets, and passing on marital property to their
children.
34 Because the family structure of African Americans has diverged
from social norms, achieving this benchmark of hegemonic femininity has
been virtually impossible. The financial necessity that sent Black women to
work outside the home since emancipation enabled various patterns of
198


--- PAGE 210 ---
VERY NECESSARY
female authority and subordination to emerge within African American
families. In essence, Black women were not financially subordinated within
African American families and communities and, as a result, were deemed
to be less feminine because they had to work. African American women’s
behavior as workers violated the assumptions of hegemonic femininity. For
one, Black women did hard labor as agricultural workers or as domestic
workers. The type of work that they did made it difficult to see them as
fragile, ornamental, or beautiful. Because they were employed outside the
home and brought home their own independent income, they seemingly
usurped Black male authority within Black families. Their incomes were
not supplemental—their income was essential to family survival. Black
women also became mothers without benefit of marriage, and they main-
tained families on their own when men left.
35 
Finally, race itself plays an important part as a benchmark in con-
structing hegemonic femininity. Black women, by definition, cannot
achieve the idealized feminine ideal because the fact of Blackness excludes
them. Dominant gender ideology provides a social script for Black women
whereby everyone else needs Black women to be on the bottom for every-
thing else to make sense. Just as hegemonic White masculinity occupies the
most desired social script, an equally hegemonic Black femininity organ-
ized via images of bitches, bad mothers, mammies, and Black ladies coa-
lesce to mark the least desirable form of femininity. 
REDEFINING BLACK GENDER IDEOLOGY—
UNCOUPLING STRENGTH FROM DOMINANCE 
Whether hegemonic masculinity or femininity, or the Black gender ideol-
ogy that comprises their opposite, most African Americans try to craft
meaningful lives within the confines of existing gender norms. Yet because
they lack realistic opportunities to be seen as “real” men and women, the
pressures Black people face to see themselves through the lens of mass
media’s Black sexual stereotypes affects every aspect of everyday life.
Domestic violence, the decline of marriage, the spread of HIV/AIDS,
substance abuse, adolescent pregnancy, and similar social issues all reflect,
in large part, the damage done by prevailing Black sexual politics. Social
issues such as these cannot be solved by government action alone. Each
requires alternative definitions of Black masculinity and Black femininity
199


--- PAGE 211 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
that might spark different self-definitions, interpersonal relationships, and
social practices within African American community politics.
Despite this need, for ordinary African Americans, coping with hege-
monic gender ideology can be so demanding that generating alternatives can
seem virtually impossible. But the importance of this task cannot be under-
estimated because African American survival may depend on it. One impor-
tant task lies in rejecting dominant gender ideology, in particular, its use of
the thesis of “weak men, strong women” as a source of Black social control.
Because hegemonic masculinity equates strength with dominance, an
antiracist politics must challenge this connection. Within this project, the
fundamental premise of any progressive Black gender ideology is that it cannot
be based on someone else’s subordination. This means that definitions of Black
masculinity that rely on the subordination of Black women, poor people,
children, LGBT people, or anyone else become invalid. Definitions of Black
femininity that do not challenge relations of sexism, economic exploitation,
age, heterosexism, and other markers of social inequality also become sus-
pect. Rather than trying to be strong within existing gender ideology, the
task lies in rejecting a gender ideology that measures masculinity and femi-
ninity using gendered definitions of strength. 
In this endeavor to craft a more progressive Black gender ideology,
African American men and women face similar yet distinctive challenges.
The task for African American men lies in developing new definitions of
masculinity that uncouple strength from its close ties to male dominance.
Good Black men need not rule their families with an iron hand, assault one
another, pursue endless booty calls, and always seem to be “in control” in
order to avoid the sigma of weakness. The task for African American
women lies in redefining strength in ways that simultaneously enable Black
women to reclaim historical sources of female power, yet reject the
exploitation that has often accompanied that power. Good Black women
need not be stoic mules whose primary release from work and responsibil-
ity comes once a week on Sunday morning. New definitions of strength
would enable Black men and women alike to be seen as needing and wor-
thy of one another’s help and support without being stigmatized as either
overly weak or unnaturally strong. 
Currently, the thesis of “weak men, strong women” operates to the
detriment of African Americans in three primary areas, namely, dominance
in the political economy whereby wealthy White men dominate everything
200


--- PAGE 212 ---
VERY NECESSARY
on a global scale; dominance in the sexual system whereby White hetero-
sexual men set sexual norms and judge everyone else using these standards;
and physical dominance associated with athletic prowess, aggressiveness,
and violence. Redefining a Black gender ideology requires understanding
how dominance operates in each of these three areas and uncoupling
strength from its close association with dominance. Moreover, while the
need to redefine Black gender ideology affects men and women alike,
because masculinity is so intertwined with questions of dominance, Black
masculinity becomes an especially important site of change. 
Dominance in the Political Economy
Redefining Black gender ideology requires uncoupling the definition of
strength from its current association with male dominance of jobs, wealth,
and political power. Definitions of strength need to be much broader than
the narrow equation of strength with financial well-being, especially,
financial well-being gained through profiteering and inherited family
wealth. Because neither Black men nor women control much in the global
capitalist political economy, any “strength” in this area that either has is
more illusory than real. With the exception of a handful of wealthy African
Americans, the majority of people of African descent, regardless of gen-
der, have been harmed by the corporate irresponsibility of globalization.
Most are disproportionately poor and powerless. Given this context, it
makes little sense for African American men to blame African American
women for being too “strong” (holding down jobs and making money) and
for women to blame men for being too “weak” (having difficulty finding
jobs). The real problem and its solutions lie elsewhere.
The new racism constitutes a continuation of past-in-present forms of
racial oppression, yet contemporary African Americans seem to have
greater difficulty seeing how the fallacy of the “weak men, strong women”
thesis compromises Black economic development strategies. For example,
under conditions of Jim Crow segregation, Black men’s chronic unem-
ployment and Black women’s ability to get more steady but less-well-
compensated jobs were seen as one outcomeof racial oppression. Black men
were not routinely blamed for being less masculine or “weak” if their jobs
paid them less than a family wage or if they were excluded altogether from
the good jobs that did. If Black women found work in domestic service
201


--- PAGE 213 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
and/or ended up heading families on their own, they were not blamed for
their self-reliance and resourcefulness and labeled as too “strong.” Their
efforts to provide for their families and children were valued. Clearly, indi-
vidualAfrican American men and women were lazy or bossy, but collec-
tively, it was clear that race and gender discrimination were the root causes
of African American economic and political disadvantage.
36 Black men and
women did not adhere to traditional gender roles because they could not.
Structural factors associated with prior forms of racism, such as discrimi-
nation in employment, housing, education, and citizenship rights helped
explain the outcome. 
Not much has changed under the new racism. Job flight, mechaniza-
tion, poor schools, and lingering job discrimination all mean that Black
men and Black women still cannot achieve the norms of hegemonic mas-
culinity (strong men who support their families) and femininity (depend-
ent women who rely on male income). But, because the new racism is
organized differently than in the past, many African Americans cannot see
the structural causes of African American disadvantage that foster dis-
parate economic effects for men and women. For example, during the
post–civil rights era, poor and working-class African American men expe-
rienced growing rates of permanent unemployment and underemploy-
ment that made it even more difficult to bring home a “family wage.”
Many African American men work in the informal labor market, primarily
the global drug industry, as an alternative to employment in the formal
labor market. Many have prison records as convicted felons, a stigma that
disqualifies Black men from the franchise and thus precludes many men
from invoking their voting rights as citizens to change labor laws and crim-
inal justice procedures.
37 The convergence of these factors renders African
American men less able to provide financial support for their wives and
children. As a result, Black men can be viewed as irresponsible “boys” who
do not fulfill their obligations as men whereas White men are “real” men
because they do.
These same social conditions pressure poor and working-class African
American women to take up the slack by finding work in low-paying, often
dead-end service sector jobs and/or by demanding that the state provide
them with the same benefits afforded to White women. For women who
cannot make a living wage, social welfare policies have been as intrusive in
their lives as have those of the criminal justice system in the lives of Black
202


--- PAGE 214 ---
VERY NECESSARY
men. Moreover, Black women who take up the slack can be perceived as
masculinized because their financial independence (albeit in poverty) is
seen as usurping a masculine prerogative. Finding themselves as single
parents, often at a young age, they cannot become the submissive partners
trumpeted within dominant gender ideology. Instead, they become labeled
as “bitches,” “bad mothers,” “matriarchs,” and “welfare mothers,” terms
that blame them for taking responsibility. Such women are also vulnerable
to economic exploitation by Black male hustlers. Because they do not have
a man in the house and are women alone, some men expect them to pay for
male company. The circle is complete—bad mothers produce irresponsible
boys; adult men behaving as if they were irresponsible boys make poor
romantic partners and absent fathers; and this dysfunctional Black family
yields unruly, undisciplined Black children. 
The fallacy of the “weak men, strong women” thesis is that it counsels
Black men and women to embrace unrealistic strategies for dealing with
the economic exploitation and political disempowerment of dominance.
Confronted with a barrage of opinion that counsels men to look for work,
it becomes difficult to see how elusive good jobs are in the postindustrial
economy. This idea of African American men as inherently lazy and
unwilling to work is so deeply ingrained within American culture that, as
recently as 1997, a major sociology journal published an article titled “ Are
Young Black Men Really Less Willing to Work?”
38 The arguments that the
author advances in the article make sense only in the context of a public
that assumes Black male malingering to be a plausible thesis to investigate.
On the one hand, the obvious answer of “no, they are not less willing to
work” fits within the pseudo-liberal framework of American sociology.
The obverse idea, namely, that young Black men are so culturally damaged
that they don’t want to work would have been unacceptable. However, at
the same time, the author clearly identifies the White public as the refer-
ence group who would believe such ideas in the first place: “according to
survey data, a growing number of Whites believe that discrimination is no
longer a salient issue and that the persistence of racial inequality is due
rather to Blacks’ disposition,” he observes.
39 Only in the United States
could a paper whose thesis is “Black men aren’t lazy” get published, pri-
marily because it challenges dominant ideas that they are.
Black men’s inability to find well-paying work that would allow them
to support their families encourages far too many to leave. They may be
203


--- PAGE 215 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
saving their pride, but the children and female partners that they leave
behind sorely miss them. Historically,  many Black men worked at jobs that
were beneath them—the college-educated Pullman porters come to
mind—because they valued their partners and their families more than
their pride. Why should today be any different? Definitions of masculinity
that would enable Black men to see their worth in more than a steady pay-
check would create space for new ideas for Black male strength. “Weak”
Black men are those who desert their families, as opposed to the “strong”
ones who stay, even if they cannot earn a living wage. Economic contribu-
tions to a family’s well-being take many forms that go beyond bringing
home a big paycheck. 
Ironically, Black gender ideology that explains father absence through
this victim-blaming model misses how Black men are doubly victimized
when they become disconnected from family networks, all in the name of
saving male pride. Despite the fact that families headed by Black women
are not inherently inferior, the absence of men in the lives of their children
constitutes a real loss for African American families. Male children may
express this loss more forcefully (at least in the media), but its effects are
profound for girls as well. The meaning of father absence for Black boys
circulates throughout Black popular culture. From the television show
Good Timesthrough works as disparate as the choreography of Bill T . Jones
and the music of Tupac Shakur, African American men comment on the
pain that many feel at their inability to be fathers to their own children
(beyond biological coupling) and not having had fathers of their own when
they were young. Only by acknowledging this loss and by beginning to take
responsibility for each and every child that they father, can they start the
healing process.
40 Those who don’t remain trapped in a derogated space of
irresponsible, deadbeat dads.
The “weak men, strong women” thesis can also have equally insidious
financial implications for African American women. High rates of Black
poverty that leave one-third of African Americans impoverished and close
to one-half of Black children officially classified as poor are unlikely to
decline if Black women decided not to work. Becoming submissive and
more feminine will not put food on the table. For African American
women, the problem with strength coupled with dominance lies less in
their needing to work than in how their “unnatural strength” has been
derogated within existing gender ideology. Black women who carry a heavy
204


--- PAGE 216 ---
VERY NECESSARY
load can end up being exploited by those who are closest to them. The
depiction of Black women as tireless workers, both in the paid labor mar-
ket and the unpaid reproductive labor of the family, reinforces views of
African American women as the Strong Black Woman (SBW). As one of
the few positive images used to describe Black femininity, the valorization
of women’s strength in African American communities makes it difficult
for Black women to reject exploitative work and simply walk away from
responsibility, especially from their families. 
This valorization of strength coupled with the economic exploitation
of Black women’s paid labor and unpaid labor for their families sets up a
curious set of relationships. Black men may desire those Black women who
make them feel more “manly,” that is, whose appearance and demeanor
more closely approximate that of pretty White women. Yet these same men
were often raised by strong Black mothers and also may depend on their
girlfriends and mothers of their children for financial support. They need
these strong Black women to ensure their physical survival, yet neither
value them nor see them as feminine.
41 This establishes a dangerous situa-
tion that encourages Black men to become abusive toward the women who
many see as controlling their lives. As hustlers who live off of women’s
money, these irresponsible boys develop hyper-masculine identities and
use a Black male promiscuity to economically exploit Black and White
women. 
An alternative gender ideology that took seriously African American
men’s and women’s placement in the global capitalist political economy
would challenge these relations. If anything, heterosexual African
American men and women might consider pooling their resources, no mat-
ter who earned them, in support of relationships and family units. Any
family form that provided economic support for African American chil-
dren, for example, gay and lesbian families, families that incorporated
grandparents, cousins, and “fictive” kin, and heterosexual women or men
who teamed up to purchase property together, would be valued, not
maligned because it failed to measure up to some predetermined gender
norms. 
Economic dependency would be neither glorified for women nor
demonized for men. Such dependency would not be a state of being, per-
manently assigned either to women who feel more feminine when they
have access to a man’s income or men who feel more masculine when
205


--- PAGE 217 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
women take care of them because they control women and their money.
Men and women alike need to know that receiving support is not the same
as being weak, submissive, or failing to support African American children,
families, or communities. Dependency and vulnerability would not be gen-
der specific. Those who could, would lead. Those who needed support
would get it. Talent and need, not gender, would determine political and
economic behavior.
When it comes to survival in the American political economy, all Black
people suffer when an African American man refuses to do “women’s
work” or when an African American woman waits for a man to pay her
bills. Everybody has to pitch in, and any gender ideology that gets in the
way of collective financial success is itself part of the problem. 
Sexual Dominance
A second dimension of redefining Black gender ideology requires uncou-
pling definitions of strength from sexual dominance and sexual exploita-
tion. In a context that denies African American men and women access to
wealth and power, sexuality can become important to both, but for differ-
ent reasons. Promiscuity has been an important idea attributed to people of
African descent. As the prominence of the bitches and gangstas, bad Black
mothers and hustlers within Black popular culture suggests, ideas about
Black sexuality have been repackaged and circulate widely. The very scope
of these images implies that sexuality will serve as an important site of
dominance, both racial dominance of Blacks by Whites, gender dominance
of women by men, and heterosexual dominance of LGBT people by het-
erosexuals. Redefining Black gender ideology requires understanding and
challenging how sexuality, dominance, and exploitation affect men and
women differently.
For men, sexual dominance associated with the phallus becomes an
important indicator of masculinity in a culture that places barriers in other
areas of achievement. James Baldwin was one of the first authors to grap-
ple with the significance of Black men’s sexuality and the penis to
American perceptions of Black masculinity: “I think that I know some-
thing about the American masculinity which most men of my generation
do not know because they have not been menaced by it in the way that I
have been. It is still true, alas, that to be an American Negro male is also to
206


--- PAGE 218 ---
VERY NECESSARY
be a kind of walking phallic symbol: which means that one pays, in one’s
own personality, for the sexual insecurity of others.” 42 The emphasis on
Black men’s bodies, when sexualized, becomes reduced to a focus on the
Black male penis as a distillation of the essence of Black masculinity.
Beliefs that reduce Black men to their penises, especially penises that are
not under the control of White men, created space for the myth of the
Black rapist in postemancipation Jim Crow South, and the myth of Black
men’s need for booty calls within contemporary Black popular culture. 
This theme of reducing Black men to the penis reappears in contem-
porary mass media in high and low art alike. For example, cultural critic
Kobena Mercer claims that the photographs of renowned photographer
Robert Mapplethorpe invoke this deep taproot of Black male sexual
prowess created within Western imaginations.
43 Mapplethorpe’s exhibi-
tions often raised controversy, primarily due to the depiction of gay sado-
masochistic (S/M) rituals and of nude Black male bodies. Mercer notes
that the photographs of gay male S/M rituals invoke an alternative sexu-
ality that consists of doingsomething. In contrast, Black men are “confined
and defined their very beingas sexual and nothing but sexual, hence hyper-
sexual.”
44 Mapplethorpe’s Man in Polyester Suitis especially exemplary in
that the photograph eliminates all identifying features of masculinity
except hands (objects to service Whites) and an exposed Black penis (sex-
uality).
45 In this way, the image of the man in polyester suit (itself a com-
modity used to sell the book of photography) reduces Black men to images
of fragmented, commodified body parts. 
This view of Black masculinity leaves very little room for other
options. Take, for example, the emergence of a Down Low (DL) sexual
subculture among Black gay and bisexual men in the last decade that fails
to challenge the assumptions of hyper-heterosexuality. Black men living on
the Down Low live ostensibly heterosexual lives, complete with wives and
girlfriends, and also engage in secret relationships with men. As journalist
Benoit Denizet-Lewis points out, “today, while there are black men who
are openly gay, it seems that the majority of those having sex with men still
lead secret lives, products of a black culture that deems masculinity and
fatherhood as a black man’s primary responsibility—and homosexuality as
a white man’s perversion.”
46 For men on the DL, masculinity that is so
intertwined with hyper-heterosexuality renders an openly gay identity
impossible.
207


--- PAGE 219 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Those African American men who rely upon ideas of Black sexual
prowess to define Black masculinity, especially Black heterosexual prowess,
typically need women in order to actualize this type of masculinity.
Whether having multiple sexual partners, dominating one partner within a
domestic relationship, fathering children by many women as a mark of
virility, or living a Black gay sexuality on the Down Low, men who under-
stand their masculinity as residing in their penises require repeated reas-
surance that they are men. For African American men, uncoupling ideas of
male strength as expressed through sexuality and virility from this system
of sexual dominance is one important part of redefining Black gender ide-
ology. Without constant struggle against these connections, Black men will
continue, to paraphrase James Baldwin, to pay, through their own person-
alities, for “the sexual insecurity of others.”
The use of ideas about Black women’s promiscuity in structuring ideas
about Black women’s strength takes a different yet related path. On one
level, the racialized battle for sexual dominance of women among men
affects Black women. Historically, one mark of African American progress
lay in protecting Black women from the predatory sexual advances of White
men.
47 But what does protection mean in the context of the new racism?
Many Black women may be shielded from the sexual harassment and
assaults of White men, but they are now more vulnerable to those of Black
men because hypersegregated Black ghettos are immense and Black com-
munity institutions have eroded within them.
48 In the context of the vio-
lence visited upon Black men as a collectivity, many Black women choose to
support Black men at all costs. Whether granting sexual favors, ignoring
Black male abuse, or caring for children with little help from their “baby’s
daddy,” Black women have learned to become the Strong Black Woman
(SBW). Being a SBW often means enduring abuse, namely, physical, emo-
tional, and sexual harassment. Moreover, for many Black women, the insti-
tution of motherhood has become a primary site where the SBW
representation holds sway. Many arrive home tired from working two jobs,
only to find children and grandchildren asking for money, expecting free
childcare, or looking for a place to stay. Ironically, despite mass media’s neg-
ative assessment of Black motherhood for poor and working-class Black
women, motherhood remains valued by the majority of Black women.
Through motherhood, they exercise strength, demonstrate power, and, as a
result, often suffer the consequences associated with this commitment.
208


--- PAGE 220 ---
VERY NECESSARY
A certain degree of freedom is afforded those African American
women who reject traditional gender ideology of the ornamental, passive
female whose sexuality should be placed in service to the men of her racial,
ethnic, and/or social class group. Black hip-hop feminists’ challenges to
the Strong Black Woman (SBW) persona reject traditional Black gender
ideology and encourage us to think differently about Black women’s bod-
ies as an important step in reclaiming Black women’s sexuality as a site of
agency and pleasure. Lisa Jones suggests that Black women’s sense of fash-
ion and style speaks to the freedom that can accrue to those women who
realize that they are no longer confined by categories: “For black women
without access to the room of one’s own to make leisure-time art, our bod-
ies, our style becomes the canvas of our cultural yearning. It has been, in
recent history, not just a place or self-mutilation, but of healing.”
49 Yet
waiting on the other side of this freedom is a cast of sexual stereotypes that
derogate free, powerful, strong women. Despite compelling reasons to do
so, sometimes what is comfortable makes more sense than jumping out into
the unknown. It may be even more difficult for Black women to relinquish
the few hard-earned benefits that do exist simply because they are so few.
The willingness of African American women to continue to claim the sex-
ual domination and economic exploitation that can accompany the Strong
Black Woman identity reflects this dilemma. 
An alternative gender ideology that uncoupled strength from notions
of sexual dominance and exploitation would challenge these relations. In
essence, challenging dominant Black gender ideology requires developing
new understandings of Black sexuality that rejects perceptions of Black
promiscuity (both hyper-heterosexual and homosexual). One promising
path in uncoupling strength from sexual dominance may lie in looking
beyond the narrow confines of the sexually repressive culture of the
United States and investigating non-Western forms of sexual expression.
Unfortunately, one legacy of the colonial experience itself is that we know
far less about sexualities within precolonial African societies and within
indigenous societies of other non-Western peoples than we do about
British, French, Portuguese, Spanish, and Dutch perceptions of such sex-
ualities. But what can be gleaned is suggestive. Despite the common expe-
riences of racial oppression visited upon peoples of African descent in
Latin America, the Caribbean, the United States, and continental Africa,
African and African-influenced societies often retained elements of
209


--- PAGE 221 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
African cultures. Despite considerable heterogeneity, when it comes to
African understandings of the body generally and sexuality in particular,
several commonalities exist: the open expression of strong feelings and
emotions; being more at ease with sensuality and eroticism as aspects of
use of the body; openness about use of body both through appearance and
movement; a comfort level with sexual expression both within and outside
of marriage; and a commitment to spirituality that mandates its expression
in everyday life.
50 The celebration of fertility has also influenced the sexual
practices of African-influenced societies, fostering a strong emphasis on
heterosexual genital sexuality that is seen as being critical to the survival of
society. At the same time, some indigenous societies have also been toler-
ant of what is now seen as homosexuality. Drawing upon ideas such as
these as part of the process of redefining sexuality may forge a path for
redefining Black gender ideology in the American context.
Physical Dominance
Redefining Black gender ideology requires uncoupling definitions of
strength from its current association with physical dominance, namely, mus-
cular might, aggressiveness, and violence. Physical dominance and aggres-
siveness have become especially intertwined with contemporary ideas about
Black masculinity. The use of physical force, aggression, and violence as
tools of subordination creates problems within African American communi-
ties in three areas. Specifically, for African American men whose power
within the broader political economy remains compromised, violence against
other men (often under the guise of homophobic violence), violence against
women, and violence against younger Black people, especially children
(often under the guise of being authoritarian father figures) constitutes a
triad of male aggression and violence that is damaging to everyone. These
three areas are interconnected, and they also intersect with dominance in the
political economy and with sexual dominance. Black women certainly can be
aggressive and violent, especially toward Black children. But the source of
physical dominance lies in ideas about Black masculinity that in turn is situ-
ated within a larger context of hegemonic masculinity. Rethinking Black
gender ideology requires changing these gender-specific practices.
It is important to recognize that many of the tensions that surround
Black masculinity, in this case, the aggressiveness and violence that has
210


--- PAGE 222 ---
VERY NECESSARY
come to characterize Black men’s relations with one another, reflect the
greatly changed social environment in the 1980s and 1990s. The growth of
a prison industrial complex that incarcerated large numbers of young
African American men had an important influence on American and
African American societies.
51 Not only is American society more violent
and infused with a masculine ethos of aggressiveness and confrontation,
Black men are more aggressive within this context. In particular, the arrest
and imprisonment of Black street gangs, many of whose members were
involved in the drug industry, fostered more pronounced and organized
gang structures within prisons. Prison gangs inevitably became connected
to their street gang counterparts (in fact, many join gangs while in prison,
primarily for protection). As the line between street gangs and prison
gangs blurred, so did the distinctions among prison culture, street culture,
and some aspects of Black youth culture.
52 Multiple forms of incarceration
(the racially segregated neighborhoods that constitute the prison of racism
and the actual incarceration of young Black men themselves), poverty, sex-
ual dominance, and maintaining heterosexuality at all costs become intri-
cately intertwined. The valorization of thug life within Black youth
culture, the growing misogyny within heterosexual love relationships, and
the increased visibility (and some would say the increased virulence) of
homophobic violence targeted to gay, lesbian, and bisexual African
Americans all seem to be related to the incarceration of African American
men and the ceaseless need to prove one’s “manhood.” This nexus of
street, prison, and youth cultures generates a tremendous amount of pres-
sure on Black men, especially young, working-class men, to avoid being
classified as “weak.”
Given this social context, it will be extremely difficult to convince
Black men that they should renounce aggression and violence. In a preda-
tory climate created by prison, street, and some elements of Black youth
culture, being perceived as “weak” could get you killed. A more pragmatic
approach might be to develop some ground rules concerning the appro-
priate use of that force. An important first step may lie in legitimating cer-
tain forms of Black male aggression and violence, for example, in
self-defense when faced by a bona fide (as opposed to imagined) enemy or
by protecting others who cannot defend themselves. Young Black women
who are being harassed on the street or stalked by their boyfriends might
appreciate Black male intervention to stop that violence. In the same vein,
211


--- PAGE 223 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
other forms of Black male aggression and violence might receive universal
censure. Violence against women remains a major problem within African
American communities, yet few Black organizations speak out against it.
Engaging in unprovoked attacks on gay men or homosexual couples is no
show of strength that makes attacker more “manly.” It may be difficult to
uncouple ideas about Black male strength from notions of aggression and
violence, but placing Black male strength in service to community might
catalyze much-needed changes. 
Halle Berry and Denzel Washington may have won Oscars for their per-
formances, but neither of the parts that they played so well unsettles pre-
vailing Black gender ideology let alone charts new paths. Currently, we have
no models that have all of the answers, only parts of a puzzle that is yet to
be solved. African American director John Singleton’s 2001 film Baby Boy
provides one important piece by beginning to unpack the complexities of
Black masculinity and Black femininity. Singleton’s story examines why
the twenty-year-old protagonist Jody (played by Tyrese Gibson) fears leav-
ing home. Jody is still living in his thirty-six-year-old mother’s house, and
his ability to build an independent life for himself is profoundly con-
stricted by a perception of Black manhood that keeps him financially
dependent on his mother (her baby boy) yet claiming that, as the man of
the house, he will defend her from her new live-in boyfriend. Jody exer-
cises his “manhood” primarily through sexual dominance of Black women,
primarily his relationships with the mothers of his two children. Jody is a
casualty of masculine violence—his older brother was murdered and this
tragedy shaped all aspects of Jody’s life, including his difficulties in grow-
ing up and becoming a man. Singleton does a good job of exploring the
problem—we understand how prevailing views of Black masculinity and
femininity affect all of the characters in the film. However, Singleton’s
solution of having Jody leave boyhood behind by marrying one of his
baby’s mammas is far too simple. In the end, we see this new family happy,
playing in the park, and awaiting the arrival of another baby. In real life, no
neat formulas exist that provide the instant happy ending of Baby Boy.
Rather, to meet the very necessary challenge of redefining Black gender
ideology, we may have to find our own way.
212


--- PAGE 224 ---
PART III
TOWARD A PROGRESSIVE
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS


--- PAGE 225 ---



--- PAGE 226 ---
SEVEN
ASSUME THE POSITION
The Changing Contours 
of Sexual Violence
At the center of the table sat a single microphone, a
glass of water, and a name card: “Professor Anita Hill.”
I sat down at the lone chair at the table. . . . In front of
me, facing me and the bank of journalists, was the
Senate Judiciary Committee—fourteen white men
dressed in dark gray suits. I questioned my decision to
wear bright blue linen, though it hadn’t really been a
decision; that suit was the only appropriate and clean
suit in my closet when I hastily packed for Washington
two days before. In any case, it offered a fitting
contrast.
1
By now, the outcome of Anita Hill’s 1991 testimony at the con-
firmation hearings of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas
is well known. In a calm, almost flat manner and before a
packed room that contained twelve family members, including
both of her parents, Hill recounted how Thomas had sexually
harassed her when he headed the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission ten years earlier. Although she
passed a lie detector test, her testimony did not affect the
upshot of the hearings. The Senate Judiciary Committee sim-
ply did not believe her. Hill was no match for the fourteen
White men in dark gray suits, many of whom had made up their
minds before hearing her testimony. Thomas’s opportunistic
claim that the senators were engaged in a “high-tech lynching”


--- PAGE 227 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
sealed the outcome. Because lynching had been so associated with the
atrocities visited upon Black men, it became virtually impossible for the
senators to refute Thomas’s self-presentation without being branded as
racists. The combination of male dominance and the need to avoid any hint
of racism made the choice simple. Believing Thomas challenged racism.
Doubting Thomas supported it. Thomas won. Hill lost.
2
But was it really this simple? Certainly not for African Americans. For
Black women and men, the Thomas confirmation hearings catalyzed two
thorny questions. Why did so many African Americans join the “fourteen
white men dressed in dark gray suits” and reject Hill’s allegations of sex-
ual harassment? Even more puzzling, why did so many African Americans
who believed Anita Hill criticize her for coming forward and testifying?
Critical race theorist Kimberlé Crenshaw offers one reason why the hear-
ings proved to be so difficult: “In feminist contexts, sexuality represents a
central site of the oppression of women; rape and the rape trial are its
dominant narrative trope. In antiracist discourses, sexuality is also a cen-
tral site upon which the repression of Blacks has been premised; the lynch-
ing narrative is embodied as its trope. (Neither narrative tends to
acknowledge the legitimacy of the other).”
3
Crenshaw joins a prestigious group of African American women and
men who, from Ida B. Wells-Barnett through Angela Davis, have examined
how discourses of rape and lynching have historically influenced under-
standings of race, gender, and sexuality within American society.
4 In
American society, sexual violence has served as an important mechanism
for controlling African Americans, women, poor people, and gays and les-
bians, among others. In the post-emancipation South, for example, insti-
tutionalized lynching and institutionalized rape worked together to uphold
racial oppression. Together, lynching and rape served as gender-specific
mechanisms of sexual violence whereby men were victimized by lynching
and women by rape. Lynching and rape also reflected the type of binary
thinking associated with racial and gender segregation mandating that
eitherrace orgender was primary, but not both. Within this logic of segre-
gation, race and gender constituted separate rather than intersecting forms
of oppression that could not be equally important. One was primary
whereas the other was secondary. As targets of lynching as ritualized mur-
der, Black men carried the more important burden of race. In contrast, as
rape victims, Black women carried the less important burden of gender. 
216


--- PAGE 228 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
African American politics have been profoundly influenced by a Black
gender ideology that ranks race and gender in this fashion. Lynching and
rape have not been given equal weight and, as a result, social issues seen as
affecting Black men, in this case lynching, have taken precedence over
those that seemingly affect only Black women (rape). Within this logic,
lynchings, police brutality, and similar expressions of state-sanctioned vio-
lence visited upon African American men operate as consensus issues
within African American politics.
5 Lynching was not a random act; instead,
it occurred in public, was sanctioned by government officials, and often
served as a unifying event for entire communities. In this sense, lynching
can be defined as ritualized murder that took a particular form in the poste-
mancipation South. In that context, through its highly public nature as
spectacle, lynching was emblematic of a form of institutionalized, ritual-
ized murder that was visited upon Black men in particular. African
American antiracist politics responded vigorously to the public spectacle of
lynching by protesting against it as damage done to Black men as repre-
sentatives of the “race.”
6 Because African American men were the main
targets of this highly public expression of ritualized murder, the lynching
of Black men came to symbolize the most egregious expressions of racism. 
In contrast, the sexual violence visited upon African American women
has historically carried no public name, garnered no significant public cen-
sure, and has been seen as a crosscutting gender issue that diverts Black
politics from its real job of fighting racism. Black women were raped, yet
their pain and suffering remained largely invisible. Whereas lynching
(racism) was public spectacle, rape (sexism) signaled privatehumiliation.
Black male leaders were not unaware of the significance of institutional-
ized rape. Rather, their political solution of installing a Black male patri-
archy in which Black men would protect “their” women from sexual
assault inadvertently supported ideas about women’s bodies and sexuality
as men’s property. Stated differently, Black women’s suffering under
racism would be eliminated by encouraging versions of Black masculinity
whereby Black men had the same powers that White men had long
enjoyed. 
By 1991, the Thomas confirmation hearings made it painfully obvious
that these antiracist strategies of the past were no match for the new
racism. Ranking either lynching or rape as more important than the other
offered a painful lesson about the dangers of choosing race over gender or
217


--- PAGE 229 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
vice versa as the template for African American politics. What is needed is
a progressive Black sexual politics that recognizes not only how important
both lynching and rape were in maintaining historical patterns of racial
segregation but that also questions how these practices may be changed
and used to maintain the contemporary color-blind racism. Rather than
conceptualizing lynching and rape as either race or gender-specific mech-
anisms of social control, another approach views institutionalized rape and
lynching as different expressions of the same type of social control.
Together, both constitute dominance strategies that uphold the new
racism. Both involve the threat or actual physical violence done to the
body’s exterior, for example, beating, torture, and/or murder. Both can
involve the threat of or actual infliction of violence upon the body’s inte-
rior, for example, oral, anal, or vaginal penetration against the victim’s will.
Both strip victims of agency and control over their own bodies, thus aim-
ing for psychological control via fear and humiliation. Moreover, within
the context of the post–civil rights era’s desegregation, these seemingly
gender-specific forms of social control converge. Stated differently, just as
the post–civil rights era has seen a crossing and blurring of boundaries of
all sorts, lynching and rape as forms of state-sanctioned violence are not
now and never were as gender-specific as once thought. 
REVISITING THE FOUNDATION: 
LYNCHING AND RAPE AS TOOLS OF SOCIAL CONTROL
Lynching and rape both served the economic needs of Southern agriculture
under racial segregation. In the American South during the years 1882 to
1930 the lynching of Black people for “crimes” against Whites was a com-
mon spectacle—mob violence was neither random in time nor geography.
Like many other violent crimes, lynchings were more frequent during the
summer months than in cooler seasons, a reflection of the changing labor
demands of agricultural production cycles.
7 One function of lynchings may
well have been to rid White communities of Black people who allegedly vio-
lated the moral order. But another function was to maintain control over the
African American population, especially during times when White
landowners needed Black labor to work fields of cotton and tobacco.
Lynching also had political dimensions. This tool of gendered, racial
violence was developed to curtail the citizenship rights of African
218


--- PAGE 230 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
American men after emancipation. Because Black women could not vote,
Black men become targets for political repression. Explaining the power of
lynching as a spectacle of violence necessary to maintain racial boundaries
and to discipline populations, literary critic Trudier Harris describes the
significance of violence to maintaining fixed racial group identities:
When one Black individual dared to violate the restrictions, he or she
was used as an example to reiterate to the entire race that the group
would continually be held responsible for the actions of the individual.
Thus an accusation of rape could lead not only to the accused Black
man being lynched and burned, but to the burning of Black homes and
the whipping or lynching of other Black individuals as well.
8
This is why lynchings were not private affairs, but were public events,
often announced well in advance in newspapers: “To be effective in social
control, lynchings had to be visible, with the killing being a public specta-
cle or at least minimally having the corpse on display for all to witness.
Whereas a murder—even a racially motivated one—might be hidden from
public scrutiny, lynchings were not.”
9
The ritualized murders of lynching not only worked to terrorize the
African American population overall but they also helped to install a hege-
monic White masculinity over a subordinated Black masculinity. Lynching
symbolized the type of violence visited upon African American men that
was grounded in a constellation of daily micro-assaults on their manhood
that achieved extreme form through the actual castration of many Black
male lynch victims. Although Black women were also lynched, Black men
were lynched in far greater numbers. Thus, lynching invokes ideas of
Black male emasculation, a theme that persists within the contemporary
Black gender ideology thesis of Black men as being “weak.”
10 The myth of
Black men as rapists also emerged under racial segregation in the South.
Designed to contain this newfound threat to White property and demo-
cratic institutions, the sexual stereotype of the newly emancipated, violent
rapist was constructed on the back of the Black buck. No longer safely
controlled under slavery, Black men could now go “buck wild.”
Wide-scale lynching could only emerge after emancipation because
murdering slaves was unprofitable for their owners. In contrast, the insti-
tutionalized rape of African American women began under slavery and
219


--- PAGE 231 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
also accompanied the wide-scale lynching of Black men at the turn of the
twentieth century. Emancipation constituted a continuation of actual prac-
tices of rape as well as the shame and humiliation visited upon rape victims
that is designed to keep them subordinate. Black domestic workers
reported being harassed, molested, and raped by their employers.
11
Agricultural workers, especially those women who did not work on family
farms, were also vulnerable. In the South, these practices persisted well
into the twentieth century. For example, in the 1990s, journalist Leon Dash
interviewed Washington, D.C. resident Rosa Lee. It took many conversa-
tions before Lee could share family secrets of stories of sexual abuse that
had occurred in rural North Carolina. Because the experiences were so
painful, she herself had learned about them only in bits and pieces from
stories told to her by her grandmother and aunt. Rosa Lee came to under-
stand the harsh lives endured by her mother Rosetta and her grandmother
Lugenia at the bottom of the Southern Black class structure. Describing
how White men would come and look over young Black girls, Rosa Lee
recounted her family’s stories:
“You could tell when they wanted something. They all would come out
there. Come out there in the field while everybody was working. And
they’re looking at the young girls. Her mouth. Teeth. Arms. You know,
like they’re looking at a horse. Feeling her breasts and everything. The
white men would get to whispering.”
“ And the mothers let them men do that?” Rosa Lee asked her
grandmother.
“What the hell do you think they could do?” Lugenia answered.
“Couldn’t do nothing!”
12 
The overseers apparently preferred light-skinned Black girls, often the
children of previous rapes, but dark-skinned girls did not escape White
male scrutiny. In exchange for the girls, mothers received extra food or a
lighter load. The costs were high for the girls themselves. Because Rosetta
developed early, her mother tried to hide her when the men came. But after
a while, it was hopeless. Rosetta did not escape the rapes:
“Your mama was put to auction so many times,” Lugenia told Rosa
Lee. “They just kept wanting your mother.” The overseers would
220


--- PAGE 232 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
assign the girls they wanted sexually to work in isolated parts of the
farm, away from their families. The girls would try to get out of the
work detail. “It never worked,” Lugenia said. “Those men always got
them.”
13
Lugenia continued her tale by sharing how two White overseers had raped
her when she was fourteen, and how two of her daughters, including
Rosetta, had suffered the same fate. Only one daughter was spared,
“because she was so fat,” explained Lugenia. As for the children who were
conceived, they were left with their mothers. Once a girl was pregnant, she
was generally never bothered again. As Lugenia recalled: “They only
wanted virgins. . . . They felt they’d catch diseases if they fooled with any
girl that wasn’t a virgin.”
14
These social practices of institutionalized lynching and institutional-
ized rape did not go uncontested. Ida B. Wells-Barnett’s antilynching work
clearly rejected both the myth of the Black male rapist as well as the thesis
of Black women’s inherent immorality and advanced her own highly con-
troversial interpretation.
15 Not only did Wells-Barnett spark a huge con-
troversy when she dared to claim that many of the sexual liaisons between
White women and Black men were in fact consensual, she indicted White
men as the actual perpetrators of crimes of sexual violence bothagainst
African American men (lynching) andagainst African American women
(rape). Consider how her comments in Southern Horrors concerning the
contradictions of laws forbidding interracial marriage place blame on
White male behavior and power: “the miscegenation laws of the South
only operate against the legitimate union of the races: they leave the white
man free to seduce all the colored girls he can, but is death to the colored
man who yields to the force and advances of a similar attraction in white
women. White men lynch the offending Afro-American, not because he is
a despoiler of virtue, but because he succumbs to the smiles of white
women.”
16 In this analysis, Wells-Barnett reveals how ideas about gender
difference—the seeming passivity of women and the aggressiveness of
men—are in fact deeply racialized constructs. Gender had a racial face,
whereby African American women, African American men, White women,
and White men occupied distinct race/gender categories within an overar-
ching social structure that proscribed their prescribed place. Interracial
sexual liaisons violated racial and gender segregation.
221


--- PAGE 233 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Despite Wells-Barnett’s pioneering work in analyzing sexual violence
through an intersectional framework of race, gender, class, and sexuality,
African American leaders elevated race over gender.
17 Given the large num-
bers of lynchings from the 1890s to the 1930s, and in the context of racial
segregation that stripped all African Americans of citizenship rights, this
emphasis on antilynching made sense. Often accused of the crime of rap-
ing White women, African American men were lynched, and, in more
gruesome cases, castrated. Such violence was so horrific that, catalyzed by
Ida B. Wells-Barnett’s tireless antilynching crusade, and later taken up by
the NAACP and other major civil rights organizations, antilynching
became an important plank in the Black civil rights agenda. 
In large part due to this advocacy, lynchings have dwindled to a few,
isolated albeit horrific events today. This does not mean that the use of
lynching as a symbol of American racism has abated. Rather, Black protest
still responds quickly and passionately to contemporary incidents of
lynching and/or to events that can be recast through this historic frame-
work. For example, the 1955 murder of fourteen-year-old Emmett Till in
Mississippi was described in the press as a lynching and served as an
important catalyst for the modern civil rights movement. The 1989 mur-
der of sixteen-year-old Yusef Hawkins in the Bensonhurst section of New
York City also was described as a lynching. When Hawkins and three
friends came to their neighborhood to look at a used car, about thirty White
youths carrying bats and sticks (one with a gun) immediately approached
them. Furious that the ex-girlfriend of one of the group members had
invited Black people to her eighteenth birthday party, the White kids
thought that Hawkins and his friends were there for the party and attacked
them, shooting Hawkins dead. In 1998, three White men in Jasper, Texas,
chained a Black man named James Byrd, Jr. to a pick-up truck and dragged
him to his death, an event likened to a modern-day lynching. Events such
as these are publicly censured as unacceptable in a modern democracy.
These modern lynchings served as rallying cries for the continuing need
for an antiracist African American politics. 
Unfortunately, this placement of lynching at the core of the African
American civil rights agenda has also minimized the related issue of insti-
tutionalized rape. Even Ida Wells-Barnett, who clearly saw the connections
between Black men’s persecution as victims of lynching and Black
women’s vulnerability to rape, chose to advance a thesis of Black women’s
222


--- PAGE 234 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
rape through the discourse on Black men’s lynching. In the postbellum
period, the rape of free African American women by White men subsisted
as a “dirty secret” within the privatedomestic spheres of Black families
and of Black civil society. Speaking out against their violation ran a dual
risk—it reminded Black men of their inability to protect Black women
from White male assaults and it potentially identified Black men as rapists,
the very group that suffered from lynching. The presence of biracial Black
children was tangible proof of Black male weakness in protecting Black
women and of Black women’s violation within a politics of respectability.
Because rapes have been treated as crimes against women, the culpability
of the rape victim has long been questioned. Her dress, her demeanor,
where the rape occurred, and her resistance all become evidence for
whether a woman was even raped at all. Because Black women as a class
emerged from slavery as collective rape victims, they were encouraged to
keep quiet in order to refute the thesis of their wanton sexuality. In con-
trast to this silencing of Black women as rape victims, there was no shame
in lynching and no reason except fear to keep quiet about it. In a climate of
racial violence, it was clear that victims of lynching were blameless and
murdered through no fault of their own. 
Because the new racism contains the past-in-present elements of prior
periods, African American politics must be vigilant in analyzing how the
past-in-present practices of Black sexual politics also influence contempo-
rary politics. Clarence Thomas certainly used this history to his advantage.
Recognizing the historical importance placed on lynching and the relative
neglect of rape, Thomas successfully pitted lynching and rape against one
another for his gain and to the detriment of African Americans as a group.
Shrewdly recognizing the logic of prevailing Black gender ideology that
routinely elevates the suffering of Black men as more important than that
of Black women, Thomas guessed correctly that Black people would back
him no matter what. If nothing else comes of the Thomas hearings, they
raise the very important question of how sexual violence that was a pow-
erful tool of social control in prior periods may be an equally important
factor in the new racism. 
African Americans need a more progressive Black sexual politics ded-
icated to analyzing how state-sanctioned violence, especially practices such
as lynching (ritualized murder) and rape, operate as forms of social con-
trol. Michel Foucault’s innovative idea that oppression can be conceptual-
223


--- PAGE 235 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
ized as normalized war withinone society as opposed to between societies
provides a powerful new foundation for such an analysis. 18 Mass media
images of a multiethnic, diverse, color-blind America that mask deeply
entrenched social inequalities mean that open warfare on American citi-
zens (the exact case that lynching Black men presented in the past), is fun-
damentally unacceptable. Many Americans were horrified when they saw
the 1992 videotape of Rodney King being beaten by the Los Angeles
police. Fictional attacks on Black men in movies are acceptable, assaults on
real ones, less so. Managing contemporary racism relies less on visible war-
fare between men than on social relations among men and between women
and men that are saturated with relations of war. In this context, rape as a
tool of sexual violence may increase in importance because its association
with women and privacy makes it an effective domestic tool of social con-
trol. The threat of rape as a mechanism of control can be normally and
routinely used against American citizens because the crime is typically hid-
den and its victims are encouraged to remain silent. New configurations of
state-sanctioned violence suggest the workings of a rape culture may affect
not just Black women but also Black men far more than is commonly real-
ized. Given the significance of these tools of social control, what forms of
sexual violence do African American women and men experience under
the new racism? Moreover, how do these forms draw upon the ideas and
practices of lynching and rape?
AFRICAN AMERICAN WOMEN AND SEXUAL VIOLENCE 
Racial segregation and its reliance on lynching and rape as gender-specific
tools of control have given way to an unstable desegregation under the new
racism. In this context, the sexual violence visited upon African American
women certainly continues its historical purpose, but may be organized in
new and unforeseen ways. The terms institutionalized rapeand rape culture
encompass the constellation of sexual assaults on Black womanhood. From
the sexual harassment visited upon Anita Hill and Black women in the
workplace to sexual extortion to acquaintance, marital, and stranger rapes
to how misogynistic beliefs about women create an interpretive framework
that simultaneously creates the conditions in which men rape women and
erase the crime of rape itself to the lack of punishment meted out by the
state to Black women’s rapists, sexual violence is much broader than any
224


--- PAGE 236 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
specific acts. Collectively, these practices comprise a rape culture that
draws energy from the ethos of violence that saturates American society.
African American essayist Asha Bandele describes the persistent sexual
harassment she experienced during her teenaged years as part of growing
up in a rape culture: “although the faces may have changed, and the places
may have also, some things could always be counted on to remain the same:
the pulling, and grabbing, and pinching, and slapping, and all those dirty
words, and all those bad names, the leering, the propositions.”
19 It is impor-
tant to understand how a rape culture affects African American women
because such understanding may help with antirape initiatives. It also
sheds light on Black women’s reactions to sexual violence, and it demon-
strates how this rape culture affects other groups, namely, children, gay
men, and heterosexual men. 
Rape is part of a system of male dominance. Recall that hegemonic
masculinity is predicated upon a pecking order among men that is depend-
ent, in part, on the sexual and physical domination of women. Within pop-
ular vernacular, “screwing” someone links ideas about masculinity,
heterosexuality, and domination. Women, gay men, and other “weak”
members of society are figuratively and literally “screwed” by “real” men.
Regardless of the gender, age, social class, or sexual orientation of the
recipient, individuals who are forcibly “screwed” have been “fucked” or
“fucked over.” “Freaks” are women (and men) who enjoy being “fucked”
or who “screw” around with anyone. Because the vast majority of African
American men lack access to a Black gender ideology that challenges these
associations, they fail to see the significance of this language let alone the
social practices that it upholds. Instead, they define heterosexual sex acts
within a framework of “screwing” and “fucking” women and, by doing so,
draw upon Western ideologies of Black hyper-heterosexuality that defines
Black masculinity in terms of economic, sexual, and physical dominance.
In this interpretive context, for some men, violence (including the behav-
iors that comprise the rape culture) constitutes the next logical step of
their male prerogative. 
Currently, one of the most pressing issues for contemporary Black sex-
ual politics concerns violence against Black women at the hands of Black
men. Much of this violence occurs within the context of Black heterosex-
ual love relationships, Black family life, and within African American social
institutions. Such violence takes many forms, including verbally berating
225


--- PAGE 237 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Black women, hitting them, ridiculing their appearance, grabbing their
body parts, pressuring them to have sex, beating them, and murdering
them. For many Black women, love offers no protection from sexual vio-
lence. Abusive relationships occur between African American men and
women who may genuinely love one another and can see the good in each
other as individuals. Black girls are especially vulnerable to childhood sex-
ual assault. Within their families and communities, fathers, stepfathers,
uncles, brothers, and other male relatives are part of a general climate of
violence that makes young Black girls appropriate sexual targets for preda-
tory older men.
20
Because Black male leaders have historically abandoned Black women
as collective rape victims, Black women were pressured to remain silent
about these and other violations at the hands of Black men. Part of their
self-censorship certainly had to do with reluctance to “air dirty laundry”
in a White society that viewed Black men as sexual predators. As Nell
Painter points out, “because discussion of the abuse of Black women
would not merely implicate Whites, Black women have been reluctant to
press the point.”
21 Until recently, Black women have been highly reluctant
to speak out against rape, especially against Black male rapists, because
they felt confined by the strictures of traditional Black gender ideology.
Describing herself and other Black women rape victims as “silent sur-
vivors,” Charlotte Pierce-Baker explains her silence: “I didn’t want my
nonblack friends, colleagues, and acquaintances to know that I didn’t trust
my own people, that I was afraid of black men I didn’t know. . . . I felt
responsible for upholding the image of the strong black man for our young
son, andfor the white world with whom I had contact. I didn’t want my
son’s view of sex to be warped by this crime perpetrated upon his mother
by men the color of him, his father, and his grandfathers.”
22 African
American women grapple with long-standing sanctions within their com-
munities that urge them to protect African American men at all costs,
including keeping “family secrets” by remaining silent about male abuse.
23
Black women also remain silent for fear that their friends, family, and
community will abandon them. Ruth, a woman who, at twenty years old,
was raped on a date in Los Angeles, points out: “You can talk about being
mugged and boast about being held up at knife point on Market Street
Bridge or something, but you can’t talk about being raped. And I know if
I do, I can’t count on that person ever being a friend again. . . . People have
226


--- PAGE 238 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
one of two reactions when they see you being needy. They either take you
under their wing and exploit you or they get scared and run away. They
abandon you.”
24 Black women recount how they feel abandoned by the very
communities that they aim to protect, if they speak out. Theologian Traci
West describes how the very visibility of Black female rape victims can
work to isolate them: “When sexual violation occurs within their families
or by any member of ‘their’ community, black women may confront the
profound injury of being psychically severed from the only source of trust-
worthy community available to them. Because of the ambiguities of their
racial visibility, black women are on exhibit precisely at the same time as
they are confined to the invisible cage.”
25
Contemporary African American feminists who raise issues of Black
women’s victimization must tread lightly through this minefield of race,
gender, and sex. This is especially important because, unlike prior eras
when White men were identified as the prime rapists of Black women,
Black women are now more likely to be raped by Black men.
26 Increasingly,
African American women have begun to violate long-standing norms of
racial solidarity counseling Black women to defend Black men’s actions at
all costs and have begun actively to protest the violent and abusive behav-
ior of some African American men. Some African American women now
openly identify Black men’s behavior toward them as abuse and wonder
why such men routinely elevate their own suffering as more important
than that experienced by African American women: “Black women do not
accept racism as the reason for sorry behavior—they have experienced it
firsthand, and for them it is an excuse, not a justification.”
27
Since 1970, African American women have used fiction, social science
research, theology, and their writings to speak out about violence against
Black women.
28 Many African American women have not been content to
write about sexual violence—some have taken to the streets to protest it.
Determined not to duplicate the mistakes made during the Thomas con-
firmation hearings, many Black women were furious when they found out
that a homecoming parade had been planned for African American boxer
and convicted rapist Mike Tyson upon his release from prison. The Mike
Tyson rape case catalyzed many Black women to challenge community
norms that counseled it was a Black women’s duty as strong Black women
to “assume the position” of abuse. Within this logic, a Black woman’s abil-
ity to absorb mistreatment becomes a measure of strength that can garner
227


--- PAGE 239 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
praise. In efforts to regulate displays of strong Black womanhood, some
Black people apparently believed that prominent Black men like Mike
Tyson were, by virtue of their status, incapable of sexual harassment or
rape. “Many apparently felt that Washington [Tyson’s victim] should have
seen it as her responsibility to endure her pain in order to serve the greater
good of the race,” observes cultural critic Michael Awkward.
29 Rejecting
this position that views sexual violence against Black women as secondary
to the greater cause of racial uplift (unless, of course, sexual violence is
perpetrated by White men), Black women in New York staged their own
counterdemonstration and protested a homecoming celebration planned
for a man who had just spent three years in prison on a conviction of rape. 
ASSUME THE POSITION: BLACK WOMEN AND RAPE 
Rape is a powerful tool of sexual violence because women are forced to
“assume the position” of powerless victim, one who has no control over
what is happening to her body. The rapist imagines absolute power over his
victim; she (or he) is the perfect slave, supine, legs open, willing to be sub-
dued or “fucked,” and enjoying it. Rape’s power also stems from relegat-
ing sexual violence to the private, devalued, domestic sphere reserved for
women. The ability to silence its victims also erases evidence of the crime.
These dimensions of rape make it a likely candidate to become an impor-
tant form of social control under the new racism. 
We have learned much from African American women both about the
meaning of rape for women and how it upholds systems of oppression. For
one, female rape victims often experience a form of posttraumatic stress
disorder, a rape trauma syndrome of depression, anxiety, and despair, with
some attempting suicide that affects them long after actual assaults.
Women who survived rape report effects such as mistrust of men or of
people in general, continued emotional distress in connection with the
abuse, specific fears such as being left alone or being out at night, and
chronic depression that lasted an average of five and a half years after the
assault.
30 This climate harms all African American women, but the damage
done to women who survive rape can last long after actual assaults. Yvonne,
who was molested by an “uncle” when she was eight and raped at age
twelve, describes how the rape and sexual molestation that she endured as
a child affected her subsequent attitudes toward sexuality: “I didn’t take
228


--- PAGE 240 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
pride in my body after the rape. After it happened, I became a bit promis-
cuous. . . . Everyone thoughtI was bad; so I thought, I should just bebad.
After the rape it was like sex really didn’t matter to me. It didn’t seem like
anything special because I figured if people could just take it, . . . if they
just had to have it enough that they would take a little girl and put a knife
to her neck and takeit, . . . that it had nothin’ to do with love.”
31 Yolanda’s
experiences show how as an act of violence, rape may not leave the victim
physically injured—emotional damage is key. The rape itself can tem-
porarily destroy the victim’s sense of self-determination and undermines
her integrity as a person. Moreover, when rape occurs in a climate that
already places all Black women under suspicion of being prostitutes, claim-
ing the status of rape victim becomes even more suspect. 
Black women are just as harmed by sexual assault as all women, and
may be even more harmed when their abusers are African American men
within Black neighborhoods. Gail Wyatt’s research on Black women’s sex-
uality provides an important contribution in furthering our understanding
of Black women and rape.
32 Wyatt found little difference in the effects of
rape on Black and White women who reported being rape victims. One
important finding concerns the effects of repeatedexposure to sexual vio-
lence on people who survive rape: “Because incidents of attempted and
completed rape for Black women were slightly more likely to be repeated,
their victimization may have a more severe effect on their understanding of
the reasons that these incidents occurred, and some of these reasons may
be beyond their control. As a consequence, they may be less likely to
develop coping strategies to facilitate the prevention rather than the recur-
rence of such incidents.”
33 Stated differently, African American women
who suffer repeated abuse (e.g., participate in a rape culture that routinely
derogates Black women more than any other group) might suffer more
than women (and men) who do not encounter high levels of violence, espe-
cially sexual violence, as a daily part of their everyday lives. For example,
being routinely disbelieved by those who control the definitions of violence
(Anita Hill), encountering mass media representations that depict Black
women as “bitches,” “hoes,” and other controlling images, and/or experi-
encing daily assaults such as having their breasts and buttocks fondled by
friends and perfect strangers in school, the workplace, families, and/or on
the streets of African American communities may become so routine that
African American women cannot perceive their own pain. 
229


--- PAGE 241 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Within the strictures of dominant gender ideology that depict Black
women’s sexuality as deviant, African American women often have tremen-
dous difficulty speaking out about their abuse because the reactions that
they receive from others deters them. Women may be twice victimized—
even if they are believed, members of their communities may punish them
for speaking out. As Yvonne points out, “where I lived in the South, any
time a black woman said she had been raped, she was never believed. In my
community, they always made her feel like she did something to deserve
it—or she was lying.”
34 Adrienne, a forty-year-old Black woman who had
been raped twice, once by a much older relative when she was seven and
again by her mother’s boyfriend when she was twelve, observes, “Black
woman tend to keep quiet about rape and abuse . . . If you talk about it, a
man will think it was your fault, or he’ll think less of you. I think that’s why
I never told the men in my life, because I’ve always been afraid they would
not look at me in the same way. We all live in the same neighborhood. If
something happens to you, everybodyknows.”
35
One important feature of rape is that, contrary to popular opinion, it
is more likely to occur between friends, loved ones, and acquaintances
than between strangers. Black women typically know their rapists, and
they may actually love them. Violence that is intertwined with love
becomes a very effective mechanism for fostering submission. In a sense,
Black women’s silences about the emotional, physical, and sexual abuse
that they experience within dating, marriage, and similar love relation-
ships resembles the belief among closeted LGBT people that their silence
will protect them. Just as the silence of LGBT people enables heterosex-
ism to flourish, the reticence to speak out about rape and sexual violence
upholds troublesome conceptions of Black masculinity. Within the
domestic sphere, many Black men treat their wives, girlfriends, and chil-
dren in ways that they would never treat their mothers, sisters, friends,
workplace acquaintances, or other women. Violence and love become so
intertwined that many men cannot see alternative paths to manhood that
do not involve violence against women. Black feminist theologian Traci C.
West uses the term “domestic captivity” to describe women who find
themselves in this cycle of love and violence: “ Although they are invisible,
the economic, social, and legal barriers to escape that entrap women are
extremely powerful. This gendered denial of rights and status compounds
the breach with community. Being confined in a cage that seems invisible
230


--- PAGE 242 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
to everyone else nullifies a woman’s suffering and exacerbates her isolation
and alienation.”36
As Barbara Omolade observes, “Black male violence is even more
poignant because Black men both love and unashamedly depend on Black
women’s loyalty and support. Most feel that without the support of a
‘strong sister’ they can’t become ‘real’ men.”
37 But this may be the heart of
the problem—if African American men need women to bring their Black
masculinity into being, then women who seemingly challenge that mas-
culinity become targets for Black male violence. Educated Black women,
Black career women, Black women sex workers, rebellious Black girls, and
Black lesbians, among others who refuse to submit to male power, become
more vulnerable for abuse. Violence against “strong” Black women enables
some African American men to recapture a lost masculinity and to feel like
“real” men. By describing why he continued to financially exploit women,
and why he hit his girlfriend, Kevin Powell provides insight into this
process:
I, like most Black men I know, have spent much of my life living in fear.
Fear of White racism, fear of the circumstances that gave birth to me,
fear of walking out my door wondering what humiliation will be mine
today. Fear of Black women—of their mouths, their bodies, of their
attitudes, of their hurts, of their fear of us Black men. I felt fragile,
fragile as a bird with clipped wings, that day my ex-girlfriend stepped
up her game and spoke back to me. Nothing in my world, nothing in
my self-definition prepared me for dealing with a woman as an equal.
My world said women were inferior, that they must, at all costs, be put
in their place, and my instant reaction was to do that. When it was over,
I found myself dripping with sweat, staring at her back as she ran bare-
foot out of the apartment.
38
Powell’s narrative suggests that the connections among love, sexuality,
and violence are much more complicated that the simple linear relation-
ship in which African American men who are victimized by racism use
the power that accrues to them as men to abuse African American women
(who might then use their power as adults to beat African American chil-
dren). Certainly one can trace these relations in love relationships, but
the historical and contemporary interconnections of love, sexuality, vio-
231


--- PAGE 243 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
lence, and male dominance in today’s desegregated climate are infinitely
more complex. 
In these contexts, it may be possible for African American women and
men to get caught up in a dynamics of love, sexuality, and dominance
whereby the use of violence and sexuality resemble addiction. In other
words, if Black masculinity and Black femininity can be achieved only via
sexuality and violence, sexuality, violence, and domination become impli-
cated in the very definitions themselves. Once addicted, there is no way to
be a man or a woman without staying in roles prescribed by Black gender
ideology. Men and women may not engage in open warfare, but they do
engage in mutual policing that keeps everyone in check. As a form of sex-
ual violence, actual rapes constitute the tip of the iceberg. Rape joins sex-
uality and violence as a very effective tool to routinize and normalize
oppression.
The effectiveness of rape as a tool of control against Black women
does not mean that they have escaped other forms of social control that
have disproportionately affected Black men. Working jobs outside their
homes heightens African American women’s vulnerability to other forms
of state-sanctioned violence. For example, Black women are vulnerable to
physical attacks, and some Black women are murdered. But unlike the
repetitive and ritualized form of male lynching to produce a horrific spec-
tacle for White and Black viewers, Black women neither served as symbols
of the race nor were their murders deemed to be as significant. There is
evidence that forms of social control historically reserved for Black men
are also impacting Black women. For example, in the post–civil rights era,
African American women have increasingly been incarcerated, a form of
social control historically reserved for African American men. Black
women are seven times more likely to be imprisoned than White women
and, for the first time in American history, Black women in California and
several other states are being imprisoned at nearly the same rate as White
men. Incarcerating Black women certainly shows an increasing willingness
to use the tools of state-sanctioned violence historically reserved for Black
men against Black women. But is there an increasing willingness to use
tools of social control that have been primarily applied to women against
Black men? If institutionalized rape and institutionalized lynching consti-
tute differentexpressions of the sametype of social control, how might they
affect Black men? 
232


--- PAGE 244 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
AFRICAN AMERICAN MEN, MASCULINITY, 
AND SEXUAL VIOLENCE 
African American men’s experiences with the criminal justice system may
signal a convergence of institutionalized rape and institutionalized murder
(lynching) as state-sanctioned forms of sexual violence. Since 1980, a grow-
ing prison-industrial complex has incarcerated large numbers of African
American men. Whatever measures are used—rates of arrest, conviction,
jail time, parole, or types of crime—the record seems clear that African
American men are more likely than White American men to encounter the
criminal justice system. For example, in 1990, the nonprofit Washington,
D.C.–based Sentencing Project released a survey result suggesting that, on
an average day in the United States, one in every four African American
men aged 20 to 29 was either in prison, jail, or on probation/parole.
39
Practices such as unprovoked police brutality against Black male citizens,
many of whom die in police custody, and the disproportionate application
of the death penalty to African American men certainly suggest that the
state itself has assumed the functions of lynching. Because these practices
are implemented by large, allegedly impartial bureaucracies, the high incar-
ceration rates of Black men and the use of capital punishment on many
prisoners becomes seen as natural and normal. 
But how does one manage such large populations that are incarcerated
in prison and also in large urban ghettos? The ways in which Black men are
treated by bureaucracies suggests that the disciplinary practices developed
primarily for controlling women can be transferred to new challenges of
incarcerating so many men. In particular, the prison-industrial complex’s
treatment of male inmates resembles the tactics honed on women in a rape
culture, now operating not between men and women, but among men.
These tactics begin with police procedures that disproportionately affect
poor and working-class young Black men. Such men can expect to be
stopped by the police for no apparent reason and asked to “assume the posi-
tion” of being spread-eagled over a car hood, against a wall, or face down
on the ground. Rendering Black men prone is designed to make them sub-
missive, much like a female rape victim. The videotape of members of the
Los Angeles Police Department beating motorist Rodney King provided a
mass media example of what can happen when Black men refuse to submit.
Police treatment of Black men demonstrates how the command to “assume
the position” can be about much more than simple policing. 
233


--- PAGE 245 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Rape while under custody of the criminal justice system is a visible yet
underanalyzed phenomenon, only recently becoming the subject of con-
cern. Because rape is typically conceptualized within a frame of heterosex-
uality and with women as rape victims, most of the attention has gone to
female inmates assaulted by male guards. Yet the large numbers of young
African American men who are in police custody suggest that the relation-
ships among prison guards and male inmates from different race and social
class backgrounds constitutes an important site for negotiating masculinity.
Moreover, within prisons, the connections among hegemonic and subordi-
nated masculinities, violence, and sexuality may converge in ways that
mimic and help structure the “prison” of racial oppression. Because pris-
ons rely on surveillance, being raped in prison turns private humiliation
into public spectacle. The atmosphere of fear that is essential to a rape cul-
ture as well as the mechanisms of institutionalized rape function as impor-
tant tools in controlling Black men throughout the criminal justice system.
Whereas women fear being disbelieved, being abandoned, and losing the
love of their families, friends, and communities, men fear loss of manhood.
Male rape in the context of prison signals an emasculation that exposes
male rape victims to further abuse. In essence, a prison-industrial complex
that condones and that may even foster a male rape culture attaches a very
effective form of disciplinary control to a social institution that itself is rap-
idly becoming a new site of slavery for Black men. 
Drawing upon a national sample of prisoners’ accounts and on a com-
plex array of data collected by state and federal agencies, No Escape: Male
Rape in U.S. Prisons, a 2001 publication by Human Rights Watch, claims
that male prisoner-on-prisoner sexual abuse is not an aberration; rather, it
constitutes a deeply rooted systemic problem in U.S. prisons. They note,
“judging by the popular media, rape is accepted as almost a commonplace
of imprisonment, so much so that when the topic of prison arises, a joking
reference to rape seems almost obligatory.”
40 Prison authorities claim that
male rape is an exceptional occurrence. The narratives of prisoners who
wrote to Human Rights Watch say otherwise. Their claims are backed up
by independent research that suggests high rates of forced oral and anal
intercourse. In one study, 21 percent of inmates had experienced at least
one episode of forced or coerced sexual contact since being incarcerated,
and at least 7 percent reported being raped. Certain prisoners are targeted
for sexual assault the moment they enter a penal facility. A broad range of
234


--- PAGE 246 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
factors correlate with increased vulnerability to rape: “youth, small size,
and physical weakness; being White, gay, or a first offender; possessing
‘feminine’ characteristics such as long hair or a high voice; being
unassertive, unaggressive, shy, intellectual, not street-smart, or ‘passive’; or
having been convicted of a sexual offence against a minor.”
41
As is the case of rape of women, prisoners in the Human Rights Watch
study, including those who had been forcibly raped, reported that the
threatof violence is a more common factor than actual rape. A rape culture
is needed to condone the actual practices associated with institutionalized
rape. Once subject to sexual abuse, prisoners can easily become trapped
into a sexually subordinate role. Prisoners refer to the initial rape as “turn-
ing out” the victim. Rape victims become stigmatized as “punks:”
“Through the act of rape, the victim is redefined as an object of sexual
abuse. He has been proven to be weak, vulnerable, ‘female,’ in the eyes of
other inmates.”
42 Victimization is public knowledge, and the victim’s repu-
tation will follow him to other units and even to other prisons. In docu-
menting evidence that sounds remarkably like the property relations of
chattel slavery, Human Rights Watch reports on the treatment of male rape
victims:
Prisoners unable to escape a situation of sexual abuse may find them-
selves becoming another inmate’s “property.” The word is commonly
used in prison to refer to sexually subordinate inmates, and it is no
exaggeration. Victims of prison rape, in the most extreme cases, are lit-
erally the slaves of their perpetrators. Forced to satisfy another man’s
sexual appetites whenever he demands, they may also be responsible for
washing his clothes, massaging his back, cooking his food, cleaning his
cell, and myriad other chores. They are frequently “rented out” for sex,
sold, or even auctioned off to other inmates. . . . Their most basic
choices, like how to dress and whom to talk to, may be controlled by the
person who “owns” them. Their name may be replaced by a female
one. Like all forms of slavery, these situations are among the most
degrading and dehumanizing experiences a person can undergo.
43
Prison officials condone these practices, leaving inmates to fend for them-
selves. Inmates reported that they received no protection from correctional
staff, even when they complained.
235


--- PAGE 247 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Analyzing the connections among imprisonment, masculinity, and
power, legal scholar Teresa Miller points out that “for most male prisoners
in long-term confinement, the loss of liberty suffered during incarceration
is accompanied by a psychological loss of manhood.”
44 In men’s high-
security prisons and large urban jails, for example, sexist, masculinized
subcultures exist where power is allocated on the basis of one’s ability to
resist sexual victimization (being turned into a “punk”). Guards relate to
prisoners in sexually derogatory ways that emphasize the prisoners’ subor-
dinate position. For example, guards commonly address male prisoners by
sexually belittling terms such as pussy, sissy, cunt, and bitch.
45 Moreover, the
social pecking order among male prisoners is established and reinforced
through acts of sexual subjugation, either consensual or coerced submis-
sion to sexual penetration. The theme of dominating women has been so
closely associated with hegemonic masculinity that, when biological
females are unavailable, men create “women” in order to sustain hierar-
chies of masculinity. 
Miller reports that the pecking order of prisoners consists of three
general classes of prisoners: men, queens, and punks. “Men” rule the joint
and establish values and norms for the entire prison population. They are
political leaders, gang members, and organizers of the drug trade, sex
trade, protection rackets, and smuggled contraband. A small class of
“queens” (also called bitches, broads, and sissies) exists below the “men.”
A small fraction of the population, they seek and are assigned a passive sex-
ual role associated with women. As Miller points out, “the queen is the foil
that instantly defined his partner as a ‘man.’”
46 However, “queens” are
denied positions of power within the inmate economy. “Punks” or
“bitches” occupy the bottom of the prison hierarchy. “Punks” are male
prisoners who have been forced into sexual submission through actual or
threatened rape. As Miller points out, “punks are treated as slaves. Sexual
access to their bodies is sold through prostitution, exchanged in satisfac-
tion of debt and loaned to others for favors.”
47 In essence, “punks” are sex-
ual property. A prisoner’s position within this hierarchy simultaneously
defines his social and sexual status.
Male rape culture has several features that contribute to its effective-
ness as a tool of social control. For one, in the prison context, maintaining
masculinity is always in play. Miller points to the fluid nature of masculine
identity: “Because status within the hierarchy is acquired through the
236


--- PAGE 248 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
forcible subjugation of others, and one’s status as a man can be lost irre-
trievably through a single incident of sexual submission, ‘men’ must con-
stantly demonstrate their manhood through sexual conquest. Those who
do not vigorously demonstrate their manhood through sexual conquest are
more apt to be challenged and be potentially overpowered. Hence, the
surest way to minimize the risk of demotion is to aggressively prey on
other prisoners.”
48 Consensual and forced sexual contact among men in
prison has become more common. 49 Because masculinity is so fluid and is
the subject of struggle, it is important to note that sexual relations between
men does not mean that they are homosexuals. Rather, sexual dominance
matters. Those men who are treated as if they were women, for example,
the “queens” who voluntarily submit to the sexual advances of other men
and are orally or anally “penetrated” like women, may become lesser, less
“manly” men in prison but need not be homosexuals. Moreover, those men
who are forcibly penetrated and labeled “punks” may experience a subor-
dinated masculinity in prison, but upon release from prison, they too can
regain status as “men.” Engaging in sexual acts typically reserved for
women (being penetrated) becomes the mark of subordinated masculinity.
In contrast, those men who are “on top” or who are serviced by subordi-
nate men retain their heterosexuality. In fact, their masculinity may be
enhanced by a hyper-masculinity that is so powerful that it can turn men
into women. 
Another important feature of male rape culture in prison concerns its
effects on sexual identities. Since male prisoner-on-prisoner rape involves
persons of the same sex, it is often misnamed “homosexual rape” that is
thought to be perpetrated by “homosexual predators.” This terminology
ignores the fact that the vast majority of prison rapists do not view them-
selves as being gay. Rather, they are heterosexuals who see their victim as
substituting for a woman. Because sexual identities as heterosexual or
homosexual constitute fluid rather than fixed categories, masculinity in the
prison context is performed and constructed.
50 The sexual practices asso-
ciated with rape—forced anal and oral penetration—determine sexual
classification as “real” men or “punks,” not biological maleness. In this
predatory environment, it is important to be the one who “fucks with” oth-
ers, not the one who “sucks dick” or who is “fucked in the ass.” As one
Illinois prisoner explains it: “the theory is that you are not gay or bisexual
as long as YOU yourself do not allow another man to stick his penis into
237


--- PAGE 249 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
your mouth or anal passage. If you do the sticking, you can still consider
yourself to be a macho man/heterosexual.” 51 The meaningful distinction
in prison is not between men who engage in sex with men and in sex with
women, but between what are deemed “active” and “passive” participants
in the sexual act.
52
Installing a male rape culture in prison has the added important fea-
ture of shaping racial identities. White men rarely rape Black men. Instead,
African American men are often involved in the rape of White men who fit
the categories of vulnerability.
53 One Texas prisoner describes the racial
dynamics of sexual assault: “Part of it is revenge against what the non-
white prisoners call, “‘The White Man,’ meaning authority and the justice
system. A common comment is, ‘ya’ll may run it out there, but this is our
world!’”
54 Another prisoner sheds additional light on this phenomenon:
“In my experience having a ‘boy’ (meaning white man) to a Negro in
prison is sort of a ‘trophy’ to his fellow black inmates. And I think the root
of the problem goes back a long time ago to when the African Americans
were in the bonds of slavery. They have a favorite remark: ‘It ain’t no fun
when the rabbit’s got the gun, is it?’”
55 Drawing upon psychoanalytic the-
ory, William Pinar offers one explanation for these racial patterns:
“Straight black men could have figured out many kinds of revenge, could
they not: physical maiming for one, murder for another. But somehow
black men knew exactly what form revenge must be once they were on
‘top,’ the same form that ‘race relations’ have taken (and continues to take)
in the United States. ‘Race’ has been about getting fucked, castrated, made
into somebody’s ‘punk,’ politically, economically, and, yes, sexually.”
56
Yet another important feature of male rape culture in prison that
shows the effectiveness of this form of sexual violence concerns its effects
on male victims/survivors. Men who are raped often describe symptoms
that are remarkably similar to those of female rape victims, namely, a form
of posttraumatic stress disorder described as a rape trauma syndrome.
Men expressed depression, anxiety, and despair, with some attempting sui-
cide.
57 Another devastating consequence is the transmission of HIV . 58
However, because male rape victims are men, they still have access to mas-
culinity and male power, if they decide to claim it. As one Texas prisoner
described his experiences in the rape culture: “It’s fixed where if you’re
raped, the only way you [can escape being a punk is if] you rape someone
else. Yes I know that’s fully screwed, but that’s how your head is twisted.
238


--- PAGE 250 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
After it’s over you may be disgusted with yourself, but you realize that
you’re not powerless and that you can deliver as well as receive pain.” 59
Because prison authorities typically deny that male rape is a problem, this
inmate’s response is rational. As one inmate in a Minnesota prison points
out, “When a man gets raped nobody gives a damn. Even the officers laugh
about it. I bet he’s going to be walking with a limp ha ha ha. I’ve heard
them.”
60
It is important to remember that the vast majority of African
American men are not rapists nor have they been raped. However, male
rape in prison as a form of sexual dominance and its clear ties to con-
structing the masculine pecking order within prisons do have tremendous
implications for African American male prisoners, their perceptions of
Black masculinity, and the gendered relationships among all African
Americans. First and foremost, such a large proportion of African
American men are either locked up in state and federal prisons and/or
know someone who has been incarcerated, large numbers of African
American men are exposed to conceptions of Black masculinity honed
within prison rape culture.
61 Among those African American men who are
incarcerated, those who fit the profile of those most vulnerable to abuse
run the risk of becoming rape victims. In this context of violence regulated
by a male rape culture, achieving Black manhood requires notfitting the
profile and notassuming the position. In a sense, surviving in this male
rape culture and avoiding victimization require at most becoming a preda-
tor and victimizing others and, at the least, becoming a silent witness to the
sexual violence inflicted upon other men. 
Second, so many African American men are in prison on any given day
that we fail to realize that the vast majority of these very same men will
someday be released. Black men cannot be easily classified in two types,
those who are “locked up” in prison and those who remain “free” outside
it. Instead, prison culture and street culture increasingly reinforce one
another, and the ethos of violence that characterizes prison culture flows
into a more general ethos of violence that affects all Black men. For many
poor and working-class Black men, prison culture and street culture con-
stitute separate sides of the same coin. Sociologist Elijah Anderson’s “code
of the streets” has become indistinguishable from the violent codes that
exist in most of the nation’s jails, prisons, reform schools, and detention
centers. Describing young Black men’s encounters with the criminal jus-
239


--- PAGE 251 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
tice system as “peculiar rites of passage,” criminologist Jerome Miller con-
tends: “So many young black males are now routinely socialized to the rou-
tines of arrest, booking, jailing, detention, and imprisonment that it should
come as no surprise that they bring back into the streets the violent ethics
of survival which characterize these procedures.”
62 For middle-class Black
men who lack the actual experiences of prison and street culture, mass
media representations of gangstas as authentic symbols of Black mas-
culinity help fill the void. They may not be actual gangstas, but they must
be cognizant that they could easily be mistaken as criminals. Varieties of
Black masculinity worked through in prisons and on the streets strive to
find some place both within and/or respite from this ethos of violence. 
Black men who have served time in prison and are then released bring
home this ethos of violence and its culpability in shaping Black masculin-
ity. Certainly these men are denied access to full citizenship rights, for
example, having a prison record disqualifies large numbers of Black men
from getting jobs, ever holding jobs as police officers, or even voting. But
an equally damaging effect lies in the views of Black masculinity that these
men carry with them through the revolving doors of street and prison cul-
ture, especially when being victims or perpetrators within a male rape cul-
ture frames their conceptions of gender and sexuality. One wonders what
effects these forms of Black masculinity are having on African American
men, as well as their sexual partners, their children, and African American
communities. 
As sociologist Melvin Oliver points out in The Violent Social World of
Black Men, African American men live in a climate of violence.
63 Because
the American public routinely perceives African American men as actual or
potential criminals, it often overlooks the climate of fear that affects Black
boys, Black men on the street, and Black men in prison. In his memoir
titled Fist, Stick, Knife, Gun: A Personal History of Violence in America ,
Geoffrey Canada details how he and his brothers had to work out elaborate
strategies for negotiating the streets of their childhood, all in efforts to
arrive safely at school, or buy items at the grocery store. As children of a
single mother, they lacked the protection of an older Black man, thus mak-
ing them vulnerable in the pecking order among Black men.
64 All Black
boys must negotiate this climate of fear, yet it often takes an especially
tragic incident to arouse public protest about Black boys who victimize one
another. For example, in 1994, five-year-old Eric Morse was dropped from
240


--- PAGE 252 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
a fourteenth floor apartment window to his death in the Ida B. Wells pub-
lic housing project in Chicago. His tormentors allegedly threw him down
a stairwell, stabbed him, and sprayed him with Mace before dropping him
from the window. The two boys convicted of murdering him were ten and
eleven years old. 
The question of how the ethos of violence affects Black male adoles-
cents is of special concern. In many African American inner-city neigh-
borhoods, the presence of gang violence demonstrates a synergistic
relationship between Black masculinity and violence. Research on Black
male youth illustrates an alarming shift in the meaning of adolescence for
men in large, urban areas. Autobiographical work by David Dawes on the
Young Lords of Chicago, Nathan McCall recalling his youth in a small city
in Virginia, and Sayinka Shakur’s chilling autobiography that details how
his involvement in gang violence in Los Angeles earned him the nickname
“Monster” all delineate shocking levels of Black male violence.
65 As
revealed in these works, many young Black men participate in well-armed
street gangs that resemble military units in which they are routinely pres-
sured to shoot and kill one another. In these conditions, it becomes very
difficult for Black boys to grow up without fear of violence and become
men who refuse to use violence against others. 
Only recently have scholars turned their attention to the effects that
living in fear in climates of violence might have both on the quality of
African American men’s lives and on their conceptions of Black masculin-
ity. Sociologist Al Young conducted extensive interviews with young Black
men who were in their twenties, with some surprising findings. The men
in his study did not exhibit the swagger and bravado associated with glori-
fied hip-hop images of gangstas, thugs, and hustlers. Instead, these men
shared stories of living in fear of being victimized, of dropping out of
school because they were afraid to go, of spending considerable time fig-
uring out how to avoid joining gangs, and, as a result, becoming cut off
from all sorts of human relationships.
66 Some suggest that Black men have
given up hope, or as columnist Joan Morgan states: “When brothers can
talk so cavalierly about killing each other and then reveal that they have no
expectation to see their twenty-first birthday, that is straight-up depression
masquerading as machismo.”
67
Unlike Young’s work, the effects of violence on African American
men, especially those with firsthand knowledge of a prison male rape cul-
241


--- PAGE 253 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
ture, have been neglected within social science research. Moreover, the
effects of sexual violence on African American men also generates new
social problems for African American families, communities, and American
society overall. As the graphic discussion of the male “slaves” as property
within the penal system indicates, many Black men victimize one another
and strive to reproduce the same male pecking order within African
American communities that they learn and understand as masculine within
prison. These men victimize not just women and children; they harm
other men and place all in a climate of fear. 
SEXUAL VIOLENCE REVISITED
The new racism reflects changes in mechanisms of social control of the
post–civil rights era. Lynching and rape as forms of violence still perme-
ate U.S. society, but because they no longer are as closely associated with
the binary thinking of the logic of segregation, these seemingly gender-
specific practices of sexual violence are organized in new ways. First,
movies, films, music videos, and other mass media spectacles that depict
Black men as violent and that punish them for it have replaced the histor-
ical spectacles provided by live, public lynchings. When combined with the
criminalization of Black men’s behavior that incarcerates so many men, the
combination of mass media images and institutional practices justifies
these gender-specific mechanisms of control. For example, as vicarious
participants in spectator sports, audience members can watch as men in
general, and African American men in particular, get beaten, pushed,
trampled, and occasionally killed, primarily in football arenas and boxing
rings. The erotic arousal that many spectators might feel from viewing vio-
lence that historically came in attending live events (the violence visited
upon the lynch victim being one egregious example of this situation) can
be experienced vicariously in the anonymity of huge sports arenas and pri-
vately via cable television. Films and other forms of visual media provide
another venue for framing societal violence. Contemporary films, for
example, the slasher horror films targeted to adolescents, produce images
of violence that rival the most gruesome lynchings of the past. Lynching
is no longer a live show confined to African American men, but, as is the
case with other forms of entertainment, has moved into the field of repre-
sentations and images. Thus, there is the same ability to watch killing, but
242


--- PAGE 254 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
in the safety of one’s living room, with DVD technology allowing the scene
to be replayed. Both of these mass media spectacles fit nicely with the lack
of responsibility associated with the new racism. Viewers need not “know”
their victims, and violence can be blamed on the “bad guys” in the film or
on governmental or corporate corruption. Witnessing beatings, tortures,
and murders as spectator sport fosters a curious community solidarity that
feeds back into a distinctly American ethos of violence associated with the
frontier and slavery. Black men are well represented within this industry of
media violence, typically as criminals whose death should be celebrated,
and often as murder victims who are killed as “collateral damage” to the
exploits of the real hero. 
Second, in this new context of mass media glorification of violence,
rape of women (but not of men) along with the constellation of practices
and ideas that comprise rape culture has been moved from the hidden place
of privacy of the past and also displayed as spectacle. Whether in
Hollywood feature films, independent films such as Spike Lee’s She’s
Gotta Have It, or the explosion of pornography as lucrative big business,
viewers can now see women raped, beaten, tortured, and killed. Clearly, the
ideas of a rape culture persist as a fundamental form of sexual dominance
that affects African American women. As feminists remind us, thinking
about rape not as a discrete act of violence but as part of a systemic pattern
of violence reveals how social institutions and the idea structures that sur-
round rape work to control actual and potential victims. Not every women
needs to be raped to have the fearof rape function as a powerful mecha-
nism of social control in everyday life. Women routinely adjust their
behavior for fear of being raped. The workings of a rape culture, the pri-
vacy of the act, the secrecy, the humiliation of being a rape victim, seem
especially well suited to the workings of routinization of violence as a part
of the “normalized war” that characterizes desegregation. Rape becomes
more readily available as a public tool of sexual dominance. At the same
time, prison rape of men is not taken seriously and does not routinely
appear as entertainment. 
Third, the mechanisms of social control associated with a rape culture
and with institutionalized rape might be especially effective in maintaining
a new racism grounded in advancing myths of integration that mask actual
social relations of segregation. Both Black men and Black women are
required to “assume the position” of subordination within a new multicul-
243


--- PAGE 255 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
tural America, and the practices of a rape culture help foster this outcome.
Most Americans live far more segregated lives than mass media leads them
to believe. The vast majority of men and women, Blacks and Whites, and
straights and gays still fit into clearly identifiable categories of gender, race,
and sexuality, the hallmark of a logic of segregation. At the same time, the
increased visibility and/or vocality of individuals and groups that no
longer clearly fit within these same categories have changed the political
and intellectual landscape. For example, many middle-class African
Americans now live in the unstable in-between spaces of racially desegre-
gated neighborhoods; lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered (LGBT)
people who have come out of the closet undercut the invisibility required
for assumptions of heterosexism; some working-class kids of all races now
attend elite universities; and biracial children of interracial romantic rela-
tionships have challenged binary understandings of race. Crossing borders,
dissolving boundaries, and other evidence of an imperfect desegregation
does characterize the experiences of a substantial minority of the
American population. 
When it comes to African Americans, focusing too closely on these
important changes can leave the impression that much more change is
occurring than actually is. The record on African American racial desegre-
gation is far less rosy. This illusion of racial integration, especially that pre-
sented in a powerful mass media, masks the persistence of racial
segregation for African Americans, especially the racial hypersegregation of
large urban areas. Maintaining racial boundaries in this more fluid, deseg-
regated situation requires not just revised representations of Black people
in mass media but also requires new social practices that maintain social
control yet do not have the visibility of past practices. Institutionalized rape
serves as a mechanism for maintaining gender hierarchies of masculinity
and femininity. But institutionalized rape and the workings of rape culture
can also serve as effective tools of social control within racially desegregated
settings precisely because they intimidate and silence victims and encour-
age decent people to become predators in order to avoid becoming victims.
In this sense, the lessons from a rape culture become important in a society
that is saturated with relations of war against segments of its own popula-
tion but that presents itself as fair, open, and without problems.
Finally, these emerging modes of social control have important impli-
cations for antiracist African American politics generally and for develop-
244


--- PAGE 256 ---
ASSUME THE POSITION
ing a more progressive Black sexual politics in particular. Violence consti-
tutes a major social problem for African Americans. State violence is cer-
tainly important, but the violence that African Americans inflict upon one
another can do equal if not more damage. When confronting a social prob-
lem of this magnitude, rethinking Black gender ideology, especially the
ways in which ideas about masculinity and femininity shape Black politics
becomes essential. As the Clarence Thomas confirmation revealed, African
Americans’ failure to understand the gendered contours of sexual violence
led them to choose race over gender. Incidents such as this suggest that
Black leaders have been unable to help either Black women or Black men
deal with the structural violence of the new racism because such leaders
typically fail to question prevailing Black gender ideology. What happens
when men incorporate ideas about violence (as an expression of domi-
nance) into their definitions of Black masculinity? Can they remain “real”
men if they do not engage in violence? How much physical, emotional,
and/or sexual abuse should a “strong” Black woman absorb in order to
avoid community censure? Stopping the violence will entail much more
than Black organizations who protest state-sanctioned violence by White
men against Black ones. Because violence flows from social injustices of
race, class, gender, sexuality, and age, for African American women and
men, eradicating violence requires a new Black sexual politics dedicated to
a more expansive notion of social justice.
245


--- PAGE 257 ---



--- PAGE 258 ---
EIGHT
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
How Race and Gender Matter
The thirty-five undergraduates who enrolled in the first offer-
ing of “Introduction to Black Gender Studies” were an espe-
cially brave group. Most were in their early twenties, with
African American women forming a sizable minority. The class
also reflected the diversity of social class, sexualities, ethnicity,
and religion characteristic of a large, urban university. As the
course evolved and the students became more comfortable with
one another, discussions became more candid. One class session
in particular stands out in my mind. On that day, I asked the fol-
lowing questions: “Do your parents want you to marry? If so,
what kind of partner do they want for you?” Student responses
were revealing. No one identified the assumption that underlay
the questions, namely, that getting married constitutes a deep-
seated social norm. Virtually everyone agreed that their parents
would like them to marry; yet, African American women in par-
ticular did not hold out much hope that they would find suit-
able partners. Their responses suggested that they had
considered these questions more thoroughly than either African
American men or White students: “a decent Black man,” “a
man with a job,” and “a good Christian man,” Black women
responded, making the gender and race of their preferred part-
ners crystal clear. After hearing the women’s answers, African
American men offered similar responses: “marry a Black
woman,” “don’t disrespect your mother,” “marry within the
race,” and “marry a woman who can make something of her-


--- PAGE 259 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
self,” they responded in virtual unanimity. Initially puzzled by the race-
specific nature of Black students’ responses, White students came to see
how “White” served as a silent qualifier for their own beliefs. They too
were expected to marry within their race and choose partners of the oppo-
site gender. No one mentioned sexuality until an “out” White lesbian stu-
dent broke the ice. When she quipped, “My parents would be happy if I
brought home anyman!” everyone laughed.
This class discussion illustrates how the rules that regulate love rela-
tionships in the United States pivot on varying combinations of choosing
partners who are the same and/or different from oneself. One fundamen-
tal rule governs all others—marry a partner of the same race and different
gender.
1 Beyond widespread social pressure to marry, this seemingly sim-
ple tenet spawns a series of minor regulations. Because the “different gen-
der” rule installs heterosexuality as the preferred form of sexual
expression, in a context that denies gay and lesbian marriages, getting mar-
ried becomes a mechanism for certifying heterosexuality. In the U.S. con-
text in which race and class are so tightly bundled together, marrying
within one’s race typically means maintaining existing social class arrange-
ments. Because wealth and poverty are passed down through families,
keeping families racially homogeneous virtually ensures that middle- and
upper-middle class White Americans will retain family assets and that
Black Americans will experience intergenerational debt, if not poverty.
Religion also matters—one student’s desire for a “good Christian man”
points to the significance of Christianity as a civil religion in the United
States, and government policy that privileges Christians over Muslims,
Buddhists, and agnostics. Although age didn’t even enter directly into the
conversation, it too shaped student responses. Like heterosexuality, age
was simply taken for granted, languishing in the category of the obvious.
When pushed, however, students were fairly clear about the meaning of
age. Citing a popular phrase, one young Black man joked, “ain’t nothin’ an
old woman can do but show me the way to a young one.”
Historically, these rules worked through a logic of segregation that
organized all aspects of American society. Racism, sexism, heterosexism,
and class exploitation as systems of oppression all draw upon varying
dimensions of this logic of segregation. Segregate people into boxes of
ghettos, barrios, closets, and prisons, rank the boxes as being fundamen-
tally separate and unequal, and keep the entire system intact by forbidding
248


--- PAGE 260 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
individuals to get to know one another as fully human beings. In this con-
text, laws and religious teachings that detail who people could notmarry
are fundamental in upholding social inequality. They regulate love and sex-
uality by mystifying segregation and keeping people alienated from one
another. The Black gender ideology described in this volume is but one
example of many powerful ideologies that serve this purpose. These belief
systems encourage individuals to grant humanity only to those in their own
segregated boxes and to dehumanize, objectify, and, upon occasion, com-
modify and demonize everyone else. People who are alienated from one
another and from their own honest bodies become easier to rule. 
The effects of official policies of segregation persist today, yet the
post–civil rights era has replaced the rigid boundaries of the past with
more fluid borders between groups.
2 Middle-class Whites and poor Blacks
may live in different neighborhoods, yet their children may take classes
together in college classrooms. Desegregated spaces and practices catalyze
new possibilities for intimate love relationships between individuals who
no longer are confined by the logic of segregation. In this context, many
Americans claim that the rules of “same race, different gender” no longer
fit their current realities. Americans possess the formal rights to love and,
with the exception of LGBT people, marry whomever they like, but are
they really free to do so? Contemporary intimate love relationships are
influenced by a convergence of factors that collectively shape each indi-
vidual’s lived realities as well as his or her perceptions of what is possible
and desirable. Love may appear to come from nowhere, but it is profoundly
affected by the political, economic, and social conditions of the new
racism. 
How African Americans grapple with these rules has tremendous
implications for African Americans as individuals as well as for antiracist
Black politics. When it comes to the rules themselves, African Americans
are already, in some sense, gender rebels. Some accept the rules but point
to the virtual impossibility of following them. How can heterosexual
African American men marry and raise families when 25 percent are
arrested, incarcerated, or on parole? What are educated, heterosexual
African American women to do who find themselves facing a Black male
shortage that leaves them with few to no prospects of meeting and marry-
ing African American men of similar status? With 70 percent of all college
degrees awarded to African Americans going to women, how do middle-
249


--- PAGE 261 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
class Black women marry within the “race”? Others reject the rules out-
right. What would a “same race” partner look like for African Americans
who self-define as mixed race or biracial? What does “same race” mean in
the context of a multiethnic America with growing populations of Latinos
and Asians who have varying degrees of “ African descent”? How do Black
gays and lesbians negotiate the “different gender” requirement when they
are forbidden to marry at all? 
When it comes to resisting the manipulation of sexuality and love by
systems of power, much is at stake not simply for African Americans but
for all people. Oppression functions not simply by forcing people to sub-
mit, as is the case with the repackaging of sexual violence to serve the
needs of the new racism, but also works by rendering its victims unlovable.
Once objectified in their own eyes and in those of their supporters, people
police one another and all become more easily exploited and controlled.
Because African Americans have been so harmed by these relations, the
question of the intimate love relationships of Black men and women takes
on added importance. In this context, resistance consists of loving the
unlovable and affirming their humanity. Loving Black people (as distin-
guished from dating and/or having sex with Black people) in a society that
is so dependent on hating Blackness constitutes a highly rebellious act.
When it comes to intimate love relationships, defiant behavior occurs
all around us, yet because we do not recognize it, we have difficulty sup-
porting it or engaging in it ourselves. Rebellion can occur among people
who seemingly follow the rules. For heterosexual African American men,
choosing to love and commit to a heterosexual relationship with a Black woman
is a rebellious act. By choosing to love women whom society has so demo-
nized, Black men exhibit a form of “strength” in resisting their depictions
as hustlers, bad boys, and criminals. For heterosexual African American
women, demanding that their Black male sexual partners respect them for
who they are constitutes a rebellious act in a society that stigmatizes Black
women as unworthy of love. Rebellion also occurs by breaking the rules.
African American men and women who marry outside the “race” do break
the rules. Crossing the color line to marry interracially challenges deep-
seated American norms, yet such relationships may not be inherently pro-
gressive. Similarly, by choosing to love the same gender, especially those
involved in interracial relationships, African American LGBT people are
disloyal. Such love requires coming out of the closet and thus challenges
250


--- PAGE 262 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
the rules that frame the closet itself. Whether they appear to be following
the rules or breaking them, Black love relationships of all types can uphold
prevailing hierarchies of race, class, gender, and sexuality. Because hierar-
chy becomes intertwined with love and sexual expression, this is when
oppression is more effective. But rebelling not simply against the rules but
against what the rules are designed to do creates space for a very different
set of individual relationships, and a more progressive Black sexual poli-
tics. What are some of the issues that confront Black people as they search
for love within the confines of these rules? When it comes to love and sex-
uality, what does rebellion mean for straight Black people who are in same-
race love relationships, heterosexual African Americans who cross the
color line, and LGBT Black people who violate the same gender rule?
FOLLOWING THE RULES: MARRIAGE AND COMMITMENT 
Disappearing Acts(2000), a made-for-HBO film, may typify a new phase in
African American heterosexual love relationships. The film depicts the
struggles of an African American woman and man to build a love relation-
ship within the same race, different gender rule. Zora (played by Sanaa
Lathan), a struggling high school music teacher who wants a career as a
singer/songwriter, moves from Manhattan to Brooklyn with plans to use
the money she saves on cutting a demo tape. On moving day, she meets
Franklin (played by Wesley Snipes), a personable, fine-looking construc-
tion worker. They appear to be in love, become sexually intimate, yet each
resists committing to the other. Finding herself pregnant, Zora wonders
how she can hold fast to her dream and be a mother. Finally confessing to
Zora that he has two sons from a prior relationship and he never finished
high school, Franklin questions what he can bring to their relationship.
Both grapple with issues of commitment and their “disappearing acts” in
relation to one another speak to the complexities that frame contemporary
African American heterosexual relationships. 
Disappearing Acts seems to describe a sea change within African
American heterosexual love relationships, one in which a sizeable propor-
tion of African Americans remain single, and in which those Blacks who do
marry are less likely to do so than Whites.
3 Despite these changing patterns
within Black heterosexual partnerships, it is important to reiterate that the
vast majority of the 36.4 million African Americans continue to marry or
251


--- PAGE 263 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
enter into committed relationships with other African Americans. 4
However, in the post–civil rights era marriage, sexuality, and parenthood
have become separate and distinct experiences to the point at which long-
term, committed heterosexual relationships and social activities may no
longer constitute a common experience for most African Americans.
5
Until the last few decades when African Americans gained the legal
right to marry “outside the race,” the pressures on African Americans con-
cerning marriage and committed love relationships were internal to
African American communities. Given the uneven patterns of desegrega-
tion, this continues today. Black popular culture has long provided a win-
dow on the passionate relationships that have bound heterosexual Black
women and men together. Often described as the “love and trouble tradi-
tion,” Black heterosexual partnerships have produced their own form of
disappearing acts.
6 In prior periods in which residential racial segregation
pushed African American men and women together, commitment was less
of an issue. Survival required racial solidarity and marrying non-Blacks
was legally forbidden. In contrast, the changing Black social class structure
that has resulted in some residential desegregation has exposed African
Americans to potential partners of the same social class. Many middle-
class Black people now possess the educational credentials and the finances
to live in racially desegregated neighborhoods, attend desegregated
schools, and get good jobs.
7 Moreover, because so many poor and working-
class African Americans in large urban areas live in large ghettos, their love
relationships may more closely resemble the “love and trouble” tradition
crafted in earlier periods.
8
On the one hand, the chances for mutual recognition and understand-
ing become greater within love relationships in which both partners recog-
nize how the structure of racism harms both Black men and Black women,
and does so through gender-specific mechanisms. Historically, under-
standing this shared fate was mandatory. In situations of chattel slavery
and the Jim Crow South where Black men were lynched for the seeming
transgression of even looking at a White woman, and where Black women
were vulnerable to rape by White men with little recourse in the court sys-
tem, it seemed prudent if not essential for Black men and women uncon-
ditionally to support one another. Maligning one another in public (before
Whites) constituted signs of disunity, and each Black individual was
afforded some degree of acceptance from African Americans as a group.
252


--- PAGE 264 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
Barbara Omolade speculates as to how having a clear understanding of
racial segregation affected the relations among African American women
and men: “since it was blatantly clear that no one would survive alone on
the land in the face of white terror, we stayed together in marriage and
family to help each other survive. Courting, romance, sex, and love were all
tempered and shaped by mutual need and by opposition to the system of
white supremacy.”
9 The shared economic, political, and cultural reality
brought about by racism and the absence of a powerful mass media that
marketed images of Black deviancy for entertainment encouraged solidar-
ity across differences of gender. Black men and women were more likely to
recognize one another as fully human beings within a system that dehu-
manized both. 
On the other hand, heterosexual African American women and men
who uncritically accepted prevailing Black gender ideology often ended up
feeling stuck with one another. As one thinker puts it, “patriarchy is not just
‘out there,’ external to our relationships and experiences; it is manifested in
and constituted by the ways in which we structure those relationships and
experiences.”
10 African American men who crafted their understanding of
Black masculinity around images of bucks, Uncle Toms, and rapists could
come to resent any show of strength by African American women.
Conversely, African American women who wished to claim the mantle of
Black respectability often erased tell-tale signs of bitchiness or bad mother-
ing by submitting to Black male dominance. Confusing male dominance
with strength, and female submission with weakness, both felt that their
capitulation to prevailing norms served the interests of the “race.”
The social conditions may have changed, but these same tensions
operate in the post–civil rights era. Racism continues to operate in gender-
and class-specific ways and seeing how this happens might revitalize Black
male-female love relationships. The absence of such an analysis can lead to
finger pointing and statements of blame. For example, high rates of incar-
ceration and single parent households that affected African American men
and women in the 1980s can be interpreted as gender-specific sites of racial
oppression that disproportionately affect poor and working-class African
Americans. However, armed with mass media images of gangstas, thugs,
bitches, and welfare mothers, some commentators identified these out-
comes of racial oppression to explain Black poverty itself. As evidenced by
the misogyny in some segments of hip-hop culture, in which Black men
253


--- PAGE 265 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
and women began to blame one another for the joblessness, poor schools,
inadequate housing, and other causes of Black poverty, these gender poli-
tics had a negative effect on Black love relationships. 
Middle-class Black people are no less affected by the need to develop
rebellious analyses of the challenges that they face that affect love rela-
tionships. In particular, the growing gap between college graduation rates
of African American women and men promises to have effects that last far
beyond college. Analyzing the marital histories of graduates of twenty-
eight selective colleges and universities, sociologist Donna Franklin found
evidence of trouble when wives were the main wage earners. The Black
women surveyed were much more likely than White women to have hus-
bands who earned less, and those who had been married were also more
than twice as likely to have gotten divorced. Franklin attributes the higher
divorce rate among highly educated Black women to the women’s higher
earnings.
11 This explanation is only plausible in a situation in which women
and men accept prevailing gender ideology that grants men natural finan-
cial superiority. Black couples who reject the premise that strong men
should earn more money than their wives create new opportunities for new
kinds of marriages.
The absence of Black leadership that helps African Americans see how
the political economy of the new racism affects love relationships leaves the
majority of Black men and women adrift. Either they uncritically accept
the traditional view of gender and sexuality advanced within the Black
Church or they are left stitching together relationships that are unduly
influenced by negative media representations of Black masculinity and
Black femininity. Moreover, marketplace models of relationships,
described some time ago by sociologist Robert Staples as the
“finance/romance” exchange, encourage men to compete with one another
for the most desirable, feminine women. Women are encouraged to market
their attributes in the marketplace of potential partners, all the while
searching for a complementary mate who meets the requirements of a
“real” man. This capitalist value system where men “hunt” for sexual con-
quests and women “shop” for partners in the love marketplace elevates
sexuality as a valuable commodity. As Nathan McCall points out, “in the
male idiom, where men were called ‘hounds’ and women were dubbed
‘foxes,’ it required no great leap of logic to extend the realm of conquest to
sex. The hunt was on, and females were the game.”
12
254


--- PAGE 266 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
Black youth have not escaped these marketplace forces. But because as
a group, they have come of age during deteriorating economic and political
conditions in African American communities and have been so immersed
within and visible in shaping contemporary Black popular culture, this
cohort has been on the front line of issues of love, sexuality, and relation-
ships. The hip-hop generation claims new ideas about personal freedom
both to self-define, and in choice of one’s love interests. They are seemingly
rebellious in appearance, actions, and beliefs. But in a context marked by the
erosion of African American community organizations, Black youth may be
more influenced by Western ideologies than they think. As Bakari Kitwana
points out: “an intense focus on materialism is characteristic of our gener-
ation (among both men and women) and is a critical variable in the shaping
(and, at times, undoing) of our relationships.”
13 Women who aspire to be
“material girls” aim for men with money. Men who make their way via
“hustling” search for women who have jobs, welfare checks, and/or who are
willing to offer sexual favors. Within individualistic marketplace relations,
holding fast to the tenets of the prevailing Black sexual politics can foster
unrealistic expectations about romance and love relationships and profound
disappointment when they fail to materialize. 
Mass media images of Black masculinity and Black femininity can
have an especially pernicious effect on how Black men and women perceive
one another. African American men who see Black women as being physi-
cally unattractive, domineering, and promiscuous and African American
women who see Black men as being criminally inclined, promiscuous, and
dangerous evaluate the worth of their potential sexual partners and love
interests through distorted lenses. In the absence of a progressive Black
sexual politics that redefines Black gender ideology, African American
women and men can find themselves policing one another’s conformity to
a Black gender ideology that did not work in the past and that definitely
does not work now. Legal scholar and social critic Derrick Bell identifies
the problems that this mutual policing can bring: “We trivialize ourselves
when we attempt to define African American male/female relationships in
terms of the prevailing culture: we attribute to black females mystical pow-
ers and strengths that become burdensome in their superficiality, and we
attribute weakness and defeat to black males. . . . The result is that we dis-
empower ourselves and imperil our capacity to love unconditionally and,
through that love, to grow and create together.”
14
255


--- PAGE 267 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Within these marketplace models of shopping and hunting for suitable
love interests within the confines of rules that brand certain people as off-
limits, the act of “catching” the right partner takes on extreme importance.
Under tenets of hegemonic masculinity, men cannot be men without
women and vice versa. Each gender remains incomplete without the other
to complement it. When it comes to heterosexual African American love
relationships, the prevailing Black gender ideology has significant conse-
quences because both partners are steeped in it and often cannot see its
assumptions. For women, the seeming shortage of marriageable African
American men becomes redefined less by analyzing the myriad social
issues that African American men confront (and that contribute to this
shortage), but in searching for the elusive good “catch” in a sea of Black
men as an “endangered species.” Joan Morgan criticizes this new identity
category of the ENDANGEREDBLACKMAN (EBM) by describing how
damaging this construct can be for Black love relationships: 
He’s that frustrating lover whose untapped potential will never be
reached ’cuz he’s given up on his dreams and taken to quoting statistics
instead. His failure to hold a job, get an education, or take care of his
kids is everybody’s fault—white people, the system, and even you “Cuz,
you know, black women got it easier because “the Man” don’t consider y’all
a threat. He’s that womanizing athlete, rapper, or Supreme Court judge
who cries racism whenever he gets caught confusing sexual abuse with
power.
15 
In a context of a shortage of “good” (heterosexual) Black men, many
African American women remain silent about the exploits of EBM, despite
the fact that men cause harm not only to their partners but also to them-
selves. Commenting on this situation, Dalton observes, “I don’t need to be
convinced that Black men are an endangered species. But that is no reason
to compel Black women to suffer in silence.”
16 Moreover, love relationships
with the EBM remain problematic because such men fundamentally disre-
spect Black women and uphold prevailing Black sexual politics: “Love
without respect is a lethal thing. It is at the heart of any dysfunctional, abu-
sive relationship. All the unconditional love in the world does not negate
the truth. The ENDANGEREDBLACKMAN is a creature black women
have learned to love, but he is not one we respect.”
17
256


--- PAGE 268 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
African American women search for the right man to complement
them, all the while feeling as if they are in competition with other women
and wary of the motives and men whom they meet. Adhering to market-
place models of love affects relationships amongAfrican American women,
one where, the Black male shortage generates intense competition among
Black females. Many Black women aim to make themselves more accept-
able or desirable by endorsing traditional gender ideology. In a context in
which men are intimidated if not repelled by “strong women,” becoming
more submissive seemingly increases a woman’s chances of finding a Black
male partner. But women who hide their strength and who basically prop
up men who are weak do neither themselves nor the men in their lives a
favor. Because such men knowthat they need women in order to feel like
real men, this situation actually heightens men’s sense of weakness—they
do not feel stronger. Asking for help is one thing— expectingit as a male
prerogative as an EBM is another. Take for example, the African American
male undergraduates who routinely ask their Black female classmates to
share lecture notes, to help them with assignments, and, in some cases, to
type, edit, or occasionally write their term papers and other class assign-
ments. These men claim a masculinity that is predicated on dominance.
They exercise control over women by convincing women to do their
schoolwork and to be sexual partners. But such men weaken themselves
because they never develop the skills and independence required to write
their own term papers and think their own original thoughts. Their mas-
culinity remains fragile because it is predicated upon female subordination. 
This perception of a marketplace mismatch between available and
desirable African American men and women can affect how African
American women behave within their love relationships. One study of a
sample of thirty-three heterosexual Black women in Atlanta reports a sig-
nificant difference in the women’s perceptions that good sex was a require-
ment for a good or ideal relationship. Sadly, most did not consider their
current or most recent relationships as ideal. Several single, middle-class
women over age thirty reported that they felt used in sexual relationships.
Although the older women mainly complained about men who asked them
to engage in sex acts that they did not want, the younger women, both
working-class and middle-class, feared that their partners would leave
them if they did not cooperate. One of the younger women explained:
257


--- PAGE 269 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
The guys push you around. They know it is important for a girl to hold
on to a guy . . . they use you and then tell you that some other bitch is
better. I understand a man wants to be in control, but there are limits. . . .
Jay, my boyfriend, tells me he’ll leave for whoever . . . I don’t want to
get pregnant and one time I mentioned condoms to him. . . . He went
off and told me that was my problem. I love him and he takes good care
of me. He is very gentle and always wants me to come . . . sometimes, I
fake an orgasm because he would feel bad. . . . I should leave him, but
he is so great. He is especially good after we have had an argument and
he wants to make up for it. . . . I know several other girls who are flirt-
ing with him all the time. They don’t care he already has a woman.
18 
This young woman loves her partner, but she sees how they bring funda-
mentally different perceptions of one another to the relationship. This
young woman’s partner would be horrified to consider himself as a user of
women, but by referring to other women as “bitches,” refusing to wear a
condom that would protect both partners from unplanned pregnancies and
sexually transmitted diseases, and pressuring his partner to achieve a sex-
ual orgasm, he does foster her objectification.
In essence, a problematic Black gender ideology coupled with an unat-
tainable hegemonic (White) gender ideology leaves heterosexual Black men
and women struggling to develop honest, affirming love relationships. The
patently negative gender ideology reserved for African Americans cer-
tainly cannot form a foundation for loving relationships. How can seem-
ingly “wild” women and men learn to love one another? In his discussion
of Snoop Doggie Dog’s choice of “dog” as a term for Black men, Paul
Gilroy wryly observes, “the dog and the bitch belong together. They are a
couple, but their association does not bring about sexual healing.”
19 Or as
Joan Morgan suggests, “Sistas are hurt when we hear brothers calling us
bitches and hos. But the real crime isn’t the name-calling, it’s their failure
to love us—to be our brothers in the way that we commit ourselves to being
their sistas. But recognize: Any man who doesn’t truly love himself is inca-
pable of loving us in the healthy way we need to be loved. It’s extremely
telling men who can only see us as ‘bitches’ and ‘hos’ refer to themselves
only as ‘niggas.’
20 
At the same time, those African Americans who try to build their love
relationships on the foundation of traditional gender ideology reserved for
258


--- PAGE 270 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
Whites often find that the economic, political, and social opportunities
denied to Black people limit their chances of success. In this regard, a gen-
der ideology that defines “real” Black men as hyper-heterosexual can com-
promise love relationships. Conrad R. Pegues points out how the
convergence of heterosexism with racism can add another layer of unreal-
istic expectations, false hope, and disappointment for Black heterosexuals: 
Homophobia breeds the living of lies, causing black women angrily to
say that there are not enough “good” men around. The war of the sexes
in the black community fuels a lack of trust in black men in general. No
one stops to ask if the definition of a man is really viable if it allows
black heterosexual men to be abusive and emotionally inaccessible and
causes some black homosexual men to play with black women’s emo-
tions in their attempt to live by the accepted standards of male social
behavior . . . when trying to live a lie about one’s sexual preference,
your feelings get so wrapped up in what you’re doing to hide your true
self from the public that you don’t develop an authentic emotional life.
21 
Moving toward more affirming intimate love relationships must
involve honesty. In describing how issues of sexuality and love can alter
relationships between African American men and women, Debra, a forty-
five-year-old barber, wonders why Black men seem so reluctant to be fully
honest:
The thing I’ve come to understand about relationships is that friend-
ship is love. Everything that draws one person to another—whether it’s
sexual or non-sexual, between men and women, men and men or
women and women—is a type of love. And that love is content with
itself. It’s a good and positive thing. It’s funny that black men don’t
seem to understand this. They know how to be friends with a woman,
and they can be honest in that friendship. But in love relationships, they
may be good men but they aren’t honest with women about who they
are and what they want. They just don’t seem to be able to do this on a
one-to-one basis with a black woman.
22 
If Black men encounter social pressures to define masculinity in terms of
their ability to dominate women, gay men, and children, no wonder that
259


--- PAGE 271 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
many men will have trouble being honest with the women who love them.
The openness that is so hard to develop requires African American women
and African American men to see honestly who the other person really is
and love them unconditionally. Rebellious relationships would recognize
that “the greatest gift that can be given to someone you love is to give them
the gift to see themselves as you see them.”
23 Because existing gender ide-
ology hides African American men and women from one another, it rein-
forces oppression in ways that become very difficult to uproot. Racism,
class exploitation, sexism, and heterosexism erase the humanity of Black
men and women. Returning that humanity in the context of heterosexual
love relationships profoundly rocks this system. 
BREAKING THE RULES: CROSSING THE COLOR LINE 
The 1967 film Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner broke one of the cardinal
rules governing love relationships. Depicting the impending marriage
between Dr. John Prentice, an African American physician (played by
Sidney Poitier), and Joey Drayton, the young, idealistic daughter of a
prominent White San Francisco publisher, the film examined parental
responses to breaking the “same race” rule. As is true of many Hollywood
films, the characters in this film were no ordinary people. The doctor had
to be exceptionally qualified to marry a White woman—this Prentice
proved by getting the monsignor of a church in San Francisco to vouch for
his credentials (thus putting to rest questions of whether this Black man
was really a doctor). Thus, only a wealthy, highly educated, and quasi
famous African American man was suitable for interracial marriage. The
standards applied to his future bride were far less stringent. She was phys-
ically attractive and wealthy—a good catch for any man. But her politics
were more prominent than those of her future husband. Joey was a naïve,
romantic White woman whose unflinching belief in the logic of color
blindness made her suitable for interracial marriage. Only someone this
idealistic and sheltered could fail to notice the massive Black social protests
that occurred in the United States in the 1960s. As a couple, they were
notoriously asexual—they are seen kissing but once in the film, and the
audience views this event through a cabdriver’s rearview mirror. The
parental response was predictable—both fathers objected to the marriage
and both mothers were more supportive. Sadly, the roles played by the two
260


--- PAGE 272 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
African American women in the film both drew upon the mammy figure.
The first, Poitier’s long-suffering Black mother, was initially upset to see
her son marry outside the race, but she is willing to put her feelings aside
in order to help a string of characters work through their own reactions.
Unfortunately, the second, the Black maid who raised Joey, rudely ques-
tions whether this African American man, regardless of his credentials, is
really deserving of a White woman. Rolling her eyes and accusing the doc-
tor of being a hustler, her mannerism states, “I know your game mister, and
you’ll have to get by me to hurt this precious little White girl.”
Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner presented a fictional treatment of the
greatly changed legal context ushered in that same year by Loving v.
Virginia, the landmark U.S. Supreme Court case that lifted the ban on
interracial marriage.
24 By the standards of 1967, couples like that depicted
in Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner or the litigants in the Lovingcase were
rebellious. They broke the rules and, in the case of the Lovingcase, got
those rules overturned. But is crossing the color line still rebellious to the
same degree? 
In the over thirty years since the film’s release, the percentage of
African Americans who have crossed the color line to marry interracially
has grown. But the depiction of interracial love in Guess Who’s Coming to
Dinneralso foreshadowed a pronounced and, from the perspective of het-
erosexual Black women, troubling trend of the post–civil rights era,
namely, the numbers of African American men involved in interracial love
relationships with White women far outnumbers that of African American
women with White men.
25 These growing rates of interracial marriage
(albeit still statistically small) aggravated a long-standing double standard
within African American civil society—Black men who date and marry
White women are received quite differently from Black women who date
and marry White men. For example, Rod, an African American man in his
thirties married to a White woman, describes how his family most likely
would react if his sisters married White men: “Honestly, they would prob-
ably not be accepted . . . for the men, most of the men, we have had rela-
tionships, have brought the women to a family gathering, but not my
sisters. Too much negative response from the family.”
26 Even though the
changed legal and social climate of desegregation gave both African
American women and men the right to break the “same race” rule, a con-
stellation of social factors censured Black women from doing so while
261


--- PAGE 273 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
winking at Black men who did. Apparently, rebelling against the “marry
the same race” rule operates differently for Black men and Black women.27
Traditional explanations for this double standard identify the different
histories of African American women and men in the United States as a
factor that greatly influences contemporary Black community norms. For
African American women, acquiring legal rights meant freedom from
White male persecution. Historically, good Black women were those who
resisted the sexual advances of White men, not those who invited them.
The history for men differed. One mark of hegemonic White masculinity
lay in its ability to restrict the sexual partners available to Black men.
African American men were forbidden to engage in sexual relations with
all White women, let alone marry them. In this context, any expansion of
the pool of female sexual partners enhances African American men’s
standing within the existing system of hierarchical masculinities. Thus,
within Black civil society, African American women in interracial love rela-
tionships face the stigma of being accused of being race traitors and
whores, whereas African American men engaged in similar relationships
can find their status as men raised. 
Norms of racial solidarity that posit that African American men and
women should support one another in every way aggravate this double
standard. The rule of “marry within your race” is more easily enforced for
Black women. But when Black men break the rule and seem to benefit from
this transgression, community norms are brought to bear on them as well.
Rejecting the idealized perspective of “love conquers all” advanced within
Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner, African American artists who adhere to the
norm of racial solidarity routinely question and often reject outright inter-
racial love and marriage relationships as being bad for Black people. For
example, many of Spike Lee’s films censure such relationships, reflecting
a Black nationalist–inspired agenda in which to marry outside the “race”
does disservice to the race. These themes are directly developed in Jungle
Fever, Lee’s 1991 feature-length film about a successful African American
male architect who has an affair with Angela, his White Italian secretary.
Leaving his beautiful and accomplished African American wife and daugh-
ter, Flipper seems bitten by “jungle fever,” or a carnal (doglike) Black male
attraction for White women. Flipper “flips” the script and brings the
White woman home to meet his African American parents. As evidenced
by the reaction of Flipper’s parents (played by Ozzie Davis and Ruby Dee)
262


--- PAGE 274 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
when Flipper brought Angela home for dinner, Lee’s message is clear. No
Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner liberal machinations occurred around the
parental dinner table. Neither parent struggled to become “color-blind.”
Instead, Flipper’s parents told Angela outright that her Whiteness was a
problem and that she was not welcome. Despite Lee’s efforts to pressure
African American men to commit to Black women, one wonders why this
need to pressure Black men to choose Black women as partners exists in
the first place. If Black women were as worthwhile as White ones, why
wouldn’t Black men choose them?
African American women face a serious problem in this new desegre-
gated America that cannot be resolved simply by branching out and pur-
suing White men as partners. Growing numbers of heterosexual African
American women face bleak prospects for finding committed, loving rela-
tionships with men of any race. Within marketplace relationships of priv-
ilege and penalty, African American women’s race and gender classification
disadvantages them. As Maria Root observes, “Black women have been
rendered less desirable by both race and gender and are thus partnered in
intermarriages proportionately less than any other group. . . . Thus, when
a Black woman suggests that ‘white women are out to get any man they can’
or ‘are trying to take all the good Black men,’ her statements reflect a
demographic fact.”
28 Unfortunately, rather than questioning the market-
place model and race and gender ideology that produces this “demo-
graphic fact,” and Root conveniently ignores the growing problem of
Black women alone and uncritically celebrates all interracial love relation-
ships as “revolutionary.” African American women seem to be the group
most overlooked in a political economy that erases its own workings and
appears to be much more concerned to protect the rights of individuals to
“love who they want.” Thus, the Black women who roll their eyes at inter-
racial couples are not seen as sympathetic figures—they become recast as
familiar stereotypical Black bitches who stand in the way of progress, in
this case, the march toward a multiracial America. 
This is a real conundrum—Loving v. Virginiagranted formalrights to
African American men and women to marry whomever they want. But the
denial of realistic opportunities to do so coupled with a pernicious gender
ideology that derogates Black womeanhood has meant that the vast major-
ity of heterosexual African American women lack substantiveopportunities
to exercise this freedom of choice. Moreover, those who do are labeled as
263


--- PAGE 275 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
less authentic Black women who become censured for somehow selling out
the race. This double standard and the reality of so many African
American women without partners is bound to lead to friction in how
Black men and women interpret the interracial marriages that do exist. It
also further exacerbates the strained relationships among heterosexual
African American women and men. 
Many Black men recognize how the power of Black community norms
and lack of partners for African American women affects them. For exam-
ple, Harlon Dalton tries to reconcile his commitment to African American
political struggle and to African American women with his decision to
marry a White woman: “Ultimately, I decided that if anything in life is
personal, and therefore free from social obligation, it is our intimate rela-
tionships. And I took comfort in the fact that there are many, many ways to
show love for my people. Nevertheless, I was, and remain, acutely aware
that, in symbolic terms, marrying outside the race is easily seen as a rejec-
tion of Black people, and of Black women in particular. And symbols mat-
ter.”
29 Recognizing that “symbols matter” and that, for many, his marriage
breaks an important African American community norm, Dalton identifies
intimate love relationships as one important site of individual, personal
freedom. He defends his right to love whomever he wants as a right that all
human beings should have. But despite Dalton’s sensitivity in exploring
painful issues, not all African American women accept his version of love.
As Jill Nelson bitingly observes, “The more cautious among them insist
that it’s not that they consciously ‘chose’ a white woman, they ‘just fell in
love.’ They conveniently cloak themselves in an adolescent notion of love
as a state independent of history, politics, and cultural conditioning that we
inadvertently and unintentionally ‘fall’ into, like a sinkhole.”
30
Because African American women are the ones left without partners
and alone, apparently, African American women remain the group most
bothered by this situation. Like the maid in Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner,
they remain stigmatized as “bitches” when they complain. For example,
author Maria Root seems mesmerized by her own book’s title. In Love’s
Revolution, she clearly sees interracial love and marriage as “revolution-
ary.” At the same time, whereas she does describe the difficulties that
African American women have in marrying interracially, she is far more
concerned with protecting White women from “blame” for social relations
that leave African American women without partners. Instead, she puts the
264


--- PAGE 276 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
responsibility not on the African American men and White women
involved in such relationships but on the convenient target of White men:
“White women are not to blame, however: the construction of whiteness
and its control by white men are responsible. While white women are sec-
ond-class citizens by gender, ironically they have more room to search for
other partners.”
31 In this universe, White women as “second-class citizens
by gender” seemingly benefit from desegregation because they have “more
room” to search for partners among those historically off-limits. Views
such as these not only leave political and economic factors that frame the
new racism unexamined, they conveniently let White women off the hook.
They also reify long-standing images of White women either as passive
creatures without agency or as moral women who, unlike their Black sis-
ters, hold fast to the core American belief of “color blindness.”
32
Social and economic conditions certainly establish the parameters for
interracial love relationships—after all, it is difficult to fall in love with
someone of a different race whom you never meet because you attend
racially segregated schools, live in racially segregated neighborhoods, and
spend the bulk of your time with people of your own social class and citi-
zenship status. Difference in the border zones of racial desegregation may
increase the allure of the long forbidden “other”—Spike Lee’s infamous
“jungle fever” thesis. But the reasons why some African American men
marry White women rather than African American women go beyond
White women as forbidden fruit or White women’s pursuit of Black men
(the case of Black athletes, for example). 
Harlon Dalton recognizes that many African American women ques-
tion his decision to marry a White woman: “I realize that some of you are
thinking, ‘If you care about Black women so much, why didn’t you marry
one?’ That is a perfectly fair question, especially in light of my suggestion
that love and obligation are wellsprings of community. The answer begins
with the simple yet profound fact that I fell in love with a woman who is
White.”
33 Dalton’s comments are telling. His wife may be “White,” but
because White women are very diverse, the racial consciousness of White
women is equally heterogeneous. 
Some White women lack a consciousness of racism and only see their
Black lovers through prevailing ideas of Black masculinity. To this day, I
remain stunned by the memory of a small group of White women who
approached me after a talk on a large, predominantly White, public uni-
265


--- PAGE 277 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
versity in a rural area in the Midwest. The girls announced that they were
all dating Black men and that did not know any Black women who were
willing to answer their questions. They wondered if I had any tips for them
when they had their biracial babies. Unlike the many heterosexual African
Americans who also routinely approach me after talks to share painful sto-
ries of how rejected they feel, especially by Black men, these White women
had no doubt that they would marry Black men. They knew that they were
part of “love’s revolution.” In contrast, other White women craft complex
White identities through a prism of antiracist analysis. Dalton’s wife Jill
seems to fall into this category. Several months into their relationship, Jill
asked him, “Why are you dating a White woman?” Dalton recalls, “that
conversation had a profoundly liberating effect on me, for it let me know
that Jill saw and understood herself as a person with a race and that she had
no interest in trying to pretend that we could, or should, lead a colorblind
or colorless existence.”
34 For Jill, the task was not to erase Whiteness but to
change its meaning in the context of the politics of color-blind America.
By this decision, she became a race rebel. 
In the 1990s, popular culture began to examine the issues within inter-
racial love relationships. For example, recent feature films have begun to
explore interracial relationships of African American women that grants
them the type of individual freedom claimed by Black men and White
women. The Black women depicted in these films are quite different from
Guess Who’s Coming To Dinner’s long-suffering mother or uppity maid, or
of Jungle Fever’s Black professional women whose painful discussion of
why Flipper and other Black male professionals show a predilection for
White women remains legendary. For example, in Waiting to Exhale, when
Bernadine (played by Angela Bassett) discovers that her spouse has been
cheating on her with his Whitesecretary, she throws him out of their lux-
urious house, puts his expensive suits in his car, and sets it on fire. “Would
it be better if she were Black?” her husband asks. “No—it would be better
if you were Black!” she replies. Long-suffering Black women are appar-
ently out—dealing with the White Woman issue requires exhaling right-
eous anger. 
Interracial love relationships are at the forefront of changing race rela-
tions in the United States, but the direction that they will go is far from set-
tled. In this regard, the increasing visibility of biracial African Americans in
scholarship and within popular culture and the partners they choose pro-
266


--- PAGE 278 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
vides yet another angle of vision on the fate of the “same race, different
gender” rule. Interestingly, the emerging archetype of the biracial Black
child is typically female, light-skinned, and sporting a curly mop of hair
that marks her as not-White but as also not-Black.
35 How will these Black
biracial women respond to the “same race, different gender” rules?
Apparently, middle-class women have far more freedom to love whomever
they want than do working-class women. The 1998 film Mixing Niatakes
up exactly this issue. Nia (played by Karyn Parsons), the highly educated,
biracial daughter of a White Jewish father and a Black mother, quits her job
at an ad agency over some racially offensive material. Recognizing that she
knows little of the blackness that seems to be so important to her ad agency
(they want her to market a questionable product to Black ghetto youth using
icons from “authentic” Black culture), Nia tries to find a career as a writer.
Through this quest, Nia encounters an updated version of the “tragic
mulatto” whereby the old “tragic” flaw of mixed-race identity and rejection
by Whites and Blacks alike becomes transformed into Nia’s “tragic” flaw of
feeling White, identifying with Whites, yet remaining saddled with the
restrictions of being viewed as Black. Nia searches for her Black identity
through an intimate love relationship with a Black Nationalist professor but
eventually rejects him for the benefits of color blindness. Nia is free to date
whomever she pleases, and she does. At the end of the film, however, she
discovers her own story, a biracial one that grants her freedom to be an indi-
vidual who can date, love, and be whomever she pleases. In an ideal world,
all of those Black women alone would experience the same degree of free-
dom that seemingly is available to Nia.
The 1992 film Zebraheadprovides one of the best analyses of crossing
the color line presented within contemporary films. Here the forbidden
relationship occurs among the young, the group that seemingly represents
the future of America. But these are not affluent, suburban young peo-
ple—the adolescents in Zebraheadare working-class, attend high school in
Detroit, and are clearly of the hip-hop generation. In this context, Nikki a
young brown-skinned African American girl from a single-parent home,
meets Zeke, the White friend of her cousin. Zeke is no ordinary White boy.
He loves Black culture, has Black friends, yet, unlike his White friends, he
does not see Black culture and African Americans as primitive, promiscu-
ous, and exotic. Zeke and Nikki fall in love and other African American
young men resent their relationship. Nikki’s cousin is accidentally killed, in
267


--- PAGE 279 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
part, because of his friendship with Zeke and for his acceptance of Nikki
and Zeke’s relationship. The sobering message of Zebraheadseems light
years away from the upbeat humor of Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner—love
whom you like, but keep in mind that the “same race” rule is alive, your
dinner guest may not be welcome, and crossing the color line can still get
you killed.
BREAKING THE RULES: LOVING THE SAME IN YOU 
In 1991, P.O.V. (Point of View), the public television series that features
independently produced films, scheduled critically acclaimed director
Marlon Riggs’s video documentary Tongues Untied. The video explores the
circumstances, politics, and culture of Black gay men using a mixture of
styles ranging from social documentary to experimental montage, personal
narrative, and lyric poetry. Relying on an array of Black and/or gay cul-
tural forms, the video mixes the music of Billie Holiday and Nina Simone
with the poetry of Essex Hemphill and Joseph Beam; it presents vogue
dance and Snap! expression. Tongues Untiedclearly fits within the mission
of P.O.V. Yet, unlike Riggs’s prior work, which had been shown with little
controversy, Tongues Untiedraised a firestorm of controversy. Seventeen of
fifty major public television stations refused to show it, claiming that
“community standards” would find it offensive. Some stations pointed to
specific elements that might offend their audiences such as the frequent
use of the word “fuck,” a drawing of a penis, and a scene showing two men
kissing. The video documentary also came under greater scrutiny due to its
funding. Along with private donations, Riggs’ had financed the video with
a $5,000 grant from the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA), a fed-
eral agency supporting literary, visual, and performing artists. Moreover,
because the P.O.V. series itself also received funding from the NEA, crit-
ics of Tongues Untiedquestioned whether government funding should sup-
port art that many found to be obscene. Responding to the controversy,
Riggs vehemently opposed the charge of “obscenity.” He expressed frus-
tration at what he saw as mainstream Black America’s “collusion” by its
silence with this “nakedly homophobic and covertly racial assault.” Riggs
pointed out another purpose behind the “obscenity” rhetoric: the charge of
being too “graphic” or “grossly offensive” provided the perfect pretext for
“silencing a disenfranchised minority’s attempt to end its subjugation and
268


--- PAGE 280 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
challenge the cultural terms of the majority’s social control. Having
deemed the language of black gay men unsuitable for public broadcast,
tongues untied were peremptorily re-tied.”
36
Six years later, Cheryl Dunye’s 1997 film Watermelon Woman also
broke new ground, but this time for Black lesbians. With Dunye playing
the lead role in a mock documentary, the plot of the film focuses on a
young Philadelphia video store employee whose burning ambition to
become a filmmaker fosters her determination to make a documentary. In
the film, Cheryl becomes increasingly fascinated with an obscure Black
actress who appeared in a number of Hollywood films in the 1930s, known
only as the Watermelon Woman. Taking a cue from Black feminist histori-
ography that has been devoted to documenting, recovering, and analyzing
lost histories of African American women, the mock documentary traces
Cheryl’s efforts to reclaim the Watermelon Woman’s past, a search that
symbolizes efforts of Black lesbians to reclaim a closeted history. Using her
camera rather than fiction as her primary tool of discovery, Dunye’s
Watermelon Womanexplored a variety of themes of Black lesbian identity
and sexuality. For one, it examined how norms of racial solidarity within
African American communities affect LGBT Black people. Cheryl’s best
friend and coworker (also a lesbian) became uptight when Cheryl began a
romance with a White customer. For another, Watermelon Womandepicts
lesbian sexuality, a rarity in films that reach larger audiences. Moreover,
lesbian sexuality occurs not between two African American women but
across the lines of race. Whereas one reviewer described the film’s love
scenes as “the epitome of discreet eroticism,” its depiction of lesbian sex-
uality sparked another NEA funding debate. “It is inconceivable that had
the actors been of the same race but not the same sex, such a sequence
could have caused such a furor.
37
The controversies that greeted Tongues Untiedand Watermelon Woman
illustrate the difficulties that Black LGBT people face in toppling the
“marry the opposite gender” rule. When they come out and are visible,
whether partnered or not, all lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered
individuals break the rule of choose a different gender. But as revealed in
the literature of LGBT African Americans, the politics of “coming out”
have different consequences for Black Americans than for Whites. The vis-
ibility of Black LGBT individuals is doubly jarring in the context of a
racialized history that constructs homosexuality as white. In this context,
269


--- PAGE 281 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
visible “out” Black gays and lesbians (let alone those who use the word
“fuck,” kiss one another, and shamelessly film their exploits as did charac-
ters in films by Riggs and Dunye) challenge heterosexist and racial norms
adhered to by Whites and Blacks alike. In essence, “out” LGBT African
Americans are inherently rebellious, regardless of their choice of love
interest, the sexual practices they prefer, and/or whether they are sexually
active at all.
Unlike African American heterosexual relationships, or interracial
heterosexual relationships, the committed love relationships of African
American lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered people remain under-
studied and virtually invisible. Black LGBT people and politics are cer-
tainly more visible than ever before, especially regarding the process of
coming out.
38 But when compared to the volumes written about Black het-
erosexual love relationships, historical and social scientific studies of the
intimate love relationships and sexual practices of LGBT Black people
remain far less common.
39
When it comes to Black gays and lesbians, answering even relatively
simple questions can take on major proportions. How many LGBT cou-
ples are there? How do they meet? How long do they stay together? How
do they manage responsibilities within their households? How does one
measure commitment among homosexual couples? Social science literature
has a series of indicators to answer these questions for straight people.
Within social science, for example, marriage is widely used as a primary
indicator of committed love relationships. Yet relying solely on this indi-
cator distorts the experiences of people who live together in committed
partnerships, but who either choose not to marry (shack up) or who, like
Black gays and lesbians, are forbidden to marry.
40 Social science research is
making progress but LGBT relationships remain understudied. 41 Given
this context, the results of the Black Pride Survey 2000, a survey of 2,645
African American attendees of nine regional Black Gay Pride celebrations
does provide an important preliminary snapshot of the love relationships
of Black LGBT people. While not a representative sample of Black LGBT
people in the United States, the survey does provide an important supple-
ment to the more general findings of the 2000 census.
42 The survey identi-
fied noticeable differences among men and women in committed
relationships—Black lesbians were more likely to be in committed rela-
tionships than Black gay men—and also found that Black lesbians were
270


--- PAGE 282 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
more likely than Black gay men to have children living with them. This
issue of marriage and domestic partnership was so high on the list of Black
lesbians that it was identified as one of the top three issues facing Black
LGBT people.
43 
As was the case for social science research prior to the Black Pride
Survey, until the appearance of works such as Tongues Untied and
Watermelon Womanin the 1990s, Black gays and lesbians had largely been
written out of Black film and television histories. Through fiction, poetry,
and interpretive essays, Black lesbian and bisexual writers such as Barbara
Smith, Pat Parker, Audre Lorde, and June Jordan had long written about
their lives and their relationships.
44 Essays and fiction by gay Black men
have also explored themes of homosexual desire. 45 Black LGBT eroticism
has existed, but it has neither been widely depicted in visual media nor in
Black popular culture. Black gay and lesbian themes that until recently
have been largely explored via fiction, poetry, and interpretive essays now
move into the more visible and influential media of video, film, and public
and cable television. 
With love relationships so ignored by scholarship and media alike, the
representations that do appear within popular culture can take on added
importance, because, unlike the large number of films on Black heterosex-
ual relationships and the growing treatment of interracial heterosexual
relationships, representations of LGBT relationships and Black gay sexu-
ality occur in an interpretive vacuum. As a general rule of thumb, Black
gay and lesbian characters are denied both love relationships and sexual
expression on film. Mainstream films typically relegate Black lesbians and
Black gay men to stereotypical roles in which they are identified as homo-
sexual but are denied on-screen sexual relationships. Reminiscent of the
tragic mulatto, Black lesbians seem to have acquired the mantle of the
tragic lesbian saddled with unrequited love, often for a White woman. In
the feature film Boys on the Side, Whoopee Goldberg portrays Jane, a Black
lesbian who loves Robin, a dying White woman. Jane unselfishly cares for
Robin during the last days of her life. In this film, friendship is acceptable,
with the notion of unrequited romantic and sexual love used to highlight
the expressive energy of the friendship. The message about love seems to
be that love cannot supersede heterosexuality and that sexual love can be
expressed only through a friendship. In contrast to the tragic lesbian, Cleo,
Queen Latifah’s character in the 1996 feature film Set It Off, depicts the
271


--- PAGE 283 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
stereotypical image of the butch Black lesbian. The lesbian couple in Set It
Offdoes not have a sex scene. Rather, their relationship is only a footnote
used to explain the main character’s butch demeanor. More typically, Black
lesbians are simply absent.
For lesbian and gay African Americans, on-screen romantic relation-
ships are more often implied that depicted. White lesbian relationships in
mainstream films are more likely to contain sexual scenes, for example, the
sex scenes between two White women in Boys Don’t Cryand Chasing Amy.
Films with Black lesbians are more discreet. For example, The Color
Purple, Daughters of the Dust, and The Women ofBrewster Place all present
African American lesbian couples. However, in contrast to heterosexual
sexuality, in all of the films, sexuality is suggested but rarely seen. In
Women of Brewster Place, the lesbian couple clearly lives together in a
romantic partnership, encounter the censure and ridicule of neighborhood
residents who are aware of their lesbian relationship, yet the audience
never sees the sexual nature of that relationship, even when the women are
home alone together. Julie Dash’s critically acclaimed independent film
Daughters of the Dust(1992) also has lesbian characters, but here too, no
space exists for explicit sexuality. The sexuality associated with Celie and
Shug’s lesbian relationship in Alice Walker’s novel The Color Purplenever
makes it into the film version. With the exception of pornography, where
explicit sexuality between two women of color is common practice, finding
examples of two African American women engaged in a sexual act in a
movie remains difficult.
Films such as Tongues Untiedand the Watermelon Womancould hap-
pen only in a greatly changed intellectual and political climate in which
love relationships that break the “same gender” rule have become more
open. Through an increased visibility of Black LGBT people, and their
being more vocal in claiming lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered
identities, Black LGBT people have identified several issues that shape
Black gay love and sexuality. For one, the increasing visibility of gays and
lesbians in wider society has enabled LGBT African Americans to question
prevailing Black sexual politics. With the exception of large urban areas,
historically, LGBT Black people have often remained closeted, tolerated
within segregated African American communities just as long as they
remained silent concerning their sexuality.
46 In contrast, in the post–civil
rights era of desegregation, many LBGT African Americans are not
272


--- PAGE 284 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
ashamed of their sexual orientation, do not consider it to be a problem or
a sin, and refuse to devalue it. Consider, for example, Donna Allegra’s tes-
timony of how she feels about her love of women: 
The upshot of my lesbian identity is that I fall in love with female peo-
ple—and want to. I don’t see this as a “lifestyle”—such a temporary-
sounding term. It brings to mind this season’s fall fashions or a layout
of home decoration. . . . My lesbianism is more the ground zero of an
emotional compass, ever searching out women. This orientation of my
heart is not going to change because I don’t want it to. I’ve never been
tormented by my lesbianness. In fact, it’s a favorite part of me, as
Goddess given as being Black. What I have been tormented by is peo-
ple’s homophobia—their deliberate ignorance concerning my affec-
tional orientation, their active offenses against me because of my sexu-
ality. I am not the problem here.
47 
Allegra is not “tormented” by being a lesbian. Rather, she sees homopho-
bia as the problem, not her own sexuality. This is the orientation she takes
with her into her love relationships.
Allegra’s comments speak to another important issue raised by Black
gays and lesbians as having an important effect on their lives, namely, cop-
ing with heterosexual African Americans’ often-negative reaction to homo-
sexuality, especially Black same-sex desire and/or love relationships. Far
too often, LGBT African Americans feel that they cannot remain within
African American communities and have open, committed same-sex rela-
tionships. According to womanist theologian Kelly Douglas, the homo-
phobia that many heterosexual Black people express toward LGBT people
overall is one consequence of “sexual humiliation” that has left Black men
and women vulnerable to adopting dysfunctional perceptions of masculin-
ity and femininity. Moreover, this Black gender ideology also obliges them
to “negate the humanity and worth of gay and lesbian persons whose ways
of being challenge their distorted views of sexuality.”
48 In this situation,
the politics of respectability that suppress discussions of Black sexuality in
general operate to police Black LGBT sexualities that are seen as being a
threat to the integrity of the entire African American community. In this
context, Black LGBT people may remain closeted within their African
American families and Black civil society; yet, they also may live open
273


--- PAGE 285 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
“out” lives once they leave African American residential enclaves. Love
relationships become negotiated in the context of shifting patterns of sex-
ual identification marked by varying degrees of familiarity. Ironically, for
LGBT African Americans, coming out of the sexual closet may require
leaving the seeming safety of Black communities. 
This theme of safety emerges as an important component of relation-
ships of gay and bisexual Black men who are living on the Down Low
(DL). While living ostensibly heterosexual lives, often with wives and girl-
friends, Black men on the DL have sex with men. For many men on the
Down Low, the label is both “an announcement of masculinity and a sep-
aration from white gay culture. To them, it is the safest identity available—
they don’t risk losing their ties to family, friends, and black culture.”
49 In
recent years, DL culture has grown out of the shadows and has developed
its own contemporary institutions, for those who know where to look: web-
sites, Internet chat rooms, private parties, and special nights at clubs. This
subculture enables Black men on the DL to avoid the ridicule, rejection,
and danger often encountered by gays who are out. Explaining why these
men do not go to gay bars, “in a black world that puts a premium on hyper-
masculinty, men who have sex with other men are particularly sensitive to
not appearing soft in any way.”
50 
Leaving racially separate communities broadens the pool of potential
love interests, but it also increases the possibilities that new partners may
be non-Black. This tension fosters another important theme affecting
Black LBGT love relationships, namely, the “same race” rule also affects
African American lesbians, gays, bisexuals, and transgendered people. In
this regard, LBGT African American love relationships share at least one
issue with their heterosexual counterparts—interracial dating remains
controversial. Moreover, as was the case with Black heterosexual love rela-
tionships, regardless of actual numbers, the visibility of Black LBGT peo-
ple who have White partners and lovers compounds the issue. As Boykin
observes, “gay interracial couples often face the scorn of Whites and
Blacks alike. Derogatory terms like ‘snow queen’ (a Black person who pri-
marily dates Whites) and ‘dinge queen’ (a White person who primarily
dates Blacks) identify these modern day ‘race traitors.’”
51 
Whites often view interracial LBGT sexuality and relationships as
especially rebellious. Having a same-sex lover is shocking, but having one
who is also Black is even more scandalous. This world of interracial LGBT
274


--- PAGE 286 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
sexuality as inherently rebellious may resonate with White gays and les-
bians whose sexual paradigms have had difficulty accommodating race and
whose politics often exclude African American people.
52 Not everyone
agrees that interracial LGBT sexuality is inherently rebellious. In his essay
“Dinge,” Robert Reid-Pharr challenges the notion that interracial gay sex-
uality is a site of liberation, and thus muddies the waters for those who
would claim that interracial gay and lesbian love relationships are inher-
ently progressive and that the sex act itself transcends everyday power rela-
tions. Using a psychoanalytic framework to challenge the assumptions of
queer theory that gay and lesbian sex is inherently rebellious and need not
be analyzed, Reid-Pharr argues that race operates within this form of sex-
ual expression. His question “What do we think when we fuck?” suggests
that all forms of sexuality (including intraracial and interracial heterosex-
uality) are sites of acceptance and rebellion. As Reid-Pharr points out,
“what is more difficult to accept is the idea that the sexual act, at least as it
is performed between queers . . . is not necessarily a good, expansive, and
liberatory thing, a place in which individuals exist for a moment outside
themselves such that new possibilities are at once imagined and actual-
ized.”
53 Instead, he argues: “We do not escape race and racism when we
fuck. On the contrary, this fantasy of escape is precisely that which marks
the sexual act as deeply implicated in the ideological processes by which
difference is constructed and maintained.”
54 
FOSTERING REBELLION
For African Americans coping with the multiple prisons and closets that
symbolize intersecting oppressions, it is important to develop more sophis-
ticated understandings of freedom. In her 1999 memoir The Prisoner’s
Wife, Asha Bandele describes how she came to fall in love with Rashid, a
prisoner who had been convicted of murder. Rashid’s actual prison and
Asha’s psychological one were contemporary manifestations of a historical
process of oppression. Her narrative explores how love within a prison
served as a form of rebellion. Their love for one another set both partners
on a path toward a freedom that recognized the constraints of prison yet
transcended its boundaries. The actual prison walls that separated her
from Rashid were real, not socially constructed. Just as Rashid could not
“break out” of prison, the structural constraints that circle Black people’s
275


--- PAGE 287 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
love relationships often limit choice. Asha also had her own internalized
prisons, namely, the emotional scars that she carried due to sexual violence
associated with racism, sexism, and heterosexism. Asha could rebel against
the harm done to her by changing her consciousness, but this strategy had
its limits. As individuals, neither Rashid nor Asha had the power to destroy
the prisons of ghettoization and incarceration that circumscribed both of
their lives. 
Asha Bandele’s memoirs may speak from the specificity of African
American experience, in this case, a heterosexual love relationship with an
incarcerated partner, but the themes she explores apply to all people who
wish to love within situations that forbid them to do so: 
The prison itself played a significant role in solidifying how we were
with each other, how close we would become. The prison, with all of its
efforts to keep us unsteady, uncomfortable, and unable to love, became
my adversary. Its stance against love automatically made me take a
stance for love; I became a warrior. When I went to war, then, initially I
thought I was battling against the bars and steel, the chains and cells,
the brutal separation. . . . After enough time had passed that I was
allowed some perspective, I came to see the battles quite differently,
however. When all of my tactics and strategies had played out . . . in the
end, the only one left in ruins was me. When the shock of seeing myself
destroyed wore off, I realized it was not so terrible. The me in me who
had been killed was the me who had gone through life with shifty eyes,
the ones that always greeted love sideways, looking at it askance, always
as a potential enemy. I tell Rashid this, about how I had once looked at
love, and he said he understood. He said that it was how he felt once,
before me, before us. This was how we came to see ourselves as rebels.
We vowed a lifetime of battles against anything and anyone who tried to
block our love from coming.
55 
Rashid’s incarceration demanded that both partners define themselves dif-
ferently and perceive one another differently than had they met in another
time and place. Bandele recognized that the prison “played a significant
role in solidifying how we were with each other, how close we would
become” and decided to take a stance against it. Bandele came to see how
her humanity had never been allowed to develop fully because she too had
276


--- PAGE 288 ---
NO STORYBOOK ROMANCE
been in her own prison. Trying to beat prison by its own terms simply
could not take her to the next step. “In the end, the only one left in ruins
was me,” she surmises. 
The physical prison that incarcerated Rashid certainly curtailed both
of their movements. But the larger prison that created it, namely, the his-
tory of racial oppression refracted through the lens of class, gender, and
sexuality, presents a particular kind of prison that circumscribes all African
American love relationships. The effects of past-in-present racism seen in
contemporary demographics of schooling, housing, health, and jobs, and
the deeply entrenched ideologies that justify these outcomes through a
never-ending array of mass media images of Black masculinity and Black
femininity speak to the necessity of Black dehumanization for the new
racism. Ironically, the new prisons created by racial segregation and the
erasure of Black pain through a blind commitment to color blindness now
turns everything upside down. For African Americans, the mark of
humanity (and, by implication, for everyone else) may be the ability to love
fully, to see other people for who they are as fully human beings, to love
within the context of oppression, and to bend or break the rules described
here. 
Asha and Rashid’s courtship and marriage is not just another love
story. For these two individuals, resistance came in rejecting the categories
that confined them, seeing the actual and the larger societal prison for what
it actually was, and engaging in the rebellious act of loving one another.
When Asha saw what kind of woman she had become, one who “had gone
through life with shifty eyes, the ones that always greeted love sideways,
looking at it askance, always as a potential enemy,” she realized how dam-
aged she had been by trying to play by prison rules. Bandele and Rashid
saw that oppression operates by distorting this basic ability to see and love
one another as fully human beings. They decided to become rebels and
claim their humanity, even within the strictures of a physical prison.
Asha and Rashid’s love story is significant in that it points the way
toward a different kind of love for individuals. Their story is certainly
inspiring and can be read as a story of hope. However, whether these two
individuals “make it or not” is not the issue. They are not “role models”
whose actions should be emulated. The lesson here for Black women is not
one of “go to prison and get yourself your own Rashid.” Rather, their rela-
tionship of love within the context of prison points the way toward new
277


--- PAGE 289 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
self-definitions and new actions that recognize the humanity of those
around us in the context of oppression. Such love need not be sexual, nor
must it be within the same age group or across genders or within one race.
Rather, this interior space of “love” described by Asha can serve as a space
of freedom if only we are willing to imagine new possibilities.
278


--- PAGE 290 ---
NINE
WHY WE CAN’T WAIT
Black Sexual Politics and the 
Challenge of HIV/AIDS
On May 3, 2002, a group of South African citizens, interna-
tional reporters, dignitaries, and common folk assembled in
South Africa for a memorial service. Normally, such a cere-
mony would have attracted little attention. But this event was
different because it marked the return of the remains of Sarah
Bartmann, the so-called Hottentot Venus, to South Africa.
Bartmann’s homecoming had not been easy. After years of
repeated requests by Nelson Mandela, South Africa’s first
postapartheid president, France finally agreed to release her
remains. Greeting Bartmann as a forgotten ancestor 192 years
after she left Capetown, the Khoi people placed her remains in
a wooden coffin, the first ever to hold them. Commenting on
the meaning of the memorial service, one sixty-three-year-old
Khoisan woman remarked, “It is important for her to come
back. She is one of ours.”
1
It was a bittersweet return, filled with the contradictions
that confront people throughout the African Diaspora. Sarah
Bartmann returned to a South Africa that bore little resem-
blance to the one that she left almost 200 years earlier. This
South Africa was filled with immense promise and momentous
problems. On the one hand, her remains arrived in a nation
whose former policies of racial apartheid had come to symbolize
the last vestige of a 500-year-old system of racial oppression. A
democratically elected government now ran postapartheid
South Africa, with Black Africans at the helm. Aspiring for a


--- PAGE 291 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
more just society, South Africa’s freedom struggles had inspired worldwide
respect and galvanized global antiracist initiatives. As a new multiracial
democracy that seemingly escaped the widespread corruption plaguing
other African nation-states, South Africa’s citizens had approved one of the
most progressive constitutions in the world. South Africa’s many ethnic
groups, women, children, and its lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered
citizens all found constitutional protection from discrimination and guar-
antees of human rights. The people of South Africa also recognized that, in
order to progress, they needed to heal the wounds caused by their apartheid
past. Recognizing the power of past-in-present racism, the members of
South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission sat through painful
sessions in which people shared the tragic stories of how their children, par-
ents, spouses, and loved ones had suffered under apartheid. The return of
Sarah Bartmann’s remains to this new progressive South Africa was part of
this healing process of acknowledging the past in order to move into a
promising future. 
On the other hand, Bartmann’s remains arrived in a South Africa con-
fronting the enormous social problems of poverty, inadequate housing,
poor health care, illiteracy, and unemployment. As the new government
struggled to address these issues, it found itself confronting a major social
problem that disproportionately affects its Black citizens and in ways that
threaten their very survival. South Africa has one of the highest rates of
HIV infection in the world and confronts a crisis of immense proportions.
In South Africa, as elsewhere where HIV/AIDS is growing, the very
future of Black communities is at stake.
2 Recognizing the magnitude of this
crisis, citizens of South Africa (often in defiance of government officials)
have joined together with those from other nations of continental Africa,
the Caribbean, and other areas where HIV/AIDS constitute a major health
crisis. All acknowledge that the global HIV crisis affects all people, yet it
has especially devastating effects on Black people. Recognizing that the
promise of a new South Africa could not be realized without tackling the
problem of HIV/AIDS, many South African citizens took up the fight
against HIV/AIDS. 
When compared to their South African counterparts, Black American
leaders and organizations have been far less vocal. Certainly the problems
of HIV/AIDS among African Americans resemble those in South Africa
and throughout the African Diaspora.
3 The political, economic, and social
280


--- PAGE 292 ---
WHY WE CAN’T WAIT
factors that frame the global HIV/AIDS pandemic also affect African
Americans. Joblessness and high rates of poverty mean that poor and
working-class African American men and women often lack access to hous-
ing, education, and health care, factors that would help keep them healthy.
New forms of social control, for example, the growth of a prison system
that incarcerates large numbers of Black men and disciplines them by con-
doning institutionalized rape, simultaneously raise rates of infection and
suppresses protest. A powerful mass media masks these structural barriers
by using controlling images of Black masculinity and Black femininity that
stigmatize straights with a promiscuous Black hyper-heterosexuality and
pathologize the sexual practices of LGBT Black people. Collectively, these
social practices and the ideas that defend them underpin a powerful Black
gender ideology that blames Black people for their own problems, in this
case, the promiscuity that catalyzes disease and encourages African
Americans to remain silent about their suffering.
4 
In this context, the spread of HIV/AIDS among African American
men and women challenges African American politics’ treatment of gen-
der and sexuality. Because sexual contact constitutes one major trajectory
of HIV contraction, the HIV/AIDS crisis reveals how the failure to criti-
cize prevailing Black sexual politics places all African Americans at risk.
Many African Americans fail to question dominant Black gender ideology
and thus help replicate America’s sexually repressive culture that takes
special form within African American communities. For example, Black
men who confuse masculinity with dominance and take these beliefs into
their romantic relationships place their partners at risk. Whether straight,
gay, or bisexual, Black men who make “booty calls” without condoms fos-
ter the spread of HIV . Black women who confuse femininity with submis-
sion and weakness fare no better. When partnered with these same men,
heterosexual African American women who try to be the “strong” Black
woman can end up being sexually exploited, economically used, and aban-
doned when they can no longer compete sexually in the marketplace.
Labeling homosexuality as “white” suppresses recognition of the range of
sexual identities among African Americans, further masking the spread of
HIV within African American communities and retarding coalitions for
AIDS activism.
5 
In a context in which HIV/AIDS is killing Black people, standing by
and refusing to speak out about gender and sexuality within African
281


--- PAGE 293 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
American communities contributes to the problem. It is impossible to craft
an antiracist African American political agenda when the very people such
an agenda claims to represent are so profoundly threatened with survival.
Combating HIV/AIDS among African Americans certainly requires
efforts to change existing social policies concerning education, health care,
housing, and jobs. But it also requires developing a more progressive Black
sexual politics among African Americans that aims to transform interper-
sonal relations and internal Black community politics. Such a politics
might emphasize three core themes: first, a body politics grounded in the
concept of the “honest body” that would enable individuals to reclaim
agency lost to oppression; second, an ethic of honesty and personal
accountability within all relationships that involve sexual contact; and
third, increased importance placed on questions of gender and sexuality
within African American politics. Changing interpersonal relations among
African Americans and demanding more informed, responsible Black lead-
ership concerning issues of gender and sexuality might catalyze a revital-
ized, broader antiracist social justice project. 
HONEST BODIES: SEXUAL AUTONOMY 
AND BLACK BODY POLITICS 
If your heart and your honest body can be controlled by the state,
or controlled by community taboo, are you not then, and in that
case, no more than a slave ruled by outside force.
—June Jordan
6 
A Black gender ideology that encourages Black people to view themselves
and others as bitches, hoes, thugs, pimps, sidekicks, sissies, and modern
mammies signals a dishonest body politics. In this situation, top-down
power relations of race, class, gender, and sexuality permeate individual
consciousness and tell African Americans how they should think about
their own bodies.
7 Moreover, such power relations invade the body because
they also instruct Black people how they should feelwithin their own bod-
ies. This ideology severs mind, soul, and body from one another and helps
structure oppression.
8 Taking gender-specific forms, African American
men and women who come to see their bodies through the frames of the
282


--- PAGE 294 ---
WHY WE CAN’T WAIT
dominant society and who develop a consciousness based on these ideas are
always on display. Where is the authentic, honest body in this context of
dehumanization? 
Honest bodies strive to treat the mental, spiritual, and physical aspects
of being as interactive and synergistic. No one element becomes privileged
over the other. Because honest bodies as described by June Jordan rejoin
the mind, soul, and body, they become in one sense free. Starting with the
mind, by interrogating one’s own individual consciousness, is essential.
Individuals who reject dominant scripts of Black gender ideology by fully
accepting their own bodies “as is” move toward achieving honest bodies.
What difference does it make if a Black woman is dark-skinned, or has long
hair, or inherited “bootylicious” buttocks? Why place so much emphasis on
evaluating Black men who are 5'5" as too short to date, or those with body-
builder physiques as “hunks”? Black people may be bombarded with gen-
der-specific images that deem Black bodies as less desirable if not
downright ugly. But nowhere is it written that any African American need
believe them. Because no organization, television network, hip-hop artist,
or love partner can ever fully control what each of us thinks, individual
consciousness remains a sphere of freedom. As individuals, we each have
the power to reject prevailing ideas about gender and sexuality and to think
about our own bodies differently
.9
Developing honest bodies and a politics grounded in that fact thus
begins from the inside out.10 Less emphasis would be placed on how Black
bodies look and how we should interpret them (scripts of Black masculin-
ity and Black femininity) and more on how honest Black bodies feel, hear,
and move. These are all elements of how individuals actually experience
their bodies. We cannot actually “see” ourselves. Thus, expanding body
politics beyond its current focus on the visual allows other themes to
emerge, namely, new understandings of sexuality that rejoin ideas of soul
and embodiment.
11
There is evidence that Black people, however unintentionally, already
draw upon a constellation of ideas and social practices that foreshadow a
new body politics. In this regard, the meaning of soul among African
Americans begins to expand ideas about sexuality itself.
12 An honest body
would be in touch with its life spirit, or soul. A 1998 forum among Black
intellectuals titled “ Ain’t We Still Got Soul?” generated a lively discussion
about the meaning of soul and its connections to Black people and
283


--- PAGE 295 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Blackness. Thulani Davis notes, “in the world I grew up in, which was the
segregated upper South, soul was the world we lived in.”13 Davis identifies
elements of the soul culture such as, “being able to offer prayer from the
heart” and “taking a solo—having something to say within the context of
the room where you find yourself.”
14 Ishmael Reed claims “soul is an
English word that African Americans have borrowed to explain something
that defies empirical investigation.”
15 Clearly a booster of soul, Reed con-
tinues: “When we say soul, I think that we mean style, and there is no
doubt that African Americans have a style, a way of cooking, of dancing,
that’s so attractive that even those who are pathologically hostile to Blacks
adopt this style.”
16
The concept of soul fell out of favor in the 1980s and 1990s. Greg Tate
identifies himself as a child who came of age in the late 1970s and that “by
the time my generation reached its teens soul was something to be revered
and parodied.”
17 Tate describes his reactions to conference papers by
Baraka, Reed, and Angela Davis who reconnected the term soulwith its
Yoruba, hoodoo, and Black nationalist roots: “I mulled how my own thirty-
something generation and the hip hop generation’s definitions of soul were
more a function of reference than essence. In other words, soul wasn’t
nothing but a word to us—a way of describing how folk felt about the con-
dition their condition was in back in the day.”
18 Also describing a genera-
tional disconnect, Mark Anthony Neal uses the term the “post-soul
aesthetic” to describe Black popular culture in the post–civil rights era.
Neal claims that the post–civil rights era fostered Black identities that ren-
dered many traditional ideas about Blackness meaningless.
Tate and Neal may be so focused on claiming a unique generational
identity that they fail to see how the two periods of the post–civil rights
era, namely, the legislative and social gains of the 1960s and 1970s, and the
contemporary racial backlash that began in the 1980s and catalyzed puni-
tive policies targeted toward Black youth, fostered the continuity of soul in
different forms. As Portia Maultsby points out, “Soul is a concept that
defines a distinctly Black worldview and a way of being. Because Black cul-
ture is not monolithic nor stagnant, each generation employs this concept
in ways that reflect its unique set of circumstances, which are informed by
cultural, social, and political environments.”
20 Rhythm and blues (old
school) and hip-hop may be differently soulful. The question lies less in
choosing one form over the other than in examining how ideas about Black
284


--- PAGE 296 ---
WHY WE CAN’T WAIT
bodies, feelings, love, and sexuality have been configured within Black cul-
ture in the civil rights and post–civil rights eras. How did Black people feel
about their bodies in response to the assaults of nineteenth- and twentieth-
century scientific racism? How do Black people feel about their bodies now
in the context of the new racism?
Black culture and its characteristic soulmay be life affirming, but it is
important to avoid the temptation to celebrate uncritically Black expres-
siveness (soul) as if it already constitutes a sphere of freedom. Black
women who reject feminism, claiming a womanist politics for themselves
where they are already liberated redefine Alice Walker’s inclusive woman-
ist vision for freedom in ways that minimize the workings of oppression.
21
Despite singing and dancing in church or partying in hip-hop venues, vis-
iting Internet chat rooms or enjoying poetry slams, African Americans still
experience the limitations of oppression. Here we can take lessons from
the blues. As Angela Davis points out, “The blues idiom requires absolute
honesty in the portrayal of black life. It is an idiom that does not recognize
taboos: whatever figures into the larger picture of working-class African-
American realities . . . is an appropriate subject of blues discourse.”
22 For
example, the blues contains numerous songs about prostitution, told from
both the male and the female perspective. Typically, the blues do not crit-
icize the institution, but rather treat it as real.
Across these different views of soul, one thing seems common. Soul is
an inherently embodied concept and movement through time and space
constitutes an important dimension of the expressive component of soul.
Black dance provides an important template for developing honest bodies
and a body politics grounded in them. As expressive (soulful) movement,
Black dance links the soul with the body, the expressive, spiritual, and
dynamism of life. Ishmael Reed provides a glimpse of the significance of
Black dance to African Americans from all walks of life. In his essay
“Introduction: Black Pleasure—An Oxymoron,” Reed describes how pain
and pleasure are omnipresent in Black experience, and how anything that
helps Black people negotiate them is important: “one form of Black pleas-
ure is that which makes life easier, no matter how difficult the circum-
stances under which this pleasure is experienced. Take dance. African
American dance is used not only as a form of pleasure, but in African
American religion throughout the hemisphere. Indeed, some of those reli-
gious dances have invaded American dance clubs, rendering Yoruba a per-
285


--- PAGE 297 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
vasive, persistent cultural influence throughout most of the Western
Hemisphere.”23 The meaning of dance to Black people may serve as a tem-
plate for a nascent Black body politics grounded in the idea of the honest
body. For example, Josephine Baker’s answer to a reporter’s query about
her future suggests a way of being in her body that rejoins body and soul:
“I shall dance all my life, I was born to dance, just for that. To live is to
dance, I would like to die, breathless, spent, at the end of a dance.”
24
Baker’s notion that “to live is to dance” illustrates the connection
between soul (expressiveness as an individual life force) and embodiment
(how people feel, move, and think within their bodies). It also points to a
more expansive definition of sexuality as an embodied function. Because
sexuality lies at the intersection of soul (individual expressiveness) and
body (dance and movement), an expansive and redefined sexuality can
serve as a critical site of struggle for an honest body. In this regard, sexual
autonomy, namely, the ability to select one’s own sexual orientation, sexual
practices, and/or sexual partners, becomes ground zero in claiming an
honest body.
25 
Rethinking sexual autonomy for Black people is essential for a body
politics that rejoins mind, soul, and body. In this endeavor, Audre Lorde’s
work on the power of the erotic has been invaluable.
26 With its focus on the
erotic, passion, and desire, Lorde’s writing suggests that Black lesbian sex-
ualities can be read as one expression of the reclamation of a despised
Black female body. By claiming agency for Black lesbians, individuals
whose race, gender, sexuality, and, in many cases, class, and age places
them at the bottom of the social hierarchy, Lorde’s work rescues Black
female bodies that are most devalued and grants them respect.
27 Since
Lorde’s work over thirty years ago, Black female desire for women (or men)
and agency concerning their own sexuality can now be more openly
expressed. Certainly this theme of expanding Black female desire and
pleasure permeates the work of Alice Walker, Gayl Jones, Gloria Naylor,
Toni Morrison, and other major African American women writers.
28 Yet
examining the various dimensions of sexual autonomy for Black women
remains in its infancy. In Longing to Tell: Black Women Talk about
Sexuality and Intimacy, Tricia Rose reports the sexual testimonies of Black
women from all walks of life.
29 Realizing that American society is fixated on
issues of race and sexuality, Rose saw that “we are bombarded by stories
about sex and romance, but we almost never hear what black women have
286


--- PAGE 298 ---
WHY WE CAN’T WAIT
to say. The sexual stories that black women long to tell are being told in
beauty parlors, kitchens, health clubs, restaurants, malls, and laundry
rooms, but a larger, more accessible conversation for all women to share
and from which to learn has not yet begun.”
30 Black men too suffer from a
silencing concerning the emotional, expressive, and erotic dimensions of
their lives.
31
Developing the sexual autonomy of honest bodies also invokes the
power of the erotic, a force that is very different than the commodified sex-
uality pushed within mass media. This distinction between the erotic and
sex (fucking), however, is far from clear, especially within contemporary
Black popular culture. For example, Joan Morgan clearly confuses the type
of erotic power proposed by Audre Lorde with the commodified sexuality
that permeates hip-hop culture. In discussing the “ultimate truth about
erotic power,” Morgan argues: “without financial independence, educa-
tion, ambition, intelligence, spirituality, and love, punanny alone isn’t all
that powerful. The reality is that it’s easily replaceable, inexhaustible in
supply, and quite frankly, common as shit. Women who value their erotic
power over everything else stand to do some serious damage to their self-
esteem.”
32
Rebelling against the rules and reclaiming the erotic means that Black
straight and gay people alike can support one another in claiming honest
bodies that are characterized by sexual autonomy. Using one’s honest body
engages all forms of sexual expression that bring pleasure and joy.
33
Overall, soul, expressiveness, spirituality, sensuality, sexuality, and an
expanded notion of the erotic as a life force that may include all of these
ideas seem to be tightly bundled together within this notion of an honest
body that is not alienated from itself and where each individual has the
freedom to pursue his or her sense of the erotic.
Two major challenges arise in advancing a philosophy of honest bod-
ies that might catalyze a progressive Black body politics. For one, not all
pleasure is political, and not all forms of sexual expression signal the pres-
ence of honest bodies. Seeking pleasure can simply be self-centered, self-
serving, and selfish, the classic booty call in which one partner is unaware
of the rules. In a context in which popular culture markets pleasure, espe-
cially sexual pleasure, as the antidote to alienation, and does so by using
Black bodies and race as proxy for danger, excitement, forbidden practices,
and sex, African Americans must be careful in embracing any strategy that
287


--- PAGE 299 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
claims pleasure as inherently transgressive.34 Sexuality among African
Americans must be understood in the context of structures of power
(whether class, race, gender, or sexuality). Embracing “pleasure” without a
broader understanding of how sexuality articulates with power relations of
race, class, and gender, especially if the simple act of claiming pleasure is
deemed inherently progressive, runs the risk of resurrecting stereotypes of
Black people whereby ideas about Blackness remain culturally coded as
sexual. 
Another challenge for crafting a progressive body politics concerns
countering the high level of sexual violence that permeates American soci-
ety. Love, sexuality, and violence can be deeply intertwined and, for many
Black people, separating them is not easy. Violence is often eroticized
within American culture to the point where sexuality becomes understood
through a prism of violence. For example, the threat of danger may
heighten sexual attraction. Women who pass up good guys for thugs may
find the attraction of rule breaking itself arousing. Taken further, some
consumers of film and mass media find the high levels of victimization of
Blacks, women, gays and lesbians, children, and poor people sexually stim-
ulating. Certainly the movie industry and certain themes within hip-hop
culture contribute to linking violence and sexuality. Violence may not be a
sexual act per se, but its outcome may provide an arousal resembling that
produced by sexual orgasm. Individuals who participate, however vicari-
ously, in violence against an opponent may achieve heightened levels of
excitement. For example, lynchings were public events at which Black men
were often castrated, indicating that much more was at stake concerning
White masculinity than punishing an individual wrongdoer.
35 Violence can
also accompany deep feelings and passions that often are associated with
love. Men who beat their wives would never consider hitting women about
whom they cared little—strong feelings and “love” seem intertwined with
the feelings that foster such behavior. Similarly, the degree of violence
among Black men cannot all be attributed to the frustrations of dealing
with racism. Instead, some violence among men may reflect the fear of a
latent homoerotic love.
36
Achieving honest bodies and the sexual autonomy that they promise
will not be easy because, as James Baldwin points out: “people find it very
difficult to act on what they know. To act is to be committed, and to be
committed is to be in danger.”
37 The struggle may be well worth the effort,
288


--- PAGE 300 ---
WHY WE CAN’T WAIT
especially in times of living with HIV/AIDS. Individuals living in honest
bodies should do what they want with their bodies, and reject what they
don’t want. Yet how does one have pleasure and remain safe during an era
when HIV constitutes such a danger? The old binary thinking that juxta-
posed a politics of respectability to one of ill-repute (the derogated Black
sexuality) promises safety through sexual abstinence (“just say no”). Yet
the cost of safety is to deny bodily pleasure. When it comes to HIV/AIDS,
a new path to an honest body defined by sexual autonomy mandates a
commitment to thoughts, feelings, and actions that might place one in dan-
ger. Such a commitment involves living life differently such that, accord-
ing to Baldwin: “to be sensual, I think, is to respect and rejoice in the force
of life, of life itself, and to be presentin all that ones does, from the effort
of loving to the breaking of bread.”
38 Thus, being in one’s honest body
becomes an essential part of the “force of life.”
“READYING UP FOR SOME HONESTY:” 
REBELLIOUS GENDER IDEOLOGY 
Men have got to develop some heart and some sound analysis to
realize that when sisters get passionate about themselves and their
direction, it does not mean they’re readying up to kick men’s ass.
They’re readying up for honesty. And women have got to develop
some heart and sound analysis so they can resist the temptation of
buying peace with their man with self-sacrifice and posturing. 
—Toni Cade Bambara
39
Sexual contact constitutes one main source of HIV infection. Because sex-
ual intimacy reflects an individual’s relationship with his or her own body
as well as how others see and value that body, individual sex acts are highly
politicized. The danger posed by HIV/AIDS forces individual men and
women to weigh the nature of each sexual contact, as well as all interper-
sonal relationships in which sexual expression might take physical form.
For all African American men and women, straight and LGBT alike,
“ready up for some honesty” concerning gender and sexuality is essential.
However, “readying up for some honesty” is unlikely to happen in the
absence of both a Black female and a male sexual autonomy, as well as a
289


--- PAGE 301 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
progressive Black gender ideology that helps Black men and women see
other alternatives to those that currently exist. 
Understanding how ideas about Black masculinity and Black feminin-
ity affect interpersonal relationships is intrinsically important, and it is
necessary for addressing HIV/AIDS. Individual choice lies at the heart of
any long-range solutions to HIV/AIDS. On the one hand, individual
African American women and men can construct their own sexuality and
that of their partners as sites of control and domination. When heterosex-
ual men, for example, demand sexual intercourse without a condom, they
become part of the HIV problem, whether or not they are infected with the
HIV virus. When heterosexual women trade sexual favors for material gain
without practicing safe sex, they too are part of the problem. On the other
hand, when individual African American women and men strive to develop
honest bodies and to reclaim the erotic as a site of freedom, and love as a
source of affirmation for self and others, they challenge the spread of
HIV/AIDS. Ironically, the much-maligned 1997 film Booty Call made
these ideas explicit for heterosexuals by calling into question condom use
in both committed relationships and mutual booty calls. The film explored
one Black man’s struggles to “ready up for some honesty” with his girl-
friend by rejecting definitions of Black masculinity that rendered him an
irresponsible boy. But the film did not stop with this endorsement of tra-
ditional heterosexual relationships. The film also sent another important
message—sexual autonomy and sexual pleasure can be organized around
the pleasure of a mutual booty call in which both parties agree to protect
one another by practicing safe sex. 
When it comes to HIV/AIDS, African American women and men,
straight and LBGT , are all harmed by the refusal to “ready up for some
honesty.” One reason for the continued spread of HIV is that about half of
people who carry the HIV virus have not been diagnosed as HIV positive,
treated, or both. Many unknowingly transmit the virus to their sex part-
ners. Take, for example, how the politics of gender and sexuality have
affected the rapid growth of HIV/AIDS among poor Black women in the
Mississippi Delta and across the rural South. Between 1990 and 2000,
Southern states with large African American populations experienced a
dramatic increase in HIV infections among African American women.
40
Most of the women lived in poverty, contracted HIV through heterosexual
contact, and most found out that they were HIV positive when they
290


--- PAGE 302 ---
WHY WE CAN’T WAIT
became pregnant. Some women started having sex at very young ages,
almost always with older men, and they found that they had little ability to
persuade their partners to use condoms.
41 An informal sex-for-money sit-
uation existed, where nothing was negotiated up front, but where unstated
assumptions existed in which women who engaged in casual sex with men
would be rewarded with a little financial help, perhaps in paying the rent
or in buying groceries. From the outside, these behaviors seem to support
accusations of Black women’s promiscuity, but the impoverished Black
women who engaged in sex-for-money relationships desperately needed
the money, especially if they had elderly parents or dependent children.
They knew about HIV/AIDS but felt virtually powerless to take the steps
needed to protect themselves from infection. Because they had so little
control over other aspects of their lives, they felt that if God wanted them
to get AIDS, then they resigned themselves to getting it. 
The level of denial among these African American women who felt
that testing positive for HIV could not happen to them resembles the stun-
ning growth of a similar culture of denial among young Black gay men.
Gay men account for the largest proportion of new HIV infections (43%),
followed by people infected by heterosexual sex (27%), and intravenous
drug users (23%).
42 Largely as a result of aggressive organizing and advo-
cacy by gay White men, the disease leveled off in this population. Yet a
study of approximately 5,700 gay men in six major U.S. cities reports that
the rates of unawareness among Black gay men ages fifteen to twenty-nine
are “staggeringly high.” Among those found to have HIV , 90 percent of
Blacks said that they did not know they were infected.
43 Given the history
of AIDS activism among gay men, this lack of knowledge among Black gay
men is disconcerting. 
The emergence of a Black gay male subculture in which gay and bisex-
ual Black men live on the Down Low (DL) aggravates this situation. The
secretive nature of the DL subculture speaks to the linking of danger, dis-
honesty, and excitement. Popularized in the 1990s by singers TLC and R.
Kelly, the term Down Low means “secret.” It has a sexy ring to it, a hint
that the person is doing something that is wrong but that “feels right.” DL
culture places a premium on pleasure and there is a certain degree of free-
dom in not having to fit within rigid sexual self-definitions. Men on the
DL convey a strong sense of independence. At the same time, the Black
masculine identities constructed within this subculture place Black gay
291


--- PAGE 303 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
and bisexual men at risk. Many DL guys search for the roughest, most
masculine thugs, men who often do not use condoms. William, a partici-
pant in the Atlanta DL subculture, describes this phenomenon to journal-
ist Benoit Denizet-Lewis: “Part of the attraction to thugs is that they’re
careless and carefree. Putting on a condom doesn’t fit in with that. A lot of
DL guys aren’t going to put on a condom, because that ruins the fantasy.”
Denizet-Lewis draws out the implications of the lack of condom use: “It
also shatters the denial—stopping to put on a condom forces guys on the
DL to acknowledge, on some level, that they’re having sex with men.”
44
As these examples suggest, the denial of honest bodies as well as the
absence of honesty within heterosexual and homosexual relationships alike
place everyone at risk. Despite the importance of HIV/AIDS, sexual prac-
tices associated with safe sex such as promoting condom use are still seen
by far too many African American men as interfering with their pleasure
and challenging a view of Black masculinity that glorifies sexual virility.
Consider, for example, how the belief in having multiple sexual partners as
an indicator of Black masculinity works to spread HIV , especially through
unprotected sexual contact. When mass media figure Wilt Chamberlain
bragged that he had engaged in sexual contact with over 10,000 women, he
helped reinforce this notion that “real” Black men have multiple sexual
partners. The level of denial of Black men living on the DL places their
Black wives and girlfriends in harm’s way. Public health officials are
alarmed about men on the DL who spread HIV to unsuspecting wives and
girlfriends—in 2001, almost two-thirds of women in the United States
who found out they had AIDS were Black.
45 For some men and women,
even testing positive for HIV does not serve as a deterrent to engaging in
unprotected sex with unsuspecting partners. Behaviors such as these signal
a fundamental reluctance to question Black gender ideology, especially the
nexus of sexuality and violence that upholds hegemonic masculinity in the
United States. 
Overall, African Americans certainly need to “ready up for some hon-
esty” in intimate love relationships. Doing so would enable individuals to
tell the difference between the commodified sexuality and romantic love
that are so heavily marketed within mass media and more complex notions
of sexual autonomy and eroticism. As systems of oppression, racism, sex-
ism, class exploitation, and heterosexism all gain power by denying sexual
autonomy and annexing the power of the erotic for their own ends. In this
292


--- PAGE 304 ---
WHY WE CAN’T WAIT
context, reclaiming love and sexuality constitutes a necessary first step. At
the same time, love and sexuality are insufficient for confronting the eco-
nomic exploitation, political powerlessness, and sexual violence of the new
racism. “Love” is often what is manipulated within relationships of dom-
ination. Can “love” conquer violence in an abusive relationship? Would
“loving” their masters really have toppled the system of slavery?
Identifying the micro-politics of intimate love relationships as a sphere
of freedom is alluring, but as the HIV/AIDS epidemic reminds us, sexu-
ality is not necessarily a place of freedom. Instead, manipulating sexuality,
annexing the power of the erotic, and using both to deny the very human-
ity of love constitute important mechanisms of social control. This annex-
ation perverts African Americans’ understandings of their own bodies and
frames how everyone else perceives and treats Black people. For philoso-
pher Michel Foucault, whose pioneering work has profoundly affected
understandings of sexuality and power, “Sexuality is not opposed to and
subversive of power. On the contrary, sexuality is a ‘dense transfer point’
of power.”
46 When tied to his work on the disciplinary power of bureau-
cracies (the case of prisons for African Americans under the new racism),
sexuality becomes an important terrain of control under hegemonic social
relations that squeeze out all dissent.
Critical race theorist Paul Gilroy certainly supports this view. Gilroy
paints a gloomy picture of the possibilities for finding freedom within sex-
ual relationships. Noting that the word freedomis disappearing from the
vocabulary of Blacks in the West, Gilroy argues that the yearning for free-
dom is being transported into a different, private mode, one that he calls
“racialized biopolitics.”
47 Within Gilroy’s schema, because literal freedom
has been won, Blacks search for substantive freedom by escaping into per-
sonal relationships and striving for freedom via the release provided by
sexual orgasms. Just as drug addicts become addicted to the pleasure
and/or avoidance of pain provided by their drug of choice, sexuality can
provide a similar release. But what happens, queries Gilroy, when the
internal space of pleasure becomes emblematic of Black politics? During
prior periods of freedom struggle, “wild, intense sexual activity between
consenting heterosexual adults in private” signaled African American suc-
cess in claiming spaces of privacy.
48 Now, however, because marketplace
relations of Black popular culture have found a way to annex these “dense
transfer points” of contemporary oppression, private sites of Black sexual
293


--- PAGE 305 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
expression are no longer rebellious. As evidence for this gloomy view of
love relationships, Gilroy argues: “the sharpest break between the older
traditional patterns and the newer biopolitics is evident where what were
once love stories have mutated into sex stories.”
49 Stated differently, the
people dancing to Missy Elliott’s “Get Yr Freak On” may feel free, but the
economic and political mandates of the new racism want them to buy CDs,
clothing, gym shoes, liquor, cell phones, and use these material possessions
as substitutes for the abscence of deep love in their lives. 
Robert Reid-Pharr also expresses skepticism about the ability of the
erotic to hold its own in the context of new social relations. On the one
hand, Reid-Pharr believes that the homoeroticism of gay sexuality consti-
tutes a potential sphere of freedom. For example, despite the regressive
racial and gender politics that framed the 1995 Million Man March on
Washington, he describes moments of transcendence that felt like free-
dom: “If freedom were truly the ultimate goal of the march, then it was
freedom of a discrete, limited kind: freedom from the crushing burden of
images—the criminal, the addict, the vengeful lover, the victim, the
invalid. Instead, we were presented with an ocean of men, orderly,
directed, clean-cut, and remarkably eloquent.”
50 For Reid-Pharr, the
source of freedom at the march lay in Black men’s ability to create a Black
male space that kept the damaging effects of Black gender ideology at bay.
Despite his claims that love, sexuality, and freedom are intertwined, Reid-
Pharr also cautions that eroticism cannot be installed as a new “model” for
sexual liberation: “What is more difficult to accept is the idea that the sex-
ual act, at least as it is performed between queers . . . is not necessarily a
good, expansive, and progressive thing, a place in which individuals exist
for a moment outside themselves such that new possibilities are at once
imagined and actualized.”
51 
What a complex world Foucault, Gilroy, and Reid-Pharr present, one
in which even the interior space of Black consciousness may have lost the
power to love, or to even try. In their worlds, domination, which operates
both by structuring power from the top down through disciplinary means
such as prisons and by annexing the power of the erotic available to each
individual human being, has won. Certainly those Black men and women
who engage in unsafe sex, and who physically, emotionally, and/or sexu-
ally abuse one another, fit this profile. In the sobering world produced by
HIV/AIDS, these works provide an important corrective against overly
294


--- PAGE 306 ---
WHY WE CAN’T WAIT
optimistic views of human nature that counsel us that “love” is the answer.
At the same time, this interior space of sexuality, sensuality, the erotic, and
love does not always serve as a dense transfer point of power that disem-
powers African American men and women. When it comes to individual
consciousness, new knowledge of progressive Black sexual politics can
generate important behavioral changes that make intimate love relation-
ships key sites of rebellion.
In readying up for some honesty, African American men and women
might refashion the relationship between love and freedom in ways that
expand our understanding of the connections among soul, spirituality,
embodiment, sensuality, expressiveness, eroticism, and sexuality. Take, for
example, James Baldwin’s discussion of love as a spiritual journey and as a
means of moving toward “liberation” or freedom: “To be with God is
really to be involved with some enormous, overwhelming desire, and joy,
and power which you cannot control, which controls you. I conceive of my
own life as a journey toward something I do not understand, which in the
going toward, makes me better. I conceive of God, in fact, as a means of
liberation and not as a means to control others. Love does not begin and
end the way we seem to think it does. Love is a battle, love is a way; love is
a growing up.”
52 Baldwin places his discussion of love in a spiritual context,
but such love need not be associated with an organized religion nor recog-
nize God as the head of a church. This mature notion of love at its fullest
imvolves bringing an honest body to a fully human relationship. How many
African Americans are ready for that kind of honesty?
BUILDING COMMUNITY: 
LOVE AND BLACK EMPOWERMENT 
It’s clear to me that I spent too much time in the past believing it
was necessary to mobilize entire armies against the devastating
effects of racism, and not enough time considering how one person
can help another person to heal from those effects. A chain, after
all, is only as strong as its individual links, and it seems to me now
that the way to help strengthen my community as a whole is to
improve the quality of my relationships—romantic and other-
wise—with individual Black folks I meet every day. To do this
295


--- PAGE 307 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
requires tearing down all the walls I’ve built around myself and
taking a long, hard look inside; what I’ve already discovered, much
to my surprise, is that the view isn’t really all that bad.
—Quinn Eli
53
The issues raised by the HIV/AIDS epidemic suggest that the need for a
progressive Black sexual politics is far from an abstract, academic concern.
Advocates from around the globe lobby for effective treatment and pre-
vention initiatives, for example, making HIV medications available to all
who need them and a good public health effort to educate people about the
disease and how they can protect themselves. But what does prevention
really mean? As the African American women in Mississippi and the
African American gay men in major U.S. cities suggest, prevention
requires going much further than information about disease transmission
and free access to condoms. Definitions of Black masculinity and Black
femininity, the recognition of an array of sexual identities (straight, gay,
lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered), questions concerning sexual prac-
tices and when “safe sex” is truly “safe,” ideas about whether and when to
get tested for the HIV virus and how to reveal the outcome to one’s sexual
partners, all are questioned by the presence of HIV/AIDS. These issues
require new understandings of Black body politics, new interpersonal rela-
tionships that “ready up for some honesty,” and new conceptualizations of
the idea of Black communityand the politics it might engender. 
One way that African Americans might move toward a progressive
Black sexual politics lies in developing inclusionary definitions of Black
community. Despite its disfavor within contemporary academic circles, the
phrase Black communityis one that many ordinary African Americans rec-
ognize and use, if only to mourn its seeming loss. The language of com-
munity encompasses two main ideas. The first views community as being
synonymous with family and/or people. In this case, the term Black com-
munityis used interchangeably with the phrase Black people. Both concepts
view all Blacks as connected and reference the physical, emotional, and psy-
chic spaces in which Black people “belong.”
54 This use connotes moral, eth-
ical associations whereby African American families, neighborhoods,
churches, fraternal organizations, and civic organizations serve as places of
acceptance and safety that affirm African American individuals. Providing
respite from racial oppression, ideally, Black “communities” become spaces
296


--- PAGE 308 ---
WHY WE CAN’T WAIT
in which Black people can be honest with one another and find recognition
and acceptance. This view of Black community also invokes views of Black
leadership whereby African Americans with more talent, skills, and
resources devote them to building up the community. Because Black people
are seen as organically connected, these “race” men and women work on
behalf of the “race’s” progress.
55 Black humanity is affirmed without ques-
tion within such communities. This idealized view of Black community
involves claiming a Black identity that is grounded in a moral, ethical
framework of acceptance of each African American individual. 
The HIV/AIDS crisis reveals that the majority of African Americans
experience neither their communities nor their relations with other Black
people in this fashion. Instead, a narrow Black identity politics that
demands an unquestioned loyalty to one version of Blackness consistently
privileges some versions of Blackness and disadvantages others.
56 Such
politics routinely derogate and exclude African Americans who are the
wrong sexual orientation; who love significant others that are the wrong
color; who do not wear expensive clothes and gym shoes; who are deemed
to be too young or too old to express a worthwhile opinion; or whose gen-
der merits that they take a back seat in families, churches, and other Black
organizations. African Americans as a group are politically harmed by this
perversion of Black identity politics that installs rigid social hierarchies
within the boundaries of race and then requires unquestioned loyalty to
the “race.” This version of Black identity politics also undercuts the very
definition of community that it seemingly represents. Without developing
moral, ethical communities that fully accept and support each African
American individual, how can African Americans meet the challenge of
HIV/AIDS? Why should non-Black American citizens care about African
Americans if Black people do not value and care for one another?
The language of community also connotes a second main idea, namely,
a political solidarity whereby people see themselves as part of a larger
political entity that shares a common agenda. In the context of the new
racism, Black people as a cultural community would also constitute a polit-
ical community charged with developing an antiracist politics. Black
antiracist politics would strive to empower African Americans as a collec-
tivity in order to solve problems that disproportionately affect the broader
Black community, in this case, the HIV/AIDS epidemic. This under-
standing of community comes with its own set of problems. For one, being
297


--- PAGE 309 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
Black is insufficient for building a political agenda because the needs and
perceptions of African Americans vary greatly. For another, political com-
munities typically have some sort of ideology or philosophy that bind them
together by explaining their current predicaments and suggesting strate-
gies for change. But no ideology by itselfcan explain HIV/AIDS let alone
craft a political agenda that will help people deal with it.
57 Finally, because
HIV/AIDS (as is the case for virtually every social issue) does not affect
just Black people, solutions require coalitions with other groups who share
a similar agenda. Addressing the challenges of HIV/AIDS certainly
requires a broad-based, coalition politics. But one might ask, given the
deeply entrenched nature of racism in the United States, how long-lasting
these coalitions would be when the immediacy of the issue in question
fades? When it comes to HIV/AIDS, for example, what arguments would
be so compelling that they would convince affluent gay White men in the
West to throw in their lot with poor South African adolescent girls and vice
versa? What ideologies would sustain such a coalition?
58 
Responding to HIV/AIDS requires building Black communities that
encompass both meanings of community, namely, a revitalized Black iden-
tity politics that recognizes the significance of gender and sexuality and
political communities that work for Black empowerment, primarily as part
of broader coalitions with other groups. For both connotations of commu-
nity, the relationships that Black individuals have with one another become
ground zero for a revitalized Black community politics. Love relationships
are essential because they are the glue that holds Black community
together. 
On its most basic level, love relationships between two people consti-
tute a community of two members. For example, the love relationship
between Asha and Rashid described in Bandele’s memoir The Prisoner’s
Wife(as discussed at the end of chapter 8) points to the significance of an
ethic of care in building a more politicized understanding of oppression
and how it might be resisted. By recognizing patterns of sameness and dif-
ference that joined them, they constructed a community of two. Asha and
Rashid’s story suggests that if these two individuals can recognize one
another’s humanity, love one another despite their faults, and commit to
one another in the harsh environment that destroys love and therefore self
(the actual prison and the metaphorical prisons of racism, sexism, etc.)
then love and commitment constitute important qualities for a progressive
298


--- PAGE 310 ---
WHY WE CAN’T WAIT
Black sexual politics. This politicized love is grounded in a type of com-
mitment to self and others that comes from seeing Black humanity in the
context of oppression, and recognizing that choosing to love in that con-
text is a political act. 
The message is simple—take a stand against oppression, love a Black
woman; take a stand against oppression, love a Black man. Such love is
extremely difficult to co-opt. There have always been Ashas and Rashids in
Black America, people who refused to follow the rules. However, we either
fail to recognize them and/or just do not know what to make of them.
More important, we have not been encouraged to bethem in the contexts
of our everyday lives. 
Love certainly holds a prominent place in African American intellec-
tual traditions. Perhaps the best known is Martin Luther King, Jr.’s con-
cept of “beloved community.” King spoke of the need to cultivate a
three-dimensional love for God, Self, and Others that in turn might serve
as a framework for community. King may have popularized the concept of
beloved community, but contemporary scholars now use it to rethink the
workings of gender and sexuality. Take, for example, theologian Kelly
Douglas’s discussion of how agape, spirituality, and sexuality are linked
and have a place within Christian theology. Spurred on by the inaction of
Black churches in confronting HIV/AIDS, Douglas searched for theology
that would provide an alternative interpretive framework designed to
change the church’s approach to sexuality: 
The love of God made manifest in Jesus is what has come to be under-
stood as agape. Agape is God’s love. It is an active love, the giving of one-
self for the sake of justice and the building of an authentically human
community. . . . A positive embrace of human sexuality is critical to
agape, and it is crucial for those who would radiate what it means to be
created in the image of God. Human sexuality is what provides men and
women with the capacity to enter into relationships with others. Sexuality
is that dimension of humanity that urges relationship. Sexuality is a gift
from God that, if properly appreciated, helps women and men to become
more fully human by entering into loving relationships.
59
Kelly suggests that embracing this notion of agape fosters a politics
whereby the beloved community should protect its most vulnerable mem-
299


--- PAGE 311 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
bers. In this context, HIV/AIDS would not be seen as a crosscutting issue
that only affects some members of the community, but rather a consensus
issue whereby the community recognized how its very being was threat-
ened by what was happening to its most vulnerable members. Versions of
the beloved community in general and of a notion of a Black beloved com-
munity that finds space for all of its members and is complete with their
heterogeneity are not a luxury. In confronting the challenge of
HIV/AIDS, such a notion of community is essential. 
How does one actually build such a beloved community that would be
affirming of all Black people yet simultaneously would be accepting of a
broader social justice agenda? Within African American history, striving
for a beloved community has not been an abstraction; it has guided politi-
cal activism. One significant feature of the civil rights movement was that,
because agape addressed freedom struggles of actual and not imagined
Black communities, one finds models of women and men who tried to
build beloved communities in reality. For example, Ella Baker’s notion of
group-centered leadership suggests a very different form of community
organization and, by implication, conception of freedom. From Baker’s
perspective, the very idea of leading people to freedom was a contradiction
in terms. Freedom required that people stop relying on leaders and develop
the capacity to analyze their own social position and understand their col-
lective ability to change the circumstances of their lives. In one interview
she stated, “Strong people don’t need strong leaders. My basic sense of it
has always been to get people to understand that in the long run they them-
selves are the only protection they have against violence or injustice. . . .
People have to be made to understand that they cannot look for salvation
anywhere but to themselves.”
60 
The civil rights movement provides important insights concerning how
African Americans tried to build a beloved community that would be
affirming of African Americans yet simultaneously focused on a broader
social justice agenda. Yet because its challenge lay in confronting deeply
entrenched patterns of legal racial segregation, it faced markedly different
challenges than those associated with joblessness, inner-city decay, the
commodification of Black popular culture, and other manifestations of the
new racism. It is one thing to say that Black people should love one another
and that this should serve as the basis for community and for an impas-
300


--- PAGE 312 ---
WHY WE CAN’T WAIT
sioned politics. It is entirely another to conceptualize how a beloved com-
munity can be accomplished within contemporary America. Divisions
among African Americans make notions such as beloved community seem
like an unattainable abstraction. Black youth in particular remain alienated
from these ideas, associating them with either the “near obsessive national
attention given to praising the long gone civil rights movement” or dis-
missed by caricaturing the Black Power movement.
61 Such praise and/or
dismissal ignores the fact that Black youth who have come of age during
the four decades following the civil rights movement not only have notseen
its promise of a beloved community come to fruition, they have been
deemed the problem of America (not its hope for the future). 
What will it take for Black people to love one another? The power on
this one seems to be entirely in our own hands. What will it take for more
African Americans to arrive at a place at which we can say: “Yes, my spirit
is liberated, even here behind a wall, a razor-wire fence, and four electron-
ically locked doors. Here with Rashid, I have never felt so open, so free, or
for that matter, and by extension, never so close to God.”
62 We currently
have no language for the “love” needed for this endeavor, only terms that
get us close. In a context in which “fucking” serves as a poor substitute for
a sense of the erotic that might nourish body and soul, and in which courts
protect child pornography on the Internet as bona fide expressions of free
speech, popular notions of “romantic love” create more problems than
they solve. So we have to start small, by thinking through what is needed
for a new gender ideology for everyone and for new types of relationships
for African American women and men based on these fresh ways of seeing
others and ourselves. Forging our own original paths might enable us to
develop a progressive Black sexual politics that one day will meet the chal-
lenge of HIV/AIDS.
301


--- PAGE 313 ---



--- PAGE 314 ---
AFTERWORD
THE POWER OF A 
FREE MIND
Any real change implies the breakup of the world as one
has always known it, the loss of all that gave one an
identity, the end of safety. And at such a moment,
unable to see and not daring to imagine what the future
will now bring forth, one clings to what one knew; to
what one possessed or dreamed that one possessed. Yet,
it is only when a man is able, without bitterness or self-
pity, to surrender a dream he has long cherished or a
privilege he has long possessed that he is set free—he
has set himself free—for higher dreams, for greater
privileges.
—James Baldwin
1
James Baldwin tells us much about the process of negotiating
the paradoxes of Black gender ideology within the confines of
contemporary Black sexual politics. When it comes to romantic
love relationships, for example, far too many heterosexual
African American women cling to what they “know” and try to
apply existing gender scripts even when such scripts have little
hope of success. “Maybe if I had longer hair, lighter skin, and
smaller lips; maybe if I talked more quietly and let him think
that he is right when I know that he’s not; maybe if I share him
with other women, I’ll be able to keep a man,” many speculate.
“I have to be strong to compensate for his weaknesses,” they
reason. The loss of what one “dreamed that one possessed” can


--- PAGE 315 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
be even more insidious. Most men see gender equality with women as a
defeat and this perception affects their relationships both with women and
with one another. Young, working-class African American men, for exam-
ple, can engage in violence toward one another and toward women for no
apparent reason, in part because they do not feel powerful and fear the loss
of an expected male entitlement. “He tried to steal my gym shoes; she
‘dissed’ me; he was looking at my woman; he was looking at my ass; all that
skeezer wanted was my money; s/he deserved what s/he got,” they ration-
alize. Violence comes in defense of an illusionary respect that all desire but
few really possess. “I may spend the rest of my life in prison for murder-
ing that ‘bitch’/ ‘nigger’/ ‘faggot,’” some reason, “but now I know that
I’m a man.” So much fear accompanies being African American—fear of
being unloved, alone, disrespected, ignored, ridiculed, too visible, invisible,
silenced, or forgotten. 
In this situation of fear in which every modicum of privilege may be
staunchly defended, defying existing Black sexual politics can signal “the
loss of all that gave one an identity” and “the end of safety.” With so much
at stake, no wonder so few African American women and men dispute, let
alone openly and in public, prevailing Black sexual politics. Many complain
about their love lives (or lack thereof), but few challenge the social struc-
tures that bring about their unhappiness. But without challenging a U.S.
sexual politics that installs a hegemonic White masculinity in the center of
all assessments of human worth as the gold standard against which we are
all measured (and that includes White men); that masks the gender-
specific forms of political economy that keep far too many African
American women dependent on welfare and African American men locked
up in prison; that defends these state practices by reconfiguring institu-
tionalized lynching and rape as forms of sexualized violence suitable for
controlling African American populations; and that justifies the new
racism with a media that is saturated with updated, class-specific images of
bucks and jezebels, how can African Americans develop a more progressive
Black sexual politics? 
Given the potential loss of perceived privileges let alone the very real
threat of loss of safety, why do it at all? Why rock the boat and defy pre-
vailing Black sexual politics? Certainly one reason concerns efforts to avoid
the abuse that routinely accompanies playing by the rules. Slaves ran away
because they knew that they were being exploited and victimized. Their
304


--- PAGE 316 ---
AFTERWORD
prisons were clear to them. Women who leave abusive relationships see
safety not in staying with their batterers but in leaving them. Gays, les-
bians, bisexuals, and transgendered individuals choose to leave the closet
because the emotional abuse of remaining closeted may be more damaging
than the physical danger of being identifiably “out.” Given the mistreat-
ment that so many African American men and women experience due to
the body politics that accompany ideas about Black sexuality as well as the
gender politics expressed via views of Black masculinity and Black femi-
ninity, rejecting prevailing Black sexual politics may provide a respite from
abuse. 
But there’s more. Baldwin also holds out the heady possibilities of the
benefitsthat might ensue should individuals try to change both the systems
that confine them and their reactions to those systems. For African
American women, straight and gay alike, relinquishing the cherished
dream of finding a sexual partner of the appropriate race, gender, social
class, age, skin color, and religion may be the precise action needed to be
“set free” to find a more complex love. For African American men, straight
and gay alike, surrendering the seeming privileges of being their mothers’
“baby boys,” or the extra attention afforded Black men who are deemed to
be an “endangered species,” or the ability of heterosexual Black male col-
lege students to exploit the sex-ratio imbalance to get as many women as
they want, or the perpetual excuses many African American men offer for
decidedly bad behavior (“racism made me do it—can’t a brother catch a
break?”) may be the price of being “set free.” For African American
women, men, and transgendered people, the dreams catalyzed within a
context of oppression remain limited—oppression crowds out the possi-
bilities of new, more liberatory dreams. 
Confronting existing gender ideology, prevailing notions of Black sex-
uality, and the social relations that they justify raises an important question
of how to move toward freedom in the context of oppression. With prison
as the metaphor for Black life, freedom becomes its antithesis. Prison can
be literal—actual laws and customs that foster forms of subordination of
race, class, gender, and sexuality. Prison can also be figurative—ideas about
heterosexism and about masculinity and femininity can keep some African
Americans as securely locked up in small worlds as the most powerful laws.
As Gaines points out, “a jail is a jail, but the greatest imprisonment of all
and, therefore, the greatest freedom, too, is in your mind.”
2 Within the
305


--- PAGE 317 ---
BLACK SEXUAL POLITICS
confines of race, African Americans police one another, using the cross-
cutting weapons of sexuality, gender, and class. Is it possible to craft a new
gender ideology, new understandings of Black sexuality, and new social
class relations that are not predicated upon dominance? For African
Americans as a group, collective freedom struggles require a progressive
sexual politics. For individuals, claiming new identities of race, gender, and
sexuality, and seeing one another in honest and loving ways, reverses the
process of dehumanization associated with oppression. In essence, strug-
gling to both redefine Black masculinity and Black femininity in ways that
are life affirming and live one’s life by those new self-definitions may be
what is needed to move toward “higher dreams,” “greater privileges,” and,
ultimately, a degree of personal freedom that can never occur when one
lives by someone else’s rules.
How do we do this? How might we translate the desire to change into
action strategies that might produce honest bodies, honest loving relation-
ships, and African American community politics predicated upon a love
ethic? Toni Cade Bambara points to the enormity of the task of develop-
ing the power of a free mind that will catalyze the type of progressive
Black sexual politics suggested here: “Perhaps we need to face the terrify-
ing and overwhelming possibility that there are no models, and that we
shall have to create from scratch.”
3 Starting from scratch is difficult. But
the importance of this task cannot be underestimated because, as the chal-
lenges of HIV/AIDS reveal, African American survival may depend on it.
Acceptance and escape constitute important, timeworn, and often effective
strategies. They do grant individuals a place within existing power rela-
tions. Yet neither strategy challenges the historical Black gender ideology
that resurrects ideas about “weak men, strong women” and places them in
service to the new racism. Neither acceptance nor escape can support a
progressive Black sexual politics because neither constructs alternatives to
current arrangements.
African Americans need to rebel against the ideas and practices that
disempower us. African Americans need different conceptions of feminin-
ity and masculinity that do not simply mimic those of White men and
women, but that reflect the needs of actual lived Black experience and that
contribute toward building a true democracy in the United States. In this
context, Black people must rebel against existing Black sexual politics
throughout the entire system; from the micro-politics that frame the one-
306


--- PAGE 318 ---
AFTERWORD
on-one interactions of everyday life; through trying to change the ethos of
the Black Church and other Black community organizations; through the
macro-politics of building new social movements with other groups who
are engaged in similar social justice initiatives. Rebellion without direction,
however, can be fruitless. Sanyika Shakur came to this realization after
spending years in prison: “little did I know that I had been resisting all my
life. By not being a good black American I was resisting. But my resistance
was retarded because it had no political objective. . . . Repression is funny.
It can breed resistance, though it doesn’t mean that the resistance will be
political, positive, or revolutionary.”
4
Rebellions are usually the purview of youth because they have the
most to gain and the least to lose. African American youth in partnership
with White youth were at the forefront of the civil rights struggles; Black
youth formed the core of the Black power movement; and Black South
African youth gave up years of their education to resist the policies of
apartheid. Rebellious youth who are armed with a vision and the knowl-
edge and skills needed to build a movement can work wonders. When it
comes to issues of gender and sexuality, Black youth must lead the way in
the next phase of antiracist struggle because failing to do so virtually guar-
antees them an impoverished future. Surrendering old dreams should
enable Black people to dream new ones. In this sense, as James Baldwin
suggests, Black people may set ourselves free, “for higher dreams, for
greater privileges.”
307


--- PAGE 319 ---



--- PAGE 320 ---
INTRODUCTION
1. Collins 2000a.
2. Collins 1998.
3. Sexuality and sexual orientation are social constructs that are con-
nected to gender scripts, the constellation of behaviors a culture
deems appropriate or even ideal for men and women. These roles
include not only behavior but also attitudes and emotions that are
seen as being a normal man or woman. Because gender scripts are
frequently used to define the parameters of sexuality, all forms of
sexuality must be understood as reflecting a specific culture (Greene
2000, 240).
4. Collins 2000a.
5. See, e.g., Staples 1979.
6. Thomas 1996.
7. I write extensively about the concept of critical social theory in
Fighting Words. Critical social theory constitutes theorizing about the
social in defense of economic and social justice. What makes critical
social theory “critical” is its commitment to justice, for one’s own
group and/or for that of other groups. Where social group differ-
ences exist such that some groups are privileged while others are
oppressed, achieving social justice requires resisting oppression.
Thus, while individuals matter, I emphasize justice as a group-based
phenomenon. Questions of justice and fairness typically fall outside
the scope of traditional definitions of social theory, yet they emerge
as central to critical social theory. See Fighting Wordsfor a compre-
hensive analysis of critical social theory (Collins 1998). 
8. This project relies upon a broad corpus of empirical and conceptual
studies that have been done by others. The edited volumes Words of
Fireand Trapsprovide solid introductions to questions of masculin-
ity and femininity within African American communities (Guy-
Sheftall 1995; Byrd and Guy-Sheftall 2001). Donna Franklin’s
Enduring Inequalityprovides an historical summary of Black family
life and love relationships (Franklin 1997). For readers who are unfa-
miliar with the internal dynamics of African American communities,
Gender Talk, coauthored by Johnnetta Cole and Beverly Guy-
Sheftall contains a comprehensive overview of the struggle for
women’s equality within Black communities (Cole and Guy-Sheftall
2003). Black Sexual Politics places these and similar works in a
broader theoretical and political context. 
9. Cole and Guy-Sheftall 2003, xxxi, xxxiv .
NOTES


--- PAGE 321 ---
NOTES
10. Both the incidence and mortality rates of prostate cancer for Black men show
marked racial patterns. Between 1988 and 1992, the incidence and mortality rates
for prostate cancer were 34 percent and 123 percent higher, respectively, for Black
men than for White men (Stanford et al. 1999, 48). Breast cancer, the most com-
mon form of cancer among women in the United States, shows similar patterns.
Incidence rates are higher as are mortality rates, primarily because, relative to
White women, a larger percentage of Black women’s cancers are diagnosed at a
later, less treatable stage. 
11. Definitions of sexuality are notoriously difficult to pin down. For example, the
Oxford Paperback Dictionary and Thesaurus describes sexuality as the “fact of
belonging to one of two sexes” and has having “sexual characteristics, impulses,
etc.” What does this mean? The dictionary’s definition of the term sexis more
specific: As a noun, the dictionary defines sexas a “group of males or females col-
lectively,” the “fact of belonging to either group,” or as “sexual instincts, desires,
activity, etc.” In its colloquial use, sex refers to “sexual intercourse.” The diction-
ary also lists a definition that connotes the sex act: “carnal knowledge, coitus, con-
summation of marriage, copulation, coupling, fornication, intercourse, intimacy,
lovemaking, mating, sexual intercourse, sexual relations, union.” These defini-
tions are much more narrow than my use of sexuality here. For more information,
consult the website at http://www.askoxford.com/dictionary/sexuality.
12. For an extended discussion of these three approaches, see Collins 2000a, 128–148.
Also, queer theory’s conceptual move to distinguish between gender and sexual-
ity has been vital to the development of new vocabularies of all sorts, including
those used here.
13. Ironically, often under the guise of intersectionality, the black/white race rela-
tions paradigm becomes expanded to what essentially becomes a white and all
others race relations paradigm. 
14. McKinnon 2001, 1.
15. Brazil (182 million) has the largest population of people of African descent in the
New World. However, because Brazil also has a unique history of racial classifica-
tion, it is difficult to specify its racial makeup. All population statistics were taken
from http://emuseum.mnsu.edu/information/population.
16. In this context, capitalizing the terms Whitesand White Americanserves the same
purpose. In any place where one might substitute Italian, Puerto Rican, French,
or British as population groups with identifiable histories, I capitalize Black. I also
capitalize the terms Blackand Whitewhen they are used as adjectives that clearly
refer to specific population groups, for example, Black neighborhoods or White-
run corporations. I also capitalize the terms Black and White even though they
reference ideologies or concepts, whether self-defined or imposed, for example,
Black feminism, ideologies of Black sexuality developed in conjunction with ide-
ologies of White supremacy, constructs of hegemonic White masculinity and
hegemonic Black femininity. The phrase Black sexual politics illustrates these
crosscutting meanings. It refers alternately to a set of ideas, practices, and people
that are already in place as well as to a constellation of ideas and behaviors that
this volume hopes to foster. I had hoped to distinguish among these varying uses,
but capitalizing Blackin some places and not in others was ultimately confusing
and unwieldy. I recognize that these distinctions are not always clear-cut, but for
now, they will have to suffice.
310


--- PAGE 322 ---
NOTES
CHAPTER ONE
1. Asante 1993.
2. The details of this version come from (Fausto-Sterling 1995). Depending on the
intent of the author, Sarah Bartmann’s story takes on different meanings. For
example, Anne Fausto-Sterling’s account focuses on the nineteenth-century sci-
entists who relentlessly probed her body and used Bartmann as a vehicle for
redefining Western concepts of race, gender, and sexuality. Fausto-Sterling’s ver-
sion points out how we learn much more about European scientists themselves via
their treatment of Sarah Bartmann than we gain any accurate information about
her. In contrast, in his groundbreaking essay “The Hottentot and the Prostitute:
Toward an Iconography of Female Sexuality,” Sander Gilman’s account traces
how ideas about the Hottentot Venus as an icon of Black sexuality were crucial to
nineteenth-century European perceptions of women’s sexuality (Gilman 1985,
76–108). Advancing a materialist analysis, Zine Magubane takes issue with
Gilman’s claim that, by the eighteenth century, the sexuality of African men and
women became the icon for deviant sexuality in general. Rather, Magubane con-
tends that the Bartmann exhibition encapsulated the debates that were occurring
concerning colonial labor needs (Magubane 2001). Grounded in a cultural stud-
ies framework, Susie Prestney explores how the image of the Hottentot Venus was
central to conceptions of difference, especially those of freak shows and similar
spectacles (Prestney 1997). Taking a different approach, Yvette Abrahams chal-
lenges the flawed historiography on the Khoi people and indigenous people in
general that places Bartmann outside history (Abrahams 1998). Finally, my own
rendering of this narrative in Black Feminist Thought (Collins 2000a, 136–137,
141–145), and in this volume aim to place Sarah Bartmann in an intersectional
analysis of how race, class, gender, and sexuality affect women of African descent. 
3. Bederman 1995, 1–5.
4. I use the terms representations, stereotypes, and controlling images to refer to the
depiction of people of African descent within Western scholarship and popular
culture. Each term has a different history. Representations need not be stereotyp-
ical and stereotypes need not function as controlling images. Of the three, con-
trolling images are most closely tied to power relations of race, class, gender, and
sexuality. For a discussion of controlling images, see Collins 2000a, 69–96. 
5. As used here, the term inventedresembles Benedict Anderson’s notion of an imag-
ined community (Anderson 1983). In his important study of nationalism,
Anderson contends that members of nations can never know one another. They
“imagine” or “invent” a community. Racial categories such as White, Black, and
native are all, in this sense, invented. Also, the term discourse has a particular
meaning of a set of ideas and practices that, when taken together, organize both
the way a society defines certain truths about itself and the way it deploys social
power. An invented discourse is in some sense an oxymoron in that all discourses
are social constructions that simultaneously shape and reflect actual social rela-
tions. For a good use of the term invented as the frame of an argument, see
Oyèrónké Oyˇewùmí’s book The Invention of Women: Making an African Sense of
Western Gender Discourses(Oyewumi 1997). All invented discourses typically con-
tain contradictions and are often hotly contested, certainly the case with invented
discourses on Black sexuality. For historical treatments of the invention of dis-
courses of Black sexuality, see Jordan 1968, 136–178, especially 150–151; and
D’Emilio and Freedman 1997, 34–37. 
311


--- PAGE 323 ---
NOTES
6. Collins 2000a, 69–96.
7. Abrahams 1998; Maseko 1998.
8. Morton 1991; Jewell 1993; Davis 1994; Asante 1994; Turner 1994.
9. The theme of primitivism of non-Western peoples was used to justify colonial-
ism and slavery. For an analysis of how this idea was constructed and used, see
Young 1995; Torgovnick 1990; McClintock 1995.
10. The term Latinaaddresses some of the multifaceted debates within contempo-
rary racial theory that demonstrate the fluidity of racial classification. Research
on how the different histories of people of African descent within Latin American
countries coupled with a philosophy of “racial democracy” shows how Latin
American populations approach race and ethnicity differently (Winant 2001,
219–248). In this context, Lopez’s history as a Puerto Rican is significant, espe-
cially regarding the changing meaning of race in the United States as evidenced
in the 2000 census (Rodriguez 2000). The category Latinarefers to a wide range
of national histories and migration streams into a new American ethnicity of
Hispanic. Historically, Puerto Ricans have been viewed as reflecting a mulatto
mixture resulting from European and African backgrounds as compared to a mes-
tizo mixture of European and Indian of Chicana or Mexican-American popula-
tions. But the very categories of mulatto and mestizo may mask more than they
reveal about the fluidity of racial and ethnic classification throughout the
Americans. Both Puerto Rico and Mexico have varying combinations of racial
mixtures, a situation that generates different approaches to skin color, hair tex-
ture, and the racial order itself. These ideas become layered upon North American
ideas concerning race. 
11. D’Emilio and Freedman 1997, 102–103.
12. Ironically, the theme of racial mixture of African, Indians, and Whites falters
when Spain and Portugal are in the mix. Latinas have Spanish blood, but the
Whiteness of this lineage can be questioned. Moors brought dark skin and Islam
to Spain and intermingled with its peoples. Ferdinand and Isabella were cele-
brated for unifying Spain, “civilizing” it, and insisting on Catholicism as the way
to prove membership and belonging in the emerging Spanish nation. Thus,
Moors with their heathen Muslim beliefs and their dark skin became coded as sav-
ages. 
13. The relationship among colonialism, European nationalism, and women has been
explored by a variety of authors. For a representative work, see Yuval-Davis 1997.
14. People of African descent were not the only ones whose sexuality was patholo-
gized in this process. Whereas the black/white binary is the anchor that frames all
others, different race/gender groups found their sexuality differentially stereo-
typed and pathologized in this process. Enslaving people of African descent not
only required enforcing the master/slave relationship, it also required erasing the
presence of indigenous peoples (who faced genocidal policies) as well as claiming
land that had been historically governed by Mexico (Takaki 1993). Racial ideolo-
gies constructed the sexualities of multiple groups in relation to one another
(D’Emilio and Freedman 1997). Justifying slavery also required establishing a
social class hierarchy among Whites while hiding the effects of this hierarchy
under the assumed privileges attached to Whiteness.
15. For an early discussion of Black male sexuality, see Jordan 1968, 151–152. For
more recent works that build on historical work, see Ferber 1998; Riggs 1999;
Jones 1993. 
312


--- PAGE 324 ---
NOTES
16. For an analysis of how this process operated in the late nineteenth and early twen-
tieth centuries, see Somerville 2000; Bederman 1995. 
17. For a classic work on this process, see Hoch 1979. 
18. The changes generated by postcoloniality, global capitalism, and new technologies
have sparked a lively debate about the contours and meaning of the new racism in
the United States. Some scrutinize the transformation of contemporary U.S.
society as a racialized social system composed of structural and ideological dimen-
sions (Bonilla-Silva 1996). When it comes to African Americans, structurally,
American society has not made the gains in desegregating its housing, schools,
and employment promised by the civil rights movement (Massey and Denton
1993). One study of Atlanta, Georgia, revealed that neighborhood-level racial
resegregation is emerging as a new spatial pattern within major American cities,
even those with a politically enfranchised and highly visible Black middle class
(Orfield and Ashkinaze 1991). Other research points to the growth of a prison-
industrial complex as an important new site for institutionalized racism con-
fronting working-class and poor African Americans and Latinos (Miller 1996).
Ideologically, a belief in upholding “color blindness” masks the continued
inequalities of contemporary racism. By proclaiming that equal treatment of indi-
vidualsunder the law is sufficient for addressing racism, this ideology redefines
group-based, antiracist remedies such as affirmative action as being “racist”
(Crenshaw 1997). For a critique of color blindness and an analysis of how this
racial ideology merits rethinking in the United States, see Guinier and Torres
2002. 
19. For a thorough analysis of how globalization shapes contemporary racial forma-
tions, see Winant’s analysis of the United States, South Africa, Brazil, and Europe
in the post–World War II era (Winant 2001). Feminist analysis has also produced
a broad literature on globalization and women’s economic status, some of it
focused on racism, sexism, and issues of globalization. For representative theo-
retical work in this tradition, see Alexander 1997; Mohanty 1997. African
American scholars have also focused more attention on the global political econ-
omy. For representative works in this tradition, see Wilson 1996; Brewer 1994;
Squires 1994.
20. Bauman 1998, 9.
21. Lusane 1997, 114.
22. M. Jacqui Alexander’s discussion of the tourist industry in the Bahamas provides
an especially insightful analysis of the effects of globalization on nation-state
autonomy and on social problems within the Bahamas (Alexander 1997).
23. Cultural studies and studies of mass media underwent massive growth after 1980.
For general work on the media, see Gitlin 2001. For race and media, see Entman
2000. The field of Black cultural studies has generated a range of literature. For rep-
resentative works, consult Bobo 1995; Kelley 1994; Kelley 1997; Rose 1994; Wallace
1990; Gilroy 2000; Ransby and Matthews 1993; Gates 1992; Neal 2002; Watkins
1998; Cashmore 1997; Caponi 1999; Dent 1992b; Hall 1992; and Dyson 1996.
24. Kitwana 2002.
25. Clarke 1983, 199.
26. D’Emilio and Freedman suggest that the suppression of a range of sexual prac-
tices was part of colonization. Comparing the sexual practices of Native
Americans, which varied widely, with European colonialist perceptions of such
practices, in every region where Europeans and indigenous peoples came into
313


--- PAGE 325 ---
NOTES
contact, Europeans judged the sexual life of natives as “savage” and their own
practices as “civilized.” For example, most indigenous peoples did not associate
either nudity or sexuality with sin. They accepted premarital intercourse,
polygamy, or institutionalized homosexuality, all practices that were condemned
by European church and state (D’Emilio and Freedman 1997, 6–7). They point
out, “perhaps the most striking contrast between English and Indian sexual sys-
tems was the relative absence of sexual conflict among native Americans, due in
part to their different cultural attitudes toward both property and sexuality. . . . In
cultures in which one could not ‘own’ another person’s sexuality, prostitution—
the sale of sex—did not exist prior to the arrival to European settlers. Rape—the
theft of sex—only rarely occurred, and it was one of the few sexual acts forbid-
den by Indian cultures” (D’Emilio and Freedman 1997, 8). 
27. D’Emilio and Freedman 1997, 16.
28. A 1995 report published by the Social Science Research Council charts the polit-
ical difficulties that have plagued scientific studies of sexuality within American
social science (di Mauro 1995). 
29. Hegemony is also a mode of social organization wherein the dissent of oppressed
groups is absorbed and thereby rendered politically useless. Moreover, in hege-
monic situations, power is diffused throughout a social system such that multiple
groups police one another and suppress each other’s dissent. For example, if
African Americans come to believe the dominant ideology and accept ideas about
Black masculinities and Black femininities constructed within the dominant
framework, then Black political dissent about gender and about all things tied to
gender becomes weakened. Because they are used to justify existing social hierar-
chies, hegemonic ideologies may seem invincible. But ideologies of all sorts are
never static. Instead, they are always internally inconsistent and are always subject
to contestation (Magubane 2001). 
30. Remez 2000.
31. This history of suppression of sex education and the limits on discussions that do
exist have an especially negative impact on African American adolescents.
HIV/AIDS has had a significant impact on African American youth. For statis-
tics, see http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pubs/Facts/afam.pdf.
32. For an analysis of talk shows, especially the production of “trashy” talk shows, see
Grindstaff 2002. Grindstaff does not emphasize race, but her study of how talk
shows replicate and reproduce ideas about social class and gender provides insight
into the general process of ideology construction and contestation. She notes that
talk shows are typically geared to women, feature working-class guests, and aim to
display ordinary people engaged in extraordinary behavior. 
33. Mark Anthony Neal and Hortense Spillers offer two different interpretations of the
emergence of the term “baby daddy” to describe unmarried fatherhood among
African American men. Neal’s chapter “Baby Mama (Drama) and Baby Daddy
(Trauma): Post-Soul Gender Politics” uses Black popular culture (Neal 2002,
57–97). In contrast, Spillers’s essay “Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American
Grammar Book,” also examines unmarried fatherhood in the context of American
race relations and the exploitation of Black bodies under slavery (Spillers 2000). 
34. Grindstaff borrows the phrase the “money shot” from pornography to describe
the efforts of producers to get ordinary people to deliver strong emotions such as
joy, sorrow, rage, or remorse that can be seen in visible, bodily terms. Crying,
shaking, running, and other evidence of emotion besides just talk are solicited. As
314


--- PAGE 326 ---
NOTES
Grindstaff points out, “Like pornography, daytime talk is a narrative of explicit
revelation in which people ‘get down and dirty’ and ‘bare it all’ for the pleasure,
fascination, or repulsion of viewers. Like the orgasmic cum shot of pornographic
films, the money shot of talk shows makes visible the precise moment of letting
go, of losing control, of surrendering to the body and its ‘animal’ emotions”
(Grindstaff 2002, 19). This is why Mr. Povich followed the woman backstage—
he was in search of an authentic money shot.
35. Sociologist Abby Ferber describes how White supremacist literature remains
obsessed with this theme of interracial sexuality generally and of protecting the
body of the White woman (and thus the White race) from Black penetration.
White women who willingly partner with Black men become redefined as “dark-
ened,” trashy women (Ferber 1998). 
36. West 1993, 83.
37. The works of Black women writers repeatedly identify how they are encouraged
to keep silent about gender problems within African American communities. For
example, African American scholars Johnnetta Cole and Beverly Guy-Sheftall
recount how their volume on the struggle for women’s equality within African
American communities goes against racial discourse that counsels Black women
not to “air dirty laundry” about gender and sexuality (Cole and Guy-Sheftall
2003, xxiii–xxxviii). They name their book Gender Talk in an effort to reverse
these silences. 
38. Sex role theory has generated considerable critique. Michael Messner summarizes
five common problems with sex role theory: (1) it focuses on individualistic, vol-
untary levels of analysis that minimize institutional power relations; (2) it implies
a false symmetry between men and women that masks gender oppression; (3) it
uses the male sex role to create a falsely universalized (middle-class, White, het-
erosexual) norm and measures deviance using this standard; (4) it relies on binary
ideas about gender that reify biological notions of male and female sex categories;
and (5) it is inadequate for examining changes in gender ideology, especially resist-
ance (Messner 1998, 258). Messner points out that sociologists do not use the
terms “race roles” or “class roles” when describing other social inequalities: “we
may speak of race or class identities, but we do so within the context of an under-
standing of the historical dynamics of race and class relations” (Messner 1998,
258). R. W . Connell offers a comparable critique: “the conceptualization of gender
through role theory . . . reifies expectations and self-descriptions, exaggerates con-
sensus, marginalizes questions of power, and cannot analyze historical change”
(Connell 1992, 735). By the 1980s, a more historicized and politicized language of
gender relations virtually supplanted the language of sex role theory within sociol-
ogy, although not within psychology, education, social work, and other disciplines. 
39. In his classic work on stigma, Erving Goffman examines the strategies used by
people who are stigmatized to manage a “spoiled identity” (Goffman 1963).
While scholars often use Goffman’s work to explore the management of stigma by
individuals, here I use the concept to explore how Blacks as a group respond to
the stigma of Blackness that is evidenced by a seemingly deviant Black sexuality.
40. African American organizational response to HIV illustrates this stance of avoid-
ance (Cohen 1999, 250–292). Political theorist Cathy Cohen contends that the
NAACP , the Urban League, and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference
exemplify national Black organizations that have been “uneven at their best
moments and neglectful in their worst” (Cohen 1999, 258). The sexual miscon-
315


--- PAGE 327 ---
NOTES
duct of prominent Black male political leaders never raised the types of debates
within African American communities concerning the gender politics involved.
For example, the NAACP chose to cover up the sexual harassment case against
then head Ben Chavis. The paternity suit filed against politician Jesse Jackson was
ridiculed but not analyzed. 
41. For an overview of gender and Black churches, see Cole and Guy-Sheftall 2003,
102–127. Recalling their own upbringings in Southern Christian churches, Cole
and Guy-Sheftall summarize the principal lessons about gender: “That God is a
male and that Jesus is both white and male; that the relationship between women
and men in everyday life is to be like that between God and His church, for God
is the head of the church, and all members are to follow Him; and that God and
all of His people will look down on a ‘bad woman’ (for example, one who gets
pregnant out of wedlock) and praise ‘a virtuous woman’ (for example, one who is
a loyal helpmate to her husband and a good mother to her children)” (Cole and
Guy-Sheftall 2003, 104).
42. I focus on established Black political organizations in this section, but it is important
to note that these organizations appeal to older African Americans. These tradi-
tional players in African American politics have been joined by the hip-hop gen-
eration, a segment of Black youth who express contradictory positions on gender
and sexuality. They do not vote, but their importance within popular culture gives
their ideas a greater visibility among Black youth than the programs of established
African American organizations (Kitwana 2002, 175–194). 
43. Forms of biological racism that reached their peak during the eugenics movement
and historical ideas about race that emerged from this view of the world have been
disproved. However, recent developments within genetics, for example, the map-
ping of human DNA in the Human Genome Project, the increasing use of DNA
identification in criminal justice, and controversies that now surround the use of
genetic information in medical and insurance records all suggest that biology and
race are still closely linked. For a discussion of issues of racism and science, see
the essays in Harding 1993.
44. Wieviorka 1997, 139.
45. Wieviorka 1997.
46. For an insightful social science study of White racial attitudes, see Bonilla-Silva
2001. For an analysis of strategies of everyday racism that operate without a clear
color line, see Essed 1991. In my own work, I identify four domains of power that
collectively provide a framework for conceptualizing race and similar systems of
oppression. The four domains are structural, disciplinary, hegemonic, and inter-
personal. Under color-blind racism, for example, the hegemonic domain has
increased in importance such that it generates ideologies that mask how race
frames public policy in social institutions (structural), the differential application
of rules to Blacks and Whites within schools, jobs, and other organizational set-
tings (disciplinary) and how individuals treat one another in everyday life (inter-
personal). For an extended discussion of the domains as sites for Black women’s
resistance, see Collins 2000a, 273–290.
47. In 1999, 55 percent of Blacks but only 22 percent of non-Hispanic Whites lived
in the central cities of metropolitan areas (McKinnon and Humes 2000, 2).
48. Dawson 1994.
49. Wilson generated controversy by suggesting that class was increasing in impor-
tance within African American communities and pointed out that social class may
316


--- PAGE 328 ---
NOTES
be well on its way toward becoming a crosscutting issue for African Americans
(Wilson 1978). 
50. Cohen 1999, 14–15.
51. Scott 1990.
52. Kelley 1994, 8.
53. Gilroy 2000.
54. Lorde 1984, 53–59.
CHAPTER TWO
1. For a comprehensive analysis of this same theme as it applies to African American
women, see my discussion of the new politics of containment in chapter 2 of
Fighting Words (Collins 1998, 11–43). 
2. Kitwana 2002, 23.
3. For discussions of various aspects of globalization, race, and inequality, see Bales
1999; Lusane 1997; Bauman 1998; Mohanty 1997.
4. For a general overview of how race operates in a transnational framework, see
Winant 2001. The framework of transnationalism is less often applied to African
American experiences than those of Latinos. 
5. For representative works on new racist ideologies, see Crenshaw 1997; Guinier
and Torres 2002; Bonilla-Silva 2001; and Goldberg 1993. For race and media, see
Entman 2000. For representative works in the field of Black cultural studies, con-
sult Kelley 1994; Kelley 1997; Gates 1992; Neal 2002; Dent 1992b; Hall 1992;
Dyson 1996.
6. For example, much attention has been given to the important issue of the poor
school performance of African American youth (Fordham 1996), and Black males
in particular (Arnett Ferguson 2000). Afro-Caribbean immigrants to the United
Kingdom express similar concerns with their children’s performance. This theme
of Black youth being denied access to education and/or receiving differential
treatment by schools run by dominant groups reappears across societies. Despite
similar disadvantages among Black youth worldwide, a transnational discourse
addressing issues peculiar to Black youth has not yet surfaced. 
7. For a comprehensive treatment of racial formation theory, see Omi and Winant
1994. 
8. The literature on slavery is vast and I make no effort to review it here. This sec-
tion relies on material from Jordan 1968, 24–32, 216–265 and Torgovnick 1990,
3–11. Despite Orlando Patterson’s troublesome analyses of the gendered aspects
of slavery (see, Patterson 1998), his classic cross-cultural analysis of slavery ana-
lyzes chattel slavery as one of several forms within a global context (Patterson
1982). Material in this section is also drawn from general African American his-
toriography, in particular, Takaki 1993, 51–76 and 106–138; Berry 1994; Franklin
1992; Gutman 1976; and also from feminist scholarship on slavery, in particular,
Giddings 1984; Jones 1985; White 1985a.
9. Omolade 1994, 7.
10. Collins 2000a, 72–84.
11. A variety of authors analyze contemporary representations of Black masculinity
in relation to this foundational controlling image of the buck. For work in this tra-
dition, see Hoch’s discussion of White men as heroes and Black men as “beasts”
(Hoch 1979). See also, Dines 1998; Turner 1994; Harrison 2001.
317


--- PAGE 329 ---
NOTES
12. Berry 1994, 14–26.
13. For an overview of contemporary work that analyzes masculinity in terms of
patriarchy, see Messner 1998, 1990; Connell 1995. 
14. For general works that examine Black masculinity within the interpretive frame-
work put forth here, see Carbado 1999b, 1999c; Riggs 1992, 1999; Thomas 1996.
15. Angela Davis presented one of the earliest and most comprehensive analyses of
institutionalized rape as a tool of domination (Davis 1978). Davis reports that
legal institutions not only do not punish institutionalized rape, they actually
encourage and support it as an extension of public policy. For example, rapes by
soldiers and rapes of imprisoned peoples are not punished. I take up this theme
more thoroughly in chapter 7. 
16. Kapsalis 1997; White 1985a.
17. Spillers 2000, 73.
18. Berry 1994.
19. Frazier 1948; Moynihan 1965.
20. For a discussion of gender arrangements and marriage, see Gutman 1976. For
discussions of the idea of gender equality, see White 1985a; Davis 1981.
21. See, for example, Thompson 1983; Sudarkasa 1981.
22. Patterson 1998, 3.
23. Patterson 1998, 25.
24. Oliver and Shapiro 1995, 13–15.
25. Berry 1994.
26. Dash 1996, 79.
27. For analyses of the climate for African Americans, see Giddings 1984. For a dis-
cussion of the content of images, see Morton 1991; Jewell 1993; Turner 1994. For
discussions of race and sexuality in late-nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century
America, see Somerville 2000; Bederman 1995.
28. For discussions of the myth of the Black male rapist and its connection to lynch-
ing during this period, see Bederman 1995, 45–76, and Wiegman 1993. For a lit-
erary analysis of this theme, see Harris 1984.
29. Giddings 1992, 443.
30. Franklin 1995, 74.
31. Ida B. Wells-Barnett was the first African American critic to link the myth of the
Black rapist to state-sanctioned lynching. Wells-Barnett argued that social and
economic factors catalyzed lynching, not the behavior of African American men.
See Wells-Barnett’s reprinted pamphlets in Wells-Barnett 2002.
32. D’Emilio and Freedman 1997, 107.
33. Collins 2002, 14.
34. Hill 1997, 25.
35. Hill 1997, 29.
36. Hill 1997, 36–37.
37. Marks 1989.
38. A research tradition of urban ethnographies that is too vast to cite here describes
how these trends were organized in different American cities. The material in this
section is taken from Marks 1989, 137–151.
39. Carby 1992, 754.
40. Carby 1992, 739.
41. Carby 1992, 746.
42. Higginbotham 1993, 185–229.
318


--- PAGE 330 ---
NOTES
43. I’m thinking here of the alliance between C. Delores Tucker, president of the
National Political Congress of Black Women, and former Reagan administration
official William Bennett in response to the profanity, violence, and misogyny in
gangsta rap. For a summary, see George 1998, 188–192.
44. Carby 1992, 745.
45. Higginbotham 1993, 193.
46. Davis 1998, 44. Material in this section is taken from Davis.
47. Davis 1998, 44.
48. During this period, gender reassignments were not an option as they are for con-
temporary transgendered individuals. For this reason, I omit the category of
transgendered from this discussion. There was, however, a prominent gay, lesbian,
and bisexual presence in Harlem. Contemporary queer readings of some of the
major works of the Harlem Renaissance provide a window into literary figures
(see, e.g., Somerville 2000; Julien 1992). More contemporary works such as
anthropologist William Hawkeswood’s study of Black gay men in Harlem
(Hawkeswood 1996), and Audre Lorde’s memoirs about 1950s New York (Lorde
1982) suggest a community with a long history that precedes the dominance of
the closet from the 1950s to the 1980s. Sociologist Steve Seidman reminds us that
the closet is a historically specific entity (Seidman 2002, 29).
49. During this same period, heterosexism as a system of power grew in tandem with
the color line, and it relied upon a similar logic of segregation that was differently
organized and deployed. For an extended discussion of this period, see
Somerville 2000, 1–14.
50. See, for example, Kennedy and Davis 1994; Lorde 1982.
51. Black middle-class women also found it difficult to contest prevailing norms of
femininity. Because they were often held up as symbols of the race, a common
practice within nationalist-inspired group politics (see, e.g., Davis 1998, 44), mid-
dle-class Black women were further restricted by the politics of respectability.
Their lifestyles were on display as visible signs that Black women were not inher-
ently sexually wanton. 
52. Nelson 1997, 63.
53. Carbado 1999a, 177.
54. Robinson 2000, 237–238.
55. Root 2001.
56. Wilson 1978.
57. McKinnon and Humes 2000, 2.
58. Five measures of racial residential segregation are typically used. Evenness meas-
ures the differential distribution of the population. Exposure measures potential
contact among racial groups. Concentration refers to the relative amount of phys-
ical space occupied by a racial group. Centralization indicates the degree to which
a racial group is located near the center of an urban area. Clustering measures the
degree to which racial groups live disproportionately in contiguous areas (Iceland,
Weinberg, and Steinmetz 2002, 7–10). The literature reports declines in residen-
tial racial segregation for African Americans across all five measures. However,
the largest metropolitan areas (1 million or more population) had higher residen-
tial segregation than the middle-sized ones (500,000 to 999,999), which in turn
had higher rates than smaller ones. The size of the metropolitan area and the size
of the Black population within it seem to matter. Three of the five indexes
showed a pattern of higher segregation in places with a higher percentage of
319


--- PAGE 331 ---
NOTES
Blacks in 2000, while two showed the reverse. In particular, as the percentage of
the population that is Black increased, Blacks were (1) less likely to be evenly
spread across the metropolitan area; (2) less likely to share common neighbor-
hoods with Whites (isolation index); and (3) more likely to live near other Blacks
(spatial proximity index) (Iceland, Weinberg, and Steinmetz 2002, 63). 
59. For an analysis of racial segregation, see Massey and Denton 1993. Also, see
Oliver and Shapiro 1995, 15–23. In 2000, the five most segregated metropolitan
areas for Black people were Milwaukee, Detroit, Cleveland, St. Louis, and
Newark. Cincinnati, Buffalo, and New York were roughly tied for sixth place, and
the top ten was rounded out by Chicago and Philadelphia (although Philadelphia
was roughly tied with Kansas City, New Orleans, and Indianapolis) (Iceland,
Weinberg, and Steinmetz 2002, 68). By 2000, African Americans constituted a
sizeable percentage of the populations of large American cities. Of the ten largest
areas in the United States, Detroit had the largest proportion of Black people (83
percent), followed by Philadelphia (44 percent), and Chicago (38 percent). Two
places—New York and Chicago—together accounted for nine percent of the total
Black population. The ten largest places for Blacks accounted for 20 percent of
the total Black population (McKinnon 2001, 7). 
60. McKinnon 2001.
61. The criteria used to define social class, for example, educational attainment, occu-
pational level, and income, affect estimates of the size of the Black middle class.
Here I emphasize occupational characteristics because these demonstrate
race/gender patterns that are central to the arguments in this book. 
62. Race and gender differences characterize this movement of African Americans
into professional and managerial jobs. In 1999, the proportion of employed non-
Hispanic White men (32 percent) in managerial and professional occupations was
almost twice that of Black men (17 percent). Non-Hispanic White women (35
percent) were more likely than Black women (24 percent) to be in these positions.
In this regard, White men and women were far closer in occupational status (32
and 35 percent) than Black men and women (17 and 24 percent) (McKinnon and
Humes 2000).
63. This heterogeneity within the Black middle class should not obscure the major
differences between middle-class Blacks and Whites. For an analysis of these dif-
ferences in income and wealth, see Oliver and Shapiro 1995, 91–125.
64. Graham 2000.
65. Iceland, Weinberg, and Steinmetz 2002, 3–4.
66. Patillo-McCoy 1999.
67. Patillo-McCoy 1999, 123.
68. Race and gender also influenced the continued concentration of Black men and
women in less desirable jobs. For example, Black men (17 percent) are more than
twice as likely as White men (8 percent) to work in service occupations and almost
twice as likely (31 percent compared to 17 percent) to be operators, fabricators,
and laborers. Black women (27 percent) were more likely than non-Hispanic
White women (15 percent) to be employed in service occupations (McKinnon and
Humes 2000, 4). In essence, gender-segmented jobs of laborers and service work
continued to characterize the occupational experiences of poor and working-class
African Americans. 
69. Much has been written about the PRWOR Act. For a discussion of how this act
fits into a frame of “welfare racism,” see Neubeck and Cazenave 2001, 115–144.
320


--- PAGE 332 ---
NOTES
70. Kitwana 2002, 48.
71. Squires 1994.
72. McKinnon and Humes 2000, 5.
73. McKinnon and Humes 2000, 6.
74. Franklin 1997b, 153–214.
75. Miller 1996, 1–9.
76. Kitwana 2002, 71–76.
77. Kitwana 2002, 76.
78. McKinnon and Humes 2000, 2.
79. Definitions of poverty seem to matter greatly in who gets counted as poor. In
1998, the official poverty threshold for a family of four was $16,600, leaving a
sizeable gap between the $25,000 income threshold reported here and official
poverty. Whatever the family composition, Black families are poorer than White
ones, with families headed by Black women with no spouse present poorer than
all. In 1998, poverty was highest in families maintained by women with no spouse
present: 41 percent for Blacks compared to 21 percent for non-Hispanic Whites
(McKinnon and Humes 2000, 6).
80. Varying explanations have been given for these patterns. William Julius Wilson’s
research links patterns of family organization to the changing contours of eco-
nomic opportunities in Black urban neighborhoods (Wilson 1996; Wilson 1987).
Wilson’s research highlights how growing joblessness among African American
men in the 1960s and 1970s correlates with (but does not necessarily cause)
increasing rates of African American mother-child families. His work documents
how the emergence of mother-child families among working-class African
Americans can be attributed, in part, to a changing political economy that disad-
vantaged U.S. Blacks. Others criticize capitalist development itself (Squires 1994). 
81. Anderson 1999.
82. The crisis within contemporary gender politics sparked Cole and Guy-Sheftall to
write their book: “Now is a particularly critical time for Gender Talkbecause of what
we perceive to be an embattled Black, mostly male leadership, a deepening crisis in
Black male-female relationships, an embrace of patriarchal family values, and a back-
lash against feminism and Black feminists” (Cole and Guy-Sheftall 2003, xxxii).
83. Cole and Guy-Sheftall 2003, 186.
84. Dickerson 2000.
85. Chambers 1996, 44.
86. Chambers 1996, 46.
87. Golden 1995, 68.
88. Bales 1999, 6.
89. Robinson 2000, 74.
CHAPTER THREE
1. The field of postcolonial studies contains many works that examine how ideas
generally, and sexual discourse in particular, was essential to colonialism and to
nationalism. In this field, the works of French philosopher Michel Foucault have
been pivotal in challenging prior frameworks heavily grounded in Marxism and in
Freudian psychoanalysis. Here I rely on two main ideas from the corpus of
Foucault’s work. The first, expressed in his classic work Discipline and Punish,
concerns the strategies that institutions use to discipline populations and get them
321


--- PAGE 333 ---
NOTES
to submit under conditions of oppression (Foucault 1979). The second idea con-
cerns the normalization of such power through the use of hegemonic ideologies.
Volume I of Foucault’s The History of Sexualityuses sexuality to illustrate this
normalization of power (Foucault 1980). Despite the enormous impact that
Foucault has had on studies of power, few works analyze his treatment of race.
Ann Stoler’s Race and the Education of Desireis exemplary in this regard (Stoler
1995). Stoler examines how Foucault’s analyses of sexuality in European societies
can be read also as an analysis of race. In this chapter, I rely on many of Stoler’s
insights. For a comprehensive overview of works on Foucault and sexuality that
do not deal with race, see Stoler 1995, 19, n. 1. For a description of the specific
manipulation of sexual discourse within colonialism, see McClintock 1995;
Gilman 1985; and Young 1995, 90–117.
2. Jordan 1968, 3–43.
3. Jordan 1968, 136–178.
4. See, for example, White 1985a.
5. Despite the marginality of all LGBT Black people, subpopulations did not place
issues of sexuality on the public agenda at the same time or in the same way. Black
lesbians raised issues of heterosexism and homophobia in the 1980s, fairly early in
modern Black feminism. For classic work in this tradition, see Combahee River
Collective 1982; Lorde 1982; Smith 1983; and Clarke 1983. For a representative
sample of more recent works, see Clarke 1995; Gomez and Smith 1994; Moore
1997; Gomez 1999; Greene 2000; Smith 1998. In contrast, works by gay Black
men achieved greater prominence later. See, for example, Hemphill 1991; Riggs
1992. Tongues Untied, the documentary by the late Marlon Riggs, represents an
important path breaking work in Black gay men’s studies in the United States
(Tongues Untied 1989). More recently, work on Black masculinity that analyzes
homosexuality has gained greater visibility. See Hutchinson 1999; Riggs 1999;
Thomas 1996; Carbado 1999c; Hawkeswood 1996; Simmons 1991.
6. Cohen and Jones 1999, 88.
7. Mandela 1994, 341. Foucault suggests that the prison serves as an exemplar of
modern Western society (Foucault 1979). The techniques used to discipline and
punish deviant populations constitute a punishment industry. Prisons operate by
controlling populations via disciplining the body. Foucault’s work on sexuality
also emphasizes regularization and discipline, only this time via creating dis-
courses of sexuality that also aim to control the body (Foucault 1980). For an
analysis of Foucault’s treatment of race, sexuality, and gender, see Stoler 1995.
8. Wideman 1984, 52.
9. For works that detail the effects of welfare state policies on African Americans,
see Quadagno 1994; Brewer 1994; Neubeck and Cazenave 2001. For general works
on state policy and African American economic well-being, see Squires 1994;
Massey and Denton 1993; Oliver and Shapiro 1995. For analyses of jobs and
urban economies, see Wilson 1996; 1987.
10. West 1993.
11. In the 1980s, homicide became one of the leading causes of death of young Black
men (Oliver 1994). For work on the vulnerability of Black youth in inner cities,
see Anderson 1978; 1990; 1999; Canada 1995; Kaplan 1997; Kitwana 2002.
12. Anderson 1999.
13. Anderson 1999.
14. Anderson 1978; 1990; 1999.
322


--- PAGE 334 ---
NOTES
15. As quoted in Cole and Guy-Sheftall 2003, 139.
16. Mandela 1994, 367–368.
17. Mandela 1994, 341.
18. Rose 1994, 21–61; George 1998, 1–21.
19. Sociologist Steve Seidman traces the emergence and decline of the closet as a
metaphor describing contemporary LGBT politics (Seidman 2002). Seidman
dates the closet as reaching its heyday in the 1950s and early 1960s during the
early years of the cold war. In his research, he was surprised to find that many
contemporary gay Americans live outside the social framework of the closet.
Seidman suggests that the two main ways that gay life has been understood since
1969, namely, the coming-out narrative or the migration to gay ghettoes, may no
longer be accurate: “as the lives of at least some gays look more like those of
straights, as gays no longer feel compelled to migrate to urban enclaves to feel
secure and respected, gay identity is often approached in ways similar to hetero-
sexual identity—as a thread” (Seidman 2002, 11). Unfortunately, Seidman’s
methodology did not allow him to explore the ways in which Black LGBT people
have similar and different experiences. 
20. Both science and religion advanced different justifications for stigmatizing homo-
sexuals. Until recently, Western medicine and science viewed sexuality as being bio-
logically hardwired into the human species and obeying natural laws. Heterosexual
sexual practices and reproduction were perceived as the “natural” state of sexuality,
and all other forms of sexual expression were classified as deviant. Religion offered
similar justifications. Promiscuity and homosexuality emerged as important cate-
gories of “unnatural” sexual activity that normalized monogamous heterosexuality
within the context of marriage and for purposes of reproduction. 
21. This is Foucault’s argument about biopower, the normalization of practices that
enable society to discipline individual bodies, in this case, sexual bodies, and
groups, in this case, straights and gays, as population groups that become com-
prehensible only in the context of discourses of sexuality. This view prevailed
until shifts within the study of sexuality in the 1980s and 1990s.
22. Seidman 1996, 6.
23. The term queeroften serves as an umbrella term for lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans-
gendered, and anyone else whose sexuality transgresses the status quo. Not every-
one claims the term as an identity or statement of social location. Some argue that
the term erases social and economic differences among lesbians and gay men, and
others consider it to be derogatory. Still others use the term to acknowledge the
limitless possibilities of an individual’s sexuality. They see terms such as gay, les-
bian, and bisexual as misleading in that they suggest stable sexual identities.
Beyond these ideological differences, I do not use the term queerhere because
LGBT African American people do not prefer this term. When participants in
the National Black Pride Survey 2000were asked which label from a very extensive
list came closest to describing their sexual orientation, 42 percent self-identified as
gay, 24 percent chose lesbian, 11 percent chose bisexual, and 1 percent marked
transgendered. In contrast to high levels of agreement on gay and lesbian,
“queer” was one of the least popular options (1 percent). As the survey reports,
“Black GLBT people do not readily, or even remotely, identity as ‘queer’” (Battle
et al. 2002, 19). 
24. LGBT politics and the “queering” of sexuality has been one important dimen-
sion of the post–civil rights era and Seidman contends that the postcloseted world
323


--- PAGE 335 ---
NOTES
of the post–civil rights era has shown greater acceptance of LGBT people. Yet,
suggests Seidman, acceptance may come with a price. Today, LGBT people are
under intense pressure to fit the mold of the “good gay citizen” to be monoga-
mous and to look and act normal. This image may be safe, but it continues to jus-
tify discrimination against those who do not achieve this ideal (Seidman 2002).
25. Here I use the framework of “domains of power” to examine the convergence of
racism and heterosexism. Briefly, race, sexuality, gender, class, and other systems
of oppression are all organized through four main domains of power. The struc-
tural domain of power (institutional policies), the disciplinary of power (the rules
and regulations that regulate social interaction), the hegemonic domain of power
(the belief systems that defend existing power arrangements), and the interper-
sonal domain of power (patterns of everyday social interaction) are organized dif-
ferently for different systems of oppression. Here I use this model as a heuristic
device to build an argument about the interconnections of racism and heterosex-
ism. For a discussion of the framework and its applicability in Black feminist pol-
itics, see chapter 12 of Black Feminist Thought(Collins 2000a, 273–290).
26. For a discussion of the Lovingdecision and its effects on interracial marriage, see
Root 2001. For the full definition of the Defense of Marriage Act, see U.S.
Census Bureau 2000.
27. Racism and heterosexism share this basic cognitive frame, and it is one shared by
other systems of power. 
28. Clarke 1983.
29. Both sets of ideas also serve as markers for constructing both heterosexuality and
homosexuality within the wider society. Prior to the social movements of the civil
rights era that called increased attention to both racism and heterosexism, racial
protest was contained within the prisons of racially segregated neighborhoods
and LGBT protest within the invisibility of individual closets. 
30. Mudimbe 1988; Appiah 1992.
31. Young 1995, 90–117; McClintock 1995.
32. Jordan 1968, 7.
33. Jordan 1968, 5. Jordan suggests that the reactions of the English differed from
those of the Spanish and the Portuguese who for centuries had been in close con-
tact with North Africa and who had been invaded by peoples both darker and
more civilized than themselves. The impact of color on the English may have been
more powerful because England’s principal contact with Africans came in West
Africa and the Congo, areas with very dark-skinned Africans. Thus, “one of the
fairest-skinned nations suddenly came face to face with one of the darkest peoples
on earth” (Jordan 1968, 6).
34. Torgovnick 1990, 18–20.
35. Historically, scientific racism has made important contributions to creating and
sustaining myths of Black promiscuity as well as constructing a normalized het-
erosexuality juxtaposed to the alleged deviancy of White homosexuality. The sci-
entific racism of medicine, biology, psychology, anthropology, and other social 
sciences constructed both Black promiscuity as well as homosexuality and then
spent inordinate time assisting state and religious institutions that aimed to regu-
late these practices. For general discussions of race and science, see Gould 1981;
Harding 1993; Zuberi 2001.
36. Fausto-Sterling 1995.
37. Foucault 1979.
324


--- PAGE 336 ---
NOTES
38. Haraway 1989, 262. In this context, studying animals that were clearly not human
but close to it might reveal what granted Europeans their humanity and Africans
their putative bestiality. Here the interest in animal behavior as a form of human
behavior uninterrupted by culture appears. Within primatology, monkeys and
apes have a privileged relation to nature and culture, in that “simians occupy the
border zones” (Haraway 1989, 1). “In Africa, the primate literature was produced
by white colonists and western foreign scientists under no pressure until well after
independence to develop scientific, collegial relations with black Africans. African
primates, including the people imagined as wildlife, modeled the ‘origin of man’
for European-derived culture. . . . Africa became a place of darkness, one lacking
the enlightenment of the West. India has been used to model not the ‘origin of
man,’ but the ‘origin of civilization.’ Both are forms of ‘othering’ for western
symbolic operations, but their differences matter” (Haraway 1989, 262).
39. Collins 2000a, 69–96.
40. Wiegman 1993, 239.
41. Quoted in Kapsalis 1997, 37. Understandings of Black women’s promiscuity also
build upon a deep historical theme within Western societies that links deviant sex-
uality with disease. The hypervisible, pathologized portion of Black women’s 
sexuality centered on the icon of the whore, the woman who demands money for
sexual favors. This image is pathologized in that prostitutes were associated with
ideas about disease and pollution that bore stark resemblance to ideas about the
threat of racial pollution so central to conceptions of whiteness grounded in
purity (Giddings 1992, 419). 
42. Baker 1993, 43.
43. Baker 1993, 33–60.
44. Dwyer 2002. This case also resembles the well-known case of the Scottsboro boys
in which a group of Black men were convicted of allegedly raping White women.
They too were eventually exonerated.
45. White 1985a.
46. Gould 1981; Zucchino 1997; Amott 1990; Brewer 1994; Neubeck and Cazenave
2001.
47. Roberts 1997, 4.
48. In a context in which the United States has the highest teen pregnancy rate in the
Western world, the even higher rates of teen pregnancy among African American
adolescents is a cause for alarm. Many factors influence high rates of pregnancy
among young Black women. For example, adult men, some of whom may have
coerced girls to have sex with them, father most of the babies born to teen moth-
ers. Studies show that as many as one in four girls are victims of sexual abuse
(Roberts 1997, 117). 
49. See Gould 1981; Lubiano 1992; Zucchino 1997; Neubeck and Cazenave 2001.
50. Roberts 1997, 152.
51. As quoted in Cole and Guy-Sheftall 2003, 165.
52. For a discussion of the type of racial reasoning that generates ideas of racial
authenticity, see Cornel West’s “The Pitfalls of Racial Reasoning” (West 1993,
21–32).
53. These same pressures fostered views of homosexuals as invisible, closeted, and
assumed to be White. Normalized White heterosexuality became possible and
hegemonic only within the logic of both racism and heterosexism.
54. The general use of the term “the Black Church” refers to Black Christian churches
325


--- PAGE 337 ---
NOTES
in the United States. This includes any Black Christian who worships and is a mem-
ber of a Black congregation. The formal use of the term refers to independent, his-
toric, and Black-controlled denominations that were founded after the Free African
Society in 1787. For a listing, see Monroe 1998, 297, n. 1. For a general history of
the Black Church, see Lincoln 1999. For analyses of Black women’s participation in
the Black Church, see Douglas 1999; Gilkes 2001; Higginbotham 1993.
55. See, Patillo-McCoy 1999, especially Patillo-McCoy 1998.
56. Lincoln 1999, xxiv .
57. Douglas 1999.
58. Cole and Guy-Sheftall 2003, 116. 
59. Cole and Guy-Sheftall 2003, 120.
60. Cohen 1999, 276–288.
61. Simmons 1991.
62. For a discussion of the family networks of Black gay men in Harlem, see
Hawkeswood 1996. Also, see Battle et al. 2002, 13–17.
63. Higginbotham 1993, 185–229.
64. Somerville 2000.
65. Julien 1992, 274.
66. Davis 1998.
67. Davis 1998, 3.
68. Kennedy and Davis 1994.
69. Lorde 1982.
70. Monroe 1998, 281.
71. Comstock 1999, 156.
72. Comstock 1999, 156.
73. Boykin 1996, 90.
74. Boykin 1996, 19.
75. Moore 1997; McCready 2001.
76. Smith 1990, 66.
77. Boykin 1996, 81.
78. “Skeleton in Newark’s Closet: Laquetta Nelson Is Forcing Homophobia Out into
the Open” 2003.
CHAPTER FOUR
1. The Funny Pages: List of Penises 15.
2. Jordan 1968, 3–43.
3. For an analysis that argues that body politics are a Western phenomenon and that
African societies place far less emphasis on the body, see Oyˇewùmí 1997.
4. Fausto-Sterling 1995; Giddings 1992.
5. Kennedy 2002, 48. The effectiveness of this strategy is debatable. 
6. Kelley 1997; Mercer 1994; Rose 1994; Wallace 1990; Giddings 1992; Riggs 1992;
Dyson 1993; Neal 2002; Dent 1992b; Hall 1992.
7. I use the terms representations, stereotypes, and controlling images to refer to the
depiction of people of African descent within Western scholarship and popular
culture. Each term has a different history. Representations need not be stereotyp-
ical and stereotypes need not function as controlling images. Of the three, con-
trolling images are most closely tied to power relations of race, class, gender, and
sexuality. For a discussion of controlling images, see Collins 2000a, 69–96. 
326


--- PAGE 338 ---
NOTES
8. Kennedy 2002, 63.
9. Bogle 1989, 252.
10. One commentator fails to see the complexities of the race and gender politics in
some of Grier’s movies and places her with a framework of an undifferentiated
“superbitch:” “In Foxy Brownalone, Grier thrashes a call girl in a bar, slashes the
throat of another woman, cremates two men to death, and castrates a third and
delivers his genitals in a pickle jar to his womanfriend as a warning. . . . It didn’t
matter what Grier’s slated role was, her character type remained the same—who-
rish superbitch who bedded with anyone including her professed enemies”
Freydberg 1995, 234–235. Grier certainly did all of these things, but she was not
a whore and her actions were politically motivated. 
11. Nelson 1997, 102.
12. Nelson 1997, 102.
13. Souljah 1999, 4.
14. Souljah 1999, 4.
15. Marriott, 126.
16. Marriott, 126.
17. Roberts 1995.
18. Roberts 1995, 79.
19. Jones 1994, 80.
20. Torgovnick 1990, 90.
21. See the discussion in chapter 6 of how images of White femininity, especially con-
cerning physical beauty, operate as a hegemonic gender ideology for all women.
22. Cole and Guy-Sheftall 2003, 182–215.
23. Latifah 1999, 3.
24. For a discussion of the family ideal as it affects African American women, see
Collins 2000a, 46.
25. Roberts 1997, 153.
26. Roberts 1997, 152. Even worse are those women who remain on drugs, sell their
bodies, and decide to keep their children. Those Black women who engage in sex
work in order to support their children are especially chastised. The hoochie
mama popularized in Black popular culture constitutes a bad mother who sells sex
and neglects her children. The derogated Black mother who is on drugs also fits
within this nexus of representations of bad Black mothers.
27. Two groups of children cost the state little: (1) those children whose middle-class
and affluent parents absorb the costs of their education, health care, recreational
services either through supporting private institutions or through living in sub-
urbs that limit public services to residents; and (2) children of undocumented
immigrants whose citizenship status renders them ineligible for state services
and/or fearful of claiming state services to which they are entitled. The first
group is groomed to take over professional and managerial positions while the lat-
ter can be used to fill the increasing service sector jobs. The majority of African
American children, half of whom live in poverty but who by virtue of citizenship
remain entitled to public benefits, fall into neither of these two categories. The
result—Black children become increasingly expendable.
28. Collins 1999; Roberts 1997.
29. For discussions of race, welfare, and population control, see Collins 1999;
Neubeck and Cazenave 2001.
30. Roberts 1997, 122–142.
327


--- PAGE 339 ---
NOTES
31. Roberts 1997, 143–148.
32. For general discussions of race and the American social welfare state, see
Quadagno 1994; Brewer 1994; Neubeck and Cazenave 2001.
33. Davis 1998; Roberts 1995.
34. Roberts 1995, 324.
35. Emerson 2002, 116.
36. Emerson 2002, 126.
37. Emerson 2002, 127.
38. McPherson 2000, 189.
39. McPherson 2000, 189.
40. “Skeleton in Newark’s Closet: Laquetta Nelson Is Forcing Homophobia Out into
the Open” 2003.
41. For a discussion of The Cosby Showand race relations in the 1980s, see Jhally and
Lewis 1992.
42. The professional success of the character of Claire Huxtable required erasing the
actual high degree of discrimination that faces African American women in the
legal profession. To get some sense of a sea change in media depictions of this
theme, one need only compare the image of Claire Huxtable to that of Teri Joseph
(played by actress Nicole Ari Parker) on Showtime’s original series Soul Food.
Joseph is a high-powered Chicago lawyer aiming to juggle a career and family
obligations. Unlike Claire Huxtable, who managed to make partner in record time
as a mother of five children, childless Teri has a degree from a prestigious law
school, works extremely long hours, is devoted to her job, yet is passed over for
promotion to partner. 
43. The Anita Hill/Clarence Thomas media event sparked numerous articles and at
least two edited volumes entirely devoted to the case; see Smitherman-Donaldson
1995; Morrison 1992. Yet work on Oprah Winfrey, a figure who has had a far
greater impact on American popular culture, remains neglected.
44. Bogle 1989, 82.
45. Grindstaff 2002.
46. Aldaraca 1995.
47. Aldaraca 1995, 214.
48. Jhally and Lewis 1992.
49. Magubane 2001.
CHAPTER FIVE
1. This notion of booty as the spoils of war spurs a series of related meanings,
namely, commonly acquired plunder that will be divided among the winners.
Also, the phrase “to play booty” appears in the history of the term booty, in this
case, to join with confederates in order to “spoil” or victimize another player. In
other words, when two players act falsely in order to gain a desired object, they
“play booty.”
2. The term bootyalso has special significance for Black femininity, for example, the
fascination with Black female buttocks discussed in chapter 4 as a sign of racial
difference. However, booty does not have the same function in shaping Black fem-
ininity as that played in framing Black masculinity. The dual meaning of booty as
property and as sexual conquest is central to definitions of masculinity and Black
men’s access to both has been blocked in American society. Because manhood is
328


--- PAGE 340 ---
NOTES
an active endeavor that must be constantly defended and proved (through acts
such as sexual conquest, having money, etc.) conceptions of Black masculinity are
dependent on Black women’s behavior, in this case, the booty. In contrast, Black
femininity has no comparable dependence on male behavior. Black women can
still be women without any need to call attention to their booties or to engage in
booty calls. In this sense, men have much more at stake regarding their masculin-
ity than women. 
3. Anderson 1978; 1990; 1999.
4. Platt 2002, 18.
5. Platt 2002, 23.
6. One puzzle is how White audiences can admire Black men’s athletic bodies 
yet fear actual African American men. By arguing that commodified bodies are
actually “flesh” that is then sold on the open marketplace, Hortense Spillers
investigates the complicated mechanisms that join Black male athletes with their
adoring fans. Reducing Black men’s bodies to “flesh” in order to objectify them
for reasons of profit, yet marketing those same bodies as objects of desire, intro-
duces unsolvable contradictions (Spillers 2000, 60).
7. George 1998, 53.
8. Awkward 1999.
9. Boyd 2000, 65.
10. Boyd and Shropshire 2000, 7.
11. Neal 2002, 144.
12. Platt 2002, 45–46.
13. Platt 2002, 124.
14. Platt 2002, 125.
15. Platt 2002, 128–129.
16. Platt 2002, 128.
17. Platt 2002, 128.
18. Platt 2002, 125–126.
19. Platt 2002, 24.
20. Boyd 2000, 66.
21. Human Rights Watch 2001, 27. For additional material on incarceration, see
Davis 1997; Tonry 1995; Hutchinson 2001.
22. In contrast, young White youth who mimic the styles of thug life may do so as a
fashion statement because they are guaranteed access to education and jobs
regardless of their youthful rebellion. For discussions of the phenomenon of
White appropriation of Black culture, see the articles in Tate 2003.
23. Wilson 1996; Canada 1995; Anderson 1999; Kitwana 2002.
24. Dyson argues that Tupac pursued themes that covered rap’s subgenres: conscious
rap, political hip-hop, party music, hedonism rap, thug rap, and ghettocentric rap.
He notes that Tupac was also skilled at several modes of address within hip-hop
such as the dis rap, the hip-hop eulogy, the maternal letter, and the pastoral letter
to keep hope alive (Dyson 2001, 64). 
25. Dyson 2001, 49.
26. Dyson 2001, 64.
27. Dyson 2001, 64.
28. George 1998, 139.
29. Ogbar 1999, 172.
30. Ogbar 1999, 173.
329


--- PAGE 341 ---
NOTES
31. Kennedy 2002, 38–55.
32. Kennedy 2002, 48.
33. Dines 1998, 294.
34. For a provocative analysis of Black male sexuality and the importance of the body,
see Kobena Mercer’s essay on racial fetishism in the work of photographer Robert
Mapplethorpe, Mercer 1994, 171–219.
35. Fair and Astroff 1991.
36. Fair and Astroff 1991, 65.
37. Fair and Astroff 1991, 73.
38. Los Angeles Times, April 30, 1990.
39. New York Times, September 17, 1990.
40. Fair and Astroff 1991, 68.
41. Fair and Astroff 1991, 69.
42. Smith 1983, 142.
43. Angela Davis identifies the power that the idea of the Black male criminal or thug
has for many White Americans that made the Horton incident work: “The fear of
crime has attained a status that bears a sinister similarity to the fear of commu-
nism as it came to restructure social perceptions during the fifties and sixties. The
figure of the ‘criminal’—the racialized figure of the criminal—has come to rep-
resent the most menacing enemy of American society” Davis 1997, 270.
44. Kellner 2001.
45. Guerrero 1993, 239.
46. This process has long worked with mass media, especially sports. Babe Ruth was
an icon of American sports because the White working-class origins of a large
segment of the American population saw baseball and his place in it as speaking
for them. Similarly, for many working-class African Americans, Muhammad Ali
represented a new politics of racial defiance that refused to bow down to the
buddy image. In this context, “Jordan’s overall image, while popular, is one devoid
of the character substance and specific cultural identity so integral to both Ruth
and Ali” (Boyd and Shropshire 2000, 6). 
47. Jones 1993, 252. Black male heterosexuality is a repressed discourse characterized
by powerlessness and reaction (Jones 1993, 252). This subordination is especially
evident in Black buddy films in that Black buddies are rarely depicted engaged 
in loving sex acts. Rather, as Jones suggests, “The sexuality of the Black male is
realized through individualized, physical dominance rather than sex itself, when
realized at all” (Jones 1993, 251). Physical dominance typically occurs through
violence and, as a result, the sexuality of Black characters is constructed through
the violent action of the film. The result—a Black male heterosexuality emerges
that is grounded in sexuality without a sex act.
48. Carby 1998, 190.
49. Seidman 2002, 128–129.
50. Riggs 1999, 307.
51. In summer 2003, the ailing Bravo network picked up this theme of the gay buddy
with its smash series Queer Eye for a Straight Guy . Using five gay men (four of
whom were White), the show builds upon the theme of the gay buddy by provid-
ing help to a straight guy who needs assistance with some sort of major event, for
example, proposing to his girlfriend or asking his girlfriend to move in with him. 
52. Denizet-Lewis 2003, 30. 
53. Arnett Ferguson 2000.
330


--- PAGE 342 ---
NOTES
54. The appeal of machismo that has been associated with Black Nationalist philoso-
phy may stem in part, from this perception that Black intellectuals have “sold
out,” and that Black male intellectuals in particular are “punks.” Black
Nationalism is patriarchal, but its adherents have few qualms about challenging
White male authority.
55. Boyd 2000, 67.
56. Interestingly, because this rhetoric of color blindness seems to challenge ideas of
White supremacy, it makes it doubly difficult to contest. Ferber argues that the
White supremacist discourse that she studied required a difference/equality dis-
tinction that was violated by interracial sexuality. Within this framework, race and
gender differences are constructed as hierarchical and necessary. Thus, efforts to
erase hierarchy are reinterpreted as efforts to do away with racial and/or gender
differences. As Ferber points out, “an equality that recognizes differences is
impossible within this framework” (Ferber 1998b, 70). At the same time, the
framework of equality provides no space as well for bona fide “differences” that
can be used to remedy past and present inequalities. The result is an impotent
antiracist and feminist discourse that is trapped between tenets of White
supremacy and a head in the sand color blindness. Neither can address current
inequalities in desegregated environments.
57. Dalton 1999a, 333.
CHAPTER SIX
1. Bambara 1970, 108. Traditional gender ideology holds that, ideally, men and
women should complement one another because neither gender is complete with-
out the other. Relying on assumptions of heterosexuality, each gender has appro-
priately masculine and feminine attributes that, when combined, fit together
smoothly to make a couple whole. Moreover, this logic of gender complementary
offers a view of gender equality based on male and female differences. Ideally, men
and women have distinctive responsibilities that also complement one another.
Men lead and women follow. Men care for women by protecting them from harm
and ensuring their financial security. Women care for men by supporting them in
any way they can. This traditional gender ideology is not inherently flawed because
many men and women rely upon these standards to build affirming, lifelong part-
nerships and family lives. The problem occurs when this traditional gender ideol-
ogy becomes the norm for evaluating everyone’s experiences. 
2. Bambara 1970, 101.
3. Black family research has often uncritically accepted the assumption of gender
complementarity associated with sex role theory. For example, both William E. B.
Du Bois and E. Franklin Frazier’s work on African American families identified
as problematic gender norms that differed from those characterizing White mid-
dle-class families. Frazier describes African American gender arrangements as a
“Black matriarchy” and, as a result, is accused of endorsing the “weak men,
strong women” thesis. Neither author saw a deficient gender ideology as the sole
or even the primary cause of African American poverty and political powerlessness.
Instead, they explore how social structures associated with capitalist development
and with racism interfered with African Americans’ ability to fulfill traditional
gender roles. This basic framework that social structures retarded African
American ability to fulfill traditional gender roles was transformed yet again and
331


--- PAGE 343 ---
NOTES
moved into public policy forums in 1965 with the publication of the Moynihan
report, The Negro Family: The Case for National Action. This volume marked the
beginnings of the modern debate on Black gender ideology (Moynihan 1965). For
a discussion of these issues, see Franklin 1997a.
4. Family researchers first raised the issue of how gender ideology worked to privi-
lege the nuclear family over other configurations (Andersen 1991). Black feminist
analyses identify similar issues. See, for example, Jordan 1992; Lorde 1984; Gilkes
2001.
5. The general use of the term “the Black Church” refers to Black Christian
churches in the United States. For a general history of the Black Church, see
Lincoln 1999.
6. See Patillo-McCoy 1999, especially Patillo-McCoy 1998.
7. Douglas 1999.
8. Collins 1989.
9. Spillers 2000, 74.
10. Torgovnick 1990, 42.
11. Torgovnick 1990, 55.
12. Hegemony is a mode of social organization that relies on ideology to make
oppressive power relations seem natural and normal. One goal of hegemonic ide-
ologies is to absorb the dissent of oppressed groups, thereby dissipating its polit-
ical effects. For example, if African Americans come to believe the dominant
Black gender ideology circulated within the mass media, then Black political dis-
sent about gender and sexuality becomes weakened. Hegemonic ideologies may
seem invincible. But ideologies of all sorts are never static but instead are always
internally inconsistent and are resisted (Magubane 2001).
13. Emerging in conjunction with a men’s movement, and influenced by Western
feminism (although this debt is not typically acknowledged) as well as the con-
structionist turn in the American academy in the 1990s, gender scholarship
rejected the apolitical and nonhistorical framework of traditional sex role theory.
New analyses of masculinity approached it as a system of gender power. “To
understand a system of inequality, we must examine its dominant group—the
study of men is as vital for gender analysis as the study of ruling classes and elites
is for class analysis,” argued R.W . Connell (Connell 1992, 736). Within this
framework, the term “hegemonic masculinity” came to refer to the dominant
form of masculinity in any given society and created the space to view represen-
tations of White masculinity and Black masculinity not as descriptions of nature
but as social constructions rooted in American power relations. 
Rejecting the term “patriarchy” as overly simplistic, at any given moment a
range of masculinities exists in any social order, including masculinities that are
hegemonic, marginalized, and subordinated. Some key features characterize
hegemonic masculinity. First, hegemonic masculinity is defined in relation to the
subordination of women andin relation to other subordinated and marginalized
masculinities (Messner 1990, 205). Second, hegemonic masculinity does not refer
to a personality type or an actual male character. Rather, it describes a set of pre-
scriptive social norms, symbolically represented, that operate as a crucial part of
daily, routine activities (Wetherell and Edley 1999, 336). Third, the constellation
of ideas and social practices that constitute hegemonic masculinity are accepted,
rejected, and performed by men from diverse social class groupings, racial/ethnic
groups, ages, and religions. Whereas men are not equal in their ability to control
332


--- PAGE 344 ---
NOTES
the very definitions of masculinity itself, the vast majority of men are, in some
fashion, complicit in upholding hegemonic masculinity (Connell 1995). Finally,
the power relations that construct these relational masculinities enable the erasure
of whiteness, class privilege, and assumptions of heterosexuality, in short, the
workings of hegemonic masculinity itself. As a result, hegemonic discourses of
American masculinity operate as unquestioned truths. Ironically, despite the
ubiquity of gender, race, class, and sexuality in constructing American masculin-
ity, masculinity can be discussed without referencing these systems at all.
Over time, this literature on masculinities devoted increasing attention to the
socially constructed nature of hegemonic masculinities in relation to a variety of
other constructed masculinities across differences of class, race, ethnicity, and sexu-
ality. Masculinity itself was seen as highly heterogeneous and relational, with mas-
culinities constructed in relation to one another emerging as an important area of
study (Connell 1992, 1995). One important idea now possible with the emergence of
this literature is that, from the perspectives of subordinated groups, all masculinities
are in some sense hegemonic—a situation in which, for example, White men
encounter a hegemonic White masculinity of what a White man should be and do,
and Black men encounter equally hegemonic ideas about what Black men should be
and do. In a sense, there are levels of hegemonic masculinity, all designed to control.
14. Kimmel 2001.
15. Freydberg 1995, 2257.
16. Freydberg 1995, 2257.
17. “Skeleton in Newark’s Closet: Laquetta Nelson Is Forcing Homophobia Out into
the Open” 2003.
18. This fear of feminization may help explain why many Black men reject feminism:
“it is the idea of feminism connected to a perverse notion of the feminine that in
the historical memory of Black men conjures up images of feminization, castra-
tion, and ultimately death” (Lemons 1997, 45). In everyday life, such men are
viewed as being emasculated or, in Black vernacular, “pussy whipped.”
19. Initially, sports operated as a White, middle- and upper-class male-created
homosocial cultural space that provided elite men a psychological separation from
the perceived “feminization” of society while providing symbolic proof of male
superiority. As Messner observes, “it is not simply the bonding among men and
the separation from women, but the physicality of the activity which gives sports
its saliency in gender relations” (Messner 1990, 204). Over time, as this space
became dominated by working-class White men, by Black men, and most recently
by women, sport delivers less of this “symbolic proof of White male superiority.”
20. Anderson 1999, 9–10.
21. The concept of a “family wage” also leads to pay discrimination against women.
It argues that men should be paid more than women because men have the
responsibility of financially supporting their wives and children. In contrast,
women are more likely to have babies and leave the labor market to care for them.
22. Connell 1992, 748.
23. Connell 1992, 736.
24. Dalton 1999a, 333.
25. This theme of body politics has a prominent place in feminist theory. For discus-
sions of women’s biology and human nature, see Bordo 1993. For an alternative
analysis of the meaning of the body within Western societies, see Oyˇewùmí 1997.
26. Banks 2000, 28.
333


--- PAGE 345 ---
NOTES
27. Patterson 1982, 61.
28. Patterson 1982, 61.
29. Banks 2000, 29.
30. Girls constitute a related benchmark used to construct hegemonic femininity.
Girls are allegedly pure, innocent, and sexual virgins. They should be unspoiled.
Interestingly, representations of young women/girls within contemporary popu-
lar culture contain the contradictions currently plaguing views of young White
womanhood. On the one hand, women are expected to aspire to a body type that
approximates that of adolescent girls. The inordinate pressure placed on thinness
within U.S. society advances a social norm that values youth. At the same time,
these same inordinately thin adolescent girls are dressed as highly sexualized
women within high fashion. Black women as sexualized, full-figured women
become juxtaposed to the thin, young, fragile and increasingly ornamental and
sexualized young White girls.
31. Torgovnick 1990, 53. This theme of White female submissiveness also appears in
other major icons of Western popular culture. For example, the various remakes
of King Kongtake this need to rescue White womanhood from sexual predators
to an entirely new level. With King Kong theorized to be symbolic of Black men
as animals or “apes” run amuck, just as Jane needed saving from the predators in
the jungle, the White woman in Manhattan needed saving from a lustful Kong
now transplanted to an urban jungle (Dines 1998). 
32. Naylor 1988, 28.
33. Gomez 1999, 174. Gomez observes that Black lesbians are rarely represented on
film or in print and that, if they are, the fully developed characters presented by
Audre Lorde or Alice Walker are missing. Instead, Black lesbians are typically
presented as tragic (television adaptation of The Women of Brewster Place), as
peripheral to the main story, or as caricature (Cleo played by Queen Latifah).
Given this history, the character of Kima on the HBO series The Wireconstitutes
a breakthrough character.
34. Collins 2000b.
35. For general discussions of Black women, family, and work, see Giddings 1984;
Jones 1985.
36. This recognition does not mean that race and gender discrimination were given
equal weight within African American politics. Black feminist analyses of Black
women’s subordination have long been present, but, until the post–civil rights era,
they have functioned as a minor strand within Black community politics (Collins
2000a).
37. Calmore 2001.
38. Petterson 1997.
39. Petterson 1997, 605.
40. Neal 2002, 68.
41. Black women’s unwillingness to confront the SBW image can foster Black
women’s vulnerability to domestic violence (Richie 1996) as well as their experi-
ences with incest and sexual abuse (Wilson 1994; White 1985b).
42. Baldwin 1993, 217.
43. Mercer 1994, 171–220.
44. Mercer 1994, 174.
45. See the photograph on p. 186 in Mercer 1994, 174.
46. Denizet-Lewis 2003, 30.
334


--- PAGE 346 ---
NOTES
47. This was a major plank in the platform of turn-of-the-twentieth-century Black
Club Women (Giddings 1984).
48. For discussions of hypersegregation, see Massey and Denton 1993. For discus-
sions of the erosion of Black institutions, see Gregory 1994.
49. Jones 1994, 92.
50. McClary and Walser 1994.
51. Racial integration may be one marker of the post–civil rights era, but it is clear that
it has been accompanied by dramatic increases in the incarceration rates of African
American men. In the last half of the twentieth century, especially during the
post–civil rights era, the incarceration rates of African Americans in relation to
Whites went up dramatically. In 1933, Blacks were incarcerated at a rate approxi-
mately three times that for Whites. By 1950, the rate was 4 to 1; in 1960, it was 5
to 1; in 1970 it was 6 to 1, and by the 1980s, it was 7 to 1 (Miller 1996, 88). Various
expressions of racial bias in all phases of the criminal justice system have, by now,
been well documented as producing this outcome (Miller 1996, 48–88).
52. This growing interconnectedness of prison, street, and youth culture, with the
importance given to hierarchies of masculinity, became repackaged and sold
within the commodified relations of global mass media. These ideas now perme-
ate not only African American culture but also have become markers of a new
form of authentic Blackness. 
CHAPTER SEVEN
1. Hill 1997, 13.
2. African Americans may have lost far more than Anita Hill as a result of Thomas’s
appointment. Routinely aligning himself with its most conservative wing,
Thomas’s record on the Supreme Court concerning racism has been disappoint-
ing to labor organizations, women’s constituencies, and civil rights groups. Anita
Hill also suffered personal loss. In the ten years following the hearings, Hill expe-
rienced hate mail, unwanted phone calls, and death threats. In contrast, Thomas
has remained on the Supreme Court, enjoying its privileges. Hill was virtually run
out of her job as a law professor at the University of Oklahoma and underwent
persistent harassment by students, colleagues, and strangers on the street (Hill
1997). 
3. Crenshaw 1992, 405.
4. Wells-Barnett 2002; Davis 1978.
5. For a discussion of consensus and cross-cutting issues within Black politics, see
Cohen 1999.
6. Lynching has not always been so central to Black antiracist politics. See historian
Paula Giddings’ analysis of Black leadership, which initially took little action con-
cerning lynching before Ida B. Wells-Barnett’s solitary crusade (Giddings 2001). 
7. Beck and Tolnay 1992, 22.
8. Harris 1984, 19.
9. Beck and Tolnay 1992, 7–8.
10. Gender analyses shed light on why castration reappears in accounts of Black male
lynchings. Robyn Wiegman provides a psychoanalytic analysis of lynching that
examines its power in terms of national identity—the end of slavery constituted a
rebirth of the nation that needed to develop new race relations. African American
bodies were no longer commodities, and making this transition from slavery to the
335


--- PAGE 347 ---
NOTES
reenslavement of Jim Crow de jure segregation required a complicated process of
reworking Black male sexuality and African American masculinity. Wiegman sug-
gests that lynching served as a “threat of ritualized death” that provided one means
for hegemonic White masculinity to be rearticulated within the uncertainties of
postemancipation. As Wiegman points outs, “not only does lynching enact a
grotesquely symbolic—if not literal—sexual encounter between the white mob and
its victim, but the increasing utilization of castration as a preferred form of mutila-
tion for African American men demonstrates lynching’s connection to the
sociosymbolic realm of sexual difference. In the disciplinary fusion of castration
with lynching, the mob severs the black male from the masculine, interrupting the
privilege of the phallus, and thereby reclaiming, through the perversity of dismem-
berment, his (masculine) potentiality for citizenship” (Wiegman 1993, 224). 
11. Collins 2000a, 53–55.
12. Dash 1996, 225.
13. Dash 1996, 226.
14. Dash 1996, 226.
15. In 1892, Ida B. Wells-Barnett learned firsthand the lengths to which some White
citizens of Memphis were willing to go to maintain African American political
and economic subordination. In March, Memphis Whites lynched three success-
ful  African American managers of a grocery business. Wells knew all three men,
and also understood that they were resented because their store successfully com-
peted with a White store. This painful personal experience of her friends’ lynch-
ing was a turning point in Wells-Barnett’s commitment to social justice activism.
Wells-Barnett wrote an editorial that, for 1892, advanced the shocking hypothesis
that not only were African American men often falsely accused of rape but also
that because some White women were attracted to Black men, some sexual rela-
tions that did occur between African American men and White women were con-
sensual. Fortunately, when the editorial appeared, Wells-Barnett was out of town
or she too might have been lynched. Memphis citizens burned down the Free
Speechand threatened Wells-Barnett’s life if she ever returned to Memphis. This
shocking catalyst marked the beginning of Ida Wells-Barnett’s impressive over-
twenty-year crusade against lynching that took the form of going on speaking
tours, publishing editorials, preparing pamphlets, organizing community services,
participating in women’s and civil rights groups, and publishing Southern Horrors,
A Red Record, and Mob Rule in New Orleans , three of Wells-Barnett’s important
pamphlets on lynching (Wells-Barnett 2002). 
16. Wells-Barnett 2002, 6.
17. James 1996; Giddings 2001.
18. These ideas come from Ann Stoler’s excellent analysis of Michel Foucault’s ideas
about race. Stoler states: “as ‘private wars’ were cancelled and war was made the
prerogative of states, as war proper moves to the margins of the social body, as
society is ‘cleansed of war-like relations’ that this ‘strange,’ ‘new’ discovery
emerged, one in which society itself was conceived as an entity saturated with the
relations of war” (Stoler 1995, 64–65).
19. Bandele 1999, 86.
20. See Wilson 1994 and Pierce-Baker 1998, 117–139. African American adolescent
mothers also report that the fathers of their babies are much older men (Kaplan
1997).
21. Painter 1992, 213.
336


--- PAGE 348 ---
NOTES
22. Pierce-Baker 1998, 64.
23. Cleage 1993.
24. Pierce-Baker 1998, 91.
25. West 1999, 59.
26. Because so many African American women live in large, racially segregated urban
areas, Black women more likely to be victims of rape than White women—
reported rapes are 1.4 to 1.7 times higher. Yet such women are less likely to have
their rape cases come to trial than White women, and they are less likely to get
convictions for those cases that do come to trial. Moreover, African American
women who are sexually assaulted are less likely to use rape-counseling services.
It is important to stress that patterns of Black male violence against Black women
occur within a broader social context in which the routinization of violence works
to desensitize everyone to its effects. Viewing one’s first violent movie may be
shocking—viewing the fiftieth film has far less impact. The genre of stalker films
that make raping and killing women a spectator sport contributes to this broader
climate of violence against women. Black men whose violent behavior is targeted
toward Black women are certainly not immune from these societal pressures.
27. Bell 1999, 240.
28. Childhood sexual assault (Maya Angelou’s I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings and
Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye); family violence (see Alice Walker’s fiction, espe-
cially The Color Purpleand The Third Life of George Copeland), and the effects of
rape on African American women (Gayl Jones’s Eva’s Man) have all been
explored in African American women’s fiction. Black women’s essays examine
similar themes. Statements about the pain of rape (Austin 1993), rape as a tool of
political control (Davis 1981), and the pervasiveness of violence in African
American civil society (Cleage 1993) all have received considerable treatment in
African American women’s writings. Increasingly, womanist theologians are pro-
viding a new interpretive context that encourages Black women to speak out about
abuse. See Douglas 1999 and West 1999.
29. Awkward 1999, 137.
30. Wyatt 1992, 87.
31. Pierce-Baker 1998, 136.
32. Supplementing survey data with interviews with 126 African American and 122
White women in the Los Angeles area conducted by a same race interviewer,
Wyatt investigated women’s perceptions of rape. Wyatt’s interviewers also asked
the question, “Why do you think you were victimized?” African American women
were significantly more likely than White women to offer explanations about their
victimization that involved the riskiness of their living circumstances (Wyatt
1992, 84).
33. Wyatt 1992, 85.
34. Pierce-Baker 1998, 124.
35. Pierce-Baker 1998, 161.
36. West 1999, 58.
37. Omolade 1994, 89.
38. Powell 2000, 74.
39. Miller 1996, 1–9.
40. Human Rights Watch 2001, 3.
41. Human Rights Watch 2001, 5.
42. Human Rights Watch 2001, 7.
337


--- PAGE 349 ---
NOTES
43. Human Rights Watch 2001, 8.
44. Miller 2000, 300.
45. Material in this section is taken from Miller 2000, 300.
46. Miller 2000, 302.
47. Miller 2000, 303.
48. Miller 2000, 303.
49. Human Rights Watch 2001.
50. Sociologist R. W . Connell offers an explanation for the fluidity of gender cate-
gories: “In our culture, men who have sex with men are generally oppressed, but
they are not definitively excluded from masculinity. Rather, they face structurally-
induced conflicts about masculinity—conflicts between their sexuality and their
social presence as men, about the meaning of their choice of sexual object, and in
their construction of relationships with women and with heterosexual men”
(Connell 1992, 737).
51. Human Rights Watch 2001, 70.
52. Violence targeted against gay Black men can be especially vicious, in part, because
gay Black men become suitable targets for the violence. Some guards view homo-
sexuality as an open invitation to sexuality. As one prisoner, who was heterosex-
ual, recalled: “I had an officer tell me that ‘faggots like to suck dick, so why was I
complaining’” (Human Rights Watch 2001, 114).
53. Pinar 2001, 1031–1046. Given the myth of the Black rapist, placing Black men in
prison situations in which they are encouraged to rape other men produces the
very stereotype created in the postemancipation era. Black men become danger-
ous, a reason to keep them locked up. 
54. Human Rights Watch 2001, 169.
55. Human Rights Watch 2001, 216.
56. Pinar 2001, 1119.
57. Pinar 2001, 1053–1057.
58. Human Rights Watch 2001, 109–122.
59. Human Rights Watch 2001, 171.
60. Human Rights Watch 2001, 168.
61. African American men constituted 42 percent of those admitted to prison in 1981
and, by 1993, had become an unsettling 55 percent of those admitted (Miller
1996, 55).
62. (Miller 1996, 97). Sociologist Elijah Anderson describes the code of the street in
which demanding respect and exhibiting toughness function as important dimen-
sions of Black masculinity within inner-city neighborhoods (Anderson 1999). In
his lengthy study of lynching and prison rape, William Pinar identifies another
connection between prison culture and masculine identity: “Prisons are not alien
womanless worlds in which men resort to unimaginable acts. Prisons disclose the
profoundly womanless worlds most men in fact inhabit, in which women are fun-
damentally fictive, units of currency in a homosocial economy . . . perhaps most
men ‘live’ in an all-male world intrapsychically from which women are aggres-
sively banished. It is a sign of manhood” (Pinar 2001, 1119).
63. Oliver 1994.
64. Canada 1995. 
65. McCall 1994; Shakur 1993.
66. Anecdotal, unpublished material. 
67. Morgan 1999, 73.
338


--- PAGE 350 ---
NOTES
CHAPTER EIGHT
1. Root 2001, 1. This rule may seem natural, but it actually requires constant reiter-
ation. Most people encounter widespread societal pressure to get married. Should
there be any confusion about the definition of marriage, the 1996 Federal Defense
of Marriage Act felt compelled to clarify it: “In determining the meaning of any
Act of Congress, or of any ruling, regulation or interpretation of the various
administrative bureaus and agencies of the United States, the word ‘marriage’
means only a legal union between one man and one woman as husband and wife,
and the word ‘spouse’ refers only to a person of the different sex who is a husband
or wife” (U.S. Census Bureau 2000). One wonders just who is attacking marriage
if Congress feels that it must pass laws to “defend” it. 
2. Social movements for Black and Latino civil rights, for women’s rights, and for
the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered (LGBT) people, among
others, profoundly changed historical relations of segregation. Whether racial
segregation in schools, housing, and public life; of gender segregation of women
and men into separate spheres of life; of heterosexuals from gays and lesbians
through the forced closeting of sexual minorities; and of national policies that
excluded immigration from Latin America, Asia, Africa, and the Caribbean, rigid
forms of segregation are all giving way to an imperfect desegregation. Despite
higher rates of residential racial segregation for African Americans than Whites,
especially those living in large cities, rates of residential racial segregation
dropped between 1980 and 2000 (Iceland, Weinberg, and Steinmetz 2002, 59–76).
On average, all women still earn less than men, but White women in particular are
closing the occupational gap—in 1999, 35 percent of non-Hispanic White women
were in professional and managerial jobs compared to 32 percent of non-Hispanic
White men (McKinnon and Humes 2000, 4). Assumptions about marriage and
about LGBT partnerships are changing. In the 2000 census, 5.5 million couples
reported living together without being married, up from 3.2 million in 1990. The
majority of unmarried-partner households had partners of the different sex (4.9
million), but about 1 in 9 had partners of the same sex (Simmons and O’Connell
2003, 1). Assumptions concerning American citizenship are also changing. The
Census Bureau estimated that by 2002 the foreign-born population numbered
32.5 million people, accounting for 11.5 percent of the total U.S. population (U.S.
Census Bureau 2003).
3. In 1998, 60 percent of all White men over the age of fifteen were married. In con-
trast, 41 percent of Black men fell in this category. Marital rates for White and
Black women were even more disparate. For White women, 57 percent were mar-
ried whereas 36 percent of Black women were married. A sizeable proportion of
African Americans remain unmarried (which does not necessarily mean living
without a partner)—46 percent of Black men and 41 percent of Black women
were never married (U.S. Census Bureau 1999). Marital rates among African
Americans may be in decline, but it is important to note that, despite the lower
rates, Black men (41 percent) are more likely to be married than Black women (36
percent). 
4. Marital rates are not adequate evidence of commitment. The marital rates mask
the prevalence of unmarried partnerships among African Americans. Black men
and women (never married, widowed, and divorced) may be identified as unmar-
ried yet live with opposite-sex partners in unmarried-partner households. In
2000, approximately 15.5 percent of all households maintained by African
339


--- PAGE 351 ---
NOTES
American couples contained unmarried opposite-sex partners. In other words, the
marital rate may be a less accurate measure of committed heterosexual relation-
ships among African Americans than among Whites (7.3 percent) or Asians (4.0
percent) where opposite-sex, unmarried-partner households are lower (Simmons
and O’Connell 2003, 6).
5. The decline in marriage accelerated in the 1970s. In 1970, 57 percent of Black
men and 54 percent of Black women were married. By 1980, 49 percent of Black
men and 44 percent of Black women were married (U.S. Census Bureau 1999). A
variety of factors have been identified as contributing to these patterns of decline.
Black marriages fail at higher rates than in previous years and many African
Americans no longer choose to marry at all (Franklin 1997b). Many dating rela-
tionships and marriages remain characterized by emotional and/or physical vio-
lence (Richie 1996; Wilson 1994; White 1985b; Cleage 1993). 
6. Collins 2000a, 151–160.
7. Recent research suggests that Black middle-class experiences differ from those of
their White counterparts. For one, middle-class Black people are more likely to live
in closer proximity to poor and working-class Black people (Patillo-McCoy 1999). 
8. Moreover, not all poor and working-class Black people live in racially segregated
neighborhoods. The guests on the popular talk shows discussed in chapter 1 who
underwent paternity tests were typically from different races. 
9. Omolade 1994, 80.
10. Carbado 1999b, 420.
11. Cose 2003.
12. McCall 1997, 37.
13. Kitwana 2002, 104.
14. Bell 1999, 243–244.
15. Morgan 1999, 130–131.
16. Dalton 1999a, 124.
17. Morgan 1999, 121–122.
18. Sterk-Elifson 1994, 114.
19. Gilroy 2000, 204.
20. Morgan 1999, 74–75.
21. Smith 1999, 117.
22. Washington 1996, 1121.
23. Bandele 1999, 114.
24. In the two decades following this momentous decision, Whites intermarried with
non-Whites and interracial marriage grew at least 500 percent (Root 2001, 6).
Despite this statistical increase, the overall rate of interracial marriage remained
small—only 1.3 percent of married couples over age fourteen were in interracial
marriages in the 1970s. However, when it came to African Americans, this “500
percent increase” masked significant racial patterns. Because African Americans
and White Americans constitute numerically large population groups, Black-
White intermarriages represent the greatest numberof relationships. Statistically,
however, African Americans remained the leastlikely group to marry interracially
with Whites.
25. The 1960 census counted 51,000 Black-White couples, fairly evenly divided
between Black husbands with White wives (25,000) and Black wives with White
husbands (26,000). During the 1960s, however, the number of African American
men married to White women increased to 41,000, whereas the numbers of
340


--- PAGE 352 ---
NOTES
African American women married to White men remained virtually the same.
Thus, during the 1960s, Black-White intermarriages increased only because of an
increase in the number of African American men marrying White women. By
1980, approximately 80 percent of all Black-White intermarriages involved a
Black man and a White woman—an estimated 9.5 percent of African American
men who got married at all married White women. By the 1990 census, gender
differences in patterns of Black-White intermarriage were even more pro-
nounced. Numerically, the number of Black-White marriages in the 1980s nearly
doubled, jumping from 121,000 couples in 1980 to 213,000 couples in 1990. The
increase of Black men marrying White women continued its upward path—the
94,000 couples reported in 1980 had mushroomed to 159,000 such couples by
1990. Statistically, however, because African American women also began to enter
into interracial marriages, by 1990 approximately 75 percent of Black-White mar-
riages were between a Black man and a White woman. The rate of intermarriage
for Black women with White men, which had stayed fairly constant from 1960 to
1980, doubled during the 1980s, jumping from 27,000 in 1980 to 54,000 in 1990.
This would have been a remarkable increase had it not been for the continued
increase in marriages between Black men and White women. These figures are
taken from Root (Root 2001, 179–188). See Root’s appendix for a comprehensive
discussion of all patterns of intermarriage, not just Black/White couples.
26. Root 2001, 169.
27. Ironically, an African American woman and a White man brought forward the
Loving v. Virginiacase that overturned laws against interracial marriage. 
28. Root 2001, 11.
29. Dalton 1999b, 125.
30. Nelson 1997, 108.
31. Root 2001, 11.
32. Despite efforts to construct White women as either “blameless innocents” or as
heroic champions of a democratic, color-blind America, it is important to remember
that much is at stake for individual White women who love and/or marry African
American men. Even within the changed legal and social climate of desegregation,
their families and friends may see heterosexual White women who enter into inter-
racial partnerships with African American men as violating some historical taboos.
Contemporary White supremacist literature, in particular, has been obsessed both
with interracial sexuality and with explaining White women’s seemingly free partic-
ipation in it. Within this literature, a White woman who thinks for herself and
chooses a Black male sexual partner becomes an unthinkable abomination. The only
satisfactory explanation is that these women have been “brain raped,” stripped of
free will and thereby not responsible for their actions (Ferber 1998a). 
33. Dalton 1999b, 124.
34. Dalton 1999b, 125.
35. Two things here—these biracial Black women are replacing more “authentic”
looking Black women in movies, televisions ads, music videos, and other arenas of
popular culture that call for Black women. Moreover, biracial Black women are
the ones depicted with struggles over their racial identity. In the fictional world of
media, biracial Black men are depicted as being far less bothered by the color line. 
36. Riggs 2002. Black British film and visual media has been far more open in explor-
ing issues of gay sexuality. For example, British filmmaker Isaac Julien’s film
Looking for Langston also raised considerable controversy with its then shocking
341


--- PAGE 353 ---
NOTES
thesis concerning Langston Hughes and homosexuality. Julian’s 1991 film Young
Soul Rebelsalso examines the love relationship of Black gay men. 
37. Thomas 1997. As uncommon as images of interracial lesbian love relationships
are, it is even more unusual to see one that involves a woman who is neither Black
nor White. The love relationship of Evy, a Latina, and Kia, an African American
woman, in the 1994 film Go Fishconstitutes one exception. Even here, their rela-
tionship was not the focus of the film. The character of Kima on the HBO show
The Wire, played by an actress of African American and Korean American her-
itage, also breaks new ground in this regard.
38. Boykin 1996; Hawkeswood 1996; Moore 1997; Smith 1999.
39. For exceptions to this situation, see Boykin 1996; Wekker 2000; Johnson 2000;
Battle et al. 2002.
40. Because LGBT people are not allowed to marry, relying on traditional data sources
to gauge commitments to LGBT relationships remains difficult. The treatment of
LGBT households in the 1990 and 2000 censuses illustrates the difficulties of
gathering basic demographic data on the extent of LGBT committed relation-
ships, let alone dynamics within those relations. In 1990, the response “unmarried
partner” was added as an option to the census question on household relationship,
and in both the 1990 and 2000 censuses the terms “spouse” and “unmarried part-
ner” were defined and asked the same way. In both censuses, if a person was iden-
tified as the “spouse” of the householder and was the same sex as the householder,
the “spouse” response was flagged for further review and allocation, that is, assign-
ment of a value other than originally reported by the person. Yet the analysis of
this data differed in the two censuses. In 1990, the edit and allocation process did
not allow the same-sex “spouse” combination to occur. In contrast, in 2000, when
the combination occurred, the term “unmarried partner” was substituted for the
term “spouse,” thus allowing the category of same-sex unmarried partner to
appear for the first time (U.S. Census Bureau 2000). Certainly same-sex, unmar-
ried partnerships existed before the Census Bureau recognized them in 2000, but
the very process of collecting and analyzing data has been a major factor in the
closeting and subsequent visibility of LGBT committed relationships and families.
41. For example, the findings in Married and Unmarried-Partner Household: 2000, the
first report ever issued by the Census Bureau on unmarried partners, contains
information on people who reported living in different-sex and same-sex part-
nerships. For African Americans in racially homogeneous partnerships, the report
notes that 16.9 percent of Black households are maintained by different-sex
unmarried couples, and 1.4 percent are maintained by same-sex unmarried part-
ners (Simmons and O’Connell 2003 , 6). Because the material from the 2000 cen-
sus will be released over time, and because the 2010 census may provide the first
ten-year overview of trends in same-sex unmarried partner households, it will
take time for reputable government sources such as the census to document trends
in same-sex partnerships. 
42. Regarding gender, men comprised 58 percent of the sample, women 40 percent,
and transgendered people 2 percent. Regarding sexual identity, the study reports
that 63 percent of the men in the sample self-identified as gay and 13 percent as
bisexual. For women, 61 percent self-identified as lesbian, 12 percent selected gay,
and 10 percent chose bisexual. Less than 1 percent of men, women, or transgen-
dered individuals self-identified as “queer” (Battle et al. 2002, 19).
43. Battle et al. 2002, 26.
342


--- PAGE 354 ---
NOTES
44. Jordan 1992; Smith 1998; Lorde 1982.
45. Hemphill 1991; Smith 1999.
46. For example, Gloria Hull’s retrieval and collection of the papers of Alice Dunbar
suggests that Dunbar was a deeply closeted lesbian. Urbanization created new
opportunities for Black gays and lesbians to find one another and, in many cases,
build communities that reached across racial lines. Thus, the visibility of Black gay
and lesbian love relationships became more possible and prominent within new city
spaces. For example, through oral histories, the award-winning book Boots of
Leather, Slippers of Goldre-creates the social norms of lesbian communities in
Buffalo, New York, in the 1940s and 1950s. African American lesbians are pre-
sented as being simultaneously a marginal part of the larger community of White
lesbians, yet having a social structure of their own that operated largely within the
confined, segregated world of Black Buffalo (Kennedy and Davis 1994). In a sim-
ilar fashion, Audre Lorde’s autobiographical Zami is an important work that
describes from an insider perspective, lesbian communities in New York City dur-
ing this same period. From Lorde’s autobiography, one can learn about the types
of love relationships that were available to Black lesbians (Lorde 1982). More
recently, the 2000 census identifies how unmarried partner households of all types
are concentrated in central cities as compared to the concentration of married
partner households in suburbs or rural areas (Simmons and O’Connell 2003, 2–3).
47. Moore 1997, 149.
48. Douglas 1999, 128.
49. Denizet-Lewis 2003, 31.
50. Denizet-Lewis 2003, 32. 
51. Boykin 1996, 107.
52. For analyses of issues that affect the politics of Blacks and gays, see Cohen and
Jones 1999.
53. Reid-Pharr 2001, 97.
54. Reid-Pharr 2001, 98. In her analysis of interracial lesbian relationships in film,
Pellegrini proposes a similar psychoanalytic argument by exploring the ways in
which Blackness works in films that were directed by White men and in some
cases, White women (Pellegrini 1997). Arguing that all love relationships consti-
tute some combination of sameness and difference, the problem confronted by
lesbian films when both of the women are White lies in maintaining the distinc-
tion between female homosocial bonding and female homosexuality. Watching
two White women engaged in a lesbian relationship raises too many questions
about close female friendships for White audiences. In this context, Blackness
bears the burden of helping the audience displace these uncomfortable questions
onto the historically forbidden, interracial sexual relationship. By articulating les-
bian difference through racial difference, the films can avoid, or potentially avoid,
homophobic equations of same-sex love with narcissistic love of the same.
55. Bandele 1999, 72–73.
CHAPTER NINE
1. Swarns 2002.
2. The magnitude of the problem in continental Africa is staggering. For example, a
2002 report issued jointly by the United Nations Program on AIDS, UNICEF , and
the U.S. Agency for International Development reported that HIV/AIDS had left
343


--- PAGE 355 ---
NOTES
11 million African children orphans, defined as children under age fifteen who lose
one or both parents. This number is expected to rise to 20 million in Africa by 2010.
Most of the AIDS orphans do not lose their parents as infants, but years later when
they are of school age (Altman 2002b). More than half of South Africa’s fifteen-year-
olds will die of AIDS-related diseases, government officials predict (Swarns 2001). 
3. African Americans are more at risk for contacting AIDS than other racial/ethnic
groups. In 1998, African Americans represented 37 percent of all AIDS cases ever
reported to the Center for Disease Control. In 2000, Black Americans accounted for
43 percent of AIDS cases (Altman 2002a, 1). Almost half (45%) of new AIDS cases
reported in the United States in 1998 were African American. Moreover, not only
are HIV/AIDS rates in the United States increasing faster among African Americans
than among other groups, much of the increase is occurring in African American
women. Among those who acquired HIV through heterosexual sex, from 1994
through 2000, Black women accounted for nearly half and Black male heterosexu-
als accounted for an additional 25 percent (Altman 2002a, 1). Age also matters—
Black youth in the United States have been hard hit by HIV/AIDS. In 1998, young
African Americans represented more than half (57%) of new AIDS cases reported
among those thirteen to nineteen years old (Kaiser Family Foundation 2000, 5).
4. Ideas about disease associated with modern/Western medicine emerged in a sci-
entific context that was preoccupied with issues of biology, race, and gender. The
concepts of health juxtaposed to those of sickness and disease constituted an
important binary woven throughout those discussed in earlier chapters. These
beliefs served as the basis for long-standing taboos on intermarriage and on inter-
racial sexuality. Western science was deeply implicated in creating these relation-
ships (Gould 1981; Fausto-Sterling 1992). Exploring the connections between
sexuality and disease was of special interest. Europeans defined Blacks as another
species, a diseased, degenerate “race,” and saw sexual contact between Whites and
Blacks as polluting and causing disease among the allegedly superior White race.
Similar beliefs framed European understandings of social class, this time encap-
sulated with European perceptions of prostitutes as a lower social class and as a
group who also carried disease and pollution. In this way, sexuality, disease, race,
gender, and class mutually constructed one another. Within this logic, sexuality
and disease became intricately connected and gained meaning from one another.
On the one hand, one way to maintain allegedly normal sexuality is to portray
alternative sexualities as deviant. People who engaged in taboo sexual practices or
in sexual practices with taboo people became stigmatized as being “sick” or were
liable to become “polluted” or “diseased” if they continued the forbidden contact.
Groups stigmatized in this fashion included homosexuals and prostitutes.
Victorian prostitutes—working-class White women—were accused of spreading
syphilis and were stigmatized as “bad women.” As historian Paula Giddings
points out, this association of Black sexuality with disease has striking predeces-
sors in the nineteenth century: “In the medical metaphors of the day, the sexual
organs of sexual women were not only hotbeds of moral pathology, but of disease.
In the nineteenth century the great fear was of a sexually transmitted disease that
was spreading among the population, was incurable, and after invading the body,
disfigured and decomposed it in stages. The name of the disease was syphilis, and
it was the era’s metaphor for the retribution of sexual sin” (Giddings 1995, 419).
5. For a discussion of coalitions between African Americans and LGBT people, see
Brandt 1999.
344


--- PAGE 356 ---
NOTES
6. Jordan 1992.
7. In the 1990s, ideas about the body became widespread in literary criticism and in
cultural studies. For work that examines this trope of the body to explore issues
that affect Black women, see especially Holloway 1995; Roberts 1997; Carby 1992;
Bennett and Dickerson 2001. For work on Black men’s bodies, see Cunningham
1996.
8. This splitting speaks to the theme of double consciousness first proposed by
African American intellectual William E. B. DuBois one hundred years ago
whereby the mind was split from the body and Black people were dominated
because they learned to think about themselves through the lens of racial ideology.
This argument preceded contemporary views of internalized oppression whereby
controlling images of Black masculinity and Black femininity are believed and
shape self-perception. DuBois does not speak of how that double consciousness
also disrupts how people feel in their bodies, the theme that I raise here.
9. I write extensively about this concept in chapter 5 of Black Feminist Thought. See
“The Power of Self-Definition” (Collins 2000a, 97–122).
10. This approach diverges from current work in body politics that views the body as
“skin” and equates it with a canvas on which scripts of domination are written.
The focus of this outside/in approach becomes the social scripts themselves. I am
indebted to this approach and have certainly relied upon it in this volume. But to
me, this version of body politics underemphasizes individual agency, will, and
spirit. Actual people disappear to be replaced by abstract social actors and social
scripts. Phrases such as “the black body” and “my Black body” catalyze different
politics. For an overview of this outside/in body literature and an example of its
use, see Mohanram 1999.
11. One feature of the Western emphasis on the mind concerns the reliance on visual
metaphors and seeing as a cultural frame for analyzing society. When people get
an idea, they say, “I see what you mean.” Reading this book is an exercise in think-
ing that depends on the visual. But how might an honest body politics operate if
visual metaphors were no longer privileged in this way? How might an honest
body politics operate if other ways of knowing were also incorporated into mod-
els of body politics?
12. As a term that emerged in the context of the Black arts movement of the 1960s,
soul remains a slippery concept to identify. Black scholars point out how difficult
it is to define soul: “ Although we may not know specifically what soul ‘is,’ we still
may be able to recognize it” (Guillory and Green 1998, 3). Soul may be gaining
new favor: “In some ways, the concept of soul may serve us far better than race
ever will. While statisticians and clinicians . . . discern Blackness through a vari-
ety of biological and social attributes, soul remains an abstract and evocative site
for identity formation” (Guillory and Green 1998, 2). Portia Maultsby provides
one of the most comprehensive definitions of soul: “Soul, as a concept, originated
in African-American communities during the late 1960s. It evolved from the ide-
ology of Black Power, which promoted Black nationalism. Therefore, soul has
both sociopolitical and cultural functions and meanings. From a sociopolitical
perspective, it advocated self-awareness, Black empowerment, and a Black iden-
tity. From a cultural perspective, it identified expressions symbolic of a Black
style or a Black way of doing things, as well as a range of traditions unique to
African Americans” (Tate et al. 1998, 270). 
13. Tate et al. 1998, 275.
345


--- PAGE 357 ---
NOTES
14. Tate et al. 1998, 276.
15. Tate et al. 1998, 281.
16. Tate et al. 1998, 281.
17. Tate et al. 1998, 269.
18. Tate et al. 1998, 269–270.
19. Neal 2002, 3. In his work on Black popular culture, Mark Anthony Neal takes an
ethereal view of soul, claiming that it emerged in conjunction with African
American modernity and was premised on the production of “positive” represen-
tations of Blackness that could be used to counter the negative ones long associated
with racism. Within this definition, claiming soul was a way for African Americans
to identify a racial essence that distinguished them from their oppressors. Two dis-
tinctive political moments of Black activism, namely, the 1920s and the 1960s, both
produced Black arts movements that investigated Black culture and identified its
significance for Black political struggle. Culture and identity, especially the con-
struction of positive Black identities, were central to both political moments.
20. Tate et al. 1998, 282.
21. Collins 1998, 61–65.
22. Davis 1998, 107.
23. Reed 1998, 169.
24. Asante 1994, 78.
25. Spirituality (expressiveness) and sexuality may also be directly linked. Many
African cultures have long demonstrated an intrinsic connection between spiritu-
ality and sexuality (Douglas 1999, 84). Kelly Douglass describes these connec-
tions: “Spirituality concerns a person’s connection to God and, thus, inevitably
involves her or his sexuality. . . . [S]exuality is that fundamental dimension of
human beings that governs intimate, sensual, affective, emotional, and sexual rela-
tionships. Human sexuality and spirituality are inextricably linked because both
involve a person’s relationship to God” (Douglas 1999, 84). Like soul, the concept
of spirituality also has the potential to expand sexual meanings and move men and
women toward sexual autonomy.
26. Lorde 1984, 53–59.
27. Hammonds 1997, 181.
28. One outcome of their work is that forms of women’s sexual desire and expression
that have been labeled nasty, dirty, or forbidden (the hallmark of the Western
invention of Black sexuality) may no longer be so. As Gina Dent observes, oral sex
serves as a “code for black women’s pleasure, gay sexuality, and other illicit prac-
tices, including drug use in black communities” (Dent 1992a, 14). 
29. Rose 2003.
30. Rose 2003, 4.
31. Building on Lorde’s work, Black men have only recently begun to explore similar
questions of Black male desire, agency, and eroticism across diverse sexualities
(Carbado 1999c). Robert Reid-Pharr suggests that much that has been written
about sexuality, a basic bodily activity, but that this literature says little about the
physicality of sexuality itself. Reid-Pharr takes queer theory to task, arguing that
new theories of sexuality must find ways to influence how people act, and not just
how they think. “The task that awaits all of us, then, is to speak desire plainly, to
pay attention to what we think when we fuck. It is the particular task of white men
to give up the comforts of naiveté, of banal gestures to racial inclusion. The work
before us is precisely to put our own bodies on the line. We much refuse to allow
346


--- PAGE 358 ---
NOTES
the production of a queer theory so reified that it does nothing to challenge the
way we interact, the way we think, and the way we fuck. We must insist on a queer
theory that take the queer body and what we do with it as a primary focus” (Reid-
Pharr 2001, 98).
32. Morgan 1999, 224.
33. This concept of honest bodies may also have links to spirituality and a relation-
ship with God. Working within traditions of Christian theology, Douglas argues
for a Black sexual politics that protects the historical realness of God’s revelation
in Jesus, one that requires a theological understanding of the body. Bodies are not
worshipped within this tradition, but rather are appreciated both as “temples of
God” and as the medium of God’s love. God was distinctly revealed in human
history only by becoming embodied. Moreover, human beings can come to know
and be in relationship with one another only by reaching out to one another with
their bodies, and accepting one another as being embodied (Douglas 1999, 118).
34. The growing impoverishment of the phrase the personal is political illustrates
these problems. As British cultural critic Kobena Mercer observes, “sexual politics
is narrowed down first to sexuality, then to the self. It strikes me that this ‘self-
centeredness’ is a characteristic of white sexual politics, or rather it is an inter-
pretation of ‘the personal is political’ which is made in a highly individualistic
manner that tends to exclude questions of race because it is so preoccupied with
‘self ’ at the expense of the ‘social’” (Mercer 1994, 148).
35. Harris 1984; Hall 1983; Wiegman 1993; Pinar 2001.
36. Within literature, E. Lynn Harris explores this theme through the character of
Basil Henderson, a Black bisexual football player who has difficulty coming to
terms with his sexuality. Henderson pursues gay men as sexual partners yet lashes
out, often violently, at gay men who pursue him. 
37. Baldwin 1963, 9.
38. Baldwin 1963, 43.
39. Bambara 1970, 109.
40. For example, in Mississippi, 28.5 percent of those reporting new HIV infections
in 2000 were Black women, up from 13 percent in 1990. In Alabama, the number
rose to 31 percent from 13 percent whereas in North Carolina, it rose to 27 per-
cent from 18 percent (Sack 2001). 
41. Data in this paragraph are from Sack 2001.
42. Data in this paragraph are from Altman 2002a, 1.
43. Altman 2002a, 1.
44. Denizet-Lewis 2003, 32.
45. Denizet-Lewis 2003.
46. Stoler 1995, 3. Also see, Foucault 1980, 1979.
47. Gilroy 2000, 185.
48. Gilroy 2000, 184. Angela Davis makes a similar argument in her claim that Black
women’s blues was a public text that wrestled love relationships away from either
White or Black male control (Davis 1998). 
49. Gilroy 2000, 195.
50. Reid-Pharr 2001, 174–175.
51. Reid-Pharr 2001, 97.
52. Baldwin 1993, 136.
53. Eli 1995, 143.
54. This use of community is derogated because it is seen to reflect nineteenth-century
347


--- PAGE 359 ---
NOTES
racist beliefs used to construct understandings of race itself. Benedict Anderson’s
important work Imagined Communities describes this process of constructing
modern nation states from the imagined communities of people who never meet
(Anderson 1983). Anderson’s argument has been extended to the social construc-
tion of races, which in the climate of the new racism, sees races as equally imag-
ined. The origins of ideas of race as family may lie in nineteenth-century politics
and science, but the historical experiences that have accompanied these ideas now
have a life of their own. Despite the fiction of “race” for Black people, the reality
of race persists through shared experiences that are not directly attributable to
racism. For a discussion of this use of “race” among Black people, see
Higginbotham 1992.
55. For discussions of these concepts, see selected works by Gilkes 2001; Carby 1998;
Higginbotham 1993.
56. This criticism of Black identity politics has been raised from many directions. For
a classic representative work, see West 1993, 21–32.
57. Ideological commitment can only go so far because ideologies gain credence and
fall out of favor based on their ability to explain current social phenomena.
Liberalism, Marxism, multiculturalism, Black nationalism, feminism, queer the-
ory, and other political ideologies all claim the rightness of their cause and aim to
organize groups around their core principles. Yet these ideologies often work at
cross purposes and can divide African American populations more than they unite
them. Ideological groups always exclude those who somehow violate the party
line, no matter how right it can appear to be to its supporters. The HIV/AIDS
crisis reveals the limitations of current Black political agendas (typically the false
choice of racial integration versus Black separatism) that fail to make issues of
gender and sexuality central to their platforms.
58. Racism in the United States provides a pristine example of the shifting nature of
racial coalitions. Differences of class, age, gender, sexuality, and race do not dis-
appear simply because a social movement has managed to transcend them for one
moment in time. For example, the absence of protest by White women during the
challenges to affirmative action in the early 2000s suggests that White women
abandoned this coalition when they perceived it as no longer serving their inter-
ests. Increasingly cast as a program for racial/ethnic minorities who needed
“help,” affirmative action came under attack. Similarly, the racial coalitions that
culminated in the 1963 March on Washington seem a distant past in the context
of segregated suburbs. Whites have left the coalition and voted with their feet. 
59. Douglas 1999, 115.
60. Payne 1989, 893.
61. Kitwana 2002, xx.
62. Bandele 1999, 138.
AFTERWORD
1. Baldwin 1993, 117.
2. Gaines 1994, 191. 
3. Bambara 1970, 109.
4. Shakur 1993, 330.
348


--- PAGE 360 ---
binary thinking: a system of thought that divides concepts into
two oppositional categories, for example, white/black, man/
woman, heterosexual/homosexual, saint/sinner, reason/emo-
tion, and normal/deviant.
Black community: a set of institutions, communication net-
works, and practices that help African Americans respond to
social, economic, and political challenges confronting them.
Also known as Black civil society.
Black sexuality: a set of ideas invented about the sexual practices
of people of African descent that have been used to justify Black
subordination. Ideas about Black sexuality underlie dominant
societal beliefs about Black masculinity and Black femininity.
Black sexual politics:a set of ideas and social practices shaped by
gender, race, and sexuality that frame Black men and women’s
treatment of one another as well as how African Americans are
perceived and treated by others.
capitalism: an economic system based on the private ownership
of the means of production. Capitalism is typically character-
ized by extreme distributions of wealth and large differences
between the rich and the poor.
color blindness: a racial ideology that gained prominence during
the post–civil rights era that argues that using racial language
perpetuates racism.
GLOSSARY


--- PAGE 361 ---
GLOSSARY
commodification: in capitalist political economies, land, products, services,
and ideas are assigned economic values and are bought and sold in market-
places as commodities.
controlling images: the gender-specific depiction of people of African
descent within Western scholarship and popular culture. The terms repre-
sentations and stereotypesalso describe this phenomenon. Representations
need not be stereotypical and stereotypes need not function as controlling
images. Of the three, controlling images are most closely tied to power
relations of race, class, gender, and sexuality. 
critical social theory: bodies of knowledge and sets of institutional practices
that actively grapple with the central questions facing groups of people
differently placed in specific political, social, and historical contexts char-
acterized by injustice. What makes critical social theory “critical” is its
commitment to justice, for one’s own group and/or for that of other
groups.
disciplinary practices: a way of ruling that relies on bureaucratic hierarchies
and techniques of surveillance. Institutionalized rape and lynching are dis-
ciplinary practices that have been used to uphold oppression.
discourse: a set of ideas and practices that, when taken together, organize
both the way a society defines certain truths about itself and the way it puts
together social power.
globalization: the increasing concentration of capital in the hands of a 
relatively small number of transnational corporations. Two effects of glob-
alization are greater influence on the world economy than that of nation-
states, and a global distribution of wealth and poverty that privileges
Western European, North American, and other advanced industrial
nations. 
hegemony: a form of social organization that uses ideology to create taken-
for-granted ideas that are used to justify oppression. Hegemonic conditions
absorb and depoliticize oppressed groups’ dissent and encourage individu-
als and groups to police one another and suppress each other’s dissent.
350


--- PAGE 362 ---
GLOSSARY
heterosexism: an ideology and system of power that defines what constitutes
normal and deviant sexuality and distributes social rewards and penalties
based on this definition. Heterosexism and its accompanying assumptions
of heterosexuality operate as a hegemonic or taken-for-granted ideology.
For example, the term sexualityitself is used so synonymously with hetero-
sexuality that schools, churches, and other social institutions treat hetero-
sexuality as natural, normal, and inevitable. 
homophobia: holding or expressing negative beliefs and actions toward gay,
lesbian, bisexual, and/or transgendered people.
hyper-heterosexuality: a thesis developed within Western societies that
views people of African descent as being sexually promiscuous and engag-
ing in sexual practices that resemble those of animals. 
identity politics: a way of knowing that sees lived experiences as important
to creating knowledge and crafting group-based political strategies.
ideology: a body of ideas reflecting the interests of a particular social group.
Racism, sexism, and heterosexism all have ideologies that support social
inequality. Ideologies are never static and always have internal contradic-
tions.
intersectionality: analysis claiming that systems of race, economic class,
gender, sexuality, ethnicity, nation, and age form mutually constructing
features of social organization, which shape African American experiences
and, in turn, are shaped by African Americans.
oppression: an unjust situation in which, systematically and over a long
period of time, one group denies another group access to the resources of
society. Race, gender, class, sexuality, nation, age, and ethnicity constitute
major forms of oppression. 
paradigm: an interpretive framework used to explain social phenomena.
political economy: the way of organizing power relations and the economic
system of a society. Capitalism has a distinctive political economy charac-
351


--- PAGE 363 ---
GLOSSARY
terized by large differences in wealth between social classes and major dif-
ferences in power where wealthy people have more power than poor people. 
racial solidarity: the belief that members of a racial group have common
interests and should support one another above the interests of members
of other racial groups.
racism: a system of unequal power and privilege in which humans are
divided into groups or “races” with social rewards unevenly distributed to
groups based on their racial classification. In the United States, racial seg-
regation constitutes a fundamental principle of how racism is organized.
scientific racism: a specific body of knowledge about Blacks, Asians, Native
Americans, Whites, and Latinos produced within biology, anthropology,
psychology, sociology, and other academic disciplines of Western science.
Scientific racism was designed to prove the inferiority of people of color.
segregation: a constellation of policies that separate groups based on the
belief that proximity to the group deemed to be inferior will harm the
allegedly superior group. Though currently forbidden by law in the United
States, racially segregated neighborhoods, schools, occupational cate-
gories, and access to public facilities persist.
social class: in its most general sense, social groups differentiated from one
another by economic status, cultural forms, practices, or ways of life.
Social class refers to a group of people who share a common placement in
a political economy. 
social justice project: an organized, long-term effort to eliminate oppression
and empower individuals and groups within a just society.
transnationalism: a view of the world that sees certain interests as going
beyond the borders of individual countries. Whereas internationalism
emphasizes the relationship between nation-states, transnationalism
emphasizes processes that transcend nations, for example, migration, cap-
ital flight, and the creation of new Diasporic populations.
352


--- PAGE 364 ---
“The Funny Pages: List of Penises.” Web page [accessed July 2, 2003]. Available
at http:funnies.paco.to/PenisList.html.
Tongues Untied. 1989. Marlon T . Riggs. 1 videocassette (55 min.): San Francisco,
CA: Frameline.
“Skeleton in Newark’s Closet: Laquetta Nelson Is Forcing Homophobia Out into
the Open.” Web page [accessed July 30, 2003]. Available at http://www.theg-
ully.com/essays/gaymundo/030619_race_gays_newark.html.
Abrahams, Yvette. 1998. “Images of Sara Bartman: Sexuality, Race, and Gender in
Early-Nineteenth-Century Britain.” Nation, Empire, Colony: Historicizing
Gender and Race. Ed. Ruth Roach Pierson and Nupur Chadhuri, 220–236.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Aldaraca, Bridget A. 1995. “On the Use of Medical Diagnosis as Name-Calling:
Anita F . Hill and the Rediscovery of ‘Erotomania.’” Black Women in America.
Ed. Kim Marie Vaz, 206–221. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.
Alexander, M. Jacqui. 1997. “Erotic Autonomy as a Politics of Decolonization: An
Anatomy of Feminist and State Practice in the Bahamas Tourist Industry.”
Feminist Genealogies, Colonial Legacies, Democratic Futures. Ed. M. Jacqui
Alexander and Chandra Talpade Mohanty, 63–100. New York: Routledge.
Altman, Lawrence K. 2002a. “Many Gay Men in U.S. Unaware They Have HIV ,
Study Finds.” Web page [accessed July 13, 2002]. Available at
http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/08/health/08AIDS.html.
———. 2002b. “ AIDS Leaving Grim Legacy of Orphans, Report Says.” Web
page [accessed July 10, 2002]. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/
2002/07/1.../10.
Andersen, Margaret L. 1991. “Feminism and the American Family Ideal.”Journal
of Comparative Family Studies22, no. 2: 235–246.
Anderson, Benedict. 1983. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and
Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso.
Anderson, Elijah. 1978. A Place on the Corner. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1990. Streetwise: Race, Class, and Change in an Urban Community .
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1999. Code of the Street: Decency, Violence and the Moral Life ofthe Inner
City. New York: W . W . Norton.
Appiah, Kwame Anthony. 1992. In My Father’s House: Africa in the Philosophy of
Culture. New York: Oxford University Press.
Arnett Ferguson, Ann. 2000. Bad Boys: Public Schools in the Making of Black
Masculinity. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Asante, Kariamu Welsh. 1993. “Josephine Baker.” Black Women in America: An
Historical Encyclopedia. Ed. Darlene Clark Hine, 75–78. Vol. 1. New York:
Carlson Publishing.
BIBLIOGRAPHY


--- PAGE 365 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
———. 1994. “Images of Women in African Dance: Sexuality and Sensuality as Dual Unity.”
Sage8, no. 2 (fall): 16–19.
Austin, Dorisjean. 1993. “The Act Behind the Word.” Wild Women Don’t Wear No Blues: Black
Women Writers on Love, Men and Sex.Ed. Marita Golden, 147–60. New York: Anchor.
Awkward, Michael. 1999. “‘You’re Turning Me On’: The Boxer, the Beauty Queen, and the
Rituals of Gender.” Black Men on Race, Gender, and Sexuality. Ed. Devon W . Carbado,
128–46. New York: New York University Press.
Baker, Houston A. 1993. Black Studies, Rap, and the Academy. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Baldwin, James. 1963. The Fire Next Time. New York: Vintage.
———. 1993. Nobody Knows My Name. New York: Vintage.
Bales, Kevin. 1999. Disposable Slavery: New Slavery in the Global Economy. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Bambara, Toni Cade. 1970. “On the Issue of Roles.” The Black Woman: An Anthology.Ed. Toni
Cade Bambara, 101–110. New York: Signet.
Bandele, Asha. 1999. The Prisoner’s Wife: A Memoir. New York: Scribner.
Banks, Ingrid. 2000. Hair Matters: Beauty, Power, and Black Women’s Consciousness. New York:
New York University Press.
Battle, Juan, Cathy J. Cohen, Dorian Warren, Gerard Fergerson, and Suzette Audam. 2002. Say
It Loud, I’m Black and I’m Proud: Black Pride Survey 2000. New York: The Policy Institute
of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.
Bauman, Zygmunt. 1998. Globalization: The Human Consequences . New York: Columbia
University Press.
Beck, E. M., and Stewart E. Tolnay. 1992. “ A Season for Violence: The Lynching of Blacks and
Labor Demand in the Agricultural Production Cycle in the American South.” International
Review of Social History37: 1–24.
Bederman, Gail. 1995. Manliness and Civilization: A Cultural History of Gender and Race in the
United States, 1890–1917. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bell, Derrick. 1999. “The Sexual Diversion: The Black Man/Black Woman Debate in Context.”
Black Men on Race, Gender, and Sexuality: A Critical Reader. Ed. Devon W . Carbado,
237–247. New York: New York University Press.
Bennett, Michael, and Vanessa D. Dickerson, eds. 2001. Recovering the Black Female Body: Self-
Representations by African American Women. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.
Berry, Mary Frances. 1994. Black Resistance, White Law: A History of Constitutional Racism in
America. New York: Penguin Press.
Bobo, Jacqueline. 1995. Black Women as Cultural Readers. New York: Columbia University Press.
Bogle, Donald. 1989. Toms, Coons, Mulattoes, Mammies, & Bucks: An Interpretive History of
Blacks in American Films. New York: Continuum.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 1996. “Rethinking Racism: Toward a Structural Interpretation.”
American Sociological Review62 (June): 465–480.
———. 2001. White Supremacy and Racism in the Post–Civil Rights Era . Boulder, Colo.: Lynne
Rienner Publishers.
Bordo, Susan. 1993. Unbearable Weight. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Boyd, Todd. 2000. “Mo’ Money, Mo’ Problems: Keepin’ It Real in the Post-Jordan Era.”
Basketball Jones: America Above the Rim.Ed. Todd Boyd and Kenneth L. Shropshire, 59–67.
New York: New York University Press.
Boyd, Todd, and Kenneth L. Shropshire. 2000. “Basketball Jones: A New World Order?”
Basketball Jones: America Above the Rim. Ed. Todd Boyd and Kenneth L. Shropshire, 1–11.
New York: New York University Press.
354


--- PAGE 366 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Boykin, Keith. 1996. One More River to Cross: Black and Gay in America . New York: Anchor
Books.
Brandt, Eric, ed. 1999. Dangerous Liaisons: Blacks, Gays, and the Struggle for Equality. New York:
The New Press.
Brewer, Rose. 1994. “Race, Class, Gender and U.S. State Welfare Policy: The Nexus of
Inequality for African American Families.” Color, Class and Country: Experiences of Gender.
Ed. Gay Young and Bette J. Dickerson, 115–127. London: Zed.
Byrd, Rudolph P ., and Beverly Guy-Sheftall, eds. 2001. Traps: African American Men on Gender
and Sexuality. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Calmore, John O. 2001. “Race-Conscious Voting Rights and the New Demography in a
Multiracing America.” North Carolina Law Review79, no. 5: 1254–81.
Canada, Geoffrey. 1995. Fist, Stick, Knife, Gun: A Personal History of Violence in America .
Boston: Beacon Press.
Caponi, Gena Dagel, ed. 1999. Signifyin(g), Sanctifyin’, & Slam Dunking: A Reader in African
American Expressive Culture. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Carbado, Devon W . 1999a. “The Construction of O.J. Simpson as a Racial Victim.” Black Men
on Race, Gender, and Sexuality. Ed Devon W . Carbado, 159–193. New York: New York
University Press.
———. 1999b. “Epilogue Straight Out of the Closet: Men, Feminism, and Male Heterosexual
Privilege.” Black Men on Race, Gender, and Sexuality.Ed Devon W . Carbado, 417–447. New
York: New York University Press.
———. 1999c. “Introduction: Where and When Black Men Enter.” Black Men on Race, Gender,
and Sexuality.Ed Devon W . Carbado, 1–17. New York: New York University Press.
Carby, Hazel V . 1992. “Policing the Black Woman’s Body in an Urban Context.”Critical Inquiry
18: 738–755.
———. 1998. Race Men. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Cashmore, Ellis. 1997. The Black Culture Industry. New York: Routledge.
Chambers, Veronica. 1996. Mama’s Girl. New York: Riverhead Books.
Clarke, Cheryl. 1983. “The Failure to Transform: Homophobia in the Black Community.”Home
Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology.Ed. Barbara Smith, 197–208. New York: Kitchen Table Press.
———. 1995. “Lesbianism: An Act of Resistance.” Words of Fire: An Anthology of African-
American Feminist Thought.Ed. Beverly Guy-Sheftall, 241–251. New York: The New Press.
Cleage, Pearl. 1993. Deals with the Devil: And Other Reasons to Riot. New York: Ballantine.
Cohen, Cathy J. 1999. The Boundaries of Blackness: AIDS and the Breakdown of Black Politics.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cohen, Cathy J., and Tamara Jones. 1999. “Fighting Homophobia versus Challenging
Heterosexism: ‘The Failure to Transform’ Revisited.” Dangerous Liaisons: Blacks, Gays, and
the Struggle for Equality.Ed. Eric Brandt, 80–101. New York: The New Press.
Cole, Johnnetta Betsch, and Beverly Guy-Sheftall. 2003. Gender Talk: The Struggle for Women’s
Equality in African American Communities. New York: Ballantine.
Collins, Patricia Hill. 1989. “ A Comparison of Two Works on Black Family Life.” Signs14, no.
4: 875–84.
———. 1998. Fighting Words: Black Women and the Search for Justice. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press.
———. 1999. “Producing the Mothers of the Nation: Race, Class and Contemporary U.S.
Population Policies.” Women, Citizenship and Difference. Ed. Nira Yuval-Davis, 118–129.
London: Zed Books.
———. 2000a. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of
Empowerment. New York: Routledge.
355


--- PAGE 367 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
———. 2000b. “Gender, Black Feminism, and Black Political Economy.”Annals of the American
Academy of Political & Social Science 568 (March): 41–53.
———. 2002. “Introduction to On Lynchings.” On Lynchings.Ed. Ida B. Wells-Barnett, 9–24.
Amherst, N.Y .: Humanity Books.
Combahee River Collective. 1982. “ A Black Feminist Statement.”But Some of Us Are Brave.Ed.
Gloria T . Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara Smith, 13–22. Old Westbury, N.Y .: Feminist
Press.
Comstock, Gary David. 1999. “‘Whosoever’ Is Welcome Here: An Interview with Reverend
Edwin C. Sanders II.” Dangerous Liaisons: Blacks, Gays, and the Struggle for Equality. Ed.
Eric Brandt, 142–157. New York: The New Press.
Connell, R. W . 1992. “ A Very Straight Gay: Masculinity, Homosexual Experience, and the
Dynamics of Gender.” American Sociological Review57 (December): 735–751.
———. 1995. Masculinities. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Cose, Ellis. 2003. “The Black Gender Gap.” NewsweekMarch 3: 46–51.
Crenshaw, Kimberlé Williams. 1992. “Whose Story Is It Anyway? Feminist and Antiracist
Appropriations of Anita Hill.” Race-ing Justice, En-Gendering Power. Ed. Toni Morrison,
402–440. New York: Pantheon Books.
———. 1997. “Color Blindness, History, and the Law.” The House That Race Built. Ed.
Wahneema Lubiano, 280–288. New York: Pantheon.
Cunningham, George P . 1996. “Body Politics: Race, Gender, and the Captive Body.”Representing
Black Men. Ed. Marcellus Blount and George P . Cunningham, 131–154. New York:
Routledge.
Dalton, Harlon L. 1999a. “ AIDS in Blackface.” Black Men on Race, Gender, and Sexuality. Ed.
Devon W . Carbado, 324–337. New York: New York University Press.
———. 1999b. “Pull Together As Community.” Black Men on Race, Gender, and Sexuality: A
Critical Reader.Ed Devon W . Carbado, 120–127. New York: New York University Press.
Dash, Leon. 1996. Rosa Lee: A Mother and Her Family in Urban America. New York: Basic Books.
Davis, Angela Y . 1978. “Rape, Racism and the Capitalist Setting.”Black Scholar9, no. 7: 24–30.
———. 1981. Women, Race, and Class. New York: Random House.
———. 1994. “ Afro Images: Politics, Fashion, and Nostalgia.”Critical Inquiry21, no. 2: 37–45.
———. 1997. “Race and Criminalization: Black Americans and the Punishment Industry.” The
House That Race Built.Ed. Wahneema Lubiano, 264–279. New York: Pantheon.
———. 1998. Blues Legacies and Black Feminism: Gertrude “Ma” Rainey, Bessie Smith and Billie
Holiday. New York: Vintage.
Dawson, Michael C. 1994. Behind the Mule: Race and Class in African-American Politics .
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
D’Emilio, John, and Estelle B. Freedman. 1997. Intimate Matters: A History of Sexuality in
America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Denizet-Lewis, Benoit. 2003. “Double Lives on the Down Low.” New York Times Magazine,
August 3, 28–33+.
Dent, Gina. 1992a. “Black Pleasure, Black Joy: An Introduction.” Black Popular Culture. Ed.
Gina Dent, 1–19. Seattle: Bay Press.
———, ed. 1992b. Black Popular Culture. Seattle: Bay Press.
Dickerson, Debra J. 2000. An American Story. New York: Anchor.
di Mauro, Diane. 1995. Sexuality Research in the United States: An Assessment of the Social and
Behavioral Sciences. New York: Social Science Research Council, Sexuality Research
Assessment Project.
Dines, Gail. 1998. “King Kong and the White Woman: HustlerMagazine and the Demonization
of Black Masculinity.” Violence against Women4, no. 3 (June): 291–307.
356


--- PAGE 368 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Douglas, Kelly Brown. 1999. Sexuality and the Black Church: A Womanist Perspective. Maryknoll,
N.Y .: Orbis.
Dwyer, Jim. 2002. “Reinvestigation of Park Jogger Case Leaves Some Officials with Doubts”
New York Times, A15. September 28.
Dyson, Michael Eric. 1993. Reflecting Black: African-American Cultural Criticism. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
———. 1996. Between God and Gangsta Rap: Bearing Witness to Black Culture . New York:
Oxford University Press.
———. 2001. Holler If You Hear Me: Searching for Tupac Shakur. New York: Basic Books.
Eli, Quinn. 1995. “ A Liar in Love.”Speak My Name: Black Men on Masculinity and the American
Dream.Ed. Don Belton, 137–143. Boston: Beacon Press.
Emerson, Rana A. 2002. “‘Where My Girls At?’ Negotiating Black Womanhood in Music
Videos.” Gender & Society16, no. 1: 115–135.
Entman, Robert M., and Rojecki Andrew. 2000. The Black Image in the White Mind: Media and
Race in America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Essed, Philomena. 1991. Understanding Everyday Racism: An Interdisciplinary Theory. Newbury
Park, Calif.: Sage.
Fair, Jo Ellen, and Roberta J. Astroff. 1991. “Constructing Race and Violence: U.S. News
Coverage and the Signifying Practices of Apartheid.” Journal of Communication41, no . 4:
58–74.
Fausto-Sterling, Anne. 1992. Myths of Gender: Biological Theories about Women and Men. New
York: Basic Books.
———. 1995. “Gender, Race, and Nation: The Comparative Anatomy of ‘Hottentot’ Women in
Europe, 1815–1817.” Deviant Bodies: Critical Perspectives on Difference in Science and Popular
Culture.Ed. Jennifer Terry and Jacqueline Urla, 19–48. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.
Ferber, Abby L. 1998. White Man Falling: Race, Gender, and White Supremacy. Lanham, Md.:
Rowman & Littlefield.
Fordham, Signithia. 1996. Blacked Out: Dilemmas of Race, Identity, and Success at Capital High.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Foucault, Michel. 1979. Discipline and Punish: The Birth ofthe Prison . New York: Schocken.
———. 1980. The History of Sexuality Vol. I: An Introduction. New York: Vintage Books.
Franklin, Donna L. 1997. Ensuring Inequality: The Structural Transformation of the African-
American Family. New York: Oxford University Press.
Franklin, Vincent P . 1992. Black Self-Determination: A Cultural History of African-American
Resistance. Brooklyn, N.Y .: Lawrence Hill Books.
———. 1995. Living Our Stories, Telling Our Truths: Autobiography and the Making of the
African-American Intellectual Tradition. New York: Scribner.
Frazier, E. Franklin. 1948. The Negro Family in the United States. New York: Dryden.
Freydberg, Elizabeth Hadley. 1995. “Sapphires, Spitfires, Sluts, and Superbitches: Aframericans
and Latinas in Contemporary American Film.” Black Women in America. Ed. Kim Vaz,
222–243. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.
Gates, Henry Louis. 1992. Loose Canons: Notes on the Culture Wars . New York: Oxford
University Press.
George, Nelson. 1998. Hip Hop America. New York: Penguin.
Giddings, Paula. 1984. When and Where I Enter: The Impact ofBlack Women on Race and Sex in
America. New York: William Morrow.
———. 1992. “The Last Taboo.” Race-ing Justice, En-Gendering Power. Ed. Toni Morrison,
441–465. New York: Pantheon.
357


--- PAGE 369 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
———. 2001. “Missing in Action: Ida B. Wells, the NAACP , and the Historical Record.”
Meridians: Feminism, Race, Transnationalism1, no. 2: 1–17.
Gilkes, Cheryl Townsend. 2001. If It Wasn’t for the Women: Black Women’s Experience and
Womanist Culture in Church and Community. Maryknoll, N.Y .: Orbis.
Gilman, Sander L. 1985. Difference and Pathology: Stereotypes of Sexuality, Race, and Madness.
Ithaca, N.Y .: Cornell University Press.
Gilroy, Paul. 2000. Against Race: Imagining Political Culture Beyond the Color Line. Cambridge,
Mass: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Gitlin, Todd. 2001. Media Unlimited: How the Torrent of Images and Sounds Overwhelms Our
Lives. New York: Henry Holt.
Goffman, Erving. 1963. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice Hall.
Goldberg, David Theo. 1993. Racist Culture: Philosophy and the Politics of Meaning
Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell.
Golden, Marita. 1995. Saving Our Sons: Raising Black Children in a Turbulent World. New York:
Doubleday.
Gomez, Jewell, and Barbara Smith. 1994. “Taking the Home Out of Homophobia: Black
Lesbian Health.” The Black Women’s Health Book: Speaking for Ourselves. Ed. Evelyn C.
White, 198–213. Seattle: Seal Press.
Gomez, Jewelle. 1999. “Black Lesbians: Passing, Stereotypes and Transformation.” Dangerous
Liaisons: Blacks, Gays, and the Struggle for Equality. Ed. Eric Brandt, 161–177. New York:
The New Press.
Gould, Stephen Jay. 1981. The Mismeasure of Man. New York: Norton.
Graham, Lawrence Otis. 2000. Our Kind of People: Inside America’s Black Upper Class . New
York: HarperPerennial.
Greene, Beverly. 2000. “ African American Lesbian and Bisexual Women.” Journal of Social
Issues56, no. 2: 239–249.
Gregory, Steven. 1994. “Race, Identity and Political Activism: The Shifting Contours of the
African American Public Sphere.” Public Culture7, no. 1: 147–164.
Grindstaff, Laura. 2002. The Money Shot: Trash, Class, and the Making of TV Talk Shows .
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Guerrero, Ed. 1993. “The Black Image in Protective Custody: Hollywood’s Biracial Buddy Films of
the Eighties.”Black American Cinema.Ed. Manthia Diawara, 237–246. New York: Routledge.
Guillory, Monique, and Richard C. Green, eds. 1998. Soul: Black Power, Politics, and Pleasure.
New York: New York University Press.
Guinier, Lani, and Gerald Torres. 2002. The Miner’s Canary: Enlisting Race, Resisting Power,
Transforming Democracy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Gutman, Herbert. 1976. The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom, 1750–1925 . New York:
Random House.
Guy-Sheftall, Beverly, ed. 1995. Words of Fire: An Anthology of African-American Feminist
Thought. New York: New Press.
Hall, Jacqueline Dowd. 1983. “The Mind That Burns in Each Body: Women, Rape, and Racial
Violence.” Powers of Desire: The Politics of Sexuality.Ed. Ann Snitow, Christine Stansell,
and Sharon Thompson, 329–349. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Hall, Stuart. 1992. “What Is This ‘Black’ in Black Popular Culture?” Black Popular Culture.Ed.
Gina Dent, 21–33. Seattle: Bay Press.
Hammonds, Evelynn M. 1997. “Toward a Genealogy of Black Female Sexuality: The
Problematic of Silence.” Feminist Genealogies, Colonial Legacies, Democratic Futures. Ed. M.
Jacqui Alexander and Chandra Talpade Mohanty, 170–181. New York: Routledge.
358


--- PAGE 370 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Haraway, Donna. 1989. Primate Visions: Gender, Race, and Nature in the World ofModern Science.
New York: Routledge, Chapman & Hall.
Harding, Sandra, ed. 1993. The “Racial” Economy of Science: Toward a Democratic Future .
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Harris, Trudier. 1984. Exorcising Blackness: Historical and Literary Lynching and Burning Rituals.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Harrison, C. Keith. 2001. “From Paul Robeson to Althea Gibson to Michael Jordan: Images of
Race Relations and Sport.” Michael Jordan, Inc. Corporate Sport, Media Culture, and Late
Modern America.Ed. David L. Andrews, vii–xii. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Hawkeswood, William G. 1996. One of the Children: Gay Black Men in Harlem . Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Hemphill, Essex, ed. 1991. Brother to Brother: New Writings by Black Gay Men. Boston: Alyson
Publications.
Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks. 1992. “ African-American Women’s History and the
Metalanguage of Race.” Signs17 (winter): 251–274.
———. 1993. Righteous Discontent: The Women’s Movement in the Black Baptist Church
1880–1920. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Hill, Anita. 1997. Speaking Truth to Power. New York: Doubleday.
Hoch, Paul. 1979. White Hero, Black Beast: Racism, Sexism, and the Mask of Masculinity .
London: Pluto Press.
Human Rights Watch. 2001. No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons. New York: Human Rights Watch.
Hutchinson, Darren Lenard. 1999. “‘Claiming’ and ‘Speaking’ Who We Are: Black Gays and
Lesbians, Racial Politics, and the Million Man March.” Black Men on Race, Gender, and
Sexuality.Ed. Devon W . Carbado, 28–45. New York: New York University Press.
Hutchinson, Earl Ofari. 2001. “Hardest Hit by the Prison Craze.” Web page [accessed March 24,
2002]. Available at http://www.salon.com/news/feature/2001/01/12/black_women/
print/html.
Iceland, John, Daniel H. Weinberg, and Erika Steinmetz. 2002. Racial and Ethnic Residential
Segregation in the United States: 1980–2000 , U.S. Census Bureau, Series CENSR-3.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
James, Joy. 1996. “The Profeminist Politics of W . E. B. DuBois with Respects to Anna Julia
Cooper and Ida B. Wells Barnett.”W. E. B. DuBois on Race and Culture.Ed. Bernard W . Bell,
Emily R. Grosholz, and James B. Stewart, 141–160. New York: Routledge.
Jewell, K. Sue. 1993. From Mammy to Miss America and Beyond: Cultural Images and the Shaping
of U.S. Social Policy. New York: Routledge.
Jhally, Sut, and Justin Lewis. 1992. Enlightened Racism. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Johnson, Cary Alan. 2000. “Hearing Voices: Unearthing Evidence of Homosexuality in
Precolonial Africa.” The Greatest Taboo: Homosexuality in Black Communities. Ed. Delroy
Constantine-Simms, 132–148. New York: Alyson Books.
Jones, Jacqueline. 1985. Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and the Family
from Slavery to the Present. New York: Basic Books.
Jones, Jacquie. 1993. “The Construction of Black Sexuality: Towards Normalizing the Black
Cinematic Experience.” Black American Cinema.Ed. Manthia Diawara, 247–256. New York:
Routledge.
Jones, Lisa. 1994. Bulletproof Diva: Tales of Race, Sex, and Hair. New York: Doubleday.
Jordan, June. 1992. Technical Difficulties: African-American Notes on the State ofthe Union . New
York: Pantheon Books.
Jordan, Winthrop D. 1968. White Over Black: American Attitudes toward the Negro, 1550–1812 .
New York: W . W . Norton.
359


--- PAGE 371 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Julien, Isaac. 1992. “Black Is, Black Ain’t: Notes on De-essentializing Black Identities.” Black
Popular Culture.Ed. Gina Dent, 255–275. Seattle: Bay Press.
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2000. “The State of the HIV/AIDS Epidemic in America.” Kaiser
Family Foundation, April.
Kaplan, Elaine Bell. 1997. Not Our Kind of Girl: Unraveling the Myths of Black Teenage
Motherhood. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Kapsalis, Terri. 1997. Public Privates: Performing Gynecology from Both Ends of the Speculum .
Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
Kelley, Robin D. G. 1994. Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class. New York:
Free Press.
———. 1997. Yo’ Mama’s DisFUNKtional!: Fighting the Culture Wars in Urban America .
Boston: Beacon Press.
Kellner, Douglas. 2001. “The Sports Spectacle, Michael Jordan, and Nike: Unholy Alliance?”
Michael Jordan, Inc. Corporate Sport, Media Culture, and Late Modern America.Ed. David L.
Andrews, 37–63. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Kennedy, Elizabeth Lapovsky, and Madeline D. Davis. 1994. Boots of Leather, Slippers of Gold:
The History of a Lesbian Community. New York: Penguin Books.
Kennedy, Randall. 2002. Nigger: The Strange Career of a Troublesome Word. New York: Pantheon.
Kimmel, Michael S. 2001. “Masculinity as Homophobia: Fear, Shame, and Silence in the
Construction of Gender Identity.” Men and Masculinity: A Text Reader. Ed. Theodore F .
Cohen, 29–41. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth Press.
Kitwana, Bakari. 2002. The Hip Hop Generation: Young Blacks and the Crisis in African-American
Culture. New York: Basic Books.
Latifah, Queen. 1999. Ladies First: Revelations of a Strong Woman. New York: Quill.
Lemons, Gary L. 1997. “To Be Black, Male, and ‘Feminist’ —Making Womanist Space for Black
Men.” International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy1, no. 2: 35–61.
Lincoln, C. Eric. 1999. Race, Religion, and the Continuing American Dilemma. New York: Hill & Wang.
Lorde, Audre. 1982. Zami, A New Spelling ofMy Name . Freedom, Calif.: Crossing Press.
———. 1984. Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches. Freedom, Calif.: Crossing Press.
Lubiano, Wahneema. 1992. “Black Ladies, Welfare Queens, and State Minstrels: Ideological War
by Narrative Means.” Race-ing Justice, En-Gendering Power. Ed. Toni Morrison, 323–63.
New York: Pantheon Books.
Lusane, Clarence. 1997. Race in the Global Era: African Americans at the Millennium . Boston:
South End Press.
Magubane, Zine. 2001. “Which Bodies Matter? Feminism, Poststructuralism, Race, and the
Curious Theoretical Odyssey of the ‘Hottentot Venus.’”Gender and Society15, no. 6: 816–834.
Mandela, Nelson. 1994. Long Walk to Freedom: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela. Boston:
Little, Brown.
Marks, Carole. 1989. Farewell, We’re Good and Gone: The Great Black Migration. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Marriott, Robert. 2000. “‘Blowin’ Up.” Vibe: 126–132.
Maseko, Zola. 1998. The Life and Times of Sara Baartman: “The Hottentot Venus.” New York:
First Run/Icarus Films.
Massey, Douglas S., and Nancy A. Denton. 1993. American Apartheid: Segregation and the
Making of the Underclass. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
McCall, Nathan. 1994. Makes Me Wanna Holler: A Young Black Man in America . New York:
Random House.
———. 1997. What’s Going On: Personal Essays. New York: Random House.
McClary, Susan, and Robert Walser. 1994. “Theorizing the Body in African-American Music.”
Black Music Research Journal14: 75–84.
360


--- PAGE 372 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
McClintock, Anne. 1995. Imperial Leather: Race, Gender, and Sexuality in the Colonial Contest .
New York: Routledge.
McCready, Lance. 2001. “When Fitting In Isn’t an Option, or, Why Black Queer Males at a
California High School Stay Away from Project 10.” Troubling Intersections of Race and
Sexuality: Queer Students of Color and Anti-oppressive Education. Ed. Kevin K. Kumashiro,
37–54. New York: Rowman & Littlefield.
McKinnon, Jesse. 2001. The Black Population: 2000. Vol. C2KBR/01–5. U.S. Census Bureau.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
McKinnon, Jesse, and Karen Humes. 2000. The Black Population in the United States: March
1999. Current Population Reports, Series P20–530. U.S. Census Bureau. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
McPherson, Tara. 2000. “Who’s Got Next? Gender, Race, and the Mediation of the WNBA.”
Basketball Jones: America Above the Rim. Ed. Todd Boyd and Kenneth L. Shropshire,
184–197. New York: New York University Press.
Mercer, Kobena. 1994. Welcome to the Jungle: New Positions in Black Cultural Studies. New York:
Routledge.
Messner, Michael A. 1990. “When Bodies Are Weapons: Masculinity and Violence in Sport.”
International Review of the Sociology ofSport 25: 203–217.
———. 1998. “The Limits of ‘The Male Sex Role’: An Analysis of the Men’s Liberation and
Men’s Rights Movements’ Discourse.” Gender & Society12, no. 3: 255–276.
Miller, Jerome G. 1996. Search and Destroy: African-American Males in the Criminal Justice
System. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Miller, Teresa A. 2000. “Sex and Surveillance: Gender, Privacy and the Sexualization of Power
in Prison.” George Mason University Civil Rights Law Journal 10, no. 2: 291–356.
Mohanram, Radhika. 1999. Black Body: Women, Colonialism, and Space. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press.
Mohanty, Chandra Talpade. 1997. “Women Workers and Capitalist Scripts: Ideologies of
Domination, Common Interests, and the Politics of Solidarity.” Feminist Genealogies,
Colonial Legacies, Democratic Futures. Ed. M. Jacqui Mohanty Chandra and Talpade
Alexander, 3–29. New York: Routledge.
Monroe, Irene. 1998. “Louis Farrakhan’s Ministry of Misogyny and Homophobia.” The
Farrakhan Factor: African-American Writers on Leadership, Nationhood, and the Minister Louis
Farrakhan.Ed Amy Alexander, 275–298. New York: Grove Press.
Moore, Lisa C., ed. 1997. Does Your Mama Know? An Anthology of Black Lesbian Coming Out
Stories. Austin, Texas: Redbone Press.
Morgan, Joan. 1999. When Chickenheads Come Home to Roost: My Life as a Hip-Hop Feminist .
New York: Simon & Schuster.
Morrison, Toni, ed. 1992. Race-ing Justice, En-Gendering Power: Essays on Anita Hill, Clarence
Thomas, and the Construction of Social Reality. New York: Pantheon Books.
Morton, Patricia. 1991. Disfigured Images: The Historical Assault on Afro-American Women. New
York: Greenwood Press.
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick. 1965. The Negro Family: The Case for National Action. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Mudimbe, V . Y . 1988. The Invention of Africa: Gnosis, Philosophy, and the Order of Knowledge.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Naylor, Gloria. 1988. “Love and Sex in the Afro-American Novel.”The Yale Review78, no. 1: 19–31.
Neal, Mark Anthony. 2002. Soul Babies: Black Popular Culture and the Post-Soul Aesthetic. New
York: Routledge.
Nelson, Jill. 1997. Straight, No Chaser: How I Became a Grown-up Black Woman. New York: G.
P . Putnam’s Sons.
361


--- PAGE 373 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Neubeck, Kenneth J., and Noel A. Cazenave. 2001. Welfare Racism: Playing the Race Card against
America’s Poor. New York: Routledge.
Ogbar, Jeffrey O. G. 1999. “Slouching toward Bork: The Culture Wars and Self-Criticism in
Hip-Hop Music.” Journal of Black Studies30, no. 2: 164–183.
Oliver, Melvin L., and Thomas M. Shapiro. 1995. Black Wealth/White Wealth: A New
Perspective on Racial Inequality. New York: Routledge.
Oliver, William. 1994. The Violent Social World of Black Men. New York: Lexington Books.
Omi, Michael, and Howard Winant. 1994. Racial Formation in the United States: From the 1960s
to the 1990s. New York: Routledge.
Omolade, Barbara. 1994. The Rising Song of African American Women. New York: Routledge.
Orfield, Gary, and Carole Ashkinaze. 1991. The Closing Door: Conservative Policy and Black
Opportunity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Oyˇewùmí, Oyèrónké. 1997. The Invention of Women: Making an African Sense of Western Gender
Discourses. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Painter, Nell. 1992. “Hill, Thomas, and the Use of Racial Stereotype.” Race-ing Justice, En-
Gendering Power.Ed. Toni Morrison, 200–214. New York: Pantheon Books.
Patillo-McCoy, Mary. 1998. “Church Culture as a Strategy of Action in the Black Community.”
American Sociological Review63 (December): 767–784.
———. 1999. Black Picket Fences: Privilege and Peril among the Black Middle Class . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Patterson, Orlando. 1982. Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study . Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
———. 1998. Rituals of Blood: Consequences of Slavery in Two American Centuries. Washington,
D.C.: Civitas Counterpoint.
Payne, Charles. 1989. “Ella Baker and Models of Social Change.” Signs14, no. 1: 885–899.
Pellegrini, Ann. 1997. “Women on Top, Boys on the Side, but Some of Us Are Brave: Blackness,
Lesbianism, and the Visible.” College Literature24, no. 1: 83–98.
Petterson, Stephen M. 1997. “ Are Young Black Men Really Less Willing to Work?” American
Sociological Review62: 605–613.
Pierce-Baker, Charlotte. 1998. Surviving the Silence: Black Women’s Stories of Rape. New York:
W . W . Norton.
Pinar, William F . 2001. The Gender of Racial Politics and Violence in America: Lynching, Prison
Rape, and the Crisis of Masculinity. New York: Peter Lang.
Platt, Larry. 2002. New Jack Jocks: Rebels, Race, and the American Athlete. Philadelphia: Temple
University Press.
Powell, Kevin. 2000. “Confessions.” MS,April/May, 73–77.
Prestney, Susie. 1997. “Inscribing the Hottentot Venus: Generating Data for Difference.”At the
Edge of International Relations: Postcolonialism, Gender & Dependency. Ed. Phillip Darby,
86–105. New York: Pinter.
Quadagno, Jill. 1994. The Color of Welfare: How Racism Undermined the War on Poverty. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Ransby, Barbara, and Tracye Matthews. 1993. “Black Popular Culture and the Transcendence of
Patriarchal Illusions.” Race and Class35, no. 1: 57–68.
Reed, Ishmael. 1998. “Introduction: Black Pleasure—An Oxymoron.” Soul: Black Power,
Politics, and Pleasure. Ed. Monique Guillory and Richard C. Green, 169–171. New York:
New York University Press.
Reid-Pharr, Robert F . 2001. Black Gay Man. New York: New York University Press.
Remez, Lisa. 2000. “Oral Sex among Adolescents: Is It Sex or Abstinence?” Family Planning
Perspectives32, no. 6: 298–304.
362


--- PAGE 374 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Richie, Beth E. 1996. Compelled to Crime: The Gender Entrapment of Battered Black Women. New
York: Routledge.
Riggs, Marlon T . “Current Online: Marlon Riggs on the ‘Tongues’ Episode.” Web page
[accessed September 8, 2002]. Available at http://www.current.org/prog/prog114g.html.
Riggs, Marlon T . 1992. “Unleash the Queen.” Black Popular Culture.Ed. Gina Dent, 99–105.
Seattle: Bay Press.
———. 1999. “Black Macho Revisited: Reflections of a SNAP! Queen.” Black Men on Race,
Gender, and Sexuality. Ed. Devon W . Carbado, 306–311. New York: New York University
Press.
Roberts, Dorothy E. 1997. Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction, and the Meaning of
Liberty. New York: Pantheon Books.
Roberts, Robin. 1995. “Sisters in the Name of Rap: Rapping for Women’s Lives.” Black Women
in America.Ed. Kim Marie Vaz, 323–333. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.
Robinson, Randall. 2000. The Debt: What America Owes to Blacks. New York: Plume.
Rodriguez, Clara E. 2000. Changing Race: Latinos, the Census, and the History of Ethnicity in the
United States. New York: New York University Press.
Root, Maria P . P . 2001. Love’s Revolution: Interracial Marriage. Philadelphia: Temple University
Press.
Rose, Tricia. 1994. Black Noise: Rap Music and Black Culture in Contemporary America. Hanover,
N.H.: Wesleyan University Press.
———. 2003. Longing to Tell: Black Women Talk about Sexuality and Intimacy . New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Sack, Kevin. 2001. “ AIDS Epidemic Takes Toll on Black Women.” Web page [accessed
December 2, 2001]. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2001/07/03/health/03AIDS.
Scott, James C. 1990. Domination and the Arts of Resistance: The Hidden Transcripts. New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press.
Seidman, Steven. 1996. “Introduction.” Queer Theory/Sociology. Ed. Steven Seidman, 1–29.
Malden, Mass.: Blackwell.
———. 2002. Beyond the Closet: The Transformation of Gay and Lesbian Life . New York:
Routledge.
Shakur, Sanyika. 1993. Monster: The Autobiography of an L.A. Gang Member . New York:
Atlantic Monthly Press.
Simmons, Ron. 1991. “Some Thoughts on the Challenge Facing Gay Intellectuals.” Brother to
Brother: New Writings by Black Gay Men. Ed. Essex Hemphill, 211–228. Boston: Alyson
Publications.
Simmons, Tavia and Martin O’Connell. Married-Couple and Unmarried-Partner Households:
2000, CENSR-5. 2003. U.S. Census Bureau. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office. 
Smith, Barbara, ed. 1983. Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology. New York: Kitchen Table Press.
———. 1990. “The NEA Is the Least of It.” 65–67. 
———. 1998. The Truth That Never Hurts: Writings on Race, Gender, and Freedom . New
Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.
Smith, Charles Michael, ed. 1999. Fighting Words: Personal Essays by Black Gay Men.New York:
Avon.
Smitherman-Donaldson, Geneva. 1995. African American Women Speak Out on Anita
Hill–Clarence Thomas. Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
Somerville, Siobhan B. 2000. Queering the Color Line: Race and the Invention of Homosexuality
in American Culture. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
Souljah, Sister. 1999. The Coldest Winter Ever. New York: Pocket Books.
363


--- PAGE 375 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Spillers, Hortense J. 2000. “Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American Grammar Book.” The
Black Feminist Reader. Ed. Joy James and T . Denean Sharpley-Whiting, 57–87. Malden,
Mass.: Blackwell.
Squires, Gregory D. 1994. Capital and Communities in Black and White: The Intersections of Race,
Class, and Uneven Development. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Stanford, J. L., R. A. Stephenson, L. M. Coyle, R. Correa, J. W . Eley, F . Gilliland, B. Hankey,
L. N. Kilonel, C. Kosary, R. Ross, R. Severson, and D. West. 1999. Prostate Cancer Trends
1973–1995. NIH Pub. No. 99–4543. SEER Program, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland.
Staples, Robert. 1979. “The Myth of Black Macho: A Response to Angry Black Feminists.”
Black Scholar10, no. 6: 24–33.
Sterk-Elifson, Claire. 1994. “Sexuality among African-American Women.” Sexuality Across the
Life Course.Ed. Alice S. Rossi, 99–126. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Stoler, Ann Laura. 1995. Race and the Education of Desire: Foucault’s History of Sexuality and
the Colonial Order of Things. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
Sudarkasa, Niara. 1981. “Interpreting the African Heritage in Afro-American Family
Organization.” Black Families.Ed. Harriette Pipes McAdoo, 37–53. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage.
Swarns, Rachel L. 2001. “South Africa’s AIDS Vortex Engulfs a Rural Community.” Web page
[accessed December 2, 2001]. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2001/11/25/health/
25AIDS.html.
———. 4 May 2002. “Mocked in Europe of Old, African Is Embraced at Home at Last.” New
York Times,sec. A, p. 3.
Takaki, Ronald T . 1993. A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural America. Boston: Little,
Brown.
Tate, Greg, ed. 2003. Everything but the Burden: What White People Are Taking from Black
Culture. New York: Broadway Books.
Tate, Greg, Portia Maultsby, Thulani Davis, Clyde Taylor, and Ishmael Reed. 1998. “ Ain’t We
Still Got Soul?” Roundtable Discussion. Soul: Black Power, Politics, and Pleasure. Eds.
Monique Guillory and Richard C. Green, 269–283. New York: New York University Press.
Thomas, Kendall. 1996. “‘Ain’t Nothin’ Like the Real Thing’: Black Masculinity, Gay Sexuality,
and the Jargon of Authenticity.” Representing Black Men.Ed. Marcellus Blount and George
P . Cunningham, 55–69. New York: Routledge.
Thomas, Kevin. March 28, 1997. “The Watermelon Woman: Wry ‘Woman’ Explores Race,
Sexuality.” Los Angeles Times.
Thompson, Robert Farris. 1983. Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art and
Philosophy. New York: Vintage.
Tonry, Michael. 1995. Malign Neglect: Race, Crime, and Punishment in America . New York:
Oxford University Press.
Torgovnick, Marianna. 1990. Gone Primitive: Savage Intellects, Modern Lives . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Turner, Patricia A. 1994. Ceramic Uncles and Celluloid Mammies: Black Images and Their
Influence on Culture. New York: Anchor.
U.S. Census Bureau. 1999. “Marital Status of the Population 15 Years Old and Over, by Sex and
Race: 1950 to Present.” Web page [accessed March 17, 2003]. Available at http://www.cen-
sus.gov/population/socdemo/ms-la/tabms-1.txt.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2000. “Technical Note on Same-Sex Unmarried Partner Data from the
1990 and 2000 Censuses.” Web page [accessed March 16, 2003]. Available at
http://www.census.gov/population/www/cen2000/samesex.html.
364


--- PAGE 376 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
U.S. Census Bureau. 2003. “Foreign-Born Population Surpasses 32 Million Census Bureau
Estimates.” Web page, [accessed March 16, 2003]. Available at http://www.census.gov/
Press-Release/www/2003/cb03–42.html.
Wallace, Michele. 1990. Invisibility Blues: From Pop to Theory. New York: Verso.
Washington, Elsie B. 1996. Uncivil War: The Struggle between Black Men and Women. Chicago:
The Noble Press.
Watkins, S. Craig. 1998. Representing: Hip Hop Culture and the Production of Black Cinema .
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wekker, Gloria. 2000. “Mati-ism and Black Lesbianism: Two Ideal Typical Expressions of
Female Homosexuality in Black Communities of the Diaspora.” The Greatest Taboo:
Homosexuality in Black Communities. Ed. Delroy Constantine-Simms, 149–162. New York:
Alyson Books.
Wells-Barnett, Ida B. 2002. On Lynchings. Amherst, N.Y .: Humanity Books.
West, Cornel. 1993. Race Matters. Boston: Beacon Press.
West, Traci C. 1999. Wounds of the Spirit: Black Women, Violence, and Resistance Ethics. New
York: New York University Press.
Wetherell, Margaret, and Nigel Edley. 1999. “Negotiating Hegemonic Masculinity: Imaginary
Positions and Psycho-Discursive Practices.” Feminism & Psychology9, no. 3: 335–356.
White, Deborah Gray. 1985a. Ar’n’t I a Woman? Female Slaves in the Plantation South. New York:
W .W . Norton.
White, Evelyn C. 1985b. Chain, Chain, Change: For Black Women Dealing with Physical and
Emotional Abuse. Seattle: Seal Press.
Wideman, John Edgar. 1984. Brothers and Keepers. New York: Penguin.
Wiegman, Robyn. 1993. “The Anatomy of Lynching.” American Sexual Politics. Ed. John C.
Fout, and Maura Tantillo, 223–245. 
Wieviorka, Michel. 1997. “Is It So Difficult to Be an Anti-Racist?” Debating Cultural Hybridity:
Multi-cultural Identities and the Politics of Anti-racism. Ed. Pnina Werbner and Tariq
Modood, 139–53. London: Zed.
Williams, Sherley A. 1986. Dessa Rose. New York: William Morrow.
Wilson, Melba. 1994. Crossing the Boundary: Black Women Survive Incest. Seattle: Seal Press.
Wilson, William Julius. 1978. The Declining Significance ofRace. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
———. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public Policy .
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1996. When Work Disappears: The World ofthe New Urban Poor . New York: Knopf.
Winant, Howard. 2001. The World Is a Ghetto: Race and Democracy since World War II . New
York: Basic Books.
Wyatt, Gail Elizabeth. 1992. “The Sociocultural Context of African American and White
American Women’s Rape.” Journal of Social Issues48, no. 1: 77–91.
Young, Robert J. C. 1995. Colonial Desire: Hybridity in Theory, Culture and Race . New York:
Routledge.
Yuval-Davis, Nira. 1997. Gender and Nation. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.
Zuberi, Tukufu. 2001. Thicker than Blood: How Racial Statistics Lie. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Zucchino, David. 1997. The Myth of the Welfare Queen. New York: Scribner.
365


--- PAGE 377 ---



--- PAGE 378 ---
African Diaspora, 13, 33,
209–10, 279–81
African people: as animals,
image of, 56–57, 99–101,
105–6, 130; culture of,
98–100
Allegra, Donna, 273
antiracism, new difficulty of,
45–51
apartheid, 164–65, 279–80
athletes: Black men as, 152–66;
Black women as, 134–37
autonomy, sexual, 72–75,
282–307
Baby Boy(Singleton), 212
“Baby Got Back” (Mix A Lot),
129
Bad Black Mothers (BBM),
131–38
Baker, Josephine, 26, 28, 43
Baldwin, James, 206-7, 295,
303–7
Bambara, Toni Cade, 182, 306
Bandele, Asha , 275, 298
Barkley, Charles, 156–58
Bartmann, Sarah, 26–27,
50–51, 99, 120, 279–80
“beast” category, 100–101
beauty, standards of, 194–95
Beloved(Morrison), 60
Berry, Halle, 145, 181–82,
194–95, 212
Bird, Larry, 155
birth control, forced, 104–5,
133
Birth of a Nation (Griffith),
65–66, 166
bitchterm/role, 121, 123–30,
138, 145–48, 179, 258
Black Feminist Thought
(Collins), 3, 5
Black men: as athletes, 152–66;
bodies of, 160–61, 207, 283;
in families, 201–6; and fear,
4, 239–42; and gender ideol-
ogy, 185–212; as hypersex-
ual, 30–32; images of,
149–80; incarceration of,
80–82, 158–59, 233–42;
lynching of, 63–64, 216–20,
222–24; and rape, 64–66,
102–3, 165–66, 152–53,
221–22, 226–31, 234–42; and
respectability, 73–74; and
slavery, 55–61; and White
women, 261–68
Black nationalism, 46–47, 70,
75
black/white paradigm of race,
12–15
Black women: as athletes,
INDEX


--- PAGE 379 ---
INDEX
134–37; bodies of, 25–52, 128–29,
283; empowerment of, 7, 9; as
family heads, 80–84; and gender
ideology, 187–88, 193–99; and
HIV , 290–91; and rape, 64–66,
215–32; and reproductive freedom,
104–5; and slavery, 55–61, 65, 104;
testimony ignored, 2–4; “too
strong,” 183–84, 208–10; and
urbanization, 69–75; working class,
123–38
blues culture, 72–73, 110, 133, 180,
285
Bogle, Donald, 124–25
Booty Call, 145–46, 149–50, 162–64,
290
bootyterm, 150–51
“Bootylicious” (Knowles), 26–30,
50–51
Botha, P . W ., 164–65
Boyd, Todd, 154–55, 157–58
Boys on the Side, 271–72
breeder woman image, 56–57
Brown v. Topeka Board of Education,
61, 70, 76
Bruce, Philip, 66
buck image, 56–57, 59, 152–53
Bush, George W ., 78
Byrd, James, Jr., 222
Canada, Geoffrey, 240
Car Wash, 171–72
“Central Park Jogger” panic, 102–3
Chamberlain, Wilt, 292
churches, Black: and deviancy, 107–9;
and gender, 183; and HIV , 108,
112; and politics, 45; and
respectability, 71–73; and sexuality,
299–300
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 76
civil rights movement, 1–2, 45, 61–62,
74, 77–78, 222
Clarke, Cheryl, 35-36
class: among Blacks, 47–48, 59–64,
77–78; intersectionality with other
oppressions, 10–12; in popular cul-
ture, 20; in post–civil rights era,
75–80; and urbanization, 69–75
Clinton, Bill, 78–79
closet, prison as, 19
Coldest Winter Ever, The(Sister
Souljah), 126
color blindness, 178
Color Purple, The(Walker), 272
community, Black: building of,
295–301; difference within, 47–48;
erosion of, 121–22; politics of,
43–51
Contending Forces(Hopkins), 109–10
Cosby Show, 139–42, 147, 166–69
“crack mother” image, 131–32
critical social theory, 8–9
Cunningham, Rosa Lee, 63
Dalton, Harlton, 179–80, 264–66
Dash, Julie, 272
Dash, Leon, 63
Daughters of the Dust(Dash), 272
Davis, Angela, 284, 285
Democratic Party, 78–79
dependency, economic, 201–6
Dessa Rose(Williams), 60
Destiny’s Child, 25–30, 42–43, 50–51
“Dinge” (Reid-Pharr) , 275
Disappearing Acts, 251–52
“dog” term, 42, 258
“Doing Da Butt” (Lee), 129
dominance: and love, 293; types of,
199–212
Douglas, Kelly, 299–300
368


--- PAGE 380 ---
INDEX
Down Low (DL) scene, 173–74, 207,
273–74, 291–92
DuBois, William E. B., 32
Dunye, Cheryl, 269–70
Dyson, Michael, 159–60
Elliott, Missy, 119–21
empowerment, 295–301
ENDANGEREDBLACKMAN
(EBM) identity, 256–57
eroticism, rebellion and, 287–95, 301
Erving, Julius, 155
everyday resistance, 49–50
faggotterm, 121, 171–72
Fair Housing Law of 1968, 76
families: African conceptions of, 59;
in great migration, 67–71; men in
201–7; urban, 69–75; woman
headed, 80–84
family values discourse, 37
Farrakhan, Louis, 45
father role, 204, 207
feminism, Black, 7–8, 87–88
femininity, Black: in athletics, 135–37;
and gender ideology, 187–88,
93–99; images of, 119–48; new
forms of, 51–52; and slavery, 58–59
Fighting Words(Collins), 3
film, popular, 18, 124–25, 145–46,
168–73, 181–82, 185, 212, 242–43,
261–72
“finance/romance” equation, 254–55
Fist, Stick, Knife, Gun(Canada), 240
Fox, Viveca, 145–46
Foxy Brown, 124
Foucault, Michel, 223, 293
“freak” term, 42, 119–23, 225
freedom, 295, 300, 303–7
Furtado, Nelly, 119, 130
gang culture, 81–82, 211, 241
gangsta role, 78–79, 158–59, 175
Garrison, Zina, 135
gender: as ideology, Black, 6–8, 20;
intersectionality with other
oppressions, 10–12; and “new”
racism, 5–8, 177–80; and politics,
43–51; rebellion in, 250–80;
redefining, 181–212; silence on,
35–45; and slavery, 58; White
norms of, 44;
“Get Your Freak On” (Elliott),
119–21
ghettoization, 69–75, 84, 90
Gibson, Althea, 135
Gibson, Tyrese, 212
Gilroy, Paul, 293–94
global capitalism, 19, 33–34, 205
Glover, Danny, 168, 170–71
Goldberg, Whoopee, 181, 271–72
Golden Marita, 83
Grier, Pam, 124–25, 145
Griffith, D. W ., 65–66, 166
Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner, 260–68
Gunn, Sakia, murder of, 114–16, 
138
hair type, 195–96
Harlem Renaissance, 109–10
Harris, Trudier, 219
Hawkins, Yusef, 222
heterosexism, 12, 19–20, 37–38,
88–116, 259
Higginbotham, Evelyn Brooks, 
71–72
Hill, Anita, 67–68, 109, 142–45,
215–16, 223
hip hop culture: Black nationalism in,
46–47, 75; misogyny in, 82–83,
253–54; as protest, 4, 92; and pub-
369


--- PAGE 381 ---
INDEX
lic spaces, 102–3; and sexuality,
31–32, 42–43, 150–51; and sport,
155–60; violence and, 91; women
in, 126–30, 133–34
HIV/AIDS, 7, 10, 21, 38–39, 109,
112, 238, 279–301, 306
“ho” term, 258
Holiday Heart(Townsend), 174–75
“honest body” concept, 282–89
Hopkins, Pauline, 109–10
Horton, Willie, 132, 166
House Party(Huddlin), 172–73
Huddlin, Reginald and Warrington,
172–73
Hughes, Langston, 73, 110
Human Rights Watch, 234–35
Hustlermagazine, 161
hyper-heterosexuality, 106
hypersegregation, 76–77, 84, 90
Ice Cube, 91, 160
Ice T , 91
infrapolitics, 49
intersectionality of oppressions,
10–12, 48–50, 88
Iverson, Alan, 155–56, 158
James, Rick, 119–21
Jerry Springer Show, 40
jezebel role, 28, 56, 66, 72, 127–28
joblessness, 80–84, 202–4
Johnson, Jack, 27
Johnson, Magic, 155
Jordan, June, 282–83
Jordan, Michael, 156–58, 167–69
Julien, Isaac, 110
Jungle Fever(Lee), 262, 265, 266
Killing the Black Body(Roberts),
104–5
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 114, 299
King, Rodney, 116, 224, 233
Kinsey, Alfred, 37
Knight, Bobby, 157
Knowles, Beyoncé, 25–28, 42–43,
50–51
Ku Klux Klan (K.K.K.), 57, 65–66
land ownership, 62–63, 67–69
language issues, 16–17, 120–23,
160–61
Law and Order, 141–42
Lawrence and Garner v. Texas, 76
Lee, Rosa, 220–21
Lee, Spike, 36, 46, 129, 262, 265, 
266
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgen-
dered people (LGBT): in athletics,
136–37; in Black community, 48,
173–74, 192, 197–98; and closet,
94–98; committed relationships of,
249–51, 268–75; and families, 205;
and heterosexism, 38–39, 88–89;
images of, 146, 173–75, 268–76;
and sexual politics, 88; and urban-
ization, 73–74; and White normal-
ity, 106–14
Leslie, Lisa, 136
Lethal Weapon, 168, 171
Lil’ Kim, 126–27
Looking for Langston(Julien), 110
Lopez, Jennifer, 25, 27–30, 42–43,
50–51
Lorde, Audre, 51–52, 286–87
love: and dominance, 293; and
empowerment, 295–301; and rela-
tionships, 247–60; and violence,
230–31, 288
“love and trouble” tradition, 252–60
Love’s Revolution(Root), 264–65
370


--- PAGE 382 ---
INDEX
Loving v. Virginia, 76, 261–64
lynching: as sexual violence, 63–64,
216–20, 222–24; as social control,
20–21
Malcolm X, 46
mammy role, 28, 57, 59, 72, 140–47
Mandela, Nelson, 91–92, 279–80
Mapplethorpe, Robert, 207
March on Washington 1963, 1, 114
marriage: gay, 95, 96, 249–51; interra-
cial, 66, 76, 260–68; race and gen-
der in, 247–60
masculinity, Black: and gender ideol-
ogy, 185–212; and mass media,
122, 149–80; new forms of, 51–52;
and respectability, 73–74; and sex-
ual violence, 233–42; and slavery,
58; willingness to analyze, 8
mass media: Black femininity in,
119–48; ideas on Black sexuality
in, 31, 36–43, 65–66; and popular
culture, 17–18; relationships in,
260–73; violence in, 242–43
Maury Povich Show, 39–41
Merkerson, S. Epatha, 141–42
Metropolitan Interdenominational
Church, 111
middle class, Black, 77–78, 138–48,
166–77, 244, 254
migration form South, 67–75
Million Man March, 294
“minority groups,” 12–14
Mixing Nia, 267
Monster’s Ball, 181–82
Montel WilliamsShow, 39–41
Morgan, Joan, 256, 287
Morrison, Toni, 60
Morse, Eric, 240–41
Murphy, Eddie, 145, 168
Nation of Islam (NOI), 45, 46
National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP), 45, 61, 70, 222
Naylor, Gloria, 197
Nelson, Jill, 74, 125
“new” racism: characteristics of,
54–55; difficulty of opposing,
45–51; and gender, 5–8, 177–80;
past racial formations in, 19,
32–35, 53–85
nigger/niggaterm, 121, 123, 160–61,
258
No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons
(Human Rights Watch), 234–35
normal/deviant binary, 96–98
“On the Issue of Roles” (Bambara),
182
one-drop rule, 66, 194–95
Oprah Winfrey Show, 142–43
Parks, Rosa, 61
“passing,” 113
past racial formations, remnants of,
19, 32–25, 53–85
Patterson, Orlando, 60
Pegues, Conrad R., 259
“player” role, 161-62
Plessy v. Ferguson, 61–62
Poetic Justice(Singleton) 173
Poitier, Sidney, 181, 260–61
politics: African American, 43–51;
queer, 94–95; of respectability,
71–75, 143–48
“Pop That Coochie” (2LiveCrew),
129
popular culture, Black, 17–18
post–civil rights era, 75–85
Povich, Maury, 39–41, 51
371


--- PAGE 383 ---
INDEX
Powell, Kevin, 231
prison: and closet, 19, 87–116; as
industry, 80–82, 158–59, 211,
233–42; and relationships, 275–78;
and slavery, 92–93; women in, 
232
Prisoner’s Wife, The(Bandele),
275–78, 298
promiscuity, racialization of, 98–105,
138–39, 208–10, 255
Pryor, Richard, 160–61
public vs. private humiliation, 215–24
“punk” role, 125, 173, 175–76,
235–38
Queen Latifah, 130, 198, 271–72
“queen” role, 236–38
race: black/white paradigm of, 12–15,
96–98; vs. gender, 216–19, 222,
242; and sexuality, 29–31, 282–307;
as term, 16–17
racism: and closet, 93–98; as gender-
specific, 7; and hetrosexism,
19–20, 88–98, 112–16, 259; histori-
cal, 32–35, 53–85; intersectionality
with other oppressions, 10–12
rape: and Black men, 64–66, 102–3,
165–66; institutionalized, 20–21,
41, 58, 216–32, 243–45, 279; of
men, 234–42
Rashad, Phylicia, 139–40
Reagan, Ronald, 37, 78
rebellion: in gender, 250–80, 289–95;
and pleasure, 287–88, 295–301; in
sexual politics, 306–7
Reconstruction, 61–69
Reed, Ishmael, 284, 285
Reid-Pharr, Robert, 275, 294
relationships, committed, 247–60
Republican Party, 78–79, 90
respectability, politics of, 71–75,
139–40, 143–48, 178
Rhames, Ving, 174–75
Riggs, Marlon, 268–71
Roberts, Dorothy, 104–5
Root, Maria, 264
Rustin, Bayard, 114
Salt ’n Pepa, 127
Sanders, Edwin C., 112
Saturday Night Live, 125
School Daze(Lee), 129
segregation: and closet, 93–98; and
courtship, 253–54; Jim Crow, 32,
61–69, 93, 109; in post–civil rights
era, 75–85; and sexual violence,
243–44
Set It Off, 271–72
sexual politics, Black: absence of,
35–45; and freedom, 303–7; and
gender, 6–8; and heterosexism,
88–116; and HIV , 279–301; and
human rights, 9–10; and other
groups, 15–16; and popular cul-
ture, 17–18
sexuality: autonomy in, 72–75,
282–307; dominance in, 206–10;
“freaky,” 120–23; meanings of,
11–12; and politics, 43–51; in pop-
ular culture, 20; and race, 7–8,
29–31, 282–307; repression of,
35–43; and violence, 63–66,
215–45, 287
sexualized spectacles, bodies as,
25–32, 36–43, 207
Shakur, Tupac, 75, 79, 159–60
Sheba, Baby, 124
Shepard, Matthew, 115–16
She’s Gotta Have It (Lee), 36
372


--- PAGE 384 ---
INDEX
sidekick role, 168–71
Singleton, John, 173, 212
Sims, Marion, 101–2
Sir Mix A Lot, 129
“sissy” role, 171–72
Sister Souljah, 126
slavery: and Diaspora, 14, 33; and
marriage, 252–53; and new racism,
55–61; persistence of, 84, 92–93;
and rape, 219–21; and sexuality,
12, 30–31, 100–101; women under,
104
social justice, 9–10, 15, 19–20
Sohn, Sonja, 146
soul concept, 284, 295
Sprewell, Latrell, 152, 155, 177
Springer, Jerry, 40, 51
sterilization, forced, 104–5
strength vs. dominance, 199–212
Strong Black Woman (SBW) role,
208–10
“Superfreak” (James), 119–21
2LiveCrew, 129
Tarzan, 185, 196
Tate, Greg, 284
televison images, 139–42, 146–48,
166–69, 175, 251–52
Thigpen, Lynn, 141, 142
Thomas, Clarence, 46, 143–45,
215–16, 223, 245
Tone Loc, 103
Tongues Untied(Riggs), 268–71
Townsend, Robert, 174–75
Tuskeegee experiment, 120
Tyson, Mike, 154, 227
Uncle Tom role, 57, 167–68
“U.N.I.T .Y .,” (Queen Latifah), 130
Urban League, 70
urban uprisings, 93
urbanization, 69–77, 90
Vibe magazine, 153
violence: anti-gay, 114–16, 173; and
Black men, 4, 165–66; and domi-
nance, 210–12; forms of, 49–50; in
popular culture, 20; sexualized,
63–66, 215–45; and slavery, 57; as
social control, 20–21, 165–66,
218–45, 281
Voting Rights Act of 1965, 76
Waiting to Exhale, 266
Walker, Alice, 272
Washington, Denzel, 181–82, 212
Watermelon Woman(Dunye), 269–70
“weak man, strong woman” ideology,
20, 59–60, 183–84, 200–206
“welfare mother/queen” image, 28,
131–32
welfare program retrenchment, 79
Wells-Barnett, Ida B., 221–23
White men: and Black men’s bodies,
161, 207; and Black women, 262;
as coaches, 152, 157, 177; as hege-
monic, 185–88, 200–201, 304
White women: and Black men, 41,
261–68; as norm, 193–99; and
purity, 101–2
Whites: backlash by, 78–79; homosex-
uals as, 105–14, 173; as norm, 44,
96–97, 120, 178–79, 193–99;
spaces of, Black sexuality entering,
31–32, 87, 147; and slavery, 55–61
Wideman, John, 89–90
“Wild Thing” (Tone Loc), 103
Williams, Montel, 39–41, 50–51
Williams, Shirley Anne, 60
Williams, Venus and Serena, 135
373


--- PAGE 385 ---
INDEX
Winfrey, Oprah, 142–43
Wire, The, 146, 175
Women’s Club Movement, 71
Women’s National Basketball
Association (WNBA), 136
Woods, Tiger, 167–68
working class, Black, 78–84, 123–38
Wyatt, Gail, 229
Yoruba culture, 283–85
youth culture, Black: and class, 78–84;
and community erosion, 121–22;
and new racism, 54; and prison,
82, 211, 239–42; and rebellion,
307; and relationships, 254–55;
and violence, 304
Zebrahead, 267–68
374

