=== EXTRACTED TEXT FROM: Black-Religion-and-Aesthetics.pdf ===
Extraction Method: PyPDFLoader
Total Pages: 233
Timestamp: 2026-01-04T16:52:39.623519
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---



--- PAGE 2 ---
Black Religion and Aesthetics


--- PAGE 3 ---
Contributors
ROBERT B ECKFORD  is Reader in Black Theology and Culture at 
Oxford Brookes University (UK) and a Documentary Presenter for 
BBC and Channel 4 (United Kingdom).
ELIAS K. B ONGMBA is Professor of Religious Studies at Rice 
University, Houston, Texas.
MIGUEL A. DE LA TORRE is Associate Professor of Social Ethics and 
Director of the Justice and Peace Institute at Iliff School of Theology, 
Denver, Colorado.
CAROL B. D UNCAN is Associate Professor and Chair of the 
Department of Religion and Culture at Wilfrid Laurier University, 
Waterloo, Canada.
LINDSAY L. H ALE is a Lecturer in Anthropology at the University 
of Texas at Austin.
L
IZABETH PARAVISINI -GEBERT is Professor of Hispanic Studies on 
the Randolph Distinguished Professor Chair and Director of Africana 
Studies at Vassar College.
ANTHONY B. PINN is Agnes Cullen Arnold Professor of Humanities 
and Professor of Religious Studies at Rice University, Houston, 
Texas.
ANTHONY G. R EDDIE is Research Fellow and Consultant in Black 
Theological Studies for the Queen’s Foundation for Ecumenical 
Theological Education in Birmingham (United Kingdom).
LINDA E. T HOMAS is Professor of Theology and Anthropology at 
Lutheran School of Theology, Chicago, Illinois.
N
ANCY L YNNE W ESTFIELD  is Associate Professor of Religious 
Education with a joint appointment at the Theological Seminary and 
Graduate School of Drew University, Madison, New Jersey.


--- PAGE 4 ---
Black Religion and 
Aesthetics
Religious Thought and 
Life in Africa and the African 
Diaspora
Edited by
Anthony B. Pinn


--- PAGE 5 ---
BLACK RELIGION AND AESTHETICS
Copyright © Anthony B. Pinn, 2009.
All rights reserved. 
First published in 2009 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN®
in the United States—a division of St. Martin’s Press LLC,
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Where this book is distributed in the UK, Europe and the rest of the world, 
this is by Palgrave Macmillan, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited, 
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, 
Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies 
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States, 
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
ISBN: 978–0–230–60550–3
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
     Black religion and aesthetics : religious thought and life in Africa and 
the African diaspora / edited by Anthony B. Pinn.
      p .  c m .
    Includes bibliographical references and index.
    ISBN 0–230–60550–8
      1. Africa—Religion. 2. African diaspora. 3.  Aesthetics, African.  I. Pinn, 
Anthony B. 
BL2400.B53 2009
200.89/H1103296—dc22 2008054677
A catalogue record of the book is available from the British Library.
Design by Newgen Imaging Systems (P) Ltd., Chennai, India.
First edition: August 2009
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in the United States of America.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Dedicated
to
The Ancestors


--- PAGE 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 8 ---
Contents
List of Figures ix
Acknowledgments xi
Introduction: The Black Labyrinth, Aesthetics, and 
Black Religion 1
Anthony B. Pinn
Part 1 North and South America
1.  A Beautiful Be-ing: Religious Humanism and 
the Aesthetics of a New Salvation 19
Anthony B. Pinn
2.  The Foolish Woman Grows Angry Because They 
Teach Her: Influences of Sexism in Black Church Worship 37
Nancy Lynne Westfield
3.  Spiritual Matters: The Aesthetics of Ritual Substances in 
Umbanda 53
Lindsay L. Hale
4.  From Hattie to Halle: Black Female Bodies and 
Spectatorship as Ritual in Hollywood Cinema 71
Carol B. Duncan
Part 2 The Caribbean
5.  Sacred Forms: Ritual, Representation, and 
the Body in Haitian Painting 91
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert
6.  Dancing with Ochún: Imagining How 
a Black Goddess Became White 113
Miguel A. De La Torre


--- PAGE 9 ---
Contentsviii
Part 3 Europe
  7.  Black Suit Matters: Faith, Politics, and 
Representation in the Religious Documentary 135
Robert Beckford
 8.  A Dialectical Spirituality of Improvisation: 
The Ambiguity of Black Engagements with Sacred Texts 153
Anthony G. Reddie
Part 4 Africa
 9.  The Aesthetic Dimensions of Religion in South Africa: 
Africa Initiated Churches Considered 175
Linda E. Thomas
10.  Aesthetics in African Art: Implications for African 
Theology 187
Elias K. Bongmba
Selected Bibliography 205
Index 213


--- PAGE 10 ---
Figures
3.1  Photo of Salvador, Bahia. Photograph taken by 
Anthony Pinn. 56
5.1  Auguste, Toussaint. Papa Zaca en Possession (1953). 
Oil on masonite. 11¾ × 14¾ inches. 94
5.2  Domond, Wilmino. Dance Scene (c.1949). 
Oil on cardboard. 24¼ × 24¾ inches. 98
5.3  Nehemy, Jean. Mangé Loa (1949). 
Oil on cardboard. 20 × 16 inches. 102
5.4  Léandre, Jean. Healing Ceremony with Music (c.1975). 
Oil on masonite. 14¼ × 237/8 inches. 105
6.1  Presentation of Ochun in Cuba. Photograph taken by 
Anthony Pinn. 115


--- PAGE 11 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 12 ---
Acknowledgments
This project developed over the course of many years, and I am 
thankful to a host of individuals who played a role in it taking book 
form. In addition to family and friends (including Caroline Levander, 
Juan and Stacey Floyd-Thomas, Katie Cannon, Peter Paris, James 
Cone, Ramon Rentas, Eli and Benjamin Valentin) I would like to 
thank the editors at Palgrave Macmillan for patience and good humor. 
In addition, several of my students helped with the formatting of var-
ious essays in this volume: Thank you to Torin Alexander and Terri 
Laws. A special thank you to all those who helped in a variety of ways, 
but are not named here.
Finally , permissi o n t o r ep rin t imag es in th e v o l um e is gra t efully 
acknowledged from: Pebo Voss, Jonathan Demme, and Edwidge 
Danticat for permission to reprint the following:
Auguste, Toussaint. Papa Zaca en Possession  (1953). Oil on 
masonite. 11¾ × 14¾ inches.
Domond, Wilmino. Dance Scene  (c.1949). Oil on cardboard. 
24¼ × 24¾ inches.
Léandre, Jean. Healing Ceremony with Music  (c.1975). Oil on 
masonite. 14¼ × 23
7/8 inches.
Nehemy, Jean. Mangé Loa (1949). Oil on cardboard. 20 × 16 
inches.


--- PAGE 13 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 14 ---
Introduction
The Black Labyrinth, 
Aesthetics, and Black Religion
Anthony B. Pinn
All the world knows beauty
but if that becomes beautiful
this becomes ugly.
Lao Tzu
1
If there is anything universal about human beings, it is that
given a largely identical biology, they will represent the world
differently from stage to stage of the histories in which they
participate.
Arthur C. Danto
2
This volume is an effort to examine religion and religious thought in 
a way that recognizes cultural movement—an arrangement that con-
nects North and South America, the Caribbean, Europe, and Africa. 
And it does so by moving beyond strict attention to doctrinal con-
siderations as the proper cartography of shared religiosity, and with-
out the assumption that religion within this expansive cultural arena 
means the proliferation of a particular religious tradition.
3 In a general 
sense, the essays are shaped by a sense of the aesthetic element(s) of 
religion as connected to artistic expression (e.g., visual arts, clothing, 
sermonic style, dance, music, literature, etc.). This collection should 
not be viewed as an effort to mine the “African-ness” of the religions/
religious thought of African peoples within the geography of the 
“Americas” and its various contact points. Rather, the volume pres-
ents numerous ways in which aesthetics becomes a means by which 
to chart the nature of religion in Africa and the African diaspora (and 
its geographies—the spokes on the “Diasporic” wheel).
4 Framing this


--- PAGE 15 ---
Anthony B. Pinn2
approach is an assumption that aesthetics speaks to how the human 
is made and constituted, all the while involving something of a polit-
ical reality in that aesthetics speak to and from the concerns of social 
groups.
5 Furthermore, and of fundamental importance, the essays in 
this volume suggest the construction, presentation, and placement of 
Black bodies as a matter of aesthetics also sheds light on the nature 
of religion and religious experience within African and the African 
diaspora.
6 This  arran g e m e n t,  in  s h o rt,  is  th e  f ocus  o f  this  v o l um e .  
However, in what remains of this introduction attention is given to 
defining and framing the central terms and frameworks upon which 
the volume’s purpose rest—beginning with the troubled and trou-
bling notion of the “African diaspora.”
Context: Africa and the African Diaspora
How does one intellectually frame and “capture” the existential and 
ontological complexities of the movement into and out of Africa that 
marked the Modern Period? How does one describe the thick geo-
graphic and cultural arrangements and exchanges that supported the 
system of African slavery as a significant Modern reality?
7 From the 
sixteenth century on such questions served to shape the conceptual 
and cartographical presence we have come to refer to as the “African 
diaspora.”
8
While serving a useful purpose within contemporary scholar-
ship, this concept has been far from problem free; rather, it has been 
debated and interrogated in terms of the geographical arrangements 
envisioned, the cultural cartography developed, and the time frame 
of concern it suggests. For example, some scholars have pointed out 
the manner in which it fails to adequately account for Africa—the cul-
tural impact of Africa as concept and location—in that the diaspora 
does not begin in the Atlantic or Indian Ocean but on land with the 
movement of Africans across the continent.
9 Mindful of this debate, 
the African diaspora concept is used in this volume to reference a 
complex situation of contact and exchange encompassing Africa, the 
Americas, the Caribbean and Europe (although an argument could 
be made to include, for example, Asia in this geo-cultural cartogra-
phy). As such, this notion of the African diaspora is not synonymous 
with Paul Gilroy’s notion of the “Black Atlantic” .
10 Even if the ter-
minology of “Black Atlantic” is used as a similar reference point it 
must be done recognizing its limitations in that the African diaspora 
entails shifting boundaries, discourses of culture, and other mecha-
nisms of differentiation extending beyond a North American center


--- PAGE 16 ---
Introduction 3
to include an “active” Africa and South America. 11 In a word, “in 
strictly geographical terms, the Atlantic Ocean washes the shores 
of Africa, North and South America, and Europe.” 12 I suggest one 
might also think of the African diaspora as the B LACK LABYRINTH . 
Such a conceptualization avoids some of the geographic challenges 
and shortcomings related to nation/state formations as anchors for 
the diaspora. Instead, Black labyrinth allows for the maintenance of 
tension between “place” and “not-place” through a thick arrange-
ment over a vast geography, with many socio-cultural twist and turns, 
numerous points of contact and convergence.
13
While other formulations are possible, this volume is concerned 
with the Africa diaspora—the Black labyrinth—as it relates to the 
process of enslavement and colonization.
14 The slave trade and col-
onization are used to gauge this notion of the African diaspora in 
that the ripples and movements of the African diaspora reach beyond 
the end of “New World” slavery and continue to impact and shape 
discourses of meaning and practices of place into the twenty-first 
century.
15 This is not to argue for a single slave reality, nor to sug-
gest a single trajectory.16 Denial of such a flat depiction is given here 
through the inclusion of numerous points of contact and exchange—
North America, South America, the Caribbean, Europe and Africa. 
Furthermore, the structure of this book is meant to suggest that the 
African diaspora or what I call the Black labyrinth is not unidirec-
tional, but rather overlapping, complex, multidirectional—assuming 
the significance of porous boundaries. Stemming from these qualifi-
cations there is a somewhat obvious caveat: The nature and meaning 
of the Black labyrinth extends beyond the confines of any particular 
location while also needing to be represented in relationship to par-
ticular locals.
17
The cultural-religious geography this book seeks to address is a 
moving target because the notion of the African diaspora refers to 
something that is in transition; or, as Donald Carter, states so well: 
diaspora is meant to capture a location and being, “of drifting end-
less on the betwixt and between of the world’s boundaries. Rather 
than seeking ‘assimilation’ as a goal, diaspora is a way of being ‘other’ 
among the established, of keeping live the drama of the voyage of 
‘otherness’ in worlds that seek sameness and homogeneity.”
18 It is 
“both process and condition” offering historically situated points of 
cultural continuity and cultural areas of notable difference.
19 And, 
again, there is something aesthetic about this formulation; and 
embedded in the aesthetics of the African diaspora is something reli-
gious. Finally, the aesthetic representation and expression of religion


--- PAGE 17 ---
Anthony B. Pinn4
in the African diaspora is connected intimately to the body and issues 
of embodiment.
Into the Black Labyrinth: 
Black Bodies Constructed and “Placed”
Argued in both implicit and explicit ways, the essays in the volume 
are framed by recognition of the body as aesthetically and religiously 
significant. That is to say, the contributors to Black Religion and 
Aesthetics recognize the body as a contested terrain, as tablets upon 
which the power and practices of a given society are inscribed, and 
also a biological reality—flesh through which and on which diasporic 
geography is mapped and developed. Hence, under girding this depic-
tion shared by the various authors is an understanding of the body as 
complex—as both metaphor and material.
Focus on the body “grounds” the African diaspora by not allow-
ing it to simply have a discursive function, existing in large part as a 
conceptual arrangement.
Philosophers, sociologists and anthropologists amongst other 
scholars have given sustained attention to the body as metaphor. With 
links running back to Hegel, Kant, among others, intellectuals such 
as Michel Foucault explored the manner in which the body is con-
structed in compliance with social systems. So conceived, the body 
can be understood outside attention to materiality in that it is a sym-
bol or, for Foucault, a “matter” of discourse.
20 When defining the 
body, the privileging of epistemology and power vis-à-vis discourse 
renders the body a “story” of sorts, cartography of information meant 
to justify and safeguard certain social understandings and arrange-
ments. In opposition to this discursive construction and framing of 
the body, others have highlighted the materiality of the body by giv-
ing priority to biology. Such naturalistic rendering of the body has 
ten ded t o un derstan d i t as pre-soci ety , an un chan gin g “mass ” tha t 
must be circumscribed and civilized.
21 While helpful individually on 
some level, more is gained when the overlapping nature of the two 
theories of the body is recognized and harnessed.
Mary Douglas, for example argues the body as symbol and the 
physical body act on each other in that “there is a continual exchange 
of meanings between the two kinds of bodily experience so that 
each reinforces the categories of the other.” The regulations of the 
functions of the body, the movement or placement of the body, are 
“expression of social control” in that restrictions are placed on the 
physical body by the social system. Although there is tension between


--- PAGE 18 ---
Introduction 5
the body as self and the social body, according to Douglas, the latter 
is dominant.22 In addition to Douglas’ work, sociologists of the body 
like Bryan Turner and Chris Shillings seek to hold together for analy-
sis the two “forms” of the body, arguing that the body is affected by 
society but also affects society.
23 That is to say , there is connection 
between the two modalities of the body. Both collect and convey 
meaning. Both communicate. In other words, “meaning . . . resides 
in the body, and the body resides in the world.”
24 The body shifts 
and changes, takes various forms, occupies various spaces in time but 
always articulates meaning through its form, content, and produc-
tion. As metaphor and material, the body is displayed meaning but 
also displays meaning. Information concerning the world and action 
in light of this information comes through and is dependent upon the 
social body and the material body.
25
Of particular concern here is the manner in which this under-
standing of the body plays out with respect to particular bodies, 
Black bodies. The proclamation directed at Frantz Fanon—“Look, a 
Negro!”—echoed across the geography of contact and conquest and 
suggested the marking of all bodies defined as Black.
26 Such con-
struction of Black bodies entails the assumption of difference and, 
more to the point, the inscription of difference as a fundamental 
negation. While noted as race, this distinction is not limited to racial 
difference in that it is connected to gender, class, and so on. Only in 
this way can one recognize, for instance, the inscription on or mark-
ing of Black women in the African diaspora or the ways in which 
identity within the African diaspora involves a highlighting of class in 
some areas and race in others.
27 Mindful of this, DuBois’ problem-
atic might be rephrased: What does one do /think when one’s body 
both contains and produces a social contaminant? What does one do/
think when one’s body as flesh prompts the question of how does this 
fit—what in fact, is it—and whose body as metaphor suggest a nega-
tive response, a barrier, a warning?
The importance of the body—metaphor and material—is not lim-
ited to the generic political and social arrangements hinted at above. 
The body’s significance also rests in what it says about the formation 
and practice, the expression and arrangement, of religion within the 
African diaspora.
The way in which Black bodies are constructed, constituted, and 
arranged in time and space is interrogated in this volume through the 
rubric of religion and religious expression. This analysis is not sim-
ply concerned with body construction and display as a negative, with 
regard to how such construction and placement serve the status quo


--- PAGE 19 ---
Anthony B. Pinn6
by safeguarding the integrity of the New World experiment. Attention 
is also given to the manner in which religion and religious expression 
challenge the construction of Black bodies to serve the social system 
and encourage re-evaluation of the proper “space” for and “use” of 
material Black bodies. Furthermore, in stead of defining religion and 
religious expression solely as groupings and celebration (enactments) 
of certain doctrines and creeds, the content of this book as a whole 
suggests openness to definitions that extend beyond these markers 
and consider religion as related to what I have elsewhere labeled the 
quest for complex subjectivity—the push to make meaning in com-
plex and multilayered ways. Religious expression, then, is the enact-
ment of this “push.”
The Body, Aesthetics, and Religion: 
An African Diasporic Arrangement
Within the context of the religious, the body functions as a means of 
communication,
28 and the purpose of this communication involves 
challenges to (and at times reinforcement of) the dominant social 
structures. Recognition of religion, and the role of the body in reli-
gion, beyond doctrine/creeds demands an alternate vehicle of expres-
sion. Within this volume, that alternate mode is aesthetic in nature.
Artistic expression and aesthetics can and have been used to rein-
force subjugation of certain social and material bodies.
29 They have 
been employed to naturalize structures of domination and discrimi-
nation. For instance, aesthetics played a role in the generation of the 
Black labyrinth by presenting as refined and valuable (in theological 
terms representative of the beauty and wholeness of the divine) the 
markers of expansion and colonization. Through architecture, cloth-
ing, the visual arts, literature, music, and so on, the new cartography 
of subjugated life was made “beautiful” and balanced.
30
Aesthetics became a source of dominance without betraying any-
thing of its illusionary disinterestedness. Rather, it formed and justi-
fied a particular experience of the world. Aesthetics dictates the proper 
“form” of life for embodied bodies, and for those of African descent 
this had major consequences from the period of exploration to the 
present. “Racists accounts, widely accepted in the time of European 
colonization and beyond,” writes Sarah Nuttall, “present the African 
continent as the metaphor par excellence for physical ugliness and 
moral decay. According to these accounts, ugliness and decay were 
particularly visible in the black body . . .” Even when not presented as 
ugly, in the case of the mulatto, Black bodies remained reified and


--- PAGE 20 ---
Introduction 7
only appreciated because they were exotic, a fascinating foreignness, 
t h a t  c o u l d  b e  c o n s u m e d  b e c a u s e  o f  E u r o p e a n  p o w e r .31 Violence, 
enslavement, various forms of discrimination, pain and torture were 
rendered aesthetically pleasing through art. Or, as Russ Castronovo 
remarks, even these things could be rendered “sublime”.
32 Yet, the 
discursive creation and shaping of Black bodies, combined with the 
confinement of their corporality, was challenged by means of a new 
vision of their meaning and materiality established through an aes-
thetic turn in religion—the work and tools of aesthetic became deeply 
religious.
33
Although the “Black” in Black bodies has not meant the same 
thing to all within all locations, there is still an overarching condi-
tion and process that made Black bodies—however understood by 
those who possess them and are possessed by them—“other.” In both 
explicit and implicit ways, the essays that comprise this volume sug-
gest religious thought and religious experience within the African 
diaspora involve an aesthetic shift whereby dominant perceptions of 
Black bodies—the proper placement in time and space—are chal-
lenged and corrected by means of how the body is represented and 
what the body produces. If the construction and representation of 
Black bodies by Europe involved an “exorcizing” of blackness,
34 the 
aesthetic representations of religiosity involve a re-presenting of Black 
bodies counter to the discourse, logic, and sociocultural representa-
tions of White superiority. The expression and experience of the reli-
gions of the Africa diaspora—namely the religiosity forged by those 
of African descent in these various contexts—serves to counter the 
aesthetics used to restrain and warp their individual bodies and col-
lective body.
35 The once despised Black body is rendered, at least in 
momentary spurts, valuable through an aesthetic shift.
By aesthetics I do not simply mean philosophical discussion of 
abstract qualities, although the pieces in this volume are concerned 
with the quality and meaning attached to Black bodies and what they 
produce as a matter of aesthetic grammar—notions of wholeness, 
b e a u ty ,  b al an c e ,  m e ani n g ,  i n t e g ri ty ,  an d  s o  o n .  H o w e v e r ,  i n  a d di -
tion to this, the concern here is with an understanding of aesthet-
ics as having relationship to the historical by serving as a means by 
which lived experience is formed and shape. In these pages, then, 
aesthetics becomes a way of articulating and placing Black bodies 
over against the ontology and epistemology guiding social systems. 
This involves both values and experience—values experienced. There 
is nothing disinterested about this arrangement; rather, it is meant to 
challenge and change perception and practice with regard to Black


--- PAGE 21 ---
Anthony B. Pinn8
bodies and White bodies. The “stigmatized” body36 seeks to force its 
re- presentation and thereby to also challenge the authority and very 
meaning of the previously non-stigmatized body.
Aesthetics must have a location, must be lodged somewhere and in 
something. In this volume, the location encompasses a grammar of 
significance and involves artistic production—music, film, literature, 
dress, dance, sermonic style, and the visual arts. The task Paul Gilroy 
assigns to “artistic expression” might also be given to the expres-
sion of religiosity through aesthetics: “artistic expression, expanded 
beyond recognition from the grudging gifts offered by the masters 
as a token substitute for freedom from bondage, therefore becomes 
the means towards both individual self-fashioning and communal 
liberation.”
37 Gilroy highlights writing, spoken language, and music 
(all three revolving around the word), but Simon Williams and Gillian 
Bendelow extend the range of artistic expression as communicative 
mechanism. “Alongside performance art and other praxical modes of 
embodied expression such as dance,” they write, “art provides a pow-
erful ‘visual narrative’ of the embodied biographies of artists them-
selves, expressing fundamental features of the human condition. In 
doing so, the boundaries between art and social theory, reproduction 
and resistance, are (temporarily) destabilized, if not (permanently) 
effaced.”
38
While in agreement with the assessment of art as communicative 
device offered by Gilroy, Williams, and Bendelow, this volume offers 
a more general assumption as its guiding theory: Religion’s challenges 
to problematic re-presentations of the Black body are often expressed aes-
thetically and by means of artistic production such as the visual arts, 
but also dance, dress, music, the spoken word (e.g., sermonic style), ritual 
activities as well as a broad attention to the placement (and use) of the 
material body in time and space.  Artistic production and aesthetics, 
in this case, are meant to incite, to advance particular agendas that 
involve embodied experience of the world. Not simply contemplation 
of art for art’s sake. Artistic production and aesthetics, according to 
the scholars in this volume, “ do work.” In making this statement, 
I am not suggesting, like DuBois, that art is simply propaganda.
39 
Mine is not a judgment concerning the proper use and place of art 
and aesthetics. Rather, I am suggesting that the aims of religiosity 
as well as its display are often presented on and through the body in 
aesthetically defined fields of meaning and representation. And these 
fields of meaning were meant to disrupt and challenge the grammar 
of construction and placement that defined existentially (material) 
and ontologically (metaphor) Black bodies.


--- PAGE 22 ---
Introduction 9
The religious, in a sense, makes aesthetics intentional in a way that 
can give robust and complex meaning to what is otherwise fixed. 
Through the religiously understood grammar of aesthetics the body 
is plastic, transformed and transforming whereas the mechanisms of 
dominance have sought to reify Black bodies in ways that please and 
serve White bodies and their construction as normative.
40 This is not 
aesthetics devoid of power and influence, but aesthetics projected as 
demanding power or, as some theologians might argue, “liberative” 
existence.
This book is concerned with the ways in which the placement of 
Black bodies in time and space qua cultural formulations serves a reli-
gious purpose in the African diaspora by re-creating and re- presenting 
Black bodies vis-à-vis alternate aesthetic arrangements.
41 Put another 
way, this book through a variety of perspectives and examples seeks 
to examine the manner in which the construction and confinement 
of Black bodies (as metaphor and material) through the mechanisms 
of slavery, colonization, and continued hardship are challenged. And 
in place of these fixed and despised bodies, religion uses alternate 
aesthetics to encourage the development of new Black bodies.
42 
Furthermore, underlying the volume as a whole is an assumption that 
the aesthetic dimensions of religion allow for a move beyond nation-
framed discussion of religion by recognizing (in soft ways in this vol-
ume) the manner in which the aesthetic quality of religious thought 
and life allow for a non-threatening grammar of religious dialogue 
that reified doctrinal assertions cannot.
43 That is to say, for instance, 
doctrinal formulations differ in the various traditions and modalities 
of religious thought noted both explicitly and implicitly in this vol-
ume, but the vibrancy of color, the movement of the body, the various 
artistic renderings of ultimate questions cut across such differences, 
while still allowing for exchange, appreciation, mutuality.
The Book: Structure and Content
Methodologically, this volume is multidisciplinary in nature—shaped 
by a range of ways of exploring religion: theology, anthropology of 
religion, cultural studies, art history, film studies, sociology of reli-
gion, and religious education. The book is not devoted to any par-
ticular tool of analysis, and in fact some of the chapters combine an 
autobiographical tone with scholarly analysis while others are more 
traditional in presentation. Furthermore, the chapters are arranged in 
terms of “areas” of the Black labyrinth—North and South America, 
the Caribbean, Europe, and Africa.


--- PAGE 23 ---
Anthony B. Pinn10
The first section explores the aesthetic dimensions of religion 
in North America and South America. It opens with an essay by 
Anthony Pinn in which he examines the possibility of an embodied 
Black theology in which the notion of beauty is used to re-think and 
reformulate the meaning of liberation and “salvation.” Nancy Lynne 
Westfield explores the sermonic style of African American women 
within church circles for what the “preached word” says about the 
beauty of Black women’s bodies within the context of Black Churches 
as patriarchal organizations. Moving south, Lindsay Hale offers a 
reading of Afrobrazilian religion through the aesthetic significance 
of ritual substances such as blood, water and honey. And, Carol 
Duncan’s chapter examines the nature of ritual within the context of 
film production and viewing from a Canadian perspective.
In the second section of the book, Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert 
examines the aesthetics of Haitian painting related to the practice 
of Vodou. Primary attention is given to an interrogation of the ico-
nography developed by painters seeking to depict the lwa—its use 
within rituals and its place in the economy of Haiti. Miguel De La 
Torre follows with attention to the racialization of Ochún as a matter 
of aesthetics within Cuban Santería. He does so by questioning the 
shifting of the orisha’s body from Black to White as she moves from 
Africa into the Caribbean and North America. The volume moves 
from the Caribbean to Europe with two chapters that explore the aes-
thetic dimension of religiosity within the United Kingdom. Robert 
Beckford examines the religious significance of clothing within 
Pentecostal circles and documentary filmmaking. And, Anthony 
Reddie examines the spirituality of musical production from the per-
spective of the Afro-Caribbean diaspora as found in Britain.
The final section of the book explores the topic within the context 
of Africa. Opening this section, Linda Thomas explores the manner in 
which African Initiated Churches (AIC) in South Africa forge a sense 
of beauty over against oppressive social structures. Thomas focuses 
on rituals of renewal used to give new meaning and importance to 
Black South African bodies. In the second chapter of this final sec-
tion, Elias Bongmba argues that within the context of African art, 
aesthetics must be understood as “triadic” in nature—“addressing a 
‘feeling’ resulting from the visual dimension of the artistic produc-
tion, ‘framed’ by power dynamics associated with the social context 
of the ‘art,’ and finally as a ‘spiritually’ oriented ‘experience.’ ”
As the content of the volume suggests, less concern is given to 
representation of all religious possibilities; such a discussion—in light 
of the numerous religious traditions practiced by people of African


--- PAGE 24 ---
Introduction 11
descent—is beyond the scope of one volume. More important than an 
encyclopedic approach to covering all “major” traditions with equal 
attention to all geographic locations is the more general presentation 
of the manner in which aesthetic considerations are part of the reli-
gious orientation of people of African descent. Several traditions are 
covered so as to give this statement both abstract theological/religious 
significance as well as content-related importance.
Ultimately, what holds this volume together is a shared interro-
gation of the aesthetic and artistic workings associated with black 
religion and re-presented through the body. This issue is tackled in a 
variety of ways, some more theoretical and others more experiential. 
But in all cases, the concern remains connections between religious 
thought, religious expression, and aesthetics as seen through the lens 
of Black bodies.
Notes
1. Lao Tzu, The Tao te Ching, 2, In God’s Breath: Sacred Scriptures of the World, 
editors, John Miller and Aaron Kenedi (New York: Marlowe, 2000), 98.
2. Arthur C. Danto, The Body/Body Problem: Selected Essays  (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1999), 11.
3. For an intriguing narrative on the spread of Buddhism through Soka 
Gakkai into North and South America and Europe see Richard Hughes 
Seager, Encountering the Dharma: Daisaku Ikeda, Soka Gakkai, and the 
Globaliation of Buddhist Humanism  (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 2006).
4. While not discussed philosophically in the introduction or in the var-
ious essays in any sustained way, this book binds together aesthetics 
and religion. Formation of the African diaspora, with its clash of cul-
tures, required both as a way of forging sociopolitical hierarchies and 
justifying the brutality necessary to accomplish this process. See James 
Alfred Martin, Jr., Beauty and Holiness: The Dialogue between Aesthetics 
and Religion  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990). Also see 
Sarah Nuttall, editor, Beautiful Ugly: African and Diaspora Aesthetics  
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2006) and Cornel West, Prophesy 
Deliverance: An Afro-American Revolutionary Christianity  (Louisville, 
KY: Westminster/John Knox, 1982). West interrogated the manner in 
which the “normative gaze” fixed Black bodies and rendered them of lim-
ited value and social significance. What is most important about West’s 
project for Black Religion and Aesthetics  is his linking of struggle against 
the fixing of Black bodies to progressive religiosity.
5. Danto, The Body/Body Problem , x.
6. Regarding the United States context, readers should give attention to 
Shane White and Graham White, Stylin’: African American Expressive


--- PAGE 25 ---
Anthony B. Pinn12
Culture: From Its Beginnings to the Zoot Suit  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1998). This text provides analysis of the ways in which 
expressive culture—clothing and so on—became a mechanism for 
identity formation over against sensory-based discrimination. Such an 
anthropological argument lends itself to the concerns of this volume 
with the manipulation of the body within the context of religiosity as a 
means by which to address life in African and the African diaspora post-
European contact. For expressive culture within the context of identity 
formation and the politics of the body, see Nuttall, Beautiful Ugly.
 7. Stephan Palmie offers an interesting interrogation of the conceptualiza-
tion of Africa in his introduction to Africas of the Americas: Beyond the 
Search for Origins in the Study of Afro-Atlantic Religions  (Boston: Brill, 
2008).
 8. Tiffany Ruby Patterson and Robin D. G. Kelley, “Unfinished Migrations: 
Reflections on the African Diaspora and the Making of the Modern 
World,” African Studies Review  Vol. 43, No. 1 (Special Issue on the 
Diaspora, April 2000): 13.
 9. Michael Gomez argues this point, suggesting in the process that the idea 
of an “Atlantic World,” to be robust must include “an Africa that is fully 
participatory throughout each phase of its development, from the dawn 
of the transatlantic slave trade to the present.” Gomez, “Introduction,” 
Michael Gomez, editor, Diasporic Africa: A Reader (New York: New 
York University Press, 2006), 4; Patterson and Kelley, “Unfinished 
Migrations,” 14.
10. Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness  
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993).
11. Livio Sansone, “Introduction,” in Africa, Brazil and the Construction of 
Trans Atlantic Black Identities, editors, Livio Sansone, Elisee Soumonni, 
and Boubacar Barry (Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 2008), 1; Kristin 
Mann, “Shifting Paradigms in the Study of the African Diaspora and of 
Atlantic History and Culture,” in Rethinking the African Diaspora: The 
Making of a Black Atlantic World in the Bight of Benin and Brazil , edi-
tors, Kristin Mann and Edna G. Bay (Portland, OR: Frank Cass, 2001).
12. Antoinette Tidjani Alou, “Marine Origins and Anti-Marine Tropism 
in the French Caribbean,” in Recharting the Black Atlantic: Modern 
Cultures, Local Communities, Global Connections , editors, Annalisa 
Oboe and Anna Scacchi (New York: Routledge, 2008), 351.
13. Annalisa Oboe and Anna Scacchi, in “Introduction: Black Bodies, 
Practices and Discourses around the Atlantic,” make a similar point 
when arguing for the concept of the “circumatlantic perspective.” See 
Annalisa Oboe and Anna Scacchi, editors, Recharting the Black Atlantic: 
Modern Cultures, Local Communities, Global Connections  (New York: 
Routledge, 2008).
14. I have in mind Jayne O. Ifekwenigwe’s argument that Columbus’ con-
tact with the Americas should be used to distinguish not the Diaspora, 
but a pre-Columbian and a post-Columbian African Diaspora. See


--- PAGE 26 ---
Introduction 13
Ifekwenigwe, “Scattered Belongings: Reconfiguring the ‘African’ in 
the English-African Diaspora,” in Kahlid Koser, editor,  New African 
Diasporas (New York: Routledge, 2003).
15. While it is important to note the movement of Africans outside the frame-
work of slavery as Ivan Van Sertima and others note, I provide the fol-
lowing comment for consideration: “It was, however, the slave trade that 
made the African presence essentially global.” Joseph E. Harris, “The 
Dynamics of the Global African Diaspora,” in The African Diaspora , 
editors, Alusine Jalloh and Stephen E. Maizlish (College Station: Texas 
A & M University Press, 1996), 9. If one thinks of the African body and 
its labor as commodity, this statement has relevance.
16. See Khalid Koser, “New African Diasporas: An Introduction,” in New 
African Diasporas , editor, Kahlid Koser (New York: Routledge, 2003).
17. Jeffrey C. Stewart, “I Sing the Black Body Electric: Transnationalism 
and the Black Body in Walt Whitman, Alain Locke, and Paul Robeson,” 
in Recharting the Black Atlantic: Modern Cultures, Local Communities, 
Global Connections , editors, Annalisa Oboe and Anna Scacchi (New 
York: Routledge, 2008), 259.
18. Donald Carter, “Preface,” in New African Diasporas , editor, Khalid 
Koser (New York: Routledge, 2003), x.
19. Patterson and Kelley, “Unfinished Migrations,” 11.
20. See Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison (New 
York: Penguin, 1979); Foucault, The History of Sexuality  (New York: 
Penguin, 1981).
21. See Simon J. Williams and Gillian Bendelow, The Lived Body: Sociological 
Themes, Embodied Issues  (New York: Routledge, 1998).
22. Mary Douglas, Natural Symbols: Explorations in Cosmology (New York: 
Routledge Press, 1996), 69, 74, 76–77, 87.
23. Bryan Turner, The Body and Society  (Oxford: Blackwell, 1984); Chris 
Shilling, The Body and Social Theory, 2nd edition (London: Sage, 
1993/2003).
24. Vicente Berdayes, Luigi Esposito, and John W. Murphy, “Introduction,” 
in The Body in Human Inquiry: Interdisciplinary Explorations of 
Embodiment, editors, Vicente Berdayes, Luigi Esposito, and John W. 
Murphy (Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 2004), 13–14; Williams and 
Bendelow. The Lived Body , 54; Mariam Fraser and Monica Greco, 
“Introduction,” in The Body: A Reader , editors, Mariam Fraser and 
Monica Greco (New York: Routledge, 2005).
25. On the connection between aesthetics, bodies, and religion also see 
Philip A. Mellor and Chris Shilling, Re-forming the Body: Religion, 
Community and Modernity  (London: Sage, 1997), 4–5. This matrix of 
information and action makes use of the senses. Interesting work on 
how the senses served to justify subjective knowledge used to enforce 
race-based discrimination is offered by Mark M. Smith in How Race 
is Made: Slavery, Segregation and the Senses  (Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 2006).


--- PAGE 27 ---
Anthony B. Pinn14
26. Franz Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks  (New York: Grove Press, 1967).
27. Judith Butler notes the inseparability of sexual and racial difference. See 
Butler, Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of “Sex”  (New York: 
Routledge, 1993), 178–182.
28. Linda B. Arthur, editor, Religion, Dress and the Body  (New York: Berg, 
1999), 6.
29. See Nuttall, Beautiful Ugly; David Morgan, Visual Piety: A History and 
Theory of Popular Religious Images  (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1998).
30. See, e.g., Guy C. McElroy, Facing History: The Black Image in American 
Art, 1710–1940 (San Francisco, CA: Bedford Arts/Corcoran Gallery of 
Art, 1990).
31. See Nuttall, Beautiful Ugly, 9.
32. Russ Castronovo, Beautiful Democracy: Aesthetics and Anarchy in a 
Global Era (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007), 3–8.
33. Arthur C. Danto, The Abuse of Beauty: Aesthetics and the Concept of Art  
(Chicago: Open Court, 2003).
34. Patterson and Kelley, “Unfinished Migrations,” 13.
35. I have found Arthur Danto’s work invaluable in framing the artistic and 
aesthetic significance of religion through the body both here and in 
Terror and Triumph: The Nature of Black Religion  (Minneapolis, MN: 
Fortress Press, 2003). E.g., Danto’s Philosophizing Art: Selected Essays  
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999). Readers should com-
bine Danto’s philosophy of art with Robert Farris Thompson art history 
of the Atlantic world as represented in texts such as Flash of the Spirit: 
African and Afro-American Art and Philosophy  (New York: Vintage 
Books, 1984).
36. This idea of the stigmatized and the nonstigmatized body is borrowed 
from Erving Goffman. See Goffman, Stigma: Notes on the Management 
of Spoiled Identity (New York: Touchstone Book, 1963/1986). However, 
there seems to be in Goffman’s work limited interrogation of the 
assumed White and male body. Readers should also see Sarah Nettleton 
and Jonathan Watson, editors, The Body in Everyday Life (New York: 
Routledge, 1998).
37. Gilroy, The Black Atlantic , 40.
38. Recognition of the communicative role of the arts is made similarly 
by Simon J. Williams and Gillian Bendelow. See The Lived Body , 7–8, 
189–205.
39. See Castronovo, Beautiful Democracy , Chapter 3.
40. David Morgan provides an important discussion of aesthetics within the 
context of religious imagery that has direct bearing on the concerns in 
Black Religion and Aesthetics. See Morgan, Visual Piety .
41. I am not suggesting that this aesthetic matrix is always traceable in its 
various forms to some African origin. Such an assessment is beyond the 
scope and concerns of this volume.


--- PAGE 28 ---
Introduction 15
42. Black Religion is used as an umbrella category by which to catalog the 
various traditions, practices, signs, symbols, structures, beliefs and prac-
tices associated with people of African descent.
43. This volume, including the introduction and my essay represent my 
continuing interests in this issue. My ongoing effort to interrogate the 
connections between religiosity, aesthetics, artistic production and the 
Black labyrinth include projects under development such as my contribu-
tion to Alexander Byrd, Michael Emerson, Caroline Levander, Anthony 
Pinn, Teaching and Studying the Americas (under contract with Palgrave 
Macmillan).


--- PAGE 29 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 30 ---
1
North and South America


--- PAGE 31 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 32 ---
1
A Beautiful B E -ING : Religious 
Humanism and the Aesthetics of 
a New Salvation
Anthony B. Pinn
I believe a focus on beauty 1 as a category of significance in Black 
theological discourse is essential if this discourse has as its primary 
motive temporal liberation as the normative framework of life.  This 
is so because linking beauty to liberation, as having temporal sig-
nificance, focuses liberation on a deep appreciation for the physical 
body. That is to say, a more naturalistic notion of liberation (as a 
mode of salvation) lends itself to a needed appreciation for the beauty 
of the human body in relationship to the larger physical world. By so 
doing liberation (or “salvation” as liberation is typically understood 
in liberation theology) can involve in a significant manner the soul 
and body.
African American Theologies 
on Salvation
Analysis of African American soteriology, or doctrine of salvation, 
has often highlighted a tension between “this-worldly” concerns and 
“other-worldly” preoccupations. Many scholars posit the latter as the 
dominant element in African American soteriology—a high regard 
for salvation as the resolution of existential and ontological dilemmas 
through the culmination of human history. The problems for Black 
religion’s alleged work toward social transformation posed by this 
salvation vis-à-vis the end of human history are apparent, particularly 
when, as is usually the case, this soteriological perspective is tied to 
a general disregard of or suspicion toward the human body. Black


--- PAGE 33 ---
Anthony B. Pinn20
theology of liberation, developed as of the late 1960s as a somewhat 
radical reworking of Christian theology in light of systemic oppres-
sion and the demands of justice, seeks to modify this more anemic 
soteriology because of its inability to carry the full weight of African 
American hopes for social transformation—a radically improved exis-
tence in human history.
While leaders of this relatively new liberation theology are mindful 
of ties to traditionally Black Christianity, they also note the manner 
in which they deviate. This deviation involves a more sustained focus 
on the critique of White supremacy and its impingements on the 
life options of African Americans. Regarding this, James Cone, one 
of the recognized “fathers” of academic Black theology notes that, 
“although Martin Luther King, Jr., and other civil rights activists 
did much to rescue the gospel from the heresy of White churches by 
demonstrating its life-giving power in the Black freedom movement, 
they did not liberate Christianity from its cultural bondage to White, 
Euro-American values.”
2 The shift initiated by Cone and continued 
by his students involves the institution of a hermeneutical shift and 
alternate source materials (e.g., popular culture, African American 
history). Rather than a rehashed hermeneutic of social Christianity, 
Cone and others adapted a hermeneutic of suspicion as a way of dis-
cerning the manner in which the Christian faith had been damaged 
and shifted from a commitment to radical change for the benefit of 
the oppressed to the tool of the status quo—White supremacy and its 
trappings.
In providing this critique and offering an alternate theological 
discourse, Black theology argued for a particularized theological 
approach as opposed to the efforts of the dominant, White theologi-
cal discourse to universalize the experience of Whites. Black theology 
suggested with great force that God sided with the oppressed to such 
an extent that God is best understood as ontologically Black (as black-
ness best represented the nature and context of oppression within late 
twentieth century United States). By extension, those who claimed to 
be Christians had to also become ontologically Black.
3 The workings 
of God with regard to liberation of the oppressed, Black theology 
suggested, is found within the historical struggle for freedom and it 
is expressed aesthetically in the Black Church Tradition and also in 
Black popular culture—the blues, literature, and so on.
Black theologians gave traditional theological categories revised 
meaning and located their interpretation and application within 
the communities of oppressed African Americans. So, for example, 
Christology remained central, but transformed. Jesus the Christ is


--- PAGE 34 ---
A Beautiful BE -ING 21
presented as a revolutionary (sometimes physically Black, but always 
identified with the suffering masses) committed to the ending of 
oppressive structures and relationships. He becomes associated in 
strong ways not with the stained glass windows and paintings of a 
blond and blued-eyed figure. But rather, he becomes a representative 
of the ontologically Black God, intimately connected to oppressed 
African Americans by sharing in their pain and their “blackness.” 
Black women within theological discourse, Womanist theology, have 
rightly and convincingly argued for further rethinking of the Christ 
event so as to not emphasis the historically situated figure because 
such a focus entails a tangled mess of gender issues: Is the Divine best 
represented in the form of a male, and what does this say about the 
significance of women? Rather, they suggest a focus on the Christ 
of community—on the ministry of this figure, and the relation-
ships of respect, care, compassion, and transformation that ministry 
entailed.
4
Both Black and Womanist theologies maintain an awareness of 
Christ as a source of God’s salvation, as a sign of God’s commitment 
to liberation. Christ is God’s revelation; God’s “Yes” to human free-
dom from oppression. Regarding this, “black people,” Cone writes, 
“have come to know Christ precisely through oppression, because he 
has made himself synonymous with black oppression. Therefore, to 
deny the reality of black oppression and to affirm some other ‘reality’ 
is to deny Christ.”
5 Pushing against a strictly race-based Christology 
as presented by Black theology’s focus on the blackness of Christ, 
Womanist theology maintains an awareness of Christ as connected 
to Black communities. But it also urges recognition of the manner 
in which Christ must also be understood as present in the work of 
Black women. That is to say, Christ is concerned with the destruction 
of racism and a host of other forms of oppression, including class-
ism, sexism and heterosexism. As Womanist theologian Kelly Brown 
Douglas remarks, “a vital and effective Black Christ must reflect the 
complexities of Black reality. A womanist Black Christ is one who can 
respond to those complexities—that is, the Black struggle to ‘make 
do and do better’ in face of racist, sexist, classist, and heterosexist 
oppression.”
6
The implications of Black and Womanist Christology are impor-
tant in that they firmly lodge soteriology in human experiences of 
earthbound oppression and liberation.
A reasonable argument can be made for understanding salvation 
as socio-economic and political liberation in the contexts of both 
Black and Womanist theologies. Clearly neither theological camp is


--- PAGE 35 ---
Anthony B. Pinn22
interested in talking about heaven or the Kingdom of God as any-
thing more than a metaphor for a transformed and historically situated 
reality. That is to say, all theological categories must say something 
useful to the struggle for freedom.
7 An  ar gum e n t  i s  m a d e  a g ain s t  
otherworldly orientations, suggesting that such efforts to overly spir-
itualize the Gospel of Christ and the interpretation of this message 
involve an oppressive posture that does damage to human dignity and 
integrity by not struggling against modalities of misconduct in this 
world. Clearly, according to these liberation theologies, from the early 
missionaries amongst enslaved Africans who used an otherworldly 
framework as a way to safeguard chattel slavery to twentieth century 
churches who use this framework to avoid sociopolitical involvements 
that might compromise their mainstream and middleclass status, a 
focus beyond this world has served a negative purpose. Such has been 
theologically duplicitous, rendering disingenuous Christian piety, 
and fostering contentment with salvation that has no impact on tem-
poral conditions. In the words of the spiritual, “You can have all this 
world, just give me Jesus. ” T o this sentiment, Black and W omanist 
theologies say “no—hell, no!”
Otherworldly orientations misinterpret the meaning of human-
divine connection, assuming that it must entail the eventual usurping 
of the former by the latter. According to Cone, “human liberation is 
God’s work of salvation in Jesus Christ . . .”
8 Salvation is existentially 
and epistemological synonymous with liberation within the context 
of human history. Salvation has nothing to do with conceptions of 
a nontemporal arrangement as the culmination of God’s concern for 
the oppressed. Such an arrangement is inconsistent with the historical 
sensitivities of these theologies. Salvation, the argument goes, is not a 
reward received; but rather the outcome of struggle with God for social 
transformation. In short, “salvation” according to Cone and most in 
Black theology would agree, “is a historical event of rescue” through 
which proper relationships are enacted and justice given prominence; it 
“is the granting of physical wholeness in the concreteness of pain and 
suffering.”
9 The impetus is not a gift from God; one should not “seek 
salvation,” according to Cone because those who seek it “lose it.” As 
Scripture, a prime source for Black and Womanist theologies, says “He 
that would save his life will lose it. He who loses his life for my sake 
will gain it.” Hence, simply put from Cone’s perspective rather than 
seeking salvation the true task is rebellion “against inhumanity and 
injustice.”
10 In other words, heaven does not connote a future home 
because “home,” Cone asserts, “is where we have been placed now, 
and to believe in heaven is to refuse to accept hell on earth.”
11


--- PAGE 36 ---
A Beautiful BE -ING 23
Salvation, these theologians want us to believe, is not simply a mat-
ter of saving bodiless souls. How can it be, when “any statement that 
divorces salvation from liberation or makes human freedom indepen-
den t of divin e freedom m ust be rejected ” sa ys Con e?
12 Theologian 
Delores Williams nuances this perspective by downplaying the role of 
the cross in salvation history and emphasizing the manner in which 
Christ, through his ministry, provided survival skills that facilitate 
salvation.
13 Redemption has to do with a new vision of proper rela-
tionship between God and humanity, between humans, and between 
humans and the larger world of nature. It involves an appreciation for 
and motivation premised on the deep intersections between all forms 
of all, of which hold vitality, significance and life intensity. It is an 
effort, although I would suggest that neither Womanist or Black the-
ology have abided by this, to create a healthy synergy between body 
and spirit, one that exposes the human to the comforting weight of 
connection to all that is both within the range of the individual’s 
life meaning (body) and within the scope of connection to all that is 
(spirit).
14
Salvation for these theological oriented scholars, nonetheless, is 
not simply a one-dimensional concern with political change. No, rela-
tionship with God, with the transcendent, remains the modus ope-
randi for this understanding of salvation. Ultimately, the message is 
simple and less than a full embrace of humanity’s worth: The human 
has value because the human bears the image of God. In a word, 
God in the human gives the human ontological importance. Hence, 
the fullness of human significance is not realized solely in the realm 
of human history, it is also borne out in an undefined future known 
only by God. This is what theologian James Evans means when say-
ing the Christ event represents both “our past and future.”
15
Salvation and the Black Body
As suggested by the above, Womanist and Black theologies acknowl-
edge the body through a vocabulary of embodiment. However, this 
vocabulary promotes what James Nelson refers to as “one directional” 
discourse—beginning with the transcendental nature of religion and 
moving toward the body.
16 While there is great benefit to the idea 
of the divine embodied, this perspective has done little to highlight 
and center the physical body within black religion in general and 
Black and Womanist theologies in particular. Consequently lurking 
behind Black theology’s large claims regarding liberation, with few 
exceptions, is a troubled relationship to human flesh, to Black bodies.


--- PAGE 37 ---
Anthony B. Pinn24
Salvation may entail alteration of the space occupied by these bodies, 
but this arrangement does little to celebrate the texture, the feel and 
functions, of these bodies.
17 The theological effort to counter the 
damage done by discriminatory ideologies and sociopolitical struc-
tures tends to circumvent these same Black bodies. This is because, as 
Kelly Brown Douglas points out, liberation theologies in Black com-
munities draw from a Christian Tradition that has a troubled rela-
tionship with the body, in spite of its theology of the incarnation.
18 
Cultural critique Michael Dyson puts it this way, “. . . the Christian 
faith is grounded in the Incarnation, the belief that God took on 
flesh to redeem human beings. That belief is constantly trumped by 
Christianity’s quarrels with the body. Its needs. Its desires. Its sheer 
materiality.”
19 Furthermore, what theologian Roy Morrison II says 
about eschatology is true by extension to soteriology. He writes, “Paul 
Tillich has observed that religious symbols can lose their power. This 
is also true of an eschatology that has enshrined the hopes and aspi-
ration of a downtrodden people. Moreover, an eschatology that once 
was effective in assisting self-maintenance may, in a different century, 
be irrelevant for the task of self-transformation.”
20
Traditional readings of scripture only serve to further entrench 
this perception of human bodies. Much to their detriment, African 
American Christians have uncritically embraced this attitude, 
with deep consequences in that Black bodies become at least dou-
bly damned—religiously and socially. Nonetheless, the idea of an 
oppressed people, despised because of the bodies they carry through 
the world, embracing notions that sanction theologically their dehu-
manization is problematic on a variety of fronts, and it need not con-
tinue as a dominant theological motif. Needed here is an alternate 
approach, an understanding of salvation that avoids this dilemma. I 
suggest attention to the deep connections between liberation and aes-
thetics points in useful direction; and, a humanist framework allows 
for the linking of liberation/salvation and aesthetics in ways that res-
cue the body.
I end this section with a restating of an anchoring concern of this 
chapter: Black and Womanist theologies have made clear connections 
between salvation and liberation, but in ways that entail “distance” 
from the body. They, in essence, offer salvation as a form of disem-
bodiment to the extent that salvation means an appeal to union with 
an “outside” reality. Put differently, the Black Christian notion of 
salvation entails a radical push against status as an object without an 
equal attention to the merits of subjectivity. I propose an alternate 
way of thinking about liberation and salvation, one that does not


--- PAGE 38 ---
A Beautiful BE -ING 25
disassociate them from the body: Salvation/Liberation is concerned 
with aesthetics—the beauty of the body within spaces of quality and 
comfort.
Beauty as Liberation
Theologies within African American communities neglect aesthetics 
in general or beauty in particular in part because of their failure to 
take seriously the body as more than the target of a negative discourse 
or an activity of invisibility . What Edward Farley notes in regard to 
the Western theological tradition is quite apropos with regard to 
Black theological work. “If giving the body its needed nourishment 
is ‘pampering,’ ” Farley writes, “how much more would we pamper if 
we granted the human being its need for beauty? Here is that strand 
of the Christian movement that is deeply suspicious of the very thing 
in which beauty finds its initial mediation—the body and the senses, 
the whole pleasurable interaction with the world that constitutes life 
itself.”
21 Furthermore, Farley remarks, this negative aesthetics is pre-
mised simply on a disregard for the physical form of the human but 
is also due to a certain interpretation of time whereby the present is 
held suspect and the future, through an apocalyptic preoccupation, 
is highlighted. With such a scenario, all that is permanent, holy, and 
worthy of attention (e.g., heaven and God) is disassociated from the 
realm of the body.
22
Regardless of such a predicament, “the beautiful,” is related to 
liberation/salvation in that it entails a harmony of meaning by which 
the African American is in accord with the world, and this of course 
requires the refiguring of the world in ways that destroy racism, class-
ism, sexism, heterosexism, and so on. Furthermore, the idea that 
religion involves a quest for complex subjectivity pushes liberation 
beyond mere sociopolitical and economic arrangements and hints at 
the centrality of beauty as a marker of freedom or liberation in that 
beauty better captures the significance of a deeper sense of being or 
meaning as the fundamental aim of liberation.
23 Hence, it is recog-
nition of African American “being” as beautiful—a notion fought 
and denied in an oppressive world. In this respect liberation should 
entail a fuller sense of the beautiful: a new weight to the phrase “black 
is beautiful.” This entails recognition of the beautiful as not simply 
external to the African American (not simply a matter of proportion 
or transcendence) but rather a matter of internal realities connected 
to the significance of human existence as meaningful. This altered 
theological perspective celebrates in word and deed connection to


--- PAGE 39 ---
Anthony B. Pinn26
the “All” of life that only a full sense of the self “as related to” can 
achieve.
Liberation/salvation is not guaranteed; it is uncertain. Hence, 
beauty as connected to liberation has little to do with a guaranteed 
arrangement of ideal relationships between the self/self, self/others, 
others/world. Rather, beauty involves a certain posture toward those 
relationships, recognition of wholeness—fullness of meaning—that 
may not be achieved. Beauty is, as Farley notes, a certain type of eth-
ical inclination not tangible historical outcome—the “way in which 
the faithful person [mine is a much broader understanding of faith-
fulness] behaves towards others and in the world.”
24 Such a shift away 
from historical processes and toward a positioning of the self for deep 
and meaningful encounters entails recognition of potential, of pos-
sibility, a speaking to self, others, world, in light of what they might 
become—a celebration of the push for more life.
A qualification concerning what is normative: I am not of the 
opinion that beauty entails an openness to the “harmonious” as well 
as the “perilous.”
25 Such a perspective is reasonable from those who 
have not encountered as a component of their community’s history 
the manner in which identity and “being” are distorted through 
modes of oppression that render them less-than, “Other,” and by 
extension lacking in beauty. To the contrary, I want to be guided by 
the liberation theologian’s embrace of transformation as normative, 
without accepting her assumption that transformation is guaranteed. 
Hence, beauty as tied to liberation on the level of normative state-
ments approaches a measured realism: transformation, the full scope 
of the beauty recognized and embraced is the goal, while not always 
obtained as outcome. Mindful of this, I argue beauty glimpses the 
absence of the perilous (read oppressive). It captures the vision of the 
quest for complex subjectivity that defines religion. Beauty is libera-
tion, the final aim of progressive religious experience.
The above raises a programmatic question: How is this sense of 
liberation as a sense of the beautiful within the context of the pre-
sent developed? I suggest African American humanism points out 
an intriguing prospect with regard to this task. In place of suspicion 
concerning the body, drawing loosely on the work of Richard Wright, 
I suggest African American humanism proposes a radical embrace of 
the Black body—warts and all—as proper life orientation. African 
Am e r i c a n  h u m a n i s m  i n  t h i s  s e n s e ,  I  p r o p o s e ,  p u s h e s  f o r  r e c o g n i -
tion of the beautiful within the irreverent and within the grotesque: 
flesh is made beautiful not because it mirrors divine perfection, but 
because it houses the push for fullness or wholes; it connects us to all


--- PAGE 40 ---
A Beautiful BE -ING 27
the world. Rather, beauty connotes a wholeness involving comfort 
with one’s “weight” in the world, and the importance or significance 
of one’s presence in the world.
From Wright’s work I draw not complete lessons regarding soteri-
ology. Nor is my read concerned with literary devices per se; rather, I 
am interested in reading Wright in my capacity and interests as a theo-
logian, and in relationship to a central question: What is the nature of 
salvation in a godless world?
Humanism on Human Life
The African American Christian approach to salvation/liberation 
(and beauty by extension) briefly presented above and the human-
ist alternative I shall offer, while different in perspective, are drawn 
from a similar need: to make sense of the existential difficulties and 
dilemmas associated with being human within a troubled world. 
They both face theologically the threat of death, morality, nothing-
ness. The substantive conflict between the two positions is a matter of 
epistemological posture. In short, the reality of existential difficulties 
and deep anxiety prompts some African American Christians to seek 
resolution (or salvation) through an appeal to a divine presence that 
alters the human’s relationship to mundane life. This is not the option 
taken by African American humanists.
From the period of slavery to the present, African Americans such 
as Frederick Douglass, Hubert Harrison, J. Saunders Redding, James 
Foreman, Richard Wright, and Alice Walker—to name a few—pushed 
for a notion of the best welfare of humans (or what some might call sal-
vation) as revolving around self-realization achieved through the aus-
pices of human potentiality for transformative thought and action.
26 
From my perspective, these figures are humanist in that they pro-
mote a vision of life in keeping with what I have elsewhere labeled 
the five fundamental principles of African American humanism. They 
are: (1) Understanding of humanity as fully (and solely) accountable 
and responsible for the human condition and the correction of its 
plight; (2) Suspicion toward or rejection of supernatural explana-
tion and claims, combined with an understanding of humanity as an 
evolving part of the Natural environment as opposed to being a cre-
ated being. This can involve disbelief in God(s); (3) Appreciation for 
African American cultural production and a perception of traditional 
forms of Black religiosity as having cultural importance as opposed 
to any type of “cosmic” authority; (4) A commitment to individ-
ual and societal transformation; and, (5) A controlled optimism


--- PAGE 41 ---
Anthony B. Pinn28
that recognizes both human potential and human destructive 
activities. 27
For the African American humanist, difficulties and anxiety are 
never resolved fully but mitigated through an appeal to human poten-
tial, expressed in celebration of the human: his/her body, vision, 
integrity—without appeal to a trans-historical co-worker. By exten-
sion, for the humanist, salvation entails a process of self-realization 
and historical transformation as a human project, a conversion that 
surfaces and highlights the beauty of the human in the human form.
There is a difference between the Christian and humanist per-
spective related to the best way to locate and focus human dignity 
as it relates to soteriology. For Christian theologians (Black and 
Womanist) noted in this chapter, dignity is ultimately a matter of 
the divine making itself available to humanity and redirecting human 
self understanding through this “free gift.” On the other hand, for 
the African American humanist thinker dignity involves an assertion 
of human agency and creativity without appeal to validation from a 
trans-historical “something more,” without a God in place to guaran-
tee a certain outcome for those who play by the rules of the faith. It is 
for the African American humanist thinker, in part, an issue resolved 
through a new aesthetic of life that is attached to ethics, but not in 
the way theological aesthetics often has worked in that beauty and 
wholeness are not related to intimacy or contact with the divine; and 
ethics does not arise out of a proper response to this proposition.
African American Humanist Thought and 
the Salvific Act
In setting up this last section of my essay, I am concerned with the 
manner in which African American literature speaks to a revised 
notion of soteriology—a sense of salvation as self-realization in the 
form of beauty recognized, on some level as an embrace of the body. 
In working through this issue, drawing on African American literature 
is beneficial in that it tends to wrestle with theological questions and 
concerns without a deep regard for Christian doctrine at the expense 
of creative thinking—a problem that plagues much of what qualifies as 
more formal Black and Womanist theological discourse. Specifically, I 
give consideration to a humanist notion of salvation as self-realization 
by turning to Richard Wright’s more existentialist writings, particu-
larly “The Man Who Lived Underground.” I do this because Wright’s 
existential writings provide one of the best examples of an African 
American humanist perspective within literature. He provides an


--- PAGE 42 ---
A Beautiful BE -ING 29
explicit challenge to traditional Black Christian theological formu-
lations that helps illuminate the contours of what might qualify as 
the initial outline of an African American humanist soteriology. In a 
sense, Wright destroys what I would consider one of what Alain Locke 
labeled “the idols of the tribe.” In this case the “idol” is a soteriology 
that leaves behind, so to speak, a deep appreciation for the body as 
beautiful, and a greater sense of self-reliance and self-realization as the 
hallmarks of the best welfare (or salvation) for the human.
28
Notions of self-reliance and self-realization as presented here should 
not be understood as one’s will trumps all others. Salvation does not 
entail freedom from responsibility to others. Richard Wright’s char-
acter Cross Damon, who seeks to initially operate in this individu-
alized manner, ultimately realizes the problematic nature of such a 
stance. What Wright presents through this character is the humanist 
as understanding and accepting a life lived for self within the context 
of community as the last best option. Richard Wright portrays his 
character Cross Damon as recognizing this before dying. This is how, 
as a matter of theological insight, I interpret Damon’s words. “I wish 
I had some way to give the meaning of my life to others,” he says, “to 
make a bridge from man to man. T ell them not to come down this 
road . . . We must find some way to being good to ourselves . . . Man is 
all we’ve got . . . ”
29
Dying on the floor, Damon reflects on the life he lived, the attempt 
to live completely free from others and recognizes the search for mean-
ing cannot be done in isolation. Rather, “never alone . . . Alone a man 
is nothing . . . Man is a promise that he must never break . . . ”
30 The 
protagonist, Fred Daniels, in “The Man Who Lived Underground” 
expresses a similar commitment to self-realization within the context 
of others when reflecting on his effort to show the police officers 
what he had discovered in the cave: “He was eager to show them the 
cave now. If he could show them what he had seen, then they would 
feel what he had felt and they in turn would show it to others and 
those others would feel as they had felt . . . ”
31
Sensitivity to human integrity involves an embrace of humanity over 
against deep feelings of guilt that can only be addressed through sur-
render to the God/man, Jesus. This certainly seems the perspective of 
Fred Daniels, in “The Man Who Lived Underground.” Daniels, when 
viewing a church service from his cave in the sewer, says to their sing-
ing about accepting Jesus into their lives that “they’re wrong . . . He 
felt that their search for a happiness they could never find made them 
feel that they had committed some dreadful offense which they could 
not remember or understand.”
32


--- PAGE 43 ---
Anthony B. Pinn30
For both Cross Damon and Fred Daniels, self-realization, an 
embrace of who they are through recognition of their embodiment 
and what that means, promotes self-transformation within the con-
text of sensitivity to others. It is recognition of the body as impor-
tant, vital, really, in what philosopher Lewis Gordon refers to as “the 
constitution of a meaningful world that we may call . . . life.”
33 For the 
humanist, as Richard Wright notes, salvation, or best welfare, means 
a move to a fuller sense of self in relationship to self, others and the 
larger world. This interconnectedness involves a confrontation with 
Black flesh, the Black body—and an embrace of its ambiguity—as 
more than a subject and/or object.
34
Salvation involves the forging of identity premised on a realization 
of the realness of the world and a comfort with the body in which we 
“move and have our being.” Substituting salvation for “self-invention,” 
one gets a sense of my meaning in this statement by philosopher 
Robert Birt: “but to become human and develop a human identity 
is a process of invention (self-invention), of personal and collective 
action conditioned by social relations.”
35 For the African American 
humanist salvation is a process of construction, of self-realization, 
of identity forged by humans; and at its best this process takes place 
within the company of others. It is a profound recognition of the 
beauty that is the human in healthy relationship to self, others, world. 
Turning again to Robert Birt, one finds these words, “struggle for 
identity, for an authentic human existence which is the core of ‘our 
spiritual strivings,’ is a radical effort to transform the world, to trans-
form ourselves, and to give birth to a new humanity.”
36 As Katherine 
Fishburn notes, humans are “metaphysically alone but morally bound 
to others in a mutual sense of responsibility to life.”
37
Salvation for the humanist is not the end of trouble (no God to 
guarantee this through the completion of the liberation project). 
Rather, it is simply the forging of an identity better capable of wres-
tling with the alienation and other oppressive tendencies that mark 
life in the world. This perspective on salvation does not escape meta-
physics altogether in that it speaks to a concern with the nature of 
being and existence. Yet, unlike the Black Christian perspective, 
metaphysics here is without grounding in a notion of a divine real-
ity outside time and space. Hence, without this grounding, the pic-
ture is rather bleak.
38 However, a theological assessment premised on 
humanist sensibilities does not find it so deeply troubling. Rather, 
this bleakness points to the difficult nature of transformation. And 
this, I argue, is a much more realistic depiction of human struggle for 
salvation than one finds in the unfulfilled promises of Black theology


--- PAGE 44 ---
A Beautiful BE -ING 31
and Black Christianity. Put another way, Black Christian soteriology 
betrays determinism (based on the workings of God), while African 
American Humanism seeks to maintain an existential (nondetermin-
istic) orientation.
A distinction between this humanist perspective and that of Black 
and Womanist theologies involves the nature of passion and urgency 
involved with both—the deeply disturbed tone of Black liberation 
theologies and the more measured, dispassionate tone of humanist 
theological formulations. This difference does not stem from a lack 
of concern with oppression and the oppressed within humanist theo-
logical frameworks. Rather, it stems from humanists’ recognition of 
the absurd nature of life, and the notion that we construct this world 
alone, without divine guidance and the balance—the hopefulness of 
hope—such guidance provides.
Black Christian Tradition posits something after human history, and 
even Black liberation theologies that hold talk of heaven suspect do 
not rule out the plausibility of something beyond human history in 
that God exists. However, African American humanist soteriology is 
limited by death: Salvation is partial in that the human remains the 
resident of a troubled world. Furthermore, the humanist speaks of sal-
vation in ways that are preoccupied with the present, and the Black 
Christian Tradition with the past (the Christ event) and future (end of 
human history). Perhaps this is why Fred Daniels, when hearing the 
church service from his space below ground, wants so desperately to tell 
those Black Christians to be unrepentant, to embrace themselves.
39
For the African American humanist soteriology takes an interest-
ing twist in that salvation involves the human’s freeing of him or 
herself to forge a deeper sense of meaning and identity. It is a push 
for freedom from unnecessary restrictions that bind people and keep 
them from an embrace of the body as a sign of humanity’s poten-
tial and limitations. It is the lack of a full sense of their potential, 
their responsibility for life that at one point bothers Daniels as he 
watches people in a movie theater. Those in the theater are “sleeping 
in their living, awake in their dying,” and, like the people in church, 
they were more concerned with “shadows of themselves” than a full 
embrace of life’s realness. They embraced illusions and failed to take 
responsibility for their living. They were captivated by pretense, illu-
sion, and ignored the potential to transform their existence: they sim-
ply “laughed at their lives.”
40 Providential proclamations, hence, are 
inappropriate and without use.
Wright’s characters Cross Damon and Fred Daniels both are 
involved in a salvific process, seeking to recreate themselves, to be


--- PAGE 45 ---
Anthony B. Pinn32
“born-again” so to speak: Damon after taking the identity of another 
and Daniels after descending into the sewer. This process, this push 
for salvation, involves not the grace of a benevolent other, but rather 
shear “force of will.”
41 For Cross Damon this entails movement from 
exercise of will over-against all others to exercise of will within the 
context of communal concerns and obligations. As Michael F. Lynch 
notes, Wright absorbs in his work a notion of the interconnectedness 
of human community and salvation: individuals are saved in commu-
nity.
42 And this salvation is fragile and temporal, but significant.
The importance of this human project, self-realization and creativ-
ity, is what Daniels wanted those in church to embrace. Salvation was 
to be found, as imperfect as it is, in the work of their hands. The sing-
ing he hears “Glad, glad, glad, oh, so glad I got Jesus in my soul . . . ” 
disturbs him. In fact, “he felt,” Wright records, “that their search 
for a happiness they could never find made them feel that they had 
committed some dreadful offense which they could not remember 
or understand.”
43 Guilt over this alleged offense was unproductive 
in that it kept people beholden to a bad system of metaphysics, one 
that did not allow for the full expression of human potentiality and 
responsibility for self and others.
Fred Daniel enters the sewer or “death” and emerges (or is res-
urrected) a new man, with an alternate sense of self in relationship 
to others. Based on this it becomes somewhat clear that salvation 
involves transformation prompting a different posture toward the 
world, a realization of what it means to carry one’s body through the 
world. It is a determination to exercise one’s will through the move-
ment and positioning of this body. This is not done through nega-
tion of the body but in ways mindful of its impact on others thereby 
discerning of the “secret of [human] existence.”
44 The importance 
of the body is heightened when one notes that Fred Daniel carves 
out his new existence in the cave and his relationships with others 
through the physical force of his body pushing against walls and 
other boundaries. It was the work of his body, the pushing of his 
arms against tools, against walls, that carved out his new space in 
the sewer—not singing about a place outside this world created by 
cosmic forces.
The scriptural and theological bases for Black Christian formations 
of soteriology are groundless for African American humanists such 
as Cross Damon and Fred Daniels. Salvation entails, hence, humans 
left to their last best hope, their best devices for self-realization. Old 
notions of salvation involving Jesus and a life beyond this world sung 
about by those in the church Daniels observes from the cave are done


--- PAGE 46 ---
A Beautiful BE -ING 33
away with; and in their place Daniels suggest an unrepented embrace 
of human existence.
The humanist sense of salvation is easily put: The body is given a 
new value and importance in that salvation involves self-realization in 
the body, wholeness or beauty forged within the context of human 
possibility and limitations. Value and importance is not attached to 
something beyond human will—God in this instance. Salvation has 
nothing to do with redemption based on the actions (e.g., Christ 
event) performed by a cosmic other for the benefit of its creation. The 
beauty this mode of salvation entails is not the grand plan, the quiet 
workings of a divine being who makes the human shine by reflecting 
the divine image. Rather, it is simply the result of human creativity 
and the new sense of identity forged—all worked out within the con-
text of vibrant flesh in touch with other pulsating lives in the world.
Notes
 1. Beauty is here understood as wholeness for instance, or as the marking 
of what is pleasing and sublime.
 2. James H. Cone, “Preface to the 1989 Edition,” Black Theology & Black 
Power ( S a n  F r a n c i s c o ,  CA :  H a r p e r  &  R o w ,  1 9 8 9 ) ,  v i i .  Wh i l e  C o n e ’ s  
work represents the first generation of academic Black theology, it is 
appropriate to frame this discussion in terms of the categories estab-
lished in his work because his students, with almost no exceptions, have 
maintained his theological sensibilities with regard to major categories 
such as soteriology and Christology. Hence, some thirty years after first 
published, Cone’s work remains highly representative of black theologi-
cal discourse.
 3. See James H. Cone, Black Theology of Liberation  (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis 
Books, 1990). For a critique of this position see Victor Anderson’s 
Beyond Ontological Blackness  (New York: Continuum, 1995).
 4. See e.g., Delores S. Williams, Sisters in the Wilderness: The Challenge of 
Womanist God-Talk (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1993).
 5. Cone, Black Theology & Black Power , 120.
 6. Kelly Brown Douglas, The Black Christ  (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 
1994), 116.
 7. C one, Black Theology & Black Power , 121.
 8. James H. Cone, God of the Oppressed  (New York: Harper & Row, 
1975), 138.
 9. Cone, God of the Oppressed , 152, 153.
10. Cone, Black Theology & Black Power , 125–126.
11. James H. Cone, A Black Theology of Liberation , Twentieth Anniversary 
Edition (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1990), 141.
12. Cone, God of the Oppressed , 141.


--- PAGE 47 ---
Anthony B. Pinn34
13. Delores Williams, Sisters in the Wilderness: The Challenge of Womanist 
God-Talk (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1993), 164.
14. Williams, Sisters in the Wilderness , 165.
15. James H. Evans, Jr., We Have Been Believers: An African American 
Systematic Theology  (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1992), 142.
16. Anthony B. Pinn, “Embracing Nimrod’s Legacy: The Erotic, the 
Irreverence of Fantasy, and the Redemption of Black Theology,” in Loving 
the Body: Black Religious Studies and the Erotic, editors, Anthony Pinn and 
Dwight Hopkins (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004), 164.
17. Anthony B. Pinn, “Introduction,” in Loving the Body: Black Religious 
Studies and the Erotic , editors, Anthony Pinn and Dwight Hopkins 
(New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004), 3.
18. See Kelly Brown Douglas, The Black Church and Sexuality  (Maryknoll, 
NY: Orbis Books, 2003) and Kelly Brown Douglas, What’s Love Got to 
Do with It? (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 2005).
19. Michael Eric Dyson, “When You Divide Body and Soul, Problems 
Multiply: The Black Church and Sexuality,” in The Michael Eric Dyson 
Reader (New York: Basic Civitas Books, 2004), 221.
20. Roy D. Morrison II, “Self-Transformation in American Blacks: The 
Harlem Renaissance and Black Theology,” in Existence in Black: An 
Anthology of Black Existential Philosophy , editor, Lewis R. Gordon (New 
York: Routledge, 1997), 38.
21. Edward Farley, Faith and Beauty: A Theological Aesthetic (Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate, 2001), 11.
22. Ibid.
23. I develop this theory of religion in Anthony B. Pinn, Terror and 
Triumph: The Nature of Black Religion  (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress 
Press, 2003).
24. Farley, Faith and Beauty, 110.
25. Ibid.
26. See for additional information on a genealogy of African American 
Humanism: Anthony B. Pinn, editor, By These Hands: A Documentary 
History of African American Humanism (New York: New York University 
Press, 2001).
27. Anthony B. Pinn, African American Humanist Principles: Thinking 
and Living Like the Children of Nimrod (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2004).
28. Alain Locke “The New Negro,” in The New Negro, editor, Alain Locke 
(New York: Atheneum, 1986), 8.
29. Richard Wright, The Outsider , Library of America Edition (New York: 
HarperPerennial, 1991), 585.
30. Ibid.
31. Richard Wright, “The Man Who Lived Underground,” in Richard 
Wright, Eight Men (New York: HarperPerennial, 1996), 81.
32. Ibid., 60.


--- PAGE 48 ---
A Beautiful BE -ING 35
33. Lewis R. Gordon, “Existential Dynamics of Theorizing Black 
Invisibility,” in Lewis Gordon, editor, Existence in Black: An Anthology 
of Black Existential Philosophy  (New York: Routledge, 1997), 72.
34. Ibid., 72–75.
35. Robert Birt, “Existence, Identity, and Liberation,” in Lewis Gordon, 
editor, Existence in Black: An Anthology of Black Existential Philosophy  
(New York: Routledge, 1997), 206.
36. Ibid., 212.
37. Katherine Fishburn, Richard Wright’s Hero: The Faces of a Rebel-Victim  
(Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1977), 148.
38. See for example Arnold Rampersad, “Introduction,” in Richard Wright: 
A Collection of Critical Essays , editor, Arnold Rampersad (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1995).
39. Fishburn, Richard Wright’s Hero, 160.
40. Wright, “The Man Who Lived Underground,” 30.
41. Arnold Rampersad, “Introduction,” in Arnold Rampersad, editor, 
Richard Wright: A Collection of Critical Essays  (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1995), 4.
42. Michael F. Lynch, Creative Revolt: A Study of Wright, Ellison, and 
Dostoevsky  (New York: Peter Lang, 1990), 94.
43. Richard Wright, “The Man Who Lived Underground,” 60.
44. Patricia Watkins, “The Paradoxical Structure of Richard Wright’s ‘The 
Man Who Lived Underground,’ ” in Richard Wright: A Collection of 
Critical Essays, editor, Arnold Rampersad (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1995), 157.


--- PAGE 49 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 50 ---
2
The Foolish Woman Grows 
Angry Because They Teach Her: 
Influences of Sexism in Black 
Church Worship
Nancy Lynne Westfield
My primary questions for this chapter are: What does the African 
American Church teach when the aesthetic of the Black female body 
is rarely or never explicitly mentioned in worship? What does it mean 
if the women of the church forbid preaching concerning the aesthetic 
of the Black female body? What if, Black, Christian women are the 
purveyors of sexism and misogyny in the African American Church? 
As a way of engaging these questions, I will analyze a case study. In 
preparation for the analysis of the case study I want to describe the 
three presuppositions that I bring to this conversation.
First, I believe Black women are caught in the contortion of hav-
ing been taught to hate our bodies while at the same time required 
to love and nurture Black men, White men, White women and all 
children. Black women struggle with the impossible task of negotiat-
ing self-hatred while simultaneously charged with the responsibility 
of care for all others. The author of Communion: The Female Search 
for Love, bell hooks, states, “(N)ot only do (Black women) embrace 
this faulty logic, but also the (racist, sexist, hegemonic) culture lets 
us get away with thinking that we can hate our bodies and still be 
seen as the group most capable of teaching others about love.”
1 This 
distorted thinking concerning our bodies is the legacy of having sur-
vived North American chattel slavery.
In the undocumented, but painfully truthful, article entitled “Let’s 
Make a Slave,” attributed to Willie Lynch, Lynch describes formulaic


--- PAGE 51 ---
Nancy Lynne Westfield38
ways of preparing a woman to be a slave. Lynch writes
Take the female and run a series of tests on her to see if she will sub-
mit to your desires willingly. Test her in every way, because she is the 
most important factor for good economics. If she shows any sign of 
resistance in submitting completely to your will, do not hesitate to use 
the bull whip on her to extract that last bit of bitch out of her. Take 
care not to kill her, for in doing so, you spoil good economics. When 
in complete submission, she will train her offspring in the early years 
to submit to labor when they become of age.
2
African American women survived a system that sought to crush their 
spirit and shatter their sense of self through the brutalization of their 
body. The system demanded that they, for survival, teach their chil-
dren to be submissive, docile, and compliant to the will and ways of the 
oppressor. Black women survived the brutality of slavery, in part, but not 
exclusively, because we learned to be bent-over people—submissive and 
accommodating to authority. Constructing strategies of survival, Black 
women dealt with the reality of cruelty and dehumanization by becom-
ing dutiful and obedient. Many Black women maintaining this dutiful-
ness subscribe to what Katie Cannon calls an ethic of decorum. I will 
talk later about this ethic of decorum and how it effects our church com-
munities. The submissiveness that allowed African American women to 
survive is accompanied by a survival strategy of boldness, audacity, and 
forthrightness. Many women have kept “that last bit of bitch.”
The “bitch” in Black women is a complicated issue. Delores 
Williams, noted Womanist theologian, in a recent speech, quoted the 
Willie Lynch reference, saying “. . . do not hesitate to use the bull whip 
on her to extract that last bit of bitch out of her” then, Dr. Williams 
said parenthetically to the women in attendance, “If you got any bitch 
left in you—you better keep it.” African American women are caught 
in the conundrum of having to become compliant in order to survive 
while also having to nurture inside of us some modicum of empow-
erment, audacity, and boldness. We had to hide and cultivate a coun-
ter voice to the disenfranchisement and chattel existence that was 
our waking reality. Now, in contemporary times, African American 
women refuse the dehumanization of being called a “bitch,” while 
simultaneously reserving the right to maintain our “bitchiness.” For a 
husband, father, or lover to call a Black woman a bitch is the height of 
insult and ridicule. Conversely, for a Black woman, when the correct 
tone of voice is used, to call a sister a “bitch,” is a gesture of empower-
ment, an acknowledgement of courage, and needed forthrightness for 
continued survival. In my mid-twenties, I dated an African American


--- PAGE 52 ---
Influences of Sexism in Black Church Worship 39
man, who, in a moment of anger, called me a “bitch.” Offended, but 
not stymied by his insult, I immediately retorted to him that he was 
a “bitch lover”—meaning that if you love me you must also love the 
“bitch” inside of me. Later in the chapter I will say more about the 
use of the term “bitch,” particularly from the pulpit, and the com-
plexity it brings to the identity of Black women.
My second presupposition concerns the sexisms in Black Churches, 
most importantly, the internalized sexism of Black, Christian women. 
There exists egregious gender discrimination in Black Churches. Black 
women must contend with the distorted myths and stereotypes con-
cerning our bodies and our sexuality on a daily basis. Black women’s 
bodies, perceived through the lens of racism, classism, sexism, and 
hetereosexism have been degraded, demeaned, demonized by White 
women and all men. Four-hundred years of dehumanization, racist 
stereotyping of the Black-body-as-ugly, while simultaneously being 
an object-of-sexual-desire has served to confound Black Churches 
concerning a response to and strategy against sexism. For African 
American women, the pain of sexism is a burden carried in society, 
but more importantly, it is an unchallenged burden in Black Churches. 
Caught in this mind-body split and charged with the teaching of love, 
Black women look to the Black Church for refuge and clarity only to 
find unquestioned sexism, unchecked misogyny, unexamined patriar-
chy, and internalized sexism. The values of sexism and patriarchy are 
touted as Christian values and thus rendered as unquestionable.
Black Churches, having spent hundreds of years clearly teaching 
our people how to re-think the oppression of racism, has, in our 
complacency and silence, simultaneously taught our people that the 
oppression of sexism is not of critical importance. While there is clar-
ity for the need to combat and teach against racism, the Black Church 
is ambivalent about teaching against sexism. Alton Pollard writes, 
“today, the prevailing culture in Black Churches is still one of silence, 
repression, denial, miseducation, and misinformation, especially 
where patterns of patriarchy and sexual oppression are concerned.”
3 
The sexualized stereotyping of Black women is common place. While 
the larger culture provides a schizophrenic stereotyped portrayal of 
the Black woman as simultaneously being the vixen, the shrew, and 
undesireable, nymphomanic, and unwanted, promiscuous and unlov-
able, slut and ugly—she is the Jezebelle and the Ugly Duckling all at 
the same time, the church remains uncritical and silent. This distorted 
image of Black women’s identity and sexuality perpetuate the myth 
that Black women are being controlled by our libidos, thus sexually 
available to all men (and women) for any activity. Some few churches


--- PAGE 53 ---
Nancy Lynne Westfield40
have made a feeble response beyond silencing to blaming and sham-
ing of the victim. Much of the silencing, blaming and repression has 
been through the teaching of women by other women.
Regrettably, sexism in the Black Church is maintained and sus-
tained by Black women against other Black women. Black women 
can be more patriarchal than Black men. Alton Pollard, in an unpub-
lished essay, “A Woman’s Work, A Man’s World: Critiquing and 
Challenging Patriarchy in the Black Family,” describes internalized 
sexism as women idealizing the Black patriarchal male role. Pollard 
says that Black female patriarchs are not uncommon—they often 
occur, but not always, in the absence of a male patriarchal figure. 
Not so ironically, Black women with internalized sexism are among 
the most ardent defenders of strict gender roles and expectations. As 
ardent defenders against the sexualized stereotypes of Black women, 
the Black female patriarch justifies her stance in support of patriarchy 
as a necessary strategy for the continued survival of Black women.
Christian women, straining to demonstrate their morality and 
fighting to protect their questioned virtue overcompensate by being 
silent and silencing any conversations about sexuality. The silence and 
silencing creates and maintains self-hated and abuse. The silencing is 
a politic of decency that is strangling the women of our churches. I 
will talk more about the politic of decency, later.
Third, and the last of my presuppositions, concerns the role of wor-
ship in the Christian education of African American congregations. 
My pedagogical presupposition involves two tenets about learning. 
First, learning is both “caught” and “taught,” that is, learning hap-
pens through explicit actions as well as implicit innuendo. Persons 
learn from what is said as well as from what is never said or from what 
is veiled in speech or action. Persons learn as much or more from the 
relationship in the teaching/learning enterprise as they learn from the 
curriculum or lesson plans. And second, learning happens by doing. 
It is through experience, multisensory encounters, body/mind/spirit 
engagement that deep learning occurs. Consequently, the “happen-
ing” in African American congregations is in worship. I believe the 
gift and genius of Black Church worship is, in part, its educational 
facility for the congregation.
For Black Churches, worship is the central gathering place for reli-
gious and cultural formation, information and transformation. No 
other arena in the church is as consistently attended by the majority 
of active members as is worship, giving worship a particular basis for 
moral influence and education for faith maturity. The significance of 
worship is brought-to-bear as the majority of churches establish and


--- PAGE 54 ---
Influences of Sexism in Black Church Worship 41
maintain membership roles by worship attendance. During worship, 
the rhythms of the music and songs ranging from hymns to spiritu-
als to gospel rekindle in the congregation their African American 
heritage and culture. Prayers describe to God the needs of oppressed 
persons in contemporary time. The announcements guide persons to 
Bible studies and programs for faith education.
4
It is in the sanctuary, as gathered people, during worship, where the 
big ideas of faith are consistently and experientially worked out. The 
complex notions of salvation, forgiveness, suffering, redemption, lib-
eration and the like, are routinely grappled with through song, prayer, 
offering, sermon, and response. The ritualized practices and behaviors 
of worship teach the community the priorities, the values, the mores, 
and social codes of the congregation. Worship informs and reinforms, 
shapes, and reshapes the congregation of their shared identity as 
Christians, as African Americans, as men, women and children.
For worship in the Black Church Tradition, the sermon is the apex 
of the ritual. The preacher, I would argue, is then, the primary teacher 
in this experience of learning. Preaching as teaching, then, grapples 
with the big questions of life that would otherwise confound, con-
fuse, and devastate the community of believers. The preacher/teacher’s 
role is to assist the congregation in making sense out of those things 
that have challenged them and in some cases, bested and conquered 
them. Meaning-making and the unraveling of complexity and conun-
drums is the stuff of great sermons. Good preaching, then, as good 
teaching is finding people where they are; providing insight and elu-
cidation; challenging and strengthen resolve; nurturing and instilling 
resilience; placing new endings on old stories to create hope; dispens-
ing wisdom for mind, body and soul.
Laity, as learners, participate expectantly in the sermonic moments 
actively listening—anticipating insight, wisdom, “a word from the 
Lord.” During worship, the learner looks to the teacher to frame 
the important questions—to assist with prioritizing all that must 
be dealt with on a day-to-day basis in this oppressive society and 
then give guidance to what is right and what is wrong. Persons in 
th e  p e w s  a s  l e ar n e r s  l o o k  t o  th e  s e r m o n i c  m o m e n t  t o  e n l i g h t e n  
and nurture their imaginations—their souls. Learners do not sit 
uncritically in the pews. If the teacher is preaching without insight, 
someone will say aloud, “Help Him (Her), Holy Ghost.” Neither 
do learners sit unthinking in the pews. Regular participants of wor-
ship are very clear about what is never said or never to be said. 
Laity have a clear sense of the taboos. In short, preaching, praying, 
liturgy, are venues for congregational education—but more to the


--- PAGE 55 ---
Nancy Lynne Westfield42
point of this chapter, worship in the Black Church can assist in the 
mis-education of the people—it is the mis-education with which I 
am concerned.
5
The Problematic
Many Black Churches are progressive enough concerning issues of 
race and racism to place Black art on their church walls and use Black 
images in their worship bulletin covers as signs of their tending to 
issues of racial affirmation and pride. However, issues of body, body 
aesthetic, or sexuality are ignored and “pooh-poohed.” Few, if any, 
direct statements come from the pulpit explicitly affirming the bod-
ies and beauty of Black women. Even when women preach, the same 
pulpits that resound with clarion calls for justice against racism fall to 
whispers concerning the issues of sexism and hatred. The traditional 
practice of bold outspokenness for justice turns soft or even silent 
concerning the bodies of Black women and issues of self-hatred and 
self-acceptance.
T h e  i n c i d e n t  t h a t  I  a m  r e c o u n t i n g  o c c u r r e d  i n  a  m a i n l i n e ,  
Protestant, historically African American Church in the northeast 
corridor of the United States. The church then and now is considered 
“the flag ship church” of the denomination. The church, located in 
an urban neighborhood, is thriving with 500 members, a healthy 
budget, and vibrant worship. The congregation is middle-class, well-
educated, and members primarily live in the surrounding neighbor-
hoods of the church. For the purposes of this example, I will call this 
church “First Church.”
I am recounting this incident, not because it is atypical or rare. I 
am relating this incident because I believe that it personifies a com-
mon, typical, ethos and ethic in Black Church tradition concerning 
the treatment of the Black female aesthetic and sexuality. I have no 
doubt, that anyone steeped in Black Church culture and tradition will 
rightly presume the end of the story before I get to it.
An Incident on Woman’s Day
I was born into and remain until this day, a member of First Church. 
The elder women in my church are proud of me. Under their watch-
ful eyes and fervent prayers, I have become an ordained minister and 
scholar. By the 1990s I had graduated from college, then graduate 
school with a M.A. in Christian Education. I was ordained and was 
serving on the staff of a church in New York City. In 1995, as a way


--- PAGE 56 ---
Influences of Sexism in Black Church Worship 43
of continuing to support me, I was invited to preach on the coveted 
day—Women’s Day.
First Church’s Women’s Day is similar to other Women’s Days—
the day begins with breakfast (served by the men) with a woman 
speaker. The social hall is packed to capacity because women from 
other neighboring churches are invited to attend the special day. 
Following the breakfast is the 11:00 worship with an invited woman 
preacher, and the day ends with an afternoon concert by an all women 
choir or woman soloist. The women of the church take special pride 
in this day—there is a color of the day selected and all the women 
dress in this special color, special programs are printed with lists of 
patrons names, a special offering is taken in support of the church and 
its ministry. Women’s Day is one of the biggest fundraising events of 
our local church. The women of the church work hard to raise money 
and to make the day a highly regarded moment by the pastor, the 
men of the church, and the invited guests.
This particular Women’s Day was no exception. I was delighted to 
receive the invitation to preach on this special day. It was an honor 
to be asked—an honor for me as well as for my family. I was eager 
to preach as a gesture of appreciation and respect to the entire con-
gregation, but especially to the stalwart women who had blessed me 
throughout my life and ministerial career.
During the summer months before Women’s Day, a new fad hit 
the streets of this urban center. All summer long, teenaged girls 
could be seen wearing oversized t-shirts with the words “bitch” or 
“whore” written in large, body-sized, block lettering. I believed the 
fad was costuming for the misogynistic lyrics and messages of the 
hip-hop and rap music being produced that summer. It was painful 
to see young Black women walking in the streets literally dressed in 
the names and words of shame and disrespect. Their bodies were 
billboards proclaiming self-hatred and advertising the U.S. capital-
ism that requires victimization. By donning these t-shirts the young 
women were actively and ardently complicit in perpetuating the ste-
reotypes that Black women were still and yet chattel and that sexism, 
racism, classism ruled, in part, because of their naive support and 
ignorance.
As I wrote my sermon, the young women clad in these “bitch and 
whore” t-shirts were on my mind. I wanted to directly address this 
fad and it’s implications for young women and thought that the pulpit 
on Women’s Day Sunday was the appropriate place, time, and venue. 
I also knew, having grown up in this church, I needed to choose my 
words carefully. I knew that making remarks about the street fads and


--- PAGE 57 ---
Nancy Lynne Westfield44
hip-hop culture had to be done with great finesse or I would offend 
the elder women of the church by broaching this taboo subject and 
breaching church decorum.
I woke up that Sunday morning with my sermon rolling restlessly 
in my spirit and mind. I was unsure, even concerned about incor-
porating my “t-shirt” comments. I arrived at the church and was 
swept up by the excited women. The breakfast and the speaker were 
delicious. Eleven o’clock worship was, as they say, “a high time in 
the Lord.” I walked proudly in the procession through a sanctuary 
full-to-overflowing with women dressed in red. The choirs sang, 
the women prayed—by the time I rose to preach I was confident in 
the sermon I had prepared. I vividly recall preaching fervently and 
having the sermon well received from the start. Near the end of my 
sermon, with outstretched arms, these words came tumbling out of 
my mouth: “YOU AIN’T NO BITCH, YOU AIN’T NO WHORE. 
YOU, MY SISTERS ARE THE BELOVED OF GOD—MADE IN 
GOD’S IMAGE!” Though these words were a minor comment in 
the totality of my sermon I remember that they thickened the air of 
worship and hung without dripping for what seemed a long time. 
When the doors of the church were opened, a teenaged woman gave 
her life to Christ. After service, I stood shaking hands with people 
in the chancel. From my vantage point, I could see the elder women 
gathering in the narthex, caucusing—I knew I had offended them—I 
had breached the decorum. After greeting all the folks, I made my 
way to the pastor’s study to change out of my robe. The chair of 
the Women’s Day Committee knocked on the door and entered the 
room. I figured I would get my tongue lashing then, but instead she 
thanked me and handed me the love-offering envelope. Confused, I 
walked out of the church—on my way, I was congratulated and cele-
brated by the male pastor, the male associate pastor, and the organist 
(all without conflict or chastisement). I exchanged pleasantries in the 
parking lot with a few people and drove home.
On the drive home, I breathed a sigh of relief. I told myself, “Well 
that wasn’t so bad—no one said anything.” I was sure ( and am still 
convinced) that had I been a man the language I used and the agenda 
I affirmed would not have been an issue. I assumed that because the 
elder women did not chastise me at church that they had accepted by 
words—or at least would let me “slide” this time.
By the time I got to my parent’s house, my mother had a sumptu-
ous meal of fried chicken, candied yams, greens, and macaroni and 
cheese prepared. My family and I sat down at the table, prayed, began 
to eat and discuss the wonderful time we had shared at Women’s Day.


--- PAGE 58 ---
Influences of Sexism in Black Church Worship 45
During the meal the telephone rang and my father answered it. He 
called me to the phone and said that Mrs. Green (not her real name) 
was on the phone for me—my heart sank.
Our conversation did not last long—mostly because it was not 
a conversation. I said a series of “yes ma’ams” and “ah huhs” and 
Mrs. Green, in a firm tone said—“Baby, you know we are proud of 
you—and you did well today, but we have to tell you that the pulpit 
is NOT the place for that kind of language. The pulpit is sacred and 
that kind of street stuff has to be left in the street. We do not use 
profanity in our sanctuary.” I thanked Mrs. Green for calling and she 
ended the conversation.
Reflection
I want to reflect upon why I think the elder women were angry; why 
I think they were angry to the point of making a phone call.
Proverbs provide layers of meaning and a constellation of wisdom 
from which to mine. A proverb from the Congo says “the foolish 
(woman) grows angry because they teach (her).
6 At its surface, the 
proverb’s meaning infers that part of being foolish is to attempt to 
remain unenlightened—to maintain one’s own status quo of comfort 
in ignorance and mediocrity. Additionally, there is an inference to 
laziness. Perhaps the foolish woman is angry because she is more lazy 
than content. My experience of the elder women of my church is not 
mediocrity or laziness—so we must looker deeper into the proverb. 
A more relevant interpretation of this proverb for this situation is the 
possibility that the elder woman’s anger is confusion and cognitive 
dissonance welling up in her as the silence is broken and gives way to 
voice and liberty and a certain appreciation for the aesthetic qualities 
of the body.
I t  i s  q u i t e  r e a s o n a b l e  t o  a s s u m e  t h a t  w h a t  a n g e r e d  t h e  e l d e r  
women of my church was my use of profanity—that is, after all what 
Mrs. Green said when she chastised me. If that were the crux of the 
case, then a few words denouncing vulgarity would suffice. My hunch 
is that my use of profanity in the pulpit is not what angered the elder 
women. Male preachers have said that much and more from that pulpit 
and no chastisement occurred. I think what angered the elder women 
was my audacity to change the focus of Women’s Day away from nice-
ties, pleasantries, and fund raising to a more substantive critique con-
cerning the beauty and aesthetic value of the bodies of Black women. 
My comments, albeit brief, broke the code of the sanctuary that says 
that the bodies of women can be present (the women, after all, were


--- PAGE 59 ---
Nancy Lynne Westfield46
dressed in red), even active (the women were praying, singing, preach-
ing), but the bodies of women cannot be named, claimed as some-
thing other than chattel, or heralded as inherently, divinely good. The 
elder women were angry because my words were about the carnal, 
fleshy, sexual, experience of exploitation and sexism. The elder women 
believe that such talk is taboo even if such talk will save our lives.
Women have been taught in the sanctuary to silence, tone down, 
disregard, even hate their bodies as bodies. However, when body is 
spiritualized as while praying or singing or testifying, or shouting or 
dancing the holy dance, then the body is seen as “good.” But, if the 
body is the body, carnal, flesh, then it is to be silenced and hidden. 
I suspect that their anger had much to do with their own endurance 
of sexism as well as their own internalized sexism that they perpet -
uate. A sudden insight into one’s own oppression is cause for anger. 
Too often, the anger is mis-directed at the liberator in a gesture of 
complicity and not at the oppressor in a gesture of newfound under-
standing. Rather than being mad at society, or men or themselves, 
they were angry with me.
Sexisms (Plural)
With this proverb in mind, I want to build on my three previously 
espoused presuppositions. The sexism and internalized sexism in Black 
Churches is intertwined. Many Black men, as sexist, still refuse the 
ordination of women. Too many Black male pastors still have exclu-
sively male deacon boards and trustee boards. Black female patriarchs 
in misguided efforts to uphold male domination perpetuate and nur-
ture the inferiority of women by keeping control for men or keeping 
control as sexist men would control. Black women, in efforts of sur-
vival, have duplicated, mimicked, and replicated the power dynamics 
of the patriarchal structure. In churches that do not ordain women, 
it is the women who are often the ardent opponents to rethinking 
the ordination of women. In male dominated church structures, it 
is often the women who will fight to uphold, rather than dismantle 
the decision making structures that keep them away from the table, 
while at the same time frying chicken to place on that very table. 
Women preachers, when ordained, look strangely and dangerously 
similar to men in the ways they preach, concerning the issues they 
preach on, and in the autocratic ways they make decisions and wield 
power. Many of my female seminarians and my female colleagues who 
are pastoring have told me that unless they communicate to search 
committees that they will uphold patriarchal values that they will not


--- PAGE 60 ---
Influences of Sexism in Black Church Worship 47
get called to pulpits and once in pulpits they must uphold the values 
of sexism in order to be respected and taken seriously by men and 
women alike.
Women relating to other women as if they were chattel in order to 
maintain the status quo of patriarchy and male domination is not new 
in Black Church tradition or Black culture. The internalized sexism of 
Black women that is a direct result of Black male sexism is poignantly 
captured by Alice Walker, author of The Color Purple . In The Color 
Purple, the newly married Harpo asks his father’s advise concerning 
his new bride Sophia. Harpo wants to know from his father how to 
get his wife to mind him. The father asks, “You ever hit her?” The son 
replies, no. The father then asks “how you spect to make her mind? 
Wives is like children. You have to let’em know who got the upper 
hand. Nothing can do that better than a good sound beating.”
7 For 
a sexist, control of a woman’s mind insists on the control of her body. 
I suspect the Willie Lynch formula of brutality for breaking the spirit 
of women is so disturbing, in part, because even if the practice is not 
maintained, the mentality still rages on. Sexism is handed down from 
father to son as the right and only way to maintain “the upper hand,” 
that is to say, manly control and unquestioned power. The cycle of 
despair and dehumanization is nearly impossible to break.
More troubling to me was the advise given to young Harpo when 
he asked his step-mother Celie the same question. Celie gives Harpo 
the same advise that her husband gave—beat her. Later in the novel, 
Celie cannot sleep. She is restless for nights and feeling guilty. In the 
night, Celie realizes what she has done. Celie awakens in the night 
talking to herself:
What it is? I ast myself
A little voice say, Something you done wrong.
Somebody spirit you sin against. Maybe.
Way late one night it come to me. Sofia. I sin against
Sofia spirit.
I pray she don’t find out, but she do.
Harpo told.
The minute she hear it she come marching up the path,
toting a sack. Little cut all blue and red under her eye.
She say, Just want you to know I looked to you for help.
Ain’t I been helpful? I ast . . . 
You told Harpo to beat me, she said.
No I didn’t, I said.
Don’t lie, she said.
I didn’t mean it, I said.
8


--- PAGE 61 ---
Nancy Lynne Westfield48
Patriarchy is self-perpetuating when it is passed from father to son. 
Male dominance is a difficult oppression to overcome, but U.S. soci-
ety has made many strides. What is alarming to me is that I believe 
the entrenchment of sexism in our church tradition is nurtured as 
much or even more by women in efforts to beat down other women. 
Black female patriarchs, in foolish expressions of jealousy and envy, 
teach their boy-children to beat their wives literally and figuratively. 
Our churches are filled with women like Celie who toss and turn in 
the night, restless and guilty about the sin they have wrought on their 
sisters when they give council to men to brutalize and when they, 
acting like patriarchs, brutalize other women. Celie knew the horror 
of domination and servitude, but when given the chance to steer her 
step-son away from being a dominator or when given the chance to 
give Sofia a life without brutality from her husband, Celie spoke just 
as her husband had spoken—beat her, control her, break her body so 
she will give control of her mind. Paulo Freire, noted teacher, writes 
that the oppressed, when given even a modicum of power, will do 
what they know, that is, oppress others.
9
Sexism and internalized sexism, like other cycles of violence must 
be halted and the victims, both oppressed and oppressor must be 
healed and reeducated. Thanks be to God that our churches not only 
have Celies in the pews, but also in our congregations are women like 
Sofia—Sofias who declare to all before God that they love men, but 
that they will fight for their right to be free of domination and con-
trol, even in the church. The Sofias who never thought they had to 
fight in their own house, but who find themselves fending off attacks 
and confronting the Celies as liars and Judases must find support and 
allies in the pulpit from male and female preachers/teachers.
Alice Walker’s portrayals of Celie and Sofia provide a graphic pic-
ture of the struggle Black women have with Black men and with other 
Black women in the same house—in the same church. The dynamics 
of these sexisms are more subtle in the local church, but, it can easily 
be seen in Black Churches decorum of decency.
Decorum of Decency
Black churchwomen, as a defense for survival and in misguided attempts 
to prolong patriarchy, have become upholders of a super-morality and 
g o d l i n e s s  c o n c e r n i n g  t h e  b o d i e s  o f  w o m e n .  A t t e m p t i n g  t o  g a r n e r  
greater social (and divine) respectability, Black churchwomen pre-
scribe to notions of decency that forbid the explicit mentioning of 
the body aesthetic or the overt critique of any issues related to female


--- PAGE 62 ---
Influences of Sexism in Black Church Worship 49
body, sexuality, reproduction or exploitation. Black churchwomen, 
straining for respectability and decency, pressure other churchwomen 
to succumb to repression and self-denial if they are to be thought of 
as “good” Christians. The protocol for women in Black Churches is 
to pressure women to hide and deny their body and silence any con-
versation about the body. Womanist ethicist Dr. Katie Cannon writes 
that Black women who have internalized the sexist mindset promote 
a Victorian ethic of self-hatred, body loathing and artificial morality 
as good church decorum.
10 In an effort to combat the stereotype of 
being oversexed-Jezebelles while at the same time being intolerably 
ugly, Black women inflict upon each other an impossible standard 
by creating a climate of decency.
11 This decency requires that Black 
churchwomen are taught to suppress the sexual aspect of self. The 
church teaches, through silence and innuendo, that the body and 
bodily needs of the Black woman are lower than the spiritual expres-
sions of self. The carnal expressions of the woman must be tamed, 
overcome, shamed, blamed, ridiculed or denied. Cannon, in an essay 
entitled “Sexing Black Women: Liberation from the Prisonhouse of 
Anatomical Authority” writes, “. . . in order to inscript our skin that is 
‘too dark,’ our hair that is ‘too nappy,’ our facial features that are ‘too 
broad,’ and our buttocks that are ‘too wide’ as definitive loci of positive 
human being–ness, Black churchwomen are taught that we must sup-
press the sexual aspect of our humanity, by reinforcing norms and prac-
tices that proclaim sex as a gift from God and relational/recreational sex 
as the devil’s handiwork.”
12
The decorum of decency actively and venomously critiques Sunday 
morning attire with strict, unwritten rules. Women’s hair, make-up, 
jewelry, shoes, and all clothing must fit within rigid standards. Church 
decorum monitors a woman’s mannerism, physical gestures, volume 
of conversation, and tone of voice. There are “church behaviors” that 
must be adhered to and if breeched chastisement and often ostra-
cism occurs. Some churches where the wearing of suites by women is 
the uniform for worship will require that women while seated in the 
chancel area place a handkerchief across their laps. Ushers will sup-
ply the handkerchief if one is not brought by the woman. Ironically, 
I find that the handkerchiefs draw more attention to the bodies of 
women in the chancels, rather than less. Usher boards are instructed 
to seat women based on what they are wearing. If dress is not “accept-
able,” then she is seated toward the rear of the sanctuary.
The decorum of decency is detrimental to women and actively par-
ticipates in the mis-education of women as it creates a climate of fear 
and ridicule among the women. The mis-fitting ethical code serves


--- PAGE 63 ---
Nancy Lynne Westfield50
to alienate women creating stratas of who is “in” and who is “out.” 
When this decorum is the value that is most revered, these prudish 
tenets refuse substantive conversation or preaching about body, body 
aesthetic, or issues of sexuality. Such conversations are considered 
gosh, in poor taste, tacky. The women who are the most strident in 
upholding this mis-guided ethic are often revered by other women 
and placed as chairpersons of women’s day committee and heralded 
as leaders. Women learn and teach, like Celie, that to fit-in and gain 
any status and power, you must be alienating, dehumanizing to other 
women. The cycle of violence is very difficult to challenge, re-think, 
and heal.
The Elder Women’s Anger
My hunch is that what disquieted the elder women was not that I 
used profanity. The words I used breeched the Victorian notions of 
decency, but, more specifically, the words I used promoted and her-
alded the female body and the aesthetic of the body into our theolog-
ical conversation in the classroom called Woman’s Day worship. The 
words bitch and whore undeniably connote women’s bodies, wom-
en’s sexuality, and women’s distorted identity. My message explicitly 
included a conversation about the sexual politics of women’s bodies 
in society. The message of my sermon could not be spiritualized nor 
could it be universalized to include the men. Though I did not then, 
and do not now, want to recklessly and uncritically offend the elder 
women, I do, as a gesture of continued survival, think it is time to 
question and dismantle the decorum of decency that is stifling the 
women in our pulpits and gagging the women in our pews.
Gone to Meddling
A phrase in the Black Church tradition is to say that a preacher has 
“gone to meddling” when he or she becomes emphatic and prescrip-
tive about the lives and behaviors of the congregation. I want to 
conclude by meddling. Paul Giddings writes that conversation and 
preaching that includes gender and sexuality is “the last taboo in the 
Black community.”
13 Giddings says that there is an historical and con-
temporary refusal by Black Churches to “engage one fundamental 
issue: Black sexuality.”
14 I believe that it is the height of hypocrisy or 
naiveté to attempt to discuss issues of suffering and salvation for Black 
women and refuse to discuss sexuality, the Black body aesthetic, and 
issues germane to the deconstruction of the sexisms. If the character


--- PAGE 64 ---
Influences of Sexism in Black Church Worship 51
Celie had any wisdom, then she possessed the insight to call her sex-
ist offense against Sophia a sin. Black Churches must begin to name 
and reflect upon the sexisms, not as a social ill to be ignored, but as a 
sin against God. This sin against God, like other sins, turns our faces 
away from God’s face; turns our bodies away from God’s body; turns 
our minds away from that which is holy, righteous and love filled. We 
must, as men and women suffering the ravages of the sexisms, repent 
of this sin and turn back to God. Our silence and refusal to acknowl-
edge the gravity of these issues is a death-dealing enterprise for our 
churches. We must break these cycles of violence and despair that are 
wrecking our faith communities and find new ways of being commu-
nities that are life-affirming, life-sustaining, and healthy.
As gestures of repentance, I would offer these few suggestions:
● Assess the climate of the female leadership in your church for acts of 
sexism, judgment and violence. If the code of decency is oppressive 
to any women, work to dismantle it and heal the women.
● Set a climate of warmth, hospitality, acceptance, and affirmation for 
men, women, and children throughout the life of the congregation, 
and especially in the worship service.
● Entreat the female leaders of the church, clergy and laity, to find 
authentic, female expressions of authority and power.
● Assist Black women in healing from the contorted reality that 
demands that we hate our bodies while having the responsibility of 
teaching all to love. This, after all, is a simply a set-up for failure.
● Refuse to have a double-standard for male preachers and female 
preachers. Give all preachers encouragement to express their truest 
selves.
● Male pastors, dare to use your power to become outspoken allies 
against the sexisms. Female pastors, recognize and affirm the broth-
ers who are working on their inherited sexism.
● Rethink the event of Woman’s Day and shift it from a day of fund-
raising to a day of consciousness raising for the issues of women.
● Take seriously the mis-education in your church concerning issues 
of female identity, self-hatred and self-worth. Work at ways of tap-
ping into the educational power of worship and become intentional 
about what is being taught and caught in your congregation during 
worship.
● Preach often on issues that celebrate Black women’s bodies, issues 
of sexuality and sexual health, and love. Preach often on shifting 
roles of the Black family and the shifting roles of fathers, mothers, 
daughters, wives, husbands, etc. Preach consistently on male-female


--- PAGE 65 ---
Nancy Lynne Westfield52
relationships and gender oppression. Preach on the hardship of 
misogyny and the oppressive cruelty of the sexisms.
● Preach like our minds, souls and, most importantly BODIES 
depend upon the Lord.
We can no longer afford to be prudish, prim, proper, and pedan-
tic while our young people die from lack of education, while their 
identity and self-worth shrivels, while women live and die thinking 
them selves to be inferior and thinking that inferiority is being a good 
Christian woman. “For until and unless the Black faithful are will-
ing to face matters of human sexuality candidly we cannot ever really 
know who we are, let alone who God is.”
15
Notes
 1. bell hooks, Communion: The Female Search for Love (New York: 
HarperCollins, 2002), 106.
 2. http:/ /www.angelfire.com/ne/savedbygrace/lynch.html. Accessed 
October 14, 2008.
 3. “Teaching the Body: Sexuality and the Black Church,” in Loving The 
Body: Black Religious Studies and the Erotic , editors, Anthony B. Pinn 
and Dwight N. Hopkins  (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004), 317.
 4. For more information see Anne E. Streaty Wimberly and Evelyn L. Parker, 
editors, In Search of Wisdom: Faith Formation in the Black Church  
(Nashville, TN: Abingdon, 2002).
 5. See Carter G. Woodson, The Mis-education of the Negro  (Washington, 
DC: Associated Publishers, 1933).
 6. Albin Kweku Korem and Mawutodzi Kodzo Abissath, Traditonal 
Wisdom in African Proverbs  (Ghana: Publishing Trends, 2004), 24.
 7. Alice Walker, The Color Purple  (New York: Harcourt, 1982), 35.
 8. Ibid., 39–40.
 9. Paulo Freire, Pedagogy of the Oppressed  (New York: Continuum, 1981).
10. Anthony B. Pinn and Dwight N. Hopkins, editors, Loving the Body: 
Black Religious Studies and the Erotic  (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2004), 12.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. Emile M. Townes, editor, Embracing the Spirit  (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 
1997), 237.
14. Ibid., 236.
15. Pinn and Hopkins, Loving the Body , 316.


--- PAGE 66 ---
3
Spiritual Matters:  
The Aesthetics of Ritual 
Substances in Umbanda
Lindsay L. Hale
Dona Luciana1 had a job for me, an important job, one she could 
not do herself. It seemed that, from time to time, Ronaldo, who, like 
Dona Luciana is a medium in the Umbanda religion, would become 
possessed by Omolu, the Yoruban god of sickness and healing. When 
this happened, it did not go well for Ronaldo. I was present one eve-
ning when this occurred.
It was on a Monday, in the middle of August, during an Umbanda 
session in which Dona Luciana and Ronaldo had both received spirits 
known as caboclos. These are important spirits in Umbanda, because 
they are astute advisors and healers. In most cases, the caboclos are 
portrayed as the spirits of Brazilian Indians who lived long ago, 
though that isn’t always the case. Dona Luciana, for example, receives 
a caboclo called Jurema, who was a young, aristocratic Portuguese 
woman,
2 while one of Ronaldo’s caboclos, Hector, was an ancient 
Greek mariner. No matter. Hector had tended to a couple of visitors 
who had come. I believe the last consultation that evening involved 
an older woman with a chronic swelling in the feet and ankles. She 
visited Hector on several occasions, and these consultations always 
unfolded in the same way. Hector would begin by running his hands 
up and down the length of her body, without actually touching; this 
maneuver, known as a passe, is meant to cleanse and readjust the spir-
itual body that envelops the material body. He would proceed to lis-
ten to her as she described her recent symptoms, interrupting to ask 
questions—have you seen the doctor recently? Did he prescribe any-
thing new? Are you taking the medicines just exactly as he said? Are


--- PAGE 67 ---
Lindsay L. Hale54
you drinking enough water? How much? Ronaldo would examine the 
woman’s feet and ankles and dab them with sweet oil and lavender 
water, before giving his advice. Outside of lighting a candle in a quiet 
place in her home and visualizing peaceful, happy scenes, his advice 
was practical and not at all supernatural: Follow doctor’s orders, stay 
out of the sun, get plenty of rest, drink lots of water, massage the 
limbs, and take light exercise every day, nothing strenuous, just a walk 
around the block will do a lot of good.
His work done, Hector departed, leaving Ronaldo and me to wait 
for Jurema to finish with her clients, at which point she too would 
leave Dona Luciana’s body and we would sing a hymn to close the ses-
sion. Sitting quietly in the corner of the little bedroom where Dona 
Luciana and Ronaldo held their weekly Umbanda sessions, I noticed 
that Ronaldo seemed distracted, tired, and paler even than usual. 
Suddenly I could see distress in his eyes; his breathing was shallow, 
rapid, his hands shook, and when I took hold of one, it was cold and 
clammy. Alarmed, I called out to Jurema, just as Ronaldo fainted. 
Jurema moved quickly across the room and opened a little tackle box 
in which Ronaldo kept chalk, candles, matches, paper, olive oil, holy 
water, lavender water, a piece of black soap from Africa, a baggie full 
of dried herbs mixed with incense, little baggies of brown sugar and 
coffee beans, and other items he used during rituals. She handed me 
the box and, whispering, urged me to “ pegue a garrafa do azeite de 
dendê” (“grab the bottle of red palm oil”) which I did. “ Abre-a.” 
Open it. I did. In pantomime she indicated that I was to smear a 
little on Ronaldo’s forehead, the pulse points on his wrists, and on 
the tops of his feet. I did, and Ronaldo’s revived. I tried to hand the 
bottle to Jurema, but she backed away, shaking her head “no,” palms 
out in a gesture that said: keep it away from me. I put the bottle away 
and closed the tackle box and brought Ronaldo, sitting up against 
the wall, looking drained and weak, a glass of water. Jurema finished 
with her clients, we sang the closing hymns, and went out to the liv-
ing room to talk about the night’s events.
This chapter explores aspects of aesthetics in one Afrobrazilian 
religion, Umbanda,
3 by focusing on the deployment of substances in 
rituals of healing, cleansing, offering, and sacrifice. 4 Like the pain-
ter with her palette of colors, practitioners of Afrobrazilian religions 
draw on a wide range of substances—blood, water, oils, honey, infu-
sions of herbs, chalk and soap imported from Africa, plants and foods 
that metonymically recall an African paradise and a Brazilian hell—to 
at once represent, explore, and construct the spiritual and the sacred. 
While most studies of religious aesthetics focus on familiar genres


--- PAGE 68 ---
Spiritual Matters 55
such as music, choreography, and plastic and visual arts, I focus on 
the relatively neglected area of substances because, in appealing to 
vision but also to touch, taste, and smell, they play a crucial role in 
engaging practitioners in a deeply embodied way with their religion. 
Further, I suggest that as we come to understand the language of 
ritual substances, that we can read, written in blood and water and 
palm oil and perfume, in pungent foods and herbal baths, texts that 
speak to the historical and contemporary struggles of Afrobrazilian 
identity.
Before we go there, though, even before we can go back to Dona 
Luciana’s living room where she will explain Jurema’s gestures and give 
me my new job, it is necessary to give a brief overview of Umbanda, 
and my research into it.
Umbanda
Dona Luciana calls her religious practice Umbanda. Umbanda is a 
popular religion, practiced at least occasionally by hundreds of thou-
sands, perhaps even millions, of Brazilians, especially in Rio de Janeiro, 
where it began in the early decades of the twentieth century. Actually 
Umbanda’s roots go back much further, to the religious beliefs and 
practices brought to Brazil by enslaved Africans, mostly from West 
African (present day Nigeria, Benin, Ghana) and the Central African 
regions of Angola and Congo. In Salvador (figure 3.1), the capital of 
Bahia in the Northeast of Brazil, slaves and their descendents were 
able to maintain the West African traditions to this day with remark-
able fidelity (albeit with some changes, most notably the identifica-
tion of the African deities—the Orixás —with the Catholic Saints), 
giving rise to what is popularly known as Candomblé. In Rio de 
Janeiro, however, there was much mixing of traditions from various 
parts of Africa with Catholic elements, and especially characteristic 
of Umbanda, with Spiritism derived from the writings of a French 
mystic, Allen Kardec. The mixing of African traditions, Catholicism, 
Spiritism (and other elements) that produced Umbanda was not 
uniform, and there is a great range of variation within Umbanda. 
Many Umbanda centros (centers) are very Afrobrazilian, similar in 
many respects, especially in the aesthetics of ritual, to the traditional 
Candomblé. In this essay, I will refer to the practices at those centers 
as “Afrobrazilian Umbanda.” What goes on in Dona Luciana’s apart-
ment, though there are elements of Afrobrazilian traditions, is much 
less African; here, I will refer to it with a term that many of its practi-
tioners use. That term is “White Umbanda” (Umbanda branca).


--- PAGE 69 ---
Lindsay L. Hale56
I first began doing field research in Rio de Janeiro, focusing 
on Umbanda, in 1986. I had originally planned to do my work in 
Salvador, looking at one of the traditional (and famous) houses of 
Candomblé. But I took the wise advise of two eminent anthropolo-
gists, Gilberto Velho and Peter Fry, and delayed my trip to Salvador 
to allow myself a few weeks to look at Umbanda in Rio. Though 
I discounted it at the time, both suggested that I might find this 
extraordinarily fertile ground. They were right, and I am grateful. 
Umbanda, with its wide aesthetic (and as we will see, ideological) 
range from Afrobrazilian to White, posed questions—religious, his-
torical, political, aesthetic, personal—that I could not put aside. I 
never made my trip to Salvador that summer, and have been working 
with Umbanda ever since.
5 I first worked with Dona Luciana, and 
then over the years, while continuing with her, expanded my “sam-
ple” to include the range of diversity within Umbanda.
AZEITE  DE DENDÊ
The red palm oil—the azeite de dendê—with which I revived Ronaldo 
is a remarkable substance. It comes from the nut of the dendezeiro, 
the oil palm native to West Africa. Azeite de dendê flows through 
most Afrobrazilian cuisine. Reddish-orange, the oil is very thick, 
Figure 3.1 Photo of Salvador, Bahia.  Photograph taken by Anthony Pinn.


--- PAGE 70 ---
Spiritual Matters 57
with a velvety texture that it retains when used in cooking, and a 
pungent flavor that both conveys and mellows spicy hot seasonings, 
giving such Afrobrazilian dishes as moqueca (a stew of fish or shrimp 
made with onions, tomatoes, hot pepper, green pepper, and coconut 
milk) wonderful flavors and an exquisite, indescribable feeling in the 
mouth.
A staple of Afrobrazilian cooking, azeite de dendê is a main ingredi-
ent in many of the foods associated with, and offered to, the Orixás—
the African deities—in Candomblé and Afrobrazilian Umbanda. 
Ogum, the god of war and ironworking and protector of travelers, 
takes azeite de dendê in many of his dishes. If you roast a yam for 
Ogum, or make a pot of beans for him, you liberally douse it with 
palm oil. Popcorn for Omolu, who possessed Ronaldo that evening 
long ago, or for the trickster/messenger Exu, is cooked in red palm oil. 
Azeite de dendê, then, is a symbol, an index, metynomically connected 
to Africa, Afrobrazilian culture, Afrobrazilian religion, and various 
Orixás. But it is no mere abstract symbol; azeite de dendê is grounded 
in sensual experience; it flows through wonderfully aromatic dishes, 
it carries spicy and warming flavors, it caresses the tongue, the palate, 
and then it slides down the throat to become one with the body. It is 
Africa, in symbol, substance, and bodily experience.
So, about the job Dona Luciana had for me. While the Orixás are 
celebrated in Umbanda, they are not invited to possess mediums. 
This is especially true in White Umbanda, and especially in regard to 
Omolu, the Orixá of sickness and healing. According to Dona Luciana, 
the Orixás are too powerful, too dangerous; thus, “we receive instead 
caboclos who serve the Orixás.” Omolu, she went on, is particularly 
“heavy” and dangerous, but he comes to Ronaldo occasionally. “When 
he does, you can send him away by giving him azeite de dendê, which 
is his substance. I can’t handle azeite de dendê,” Dona Luciana con-
tinued, “it conflicts with my spirits, who are very refined and evolved. 
It is too heavy, it is a thing of Candomblé, African. It is poison for us. 
My spirits, when they use oil, use olive oil, light and sweet. But you, 
my son, are more turned to the African line; it won’t hurt you.”
AMACIS  and  BANHOS
It is afternoon at the House of Father John, a place where the Umbanda 
is very Afrobrazilian. Linda’s strong, dark fingers and Fernanda’s 
plump pink hands worked together, shredding and mashing the leafy 
herbs floating in the big porcelain bowl. Linda, a daughter of Ossaim, 
the Orixá of sacred and medicinal plants, had collected the various


--- PAGE 71 ---
Lindsay L. Hale58
herbs, each of which she named for me as she recited its properties, 
from various locations, picking each at precisely the right time accord-
ing to the vast herbal knowledge passed down over generations, first 
in Africa and later in Brazil. As Linda and Fernanda chatted softly, 
straddling the low bench with the bowl between them, their hands 
worked steadily, unhurriedly, but soon enough the mass of leaves dis-
solved into a thin, green soup. Their work done, they put the bowl 
aside, beneath an altar, to steep and ripen for seven days.
Zé, a wiry, smaller man in his thirties who grew up in the interior 
of Minas Gerais and once told me a story of how, in the old days in his 
town, an old man steeped in the ways of African sorcery, seated under 
a tree to ward off the noonday sun, could make an enemy sick or even 
kill him by just muttering the right words, some months earlier sat 
straddling the same low bench, a bowl of greenish liquid between his 
legs. Zé dipped into the bowl from time to time as he sponged the 
face of a larger man, a man with a split lip and a drooping mouth. 
I think the man had been punched in the face, but I didn’t ask. Zé 
prayed softly, his black, sinuous hands gently tending to the battered 
caramel colored face before him. I thought of the old sorcerer of his 
story, whose muttered curse could kill, and about Zé, whose prayer 
and gentle hands and herbal infusion perhaps could cure the damage 
done to one man by another.
What Linda and Fernanda were preparing that afternoon, and what 
Zé was applying to that unfortunate man that evening, are referred to 
in Afrobrazilian Umbanda as amacis.  Some are used for healing, oth-
ers to bathe ritual items, others as part of initiations and other rituals; 
amacis, these infusions of sacred and medicinal herbs, cleanse, purify, 
energize, and fortify. Pungent, organic, they smell of earth, forest, 
herbs, decay; they feel of water, the oily life juices of plants, bits of 
green matter, cool or tepid, and a little viscous, against the skin.
Amacis are important in Candomblé, and at the House of Father 
John, where Zé and Elena and Fernanda practice what I am calling 
Afrobrazilian Umbanda, but they are not used by Dona Luciana, or 
by participants at the House of Saint Benedict, a White Umbanda 
center where I spent considerable time. They do employ cleansing, 
energizing, and fortifying liquids in a practice called banhos (“baths”), 
but these are used privately and follow a rather different logic, and a 
different aesthetic. Here are some White Umbanda banhos that were 
recommended to me, to cleanse and energize my spirit:
“In the evening, pluck the petals of a fresh yellow rose, one that 
hasn’t started to fade, into a bowl of water. Place the bowl on your 
altar and light a candle. In the morning, take a regular shower and


--- PAGE 72 ---
Spiritual Matters 59
then pour the rose water over you. You can do the same with a white 
rose; the yellow rose carries the energies of Oxum (Orixá of fertility 
and fresh water); the white rose, the forces of Oxalá.”
“Fill a clean, white, ceramic bowl with water. Add seven pieces of 
rock salt, pure, without iodine, or seven drops of lavender. Let it rest 
over night, and in the morning bathe your head in the water.”
“Collect a liter of water from a waterfall of a clear flowing stream in 
the forest. Add nothing to it; this water is full of the energies of Oxum, 
the Orixá of fertility, beauty, and fresh water, who resides by the water-
fall, collecting water lilies. Let it flow over you, head to toe.”
The adjectives used to describe these banhos were “clean,” “pure,” 
“light,” “simple,” and their effects were described as “purifying,” 
“energizing”; they would make me feel “light,” “clean,” “calm,” and 
“tranquil.” When I described a banho that Zé from the Afrobrazilian 
House of Father John, had recommended—that I macerate a bunch of 
basil in a bowl of water, as I had seen Linda and Fernanda do with the 
leaves and herbs—to strengthen the powers of concentration and per-
ception I needed in my research, Seu Gomes from the House of Saint 
Benedict (White Umbanda), characterized this as “gross,” “heavy,” 
and, most tellingly, as the practice of people “lacking in science.”
As with Dona Luciana’s comments about azeite de dendê, we will 
have to return to the differences between the banhos and the amacis, 
Seu Gomes’ remarks, and their significance, in our concluding dis-
cussion. But first, let’s turn to another practice, again involving the 
application of material substances to the body as a form of spiritual 
mediation, prevalent at the House of Father John but absent among 
the practitioners of White Umbanda that I worked with.
SACUDIMENTO
Among the items in Ronaldo’s little tackle box were several pieces of 
chalk. These he used mainly to draw pontos riscados, designs that are a 
kind of signature of the various spirits. When he received Hector, the 
Greek mariner, he would draw wavy blue lines to represent the ocean, 
a yellow crescent moon, and seven white stars—a kind of pictograph, 
a scene that such a spirit would inhabit. Drawn on a square slate or 
sheet of paper, the ponto riscado  remained on the floor, nearby, as 
Hector tended to the various people who came seeking his help. Pontos 
riscados, these hieroglyphs in chalk, are ubiquitous in Umbanda.
At the House of Father John, I saw many pontos riscados, but a few 
times I saw them drawn, not in white or pastel chalk, and not small, 
but big, on the ground, in black gunpowder.


--- PAGE 73 ---
Lindsay L. Hale60
It is late afternoon at the House of Father John. At back, on a 
big concrete slab, a man is standing holding a staff, perhaps six feet 
long, with a fat, long candle at one end; the other end rests beside his 
right foot. He is dressed in old clothes, not shabby or dirty, just old, 
expendable. He is there to undergo a healing, cleansing ritual known 
as a sacudimento, a word which comes from the verb sacudir, to shake, 
jar, jolt, agitate. He looks weary, sad, troubled. No one talks to him, no 
one takes any notice of him as he stands, slope shouldered, red eyed, 
staring off into the distance, until Orlando, a medium who receives 
the spirit of a powerful sorcerer, José Mineiro, comes out and picks up 
a stick of gunpowder chalk from an assemblage of materials near where 
I am sitting. Orlando is not in trance. He nods at me, and, squatting 
down, balancing on the balls off his feet, sets to work on a magnificent 
ponto riscado. Working quickly, he draws in a double bladed hatchet, 
emblem of Xangô, the Orixá of thunder and justice; wavy lines repre-
senting water, a bow, a clutch of arrows, a Star of David, all connected 
with thin lines of gunpowder, and finishes by tracing a thick, black cir-
cle of gunpowder, several feet in diameter encompassing the man and 
the drawings. Orlando stands up, stands back, scrutinizes the work, 
and without a word turns and goes back inside.
Off to the side the materials that are to be used in the sacudimento 
have been assembled. Among other items there are:
Seven raw eggs. Eggs are said to absorb bad energies.
Seven pieces of imported African chalk, called pemba.
A bowl containing coffee beans, raw sugar, and manioc flour. These 
represent the old slaves, who were worked to death to produce cof-
fee and sugar to make White people rich, White people who in 
r e t u r n  f e d  t h e m  l i t t l e  m o r e  t h a n  t h e  e m p t y  c a l o r i e s  o f  m a n i o c  
flour.
A large clay bowl, full of cut up yams, manioc root, cabbages, beets, 
turnips and other roots. Linda, the daughter of Ossaim, tells me 
that these represent the caboclo,  or Indian spirits; these are the 
kinds of things the Indians would grow in their forest gardens.
There are various bowls of beans (uncooked). There are red and pur-
ple beans for the grandmother Orixá, Nanã; little brown beans 
known as mulatinhos (little mulattos) for the warrior god Ogum, 
white beans for the sky god, creator of humankind, Oxalá; black-
eyed peas for Oxum, and little black beans for the old slave and 
sorcerer, José Mineiro.
There were seven red and seven black candles for Exu, the trickster 
who mediates between humans and Orixás; and twenty-one candles


--- PAGE 74 ---
Spiritual Matters 61
for Oxalá. Right after Orlando finished drawing his ponto riscado, 
these candles were arranged in geometric patterns outside the circle 
of gunpowder.
A live rooster, a live hen, and a big enamel bowl containing an amaci 
made of water and the leaves of fortuna (which, as its name implies, 
is thought to bring good luck and wealth) and mamona, the broad 
leaves of the castor bean plant on which, at the House of Father 
John, foods prepared for the Orixás are served, first to the deities, 
and then to the people.
6
The light fades, until the man, all alone, is illuminated by the little 
light of his candle and the greater light of the thirty five candles sur-
rounding the ponto riscado. Full dark now, the drummer Fernando 
and several mediums emerge onto the patio. Among the mediums 
is Orlando, but now he is José Mineiro, the old sorcerer. He sits on 
a little stool, drinking sweet red wine from a little black cup. As he 
sings a little song about himself, one of the mediums brings him the 
hen. He cuts its throat, letting the blood spurt and drip onto the slab. 
Working slowly, deftly, singing softly all the while, he dismembers 
the bird, placing the feet, the wings, the head, and the heart in a clay 
bowl. He repeats the procedure with the rooster. Two of the medi-
ums carry the bowls out to the gate, where they are offered to Exu, 
without whose help, no ritual can succeed.
The time has come. Fernando’s hands come down on the drum, 
beating out a looping, clopping rhythm that, for all its drive, has 
always reminded me in one its rhythmic lines of the clip clop of a 
horse on a rough trail. Fernando knows many, many beats, to sum-
mon and send the spirits; when Fernando, like others steeped in the 
traditions of Afrobrazilian drumming, play , spirit is made manifest 
in sound, enveloping the night and penetrating the body. Suddenly 
he changes the rhythm, and doubles the tempo. His clear voice lifts 
like a horn Descarrega, Descarrega, meu santo Antônio (take away 
the load, the bad energy, Saint Anthony) . . . Almost as if in a dance, 
the mediums pour the amaci over the man, and then the bowls of 
beans, the bowls of roots and coffee and sugar; they break the eggs 
over him. A medium grabs a knife and rips at the man’s clothes; the 
mediums are all in trance now, dancing, swirling, a few, possessed 
by their Exus and Pomba Giras,
7 cackle and laugh The gunpow-
der ignites with a whooshing, ripping sound, a flash of light, and a 
shower of sparks.
And then it stops. The man is led inside, where he is cleaned up 
and dressed in new clothes, while the mediums, back to their usual


--- PAGE 75 ---
Lindsay L. Hale62
selves, clean up the patio. The man returns after awhile. He looks 
much better, relaxed, smiling. He chats for a bit and walks off into 
the night.
I don’t know what troubles brought that man to undergo the sacu-
dimento. I had never seen him before at the House of Father John, 
nor would I encounter him again. I didn’t ask; something told me 
that this was a delicate matter, better left to those who truly needed to 
know. What mattered was that this man was suffering, and people at 
the House of Father John went to his aid by way of this ritual. It was 
a remarkable, dramatic performance, filled with so many vivid images 
and scenes and moments—before it started, even, the assemblage of 
all those materials, those bowls full of beans and roots and amaci, the 
candles; visually, so striking, and each component itself a mythical 
text, a story of old slaves or Indians or an Orixá or Exu or the mag-
ical numbers seven and three and twenty one. That lone, sad figure, 
suffering written on his face, in his posture, holding his candle-torch; 
then as darkness fell, bathed in the warm glow of all those candles, the 
light of compassion. The drumming, the singing, the dancing, the rip-
ping of clothes, swirling to the fiery crescendo—it was a tour de force, 
a memory that will stay with me forever. So much, so rich, so moving; 
but for this chapter, let me just underline the fact that this ritual in 
large part involves the sensual envelopment of the body within a whole 
repertoire of substances and actions, an aesthetic experience laid on, 
and taken in through, the very nerves at the surface of the skin. The 
significance of this for our understanding of Afrobrazilian and White 
Umbanda I leave for the concluding discussion.
Blood
The brightest line dividing White Umbanda from Afrobrazilian 
Umbanda is drawn in blood. Blood sacrifice is fundamental in the 
kind of Umbanda practiced at the House of Father John. It is utterly 
banished from the White Umbanda of Dona Luciana and the House 
of Saint Benedict.
At the House of Father John, blood is ubiquitous. The blood of 
living beings both contains and represents the spiritual force of axé. 
Sacred plants, symbols, sacred places, the drums that call the spirits, 
the center post of the terreiro, the sacred items buried underneath its 
floor, these and many other things are called axés. They are foci of the 
spiritual force, the axé, immanent in the Orixás, the force that drives 
life, and being. But like any font of energy, these axés must from time 
to time be recharged, made new, and this is done largely through


--- PAGE 76 ---
Spiritual Matters 63
blood. So, for example, every year blood is shed to renew the drums, 
the center post, the terreiro itself. And, every year, on the feast day of 
the Catholic saint associated with a particular Orixá, animals specific 
to that deity are sacrificed, and its favorite foods are prepared and 
offered, representing and constituting the deep reciprocity between 
Orixás and human beings.
(I must point out that this is not the practice of people insensitive 
to animals. Sacrifice is done with the deepest respect, and much care 
is taken to minimize suffering. They believe it must be done. And yet, 
the sacrifice of mammals in particular is accompanied with sadness; 
I have seen, e.g., the watering eyes and heard the cracking voice of 
Fernando, the very macho drummer, as he wiped clean the knife he 
had just used on the throat of a goat he had caressed and calmed and 
sang softly to in its last half hour of life.)
Dona Luciana has great respect for Candomblé, in which, like the 
Afrobrazilian Umbanda of the House of Father John, blood sacrifice 
is central. As she puts it, that is their tradition, their line, and they 
must be true to it. Fortunately, she continues, “my line is Umbanda! 
So I don’t have to sacrifice animals, thank God, I love animals. 
Candomblé is Candomblé, Umbanda, and blood sacrifice is not a part 
of Umbanda.” (According to Dona Luciana.)
At the House of Saint Benedict, the responses to my questions 
about blood sacrifice are not phrased so diplomatically. An erroneous 
practice. Cruel. Barbaric. Primitive. Ignorant. Just as the Jews evolved 
beyond those Old Testament practices, so Umbanda has evolved 
beyond the backwards practices from Africa. That is what they say at 
the House of Saint benedict.
Foods
I am looking at a photograph I took sixteen years ago, in the utility 
closet of Dona Luciana’s little apartment. Dona Luciana long ago 
had turned the closet into a shrine for the Oriental line of spirits, a 
line that is not very common in Umbanda but is central to her reli-
gious practice and spiritual life. Sharing space with the water heater 
and the breaker panel is a beautifully polished dark mahogany table 
on which perches a gleaming, golden Buddha. A Chinese water 
painting scroll hangs behind the Buddha; above that, like a many 
legged starfish, shines a golden sculpture representing the sun. The 
photograph depicts a small tray, piled high with four red apples, a 
bunch of green grapes, a watermelon wedge covered in cellophane, 
a pineapple, a big, ripe papaya, a bunch of little yellow bananas, and


--- PAGE 77 ---
Lindsay L. Hale64
a spoon. Behind is a plate of rice; the plate and the tray rest on the 
floor underneath the statue of the Buddha. Dona Luciana prepared 
this offering for the Oriental spirits, to whom she owes so much. 
Sometime later, after the candle has burned down, after the spirits 
have partaken of this gift of fruits and grain, it will be covered in a 
yellow towel and taken to the beach, to be discreetly disposed of in 
the evening tide.
I am thinking of a chilly August dawn, sixteen years ago. I am sit-
ting with my late friend Jorge, a man some twenty years my senior, a 
man who grew up poor in the slums of Rio, a man who would go on 
to a successful career as a hydraulic engineer and retire to a fine neigh-
borhood, but who never would abandon the samba, the soccer, the 
Orixás, the Afrobrazilian culture of his childhood. We are out back 
of the House of Father John, sitting on some steps looking over the 
cement slab where on another occasion a man stood holding a candle 
torch while Orlando drew gunpowder designs around him. We are 
eating, and drinking beer from little plastic cups. We eat from plates 
that are broad, green leaves, about the size of both my hands cupped 
together. On my plate are a couple of black-eyed pea fritters, filled 
with bits of fresh and dried shrimp, fried in azeite de dendê; a couple 
of tablespoons of black beans; a dollop of okra stewed with tomatoes, 
green peppers, hot peppers and dried beef; a hard boiled egg, hominy 
with honey, a bit of chicken, a bit of goat meat, a piece of roasted yam 
drizzled with honey and azeite de dendê. The food is cold, and greasy. 
Jorge nibbles at his. I devour mine; after eight hours of celebrating the 
Orixás, I am famished. Jorge smiles—“so, gringo, how do you like the 
food of the saints?” I take his empty cup and fill it with beer. “Food of 
the saints I like just fine, Jorge; beer of the saints, also.”
Food is the final category of substances on which I will comment. 
Here again there are pronounced differences between the White 
Umbanda of Dona Luciana or the House of Saint Benedict, and the 
Afrobrazilian Umbanda of the House of Father John. I should begin 
by saying that Dona Luciana’s offering of food to the Oriental spir-
its is something of a departure from her usual practice. Except for 
Iemanjã, the sea goddess, who is Dona Luciana’s spiritual mother, 
and the Oriental spirits, she does not prepare food to offer the Orixás, 
or the other spirits. Nor is this done at the House of Saint Benedict. 
The rationale is that these elevated spiritual entities have no need for 
material nourishment. The food could only be symbolic, but even as 
symbol, food, grossly material, implicated in bodily functions and 
appetites, is inappropriate. As Cici of the House of Saint Benedict put 
it, better to offer ribbons and flowers, pure water.


--- PAGE 78 ---
Spiritual Matters 65
(But it is interesting that Dona Luciana, who shares those White 
Umbanda ideals, makes exceptions for those entities who are most 
central to her life. Perhaps the elemental, embodied meanings of 
commensality trump the abstract logic that separates the spiritual 
from the material.)
At the House of Father John, on the other hand, comida de santo, 
“food of the saints,” is a primary vehicle connecting humankind to 
the sacred. To begin with: the food recalls the mythology, the char-
acter, of the various Orixás. Each has favorite and tabooed dishes. As 
Jorge and I ate from our leaf plates that morning, we were taking in 
physical nourishment, but we were also in a sense “eating” a heritage. 
The hard boiled egg pertained to Oxum, the Orixá of fertility and 
fresh, flowing water; the okra stew recalls Xangô, Orixá of thunder 
and justice; the hominy, sweetened with honey, recalls Oxalá, creator 
of humankind; the black-eyed pea fritters, Iansã, the warrior goddess 
who swirls in the tempest, while the yam and the black beans and 
the beer are favorite foods of Ogum, the warrior. And so on. These 
are substances that are good to think with, to borrow Claude Lévi-
Strauss’ felicitous phrase.
Equally, these foods form part of the nexus of reciprocity underly-
ing Afrobrazilian religion. At one level, they are a labor of love, and 
they represent a significant material investment. Those cold beans 
and fritters and okra stew Jorge and I shared at the cold end of night 
were the fruits of long hours of several women’s loving labor in the 
kitchen, women who rely on the Orixás for their well being. They are 
gifts. Before they became food for Jorge and me and several dozen 
other human beings that morning, portions of each had first been 
given as offerings to the Orixás, and to other spiritual beings, as ges-
tures of appreciation but also as sustaining gifts for which the recipi-
ents would be grateful—and generous in turn.
And finally, these substances—these mediators of reciprocity, these 
vehicles of tradition—may be understood as abstract symbols, but they 
are symbols that become one with the substance of living, breathing, 
sensual bodies.
Discussion
In Distinction, his seminal work on the social significance of aesthet-
ics, Pierre Bourdieu explores the ways in which taste—in painting, in 
sport, in music, in notions of desirable body types, to name a few—
while experienced as a private property of the self, is actually a prod-
uct of social experience, and implicated in the construction of class


--- PAGE 79 ---
Lindsay L. Hale66
boundaries and class identities; it goes without saying that taste marks 
not only class, but also ethnic, regional, and political distinctions.8 To 
say that one person has a taste for Phillip Glass while another goes for 
George Strait may not tell us all we need to know about where the 
two parties are coming from and how they would like to see them-
selves in the mirror (and the improbability that they would ever find 
themselves at the same party), but it does tell us a lot.
Surely this is relevant to some of the choices, regarding ritual 
substances, we have seen in this essay. Dona Luciana and her spirits 
cannot abide azeite de dendê. The banhos prescribed at the House 
of Saint Benedict involve spring water, drops of lavender and pieces 
of rock salt, while Dona Luciana prescribes rose petals steeped in 
water. Blood is anathema, and one would never see the pungent, vis-
cous, green amacis. The language used in White Umbanda to talk 
about these substances—“pure,” “clean,” “light” for theirs, “heavy,” 
“primitive” for the stuff of Afrobrazilian Umbanda—evokes sensual/
aesthetic properties as well as an entire subtext of class and racial dis-
tinction. In their choice of ritual substances, as well as other aesthetic 
aspects of ritual (dance, drumming or its lack, and other elements 
equally beyond the scope of this short essay) White Umbanda sets 
itself apart from, and implicitly (at best, often the claims are quite 
explicit) above, Afrobrazilian Umbanda. (Remember Dona Luciana’s 
comments that she and her spirits are too evolved to work with azeite 
de dendê, or the remarks at the House of Saint Benedict that blood 
sacrifice, fundamental to Afrobrazilian religion, is barbaric, primitive, 
African). But there is more to this than holding Afrobrazilian culture 
at arms length, though as the Brazilian sociologist Renato Ortiz so 
convincingly argued in a brilliant historical study,
9 the rejection of that 
identity was enormously important in shaping this style of Umbanda. 
If these aesthetics are a rejection of African roots and Afrobrazilian 
identity, they at the same time embrace and celebrate a European 
heritage and White middle-class identity. If we take Clifford Geertz’s 
suggestions regarding the interpenetration of aesthetics, ethos, and 
worldview,
10 and if we extend Durkheim’s suggestion that religion is 
society’s way of representing itself to itself, then White Umbanda’s 
choices of substances (along with those other elements of ritual aes-
thetics) relates to the broader ethos of bourgeois, middle class and 
(mostly) White culture, and represents not only an aesthetics of what 
is good, but a view of who they are (and, negatively, who they are 
not). Equally, if not more importantly, the near-immateriality of these 
ritual substances (spring water, a few drops of lavender perfume . . .) 
reflects the dualism of Western thought, religious thought especially,


--- PAGE 80 ---
Spiritual Matters 67
that draws a dichotomy between mind and body, culture and nature, 
spirit and matter, with the first term of each pair morally privileged, 
the second, though necessary perhaps to the very existence of the 
first, a kind of embarrassment, a threat, a contaminant. And yet, par-
adoxically, the privileging of the immaterial is represented materially, 
sensually, in spring water and rose petals, drops of lavender, material 
representations of rarified spirit.
The ritual substances and their deployment in Afrobrazilian 
Umbanda paints a very different picture. These substances also make 
claims to identity, but it is an Afrobrazilian identity. That bowl of 
coffee and raw sugar and manioc flour we encountered in the sacu-
dimento is an explicit reminder of the suffering and exploitation of 
Afrobrazilian ancestors, as were the black beans for the old sorcerer 
José Mineiro, who with his little bowl of sweet red wine and his head 
and heart full of African medicine and magic, represents the potency 
of his roots, the strength of his character and his culture. The various 
leaves and roots employed in the amacis, beyond their healing intent 
and efficacy, also represent the African traditions, those age old tech-
niques of healing and cleansing using the living substances of nature. 
W e saw how various foods—many of them prepared with azeite de 
dendê—evoke the Orixás, not as abstract entities, but concrete iden-
tities, figures celebrated in a vivid and explicitly African mythology, 
spiritual beings, yes, but thoroughly embodied characters, with appe-
tites, aversions; sensual beings, mythical, but essentially human.
If the dualistic, European tradition is highlighted in White 
Umbanda, privileging spirit over matter, mind over body, nature over 
culture, the ritual substances of Afrobrazilian Umbanda seek a very 
different goal. They bring spirit and matter, nature and culture, mind 
and body together. Linda’s cultural knowledge guides her collection 
of natural herbs and leaves; she works that vegetal matter, imbued 
with spiritual force, with her strong fingers, producing a substance, 
the amaci, mindfully applied to the body of that man with the bro-
ken face, or that other man with the broken heart, to effect healing. 
Those bowls of substances that washed over that broken hearted man 
during the sacudimento were really bowls of spirit, powerful meta-
phors flooding over the surfaces of the body, to alleviate the sickness 
of a troubled mind. And those foods, lovingly prepared by women 
endowed with the “hand of the kitchen,” pungent, delicious, thor-
oughly sensual and material in their textures and flavors, those are 
given up as offerings to entities that partake of the spiritual essences 
of these substances, which then feed the bodies of tired worship-
ers, ingested as food but also understood as metaphors of spiritual


--- PAGE 81 ---
Lindsay L. Hale68
forces and the webs of reciprocity binding human beings and Orixás. 
And finally, there is blood, the sacrifice of which White Umbanda 
vehemently rejects, but which, as it is ritually shed in Afrobrazilian 
Umbanda, unites spirit and matter, mind and body, human and Orixá 
life and death, joining together that which has been separated in its 
warm, salty, crimson flow.
Notes
1. Names and certain details that might reveal identity have been changed in 
the interest of privacy.
2. Many, many Umbanda mediums receive spirits named Jurema. Almost all 
are conceived of as spirits of young Brazilian Indian women. Dona 
Luciana’s Jurema is the only one I ever met with a European background. 
This is likely related to Dona Luciana’s own strong identification with her 
Portuguese ancestry.
3. There is a wealth of scholarly literature on Afrobrazilian religions gener-
ally, and Umbanda specifically—but very little of it is in English. Here I 
will just refer to sources available in English. The classic historical and 
s o c i o l o g i c a l  o v e r v i e w  o f  A f r o b r a z i l i a n  r e l i g i o n  ( i n c l u d i n g  a n  e x c e l l e n t  
chapter on the emergence of Umbanda) is Roger Bastide’s The African 
Religions of Brazil (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. 1978) 
originally published in French in 1960. Diana Brown’s Umbanda Religion 
and Politics in Urban Brazil (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994; 
first published in 1986 and based mainly on research carried out in the late 
1960’s) is a sophisticated and meticulously well researched book that places 
Umbanda, particularly what I call “White Umbanda” within the broader 
social-historical context. John Burdick’s Looking for God in Brazil, The 
Progressive Catholic Church in Urban Brazil’s Religious Arena (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1993) discusses Umbanda within the larger 
“marketplace” of religious alternatives in a low income community in the 
greater Rio area. I have written several articles dealing with various aspects 
of Umbanda, based mainly on my ethnographic research. Among the arti-
cles are “Preto Velho: Resistence, Redemption, and En-Gendered 
Representations of Slavery in a Brazilian Possession-Trance Religion.” in 
American Ethnologist  Vol. 24, No. 2 (1997): 392–414; “The House of 
Saint Benedict, the House of Father John: Umbanda Aesthetics and a 
Politics of the Senses” in Race, Nation and Religion in the Americas , edi-
tors, Henry Goldschmidt and Elizabeth McAlister (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2004); and “Umbanda,” in Religion and Society in Latin 
America: Interpretive Essays from the Conquest to the Present , editors, Lee 
M. Penyak and Walter J. Petry (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, forthcoming). In 
addition, the University of New Mexico Press is publishing my book, ten-
tatively titled Hearing the Mermaid’ Song: The Umbanda Religion in Rio 
de Janeiro, scheduled for release in August 2009.


--- PAGE 82 ---
Spiritual Matters 69
 4. In “Blood, Oil, Honey, and Water: Symbolism in Spirit Possession 
Sects in Northeastern Brazil” ( American Ethnologist  Vol. 22, No. 4 
[1995]: 828–847) Dolores J. Shapiro explores how in these various 
sects (Candomblé, Giro, and Mesa Branca), blood, honey, oil, and water 
constitute metaphors of racial identity and ideology, in much the same 
way that blood and water work within and between Afrobrazilian and 
White Umbanda. While I was thinking along these lines before reading 
Shapiro, her excellent essay both confirmed and helped me develop my 
understanding.
 5. That first trip in 1986 lasted three months. I returned, supported by a 
Fulbright-Hays Dissertation Research Fellowship, in 1990–1991, spent 
well over a year, and subsequently made a number of return trips, each 
of around three months duration, subsequently.
 6. I was told by my friend, Jorge, that the leaves used as plates were 
mamona—but I lack the botanical knowledge to confirm this. I just 
know the leaves were broad, dark green, and made perfectly functional 
platters.
 7. In Candomblé, Exu is an Orixá who serves as the intermediary between 
human beings and the other Oixás. While this meaning is retained by 
many Umbandistas, in Umbanda Exus are the spirits of human beings, 
who, generally, conducted their lives with something short of exemplary 
moral rigor—petty or serious criminals, carousers, abortionists, or in the 
case of their female counterparts, the Pomba Giras, bargirls, prostitutes, 
dancers, and other characters. Despite, and in part due to, their moral 
ambiguity (which makes them very human) Exus and Pomba Giras are 
much loved—they tend to be funny, theatrical—and are valuable spiri-
tual allies.
 8. Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste  
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984).
 9. Renato Ortiz, A Morte Branca do Feiticeiro Negro  (Petropolois Rio de 
Janeiro: Editora Vozes, 1978).
10. Clifford Geertz, “Ethos, World-View, and the Analysis of Sacred 
Symbols,” in The Interpretation of Cultures  (New York: Basic Books, 
1973).


--- PAGE 83 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 84 ---
4
From Hattie to Halle:  
Black Female Bodies and 
Spectatorship as Ritual in 
Hollywood Cinema
Carol B. Duncan
And there one lies body to body with one’s blackness or one’s whiteness,
in full narcissistic cry, each sealed into his own peculiarity with, it is true,
now and then a flash or so, but these are threatened at the source.
Frantz Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks
Hattie McDaniel’s portrayal of Mammy in the 1939 film, Gone with 
the Wind, marked the first time that a Black actor, male or female, had 
been honoured with the Hollywood motion picture industry’s high-
est award, the Academy Award or Oscar, as it is popularly known. 
McDaniel’s Academy Award as best supporting actress commemo-
rated a role, the loyal domestic servant or slave, that she had effec-
tively portrayed, not only in Gone with the Wind , but on stage and 
screen throughout her acting career. When criticized by Black orga-
nizations such as the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People (NAACP) for playing domestic servant roles and 
thereby contributing to the perpetuation of negative racial stereo-
typing, McDaniel, pragmatic and cogently critical in her assessment 
of economic opportunities available for Black women in the United 
States during the early decades of the twentieth century, apparently 
retorted that she would rather play a maid than be a maid. And indeed 
along with other Black women actors of the first half of the twentieth 
century such as Louise Beavers and Ruby Dandridge, McDaniel made 
a career out of playing maids in Hollywood films and on television.


--- PAGE 85 ---
Carol B. Duncan72
Following McDaniel’s win, Whoopi Goldberg was awarded a best 
supporting actress award for her turn as a charlatan-turned– bona fide 
medium in Ghost (1990). A few Black women would be nominated 
for best actress Academy Awards starting with Dorothy Dandridge in 
1954 for her role as Carmen in the all-Black production of Carmen 
Jones based on Bizet’s opera, Carmen. Others followed including 
Diana Ross for her portrayal of Billie Holliday in Lady Sings the Blues 
(1972), Cicely Tyson in Sounder (1972), Diahnn Carroll for the tit-
ular role in Claudine  (1974), and Angela Bassett for her portrayal 
of Tina Turner in What’s Love Got to Do with It  (1993). However, it 
was not until 2002, that a Black woman was awarded the best actress 
Academy Award. Halle Berry’s win for her portrayal of the belea-
guered, widowed, love-starved, downtrodden Leticia Musgrove, 
in the 2001 film, Monster’s Ball , was widely hailed as a landmark 
achievement. She received the award the same night that Denzel 
Washington was awarded best actor for his role as a corrupt police 
officer in Training Day, and Sidney Poitier, an Academy Award first 
as a Black best actor winner himself, for Lilies of the Field (1963), was 
honored with a lifetime achievement award. Her tearful, emotional, 
acceptance speech in which she proclaimed that her win had kicked 
down the door for all women of color in Hollywood was watched by 
millions around the world.
The erased sexuality of Mammy in Gone with the Wind and Leticia’s 
overt sexuality in Monster’s Ball  are intrinsically linked; they are 
foils of each other as representatives of the subservient Mammy and 
hypersexual Jezebel stereotypes. Important here are McDaniel’s 
and Berry’s embodiment, as light-skinned and dark-skinned Black 
women actors, and its effects on their casting in Hollywood roles. 
Though physically different roles, there are aspects of Mammy in 
Leticia’s waitress and a glimmer of Leticia’s sexually charged per-
sona in one pivotal scene between Mammy and Rhett Butler in Gone 
with the Wind . Although there are discernible differences between 
Mammy and Leticia, there are also striking notes of similarity. While 
Black women filmmakers such as Julie Dash in Daughters of the Dust 
(1991)
1 have consciously countered stereotypic depictions of Black 
mothering in both storylines, characterization and casting, some 
portrayals in comedic movies such as The Nutty Professor
2, featur-
ing Black male actor Eddie Murphy, in female drag, come perilously 
close to stereotype in their depictions of Black motherhood. Leticia 
and Mammy serve as fantasy figures reflecting the projected desires 
of both viewers and filmmakers. What do these characters say about 
Black womanhood and why should it matter to us as viewers of


--- PAGE 86 ---
From Hattie to Halle 73
movies and scholars and students in Black religious and theological 
studies? Simply put, the movies, in addition to being a highly profit-
able culture industry with an international audience, arguably serve 
as the central popular myth and meaning-making vehicle in contem-
porary western popular culture. As such, every aspect of the movies 
from film production and distribution to marketing and manage-
ment is deserving of critical attention. Commonly held notions and 
stereotypes about race, gender, sexuality, class, and other markers 
of social difference are addressed in films. Film viewing is not the 
passive activity of escapist entertainment that it is popularly deemed 
to be but rather is potentially a meaning-making activity with the 
possibility of personal transformation for the viewer. As viewers, we 
bring our individual personal histories and communal experiences to 
films thus making each film viewing event a unique and potentially 
meaning-creating experience. From this perspective, agency in the 
creation and development of filmic narratives rests not only in the 
hands of filmmakers but also, crucially, in the interaction of viewers 
with the films-as-events. For Black people, in particular, rendered 
either invisible and absent from Hollywood cinema over the last cen-
tury of its development, or twisted and distorted through stereotype 
and caricature, the ability to look at these filmic representations, crit-
ically, provides an opportunity for analysis about Others as well as 
to look back at Black people and “[name] what we see.”
3 Historically 
Black women had to develop “looking relations” in response to era-
sure and absence in a Hollywood cinema which in effect “denie[d] 
the ‘body’ of the Black female.”
4
This chapter is an attempt to provide a reading of two Hollywood 
films, Monster’s Ball  and Gone with the Wind  from my perspective 
as a Black female Canadian viewer who is a sociologist with inter-
est in African diasporic religious and cultural forms. In doing so, 
I take up bell hooks’ notion of “black female spectatorship”
5 as an 
analytical tool suggesting, too, that it can function as ritual practice 
which could contribute to religious and theological studies of Black 
experiences. In situating film viewing as ritual, I am also drawing on 
Catherine Bell’s notion of ritual as “enacted thought”
6 which focuses 
on the meaning-making dimension of action to suggest that film-
viewing practices are a form of ritual, through which viewers, in their 
interaction with film can engage in processes of meaning-making, 
identity formation and transformation. Film viewing practices, in this 
instance, encompass private viewings in homes as well as public and 
communal viewing of films in theatres, educational and church or 
other religious group settings.
7


--- PAGE 87 ---
Carol B. Duncan74
I will present a comparative analysis of Hattie McDaniel’s Mammy, 
in Gone with the Wind , and Halle Berry’s Leticia Musgrove, in 
Monster’s Ball , suggesting that the two roles can be characterized 
as bookends of mainstream Hollywood cinematic representations of 
Black women. The Hollywood beauty aesthetic has long excluded 
dark-skinned Black women, at the same time that there has been a 
fascination with mixed-race and light-skinned Black women as sex-
ual objects stereotypically portrayed as tragic mulattos.
8 As such, 
Hollywood cinema presents a limited range of aesthetic practices 
for Black women through the recycling of these two stereotypical 
images. Though separated by more than sixty years and pivotal 
events which have altered the course of gendered, raced and class 
relations in the United States such as the Second World War, the 
modern American civil rights movement and second and third wave 
feminist movements, there are parallels which underscore and high-
light both changes and most notably consistencies in the represen-
tation of Black women in Hollywood cinema. First and foremost, 
both McDaniel’s Mammy and Berry’s Leticia occupy mothering 
roles: Mammy as a devoted and loyal enslaved domestic in a wealthy 
Southern home in the 1860s and Leticia as an early twenty-first cen-
tury, contemporary poverty-stricken single parent with few finan-
cial and emotional resources to take care of herself and her young 
son. The focus on motherhood in roles featuring Black women is, 
in itself, not surprising given that Hollywood cinema’s favored role 
for Black women, historically, is Mammy, the loyal domestic servant. 
Second, both women were publicly awarded for roles which resonate 
explicitly, by name, in the case of Mammy and implicitly, in the case 
of Leticia, with long-established racial stereotypes of Black women 
as asexual, docile mammies and hypersexual, licentious Jezebels. 
Third, both roles are linked to themes of redemptive love, forgive-
ness, and financial prosperity, won and lost, in the storylines of the 
films. Anchoring all three themes is the continued representation, 
in Hollywood cinema, of Black female bodies as sites of projected 
desire and exploitation in domestic and sexual service. These in turn 
are based on linked sets of dualisms concerning modern Black female 
representation in the West: Mammy/Jezebel, Madonna/whore and 
beauty/bestiality whose roots lie in the emergence and continued 
impact of the Hottentot Venus as an iconic image of Black female 
sexuality 200 years after she was first displayed to western European 
audiences as representative of a freak of nature and virtual proof 
of Black Africans essentialized difference and inferiority to White 
Europeans.
9


--- PAGE 88 ---
From Hattie to Halle 75
Black Female Spectatorship: Seeing 
GONE  WITH  THE  WIND  and  MONSTER ’S BALL
The act of seeing involves our historical and political locations. 10 
Seeing, thus, is both a biological and social phenomenon that involves 
people as both viewers and subjects and is shaped by social relations 
of power.
11 Fanon’s Black Skin, White Masks  asserts that Black people 
are rendered objects through the process of colonization and impor-
tantly the gaze of the colonizer.
12 bell hooks maintains that critical 
Black female spectatorship can be a site of resistance only when indi-
vidual Black women actively resist the imposition of dominant ways 
of knowing and looking.
13
My grandmother, Dorothy Sebastian Prince, and I would have 
been almost exactly the same age, definitely grown women, as the 
folk say and not girls when Gone with the Wind  premiered in 1939 
and Monster’s Ball , sixty-two years later in 2001. Our familial gen-
eration span is almost identical to that of the two films. As a Black 
woman who was born and came of age during the early decades of the 
twentieth century in Antigua, then a British colonial territory in the 
English-speaking Caribbean, my grandmother was, like most women 
of her generation, not a habitual moviegoer. In fact, her participation 
as viewer of mass visual culture was limited mostly to television and 
this was a practice of her old age begun in the 1970s in her seventies. 
My own viewing practices began then, too, at age 7 in Antigua, a 
few short months before my departure for life in Canada. My mother 
came of age as a moviegoer in 1950s Antigua, then England in the 
1960s where I was born, and finally Canada by the 1970s. Attracted 
to broad sweeping epic stories with romantic vistas, one of her first 
acts of motherly love for my brother and myself upon our migration 
to Canada was to habitually send us to movie matinees at local movie 
theatres to see films that she thought would not only entertain us, 
but also as a way of furthering our acculturation to life in Canada. We 
saw Jesus Christ Superstar  (1973) and The Sound of Music (1965) that 
first summer in Toronto.
While Gone with Wind  presents a hagiography of the Old South, 
Monster’s Ball, on the other hand, represents an ode to a New South, 
a post–civil rights era changed one in which White men with deeply 
entrenched racist attitudes as personified by prison guard, Hank 
Grotowski (Billy Bob Thornton), can redeem themselves through 
sexing/loving Black women. Told ostensibly as a love story between 
two deeply wounded people drawn together by the untimely death of 
their sons, economic circumstances, and emotional need, Monster’s


--- PAGE 89 ---
Carol B. Duncan76
Ball is an extended commentary on race, sex, gender, and desire in 
the contemporary American South.
Similar to the scene that bell hooks describes when she is watching 
Spike Lee’s She’s Gotta Have It (1986) and the character Nola Darling 
is raped by one of her lovers while the other movie audience members 
either do not react to, or actually cheer on the rapist, not realizing, it 
seems, that a rape is taking place and mistaking it for consensual and 
loving sexual interaction, I was disturbed by the unproblematized 
portrayal of desire for a Black, female body as an object of sexual 
desire by a White male whose character had been portrayed as being 
virulently racist earlier in the film and who had taken part as an agent 
of the state in her Black husband’s execution.
14 While the lovemaking 
scene, the in/famous “Make Me Feel Good” scene that is initiated by 
Leticia’s proposition to Hank in her living room, to “make me feel 
good,” could purportedly be read as an act of redeeming love, I was 
disturbed, when viewing the film, publicly, at a cinema, by the lack 
of reaction by the audience, at large, to the racism portrayed in the 
screen and the simultaneous air of excitement and titillation over the 
display of Halle Berry’s scantily clad or nude body on screen. My ini-
tial reaction at the time, in the company of friends, was to start a con-
versation, in the theatre, about the unfolding narrative on the screen. 
In so doing, we participated in a practice of viewing that disrupted the 
narrative flow and provided a basis for a burgeoning critique.
15 How 
could I, as a critical viewer and religious studies scholar, make sense 
of viewing this film and its largely unproblematic reception in ear-
ly-twenty-first-century North America topped off with an Academy 
Award at that? First Mammy wins the award and then Jezebel, too, 
it seems. What began as a movie house conversation during the first 
viewing of the film in 2002 has led to ongoing critical analysis of the 
film, specifically, and the broader issues of raced, sexed and gendered 
representation of Black women in Hollywood cinema. The starting 
point of such analysis is Mammy, the most enduring of stereotypes 
of Black women as workers and mothers, upon which Hollywood 
cinema was fixated.
Comparing Mammy and Leticia
Mammy is one of the most persistent images of Black women as 
workers and mothers. A product of U.S. Old South racial mythology, 
Mammy was a stereotypical construct that masked the sexual exploi-
tation of Black women living and working in the homes of White 
families at the same time that her docility and loyalty justified labor


--- PAGE 90 ---
From Hattie to Halle 77
exploitation. For example, Harriet Jacobs, a mixed-race Black woman 
enslaved in the United States in the mid nineteenth century, writing 
under the pseudonym, Linda Brent, gave witness to the continued 
sexual victimization that she and other enslaved Black women faced 
through her domestic servitude in the master’s and mistress’ house.
16 
Jacobs’ frank discussion of humiliation, debasement and the constant 
threat of sexually predatory behavior toward Black women by White 
male slave owners is in stark contrast to the purposely desexualized 
image of Mammy. Mammy’s physical appearance, particularly her 
girth, the darkness of her skin, her wearing of an apron and headtie 
were meant to signify her inferiority, servility, and sexual undesir-
ability. Racialized stereotypes have physical as well as emotional and 
affective characteristics. Thus, Mammy is the ultimate self-sacrificing 
nurturer. She cares more about complete loyalty to the family of her 
White master and mistress than her own. In fact, she is frequently 
portrayed as having no family of her own and being particularly harsh 
with other Black people, especially Black males. McDaniel’s portrayal 
of Mammy in Gone with the Wind, is the quintessential Mammy. Her 
devotion to the heroine, Scarlett O’Hara, and her family through 
three generations of women is total and complete. In the film, after 
the Civil War and emancipation, incredibly, Mammy chooses to stay 
behind at the burnt out plantation house, Tara, to care for her old 
master and mistress and Scarlett’s two younger sisters rather than 
seek her own freedom!
While Mammy is desexualized, Jezebel, on the other hand, is the 
hypersexualized image of Black womanhood that erased culpability 
for, and in fact the very commission of, acts of sexual exploitation and 
victimization of Black women by White men during and after slav-
ery. In the ultimate “blame the victim” scenario, Black women’s sup-
posed sexual insatiability excuses White men’s sexual victimization of 
them. As such, Black women as temptresses get blamed for leading 
the men astray into committing acts of terror and violence. Jezebel’s 
contemporary image is the “bad black girl,” according to Jewell.
17 
She is a sexually provocative, light-skinned Black woman whose phys-
ical features approximate dominant White-identified codes of beauty. 
Leticia in Monster’s Ball exemplifies Jezebel.
While hierarchies of “color” as distinct from “race” are never men-
tioned, overtly, in Monster’s Ball , they are certainly implicit in the 
casting of Halle Berry, a light-skinned Black woman in the role. 
Would audiences have responded differently to the pairing of Billy 
Bob Thornton’s Hank with a darker-skinned Black woman actor 
such as Phyllis Yvonne Stickney, Alfre Woodard, Whoopi Goldberg,


--- PAGE 91 ---
Carol B. Duncan78
or Angela Bassett, for instance? This comment is made in light of 
the well-established tradition in Hollywood cinema of using light-
skinned Black and other non-White actors and actresses in roles that 
feature romantic pairings with White partners. Examples from 1950s 
interracial dramas featuring Black/White pairings include mixed-race 
Black American Dorothy Dandridge and Kurt Jurgens in Tamango 
(1956) and light-skinned Jamaican-American Harry Belafonte and 
Joan Fontaine in Island in the Sun (1957). More recently, in films 
in the action/adventure genre, Tanzanian/British Thandi Newton 
and Tom Cruise were paired in Mission Impossible II  and Halle Berry 
and Pierce Brosnan in Die Another Day. Berry’s mixed parentage (her 
mother is White and British, her father is Black American) is widely 
reported, in the media. Audiences often read into onscreen portrayals, 
off-screen biographies of actors. This form of intertextuality linking 
characteristics associated with the actors as reported in the popular 
media with their onscreen performances could and probably does 
inform the viewing of Berry’s portrayal of Leticia who, herself, enters 
into a relationship with a White man through the course of the film. 
As Margaret L. Hunter notes in her study concerning “the politics of 
skin tone” in African American and Mexican American communities 
in the United States, women of color with lighter skins are portrayed 
in the media as most attractive and desirable.
18 Music videos, fashion 
magazines and popular films that emerge from Black popular cultural 
contexts are replete with images that feature light-skinned women of 
color as ideal sexualized objects of beauty and desire. Such mirroring 
only serves to reinforce deeply held notions about beauty and desir-
ability among consumers of popular culture. Hunter, through her 
interviews with Black and Latina women, discusses the impact of color 
hierarchies in communities of color in the United States on women’s 
self-esteem, familial relations, and importantly, for this discussion, 
perceived desirability as romantic partners.
19 Overwhelmingly, lighter-
skinned women were perceived and experienced enhanced possibili-
ties of partnership over their darker-skinned sisters.
Leticia’s body is frequently on display. When not wearing her wait-
ress uniform at the diner (her link to Mammy through paid domestic 
work), the character is usually portrayed braless in skimpy tops and 
tight skirts. Unlike the bad Black girl, however, Leticia is dependent 
and distraught. The savvy and cunning associated with the bad Black 
girl stereotype are stripped away from the character. She is instead 
a damsel in distress, a retrograde Scarlett O’Hara, as I will discuss 
later, who needs as she says to Billy Bob Thornton’s Hank at the film’s 
conclusion, “to be taken care of.” And taken care of she is as he first


--- PAGE 92 ---
From Hattie to Halle 79
gives her a lift to work, takes her and her son to the hospital where 
her son eventually dies after a hit-and-run accident, becomes her lover 
in perhaps the most sensational scene of the movie, buys her a car, 
rescues her from eviction, and moves her into his refurbished house 
and names his business after her.
Halle Berry’s Leticia Musgrove and Hattie McDaniel’s Mammy 
are both American Southern Black women. In movie narrative 
time, these women are separated by 140 years, from 1860 to 2001. 
And yet there is some of Mammy in Leticia and Leticia’s Jezebel in 
Mammy. Both are pictured without male partners. Leticia’s husband, 
Lawrence, played by rapper and music producer, Sean “Puffy” Combs 
is executed in jail early in the film. Hank Grotowski, who becomes 
her lover, is in fact, one of the guards at the jail who participates in his 
“Monster’s Ball,” the ritual enactment of the prisoner’s last meal and 
last requests before his execution. This is a fact that Hank finds out in 
the crucial sequence before his first sexual encounter with Leticia but 
which he keeps to himself and she finds out only at the film’s conclu-
sion. Mammy ostensibly has no significant other. The male servant, 
Pork, an Uncle Tom caricature, is clearly not her partner. Mammy is, 
in her own words, completely devoted to the O’Hara family having 
mothered three generations of its women including Scarlett’s mother, 
Scarlett, and Scarlett’s daughter, Bonnie Blue.
A first point of comparison is Leticia and Mammy as mothers. 
Leticia ineffectively parents her extremely obese son who eventually 
dies when hit by a car on a dark and stormy night. Her love for her 
son is never in doubt but it is clear that her husband’s incarceration 
shortly after the boy’s birth and the strain of parenting him alone 
on her wages as a waitress in an unstable job market have taken their 
toll. Leticia turns to alcohol to relieve her pain and is abusive toward 
her son, verbally and physically. Her life is clearly in crisis as her car 
breaks down, she falls behind on the house rental payments and is 
on the verge of eviction when we meet her in the movie. Mammy, 
on the other hand, is many ways the ultimate good mother in her 
relationship with the White family. She is all knowing and all caring 
and acts as a moral conscience and physical caretaker for Scarlett. She 
even draws the grudging respect of Rhett Butler who gifts her with 
a red, taffetta petticoat following his honeymoon in New Orleans 
with Scarlett. Mammy, however, has no children of her own and her 
devotion and loyalty to the White family to whom she is enslaved is 
complete.
Relations with Black and White men constitute a second point of 
comparison. Both Mammy and Leticia are estranged from Black men.


--- PAGE 93 ---
Carol B. Duncan80
Mammy seemingly by choice as her mission in life is service to the 
White household and Leticia through the death of her husband by 
execution and her son by a hit and run accident. Within days, Leticia 
is cut off, permanently, from the Black men in her life. Her isolation 
and need for connection eventually lead her to reach out to Hank, who 
unbeknownst to her, was one of the guards who escorted her husband 
to his execution in prison. Mammy, on the other hand, by dint of her 
physical appearance is deemed outside of the realm of sexual attrac-
tion. She is in fact, Scarlett’s foil. At the honeymoon scene, Rhett 
admits his admiration for Mammy and expresses his desire for her to 
like him and as a gesture of his affection suggests buying Mammy a 
gift. Scarlett declines to buy her a gift. Rhett acting on a statement 
made by his Mammy years ago decides to buy Mammy a red, taffeta 
petticoat. When we next meet Rhett and Mammy, they are conversing 
outside of the bedchamber in which Scarlett is in labor. In their inter-
change, Rhett is flirtatious with Mammy who also flirts back lifting 
her skirt to show her petticoat. As I have discussed elsewhere, this 
revelation of the petticoat of a mammified Black woman is a trope in 
erotic fiction.
20 The audience is expected to be in on the joke that this 
flirtation could not possibly be serious given Rhett’s previous state-
ments about Mammy’s size and her lack of attractiveness. This same 
motif of red fabric representing luxury shows up in Monster’s Ball. In 
the moments leading up to their lovemaking, Leticia in a drunken 
conversation tells Hank about her love of her red curtains purchased 
on credit from a store owner who “kinda liked her.” While there are 
no further allusions to Letiticia’s past life, the reference suggests that 
o n e  o f  Le ti ti ci a ’ s  p oss i b l e  s tra t e gi es  f o r  e c o n o mi c  s urvi v al  o v e r  th e  
years are “favors” from men who find her sexually attractive. The com-
ment also foreshadows the relationship that develops with Hank that 
like nineteenth-century Louisiana concubinage arrangements called 
plaçage, between mixed-race Black women and their White patrons, 
includes the provision of material goods (in Leticia’s case a car) and 
significant financial assistance including a home.
Leticia is like a retrograde Scarlett O’Hara. She is feisty, she is 
Southern, and like Scarlett, her only child dies and she is need of 
rescuing. Interestingly, both Berry and Leigh share mixed-race fam-
ily histories although Berry’s is public (it is always public if one is of 
African descent—the one drop rule in effect) and Leigh’s rumored 
(Anglo-Indian or Persian). Both are praised by men who rescue them 
for their beauty. While Mammy serves as Scarlett’s foil, in an inter-
esting gender twist, Leticia’s son, Tyrell serves as his mother’s own 
foil as a large, dark-skinned Other. Tyrell’s body is the one that is


--- PAGE 94 ---
From Hattie to Halle 81
rejected. When Scarlett returns to the plantation, Tara, and finds her 
father alone with Mammy, it is supposedly inconceivable that a sexual 
relationship could have taken place. In the film, it is outside of the 
realm of possibility; however, in reality, we know that many such rela-
tionships actually occurred. Leticia, however, completes this story arc 
in her relationship with Hank by living out the interracial possibility 
deemed not only improbable but the source of comic relief in  Gone 
with the Wind. Hank and Leticia’s relationship in Monster’s Ball can 
be viewed as a reworking of the deeply entrenched Hollywood cine-
matic trope of “love conquers all.” In the movie’s storyline, there is a 
lot to conquer including multiple losses experienced by both charac-
ters. In the case of Hank, his adult son, Sonny (Heath Ledger), with 
whom he has a troubled relationship and who also participates in the 
“Monster’s Ball,” commits suicide. We learn through the course of 
the film that Hank’s wife, Sonny’s mother, also committed suicide 
earlier. Shots of the gravestones in final sequence of the film reinforce 
Hank’s suffering. Leticia, in quick succession loses her husband, first 
to a lengthy jail sentence leading up to his eventual execution and 
then her son in a freak accident while walking home in the dark on a 
stormy night. Unable to pay for car repairs and on the verge of home-
lessness due to eviction from her rented house, it is clear that she is 
barely making ends meet, financially, in her job as a waitress at a diner 
that Hank frequents. Her son deals with his pain through chronic 
overeating and Leticia through drinking. Hank’s courting of Leticia 
involves a series of rescues in which he comes to her aid like a knight 
in shining armor. He stops on that fateful stormy night when Tyrell 
is struck by another car that speeds off into the night and is there to 
comfort Leticia when her son dies. He provides her with transporta-
tion to and from her job.
Their first sexual encounter occurs one night when Leticia invites 
Hank into her home after he gives her a lift home from the diner. 
They are both drunk and sitting on her couch when she expresses her 
despair with an imploring “make me feel good” to Hank. She exposes 
a naked breast. The graphic sex scene that followed mirrors, in some 
s e q u e n c e s ,  H a n k ’ s  d e p e r s o n a l i z e d  s e x u a l  e n c o u n t e r  w i t h  a  W h i t e ,  
female prostitute earlier in the film that the audience gathers is a 
fairly regular occurrence given the exchange of pleasantries between 
Hank and the woman. The directorial choice to include such mir-
roring suggests that the relationship began out of need for comfort 
expressed through sex and then developed into a broader based rela-
tionship. A later scene depicting a sexual encounter between Hank 
and Leticia does, in fact, bear this out through a marked difference


--- PAGE 95 ---
Carol B. Duncan82
in the depiction of the sex. The camera focuses on Leticia’s face and 
eyes, the small gold cross on her necklace. She remains semi-clothed, 
and she is depicted as receiving pleasure from Hank’s lovemaking. 
What is crucial in the depiction of both encounters is that Leticia’s 
body and its pleasuring is a crucial aspect of Hank’s development and 
transformation from prison guard with racist attitudes and behaviors 
that were undoubtedly passed down to him by his father, a retired 
prison guard with deeply entrenched racist attitudes.
Significantly, upon meeting Hank’s father when she drops by the 
house to leave a gift of a cowboy hat for him after their sexual encoun-
ter, Leticia has a conversation with him that repels her and threatens 
the newly developed relationship. It is clear from Hank’s father’s sexu-
ally suggestive comments that he, too, has had sexual contact with at 
least one Black woman in the past, even though the context of this rela-
tionship including whether or not it was consensual is not indicated. 
In fact, in discerning that Leticia’s relationship with Hank is sexual, 
Hank’s father deems this development as evidence of Hank being “just 
like his daddy.” Hank’s challenge is to overcome the powerful forces 
of familial and larger societal socialization in which he has been raised 
that would condone sex with a Black woman as a sexual object in a 
subordinate relationship as an acceptable practice but never as a loving 
act in equal partnership. Hank, however, consciously attempts to make 
that leap after hearing about his father’s conversation with Leticia and 
making the decision to relocate his father to a home for the aged where 
he significantly is placed with an older, Black, male room mate (are 
these the seeds of a Monster’s Ball part two in which Hank’s father 
also undergoes a change of heart on race?). He also quits his job as a 
prison guard and buys a gas station which he names, Leticia’s. Thus, 
in breaking the dichotomy of sexing/loving Leticia, Hank breaks the 
familial pattern of hatred of Blacks.
Crucial to Hank’s transformation is Leticia’s wordless forgiveness of 
his omission of the fact that he had been a prison guard involved in the 
execution of her husband. The audience is let in on Hank’s secret when 
he, himself, realizes during the evening of his first sexual encounter 
with Leticia that she is the wife of Lawrence Musgrove. He keeps 
this knowledge to himself and it is not revealed to Leticia until, while 
rummaging through the contents of a box in a bedroom at Hank’s 
now newly refurbished house, she comes across the drawings of Hank 
and Sonny that Lawrence had drawn on his final evening before his 
execution. The shocking realization dawns on her that the only reason 
these drawings were made was because Hank and Sonny were present 
during her husband’s last night of life. Hank, in the meantime, has


--- PAGE 96 ---
From Hattie to Halle 83
left the house to purchase chocolate ice cream because, in his words, 
“it seemed the right thing” to do. In the meantime, Leticia wordlessly 
expresses her anger with punches on the bed and tears and yet says 
nothing to him when he returns. He feeds her the ice-cream, in a scene 
that ritually enacts the dynamics of their relationship in which Hank 
is provider and Leticia is consumer. They look out into the night sky 
in the movie’s final scene. The suggestion here is clearly that they have 
decided to start over. The relationship signifies a new beginning. With 
dead spouses and children and extended family and parents either not 
in the picture, in Leticia’s case, or removed to another location, in the 
case of Hank’s father, they represent the possibilities of starting anew. 
Hank’s redemption lies in his willingness and ability to take care of 
Leticia and her silent forgiveness and acknowledgment of his pain and 
suffering. For Leticia, the deaths of her husband, Lawrence and her 
son, Tyrell, become her conduit to a new life. In their absence, Leticia 
is no longer a caretaker. In fact, she notes that she “needs to be taken 
care of” and he affirms that he will take care of her. The exchange of 
words served as a type of vow between Hank and Leticia, a pact signi-
fying the nature of their relationship.
My critical gaze as a Black woman spectator came into play when 
examining the nature of the pact between Hank and Leticia in a 
wider sociohistorical context. I view this relationship as resonating 
very strongly with long-established historical traditions, from the 
slavery era in the state of Louisiana in the southern United States and 
other parts of the Americas such as the Caribbean of concubinage 
between Black and mixed-race women and White men. These rela-
tionships were governed by economic and sexual exchange in which 
the women and their children who resulted from these unions were 
provided for financially by the men. Perhaps romantic love was a fac-
tor in some of these relationships. What is apparent, however, is that 
in traditions such as plaçage in New Orleans, the exchange of brown, 
mixed-raced women’s bodies for financial and social security was a 
dominant factor in the relationship. Thus, a critical view of Monster’s 
Ball from the standpoint of a Black woman spectator suggests that 
the nature of Hank and Leticia’s relationship including its frank and 
explicit depictions of sex, exchange of vows and her silent knowledge/
forgiveness in the execution of her husband is frankly emblematic rep-
resentation of the power dynamics involved in those earlier, historical 
relationships of concubinage.
Uncomfortable ethical questions are raised here concerning the 
degree of complicity in which these women participated in gaining 
resources and privileges within a highly stratified system of racialized


--- PAGE 97 ---
Carol B. Duncan84
and gendered power relations. As well, it suggests that such gains 
almost always necessitated subtle forms of concealment and double 
consciousness involving simultaneously knowing and not knowing 
that we discern in Leticia’s slight smile and gaze into the distance at 
the film’s close. It suggests an alternative reading of the film in which 
Leticia is not solely a reactor to her situation with limited choices but 
a woman who is able to self-consciously exercise a degree of agency 
based on sexual exchange.
Conclusion
It is my hope that this exploratory analysis of Monster’s Ball critiqued 
in comparison to Gone with the Wind , has underscored the impor-
tance of examining movies as a central place of myth-making and 
the circulation of controlling gendered, raced and sexed stereotypes 
and images. Often public discourse concerning representation, such 
as awards ceremonies, posits a dichotomy of “positive” and “nega-
tive” images when in actuality, elements that may appear “positive” 
in one circumstance may appear “negative” in another. Clearly , the 
discursive terrain in which these images are played out is much more 
complex and hotly contested. The challenge for Black religious stud-
ies and Black theology is to take these images and their discursive 
contexts seriously. This analysis is especially important for movies, 
videos, television and other forms of mass media in an increasingly 
media-oriented popular culture, the discursive is clearly one of the 
arenas in which the politics of identity gets played out.
Notes
1. Daughters of the Dust  was the first film directed by a Black woman, Julie 
Dash, to be released, nationally, in the United States. Set in 1902, it 
chronicles the migration of the Peazants, a Gullah family, living in the 
Sea Islands on the coast of the states of Georgia and the Carolinas to 
mainland United States. Nana Peazant, great-grandmother and great-
great-grandmother to many of the characters in the film, is a tall, spare 
Black woman with short dreadlocks, as embodied by actor Cora Lee Day. 
With her uncovered head of locks and long, lean body, Day presents a rad-
ical counterpoint to the stereotypical image of Black elder womanhood 
associated with signs such as the head kerchief covered hair and a stout, 
large body.
2. A remake of the 1963 film starring Jerry Lewis, The Nutty Professor fea-
tured Eddie Murphy as Professor Sherman Klump, a lonely, overweight 
Black man who is a brilliant university science professor and researcher.


--- PAGE 98 ---
From Hattie to Halle 85
Sherman’s research leads to the discovery of a substance that, upon inges-
tion, leads to radical and miraculous instant weight loss. The weight loss 
is accompanied by a personality change into his alter ego, Buddy Love. As 
a result, the peaceful, kind, and considerate Sherman becomes the arro-
gant, self-serving, and disruptive Buddy. In a scene featuring Sherman’s 
family at dinner, Murphy, through the use of clever editing and cos-
tume design and make-up, plays all of Sherman’s family members seated 
at the same dinner table including Sherman’s mother. Typically, in the 
sequences featuring Eddie Murphy as Sherman’s mother, Mrs. Klump, 
she is depicted as an overweight Black woman who loves to cook and who 
is a super nurturer rather like Aunt Jemima.
3. bell hooks, “The Oppositional Gaze: Black Female Spectators,” in 
Reel to Real: Race, Sex, and Class at the Movies  (New York: Routledge, 
1996), 199.
4. Ibid., 200–201.
5. Ibid., 197–213.
6. Catherine Bell, “Constructing Ritual,” in Readings in Ritual Studies , 
editor, Ronald L. Grimes (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1996), 
21–32.
7 . For example, as communicated by African Canadian film maker, Phillip 
Daniels, in a personal interview (January 2005), his documentary, 
Seeking Salvation: A History of the Black Church in Canada  (Vision TV 
and Travesty Productions, 2004) was purposely publicly screened in a 
number of Toronto Black Church and Black community settings in addi-
tion to its air dates on television and screenings at film festivals and uni-
versity settings, precisely because of the film maker’s awareness of the 
significance of viewing practices as a site of critical inquiry. I have had 
the opportunity to attend some of those screenings (April 24, 2004 and 
August 1, 2004), and witnessed and participated in personal and commu-
nal interaction with the unfolding narrative on screen. In this instance, 
the film viewing experience was very akin to “having church,” as several 
film goers remarked about the call and response reaction to interviewees, 
their words and musical performances, on screen.
8. The tragic mulatto stereotype portrays a light-skinned, mixed-race Black 
person, usually female, as being trapped between the social worlds of 
Blacks and Whites in a racially segregated society. The “tragedy” of the 
tragic mulatto is this supposed rejection from both Black and White social 
contexts. Usually the mixed-race heroine, as depicted in such Hollywood 
films as Imitation of Life  (1934) and its remake, Pinky ( 1 9 4 9 )  i s  p h e -
notypically close to, or indistinguishable from dominant White beauty 
standards as represented by light skin, straight textured hair, and light-
colored eyes. She is paired with a White male love interest and is poised to 
enter the world of White privilege save for the secret of the “one drop” of 
Black blood in her ancestry.
9. Sara Baartman was a Khoikhoi woman from Southern Africa who, after 
being transported from the Cape, was displayed naked as an object of


--- PAGE 99 ---
Carol B. Duncan86
supposed scientific curiosity in both London and Paris in the early nine-
teenth century. The unrelenting focus of the White European gaze was 
on Baartman’s buttocks on genitalia. After her death in 1815, her body 
was dissected and her pelvis was preserved in formaldehyde where I was 
displayed at the muse de l’homme well into the late twentieth century. 
Baartman as the Hottentot Venus, as she was dubbed, served as the 
quintessential symbol of blackness as wild, animalistic, and freakishly 
hypersexual as epitomized by the large size of her buttocks and supposed 
anatomical variations in the appearance of her genitalia in comparison to 
supposedly “normal” White European women. Her remains were finally 
returned to South Africa, for burial, in 2002. For a full discussion of 
Baartman see Janell Hobson, Venus in the Dark: Blackness and Beauty 
in Popular Culture  (New York and London: Routledge, 2005), 19–54. 
See also Sander Gilman’s discussion of Baartman “Black Bodies, White 
Bodies: Toward an Iconography of Female Sexuality in Art, Medicine, 
and Literature,” in “Race,” Writing, and Difference, editor, Henry Louise 
Gates, Jr. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986), 223–261.
10. Dionne Brand, Bread out of Stone: Recollections, Sex, Recognitions, Race, 
Dreaming, Politics (Toronto: Coach House Press, 1994), 169–171.
11. John Berger, Ways of Seeing (New York: Viking Press, 1973).
12. Frantz Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks  (New York: Grove Press, 1967).
13. bell hooks, “The Oppositional Gaze,” 198.
14. bell hooks. “ ‘Whose Pussy Is This?’ A Feminist Comment,” in Reel to 
Real: Race, Sex, and Class at the Movies  (New York: Routledge, 1996), 
232–233.
15. In “The Oppositional Gaze: Black Female Spectators,” 199, bell hooks 
cites Manthia Diawara’s discussion of the power of spectatorship in his 
article, “Black British Cinema: Spectatorship and Identity Formation in 
Territories,” suggesting that there are moments of “rupture” when the 
spectator resists “complete identification with the film’s discourse.” For 
hooks these moments of rupture were crucial to Black audiences in the 
United States during segregation being able to enjoy films in which neg-
ative stereotyping was present. She suggests that these ruptures “restored 
presence where it was negated” through viewers’ discussion both during 
or after screening.
16. For a full exploration of her experiences, see Linda Brent (Harriet 
Jacobs), “Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl,” in The Classic Slave 
Narratives, editor, Henry Louis Gates, Jr. (New York: Signet Classic, 
2002), 437–668.
17. K. Sue Jewell, From Mammy to Miss America and Beyond: Cultural 
Images and the Shaping of US Social Policy  (London: Routledge, 1993).
18. Margare t L. Hunter, Race,  Gender, and the Politics of Skin Tone (New 
York: Routledge, 2005), 85.
19. Ibid.
20. Anaïs Nin’s erotic stories, “Saffron” in Delta of Venus  (New Y ork and 
London: Harcourt, Brace and Jovanovich, 1977) and “Artists and


--- PAGE 100 ---
From Hattie to Halle 87
Models” in Little Birds  (New York and London: Harcourt, Brace and 
Jovanovich, 1979), contain references to highly sexualized Black women 
in long petticoats. In Nin’s stories, the garments serve as a code for 
Black female hypersexuality which is invariably licentious and animal-
istic. See the following article for further discussion: Carol Duncan, 
“ ‘Mammy’ in the Erotic Imaginary of Anaïs Nin,” Journal of the 
Association for Research and Mothering  Vol. 4, No. 1 (Spring/Summer 
2002):146–155.


--- PAGE 101 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 102 ---
2
The Caribbean


--- PAGE 103 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 104 ---
5
Sacred Forms: Ritual, 
Representation, and 
the Body in Haitian Painting
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert
. . . [I]n sacred works, where the acts will not, in themselves, result in 
anything, but may be rewarded if they please the divinity to whom 
they are addressed—where, therefore, there can be said to be no direct 
material purpose—the form is the total statement; and its distinctive 
quality is that reverent dedication which man brings only to divinity.
Maya Deren, Divine Horsemen
In her exploration of the work of Haitian flagmaker and Vodou priest 
Clotaire Bazile, Anna Wexler describes the “mastery of ritual detail” 
that characterizes his work as both oungan and artist as a skill that 
allows him to translate the “intense awareness of [his sacred work’s] 
power to heal and to destroy into tangible forms.”
1 This “mastery of 
ritual detail” encapsulates the aesthetic dimension of all sacred work 
in Vodou and guides the recreation of those sacred forms which, in 
Deren’s words, encompass the “distinctive quality” of “reverent ded-
ication which man brings only to divinity.”
2 In Vodou, mastery of 
the ritual forms is essential to the summoning of the spirits—known 
as lwa or mystères —into the presence of believers (or serviteurs), and 
this mastery requires strict attention to the aesthetics of worship and 
representation. As Wexler explains, “there is an edge to acts of beauty 
that not only represent but activate the transforming energy of the 
spirits.”
3
Early historians of Haitian art found in the aesthetic foundations of 
Vodou a key to understanding the development of a painting tradition 
closely linked to religious practice. LeGrace Benson, writing about


--- PAGE 105 ---
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert92
Wilson Bigaud, underscores the importance of “Haitian history, true 
and invented, and Haitian religion” as inspiration for the art created 
by the artists of his generation, born of “pride in the establishment 
of a sustained independent Black country by means of a revolution 
assisted by the lwas [and] despair that the promises made to the lwas 
were still unkept.”
4 Selden Rodman, in The Miracle of Haitian Art, 5 
argued that the artists of the first generation of the Centre d’Art in 
Port-au-Prince—many of them Vodou priests or practitioners—not 
only drew inspiration from religious beliefs and practices, themati-
cally as well as formally, but built the aesthetic bases of their visual 
language on the forms and objects familiar to them from ritual prac-
tice. Chief among these were the vèvè or ritual drawings sketched on 
the temple ground with cornmeal, ash, powdered eggshells, or cof-
fee grounds as a means to summon the lwa (spirits) to join believers 
during ceremonies. Vèvè, as Patricia Mohammed has argued, “conse-
crate the ground area they cover for the loa they represent,”
6 turning 
the space of ritual into a canvas for the reproduction of intricate and 
ephemeral ritual designs that will be erased by dancers’ feet during 
ceremonies. The masterful recreation of these ritual designs, critics 
have argued, served as an introduction to artistic creativity for many 
Haitian painters and constitutes “the visual progenitor of Haiti’s 
renaissance.”
7
Inspiration was also drawn from two other categories of religious 
art available to early Haitian painters, that of the Catholic chromo-
lithographs and church frescoes depicting incidents in the lives of 
the saints, and the “richly ornamented” sequined ceremonial flags—
such as those produced by Clotaire Bazile—which serve as “points 
of entry”
8 for the lwa during ceremonies. The chromolithographs 
offered a visual example of “an institutionalized religion’s understand-
ing . . . and . . . conceptual meditation of the sacred.”
9 The same could 
be argued for the flags, simultaneously objects of great beauty and 
potentially of great power, which, during ceremonies, “are unfurled 
and danced about . . . to signal the spirits represented by the vèvè . . . or 
the images of corresponding Catholic saints sewn on them” to join 
the ritual.
10 “Their reflective brilliance,” Wexler argues, “is said to 
attract the spirits into the human gathering, mediating between two 
worlds.”
11
The ritual function of the vèvè and the drapo —central elements 
in Vodou’s most important sacred forms—which also include food 
offerings, dance, music, and animal sacrifice—is not abstraction, but 
rather the fulfillment of a ritualistic embodiment that invites the spir-
its to enter the realm of the living through physical manifestations of


--- PAGE 106 ---
Sacred Forms 93
their presence, chief among them the phenomenon of possession. The 
achievement of beauty through ritual, which is vital to the success of 
the appeal to the spirits in Vodou, hinges on the “mastery of ritual 
detail” that Wexler observed in Bazile’s work and which is realized 
primarily through manifestations of the lwa through the bodies of 
the serviteurs or initiated. The aim is to invite the spirits— les invis-
ibles—to embody themselves in a chosen serviteur who in turn will 
give the spirit a voice. Success is predicated on mastering the forms, 
on reaching the high level of aesthetic practice that will satisfy the 
requirements of the lwa.
This close relationship between the spirits and the living—estab-
lished through the body as a vehicle for sacred work in Vodou—is one 
of the most significant themes of Haitian art, particularly in the first 
and second generations of the Centre d’Art. Early Haitian painters, 
I would argue here, turned the centrality of sacred work in Vodou 
practice into one of the guiding principles (and subject matters) of a 
bourgeoning artistic tradition. This close link between ritual prac-
tice, faith, and art—as we will see below through various examples of 
salient works by noted Haitian painters—has been repeatedly artic-
ulated through representations of bodies engaged in the masterful 
performance of sacred work, of ritual intended to breach the divide 
between living beings and the word of the lwa. The paintings exam-
ined below reveal how the “mastery of ritual detail” has been as cen-
tral to the successful embodiment of the spirits in Vodou practice as 
it has been to the articulation through art of the vital transformations 
that have made Vodou such a dynamic and aesthetic-centered reli-
gious practice.
Toussaint Auguste’s Papa Zaca en Possession  (Possessed by Papa 
Zaca, 1953, figure 5.1) depicts most vividly the breach of the divide 
between the living and the lwa that is the one common goal of all 
sacred work in Vodou. Auguste (1925–), a painter from Leogane, a 
village southwest of Port-au-Prince, just north of Jacmel, was one 
of the early painters working at the Centre d’Art in Port-au-Prince. 
Acknowledged as one of the first generation masters of Haitian paint-
ing, Auguste’s choice of religious subjects articulates the complex-
ities of religious life in Haiti, where Vodou and Christian practices 
seem often to coexist in somewhat congenial simultaneity. Known 
for sensitive depictions of Vodou ritual in his paintings, Auguste has 
also portrayed Protestant rituals (see his Baptism, 1949), which he 
knew well as a lay reader for the Episcopal Diocese in the mid-1940s, 
and was one of the muralists who participated in the decoration of 
the Episcopal Cathedral of Sainte Trinité in Port-au-Prince, which


--- PAGE 107 ---
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert94
includes his renderings of the Flight into Egypt and The Temptation of 
Adam and Eve.
In Papa Zaka en Possession , however, Auguste has turned to the 
lwa most closely connected to the Haitian peasantry (another promi-
nent subject in his work) to depict Vodou’s most significant embodi-
ment ritual within the context of Haiti’s most urgent historical crisis 
(the severe deforestation that has rapidly destroyed the land’s pro-
ductivity in the small island-nation). Papa Zaca, also known as Azaca 
or Kouzen (Cousin) Zaka, is the Vodou lwa of agriculture, the pro-
tector of the Haitian land. A peasant figure traced to Amerindian 
culture, Papa Zaca is recognized by his blue denim jacket and the 
makout or sissal market sack he habitually carries. Those possessed 
by Papa Zaca usually don his characteristic peasant straw hat and go 
through the motions of sowing seed. When he appears in a ceremony, 
he is typically offered peasant fare—boiled maize, afibas (stuffed pig 
intestines), and glasses of clairin (peasant-distilled white rum). His 
vèvè (see figure 5.1) incorporates the elements of his agricultural 
role—his makout with its decorative tassels, the scythe and machete 
Figure 5.1  Auguste, Toussaint. Papa Zaca en Possession  (1953). Oil on masonite. 
11¾ × 14¾ inches.


--- PAGE 108 ---
Sacred Forms 95
as instruments for clearing and sowing the land, the pipe that points 
to his enjoyment of simple pleasures, the grid-like patterns on the 
makout that recall seeded fields, and the bottle of clairin.
Auguste’s painting articulates with great simplicity and acute clar-
ity the reciprocity of the relationship between serviteur and lwa that 
marks the phenomenon of possession—the embodiment of a lwa in 
the body of a serviteur that is the cornerstone of Vodou as a belief 
system. During possession, the possessed—the “horse”—gives his or 
her voice to the spirit, articulating “the reciprocal abiding of human 
and god” and making communication between the world of the spir-
its and that of humans possible.
12 The lwa, as Joan Dayan has argued, 
“cannot appear in epiphany, cannot be made manifest on earth with-
out the person who becomes the temporary receptacle or mount.”
13 
The horse, therefore, must surrender his or her body temporarily to 
the needs of the lwa, allowing, through the process, the guiding wis-
dom and divine power (or ashé) to flow from the realm of the spirits 
into that of their serviteurs. In Papa Zaca en Possession , Auguste cap-
tures this ritualized reciprocity through the mirror-like elements that 
articulate the link between the two figures—the lwa and the woman 
he has possessed.
The importance of the “embodiment” of the horse by the lwa is 
underscored in Papa Zaca en Possession  by the prominence given to 
the possessed woman, who occupies the geometric center of the can-
vas. Dressed in the garb of the lwa—unadorned denim dress, mak-
out, and straw hat—she is represented following the crise de lwa, the 
moment when the spirit occupied her head, just as she has completed 
the embodiment process and is ready to speak for the lwa. The rec-
iprocity, evident in their mirroring positions, is underscored by the 
matching jugs, as Papa Zaca readies to pour the contents of his into 
hers. The exchange could be of seeds, water, the clairin or local rum 
favored by the lwa , or of the ashé or “power in the state of pure 
energy , ” as Miguel Barnet has defined it ( 82 ).
14 The prominence of 
the makout recalls the lwa’s association with abundance and magic, 
attributes traditionally linked to the tassel decorations on Papa Zaka’s 
straw bag.
15
Auguste contextualizes his representation of possession, not by 
placing his reciprocal figures within the ceremonial space of the ounfó 
or temple, but by using the backdrop of the eroded and deforested 
Haitian landscape as the means of emphasizing the need for Papa 
Zaca’s intervention to help the Haitian land recover its fertility. The 
leafless and truncated trees in the foreground, the stump of a tree 
on the lower left corner, and the denuded and deforested hills in the


--- PAGE 109 ---
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert96
background, all point to Haiti’s devastating ecological dilemma. In 
Haiti, persistent and prolonged deforestation dating back to the clear-
ing of the land for sugar cultivation in the early eighteenth century, 
and continuing into the present because of the lack of ready access 
to cooking fuel in the countryside, has left the island severely defor-
ested. With its forest coverage reduced to less than one percent of the 
national territory, Haiti has been plagued by the devastating conse-
quences of its severe environmental crisis—the catastrophic erosion 
that has washed away the fertile topsoil into the sea, frequent deadly 
mudslides, severe decreases in rainfall, and growing desertification 
in areas of the country that once produced several yearly crops.
16 It 
is a situation exacerbated by the devastating loss of the sustaining 
connection between the people and the lwa who reside in the fam-
ily’s plot of land or heritage that many have been forced to abandon 
because of its decreasing productivity. In Auguste’s painting, the red-
dish brown earth extends into the horizon to meet the bluish rocky 
hills. There is no grass, no crops, no sprouts in the landscape that 
frames the figures, thus underscoring the need for the lwa’s presence 
and intervention if the Haitian land is to be returned to its former 
fertility. The environmental contextualization underscores the “total 
integrity of cultural form” that characterizes Vodou as religious prac-
tice.
17 Possession, as illustrated by Auguste, has the ultimate goal of 
practical intervention in solving Haiti’s environmental dilemma. The 
painting underscores that the ultimate goal of successful sacred forms 
rests in the lwa’s successful intervention in the resolution of the prob-
lems plaguing the mortals who serve them.
The placement of the possessed at the center of his painting 
also allows Auguste to use the space she occupies as a liminal space 
between the two realms—that of the spirits, occupied by the lwa, 
represented here in human form, and that of the serviteurs, toward 
which, in her state of possession, she has temporarily turned her back. 
His composition, which shows a fairly symmetrical allocation of space 
to the three realms depicted, balances the space occupied by the lwa 
on the left with the space to the right occupied by four elements: a 
truncated, branchless tree which reminds us of the barrenness and 
deforestation Papa Zaca is called upon to resolve; the cemetery cross 
usually found in the vèvè for Bawon (Baron) Samdi (the lwa who rules 
over death and the cemetery and who belongs to the family of spir-
its known as Ghédé); a lamb, Christian symbol of sacrifice, standing 
here for the animal sacrifices often offered to the lwa as a gesture of 
placation or thanks; and a red door on a white hut, combining the 
colors sacred to Papa Legba, keeper of the gates that divide the spirit


--- PAGE 110 ---
Sacred Forms 97
and material worlds. The allusions to the Bawon and the Ghédé and 
to Papa Legba underscore the liminality of the space occupied by 
the possessed. Legba stands at a spiritual crossroads between humans 
and the lwa they serve; his permission is required for such interac-
tions to occur. Ghédé, as Maya Deren argues, straddles “the great 
divide between the living and the dead,” being “naturally, not only 
the lord of both, but the lord of its interaction.”
18 The allusion also 
emphasizes the link between Ghédé (who presides over fertility rites) 
and Papa Zaca (whose agricultural realm Ghédé is prone to invad-
ing). They are believed to be brothers whose relationship is marked 
by competition and uneasy truces.
Auguste’s Papa Zaka en Possession, through the centrality of the 
lwa’s horse (Papa Zaca’s living manifestation) in its composition, 
underscores how the aesthetic quality of the ritual embodiment rep-
resented (the excellence of the correspondences between lwa and 
serviteur, in this case) allows for the precise representation of the strad-
dling of “the great divide between the living and the dead” that is 
the ritualistic goal of possession. The precision of its representation—
the naïve realism through which Auguste captures the ineffable qual-
ity of the horse’s temporary transformation into the lwa—eschews 
needless metaphor, capturing the transformation instead through 
the literal embodiment of the lwa as a human mirrored by his horse. 
Auguste’s aesthetic solution to the depiction of the transformation, I 
would argue, resting as it does on an apparently simple device—that 
of showing the disembodied lwa both in its imagined bodily manifes-
tation and as embodied by its horse—moves beyond mere representa-
tion of a particular religious phenomenon for the viewer. It suggests 
a symbiotic convergence of ritual and art through which the artists 
can convey the nature of belief and practice in Vodou within a context 
that establishes the ultimate function of these ritual practices.
Just as Auguste invokes Papa Zaka in his depiction of the mys-
tery and functions of possession, Zaca’s brother Ghédé presides over 
Wilmino Domond’s Dance Scene  (figure 5.2), which illustrates the 
importance of music and dance as vital elements in Vodou’s sacred 
forms. Domond, born in 1925 in Jacmel, was a coffee-farmer-turned-
painter who followed in the footsteps of his cousin Castera Bazile, 
himself an acclaimed Haitian artist. A member of the Centre d’Art 
from 1948, Domond was one of the “dominant figures of the second 
generation” of Haitian painters.
19 His Dance Scene  offers a charm-
ing representation of couples dancing a kontredans (a version of the 
European contredanse) to the tune played by a small band of musi-
cians. It is linked to Vodou beliefs and practices by the drapo found


--- PAGE 111 ---
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert98
on the upper left quarter of the canvas, which connects the dance to 
the Ghédé. Bawon Samdi, his wife Maman Brijits (Brigitte), and the 
Ghédé spirits are traditionally served with the colors featured here 
(black, white, and purple) and are symbolized by the image of the 
cross on a coffin or tomb that we also saw in Papa Zaka en Possession. 
The allusion to the Bawon and the Ghédé transforms what could have 
been read as a pleasant peasant dance into a ceremonial offering to the 
lwa and his spirit family.
Domond’s composition privileges the three pairs of dancers, who 
occupy the foreground of the painting, forming a horizontal band 
that leads the eye from left to right. The painter, however, uses the 
diagonal lines formed by the low wall that fences the enclosed dancing 
space to point to the upper left corner occupied by the drapo, thereby 
accentuating the space occupied by the ceremonial flag. Its presence 
is also signaled by the arm of the drummer who occupies the upper 
center of the painting. As it extends upward, it creates a horizontal 
line that further delineates the space occupied by the flag. Domond, 
however, seems interested in broadening, rather than circumscribing, 
Figure 5.2  Domond, Wilmino. Dance Scene  (c.1949). Oil on cardboard. 24¼ × 
24¾ inches.


--- PAGE 112 ---
Sacred Forms 99
the presence of the lwa  in his dance scene, an aim he accomplishes 
through his use of purple, the color associated with Ghédé. Shades 
of purple, from that of the drapo itself to those of the wall against 
which it stands and the clothing of dancers and musicians, suggests 
the presence of Ghédé throughout the painting. The presence of the 
lwa, one could conclude, permeates the dance scene, enveloping the 
bodies whose ceremonial dancing invokes his company.
In Dance Scene, Domond is working with a limited palette that he 
uses to advantage to create a scene of harmony and synchrony that 
suggests the modulations of the dance and the importance of the 
synergy between musicians and dancers to sustain the presence of 
the lwa among them. Working primarily with dark blue, yellow, and 
ochre (in addition to the lwa’s characteristic purple, white, and black), 
the palette integrates his dancers and musicians into one single pur-
pose—that of uniting visually the cadences of music and movement 
to sustain the presence of the lwa. We see this, for example, in his use 
of yellow in the clothing of the drummer that occupies the apex of 
the angle formed by the low wall. The color, repeated in the dresses 
of two of the dancing women (the ones that frame the dancing 
couples to the left and right of the small group), creates a triangle that 
accentuates the diagonal lines formed by the low wall. The yellow is 
balanced at the top of the triangle by the purple of the drapo, a bal-
ancing that is rearticulated at the lower right corner of the painting by 
the clothing worn by one of the musicians. The two colors underscore 
the triangle-within-a-square composition that opens the painting to 
the space occupied by the viewer, suggesting other dancers outside that 
space, among whom the viewer could locate him or herself.
Maya Deren, in her seminal work on Vodou, found that “Haitian 
dancing was not, in itself, a dance-form, but part of a larger form, the 
mythological ritual.”
20 Ritual dance, she argued, discourages individ-
ual virtuosity and privileges “the simple, anonymous movements” of 
the collective body.
21 These “simple, anonymous” movements are the 
ones recreated by Domond in Dance Scene: its three couples move in 
unison, eyes fixed on their partners, the position of their feet suggest-
ing ritual movement in response to an uncomplicated pattern. The 
dance suggests “the gentle rolling of the hips seen in many Caribbean 
dances of Kongo provenance.”
22 None of the dancers seems inter-
ested in a virtuoso display of individual dancing skills, but in the 
measured, prescribes steps of the traditional dance. The subdued 
eroticism of the dance—the dancing in couples, the staring into the 
partners’ eyes, the coordinated movements of the dancers—link the 
dance represented in the painting to Ghédé, since ordinarily ritual


--- PAGE 113 ---
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert100
choreography is limited to a general movement of the dancers coun-
terclockwise around the poto mitan or temple center post. The most 
salient dances involving couples are linked to the performance of the 
“semicomic and sexually provoking rhythms of banda”
23 dedicated 
to Ghédé and associated either with gyrating hips and sexual gestures 
or by rhythmic, sensual dancing by couples that recalls the “intimate, 
suggestive subtlety” of Ghédé’s M’sieur Entretoute avatar.
24 While 
Ghédé can be brazenly obscene, M’sieur Entretoute is slyly erotic and 
wittily sensual. Ghédé’s dances, although most commonly associated 
with the affirmation of the erotic principle—“the inevitable and eter-
nal erotic in men”
25—are often, according to Katherine Dunham, 
performed at funerals “in keeping with the African philosophy which 
closely associates procreation with death.”
26
In her study of Katherine Dunham’s approach to ritual dance in 
Haiti, Joyce Aschenbrenner observes that, in Haiti, “the distinction 
between sacred and secular [dance is] one of function rather than 
form.”
27 This is a link not a lways understood by obser vers. Eighteent h-
century writer Louis Méderic Moreau de St. Méry, writing with little 
understanding of the religious foundation of Vodou in his seminal 
work on Haiti, could not distinguish what he called the “danse vau-
doux” from the ritual for which it opened a path. What escaped him 
was the vital link between the drums, songs, and dance: “The ritual 
orientation of the initiates, the rhythm of the drums, the songs of 
the ounsi, work together to create a kinesthetic medium for the lwa 
to manifest themselves in dance.”
28 I would argue that, for a painter 
such as Domond, vitally interested in the recreation of sacred forms in 
his painting, establishing this distinction between secular and sacred 
dance in Dance Scene was of primary importance. Hence the promi-
nent position accorded to Ghédé’s drapo in his composition and his 
efforts at recreating the simple movements of ritual dance while con-
veying the subtle eroticism characteristic of the M’sieur Entretoute 
avatar of Ghédé. Maya Deren called the Vodou dances “meditations 
of the body,” arguing that they should not be seen as means to secu-
lar pleasure, but dances in which the physical projects to the psyche, 
leading to communication with the spirits. Domond’s painting, with 
its use of the color purple as the means of connecting his musicians 
and dancers to Ghédé’s drapo and its ritualized yet sensual recreation 
of his dancing couples, captures the essential distinction between 
sacred and secular dance and affirms their role in sustaining the pres-
ence of the lwa among the living.
Auguste and Domond are concerned with depicting the impor-
tance of “mastery of ritual detail” in the summoning of the lwa


--- PAGE 114 ---
Sacred Forms 101
into the human ceremony. Nehemy Jean, in his Mangé Loa (1949), 
shows how a community prepares for such a ceremony, capturing 
the detailed arrangements required to accomplish the sort of ritual 
mastery that will summon and please the spirits. His Mangé Loa is 
named after the most common ceremony in Vodou—the feeding of 
the spirits or mystères, as they are also known—whose aim is the res-
toration of the energy that is constantly drawn away from the lwa by 
their serviteurs. “In order to continue to travailler (work) with the 
mystères,” Rigaud, Métraux, and Mètraux have explained, “it is nec-
essary to replenish their source of energy, an aim which is achieved 
both through the sacrifices and through the exercise of ritual powers 
during the service.”
29 The mangé lwa  may involve the sacrifice of 
animals (birds, goats, chickens, and, on very special occasions, a bull) 
as well as offerings of drinks, cakes, and specialized dishes favored by 
the spirits. Once the offering “has become the property of the lwa, 
the participants can come closer to them by eating the food they have 
cooked for the spirits.”
30 Mangé lwa ceremonies usually end with the 
arrival of the Ghédé.
In Vodou, feeding the lwa is the individual’s foremost duty, a rit-
ual of the greatest importance for adherents. Since the lwa’s function 
is that of organizing the physical and spiritual world into patterns of 
knowledge and well being for their devotees, their labor is cosmic and 
their energy must be replenished. It is the devotee’s responsibility to 
provide the wherewithal from which that energy is to flow by feeding 
the lwa. The ritual meals are prepared in accordance to time-honored 
traditions and must follow exact recipes and rules since the lwa are 
often hard to please. The choice of foods and method of preparation 
are often determined by the lwa’s attributes and personalities. They 
have favored foods and drinks that must be offered to them in specific 
ways. The various rituals of preparation of food for the lwa are part 
of the process of initiation, part of the konesans (knowledge) needed 
for moving up in the ounfó (temple’s) hierarchy. The elaborate rituals 
involved in the feeding of the lwa are a reminder that the most funda-
mental premise of Vodou is the notion of service. The title of serviteur 
borne by devotees implies a relationship of reciprocity between servi-
teurs and the spirits. The devotee who remembers to make a libation 
to the lwa by pouring on the ground a few drops of his morning cof-
fee is recognizing that service to the spirit is a form of discipline that 
can bring its own reward. It is representative of adherence to a moral 
code that imposes certain obligations—some of them perhaps tedious 
and repetitive—but promise the possibility of divine intervention if it 
is ever needed.


--- PAGE 115 ---
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert102
Nehemy Jean’s Mangé Loa (1949, figure 5.3) captures the Vodou 
community’s preparation for such a ceremony. Jean, who joined 
the Centre d’Art in Port-au-Prince in 1947 under the auspices of 
Dieudonné Cedor, was born in 1931 in Limbé. He was among the 
fifty artists who left the Centre to form the short-lived Foyer des 
Arts Plastiques in 1950. A painter who has enjoyed considerable inter-
national success, Jean owned his own art gallery in Port-au-Prince, 
L’Atelier. He has lived in New York, where he attended the Arts 
Student League and Columbia University, and worked in Brazil in the 
late 1950s. His murals adorn the walls of the Port-au-Prince airport.
Jean’s Mangé Loa focuses on the preparations of a ceremony appar-
ently dedicated to Papa Zaka, as two of the serviteurs are depicted as 
Figure 5.3 Nehemy, Jean. Mangé Loa (1949). Oil on cardboard. 20 × 16 inches.


--- PAGE 116 ---
Sacred Forms 103
preparing tchaka, a corn based food that is a favorite of Zaka. Papa 
Zaka’s characteristic makout hangs from the tree and the scythe and 
machete also associated with the lwa lie on the ground. The absence 
of live animals being readied for sacrifice also supports the identifica-
tion of the ceremony as one offered to the agricultural lwa. The paint-
ing could depict a ceremony-yam, a rare ritual offered to Papa Zaka, 
which involves the presentation of the first produce gathered from the 
fields in a plea for the lwa’s protection and assurance of a good crop 
for the following season. The painting captures, in the participants’ 
painstaking preparations, the notion central to Vodou ritual that “to 
participate properly is to engage divine benevolence.”
31
In Jean’s vibrant scene of ritual anticipation, the painter is care-
ful to set his scene at dusk, the period of preparation for ceremonies 
that usually take place at night. The painting is organized around a 
series of scenes that, brought together, build for the viewer the overall 
sense of the various duties performed by serviteurs in preparation for a 
communal ceremony. Jean uses color and reflected light to move the 
viewer’s eye from tableau to tableau, building his scene by a process of 
accumulation which brings order to what at first look appears discon-
nected. The upper left quarter of the painting remains in shadows and 
moves our focus toward the ceremonial space. Seen clockwise, we find 
the lwa’s fruit-laden tree, framed on the right by a brightly lit orange 
fence. The same light illuminates the figure of a fresh arrival bringing 
provisions for the ceremony; the bright blue of his shirt and orange 
pants are duplicated diagonally across on a similar figure crouching 
on the lower left quadrant of the painting. Both men wear the sim-
ple denim shirt characteristic of Papa Zaka. The same orange color 
used for the fence and the men’s trousers highlights the lwa’s makout, 
as it hangs from a branch. Two figures near the right margin of the 
painting—one, that of a woman hugging the tree—look upward (in 
hope of shaking some fruit down?). They share the right quadrant of 
the painting with the three drummers—the traditional Rada batte-
rie of petit  or bula , seconde, and maman  drums—setting up for the 
ceremony and dance. The drummers, the “lynchpins” of the Vodou 
ceremony,
32 are arranging their instruments, drawn here following 
the Rada tradition, with shells carved out of the trunks of trees in 
the shape of brightly painted truncated cones. Their heads, made out 
of goatskins, are stretched by pegs braced with cords. The lower left 
quadrant of the painting is occupied by three figures, one of which 
appears to be the drawer of the vèvè traced on the ground and of the 
uneven and as yet incomplete circle that attempts to circumscribe the 
ceremonial space. This space also includes objects used by the oungan


--- PAGE 117 ---
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert104
for divination: the playing cards that are usually spread in a laye or 
large straw tray, and the candles that some oungans use with a glass 
of water for the same purpose. At the very center of the painting 
are the vèvè and the two central figures—head drawn together in a 
quasi-ceremonial salute—whose sacred task is that of preparing the 
food for the lwa. The vèvè is similar to those drawn in honor of Papa 
Legba to ask for his blessing for the ceremony to come. As the gaze 
moves clockwise, the shadows of the upper left quadrant force the eye 
toward the center, where the principal focus of the ritual—the prep-
aration of the lwa’s favorite food—is taking place. All the necessary 
supporting activities that will contribute to the ritual feeding of the 
lwa are depicted as surrounding the preparation of the food, the true 
cornerstone of the ritual.
In Divine Horsemen, Maya Deren speaks of the collective nature of 
Vodou as resting upon the “intense degree of dedication, devotion”
33 
that Nehemy Jean captures in the ritual preparations of his Mangé Loa. 
She credits this collective effort with the ability to provide “the gen-
erally uncreative, often distracted individual with a prescribed move-
ment and attitude, the very performance of which gradually involves 
and perhaps inspires him.”
34 Service to the lwa , according to Deren, 
based as it is on mastery of the forms prescribed and favored by the 
spirits, allows the collective to function “at a level superior to the crea-
tive capacities of the individuals which make it up.”
35 As a creative act, 
the performance of sacred forms confers grace, power, and knowledge 
on the serviteurs : “The individual participates in the accumulated 
genius of the collective, and by such participation becomes himself 
part of that genius—something more than himself.”
36 Ira Lowenthal, 
in his study of Vodou ceremonies in southern Haiti, argued that the 
effectiveness of ritual is measured by its ability to “create a subjective 
reality for the sevité [serviteurs] in which the essence of worship comes 
to be participation in the collective creation of song and dance.”
37 It 
is clear, he added, “that Haitian aesthetic sensibilities are closely tied 
to the notion of full participation in the act of creation, rather than to 
passive contemplation or appreciation.”
38
Jean’s painting, with its focus on bodies providing their individual 
contributions to the steps prescribed for the collective ritual, high-
lights the reciprocal nature of the relationship between lwa and servi-
teur. The essence of the manjé lwa ceremony, as Hurbon has argued, 
is the nourishing of the lwa by the serviteurs in an effort to assure that 
the lwa will be capable of helping them when needed: “the sacrificial 
victim and the food constitute the link between the spirits and the 
faithful.”
39 It represents yet another way in which Vodou provides


--- PAGE 118 ---
Sacred Forms 105
for the breaching of the divide between the living and the lwa. The 
ceremony, however, has a secondary goal—which could be described 
as aesthetic—that results from the mastery of the ritual forms them-
selves, as “the joy and the ecstasy of the spirit” direct the faithful 
“toward genuine re-creation.”
40
Vodou’s sacred forms include healing ceremonies that are, like the 
manjé lwa, among the most-often performed rituals in Haiti. The 
oungan’s major role, as Maya Deren reminds us, is medical, and rep-
resents “one of the ways in which the houngan may mediate between 
the loa and the people.”
41 The oungan’s role as healer is displayed in 
all its complexities in Jean Léandre’s Healing Ceremony with Music  
(c.1975, figure 5.4). Léandre, a painter from Cap-Haitiën, joined the 
Centre d’Art in 1975. His work, like we see in Healing Ceremony 
with Music , often focuses on elucidating the intricate connections 
that make up a Vodou ceremony.
Healing Ceremony with Music  depicts a curative ritual most prob-
ably performed by a secret society (members of secret societies can 
often be identified by the uniforms they use during ceremonies, 
as is the case here). Secret societies, although common in Haiti, 
are less well understood than the more open Vodou ounfó , which 
are more welcoming to visitors and strangers. The societies, headed 
Figure 5.4 Léandre, Jean. Healing Ceremony with Music (c.1975). Oil on masonite. 
14¼ × 237/8 inches.


--- PAGE 119 ---
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert106
by oungans, provide vital links between religious and civil society 
throughout Haiti. Among the best known of these societies are the 
Bizango, studied by Wade Davis in his research on the phenomenon 
of zombification. His two books on the subject, The Serpent and the 
Rainbow (1985) and Passage of Darkness (1988), reveal how secret 
societies function as “an important arbiter of social life among the 
peasantry,” a force “that protects community resources, particularly 
land, as they define the power boundaries of the village.”
42 Davis’s 
research unveiled the Bizango’s role in the ethnobiology and pharma-
copeia behind the zombification process, a very rare form of “social 
sanction” administered by the secret society to those who have vio-
lated its most sacred codes. The Bizango, as Michel Laguerre explains 
in Voodoo and Politics in Haiti , is a remnant of Haiti’s colonial past, 
when Bizango, the violent spirit of a warrior, functioned as the pro-
tective spirit of the Bissagot slaves. Individuals enter such secret soci-
eties—which are widespread throughout the island—through a ritual 
of rebirth or initiation that involves an oath of allegiance to the group 
and which admits them into a world of sharing the secret handshakes 
and passwords that are the marks of powerfully connected initiates. 
The societies stand “as the conscience of certain districts in Haiti in 
that [they] protect the residents against exploitation by outsiders.”
43 
In some districts in Haiti secret societies have played a crucial polit-
ical role.
Healing Ceremony with Music  is built around the central figure 
of the man on whose behalf the ceremony is being held, his naked-
ness and thinness presented as emblematic of the illness that must be 
eradicated. As in Mangé Loa , all the elements of the ceremony are 
included here, bearing witness to the painstaking preparation for the 
sacred work of healing, a ritual in which the lwa are expected to work 
their power through the body of the petitioner to restore its health 
and vitality. The food to be offered to the lwa, carefully prepared 
and attractively presented, is ready; jars, bottles, and pitchers give 
evidence of intense preparation and careful thought to everything 
that may be needed to propitiate the lwa and follow its dictates. The 
room has been arranged carefully to facilitate the ritual. The crowded 
scene illustrates the beginning of the ceremony, when everything is at 
the ready and the oungan is just beginning his invocations to the lwa 
with the aid of the musicians, serviteurs and relatives of the patient 
(identified by the absence of the society’s uniform).
At the feet of the patient is the oungan  (or bokor, as they are often 
called in secret societies), holding in one hand a black cloth he bran-
dishes before his patient and in the other one a candle indicative on


--- PAGE 120 ---
Sacred Forms 107
his appeal to divination to diagnose the illness and seek the proper 
remedy with the advice of the Vodou spirits. Behind the oungan 
stands the Rada batterie —the three drummers with their variously 
sized sacred drums—accompanied by a woman playing a maraca made 
from a hollowed gourd. The music—appropriately, given the title of 
the painting—is regarded as the central element in the summoning 
of the lwa. To the oungan’s left stands an initiate who is represented 
holding the oungan’s asson, the sacred rattle used in summoning the 
lwa, which is the symbol of the oungan’s sacred profession. The ini-
tiated ounsi, clapping and singing to the beat of the drums, line up 
against the back partition of the enclosed ceremonial room, formed 
by an elaborate curtain. The setting is characteristic of the often afflu-
ent surroundings of the secret society’s premises. Two ritual symbols 
flank the patient—the headstone with its cross for Bawon Samedi and 
the Ghédé to his right and the serpent for Danbala to his left—both 
represented amid flames. Together with the food and drink ready to 
be presented to the lwa, there are two sacrificial animals, a pig and a 
chicken, both of whose lives, as is typical of secret society ceremonies, 
will be offered to the lwa in exchange for the renewed health of the 
patient. The most salient element in the painting, however, may be 
the multiplicity of musical notes spread charmingly over the entire 
scene, indicating that the music has permeated all the possible spaces 
in the ceremonial area, unifying all the masterfully prepared ritual 
elements of the sacred work and reinforcing the summon to the lwa. 
The floating musical notes is a device that seeks to encapsulate the 
power of the drums to bring together all the elements of the cere-
mony: “the solid mass of the drum’s beating,” as Deren explain, is “at 
once compellingly dynamic and yet of a reliability, a stability, which 
transcends all miscellany, comprehends it, swallows it, holds steady 
with such unshakeable persistence that it serves as a magnetic core to 
which all temporary deviation returns.”
44
The prominent position accorded to the ritual symbols flanking 
the patient—those of Bawon Samdi and Danbala—underscore the 
patient’s position between life and death, and therefore the gravity 
of his illness. These lwa are invoked here because of their powers for 
healing or as potential givers of life. Ghédé, although best known as 
ruler of death and the cemetery, is also “the greatest of healers, the last 
recourse against death.”
45 During ceremonies for Ghédé, the gravely ill 
are brought before the lwa for his intercession, since Ghédé, an essen-
tially fair lwa, will not allow those who plead humbly for their health 
to die if their time has not come. Danbala, in turn, is the patriarchal 
serpent divinity, an ancient water spirit, linked in ritual and service


--- PAGE 121 ---
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert108
to rain, lightning, wisdom, and fertility. Those possessed by Danbala 
during ceremonies dart out their tongues, snake-like, crawl on the 
ground with sinuous movements, climb the posts of the peristil (the 
ounfó’s entry hall) and have been known to hang head down from the 
rafters like snakes. Danbala is always understood to be a positive force, 
the essence of life. In his Simbi avatar (with which Danbala shares 
many characteristics and functions) he rules over all magic—“whether 
it be medicinal, protective paquet, or the less benevolent wanga”
46—
such as that depicted in Healing Ceremony with Music. (Bokors, unlike 
oungans, are reputed to also “work with the left hand”—to add to their 
regular functions as Vodou priests the ability to work with magic.) In 
the painting, Danbala is depicted by Léandre in his Petwo avatar of 
Danbala le Flambó (the torch), surrounded by fire.
The painting, in its mixing of elements drawn from both Rada (the 
drums, the worship of Danbala, for example) and Petwo rites (Ghéde 
and the Bawon, the Simbi and Flambó avatars of Danbala), shows the 
richness of the two main sources of Vodou rites. In Haiti, the sacred 
forms through which the lwa are summoned to communicate with 
humans conform to one of two major rites, Rada and Petwo, which 
although manifestly different, share many common elements. The 
Rada rites, traced back to the kingdom of Dahomey, in what is now 
Nigeria, Benin, and Togo, are generally considered to be the most 
faithful to ancient African traditions, and to many believers, are the 
most genuine. They are invariably portrayed as dous (doux or sweet 
tempered). The Rada pantheon boasts the great lwa, or fle Ginen, the 
first to be saluted in ceremonies: Atibon Legba, Marasa Dosou Dosa, 
Danbala and Ayida Wedo, Azaka Mede, Ogou Feray, Agwe Tawoyo, 
Ezili Freda Daome, Lasirenn and Labalenn, and Gede Nimbo. The 
Petwo rites do not lay claim to the same connection to the ancestral 
spirits. They are recognized as Creole or Haitian-born lwa, born in 
the crucible of the plantation and often incorporating belief and rit-
ual practices drawn from central and southwest African groups such 
as the Kongo and Angola—late arrivals in the new world. Whereas 
the Rada lwa are thought to be dous, Petwo lwa are considered to be 
anme (amer or bitter). They are associated with fire and said to be lwa 
cho (low chaud  or hot lwa) capable of forceful and violent behavior. 
The Petwo pantheon includes major lwa such as Met Kalfou, Simbi 
Andezo, Ezili Danto, and Bawon Samdi. Many of the lwa, however, 
exist andezo, or in two cosmic substances, and are served in both 
Rada and Petwo rituals.
Healing Ceremony with Music—with its display of the careful prep-
arations involved in a major healing ceremony, its conveying of the


--- PAGE 122 ---
Sacred Forms 109
power of music to invite the lwa into the human gathering, its place-
ment of the patient between the two major healing and life-affirming 
lwa, its blending of Rada and Petwo rites—articulates with great clar-
ity the importance of the mastery of ritual detail in Vodou’s sacred 
work. With its human body needing the intervention of the lwa and 
the support of his community at the very center of the painting, the 
work embodies the power of ritual mastery in Vodou’s sacred work.
I have attempted, through the analysis of the four works discussed 
above, to show how the concept of sacred work—with its aesthetic 
commitment to mastering ritual details as a path to securing the 
breaching of the divide between the world of the living and that of 
the lwa through the bodies of the serviteurs —has served both as 
inspiration, theme, and guiding aesthetic principle for a number of 
major Haitian artists interested in producing works that fall under 
the category of religious paintings. My analysis, dependent as it is 
on an understanding of how carefully the mastery of ritual elements 
is represented in these paintings, begs the question of the paintings’ 
implied audience and, perhaps, purpose. It is undoubtedly true that 
a significant number of Haitian paintings, especially in the first two 
generations of painters from the Centre d’Art, centered on Vodou 
ceremonies as a thematic focus. For its Haitian audience, these paint-
ings captured a world of ritual practices and embodied beliefs that 
encapsulated the essence of their spiritual world. This encapsulation 
both opened this ceremonial world to outsiders and created multi-
leveled modes of representation, not all of which could be easily read 
by an audience not versed in Vodou practices.
Toussaint Auguste’s Papa Zaka en Possession  is a case in point. We 
do not know much about the circumstances of its production, other 
than its connection to the Centre d’Art created by DeWitt Peters 
in 1944. Whether created for the market following Peters’ sugges-
tions as to desirable subjects, or commissioned by a collector, the 
painting opens its full meaning only to those who bring knowledge 
of the specificities of possession to its reading. A first confrontation 
with the painting without knowledge of its title does not readily yield 
its subject matter, as it is not a stereotypical depiction of possession. 
The reciprocity of the relationship expressed through the mirroring 
of the lwa in its horse is created by an inspired, imaginative solution 
to the question of representation that masks its true meaning from 
the casual observer, to whom the painting may look like a scene of 
two peasants greeting each other in a despoiled countryside. This 
masking, similar to the one that led to the masking of the lwa behind 
chromolithographs and plaster statues of the Catholic saints, allows


--- PAGE 123 ---
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert110
Auguste to move away from the conventional symbols of possession 
into a representation that is both full of religious and ritual content 
and alive with aesthetic substance. These multiple levels of signifi-
cance—which become increasingly accessible the deeper the viewers’ 
knowledge of the beliefs and practices of Vodou—speak to the paint-
ing’s status as religious art and to its evoking a sense of awe from its 
viewers. Writing about European religious painting, F. David Martin 
speaks of how the “awe-fullness evoked by the sacred is not supposed 
to be fully explainable, either verbally or by pictorial depiction. In 
turn, the awe-fullness of the sacred may generate ultimate concern, 
which then involves humans in various theoretical (e.g., theology), 
practical (e.g., moral) and social (e.g., ritual) activities that attempt 
to articulate the concern.”
47 In P a p a  Z a k a  e n  P o s s e s s i o n, as in the 
other paintings discussed above, this sense of “awe-fullness” stems 
from the careful representation of the principle of mastery in ritual 
practice, as an element that conveyed the spirit of Vodou as a belief 
system. For a non-Haitian audience, one not necessarily aware of the 
significance of the ritual elements displayed, the paintings nonethe-
less capture the complexity of belief and, perhaps most importantly, 
the quality of mastery which, drawn from Vodou practice itself, finds 
its way into the aesthetic dimension of the art itself.
Notes
 1. Anna Wexler, “ ‘I Am Going to See Where My Oungan Is’: The Artistry 
of a Haitian Vodou Flagmaker,” in Sacred Possessions: Vodou, Santería, 
Obeah, and the Caribbean , editors, Margarite Fernández Olmos and 
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University 
Press, 1997), 69.
 2. Maya Deren, Divine Horsemen: The Living Gods of Haiti (Kingston, NY: 
McPherson, 1953), 227.
 3. Wexler, “ ‘I Am Going to See Where My Oungan Is,’ ” 69.
 4. LeGrace Benson, “Kiskeya-Lan Guinée-Eden: The Utopian Vision in 
Haitian Painting,” Callaloo  Vol. 15, No. 3 (Summer 1992): 729.
 5. Selden Rodman, Where Art Is Joy—Haitian Art: The First Forty Years 
(New York: Ruggles de Latour, 1988 [1966]).
 6. Patricia Mohammed, “The Sign of the Loa,” Small Axe  (September 
2005): 124.
 7 . J. Kennedy, “Haitian Art Inspired by Vodun” American Visions  Vol. 6, 
No. 3 (June 1991), 14.
 8. F. David Martin, “What Is Christian Painting?” Leonardo Vol. 10, No. 1 
(Winter 1977): 24.
 9. Ibid., 29.
10. Wexler, “ ‘I Am Going to See Where My Oungan Is,’ ” 59.


--- PAGE 124 ---
Sacred Forms 111
11. Ibid.
12. Joan Dayan, “Vodoun, or the Voice of the Gods,” in Sacred Possessions: 
Vodou, Santería, Obeah, and the Caribbean, editors, Margarite Fernández 
Olmos and Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 
University Press, 1997), 19.
13. Ibid.
14. Miguel Barnet, “La Regla de Ocha: The Religious System of Santería,” 
in Sacred Possessions: Vodou, Santería, Obeah, and the Caribbean , edi-
tors, Margarite Fernández Olmos and Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert. (New 
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1997), 82.
15. Robert Farris Thompson, “From the Isle beneath the Sea: Haiti’s 
Africanizing Vodou Art,” in Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou , editor, 
Donald Cosentino. (Los Angeles, CA: UCLA Fowler Museum of 
Cultural History, 1995), 124.
16. Jared Diamond, Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed (New 
York: Viking, 2005), 329–333.
17. Deren, Divine Horsemen,  10.
18. Deren, Divine Horsemen,  112.
19. Rodman, Where Art Is Joy.
20. Deren, Divine Horsemen,  10.
21. Ibid., 229.
22. Gage Averill, A Day for the Hunter, A Day for the Prey: Popular Music 
and Power in Haiti (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997), 33.
23. Phyllis Galembo, Vodou: Visions and Voices of Haiti  (Berkeley, CA: Ten 
Speed Press, 1998), xxvi.
24. Deren, Divine Horsemen,  111.
25. Ibid., 102.
26. Gay Morris, A Game for Dancers: Performing Modernism in the 
Postwar Years, 1945–1960  (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University 
Press, 2006), 128.
27. Joyce Aschenbrenner, Katherine Dunham: Dancing a Life  (Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press, 2002), 83.
28. Joseph Murphy, Working the Spirit: Ceremonies of the African Diaspora  
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1994), 27.
29. Odette Rigaud, Alfred Métraux, and Rhoda Métraux. “The Feasting of 
the Gods in Haitian Vodu.” Primitive Man Vol. 19, Nos. 1/2 (1946): 7.
30. Laënnec Hurbon, “Vodou: A Faith for Individual, Family, and 
Community” from Dieu dans le vaudou Haitïen, Callaloo Vol. 15, No. 3 
(Summer 1992): 791.
31. Deren, Divine Horsemen,  206.
32. Alfred Métraux, Voodoo in Haiti , trans. Hugo Charteris (New York: 
Schocken, 1972), 177.
33. Deren, Divine Horsemen , 228.
34. Ibid.
35. Ibid.
36. Ibid., 229.


--- PAGE 125 ---
Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert112
37. Ira P. Lowenthal, “Ritual Performance and Religious Experience: A 
Service for the Gods in Southern Haiti,” Journal of Anthropological 
Research Vol. 34, No. 3 (1978): 405.
38. Ibid., 407.
39. Hurbon, “Vodou,” 792.
40. Ibid.
41. Deren, Divine Horsemen , 161 and 171.
42. Davis, Passage of Darkness: The Ethnobiology of the Haitian Zombie  
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1988), 8–10.
43. Michel Laguerre, V oodoo and Politics in Haiti (New York: St. Martins, 
1989), 81.
44. Deren, Divine Horsemen , 237.
45. Ibid., 113.
46. Ibid., 117.
47. Martin, “What Is Christian Painting?” 24.


--- PAGE 126 ---
6
Dancing with Ochún: 
Imagining How a Black Goddess 
Became White
Miguel A. De La Torre
Much was on her mind, so much that her head began to ache. 
What she really needed now was a reprieve so that she could get her 
thoughts together and think clearly about her options. Maybe a dip 
in cool waters would be a perfect antidote to her headache and pro-
vide a needed escape from the hot, humid summer day. Seeking relief, 
the orisha
1 Ochún, the African Aphrodite, made her way to the Osun 
River.2 There she slipped out of her clothes and eased herself into the 
refreshing, clear waters. In these waters, she had always found safety 
and clarity. As she leisurely bathed, she felt reenergized, her options 
becoming clearer. After the passing of hours, she slowly emerged 
from the waters. She undid her long hair so that it cascaded down her 
narrow back—its ends gently caressing the voluptuous curves of her 
hips as she walked toward a shaded area by the river banks. Wet and 
naked, she sat down and gingerly combed the curls of her strikingly 
dark hair that gently dangled on the sides of her long slender neck. 
Anyone who might have walked by and observed this bare goddess 
admiring herself in a hand mirror would easily conclude that she was 
the most beautiful among all beauties of Africa. Of course, if Ochún 
would have noticed the passing stranger, with a haughty paternalistic 
look, she would have dismissed him.
With each stroke of her tortoise shell comb, the numerous gold 
bracelets adorning her slim wrists jingled and chimed, producing 
the seductive musical enrapture of an alluring and intoxicating siren. 
Once dried, she arose and tied a yellow handkerchief around her 
petite waist to hold up her revealing and flowing skirt ornamented


--- PAGE 127 ---
Miguel A. De La Torre114
with tiny mirrors, gold bells, and cowrie shells. Within that skirt she 
usually hid a small gourd of oñí (honey). Whenever she rubbed her 
fingers, dripping with the sweat fluids of her gourd, across the quiv-
ering lips of any man or god, she would incite erotic abandonment. 
Truly, as the love goddess, Ochún represented female sensuality, sex-
uality in general, love, and lust.
Just as Obatalá
3 is  c o ns i d e r e d  t o  b e  rank e d  as  “ hi gh es t”  wi thin  
the orisha pantheon, Ochún is ranked the lowest, or most junior. As 
the youngest and most sensuous of all the orishas, it is easy to dis-
miss her as being too concerned with epicurean delights to care about 
the needs of her children. Yes, it is true that she revels in nightlong 
dancing and parties, but her discerning intelligence should never be 
underestimated. On this particular day she was in deep thought, anx-
ious over the fate of her beloved children, that is, her devotees.
Combing her hair served as a distraction from feelings of help-
lessness as she witnessed her children being kidnapped and sold into 
slavery. Shackled and overcrowded onto ships, her precious devotees 
would sail west, never to be seen or heard from again. As many as 
20 percent would not complete the journey, dying in route and end-
ing up as an offering to Olocun.
4 In a way, these were the lucky ones 
for at least they could be reincarnated back on the land that witnessed 
their birth. Those who did not expire were chained upon wooden 
planks. A minimum amount of space was allotted so that the maxi-
mum amount of bodies could be packed. Engulfed in darkness, lying 
in their own vomit and manure, they barely survived the voyage. 
Several of the young maidens were kept on deck to satisfy the sex-
ual appetites of the crew. Although it is difficult to calculate, Ochún 
must have witnessed more than fifteen million of her children make 
the transatlantic voyage to some mystical island called Cuba.
5
Ochún knew that something had to be done, for her children 
needed her presence during their difficult times. This is why she 
sought the consul of Yemayá, the maternal orisha whose domain is the 
oceans.
6 Unfortunately, Yemayá was forced to admit that the orishas 
were powerless to prevent this catastrophe. Ochún pondered these 
words from Yemayá. In fact, it was Yemayá’s admission that caused 
Ochún’s headache, leading her to bathe in the healing waters of the 
Osun River. But after much contemplation, Ochún arrived at a deci-
sion. Because of her love for her children, she would accompany them 
to this strange new land called Cuba. But before departing, she asked 
Yemayá to straighten her hair and lighten her skin to the color of cop-
per, so that all Cubans, masters and slaves, Spaniards and Africans, 
might join together in worshiping her as the Mother of all Cubans.


--- PAGE 128 ---
Dancing with Ochún 115
Once in Cuba, Ochún found it difficult to operate in the open 
(see figure 6.1). The faith and traditions of Africans, now forced into 
slavery, were dismissed as either superstitious or demonic. Those who 
insisted on worshiping the orishas faced all forms of abuse. The only 
way that Ochún, as well as any other orishas, could operate in Cuba 
was to put on Catholic masks to hide their African faces. This was 
possible because of the properties of ashé.
7
The orishas are universal beings because all that exists contains 
ashé. In this way, they are able to manifest themselves in the sym-
bol and figures of other world faiths and religions. Even if believers 
of other faiths never heard of the orishas, they still worship them 
whenever they bow down before their own deities. This is possible 
through a process I call “Anonymous Santería.”
8 The Yoruba world-
view recognized the existence of Ochún’s presence in other religions, 
including the faith of the slave masters; their task was to discover her 
self revelation. Within a short time Ochún’s children learned that the 
“god” of their White masters, La Virgen de la Caridad del Cobre,
9 
was really their beloved Ochún who was wearing the Catholic mask 
of their oppressors. Whenever they bowed their knees before the 
Catholic statue of La Virgen, they knew that in reality they were 
worshiping Ochún who was now represented by this particular statue. 
Figure 6.1 Presentation of Ochun in Cuba. Photograph taken by Anthony Pinn.


--- PAGE 129 ---
Miguel A. De La Torre116
The Spanish masters were pleased to see how quickly their slaves con-
verted to the “true” faith. But Ochún’s children knew that the ashé 
that flows through all religions, including their master’s Catholicism, 
made their faith more sophisticated than those who assumed to be 
their superiors. The irony is that the masters didn’t know the true 
power undergirding their faith, although it was clearly understood 
by the slaves.
Becoming White
Exploring the whitening of Ochún is more than noticing how this 
once biracial statue of La Virgin del Cobre became White. Although 
Ochún went from Black to copper, La Virgen de la Caridad del Cobre, 
along with most of the characters in her story, went from copper to 
White. Once the whitening process began, it was difficult to stop. 
In fact, the statue in my own office to which I light a candle every 
morning is a White blond with blue eyes! The whitening of this Black 
goddess is more than an aesthetical transformation, for as Ochún 
became whiter, Cuban racial hierarchies became more normalized 
and legitimized.
The bleaching of Ochún is best illustrated in the story depicting 
her first encounter with “Cubans.” According to the tradition, two 
Taíno brothers,
10 Juan and Rodrigo de Hoyos, 11 along with a ten-
year-old Black slave boy named Juan Moreno, 12 set out in 1610 on 
Nipe Bay in search of salt. Nipe Bay is not far from the copper mines of 
Cobre on the northeastern tip of the island. In these mines, countless 
Taínos perished extracting copper for the profit of the Spaniards. As 
the numbers of the Taínos dwindled, Africans were being imported 
to replenish the slave population.
13 It was about 5:30 in the morning, 
while rowing their canoe, that these two Taínos and the African slave 
boy came upon a carved statue of the Virgin Mary floating on a piece 
of wood. Miraculously, the statue was dry. At her feet was inscribed, 
“I am the Virgin of Charity.”
Since the discovery of the statue, Ochún, masked as La Virgen de 
la Caridad del Cobre made her home with the oppressed. It is no coin-
cidence that La Virgen first appeared to the Taínos and Africans, the 
two most oppressed groups on the island. She could have appeared 
to the local Spanish priest or bishop, but instead she chose to be in 
solidarity with “the least of these.” If the rich and powerful Spaniards 
or if the religious authorities who lived on the island, wanted to come 
to La Virgen in awe and adoration, they had to do so by means of the 
marginalized.


--- PAGE 130 ---
Dancing with Ochún 117
The color by which Ochún/La Virgen chose to appear is also more 
than a simple aesthetic choice. She refused to appear in the color of 
the colonizers who were responsible for introducing so much misery 
and destruction upon the Taínos and Africans. Instead, she appeared 
in the color of the racial Other, in a real sense, the color of death 
and life. Death because it was the color of the copper being mined 
at Cobre and responsible for the decimation of Native People and 
Africans. But her skin color also represented new life. She chose the 
color of those relegated to be the economic and racial outcasts—those 
who would comprise the new Cuban people.
14
With time, the symbol of La Virgen was co-opted by White Cuba, 
an attempt to rob the oppressed of a liberative symbol. As already 
mentioned, most of the popular statues depicting la virgencita
15 
reveal a White, blond-haired figure. Not only was La Virgen de la 
Caridad bleached, but so was one of the Taíno brothers in the row 
boat. Rodrigo was transfigured into a balding, bearded, white-haired 
Spaniard named Juan, thus transforming the original story into the 
legend of los tres Juanes (the three Johns), one who is Black, one 
who is red, and one who is White. But with time, even the remain-
ing Taíno is White, so that today, many statues depict an old and 
a young White Spaniard in the row boat with a small Black boy. 
Essentially, color was written out of the story, leaving a minor rep-
resentation in the form of a child. Ironically, one would never have 
expected to find a White Spaniard accompanying slaves and native 
people on such an arduous and demeaning task such as collecting 
salt. Nevertheless, this bearded patriarchal figure rewrites itself into 
the story. By incorporating the oppressor, he becomes equal with 
the Others in the row boat, and to him also appears the Divine. The 
bearded Spaniard masks the power relation along racial lines existing 
during this time.
Masking the Cuban African
Although it is problematic to make the copper-skin Virgen White; it 
is more troubling to bleach the Black goddess to appear as a mulata,
16 
for to become a mulata is to stop being Black. The whitening of Black 
symbols such as Ochún masks hostility toward those who would pre-
fer to explore negritude (Black consciousness) as the entomological 
starting point of Latino/a identity. A mulata Ochún assumes the 
myth that a purer symbol is created through the organic result of a 
racial mixture. Such miscegenation is supposed to create an accept -
able “whiter” ethnic group that, by definition, excludes Africans. In a


--- PAGE 131 ---
Miguel A. De La Torre118
perverse way, “whitening” Africans becomes the basis for developing 
racial harmony and reform among Cubans.
Throughout Cuban history, whenever the Black population threat-
ened to exceed the White population, a process known as blanquea-
miento (whitening) occurred whereby land was freely given to poor 
White Spaniard families who would leave Spain and come to live on 
the island. Another method used to keep the Black population in check 
was their exclusion from social setting by dividing Blacks from bira-
cial Cubans (mulato/as). The latter was accorded some privileges and 
assimilating, up to a point, as White allies. This procedure created a 
desire in the minds of some Blacks to whiten themselves (usually by mar-
rying whiter spouses) in the hope of achieving social advancement.
White Cuba, toward the end of the nineteenth century, believed 
that Blacks had the potential to be equal to Whites, but were “stuck” 
in an earlier stage of cultural development. The solution required 
assimilation to the “superior” White culture through a process of 
de-Africanization. Hence blanqueamiento, the whitening of Blacks, 
became a prerequisite for Black advancement. While scientists and 
intellectuals in the United States understood racial mixing as 
degeneration and mongrelization, Cubans saw mulatez as lifting the 
savage races toward civilization and progress.
17 This is evident in the 
work of José Elías Entralgo, a sociologist who was a proponent of 
Cuba’s version of eugenics. As chairperson of the 1959 Movimiento 
de Orientación e Integración National  (Movement of National 
Orientation and Integration) of Cuba, he claimed a cause and effect 
relationship existed between “mulattoization” and national integra-
tion. He applauded the rape of African women by their White masters 
as the necessary evil of bettering Africans, allowing their integration 
into White society.
18
In spite of Cuban miscegenation, “whiteness” remains synony-
mous with power and privilege, both on the island and in el exilio  
(the Exile). Ochún, like all other Cuban Blacks must learn to self-
impose the gaze of dominant White Cuban eyes. This is a gaze that 
requires her to “whiten” herself by asking Y emayá to straighten her 
hair and lighten her skin to the color of copper. If she, like all other 
Black Cubans, hopes to share in the privileges of Cuban society, then 
she must become a mulata.
With the coming of the 1959 Cuban Revolution that placed Fidel 
Castro in power, an exodus of Cubans who found refuge in the United 
States began. For the most part, the first two waves (1959–1973) of 
Cuban refugees were predominately White and educated.
19 Not sur-
prising, the culture and religious traditions they brought with them


--- PAGE 132 ---
Dancing with Ochún 119
were rooted in their whiteness. As Santería manifested itself within 
the U.S. context, that expression was aesthetically whiter. It is as if the 
Black Ochún became a mulatta in her journey to Cuba, and White 
in her journey to Miami. Although Ochún chose to leave Africa, La 
Virgen del Cobre was kidnapped from Cuba so that she too could live 
in exile. On September 8, 1961, her feast day, the statue of La Virgen 
at the parish church at Guanabo Beach in La Habana, was removed 
(stolen?) from her pedestal. This replica of the statue located in Cobre 
was stashed in a suitcase and smuggled out of the country to an await-
ing crowd of over 25,000 mainly White Cubans who congregated at 
a baseball stadium.
Anglicizing Ochún
Cuban Santería’s exodus to the United States served an important sur-
vival function. Although the first two waves of Cubans mainly belong 
to the White elite and the middle class, their Latino/a ethnicity rele-
gated them to the U.S. margins. For many, ethnic discrimination and 
poverty became a way of life. This exodus created a crisis. Santería 
responded by helping to foster a community that provided physical, 
emotional, material, and psychological assistance. The creation of a 
Cuban enclave in exile forestalled assimilation to the dominant cul-
ture during a time of alienation and grief over separation from loved 
ones due to forced migration. When Ochún followed her children to 
Cuba, worshiping her became the means by which displaced Africans 
established a common identity amidst a social structure designed to 
extract their labor while destroying their personhood. When whiter 
Cubans kidnapped La Virgen and brought her with them to the 
United States, they found themselves alone, living in economically 
deprived areas, exposed to street violence, drugs, and gangs. The 
psychological and physical need to belong was met through faith. 
Devotion to Ochún/La Virgen created solidarity among refugees 
forced to live in an alien, if not hostile environment.
Even though Ochún/La Virgen was whitened in exodus, she 
maintained her role as a religious symbol of resistance, empowering 
Cuban refugees to face and survive the adversity of a new country. 
But as decades passed, Euroamericans discovered this faith tradi-
tion. As they gazed upon this new, and what to some appeared as 
an exotic religion, its symbols began to be Anglicized, a process that 
starts with the faiths’ culture objectification followed by minimiz-
ing its role as a resistance religion. Moving the focus from the class 
and racial disenfranchisement of Hispanics to middle-class, White,


--- PAGE 133 ---
Miguel A. De La Torre120
academic Euroamericans minimized the function La Virgen/Ochún 
played in the life of the marginalized. Historically (as in the case of 
Constantinian Christians), it is always disadvantageous for the disen-
franchised when the dominant culture co-opts the religious symbols 
of marginalized groups.
For example, in the introduction of her ground-breaking book, 
Karen McCarthy Brown describes her journey to Mama Lola’s house 
in Brooklyn.
20 Her trek into the exotic is worth repeating.
. . . the brief drive to Mama Lola’s house was my introduction to the 
Brooklyn outpost of the Caribbean. As . . . I inched through the traf-
fic clogging Nostrand Avenue on an intensely hot July afternoon, our 
nostrils filled with the smells of charcoal and roasting meat and our 
ears with overlapping episodes of salsa, raggae [ sic], and the bouncy 
monotony of what Haitians call jazz. Animated conversations could be 
heard in Haitian French, Creole, Spanish, and more than one lyrical 
dialect of English. The street was a crazy quilt of shops: Chicka-Licka, 
the Ashanti Bazaar, a storefront Christian church with an improbably 
long and specific name, a Haitian restaurant, and Botanica Shango—
one of the apothecaries of New World African religions offering fast-
luck and get-rich-quick powders, High John the Conqueror root, and 
votive candles marked for the Seven African Powers. I was no more 
than a few miles from my home in lower Manhattan, but I felt as if I 
had taken a wrong turn, slipped through a crack between worlds, and 
emerged on the main street of a tropical city.
21
The “wrong turn” Brown describes betrays her middle-class privilege 
of having a car that allows her to drive through neighborhoods where 
the inhabitants never had the opportunity of making a “wrong turn.” 
Like a “lion-country safari” where people drive their cars through 
enclosed habitats, Brown gets to drive through the habitats of the 
disenfranchised, gazing and observing how they live. Regardless as 
to how many years she may have lived in Manhattan, this is her first 
in trod u cti o n t o “th e Brooklyn o u tpost o f th e Cari b bean ” tha t has 
existed a few miles from her doorsteps. Her ethnographic gaze rein-
forces the normative power structures of New York City.
Those on display to the ethnographer’s gaze “slipped through a 
crack” and found themselves in this neighborhood because of their 
skin color, ethnicity, and economic status. Brown describes this place 
as some type of pseudo-tropical city, an exotic place of strange sounds 
and smells—sounds and smells that were quite normative in my own 
upbringing. Brown’s romanticized description of the neighborhood 
ignores the reality of those of us who were forced to live there, a


--- PAGE 134 ---
Dancing with Ochún 121
reality barely unpacked in her analysis. Missing from her rich aes-
thetic description of the neighborhood is the roach infested apart-
ments, the empty refrigerators, the broken spirits of not finding 
employment, the alleys littered with used syringes and crushed lives, 
in other words, missing is the everyday hopelessness of those forced 
to live in what she saw as some type of “tropical city.” We never got 
to drive by lower Manhattan wh ere she lived and observe her habi-
tat, unless, of course, we were the domestic help, or performed some 
other type of menial labor.
These observations are not made to degrade Brown’s impressive 
and important scholarship, nor is it to insinuate that Brown doesn’t 
deal with poverty or racism in her book—she obviously does. Rather, 
I want to emphasize how her approach to the orishas from a differ-
ent social location can ignore the reason for Mama Lola’s faith and 
co-opt how the marginalized approach their religion. Missing from 
her description and the description of some White Euroamerican 
academics who study Ochún is how the orisha symbolizes libera-
tion, resistance and survival. Middle-class Anglo privilege is cre-
ating a middle-class Anglo version of Ochún. Of course, White 
Euroamericans are not the first to co-opt Ochún, and in the pro-
cess reinvent the religion of the marginalized. As already illustrated, 
White Cubans on the island led the way.
More important than what is missing when Anglo eyes gaze 
upon Ochún is how the faith must be objectified for easy appropria-
tion. Johannes Fabian illustrates what transpires when ethnographic 
research involving personal, prolonged interaction with the Other 
occurs. According to Fabian, “we pronounce upon the knowledge 
gained from such research a discourse which construes the Other in 
terms of distance, spatial and temporal. The Other’s empirical pres-
ence turns into his [her] theoretical absence.”
22 In Brown’s descrip-
tion (as well as other Euroamerican researchers), two Times are 
juxtaposed. There is the “here” Time she occupies which is modern 
and civilized as indicated by an enclosed car and a home in lower 
Manhattan. Then there is the “there” Time occupied by the Objects 
of research—a Time which is more primitive “filled with the smells 
of charcoal and roasting meat and . . . overlapping episodes of salsa, 
raggae, and the bouncy monotony of what Haitians call jazz.” The 
Objects of research are assigned a different Time, although they 
occupy the same space, thus creating a temporal distancing which 
allows the gazer to appropriate and/or dismiss the “knowledge” 
uncovered by the research. If the researcher’s Euroamerican sensi-
bilities are troubled by the predominance of blood sacrifices, then


--- PAGE 135 ---
Miguel A. De La Torre122
these rituals are minimized. If the researcher is troubled by a lack 
of codification in rituals and practices, then a set of rigid rules and 
regulations are imposed.
In addition, Anglicizing Ochún contributes to the cultural geno-
cide of the U.S. Cuban community. Non-Cubans’ limited knowledge 
of the nuances of Cuban culture makes it impossible to properly read 
or understand how Cuban Santería, through its rituals and ceremo-
nies, addresses the needs and concerns of a people. Thus, these rituals 
and ceremonies must be reinterpreted to fit a dominant Euroamerican 
worldview pattern that may be destructive to the Hispanic margin-
alized social location. As the resistance faith of the marginalized is 
restructured along Euroamerican lines, Euroamerican researchers 
can set themselves up as the “experts” of Santería, (mis)appropriating 
Ochún, along with the other cultural symbols of the faith. The faith’s 
aesthetics must be redefined and given new meaning to make sense in 
an Anglo world. This colonization of the faith only contributes to the 
continuous destruction of the Cuban faith community.
Desperately Seeking Ochún
Concerned about the aesthetical cooptation of Ochún by 
Euroamericans, and with this cooptation the change in focus of the 
religion, I began imagining what would happen if I were to simply 
speak with Ochún about my concerns. Unlike Christianity, Santería 
provides the opportunity to consult the orishas in person when they 
mount (possess) one of their children, usually during a bembe
23 when 
the gap between the spiritual and the physical is bridged. I fondly 
remember the bembes that my parents held when I was a boy. So, it 
is not difficult to imagine myself at one of the gatherings held at my 
parent’s crowded apartment in Queens to honor the Queen. I cannot 
help but wonder what would have occurred if I had had an opportu-
nity to discuss my concerns with Ochún face-to-face.
More than likely the bembe would have been held on a Saturday 
night, Ochún’s sacred day. Thirty to forty people would have crowded 
into my parents two-bedroom apartment in Jackson Heights. One 
of the rooms was dedicated to the orishas and it was here that my 
parents conducted consultations. In the other room the rest of the 
family slept. In a corner of el cuarto de los Santos  ( the room of the 
Saints) my parents would have erected un trono (a throne) in honor of 
Ochún. Along the walls surrounding el trono they would have huge 
yellow and gold
24 cloths as if they were drapes. El trono would con-
sist of a canastillero (a high cabinet) also draped with fancy gold and


--- PAGE 136 ---
Dancing with Ochún 123
yellow cloths. Leaning next to el trono would probably be a peacock-
feather fan, the common emblem of Ochún. Perched on high would 
be Ochún’s sopera25 containing her stones,26 usually five pebbles cho-
sen at dawn from the depths of a river. 27 Other tureens belonging 
to other orishas would also be present surrounding el trono .28 On 
the floor, around el trono would be an array of arranged fruits and 
cakes, including Ochún’s favorite foods: plates of rum cake, pumpkin, 
and honey. These treats serve as food offerings whose ashé will be 
“consumed” by Ochún. Also, the food offerings would be flanked by 
many flowers, specifically her favorite, sunflowers. In front of el trono 
there is a small basket to collect offerings—a derecho.
29 In this case, 
copper pennies would suffice. Next to the basket would be a bell. 
Upon entering el cuarto de los Santos , I imagine prostrating myself 
in front of el trono, dropping some copper pennies into the basket, 
shaking the bell, and kissing the floor. Upon getting up, I would join 
the bembe.
The bembe is mainly a drumming and dance ritual. Three sacred 
ritual drums called batáa  are played so that the worshiper’s messages 
can reach Ochún and induce her to respond in person. I make sure 
to show respect to the batáa by never turning my back to them, after 
all, they house the spirit of Aña. The first song honors the saint, 
so no one dances. Instead, we all stand to show honor and respect. 
Afterward, the drummers play a rhythm that invites Ochún to possess 
one or more of the dancers.
30 Among the dancers, one stands out, 
Pepito, who is whirling as if he was in a trance. Pepito is a burly mus-
cular man who works in construction. A child of Ochún, he wears 
the yellow eleke (neck beads). Pepito, like most heterosexual men, was 
distraught when he discovered that he was a child of one of the female 
orishas and thus would end up being mounted by her. Some consider 
Ochún to be the patron of gays, lesbians, bisexual, and transgender 
persons,
31 thus adding to Pepito’s apprehensions. Most machos prefer 
to be a child of one of the warriors.32
All who are present begin to focus on Pepito, channeling their 
ashé into him. Pepito started to dance in a very sensual and sugges-
tive manner, waving his arms so as to make his imaginary golden 
bracelets jingle. He would rub his body with his hands and thrust 
his hips in the direction of the men in the room. Obviously there was 
a heightened awareness of all the realms of sensuality in the room; 
hence, it is not surprising that a certain degree of gender-bending 
was occurring. I am mesmerized as I watch a transformation take 
place before my eyes. Through dance, this manly individual starts to 
exhibit very feminine seductive characteristics. Then, Pepito started


--- PAGE 137 ---
Miguel A. De La Torre124
to laugh—a laughter that seems to go on forever. At that point, all 
in the room knew Oshún had arrived. Many started to greet Ochún 
with the words, “yeye dari yeyeo.”
Suddenly the drummer loudly slaps the iya, the largest of the three 
drums that is surrounded by small bells. A deafening silence fills the 
room as Pepito collapses on the floor before us. Of course, every so 
often some try to fake an orisha possession, but those present usually 
just leave them on the floor, telling them to get themselves up. But this 
time, several santero/as rush to help Pepito. The person who started 
dancing and collapsed is not the same person who was helped up from 
the floor. Pepito started the dance but Ochún finished it. He ceased to 
exist, but in his place was the incarnated orisha. S/he was helped up by 
the santera/os and moved to the adjoining bedroom to prepare her for 
her people. Those of us who are left behind waited with anticipation 
for her return. Because Oshún is the patron of gold, and it is she who 
bestows wealth, many came tonight to ask for money aware that she 
is always eager to grant petitions to her devotees. I did not come for 
wealth, but rather, to discuss my concerns about her, with her.
After some time, Ochún returns in full regalia. At her appearance, 
the drummers start singing songs of praise to her. All eyes were trans-
fixed on the way Pepito as Oshún moved among the worshipers. 
S/he moved in a haughty matter, as though s/he was a lady of high 
society. Oshún gracefully glided around the room, at times whisper-
ing advice in the ears of believers and demanding sacrifices from oth-
ers. To a woman who madly loved a married man, Oshún showed 
great compassion; for she knows what it is to be totally infatuated 
with Changó whose passion is satisfied in other ways, be they the 
conquest of other lovers or the conquest of enemies like Oggún. Of 
course, Changó was not her only lover. She has been romantically 
engaged with other orishas, among them were Orúnla (to whom she 
was married until she met Changó), Oggún (Changó’s arch enemy), 
Ochosi, and Oko. She has even been known to tempt the dead to 
abandon their posts while guarding her lover Changó. Her multiple 
relationships gifts Oshún with profound insight into the complexi-
ties, challenges, and conflicts caused by the dynamics and difficulties 
of interpersonal relationships. Along with the advice, Oshún told the 
woman to write the name of her lover on a piece of paper and placed it 
in a hollow pumpkin (among her favorite offerings) along with honey 
and other ingredients. After a certain time, the pumpkin was to be 
brought to the river.
She clearly avoided a devotee of Obba, the lawful wife of her lover 
Changó, who was present. Ever since she tricked the naive Obba into


--- PAGE 138 ---
Dancing with Ochún 125
cutting off her ear and feeding it to Changó, both could barely stand 
being in the same room. Soon, Ochún/Pepito started to dance again. 
S/he grabbed different people, men or women, it didn’t matter. After 
a while s/he approached me, took me into her/his arms and twirled 
me around. Although I used to be a great disco dancer in my youth, 
winning many dance prizes, I had difficulty keeping up. No one, 
with the possible exception of her lover Changó, can out dance her. I 
confess at first feeling strange about dancing with Pepito, but when 
I looked into his/her eyes, I thought I saw an intelligence that could 
see into the deepest recesses of my being. The beauty of her sparkling 
eyes shone through those of Pepito. I felt bathed in love, a spiritual 
ecstasy that bordered on the material. Dancing with Ochún was an 
exhilarating and exciting experience, but what I really wanted was an 
intellectual dance. As though she sensed my thoughts, she leaned into 
my ear and purred, “ mi hijito (my little child), why are you so anx-
ious? I know you came to chat with me, so let’s go to the bedroom 
and talk.” With that, Ochún/Pepito took my hand and led me to the 
other room for a private consultation.
The Conversation
Once we arrived in the bedroom, Ochún/Pepito laid down on the 
bed, allowing both pillows to prop him/her up. I swiftly took the 
chair next to the bed and sat down.
Miguel: Gracias Ochún for taking the time to chat with me.
Ochún: How can I not take the time to answer your questions. After 
all, you are hijo de Elegguá  (a child of Elegguá)—although a trick-
ster, still remains my intimate friend and protector.
Miguel: Ochún, I’m deeply concerned about how Santería is changing 
as more and more Euroamericans enter the faith and set themselves 
up as experts, and in the process, redefine it. It is not that they 
in t en d t o redefin e i t, ra th er , th eir social l oca ti on is so p rivil e ged 
and different from the marginalized. I fear that our culture is being 
hijacked, that our religious symbols are being given new meanings 
with the possible danger of being used against us.
Ochún: Are you saying this because some Euroamericans criticized 
some of your writings concerning Santería?
Miguel: No, not necessarily, although I find it troubling when non-
Cubans correct my Cubanness—even though I’ve been a Latino a 
lot longer than they, or when those who are converted to the faith 
as adults begin to question how I’ve practiced the faith since I was 
a child.


--- PAGE 139 ---
Miguel A. De La Torre126
Ochún: Aye Miguelito, que simpático eres  (Oh little Miguel, you’re so 
cute). Here you are concerned about Santería when you left the 
faith long ago to become a Southern Baptist minister. You’re so 
concerned about the faith becoming Anglicized but then you join 
one of the most American religions in this country. Isn’t this born-
again conversion a very Eurocentric concept? Euroamericans must 
be born-again because they were never brought up to be one with 
the creation that surrounds them. You complain about Anglicizing 
Santería, yet you use American concepts of faith. Can’t you see why 
I can’t take you seriously?
Miguel: Coño Cachita
33 no jodas  (Damn it Cachita, don’t “screw 
around”). You know that I left the religion of my parents, but I 
never abandoned my heritage of which Santería is a main part. 
Todavía respeto los santos (I still respect the saints).
She let out a sarcastic laugh that curdled my blood. I instantly 
knew I had crossed a line. I shouldn’t have cursed. So I profusely 
apologized, quickly changing the topic to discuss my concerns 
about how the changing aesthetics of the faith were altering the 
power structures. I even appealed to her vanity to get the conver-
sation back on track.
Ochún: Mira Miguelito no coma mierda , (Look here little Miguel, 
don’t eat manure). The secret to life is love! This is a love that leads 
me to assist individuals, regardless if they know me or not. I want 
all to live in harmony with their destiny. There is no “us versus 
them.” All have the potential to be children of the orishas. When 
anyone looks beyond their physical self toward the otherworldly to 
deal with the difficulties of life, I stand ready to assist them in their 
ev ery da y trials an d tri b ula ti on. M y l o v e is so stron g tha t I don ’ t 
care if th ey call m e Och ún, La Virg e n d e la Cari da d d e l Co b re, 
Aphrodite,
34 Venus,35 or Lakshmi. 36 I  d o n ’ t  c ar e  i f  th e y  s e e  m e  
as Black, mulata, White, or green. What is important is the needs 
and hardships of the believer. For if there is no devotee, there is no 
Ochún, or whatever else humans want to call me.
In the same way she once seduced Oggún out of the forest (for 
he had entered the woods to live the life of a hermit thus bringing 
civilization to a standstill) she temptingly led me in our conversa-
tion to explore new possibilities.
Miguel: But I do care. Do you have to become White so as to minister 
to Euroamericans? Why can’t they become ontologically Black or 
Cuban—or both?
Ochún: Did I have to become La Virgen del Cobre so that Cubans can 
recognize me as their madre (mother)? Of course I did. Do you hon-
estly believe that the Santería you grew up in is in anyway the same 
as how I was worshiped in Africa? Of course not. The religion must 
change to meet the different needs of people. Cuba was not Africa so 
the religion, the symbols, the rituals, and the beliefs had to change


--- PAGE 140 ---
Dancing with Ochún 127
to face the challenges of a new environment. You White Cubans had 
to change the religion so that you could discover me. This does not 
mean that I abandoned my African children. Surely you noticed 
how during the Mariel boatlift of the late 1970s many of the Black 
and biracial Cubans coming to the United States were somewhat 
shocked by how Santería was being practiced by a predominately 
White Cuban exile community? The attempt to make Santería more 
mainstream by downplaying the African elements and highlighting 
concepts closer to Christian thought has and continues to radically 
transform the religion among you white Cubans. This doesn’t mean 
I abandon white Cubans because the orthodoxy was not maintained. 
Surely you have heard the critique offered by U.S. African Americans 
about how white Cubans Christianized the faith. These are similar 
to the criticisms you have about Euroamericans. But tell me, how can 
we orishas embrace the Cuban and African communities, as well as 
the Euroamerican community, if you are not willing to deal with the 
cultural barriers that divide you or the racist and ethnic discrimina-
tion that is prevalent in your social interactions.
Miguel: But Ochún, you are not really considering the reality that 
whichever group gets to define the religion reinforces its power to 
the determent of the disenfranchised Other.
Ochún: I know you are concerned with liberation, but frankly, my 
children are just trying to survive. You already survived and have a 
well-paying job so you can afford to think of utopias. My children 
are too busy trying to feed their families. I am present in their 
hardships doing something. Besides, haven’t you insisted that lib-
eration is also for the oppressor? Well, why do you think my arms 
remain open to Euroamericans, and before them White Cubans. 
Don’t be so quick to judge. Bueno Miguelito , I need to return to 
the bembe and minister to my devotees. I sincerely hope you found 
our exchange enlightening.
With that Ochún lifted herself off the bed. I too rose from my chair 
realizing that our consultation had come to an end. And then, quite 
unexpectedly, she embraced me. In the strong arms of Pepito, made 
muscular by years of hard labor, I suddenly found myself lost in the 
gentle hug of a mother. All too often, I have thought of Ochún 
as the quintessential love goddess, concluding that such love was 
restricted to the sexual. But now, finding myself in her arms, I was 
reminded of my mother. With my eyes closed, I was again in my 
own mother’s arm’s, a sensation I dearly miss since her passing several 
years ago. Ochún leaned into my ear and whispered “I love and miss 
you very much.” Tears started to roll down my face. I held her tighter, 
not wanting the moment to pass. Eventually, she pulled away and left 
the room, leaving me alone. In the empty bedroom I had to sit down


--- PAGE 141 ---
Miguel A. De La Torre128
again. I found myself gently sobbing, yet I wasn’t sure why. Maybe it 
is because I terribly miss my mother and Ochún’s presence brought 
back vivid memories. Or maybe it was because I miss from where 
I came. I am no longer a poor kid from the barrio. Instead, I have 
obtained middle-class privilege. The cultural capital obtained by my 
doctorate now made it impossible to truly return to my comunidad. 
And it is at this moment that I realize that maybe the Black goddess 
is not the only one who has been whitened.
Notes
1. Created by the Supreme Being Olodumare, orishas are considered to be 
quasi-deities. They serve as protectors and guides for all humans, exercis-
ing authority over different aspects of nature, the body, and human 
encounter.
2. Besides being the patron goddess of eros, Ochún embodies the sacred 
dimensions of waters, and can usually be found on the banks of fresh-
water rivers. The Osun River, located in present day Nigeria, specifically 
personifies Ochún. It is believed that from these waters, Olofi (the appel-
lation of the Supreme Deity on earth) soften the clay with which humans 
were formed. Other creation stories name Obatalá, the head orisha of the 
Yoruba pantheon, as forming humans from clay.
3. Obatalá, the father of peace, is the first orisha created by the Supreme 
Being Olodumare. He is considered to be the most powerful orisha in the 
Yoruba pantheon, credited with creating the universe, including humans. 
He is considered to be the patron of all human heads.
4. Olocun is considered to be among the first and most powerful orishas 
created. She is the androgynous queen of the ocean’s depths who is 
responsible for the worldwide flood. Shackled to the bottom of the sea (as 
punishment for causing the flood) her anger is still felt in the form of tidal 
waves and rough seas. Although chained in the ocean’s depth, she claims 
all humans who drown. During the Middle Passage, many Africans were 
cast overboard, either because they died during the journey, or as a means 
of disposing those who were too weak or too rebellious.
5. Hugh Thomas, Cuba: The Pursuit of Freedom , Updated Edition (New 
York: Da Cap Press, 1998), 282.
6. In some legends, Yemayá is presented as Ochún’s older sister, while in 
others, she is presented as Ochún’s mother.
7. Ashé is understood to be the Supreme Being as sacred energy—an energy 
that encompasses the power, grace, blood, and life force of all reality. As 
a transcendent world force it cannot be seen or personified; it is neither 
good nor bad. All that has life or exhibits power has ashé. Ashé is the 
energy produced by the blood of living creatures being spilled, or by the 
movement of water, wind, or fire. Simply put, this neutral cosmic energy 
undergirds every aspect of existence.


--- PAGE 142 ---
Dancing with Ochún 129
 8. “Anonymous Christianity,” according to Karl Rahner, understands 
non-Christian religions not as a self-willed decision to avoid accepting 
the “true” faith from God, but as the revelation of God at work in all 
non-Christian religions. All religions contain God’s grace, a gratuitous 
gift on account of Christ. Ergo, a non-Christian religion should be 
recognized as a lawful religion without denying the error or deprav-
ity which it may contain. See Karl Rahner, Theological Investigations , 
trans. by David Bourke (London: Darton, Longman & Todd, 1973) 
46; and, Karl Rahner, Foundations of Christian Faith: Introduction to 
the Idea of Christianity , trans. William V. Dych (New York: Seabury, 
1978) 119–123. In the same way, I insist the “anonymous Christianity” 
should not be limited to Christianity. Just as Christians theorize that 
those of other faiths are in reality worshiping the Catholic God, fol-
lowers of Santería have always maintained that believers of other faith 
traditions were worshiping the orishas whenever they honored the god(s) 
of their own faith. Everyone who worships the Divine through their 
different religious expressions is in reality worshiping the orishas. In the 
final analysis, it is those who practice Santería that are the ones with a 
deeper understanding of the spiritual for they possess el conocimiento  
(the knowledge) to recognize the names of the orishas masked by the 
faces of gods which exist in other faiths. See Miguel A De La Torre, 
(Grand Rapids: Eerdmans., 2004) 12–13.
 9. Declared the Patron of Cuba by Pope Benedict XV on May 10, 1926.
10. The Taínos were the indigenous people of the island who awoke to dis-
cover the lost Columbus anchored on their shores.
11. The fact that these two Native Americans had Spanish names indicates 
how “successful” the Spaniard genocide and assimilation project was.
12. It is interesting to point out that Moreno in Spanish means “person of 
color.”
13. During the time of La Virgen’s apparition, Cuba was an island of approx-
imately 20,000 inhabitants. This was a population in flux. Because of 
the decimation of the Taínos, there were less than 2,000 left. To replace 
them, Africans were being imported. By this time, their numbers swelled 
to about 5,000. The remaining 13,000 comprised the Spaniards (mostly 
men) who came to Cuba in search of fame and glory. For many of these 
Spaniards, Cuba was a midway point to other exploitable lands on the 
continent. See Louis A. Pérez, Jr., (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1988), 45–47.
14. Miguel A. De La Torre, “Ochún: (N)Either the (M)Other of All Cubans 
(n)or the Bleached Virgin,” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 
Vol. 69, No. 4 (December 2001): 849–850.
15. A term of endearment that can be translated as “the little virgin.”
16. Mulata refers to biracial women with African and European ancestry. 
Like La Virgen, their skin color appears copper. Cuban religious scholars 
have uncritically embraced mulatez as a theological concept to describe 
the ethos of those who define their identity through their association


--- PAGE 143 ---
Miguel A. De La Torre130
with Brazil and the Caribbean. In an attempt to create a counterbal-
ance to what Latino/as scholars of religion with indigenous roots have 
termed mestizaje, predominately white scholars from the Caribbean have 
named their culture mulatez, and in so doing, have masked their own 
complicity with internal Hispanic racism. For a deeper analysis of this 
critique, see Miguel A. De La Torre, “Rethinking Mulatez,” Rethinking 
Latino(a) Religion and Identity , editors, Miguel A. De La Torre and 
Gastón Espinosa (Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim Press, 2006), 158–175.
17. Alejandro de la Fuente. A Nation for All: Race, Inequality, and Politics 
in Twentieth-Century Cuba  (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press, 2001), 178.
18. Specifically, he said: “The day . . . when a white slave master first had 
intercourse with a slave Negress in the bush or in the barracoon [slave 
quarters] was the most luminous for mankind . . . A vivifying transfusion 
took place that engendered a fertile and plastic symbiosis. From such 
mixing was to emerge new physical attributes and ascending psychic and 
moral virtues.” See Carlos Moore, Castro, the Blacks, and Africa . (Los 
Angeles: Center for Afro-American Studies, University of California, 
1988), 47.
19. This first wave (1959–1962) brought 215,000 refuges that were 
demographically homogeneous. The vast majority composed an elite 
of former notables who were mostly White (94 percent), middle-aged 
(about thirty-eight years old), educated (about fourteen years of school-
ing), urban (principally La Habana), and literate in English. The second 
wave (1962–1973) brought 414,000 refugees who were predominately 
White, educated, and middle class. While in Cuba, they largely con-
stituted the group directly relying on economic links with the United 
States. On average they were semi-skilled working-class people who cap-
italized on the emerging economic enclave being established by the first-
wave Cubans. See Richard R. Fagan, Richard A. Brody, and Thomas 
J. O’Leary, Cubans in Exile: Disaffection and the Revolution  (Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 1968), 19–28.
20. Although Brown is describing her experiences with Haitian voodoo (a 
cousin of Santería), she could easily have been describing my New York 
barrio.
21. Karen McCarthy Brown, Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn  
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991), 1.
22. Johannes Fabian, Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes Its Object 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1983), xi.
23. Bembe is a drum and dance festival performed in honor of one or more 
orishas.
24. Yellow and gold are Ochún’s favorite colors.
25. Large lidded ceramic soup tureen that is usually decorated in the favorite 
color of the orisha.
26. According to legend, when the orishas left their earthly community, 
their ashé remained among certain stones called otanes.


--- PAGE 144 ---
Dancing with Ochún 131
27. Among ordinaries rocks are otanes resonating with the ashé or the orishas 
that can only be discovered if the believer listens carefully for the orisha’s 
presence.
28. The priest/priestess (santero/as) upon ordination usually receives soperas 
for the orishas Obatalá, Changó (the Lord of thunder), Yemayá, and 
Ochún. Many possess the soperas of other orishas.
29. Spanish for “right” signifying a monetary offering paid for services 
rendered.
30. Although I am aware that different toque songs played for different 
orisha are usually conducted in order, still, for purposes of my imagina-
tion, I will fast forward to Oshún’s toque. And while several orishas may 
possess more than one person, again, for purposes of my imagination, I 
will only concentrate on one possession.
31. Randy P. Conner and David Hatfield Sparks, Queering Creole Spiritual 
Traditions: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Participation in 
African-Inspired Traditions in the Americas  (New York: Harrington 
Park Press, 2004), 73.
32. The four warriors are: Elegguá (the trickster), Oggún (the Lord of Iron), 
Ósun (the messenger of Obatalá), and Ochosi (the Lord of the Hunt).
33. Cachita i s  a  t e r m  o f  e n d e a r m e n t  u s e d  b y  C u b a n s  w h e n  r e f e r r i n g  t o  
Ochún.
34. Greek love goddess.
35. Roman love goddess.
36. Hindu goddess of fortune and beauty.


--- PAGE 145 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 146 ---
3
Europe


--- PAGE 147 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 148 ---
7
Black Suit Matters: Faith, 
Politics, and Representation in 
the Religious Documentary
Robert Beckford
The aim of this chapter is to explore religious and political affiliations 
represented in the symbolic artifact of dress, 1 specifically, a black suit 
as a site of multiple meanings in African Caribbean communities 
within the wider context and experience of diaspora. 2 In this intro-
ductory section, I will sketch out the theoretical framework within 
which this particular case is considered.
My interest in this topic stems from considering audience response 
to the black suits I wear in my television documentaries, and conse-
quently how public perception of my dress style relates to my personal 
understanding. The hermeneutical distance between audience and 
author is always contested space that at its best facilitates discussion, 
dialogue, and challenge. But it is always without certainties.
I am an African Caribbean man living in Britain, so a legitimate 
starting point for thinking about dress is with the postwar immigra-
tion of my parent’s generation. African Caribbean Christian tradi-
tions, dress, and diaspora sensibilities collide and collapse on the stage 
of postwar immigration to Britain and the arrival of so called “West 
Indians” in Britain after World War II. After centuries of Christian 
missionary activity from first Europe and then North America most 
West Indians disembarked with a complex religious heritage, a tapes-
try of African derived themes reworked and Creolized into Caribbean 
Christianity.
3 Dress was also subject to syncretism, as the economic 
migrants also arrived with a particular sense of style; a fusion of 
English colonial civility and Caribbean color schemes infused with 
Black American flair and proportion.
4 Newsreels and black and white


--- PAGE 149 ---
Robert Beckford136
photographs capturing these moments reveal West Indians dressed 
in “Sunday best” clothes disembarking for a new life in the mother 
country. So from “day one” “dressing up” for Church—an integral 
part of African Caribbean Christianity in Britain, is bound up with 
social history and cultural expression.
Despite the conflation of faith and dress from the earliest moment in 
diaspora history, theological reflection on dress has received little aca-
demic attention. So I want to stimulate reflection by identifying ways 
that we might think about dress in relation to Church and context. 
As Anthea Butler has demonstrated we can interpret dress and attire 
through the dominant theological modes of interpretation within a 
given historical period.
5 So in the case of Britain, since postwar immi-
gration, these modes are compensation, respect, and paradox.
Dress Style and Theological Orientation
The first mode is compensation. This theme emerges from examina-
tion of fledging congregations in the mid 1960s. A seminal study 
exemplifying this approach is William Calley’s anthropological inves-
tigation of West Indian congregations. Calley argued that the forma-
tion of what he pejoratively terms “sects,” is the response to a racially 
hostile environment. In the midst of social disadvantage brought 
about by postcolonial racism, the central purpose of the “sect” is to 
alleviate the social pressure by providing “satisfaction.” Satisfaction 
refers to the function of Christology where each believer is offered 
a higher status in Christ and a new identity superior to their social 
status.
6 Within this scheme, church dress, should be interpreted as a 
momentary suspension of the drudgery of work dress. Consequently, 
“West Indians” dressed up for Sunday morning worship in early post-
war Britain in order to survive and compensate for what they were 
denied throughout the week.
7
Calley’s perspective provides little agency for Black Christian reli-
gion, a view challenged a decade or so later by Iain MacRobert. This 
leads to the second mode, respect. In contrast, the second mode inter-
prets Pentecostalism as a counter ideology rather than mere survival. 
Counter ideology signifies the creation of a new way of being in the 
world as a result of Christian conversion. Central to maintaining this 
oppositional worldview is worship. Iain MacRobert captures this ori-
entation in his 1980s study of Black Trinitarian Pentecostals wor-
ship. Speaking of the Spirit in worship he says, “the Spirit produces 
a new way of interpreting the world and a new perception of self and 
community.”
8 In this case, rather than an opiate, in a context of racial


--- PAGE 150 ---
Black Suit Matters 137
hostility, worship is a catalyst for affirming the equality, self-dignity, 
and self-worth of African Caribbean people. Counter ideology as the 
leitmotiv of Caribbean Christianity justifies the creation of an alter-
native space for the development of artistry, educational attainment 
and community projects within these congregations. Within this sec-
ond frame, dressing-up for Sunday worship reflects interior and exte-
rior self-confidence, agency, and empowerment or “respect.”
However, there are limitations to the respect mode, and these con-
cerns shape the third theological space, the paradox mode. I want 
to illustrate how it works by referring to Valentina Alexander’s 1996 
study of Black British Pentecostals.
9 She makes her starting point 
Black liberation theology. For her, a primary concern is how the 
church rates in terms of liberation or “ theological liberation and how 
it is both interpreted and utilized. ” Working with liberation herme-
neutics, a critical aspect of her work concerns social analysis—how 
social analysis facilitates liberation. Reflecting on the social analysis 
at work amongst Trinitarian Pentecostals she identifies a paradox that 
she terms, passive radicalism. Passive radicalism refers to
. . . an implicit tool enabling believers to identify, challenge and over-
come the various levels of their ideological and material oppression 
without necessarily seeking out its socio-historical source and with-
out making an explicit theological alignment with that liberational 
process.
10
In short, a personal, private faith, while facilitating personal libera-
tion (respect) lacks the necessary social criticism to address structural 
oppression. As a result Alexander calls for a new social criticism or 
active radicalism to
. . . broaden the scope of social analysis, providing it with a multi-
 dimensional insight into social transformation and allowing for the 
possibi l it y of a n h istor ico-a na ly t ica l element to be added to it s met hod 
of interpreting the social world. . . . Believers are able to recognise 
therefore that liberation must address structures of oppression as well 
as provide personal empowerment for individual advancement.
11
Within Alexander’s thesis, dressing up for Sunday morning worship 
symbolizes a conflict, a double-speak of personal empowerment and 
social passivity.
I want to build on Alexander’s perspective by making my starting 
point dress as a site of conflict. However, my intention is to move 
beyond the limitations of passive radicalism and locate within dress


--- PAGE 151 ---
Robert Beckford138
style a semiotics of active radicalism, that is to say, I want to fore-
ground religious and political signs and symbols that signify active 
radicalism. Appropriating active radicalism is not a new endeavor 
as Alexander’s analysis has been central to my reflection on African 
Caribbean Pentecostalism. Put simply, in search for a new praxis, I 
have sought to correlate political aspects of Black popular culture 
with Christian themes to produce a political theology. I have adopted 
a critical correlation where theological ideas are challenged and even 
modified by cultural criticism.
12 Further, I have opted for a praxis 
approach, which seeks to mobilize the product of correlation into a 
social theory and social action.
Religious Themes in 
Television Documentary
In recent years, I have been gifted with the opportunity to explore reli-
gious and cultural themes through television documentary. My moti-
vation for using this medium is partly a natural desire to engage with 
a cosmopolitan audience and also a result of the unnatural policing of 
Black political theology within African Caribbean Churches and the 
theological academy in Britain. As I have suggested elsewhere, being a 
Black political theologian represents a “double jeopardy.” On the one 
hand, it means one is too bookish for the passive radical church and 
on the other, too “Black” for the neo colonial theological academy 
in Britain.
13 So naturally, the interface with mass culture (television) 
and the potential for developing new and meaningful conversations is 
particularly enticing. However, unlike writing books, penning articles 
or teaching undergraduate seminars, broadcasting has drawn unsolic-
ited attention to my physical attire, namely, how and why I represent 
myself and its potential meaning(s). My resulting intellectual curios-
ity over self-representation is not retreat into narcissism, but instead 
desire to reflect on active radicalism in dress, that is to say , a social 
and religious concern for how dress “charts changes, broadcast polit-
ical conflict and communicate resistance.”
14 In order to explore dress 
as signifying practice in documentary, I want to place this concern in 
context by first detailing the type of films I have made and identifying 
a tension arising from doing religion and culture in documentary.
I initially entered filmmaking as a response to a challenge. I went 
on a viewer’s complaints program called, Right to Reply  in 1995. I 
was upset about the state of Black programming on Channel 4, one 
of Britain’s five terrestrial broadcasters. During a heated debate with 
the commissioning editor—the person responsible for programming,


--- PAGE 152 ---
Black Suit Matters 139
I was challenged to “try and do better.” Never one to turn down 
a fight, I decided to find out as much as possible about television 
broadcasting and the opportunities available to a Black political 
theologian. Naturally, there were none! British television is “made 
in the image” of British society, dominated by White elites, and still 
informed by neocolonial “regimes of truth.” I was only going to get 
a “break” from one of the few within the profession with a vision for 
Black people doing more than sports and entertainment on television. 
Thankfully, three years later a “door opened” when a Black producer, 
Trevor Phillips, who would later go on to become a leading human 
rights commissioner, approached me to participate in a documentary 
he was making on Britain’s Trans Atlantic Slave Trade. I was given 
the platform to retell an aspect of my family history. A few years prior, 
as an act of reconciling and seeking justice for my family’s slave his-
tory, I had sought out descendants of the Black and White Beckford 
families to explore how redemption might look and feel within the 
peculiarities of our situation. This story formed an integral part of 
the narrative for Phillip’s film and to critical acclaim Britain’s Slave 
Past was aired in 1999. Moreover, the response from Black people 
was positive, moving and affirming. Many informed me that it was 
the first time they had been exposed to slave history and the connec-
tions made in the documentary. I was astounded by the potential of 
the medium for politicizing people. But from the outset compromises 
had to be made—there were parts of the film that I thought funda-
mental to the story that were omitted by the producers and editors 
for commercial reasons. For instance, a meeting between a member 
of the White Beckford family and myself that explore reparations was 
omitted. (This editorial decision raises the question of the potential 
and also pitfalls of using this medium.)
The main potential documentary provides is access to a mass audi-
ence. Beyond the confines of the traditional academic logo-centricity 
the theologian is able to make a unique contribution to the public 
sphere discourse on religious and cultural themes. Although, in today’s 
world, the public sphere is multiple, layered, competitive and hierarchi-
cal, one can make an impact even though it may not be a global one. 
Even so, the media as an aspect of popular culture is a strategic site 
in the struggle for meaning and today, television, film, art and other 
visual media, are central to battles over “race and representation”:
What we are talking about is the struggle over cultural hegemony, 
which is, these days waged as much in popular culture as anywhere 
else.
15


--- PAGE 153 ---
Robert Beckford140
In recent years, these struggles have moved from the romantic idea of 
critiquing capitalism and “race” to exploring how cultural forms are 
at the service of capitalism in a “globalized world.”
16 Consequently, 
there is always a need to be reflexive and examine the potential and 
extent of one’s interpellation.
17
The major pitfall arises from the ongoing negotiation between the 
popular and prophetic. The popular refers to the commercial demands 
of mainstream popular television. At present, my films are made for 
Channel 4 . Established as a public-private partnership, twenty-five 
years ago, like all broadcasters, reviews, ratings and impact are central 
measures for evaluating the relative success of a film. Broadcasting 
cannot be separated from the wider ravages and pressures of political 
economy. The prophetic as Cornel West notes is the desire to foster 
hope, courage and love in a context driven by cynicism and skepti-
cism.
18 Tension exists because of the assumption amongst many tele-
vision executives that redemptive narratives are “too worthy” and a 
turn-off for audiences. Instead, genres grounded in fear, punishment 
and shock tactics are considered to be more bankable. To be suc-
cessful within this commercial documentary I have had to learn to 
signify—encode meanings for my intended audiences as well as find 
congruence between the media marketplace and non market values. 
Generally these two poles shift with each project and are reconciled at 
the outset of each film project but are none the less a constant strug-
gle during production.
CHANNEL  4
After Britain’s Slave Past  in 1999 and inspired by the launch of a 
new BBC station dedicated to “thinking,” I moved over to the BBC 
and developed two documentaries with BBC 4 . Black Messiah (2001) 
was a dialogue between the political theologies of African American 
and African Caribbean Christianity. The aim was to draw a distinc-
tion between African American Christianity’s engagement with pol-
itics and the African Caribbean experience of disavowal. Similarly, 
Ebony Towers (2003) compared the rise of Black intellectual thought 
in America in the late twentieth century with the struggle to establish 
a Black academy within Britain. My “calling card” for mainstream 
television was a six part series for BBC Religious Education, Test of 
Time (2001). This was my first full-fledge role as a documentary pre-
senter and explored how the hard teachings of Jesus such as forgive-
ness, peacemaking and loving one’s enemy were being played-out in 
six global situations. The film earned a British Academy of Film and


--- PAGE 154 ---
Black Suit Matters 141
Television Award (BAFTA) for education. Next came Blood and Fire 
a rare excursion with the BBC’s Black Britain Unit for BBC 2 (2002). 
It was the story of Jamaican Independence from British colonialism 
with a focus on American destabilization of the Michael Manley led 
socialist project of the 1970s.
I returned to Channel 4  in 2003 at the invitation of the new reli-
gions commissioning editor, Aaqil Ahmed, to present provocative 
explorations of religion and culture for prime-time evening viewing. 
These documentaries can be divided into three strands—church his-
tory, politics and religion, and culture.
The first strand is general church history but with an emphasis 
on insurrecting hidden themes. For instance, Who Wrote the Bible 
(2004) was a historical, critical examination of biblical authorship 
and its resource for a critical Christianity in Britain. Similarly, The 
Real Patron Saints (2006) deconstructed the hagiography of British 
saints to locate genuine unifying themes for the United Kingdom. 
The next four films were revisions of Christology. The Secret Family 
of Jesus (2006) explored the known relatives of Jesus and their place 
within the early Jesus movement. The Hidden Story of Jesus (2007) 
examines the reflections on Jesus in other faith traditions to build 
a broader inter-faith Christology. The Secrets of the Twelve Disciples 
(2008) debated the theology and politics of the disciples and apostles 
and The Nativity (2008) examined hidden as well as liberation read-
ings of the birth narratives of Jesus.
The second strand represents political investigation. In these films, 
I examine national and global themes in order to offer alternative 
vision of social, historical or economic practice. Films such as Empire 
Pays Back—Reparations for Slavery  (2005), Ghetto Britain—Failures 
of Multi Culturalism  (2006), and The Great African Scandal—How 
the West Impoverishes Africa  (2007), fall into this category. And, the 
final group consists of popularist conversations between religion and 
popular culture. For example, God is Black (2004) sought out the 
influence of Nigerian Anglicanism on debates over sexuality and gen-
der in Anglicanism. Gospel Truth (2005) contoured the argument of 
an Ivy League music professor that African American gospel music 
has part of its musical DNA in Scottish Psalm singing. Faith and the 
Fury—Hollywood Bible Films  (2005) was a cinematographic history 
of Hollywood’s retelling of biblical epics and the emergence of an 
explicitly Christian film industry at the beginning of the twenty first 
century. God Gave Rock and Roll to You (2006) detailed the rise of 
popular music from the spirituals and gospel music, its rejection and 
later appropriation by Christian musicians.


--- PAGE 155 ---
Robert Beckford142
There are a plethora of issues that arise from this work. As men-
tioned above as an academic, the tension between intellectual ideas 
and popular media has been a major concern. Similarly there are aca-
demic themes resulting from the dynamic process of doing documen-
tary. Documentary is an art, the art of record, with its own aesthetic. 
All of which produces a myriad of ethical issues within film making 
practice. Finally, as a political theologian, I am interested in how doc-
umentary facilitates hospitality and creates new alliances.
In this exploration, I want to relate to all of these issues by making 
my focus the less obvious, but equally intriguing theme of non-verbal 
communication, specifically, the dress of the documentary presenter. 
On the surface such a proposition may appear trivial, especially if we 
consider traditional documentary unease with any interference with 
the art of record.
19 The idea of form over content or dress codes play-
ing any meaningful role in the communication of events may appear 
a capitulation to the post modern hybridization and weakening of the 
form.
20 However, to my defense, dress has historically been one of the 
most important visual markers of religious commitment, class status 
and ethnic allegiance. Whether purists like it or not, dress is therefore 
consciously or unconsciously an additional layer of meaning.
In this case, I want to identify ways that a black suit is a site of 
struggle and multiple meanings but with the potential to be rein-
scribed to signify active radicalism.
Black Suit Matters
One overlooked feature of making documentary films in Britain is 
th e  fr e e d o m  t o  s i gnify  in  dr e s s .  D i s in t e r e s t e d  in  w ar dr o b e  o r  p r e -
senter aesthetics apart from the obvious technical color clashes, doc-
umentary presenters such as myself are left with a small budget to 
buy something “appropriate” for the task. Within this theater, dress 
has tended to be inconsequential, but I have always believed it to be 
fecund with meaning. After all, for some time, symbolic interaction 
has informed us that appearance is critical to how we establish our 
identity, and dress as part of appearance informs others of the role we 
are playing.
21 This sensibility was at the forefront of my mind when I 
presented my first film for BBC 2 in 2002, Blood and Fire.
I wore a navy blue shirt, beige trousers, and brown shoes. All pur-
chased from a high street men’s fashion retailer, Reiss. I thought this 
style to be a Black urban play on the middle class traditional academic 
“summer uniform” in England, but with what I considered a slightly 
more fashionable cut to the trousers and shirt. After broadcast, the


--- PAGE 156 ---
Black Suit Matters 143
feedback from both BBC executives and audiences focused exclusively 
on the subject matter—the importance of revising colonial histories, 
diaspora engagement, and so forth. Nothing was said about dress. In 
contrast, in the first film I presented for Channel 4 , God Is Black  I 
wore a black corduroy suit throughout. Intriguingly, several e-mails 
I received after the film was broadcast referred to the fact that I was 
wearing black. This warrants further investigation.
So while it was clear that in the first program, I was playing an 
accessible academic role, what did the black suits signify? For some 
viewers it was inappropriate because at particular times, I was on loca-
tion for part of the film in West Africa and therefore I should have 
worn something of a lighter color. Beyond fashion, others thought 
that the black suit was a symbol of clerical or “political affiliation.” 
So, “are you ordained,” and “are you an Afrocentrist” featured in 
some of the emails I received after broadcast. Similarly, but with a dif-
ferent tone, one Nigerian man wrote and said, “your cloths are black 
but your mind is European!” He took exception to the critical por-
trayal of an independent church in Lagos featured in the film and like 
many Black viewers interpreted critical assessment for anti-blackness.
Although, these considerations of a black suit may not be repre-
sentative of all the audience response, the comments and reflections 
challenged me to think hard about how black dress in documentary 
reflects, even unconsciously, a situating of oneself in relation to oth-
ers—a signal of what is really going on. For instance, was my dress a 
site for a subversive play on identity, politics and religion? Did it have 
the potential for exerting symbolic agency?
22 But there were other 
variables at work including hairstyle politics and audience ambiguity. 
Let me explain.
In both of the films in question, ( Blood and Fire , God Is Black) I 
wore my hair in shoulder length dreadlocks. Dreadlocks have mul-
tiple meanings in contemporary Britain. Once, the sole preserve of 
Rastafarians, the style has been appropriated by soul culture (funky 
dreads) and White youths committed to alternative lifestyles to name 
a few. My desire to “lox-up”—wear my hair in dreads was an act of 
self-confessed rebellion, a desire to reclaim dreadlocks within the con-
text of the “baldhead” Black Church. Also, it was a signifier, within 
the wider social context that black hair is beautiful without the need 
to relax or straighten it. It was not a retreat into an imaginary African 
identity, but rather a diaspora production, made in Jamaica and 
crafted in Britain.
23 In the context of the documentary, the brico-
lage of dreadlocks, black suit, and Black heterosexual male Christian 
opens up fields of semiotic enquiry where hair, dress style, gender and


--- PAGE 157 ---
Robert Beckford144
skin color are projected into a world full of assumptions about Black 
men in suits. This leads to the matter of audiences.
I had learned prior to television work of the ambiguity at work in 
wearing dreadlocks and a suit. For instance, on one occasion, I spoke 
at a “well to do” sixth form in Birmingham to a group of middle-
class young ladies attending the school. After the lecture one of the 
Black students approached me, to comment on my dress. She said 
that she appreciated the “juxtaposition of dreads and a suit, because it 
conveyed a really positive sense of blackness in the mainstream.” But 
elsewhere this combination has had an opposite effect. For example, 
elsewhere I have described the experience of being overlooked as a 
university lecturer by a receptionist at a BBC office in London for a 
White motorbike courier who was dressed in motorcycle leathers. The 
receptionist thought he was “Dr Beckford.” So, at best hairstyle is a 
“visual metaphor for identity” but it is subject to the cultural ambigu-
ity of audiences and their interpretation of appearance.
24
So  w h a t  d oes  i t  m e an  t o  w e ar  a  b l a c k  s ui t  in  d ocum e n tary  an d  
how might it be read as active radicalism? While aware of audience 
responses, by way of contrast and self-revelation, I want to state my 
intended meanings. My meanings emerge from the various contexts 
in which questions of dress have arisen and taken shape but they make 
their point of departure the critical awareness sought after in active 
radicalism. To this end, I seek to inscribe new meanings to recode 
these critical significations.
25
Holiness Suit
The first influence comes from my church upbringing. I wear a par-
ticular variation of the holiness suit when I wear a black suit.
I was raised in the Wesleyan Holiness Church in Britain, a Caribbean 
diaspora church that lived the factious intersection between its syn-
cretistic Caribbean heritage and theological allegiance to its Euro-
American denomination. A habitus, Diane Austin Broos terms the 
tension between the Africa rite and the missionary’s moral orders.
26 
In Wesleyan spirituality, dress is a code, a manifestation of the the-
ology of the people. Consequently, modesty, propriety and sobriety 
were reflected in a dress management. The basic idea was to reflect 
the central doctrine of sanctification. To this end plain colors and 
simple dress was encouraged and monitored. However, ironically, 
simple dress for men at least meant wearing 1960s style loose fit-
ting suits that at one point were fashionable in the secular world. 
Not only was there a “chronology of fashion acceptability,” enabling


--- PAGE 158 ---
Black Suit Matters 145
dress styles to one day be transformed into holiness attire, there was 
also a dialectical relationship between fabric and Sprit, both working 
on each other.
27 For instance, for the first generation of Holiness 
inspired West Indian migrants, dress codes were structured in oppo-
sition to the “rude boy” flamboyance outside of the church. Another 
and more controversial example of dress codes being fashioned as part 
of an ongoing dialectic was women’s dress.
Special attention was given to female dress, leaving the denom-
ination wide open to the charge of patriarchy and even misogyny. 
This is because modesty as an expression of holiness became syn-
onymous with policing female clothing. I can recall a plethora of 
arguments between my mother and my sisters on Sunday mornings 
while they were getting ready for church. Ironically in the 1970s 
and 1980s women were not permitted to wear trousers in church—a 
trend reversed buy the male hierarchy in the 1990s. But they were less 
flexible over the covering of heads. Based on a literal interpretation 
of St. Paul’s admonition, women were required to attend all services 
wearing a hat or scarf. Women inside the sanctuary without a hat 
were provided with one by church sisters! So on one level, a holiness 
suit came to symbolize an ethical straightjacket—a binding of a per-
ceived dangerous female sexuality. But there were other features of 
the holiness suit that facilitate an appropriation of this signifier with-
out buying into its historic relationship to misogyny.
This is because the holiness suit as part of Sunday dress was also 
“shot through” with hidden eroticism and subversion. Hidden eroti-
cism refers to the ways that dress was also intimately related to rituals 
of pleasure. There was a certain delight and appetite for transforming 
the biological image to symbolize the otherworldly image. In front of 
many mirrors on Sunday mornings, these two horizons met in cere-
mony.
28 So, even within the confines of a strict moral code dressing 
up for church was fecund with experiences of playfulness and joy. It 
was also a site for subversion. Subversion refers to the identity politics 
particularly inter-generational conflicts that were expressed in argu-
ments over dress style. On reflection for second-generation subjects 
such as myself, struggle revolved around fashion, specifically, how we 
could incorporate secular trends within the limited conventions, not 
always as an act of rebellion but also as an act of pleasure, to capture 
the “cool” of the “world.” Practically, this meant wearing suits that 
reflected local tastes than continuing to import Caribbean church 
dress style. There was a two-tier suit system in operation. On one 
tier were the progressives who opted for the local styles with their 
softer lines and subtle themes. On the other were the conservatives


--- PAGE 159 ---
Robert Beckford146
in 60s style Caribbean suits. Dress symbolized a cultural and theo-
logical divide. Capturing or appropriating aspects of secular fashion 
provided raw materials for a reworking of the black suit toward a dis-
avowal of Caribbean traditions including the attendant patriarchy.
So for me, on one level, the black suit situates me within postwar 
African Caribbean Christianity in general and Black Pentecostalism 
in particular. It signifies a second-generation contextualization of 
holiness style to reinscribe newer more inclusive gender politics.
Political Suit
Dress as a signifier of political affiliation has a long history in the 
Caribbean diaspora. There is not enough time and space for an exten-
sive survey here, but one feature emerging from late-twentieth-century 
Black Atlantic history is the collapsing of “race” and religion into mili-
tarism. For instance, we may consider the dynamic pseudo-army motif 
of Bedwardism and Garveyism or the beige khaki suit of Rastafari, as 
examples of militarism, religion and “race” in dress codes.
29 Within 
this experience of dress and style the body is presented as a political 
object to be worked upon and never completely finished. Within my 
personal history, the early 1970s was the point at which I became cog-
nizant of the conflation at hand. I was conscientized by encounters 
with African American culture, particularly, the moments in black and 
white photographs and television coverage of African American polit-
ical life (Civil Rights and Black Power Movements). Both the “Jesus 
army” of Dr. King and the “ethnic army” of the Black Panthers wore 
uniforms. In an age of anti-fashion
30 the military-politicization of black 
clothing (suits, leather jackets, etc.) were a reflection and radicalization 
of the world; the affirmation of all things black in order to exorcise its 
historic dehumanization. Ironically, these anti fashion statements have 
in the modern world been transformed into icons of fashion or “revo-
lutionary chic” for nostalgia, commoditization and consumption. You 
can pick up a “mod suit” or “black panther” style leather jacket from 
every retro cloths store in every major British city. Further, another 
danger associated with this re-contextualization is the separation of 
the politics of fashion with the politics of gender (Black feminism). 
Sexism and misogyny were unsavory aspects of these insurgent Black 
liberation struggles and played a shameful role in the marginalization 
of women and weakened the political veracity and integrity of these 
quests for “freedom.”
On this side of the Atlantic, black suits as a symbol of a quasi-
militarism of Black struggle has emerged intermittently in Black


--- PAGE 160 ---
Black Suit Matters 147
urban life and most recently in the 1990s with temporary rise of the 
Nation of Islam (UK). The religious-political dynamic of Black men 
in suits came to public prominence during the acquittal of the four 
men alleged to have murdered the promising Black teenager, Stephen 
Lawrence in 1993. The acquittal verdict was given in 2003 and led to 
disturbances outside the court. Although not involved in any trouble 
members of the Nation of Islam were in full view of the media and 
public in their dark suits and red bowties. Within the mainstream 
media with its highly racialized discursive practices, these Black men 
in suits were “read” as threat. Old English ideas of blackness as fearful 
and foreboding were collapsed into very new fears about the Islamic 
radicalization of Black youth. In contrast, for many Black urban 
youths the image of Black me in black suits represented, action, a 
show of force and a positive blackness.
So while my black suit may project back to an era of political radi-
calism, such nostalgia must, as Angela Davis suggests, recognize the 
cost, suffering, and complex historical contexts in which these images 
are formed. This is necessary to counter the nostalgic desire to reduce 
politics to consumerable fashion icons. Therefore my black suit is, 
on a second level, a signifier of being aligned to the historic struggle 
against all forms of structural oppression.
31
Designer Suit
The final suit is the designer suit. In God Is Black  one person that I 
interviewed on location  asked me, “Where did you buy that suit?” 
She said that she liked the texture of the suit and wanted to know 
what design label it was. It was a Nicole Farhi suit. Nicole Farhi is a 
reputed French designer. This designer’s more exclusive range is out 
of my financial reach, but this suit was part of a more accessible mid-
range introduced in the 1990s. The question of the designer label, 
introduces the third understanding of the black suit, its relationship 
to global economics.
As a theologian and filmmaker, my spending power is above average 
and my social mobility reflects a general rise of status amongst many 
second and third generation African Caribbean Christians. However, 
I must confess that the Holiness tradition of thrift still lives with me 
and I was only able to spend the £350 ($700) in 2004, more readily 
than normal as the production company had provided the budget 
for wardrobe. Aesthetically, I really liked the design of the suit. The 
jacket was tapered which provided a sculptured fit. The lapels were 
thin and angular, complementing the single-breasted front. It was the


--- PAGE 161 ---
Robert Beckford148
sort of design that provides early middle age men like myself, with a 
sense of elegance, class and the contemporary without having to pan-
der to youth fashion. What impressed me most was its suitability for 
the task; hard wearing yet, providing me with a sense of authority 
without detachment or inappropriateness. Intriguingly, dressing up 
to film was akin to dressing up for Church and consequently added 
to my denominational orientation of always being “in the Spirit.” 
However this approach to the designer black suit is not the dominant 
reading within African Caribbean Christian circles.
A questionable relationship between designer suits and Black male 
Christians in Britain has become a feature of early twenty-first cen-
tury life with the emergence of a more prosperous middle class and 
the influence of prosperity doctrines. Prosperity doctrine is part of a 
collection of ideas that form the basis of the Word of Faith Movement 
in North America.
32 Put simply and somewhat crudely, prosperity 
doctrines centre on the importance of financial management in the 
life of the believer and some suggest that material blessing as a sign of 
God’s favor. Within this new order, a Christian man in a well-dressed 
suit takes on a new meaning, that is, an exemplar of divine favor. 
This view runs counter to the holiness tradition and its commitment 
to the St. James’ exhortation to not favor the well dressed who enter 
the community of faith so as to avoid pandering to rich and powerful 
over and against the poor (James 2). Sadly, this very ancient “reversal 
of status” motif in Jewish literature is subordinate to translations of 
Malachi 3:10. This text is interpreted as a timeless law designed to 
secure the believer’s material prosperity.
But we should not reject the various levels of agency reflected in 
prosperity doctrine and the complex theologies at work here. For 
instance, in Britain, Pentecostal writer Mark Sturge has argued, 
material advancement amongst poor African and African Caribbean 
subjects must be interrogated in relation to the desire to establish a 
financial platform to secure social and political influence for future 
generations.
33 However, Sturge is not sufficiently critical of the 
rampant capitalism and rabid individualism that often accompanies 
capitulation to the worst excesses of this doctrine. There is a cer-
tain irony if not contradiction at work when those who have been 
devastated by global capitalism uncritically embrace it. As Dwight 
Hopkins has argued in a world beset by new forms of economic impe-
rialism fronting as globalization, a commonwealth ethic is required. 
Commonwealth asserts the need for mutuality, sharing of resources 
and communality to challenge the exploitation on which much of the 
global economy is built.
34


--- PAGE 162 ---
Black Suit Matters 149
While the aspiration of second and third generation Black Christian 
subjects is embodied in the designer suit, for me it is the common-
wealth values that are foregrounded. More specifically, I have taken it 
upon myself to pour financial resources gained from film work back 
into development projects in West Africa as a way of acting out the 
alternative economics signified in the designer suit—“to whom much 
is given, much is expected.”
Play
To some extent reflecting on a black suit this way is play, a seeking 
out of the playful aesthetics at work in a black suit. By play, I am refer-
ring to it in a carnivalesque sense that is, how a black suit signifies 
covertly and is therefore a form of deception. There is however, a dan-
ger with always reducing Black expressive forms to instrumentality as 
opposed to assessing its aesthetic quality and form. For this reason, 
I have asserted the “aesthetic.” The aesthetic also signals elements 
of delight, the erotic and pleasurable in cultural forms.
35 So playful 
aesthetics opens a broader field of meaning.
To conclude, the homology of my black suit, locates me in relation-
ship to the propriety of the Holiness tradition, the revolutionary cool 
of Black Nationalism and within the conflict zone of contemporary, 
middle-class, Black, urban church dress. What is clear from audience 
response is that even within a world of arbitrary and antonymous sig-
nifiers, there is still a limited opportunity to express agency through 
dress, in this case the social and structural themes exhibited in active 
radicalism. But, rather than being mechanical, it is arbitrary. So, I will 
continue to wear a black suit as nonverbal communication to augment 
the struggle over values that lie at the heart of black religion in Britain 
and also in my films.
Notes
1. By dress, I mean all the ways the body is used in the expression of 
identity.
2. Diaspora is a complex notion and my in ten tion here is to make use of 
Floya Antias’s view of diaspora as a society process where: “. . . a connec-
tion between groups across different nation states whose commonality 
derives from an original, but may be removed homeland; a new identity 
becomes constructed on a world scale, which crosses national orders and 
boundaries.” See: Antias, “Evaluating ‘Diaspora’: Beyond Ethnicity?” 
Sociology Vol. 32, No. 3. (August 1998): 557–580.


--- PAGE 163 ---
Robert Beckford150
 3. I am thinking here of the work of Dianne M. Stewart in Three Eyes for the 
Journey: African Dim ensions of the Jamaican Religious Experience  (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2005).
 4. Paul Gilroy, There Ain’t No Black in the Union Jack: The Cultural Politics 
of Race and Nation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991).
 5. Anthea Butler, Women in the Church of God in Christ: Making a Sanctified 
World (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007).
 6. William Calley, God’s People: West Indian Pentecostal Sects in England  
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1965), 39.
 7. I bid., 13 4.
 8. Iain MacRobert, Black Pentecostalism, Its Origins, Functions and 
Theology. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Birmingham, 1989, 458.
 9. Valentina Alexander, “Breaking Every Fetter?” To What Extent Has the 
Black Led Church in Britain Developed A Theology Of Liberation? Ph.D. 
dissertation, University of Warwick, 1997, 1.
10. Ibid., 227.
11. Ibid., 251.
12. Robert Beckford, Dread and Pentecostal: A Political Theology for the 
Black Church in Britain  (London: SPCK, 2000).
13. Robert Beckford, God and the Gangs: An Urban Toolkit for Those Who 
Won’t Be Bought Out, Sold Out or Scared Out  (London: DLT, 2004).
14. G. McCracken, Culture and Consumption  (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1990), 61.
15. Stuart Hall, “What Is the Black in Black Popular Culture?” In Black 
Popular Culture, editor, Gina Dent (Seattle, WA: Bay Press, 1992), 24.
16. Toney Sewell, Black Masculinities and Schooling: How Black boys survive 
modern schooling  (London: Trenthan Books) 170–171.
17. See Robert Beckford, “House Negro, Field Negro: New Positions in 
Theology and Culture,” in Between Sacred and Profane: Researching 
Theology and Popular Culture , editor, Gordon Lynch (London: 
I. B. Tauris, 2007).
18. Cornel West, Race Matters (Boston: Beacon Press, 2001).
19. John Corner, The Art of Record: A Critical Introduction to Documentary 
(Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press, 1996).
20. See Stella Bruzzi and Pamela Church Gibson, editors, Fashion Cultures: 
Theories, Histories and Analysis (London: Routledge 2000); Stella 
Bruzzi, Undressing Cinema: Clothing and Identity in the Movies (London: 
Routledge, 1997).
21. G. Stone, “Appearance and the Self,” in Human Behavior and Social 
Processes: An Interactionist Approach , editor, A. Rose (New York: 
Houghton, Miffin, 1962).
22. M. Douglas, Natural Symbols (New York: Pantheon Books, 1982).
23. Kobena Mercer, Welcome to the Jungle: New Positions in Black Cultural 
Studies (London: Routlege, 1994).
24. Ibid.


--- PAGE 164 ---
Black Suit Matters 151
25. B. Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffen, editors, The Empire 
Writes Back: Theory and Practice in Post-colonial Literatures  (New York: 
Routledge, 2002), Chapter 2. Here the authors describe how subju-
gated communities use language to mediate power, by disrupting and 
remolding.
26. Diane J. Austin-Broos, Jamaica Genesis: Religion and the Politics of 
Moral Orders (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997).
27. S. Toure, “A Dialectical Approach to Culture,” in Contemporary Black 
Thought, editors, R.  Christmas and N. Hare (Indianapolis and New 
York: Bobbs-Merrill).
28. O. Thieme and J. B. Eicher, “African Dress: Forms, Action, Meaning,” 
in African American dress and adornment: A Cultural Perspective , 
editors, B. Starke, L. O. Holloman, and B. Nordquist (Duubque, IN: 
Kendall and Hunt, 1990).
29. Richard E. Burton,  Afro-Creole: Power, Opposition and Play in the 
Caribbean (Ithaca, NY, and London: Cornel University Press, 1997).
30. Valerie Steele, “Anti Fashion: The 1970s.” Fashion Theory: The Journal 
of Dress, Body and Culture  Vol. 1, No. 3 (1997): 279–296.
31. Angela Davis, “Afro Images: Politics, Fashion and Nostalgia,” in 
Soul: Black Power, Politics and Pleasure , editors, Monique Guillory 
and Richard C. Green (New York: New York University Press, 1998), 
28–30.
32. Robert Beckford, Jesus Dub: Theology, Music and Social Change (London: 
Routledge, 2006).
33. See Mark Sturge, Look What the Lord Has Done! An Exploration of Black 
Christian Faith in Britain  (London: Scripture Union, 2005).
34. Dwight Hopkins, Heart and Head: Black Theology, Past, Present, and 
Future (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002).
35. Gordon Lynch, Understanding Theology and Popular Culture  (London: 
Wiley-Blackwell, 2005).


--- PAGE 165 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 166 ---
8
A Dialectical Spirituality of 
Improvisation: The Ambiguity 
of Black Engagements with 
Sacred Texts
Anthony G. Reddie
For many Black people, their general theism and theology enable 
them to hold a dialectical perspective on reality. 1 The concrete and 
explicit is not all there is. Talk of Black religious traditions and sen-
sibilities calls to mind the work of such scholars as Albert Raboteau 2 
and Robert Hood. 3 Their work is characterized by a pervasive sense 
of the work of the spirit(s) within Black life. The spirit offers differ-
ent ways of knowing,
4 and provides an alternative, parallel reality to 
the concrete nature of the immediate built environment that most 
commonly confronts us.
5
I am aware of the tension within Black religious and theological 
discourse surrounding the relationship between the spirits and the 
Holy Spirit. The latter is contained within a distinct Christian frame-
work that is often seen as being an anathema to or simply distinct and 
separate from the former.
6 Recent ethnographic research, in Africa 
for examp le, is beginnin g t o tease ou t some of the comp lexi ties of 
this discourse.
7
Whilst I accept that for some, more evangelical Christians, the 
collapsing of Christian and other forms of spiritualities is pr oblem-
atic, I will not be abiding by such orthodox Christian strictures in 
this work. Drawing on the work of Hood
8 and more recently, Dianne 
Stewart,9 I will work with the clear intentionality that the spiritual-
ities of Black people extend way beyond the often constricting limi-
tations of Hellenistic influenced orthodox Christianity. But having


--- PAGE 167 ---
Anthony G. Reddie154
said that, I need to acknowledge my own positionality; as a Christian 
Black liberation theologian and religious educator.
I was born into and have been socialized within a Christian 
Caribbean home of Jamaican migrants to Britain. I have chosen to 
give you these bare facts by way of an introduction because to under-
stand my approach, commitment to and dare one say, sheer enjoy-
ment of Black-religio cultural production; one needs to understand 
something of the context into which I was nurtured. My mother in 
particular, was (and remains) a committed Christian.
Growing up in a Daisporan Caribbean household was a fascinating 
experience. The world that was inhabited by my parents was one that was 
separated from the wider arena of White working-class life in Bradford, 
West Yorkshire, UK. My parents, in order to shield themselves and 
their children from the ongoing shadow of racism that seemed to stalk 
the lives of Black migrants living in Yorkshire, constructed an elaborate 
internal universe of ritual, belonging, and best of all, family that was to 
be our bulwark against the harshness of the outside world.
In this self-enclosed world, living in the back room of our terrace 
house that also served as a dining room and a kitchen, my parents told 
of a magical world that was back home in the Caribbean. It was a world 
punctuated by seemingly “exotic creatures” and extravagant, idio-
syncratic characters. This was a world that captured my imagination 
and that of my three siblings. The storytelling capacity of my parents 
and their peers was one of juxtaposing the ordinary and the extraor-
dinary in the one narrative structure. African American Womanist 
scholar Elaine Crawford argues that long before Jürgen Moltmann 
promulgated the notion of eschatological hope as the foreground 
for Christian theology,
10 one could witness the experiential practices 
of African women as purveyors of a theology of hope. 11 Similarly, I 
would submit that prior to the emergence of “Magic Realism” 12 as a 
category in post colonial literature, African Caribbean people, such as 
my parents, were offering a nascent practice of this very same theory. 
The religio-cultural storytelling and the narratives of my elders were 
examples of a conscious dialectical spirituality in which the struggle 
for truth between often competing realities and notions of self were 
always clearly in evidence.
The best of times in the relatively small, close-knit community of 
African Caribbean migrants in Bradford were those moments when 
members of the extended family and other close friends would visit 
our home and, over the course of several hours, myriad stories would 
ensue; each told with panache and liberal amounts of jocularity. It 
seemed like a magical time. In many respects it was.


--- PAGE 168 ---
Dialectical Spirituality of Improvisation 155
I have chosen the informality of narrative encounters within our 
familial home as the repository for this dialectical spirituality as the 
church that we attended on most Sundays was a very Eurocentric 
patrician High Wesleyan Methodist Mission, in which the phenom-
enon of cultural dissonance and Black existential concealment were 
readily apparent.
13 In short, as Black people, we knew that this church 
was not the place to “let it all hang out.” So it is in the familial home 
that I locate the central features of this dialectical spirituality.
What I took from this world of storytelling and colorful narratives 
was the importance of being able to tell a story and hold the atten-
tion of an expected audience. The great champion storytellers were 
my Mother and my Auntie “Dotty,”
14 my mother’s only surviving 
sister. These two individuals were the special women in my early life, 
and they were very different. My aunt was strident, ebullient, and 
headstrong, whereas my mother was more quiet, reflective, and cir-
cumspect; but both of them were united by an amazing ability to tell 
a good story.
15
Witnessing the elders in my family and wider community waxing 
lyrical as they told stories from the dim and distant past and those 
of a more recent vintage, I learnt one of the central truths of Black 
cultural life; namely, that the Diasporan Black religio-cultural world 
was one of painting vivid pictures and images in the mind of the 
listener.
16
Black religion and its resultant spiritualities was one where the lis-
tener was inspired by tails of another mythic world. The power of 
inspired oratory transported the listener to “another space and time.” 
When the elders in my family were regaling their younger charges 
with dramatic stories of “back home” (in the Caribbean), it often felt 
like you were there whilst the narrative was unfolding. “Back home” 
(in this case, the Caribbean island of Jamaica) remained a mythical 
and tantalizing reality not unlike the notions of home in post colonial 
literature,
17 the eschatology of Black Christianity 18 or the powerful 
notions of homeland for the exilic people of Israel in the Hebrew 
scriptures.
19
The power of this narrative was that it held in dialectical tension 
the realities of the “now” (life in inner city Bradford, West Yorkshire) 
and the “not yet” (the anticipated hopes of post colonial return to the 
seemingly romantic idyll of the Caribbean) in a manner not unlike 
the often perilous balancing acts to be found in normative Diasporan 
Black Christianity. African American religious scholar, Lawrence 
Jones contends that the notion of “hope” within Black Christian 
religious communities possesses two essential dimensions. It is a


--- PAGE 169 ---
Anthony G. Reddie156
dialectic, between the here and now and the promises of eternity—
the struggle for truth between the immanence and transcendence of 
God.
20 Lawrence Jones continues by stating that
The Black religious community has not had the luxury of dichotomiz-
ing faith and work, or religion and life, or the sacred and the secular. 
This is surely one beam of light it has to cast. The interface between 
time and eternity has always defined an area of tension in the Black reli-
gious community, the hopes of which have been directed to both.
21
Given the age stratification in this cultural environment, children 
were mostly invisible, in that they were rarely seen and certainly not 
heard. These cultural and community orientated events were most 
definitely adult oriented affairs. Whilst I was rarely permitted to share 
any of my stories in these settings, I began to appreciate their forma-
tional qualities, as I realized I was being inducted into and socialized 
within a religio-cultural world view that was markedly different from 
my White peers at the local school I attended.
22
As the elders congregated in the “front room” and we younger folk 
were banished to the more mundane climes of the back room, my 
siblings and I would occasionally peek our heads around the door in 
order to get a glimpse of the adults at play. Peering through the gap 
in the slightly opened door I saw my parents and their peers laughing, 
joking and expressing their exuberant and defiantly hopeful selves in 
a manner that so rarely found expression in their more public identi-
ties in the wider society of Bradford.
People who so often were repressed and diminished by the forces 
of racism and economic and societal struggle were, in this particular 
setting, wonderfully expressive and self conscious entertainers. In 
effect, the Black elders in my family could hold in tension the struggles 
and travails of this, the material world and the glories and potential of 
the spiritual world.
23 This dialectical balance of holding together the 
immanent and the transcendent has been both the “curse” and the 
“gift” of being Black in world where that very Blackness was a perni-
cious construction of Whiteness and White hegemony. Black people 
have long learnt the art of being dialectical improvisers!
24
DuBois and D OUBLE  CONSCIOUSNESS
The notion of competing realities is not a new phenomenon for Black 
people. This was first detailed by the great W.E.B. DuBois in his now 
classic text The Souls of Black Folk first published in 1903. DuBois


--- PAGE 170 ---
Dialectical Spirituality of Improvisation 157
detailed a phenomenon he termed “Double Consciousness.” In 
using this term, DuBois was speaking of the struggle evinced within 
African American people to reconcile two opposing realities at war 
within the Black psyche.
25 This dialectical struggle was one between 
competing notions of truth, whether determined by a self affirming 
internalized form of subjectivity, what Pinn calls the quest for “com-
plex subjectivity”
26 or an all embracing externalized form of negation 
and objectification. DuBois’ most memorable comment in this book 
that has to a great extent helped to define Black Diasporan discourse 
was that the “the problem of the 20th century is the problem of 
the color line.”
27 In the first instance there is the internal vision of 
a self that is positive and clothed in the garment of belonging and 
self-affirmation. This internalized vision is juxtaposed alongside the 
external world of White hegemony in which that same Black self is 
denigrated, demonized and disparaged. These two “unreconciled 
strivings”
28 have continued to fight their tumultuous struggle within 
the battlefield of the Black mind.
Within the Africa Diaspora, the religious and theological devel-
opments within the life experiences of the disenfranchised Black 
working-class—who I have described as the voiceless
29—has been 
accomplished by a variety of means. This study argues that one of the 
means by which Black people have sought to challenge their ongo-
ing dehumanization is through a dialectical spirituality, in which 
seemingly oppositional concepts and modes of thinking are juxta-
posed and held in tension; much in the way in which jazz musicians 
use improvisation to hold together disparate and competing musical 
phrases and sources.
In this chapter, I want to show how a dialectical spirituality that 
is at play within Black religio-cultural production has been used 
to subvert White hegemony, but can also be employed as a means 
of engaging with sacred texts; in the context of my ongoing work, 
principally the Bible. This form of dialectical spirituality is ampli-
fied when viewed through the prism of jazz music and the practice 
of improvisation. Improvisation provides a compelling thematic and 
methodological framework for enabling Diasporan Black people to 
utilize their dialectical spiritualities in order to move beyond the tra-
ditional and unhelpful binaries and rigidity in how they often engage 
with the Bible.
For the irony that confronts many Black Christian religious schol-
ars such as myself is the dichotomy that exists within many Diasporan 
African Christian religio-cultural contexts; where a playful dialec-
tical improvised spirituality as witnessed in storytelling,
30 music, 31


--- PAGE 171 ---
Anthony G. Reddie158
dance, and drama 32 is replaced by a rigid Biblicism when it comes to 
Holy Scripture. I want to argue that repeated attention to the dialec-
tical and improvised qualities of Diasporan African life can reopen 
the seemingly rigid and inflexible approaches to our Black Christian 
engagement with the Bible, which seem to be an increasingly com-
mon phenomenon across the world.
33
Although I am arguing for a more self-conscious, deliberate articu-
lation of dialectical spiritualities as a means of affirmation and empow-
ering of the Black self, I would argue that this mode of resistance has 
been one of the primary means by which Black people constructed 
a creative strategy of resistance to the dehumanizing tendencies of 
White supremacy over the past five hundred years. In effect, it is not 
a new thing!
My utilization of jazz, as opposed to the Gospels or the Spirituals is 
an acknowledgement of the plurality of Diasporan musical cultures as 
a means of indicating the intimations of Black spiritualities.
34 I must 
stress, however, that the writer remains nonetheless, a Black Christian 
theologian and religious educator, and so my task in constructing a 
dialectical and improvised approach to reading sacred texts will be 
affected by means of an engagement with the Bible. In effect, my 
plural and hopefully, inclusive cultural lens will still carry a strong 
confessional Christian, Biblical base.
Jazz and Improvisation
My assessment of the improvisatory qualities of Black religio-cultural 
life has been undertaken in order to provide a substantive underscor-
ing for the next section of this chapter, namely an outline of the basic 
features of Jazz music and improvisation. I am arguing that the seem-
ingly esoteric reflections on jazz music are not disconnected from the 
ways in which Black people have improvised with the environment in 
which they have been located as a means of engaging with the chal-
lenges, absurdities and the gift of “second sight”; that is the reality of 
double-consciousness as it has faced them.
35
One of my extra curricular activities is listening to jazz. Sadly I do 
not play and my technical sophistication in musical terms does not 
extend much beyond “that sounds great” and “I know what I like.” I 
have always admired the creative virtuosity of jazz musicians.
All great jazz musicians are able to straddle that delicate balance 
between that which is given and the newness of each performance or 
individual encounter with the tradition, which in turn, yields new 
insights and knowledge. In metaphorical terms, this delicate process


--- PAGE 172 ---
Dialectical Spirituality of Improvisation 159
of living with the tensions of creating “the new” from the “already 
established” has been likened to the art of standing on a high backed 
chair and pushing that object onto two legs and seeing how far one 
can push and retain balance before you lose control and fall onto the 
floor.
Jazz musicians are constantly reworking an established melody in 
order to create something new and spontaneous for that split moment 
in time in mid performance. Duke Ellington once remarked that there 
has never existed a jazz musician who did not have some inclination of 
what he or she was going to play before they walked onto the stage.
36 
One’s improvisation is never totally created or made up on the spot. 
One does not create new art in a vacuum. All jazz improvisation is 
a negotiation between what has been conceived previously and what 
emerges in that specific moment, either on stage or in the recording 
studio. All great jazz has its antecedents.
Jazz music is a potentially rich paradigm for all people involved in 
the task of doing, reflecting upon and writing theology. I make this 
claim with one principal thought in mind—namely, that jazz music 
represents both the best and worst in human nature. It straddles the 
contradictions between a group of intensely fierce individuals who 
come together to join forces to make music.
In my research I have spoken with a number of jazz musicians. 
From conversations with these persons, plus my reading of auto- and 
biographical literature, I have seen the ways in which the collective 
that is the jazz ensemble represents all the challenges of being an 
individual, as is the case in our personal existential relationships with 
God, alongside the perennial tension of being an individual along-
side others. The latter is the challenge of attempting to share the 
same space and time with others, with whom you are called work 
in co-operation and mutuality—the others you are called to love, 
but whose personality may drive you to distraction—or drink, drugs 
and even violence. The litany of fistfights, feuds, vendettas and sheer 
enmity within jazz bands is legendary. This tension of being an indi-
vidual with one’s own relationship to the Divine and the need to 
engage with others is summed up in Jesus’ great injunction to “Love 
the Lord your God, with all your heart, soul, mind and strength” and 
to “love your neighbor as you love yourself.” Those twin injunctions 
sum up the working dilemma of every jazz group there has ever been. 
It is the working dilemma of every community on earth there has ever 
been. It is the tension at the heart of the Kingdom of God.
Jazz music is a voluntary engagement, for it is a form that eschews 
rigid conventions or categorizations. It demands mutuality and


--- PAGE 173 ---
Anthony G. Reddie160
community, and yet it has, since the early 1920s, been built around 
the searing geniuses and contradictions of brilliant soloists. It is free 
form and yet demands certain rules and conventions working along-
side and with others—those with whom one might not possess any 
sense of empathy or love, save for the act of making music in that split 
moment of time.
Jazz represents the tension between time and eternity; between 
immanence and transcendence; between the sense that art is created 
within and through context, and yet it appears to carry within it the 
traces of inspiration and magic that comes from another space and 
time. When theologians investigate the contradictions of individuality 
and community, between being bound by conventions and yet being 
compelled to go beyond all that is known and accepted as given, one 
is dealing with the most fundamental of existential concerns.
The questions jazz poses are concerns for Christian faith and for 
all humanity. What does it mean to improvise on a given melody? 
How far can one go before what you are creating is no longer faithful 
to the melody and sources that inspired the artist in the first instance? 
How inclusive can we be? Can anyone join, or do we have or need 
certain limits or boundaries to help define who or what the band or 
the community is meant to be and become?
Many scholars have shown that jazz music is not just an inconse-
quential art form; rather, it is a depiction of the most central concerns 
of human identity and existence in the twentieth century. Jazz music 
is part of a rich musical heritage. Older Black musical traditions, like 
the blues, spirituals, hymnals and gospel music, have offered us a rich 
tapestry of cultural production through which the theologian can 
mine in order to discern the liberative impulse of God. Jazz music has 
become an integral part of this crucial matrix.
My use of jazz as a signifier for the dialectical spiritualities of 
Diasporan Black people is a commitment to the serious task of creating 
a framework in which all people are enabled to become participants in 
a process of critical thinking, reflection and then action.
37 Just as the 
jazz ensemble is a exercise in power-relations in terms of competing 
egos within wider framework of the group dynamic; so too, I believe, 
is the sense that the dialectical spiritualities of Diasporan Black peo-
ples is both an individual and a collective affair. One of important 
tropes of jazz is the dialectic between the individual and group. Solos 
take place within the context of the group ethic. In the western prac-
tice of rock music, drummers are rarely appreciated. Drummers, espe-
cially thinking of Ringo Starr for example, often get a bad press. And 
yet in jazz, not only are drummers the bedrock of the rhythm section,


--- PAGE 174 ---
Dialectical Spirituality of Improvisation 161
but in the case of the late great Art Blakey and before him Chic Web, 
drummers have even been known to become Band leaders.
In linking the aesthetics of jazz music to the practice of reading 
sacred literature, is to engage in a form of practice in which partici-
pants are enabled to improvise upon a written text and then explore 
it for new meanings and theological connections. In this work, I have 
attempted to create a model of theological exploration in which all 
persons are active participants.
38
Getting Beyond the Old Dichotomies of 
“Evangelical” versus “Liberal”
The beauty of improvisation, as I have hopefully demonstrated, is the 
facility it possesses to get us beyond the traditional and dare one say 
the sterility of perennial arguments around evangelical and liberal 
approaches to Christian theology.
Improvisation within jazz music is neither stuck with the seem-
ing rigidity of past, represented by tradition, or with the perceived 
relativism of late and post modernity. At the heart of the debates 
surrounding evangelical and liberal approaches and interpretation of 
Christianity, lays the often thorny problem of Biblical authority. Yet, 
Vincent Wimbush has illustrated, until quite recently, Black people 
have not been consumed by such arguments surrounding the literal 
or more allegorical interpretations of the Bible.
39 For Black people, 
a dialectical spirituality has enabled us to hold in tension seemingly 
contradictory and hostile approaches to sacred text.
Prior to the 1940s and 1950s, Black peoples’ engagement with the 
Bible was not characterized by sometimes arcane arguments around 
doctrine and metaphysical postulations. Rather, the critical ques-
tion was, what was going to alleviate our suffering and how did the 
Bible attest to God’s solidarity with poor Black people in the past, in 
order that the future could be redeemed?
40 This point is amplified by 
Vincent when he writes
African Americans interpreted the Bible in light of their experi-
ences. . . . As the people of God in the Hebrew Bible were once deliv-
ered from enslavement, so in the future, the Africans sang and shouted, 
would they. As Jesus suffered unjustly but was raised from the dead 
to new life, so they sang, would they be “raised” from their “social 
death” to new life. So went the songs, sermons and testimonies.
41
One can assess the truth of the art of being faithful to the source 
but playing the melody in a new way, which is at the heart of


--- PAGE 175 ---
Anthony G. Reddie162
improvisation, by acknowledging John Coltrane’s celebrated record-
ing of Hammerstein and Rogers’ perennial favorite, My Favourite 
Things made famous by the motion picture film, The Sound of Music.
The creative improvisation of Coltrane can be seen in the dramatic 
iconoclastic work of James Cone, the “Founding Father” of Black 
theology. James Cone argues that the central motif within the meta-
narrative of the Bible is that of God’s revelation in human history, 
exemplified in Christ, in order to liberate from oppression all those 
who have been denied a voice.
42
Many marginalized and oppressed peoples have read and inter-
preted the Bible in light of their own context and experience. They 
have done so in order to locate the overarching truth of God’s reve-
lation in history. This process has involved them looking within and 
behind the text in order to locate themes that attest to the reality of 
their existential condition. Writing with reference to the exodus motif 
within the Bible, which remains an emblematic theme for Black peo-
ple in South Africa during the epoch of Apartheid, Robert Beckford 
writes
For Blacks it was paradigm (Exodus) of how God was going to set 
them free from the political bondage. . . . Given the dangers of bias, 
ideological approaches to the text require a high degree of self aware-
ness and also sensitivity to the bias within the biblical text and the 
context of the reader. Greater awareness forms part of the checks and 
balances of reading a passage of Scripture ideologically.
43
Within the context of jazz music, the musician as I have outlined 
previously, is not limited by the notation or the exactitude of the mel-
ody as he or she has received it. The art of improvisation is a challenge 
to find new meaning and phrases to transform an existing melody, 
without departing from the original to such an extent that the pre-
vious incarnation is obliterated. In effect, it is the delicate synthesis 
of bringing the new from the old—bearing witness to what has gone 
before, but not being limited or constrained by it.
The need to bring new meaning and fresh insights from the Bible, 
whilst remaining connected to the traditions that have informed the 
collective whole that is “Holy Scripture,” has always been the high 
challenge presented to Black preachers, for example. It is the chal-
lenge to “bring a fresh word” for the immediate context without 
doing violence to the text from which one’s inspiration is drawn.
44 
Essentially, I am arguing that Black preachers within the ongoing


--- PAGE 176 ---
Dialectical Spirituality of Improvisation 163
dynamic that is Black worship are improvisers and that improvisa-
tion provides a helpful framework for helping us to move beyond the 
limited binary of evangelical and liberal arguments around Biblical 
authority.
Improvisation allows us to play with the dichotomy of being faith-
ful to the spirit inherent within the Word of God, without locking 
ourselves into rigid positions that assert that the WORD has to be 
taken literally and is inerrant.
So, utilizing a jazz hermeneutic can enliven our contemporary 
approaches to preaching and interpretation of the Gospel. Perhaps, of 
greater import, when allied to broader questions of Black spirituali-
ties, it can enable ordinary lay people, many of whom are Diasporan 
Africans living in racist contexts such as post colonial Britain or the 
United States, to become improvisers themselves.
They can be enabled to find the courage to play an inherited mel-
ody with new vigor, imagination and panache; and most importantly, 
to own that playing as their own creation. In the words of Jesus, they 
will find the courage to be so inspired that their improvisational will 
harness the indwelt Spirit of God in order that they might discover 
life, and that this life might be experienced in all its fullness (John 
10:10).
After all the verbiage and rhetoric, what we are left with, in terms 
of articulating an improvised approach to rereading Biblical texts 
with marginalized Black peoples, is the essence of jazz improvisation 
itself. This essence, as befits the whole nature of improvisation is one 
of dialectical tension and contradiction.
For many, the tensions and contradictions in terms of jazz impro-
visation can be found in the very human figure of the great Louis 
Armstrong. To some, Armstrong is something of an embarrassing 
anachronism. Any man who can submit himself to stand next to Bing 
Crosby of all people and allow the latter to take the major role in a 
travesty of a film entitled Birth of the Blues  deserves all the brick-
bats coming to him. And yet, when you listen to Armstrong’s sem-
inal 1927 recording of West End Blues , many people, such as myself 
will argue that there must be a God who exists within and beyond 
the human frame, but also that that God is most definitely Black. 
Jazz music can offer creative and challenging ways of opening up the 
scriptures in a manner that gives due recognition to the past without 
reifying it or limiting the Bible to ahistorical form of pseudo idola-
try.
45 Let us not forget that many of us worship a living God and not 
a dead, fixed book!


--- PAGE 177 ---
Anthony G. Reddie164
A Jazz Inspired Black Theology 
Approach to Bible Study
The final section of this chapter is premised on the basis that Jesus 
can be likened to a jazz musician.46 He responded to the challenge of 
bringing to life innovative perspectives from the tradition in order to 
respond to the current context in which he was immersed. This was 
the challenge (indeed it is an ongoing one) of attempting to preserved 
the integrity of the former whilst giving life to the latter. It is the 
power of responding to circumstances in such a way that the “give-
ness” of the context is radically realtered and something startling 
and new emerges. Whether it is Jesus’ encounter with the Canaanite 
women (Matthew 15: vv 21–28) or the rich young man (Mark 10: 
vv 17–22), the engagement with others inspires Jesus to bring about 
new insights and learning. This engagement is one that straddles the 
tension between that which exists (the tradition of Judaism) and that 
which is becoming (the reinterpretation of that tradition).
This final section offers a Black theology, jazz-inspired rereading 
of a Biblical text that is aimed at challenging adult religious educa-
tors and others charged with helping ordinary Black people to engage 
with and interpret the Bible. As a Black theologian and a religious 
educator, I am often dismayed at the extent to which many Black 
clergy and professional lay Christian educators often collude with 
Black congregations by refusing to challenge the apparent dominance 
of fundamentalist and literalist readings of Biblical texts. This final 
section offers an alternative take on how one can reread Biblical texts 
in a spirit of dialectical improvisation.
We begin this rereading by considering the importance of con-
textual engagement. Just as the jazz musician must engage with the 
context in which he or she is located, so too must the Bible study 
leader.
47 For the jazz musician the context in which they might be 
performing, ev en if it is within the same club for an audience that 
might have heard this composition before, perhaps only some few 
hours previously, there is still the challenge of trying to say some-
thing new in this situation. No two performances are ever the same, 
because people and how they respond to the time and space in which 
they are housed at the precise moment in time is never the same.
The context in which the performance is housed is a unique cock-
tail of numerous pressures, expectations and needs. The good musi-
cian is not only aware of these subtle nuances within the context, he 
or she responds to them, utilizing this stimulus to create new art from 
within the midst of existing knowledge and truth.


--- PAGE 178 ---
Dialectical Spirituality of Improvisation 165
The Bible study leader in this respect is no different. If we are lead-
ing a Bible study in the power of the Holy Spirit, the dynamic inter-
change between the various elements that co-exist in that time and 
space should ensure that our work is never stale.
48
Rereading Luke Chapter 8: 40–48
One of the great challenges facing all our Christian faith commu-
nities is the challenge of trying to find relevance from the task of 
reading the Bible. The Bible remains central to the faith of virtually 
all Black Christians.
49 How can those of us who are charged with 
leading Bible studies become so energized and inspired that we find 
new ways of opening up the scriptures for the adults and children we 
may lead?
50 In this, the final section of this chapter, I want to offer a 
Black theology reading of Luke chapter 8, which is informed by a jazz 
inspired approach to Improvisation.
My reflections upon Jesus as a jazz improviser are drawn from a 
Black theology rereading of Luke Chapter 8 and Jesus’ engagement 
with the woman hemorrhaging.
51 From my improvised perspective of 
Jesus’ actions in this text, I want to highlight a number of substantive 
themes.
First, Jesus is close to the action. He is within the crowd, not dis-
tant from it. Jesus’ improvisation involves being emotionally and 
physically involved with the context in which he finds himself.
52 In 
effect, Jazz necessitates that one is engaged with the social and cul-
tural milieu in which you are located. This very intentionality of Jesus 
acts as a counterbalance to the noncontextual and often abstracted 
theologies of predominantly prosperity led practitioners of Black 
Christianity as seen in the likes of Creflo Dollar
53 in the United States 
and Matthew Ashimolowo in the United Kingdom. 54 Jesus engages 
with the context in which he is located, in a real and embodied way 
and does not retreat into spiritual banalities as a means of avoiding 
being labeled “political.”
55
Although jazz has often been characterized as intellectually or 
cognitively based; there is no doubt that the best jazz musicians com-
mit themselves wholeheartedly and holistically to the enterprise, that 
is, their work and art is both a cognitive and an affectively based 
enterprise. Jesus’ actions in this text, like the best of jazz musicians, 
are those of commitment. It is to commit one’s whole self; one’s heart, 
mind, soul and strength—to be a proclaimer of the “Word of God,” 
in the midst of the business of the world and the contextual struggle 
in the lives of people.


--- PAGE 179 ---
Anthony G. Reddie166
In the passage, Jesus is on public display. He does not confine his 
work to a happy band of carefully chosen acolytes who will reinforce 
his every action and agree with the sentiments of all his pronounce-
ments. For all jazz musicians, there is the challenge of offering their 
art to the public gaze. The hours, months and years of practice are 
undertaken with the precise aim of offering that art and craft to the 
public. The sanctity and safety of the rehearsal room is not the end 
in itself but simply the preparatory context before the all important 
public declaration of truth on the stage.
Looking at Jesus’ actions in this text in light of a jazz process of 
improvisation is to recognize the challenge of being vulnerable in the 
self-conscious glare of the public.
56 Jesus’ actions are visible in front 
of all comers, when he engages with the woman. Similarly, taking 
Jesus’ lead and those of innumerable jazz musicians, a Black theology 
reading of this text, and the Bible as a whole, should lead its practi-
tioners and adherents to accept the challenge of engaging in a public 
act of truth seeking and truth telling in terms of one’s engagement 
with the Biblical text and with others as we mine the “Word of God” 
for meaning in the contemporary situation.
57
Jesus’ public engagement eschews any sense of the closed binary 
of “them and us” that seems to characterize aspects of the worse 
forms of self-congratulatory, overregulated forms of holiness inspired 
versions of Black Church practice and Black Christianity, as a whole, 
across the African Diaspora.
58
With all privileges there comes responsibility and even vulnera-
bility. One cannot hide. One is called to speak truth. While we are 
naturally governed by the framework of established doctrines and the 
discipline of the tradition into which we have been authorized or 
socialized, one, as an individual is called to make ourselves vulnerable 
as we enable others to engage with the Good News of Christ. And 
that can be a place of vulnerability.
Such vulnerability emerges when we consider the potentially unpal-
atable nature of Jesus’ actions as they witnessed by the many observers 
and bystanders within that context. Let us not forget the context of 
this story. Jesus is on his way to attend to a very important man, the 
leader of the synagogue—a man who would no doubt have been very 
grateful to Jesus and his movement if he healed his daughter. I am sure 
that all the disciples wanted Jesus to attend to Jairus’ daughter. No 
doubt the crowd wanted to see what Jesus would do when confronted 
with this kind of expectation.
Yet, in the midst of the business, Jesus stops and deals with this 
anonymous woman—a woman who is ritually unclean, therefore an


--- PAGE 180 ---
Dialectical Spirituality of Improvisation 167
outsider—someone who is beyond the traditional cultural and reli-
gious niceties of the wider community and society. Jesus improvises 
like a jazz musician within the context, responding to need, and in the 
process of this performance, brings about new insights and learning.
The challenge of reading the Bible from a Black theology perspec-
tive, inspired by the aesthetics of jazz improvisation is one of being 
consistently prophetic .
59 Confessional Christian Black theologians, 
such as myself, undoubtedly believe that the Gospel of Christ is good 
news for all human kind, but one has to be sufficiently honest to 
acknowledge that it is bad news for some. A Black theological reading 
of the Bible, carried through the prism of a jazz hermeneutic
60 is an 
ideological form of hermeneutical practice that challenges the casual 
ethnocentric and ecclesiological certainties that belittle, oppress and 
marginalize some people over and against others.
61 Such a Black the-
ology rereading challenges the notions that some people are created 
more in God’s image than others. It challenges those who feel that 
some people belong more than others. It challenges those who think 
that some people are a part of the “us” and others who are different 
are a part of the “them.”
62
For those who think that some belong, and deserve to be noticed, 
that is, the Jairus’ of this world, but others can and should be ignored 
because they are unclean or seemingly not worthy, that is, the woman 
who was bleeding, this text can and should be an immense challenge. 
In terms of the woman, I read her plight in hermeneutical terms as a 
Black gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered person who is seen as 
“beyond the pale” due to her social condition.
A jazz inspired reading of this text, in which Jesus is seen as a jazz 
musician, challenges us to think again, what we mean by the bounded 
nature of our theologies that still work on the binaries of “in” and 
“out.” A Black theology jazz improvised reading suddenly challenges 
us to reassess who is upset by the “Good news” of Christ. Is it those 
who think they are on the inside, with their cultural taboos toler-
ated and affirmed, or those on the so-called outside, who suddenly 
find themselves acceptable and welcomed? For all these people in the 
former category, a jazz inspired and dialectical Black theology reread-
ing of this text is bad news, because it is a disturber and a denouncer 
of all that they hold to be true.
63
A Black theology reading of this text can open up new ways of 
seeing established and well worn patterns and practices. It is my hope 
that this form of hermeneutic, following Jesus’ example as an impro-
viser, can open up new possibilities for many Black Christian commu-
nities in how they engage with sacred texts, particularly, the Bible.


--- PAGE 181 ---
Anthony G. Reddie168
Jesus’ actions remind me of the genius of many great jazz musicians 
whose dedication to improvisation opens up new possibilities for us 
all. Utilizing a dialectical spirituality in which single trajectory truths 
are rejected in favor of improvised multiple perspectives, is to draw 
upon Diasporan African cultures and traditions, particularly as they 
are applied to sacred texts, in order to learn new ways of reusing old 
tricks.
Notes
 1. See Anthony G. Reddie, Black Theology in Transatlantic Dialogue: 
Inside Looking, Outside Looking In  (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2006), 170–203 for further details. Some material and ideas from this 
chapter is presented in that volume.
 2. See Albert J. Raboteau, Slave Religion  (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1978).
 3. See Robert E. Hood, Must God Remain Greek?: Afro-cultures and God-
Talk (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1990).
 4. Cheryl Bridges, Johns, Pentecostal Formation: A Pedagogy among the 
Oppressed (Sheffield, UK: Sheffield Academic Press, 1998), 62–137.
 5. Robert Beckford, Dread and Pentecostal  (London: SPCK, 2000), 
168–182.
 6. Peter J. Paris, The Spiritualities of African Peoples: The Search for a 
Common Moral Discourse  (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1995), 
27–57.
 7. Brigid M. Sackey, “Spiritual Deliverance as a Form of Health Delivery: 
A Case Study of the Solid Rock Chapel International,” Black Theology 
in Britain: A Journal of Contextual Praxis , Vol. 4, No. 2 (May 2002): 
150–171.
 8. See Hood, Must God Remain Greek?
 9. See Dianne M. Stewart, Three Eyes for the Journey: African Dimensions 
of the Jamaican Religious Experience  (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2005).
10. See Jürgen Moltmann, Theology of Hope: On the Ground and the 
Implications of a Christian Eschatology  (London: SCM Press, 1967).
11. See A. Elaine Brown Crawford, Hope In The Holler: A Womanist Theology 
(Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox 2002), ix–xvii.
12. See Stephen M. Hart and Wen-chin Ouyang, A Companion to Magical 
Realism (Woodbridge, UK: Tamesis, 2005).
13. See Anthony G. Reddie, Nobodies to Somebodies: A Practical Theology for 
Education and Liberation  (Peterborough, UK: Epworth Press, 2003), 
11–13.
14. It is not uncommon for many Caribbean people to be given “pet names,” 
which become the popular means of identification of the person, often-
times, in preference to their given “Christian” names.


--- PAGE 182 ---
Dialectical Spirituality of Improvisation 169
15. See Anthony G. Reddie, “An Unbroken Thread of Experience,” in 
Family and All That Stuff , editor, Joan King (Birmingham, UK: 
National Christian Education Council [NCEC], 1998), 153–160.
16. See Carol Tomlin, Black Language and Style in Sacred and Secular 
Contexts (New York: Caribbean Diaspora Press, 1999), 103–124.
17. See Richard Werbner, editor, Memory and the Postcolony  (London: Zed 
Books, 1998).
18. See Lewis V. Baldwin, Towards the Beloved Community: Martin Luther 
King JR. and South Africa (Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim Press, 1995) for 
excellent analysis of Martin Luther King’s Christian eschatological vision, 
juxtaposed alongside the Black anti-apartheid struggle in South Africa.
19. See Richard Coggins, The Book of Exodus—The Epworth Commentaries  
(Peterborough, UK: Epworth Press, 2000), 3–8.
20. Lawrence N. Jones, “Hope for Mankind: Insights from Black Religious 
History in the United States,” Journal of Religious Thought , Vol. 34, 
No. 2 (Fall—Winter, 1978): 59.
21. Jones, “Hope for Mankind,” 59.
22. See Caryl Philips, The European Tribe  (London: Faber and Faber, 
1987), 2.
23. See Anthony G. Reddie, Faith, Stories and the Experience of Black Elders  
(London: Jessica Kingsley, 2001).
24. See James W. Perkinson, White Theology (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2004), 51–114.
25. See W.E.B. DuBois, The Souls of Black Folk [1st published in 1903] (New 
York: Banton Press, 1989), 3.
26. Anthony B. Pinn, Terror and Triumph: The Nature of Black Religion  
(Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2003), 82–107.
27. DuBois, The Souls of Black Folk , xxxi.
28. DuBois, The Souls of Black Folk , 3.
29. This term is used to invoke the sense of powerlessness and invisibility 
that affects Black British people in the United Kingdom. “We” are invis-
ible to the wider society, particularly in terms of religious or cultural 
significance. The all embracing hegemony of Whiteness, on which 
Englishness is predicated (see Paul Gilroy’s There Ain’t No Black in the 
Union Jack [London: Hutchinson, 1988]) excludes the important con-
tributions Black people have and continue to make to the body politic of 
the nation. This invisibility is secured on the basis of Black people being 
“other” and thereby lacking any authentic sense of belonging to Britain. 
This sense of being “other” and not belonging is exacerbated when one 
considers the tendency to pathologies of the Black self, linking Black 
presence to structural and societal ills like crime, illness, unemployment 
and educational failure. In order to find a working heuristic for this 
ongoing phenomenon, I have constructed a notion of Black in Britain 
being “voiceless.” This methodological and thematic construction is 
explored in more detail in a recent book Dramatizing Theologies: A 
Participative Approach to Black God-Talk (London: Equinox, 2006).


--- PAGE 183 ---
Anthony G. Reddie170
30. For an assessment of the dialectical and improvised qualities of religio-
cultural African Caribbean storytelling see my previous book, Reddie, 
Faith, Stories and the Experience of Black Elders .
31. See Robert Beckford, Jesus Dub: Theology, Music and Social Change  
(London: Routledge, 2006).
32. See Reddie, Dramatizing Theologies .
33. Beckford, Jesus Dub, 130–144.
34. To this list I would also add Rap, but I am less familiar with this musical 
tradition, and so have confined my interests to jazz. For a helpful study 
that engages with the spiritualities of Rap see Anthony B. Pinn, editor, 
Noise and Spirit: The Religious and Spiritual Sensibilities of Rap Music  
(New York: New York University Press, 2003).
35. See Anthony B. Pinn, Terror and Triumph (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress 
Press, 2002), 157–179.
36. Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns, Jazz: A History of America’s Music  
(London: Pimlico, 2001), 290–291.
37. This theme is addressed in greater detail in Reddie, Black Theology in 
Transatlantic Dialogue, Chapter 6.
38. See Anthony G. Reddie, Acting in Solidarity: Reflections in Critical 
Christianity  (London: DLT, 2005). See also Reddie, Dramatizing 
Theologies .
39. Vincent L. Wimbush, The Bible and African Americans: A Brief History  
(Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2003), 63–70.
40. Wimbush, The Bible and African Americans , 19–46.
41. Wimbush, The Bible and African Americans , 24.
42. James H. Cone, God of the Oppressed  (San Francisco, CA: Harper-San-
Francisco, 1975), 62–83.
43. Robert Beckford, God and the Gangs (London: DLT, 2004), 102–103.
44. Ermal Kirby “Black Preaching,” Journal of the College of Preachers  (July 
2001), pp. 48.
45. See Clive Marsh, Christ in Focus: Radical Christocentrism in Christian 
Theology (London: SCM, 2005), 57–60.
46. See Reddie, Black Theology in Transatlantic Dialogue .
47. For an excellent example of responding to the Bible contextually, see 
R.S. Sugirtharajah, editor, Voices from the Margin (New York & London: 
Orbis/SPCK, 1997).
48. See Sean Freyne and Ellen Van Wolde, editor, The Many Voices of the 
Bible: Concilium (London: SCM Press, 2002).
49. See Anthony G. Reddie, “Editorial,” Black Theology: An International 
Journal, Vol. 4, No. 1: 8–9.
50. I have attempted something of this sort in terms of my previous work. 
See Anthony G. Reddie, Growing into Hope—2 volumes (Peterborough: 
Methodist Publishing House, 1998). See also Reddie, Nobodies to 
Somebodies, 53–57.
51. This rereading has been informed by Womanist Theology. See Delores 
Williams Sisters in the Wilderness  (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1993).


--- PAGE 184 ---
Dialectical Spirituality of Improvisation 171
52. See Robert Beckford “Theology in the Age of Crack: Crack Age, 
Prosperity Doctrine and ‘Being There,’ ” Black Theology in Britain: A 
Journal of Contextual Praxis , Vol. 4, No. 1 (November 2001): 9–24.
53. See http:/ /www.creflodollarministries.org/ for further details of his min-
istry. Accessed January 5, 2009.
54. See http://www.kicc.org.uk/ for further details of his ministry.  Accessed 
January 5, 2009.
55. See Robert Beckford, “Theology in the Age of Crack: Crack Age, 
Prosperity Doctrine and ‘Being There,’ ” Black Theology in Britain: A 
Journal of Contextual Praxis , Vol. 4, No. 1 (2001): 9–24.
56. Many theologians of spoken of Jesus as the “Wounded Healer” whose 
vulnerability reaches out to others who themselves are also vulnerable 
and broken. See Henri J.M. Nouwmen, The Wounded Healer: Ministry 
in Contemporary Society  (London: DLT, 1994).
57. This is staple “ingredient of the task of Practical Theology.” See Paul 
Ballard and John Pritchard, Practical Theology in Action  (London: 
SPCK, 1996), 118–135.
58. I have addressed elements of this phenomenon in a previous piece of 
work. See Reddie, Acting in Solidarity , 45–53.
59. For excellent example of this see Gerald West,  Biblical Hermeneutics of 
Liberation (Pietermaritzburg, South Africa and New York: Cluster 
Books and Orbis, 1991).
60. See chapter 6 of Reddie, Black Theology in Transatlantic Dialogue,  
where I outline in more detail the process of undertaking a jazz inspired 
approach to undertaking Black theology.
61. See Harry H. Singleton, III, Black Theology and Ideology  (Collegeville, 
MN: Liturgical Press, 2002), 47–67. See also Anthony B. Pinn and 
Dwight N. Hopkins, editors, Loving the Body  (New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2006) for an excellent exploration of the limits placed on 
Black people by the Black Church in terms of its prohibitions around 
sex-gender sexual relationships and sexuality as a whole.
62. This form of reading has been inspired by Kelly Brown Douglas’ recent 
book What’s Faith Got to Do with It?  (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 2007), 
where Brown challenges the traditional Christian imperial hegemony 
that is built on an adversarial closed monotheism.
63. This has been the central task of Black theologians such as James Cone 
and Womanists such as Jacquelyn Grant, both of whom have a strong 
Christological focus to their theological method. See Cone, God of the 
Oppressed , 108–195. See also Jacquelyn Grant, White Women’s Christ 
and Black Women’s Jesus  (Atlanta, GA: Scholar’s Press, 1989).


--- PAGE 185 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 186 ---
4
Africa


--- PAGE 187 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 188 ---
9
The Aesthetic 
Dimensions of Religion in 
South Africa: Africa Initiated 
Churches Considered
Linda E. Thomas
The Broadway Play “The Color Purple,” based on Alice Walkers’ 
book by the same title, if interpreted through a theistic lens, serves 
as a striking example of the questions and core of theological aes-
thetics. The play unveils a storyline about a fourteen-year-old African 
American girl named Celie who endures tremendous acts of violence, 
abuse, and cruelty. At the same time, the play posits an uncomfort-
able, poignant, and surprising “thesis,” if I may use that word, that 
there exists beauty not only in the midst but in the very thing or 
person that is ei ther experiencin g or commi ttin g an action that by 
any stretch of the imagination would be considered horrible. I would 
argue that the “The Color Purple” is a play replete with a theology of 
aesthetics that presents the thesis, beauty exists in unexpected places 
and circumstances. This thesis serves as an apologetic for the issue of 
theodicy at best, or, minimally, as a way of suggesting that dignity 
and beauty exist precisely in spite of violence, denigration, and deep 
suffering.
Two scenes from this Broadway show illustrate a theology of aes-
thetics. The first is the opening of the play where people of African 
descent are in worship on a Sunday morning. It is a scene that ignites 
and liberates the spirit of the audience. The lives of Black humanity 
smitten with the everyday challenges of life are liberated through an 
authoritative message that we too are made in God’s image and like-
ness and beauty.


--- PAGE 189 ---
Linda E. Thomas176
The second scene, for me and millions of others, is central and 
powerful. Celie who throughout her life had been called ugly and 
forced to live an ugly reality of being a slave first to her abusive father 
and then to her husband now sings a song titled, “I’m Here.” Though 
others have called her ugly, she sings, “I’m beautiful, and I’m here.” 
This song pushes Celie to a new stance in her life and her human 
agency propels her forward to act on the beautiful life she builds from 
the ashes of ugliness. It takes years for Celie to become conscious of 
her God-given beauty, but when she becomes conscious of it nothing 
stops her. She is saying, “I am here so you have to get use to it. Trying 
to destroy me with violence and insults will not work. I am here not 
because of you but because of God.” Celie’s ability to see beauty in 
spite of her own suffering presents a message of life’s energy able 
to rise in spite of unspeakable suffering. It also suggests something 
slightly more disconcerting, on some levels, that in the very essence 
of that which may not be pleasing to the eye—ugliness, beauty (and 
God) are visible to the discerning eye. The one, who has eyes and 
is able to see, does so perhaps because of one’s own experience of 
suffering.
That is a theology of aesthetics. That is what this chapter will pre-
sent. I will examine a theology of aesthetics that will argue for the 
healing power of being able to see, experience and create beauty in 
the face of tremendous suffering. It is not a theology of glory. It is not 
a simplistic or naïve attempt to make light of suffering or to legitimize 
it just because beauty may be created and exists in it. As an African 
American theologian and anthropologist, let me be very clear about 
that point: Suffering of the oppressed is never legitimate. It is never 
legitimate and is always to be resisted. A theology of aesthetics is one 
way that persons forced to live with immense suffering can accom-
plish two things: survival and resistance.
That is what I will demonstrate in this chapter by sharing the lives 
of people very far from a Broadway play. They are at the opposite ends 
of the earth in many ways. I will present the history, theology, and 
ritual practices of Africa Initiated Churches (AICs), churches where 
the most oppressed of the oppressed, the poorest of the poor in South 
Africa developed and practice a theology of aesthetics that creates 
beauty in the very same world where they live, survive in spite of, and 
resist forces that create very ugly systemic and personal suffering.
I argue that the theology, practice of hospitality and correspond-
ing rituals used in worship and healing services create beauty amid 
ugly and dominant structural poverty. I define beauty as a force that 
emboldens people to live daring, determined, and intentional lives


--- PAGE 190 ---
Aesthetics of Religion in South Africa 177
even in the face of life-threatening and morally reprehensive systems 
of ugliness that would otherwise eat them alive, steal from them their 
dignity and wrest from them their agency. I explore the ways that 
a theology of beauty functionally and historically has given rise to 
understanding and actions that empower, electrify, and grant agency 
to individuals and the entire community of adherents of AICs.
My research investigations and fieldwork in South Africa com-
mencing in 1985 to the present provide the following definitions 
for the purposes of this chapter. First, religion denotes institutional-
ized expressions of belief in the sacred—the interaction of spirituality 
with humanity and all of creation. Second, ritual signifies repetitive 
practices to interact with the sacred. Third, empowerment suggests 
the ways people trapped by systems of poverty perceive their positive 
agency resulting from their aesthetic experience with the sacred.
The History of African 
Initiated Churches: General Trends
I begin with the history of AICs, will move to an examination of 
AIC theology, then move to rituals that express that theology and 
close by demonstrating ways that both theology and ritual combine 
to create an embodied theology of beauty.
The dominant social force that birthed the AIC tradition is struc-
tural poverty resulting from racism embedded in the system of 
Apartheid. Apartheid was brutal, it was racist: Its effects are long 
lasting. Structural poverty—whether chronic or transitory—impacts 
greatly the economic asymmetry among the classes within South 
Africa. Black South Africans have long lived under a regime of forced 
st r uct u ra l pover t y. Ever y t h i ng f rom la nd r ig ht s to wages, access to edu-
cation, healthcare and employment have been structurally constructed 
to limit, reject and deny their acquisition by Black South Africans. Of 
course, it began long before Apartheid. Indeed, this racial discrimi-
nation has its roots in the arrival of Christian missionaries. Andries 
Du Toit in an article titled, “Chronic and Structural Poverty in South 
Africa: Challenges for Action and Research,” writes: “Ten years after 
liberation, the persistence of poverty is one of the most important and 
urgent problems facing South Africa.”
1 Writing an article whose aim 
is to expand the accepted wisdom and approaches to poverty studies, 
Du Toit makes a distinction among terms used interchangeably for 
the poor. For example, the “chronic poor” are people who are cycli-
cally destitute or underprivileged throughout their entire lives and 
whose offspring have a high probability of being poor and living in


--- PAGE 191 ---
Linda E. Thomas178
the cycle of poverty as well.2 They are folks “who have benefited least 
or are likely to benefit least from economic growth and national and 
international development initiatives.”3
The large numbers of people who experience chronic and long-
lasting poverty in South Africa leads the Chronic Poverty Research 
Centre at the University of the Western Cape to posit that “poverty 
is proving to be much more intractable than initially hoped.”
4 The 
legacy of inequality left by the system of apartheid continues to cause 
unimaginable oppression upon the racial majority who are poor. The 
grim picture is that “inequality has increased and . . . the benefits of 
growth have not reached the poorest of the poor.”
5
Chronic poverty is tied to the class position one has in a society. 
That is to say, people are poor for extended lengths of time because 
of their structured position, that is, their place in society as it relates 
to their ability to retrieve resources and as it relates to with whom 
they come into contact. In other words, social contacts provide social 
power. People whose incomes fall below the poverty line do not 
have equal power relationships with those with social or economic 
power. Clearly it places Black South Africans into disproportionate 
levels of material poverty. Thus, structural poverty has racial and cul-
tural dimensions. Probing further along this line of investigation, 
we note the intensified racial feminization of poverty among Black 
South African women forced into adverse economic and social condi-
tions. To appreciate the grueling daily impact of material poverty in 
South Africa and throughout the continent of Africa and the African 
Diaspora, find out where and how women live. The poorest of the 
poor are the ones who have formed the core base of AICs. As anthro-
pologist and theologian, I have, for over two decades, observed the 
clear, deep, and positively structural implications of poverty that 
has its roots in racism and the abhorrent consequences of Apartheid 
and its aftermath. I have also seen the clear, deep and positively life-
changing effects of a theology and accompanying rituals of survival 
and resistance that occur among the poorest of the poor adherents 
of AICs.
6
I will focus the remainder of this chapter on the primary site for 
my research, St. John’s Apostolic Faith Mission Church, an AIC 
f o u n d e d  i n  1 9 5 2  b y  M o t h e r  C h r i s t i n a h  N k u  o f  E v a n t o n ,  S o u t h  
Africa. Predating Martin Luther King, Jr. by a century she had a 
vision of equality and equity for all people—even the poor. There 
emerged from her dream a denomination that has come to be the 
second largest AIC in South Africa—over 2 million people engage in 
rituals of healing for mind and body.


--- PAGE 192 ---
Aesthetics of Religion in South Africa 179
From this context, rose a religious movement and theology of 
beauty, led by Mokotuli Nku. Theologically, Mother Nku made a 
conscious choice to elevate portions of the traditional Christian story 
to suit the needs of her parishioners. She also made a conscious choice 
to re-imagine the Christian message, to accommodate to its primary 
tenets without assimilating fully to its dogma and doctrine that would 
have crushed if not destroyed the elements of African religion, had 
she adhered to missionized Christian orthodoxy.
Her theology of beauty and the rise of AICs, I argue, were and 
are so successful for at least three reasons. First, she insisted on incor-
porating into AIC theology traditional, non-orthodox Christianity. 
The rituals, traditions and theologies of African religion would not 
die with the advent of Christianity. This, I argue, has given legit-
imacy, empowerment and agency to the poorest of the poor, The 
Black South Africans that she served and her denomination contin-
ues to serve. Second, Mother Nku insisted on selectively choosing 
portions of the orthodox Christian story to encourage, support and 
perpetuate. Third, Mother Nku, above all, practiced the prehistorical 
art and theology of the Hebrew Scripture; that is to say, hospitality. 
Collectively, Mother Nku developed a theology that honors the spe-
cific history of Black South Africans apart from Christianity, while at 
the same time adapting the central messages of Christianity to sup-
port the specific life situation and experience of her adherents.
St. John’s Apostolic Faith Mission 
Church: Theological Considerations
The core of Mother Nku’s theology lies in the central message of imago 
dei. It is not a new concept. Surely it is a component of orthodox theol-
ogy. However, historically orthodox theology has subtly, sometimes not 
so subtly, been interpreted in thought and deed so that some members 
of humanity are made more and others less so in God’s image. The case 
for this has been well documented by Womanist and feminist scholars, 
especially those who have shown that when the imago dei portion of 
the Christian story is woven with the rest of the story, men end up 
being the head of the household, rulers of churches, dictators of gov-
ernment and, by nature, the most God-like. Black and Womanist theo-
logians and historians have long added the precursor “White” to the 
notion that men are, by nature, the most natural and ordained leaders, 
that their imago dei is a little brighter and comes with a natural superi-
ority. Such racist, sexist theologies leave Black South Africans with the 
message of being less than: less competent, less able, less capable and


--- PAGE 193 ---
Linda E. Thomas180
less beautiful than their White counterparts. Such ordained rights to 
power emerged from Christian tradition and supported the regime of 
Apartheid, at the expense of countless Black lives.
Mother Nku reclaimed the notion of imago dei from those who 
abused it and retold the message in ways that promoted the beauty, 
dignity and equality of all people. While to us today that message 
seems obvious, for Black South Africans, living under unjust systems 
that constantly and penetratingly tell them that they are absolutely 
less than beautiful, less then the complete embodiment of God’s own 
image—this message is radical. It is life-giving. It does make survival 
possible AND resistance righteous.
Nku gave primacy to the message of imago dei. She did not negate 
the rest of the Christian story, such as sin, guilt, forgiveness, and 
redemption. But what she chose to do was elevate the core message 
that she thought to be the most life-giving, the most immediately 
empowering and life-changing for her adherents. That message is one 
of absolute dignity and unqualified beauty. For people forced to live 
in poverty, abject, inhuman poverty, the message of utter sinfulness 
and the need to submit and sacrifice would not energize, would not 
encourage Black South Africans to stand tall, and certainly would not 
promote behavior to resist the systems that called them ugly, unwor-
thy, and ill-equipped to act as the equals of White persons.
Instead, they heard through Mother Nku a positive message that 
effectively empowered her adherents to believe that they were wor-
thy of and entitled to food, shelter, and clothing. Her unwavering 
message that Black South Africans are unabashedly, unequivocally, 
un-irrevocably and absolutely made in the exact image of God rooted 
her listeners in an ideology that is unmistakably ruled by personal 
dignity, human rights and collective empowerment and ultimately, 
agency—in the face of external political, social, economic and cul-
tural realities that tried to say and do the opposite.
The message of imago dei, as reinterpreted or refocused by Nku 
was not the only difference between hers and other traditional ortho-
dox Christianities. She also made central to her theology of aesthetics 
the intentional inclusion of non-Christian African beliefs and prac-
tices. She understood the necessity of poor Black people indigenizing 
the gospel in the local cultures suitable for Black folk. That is why 
she combined a reinterpreted missionary Christianity from Whites 
with the cultural contours of African sensibilities. For instance, Nku 
synthesized the prophetic role of the Hebrew Scriptures with the 
diviner’s hermeneutic found in African cultures and religion. Hence 
propheting (i.e., speaking the truth about a particular situation;


--- PAGE 194 ---
Aesthetics of Religion in South Africa 181
telling a person truths about their lives and/or predicting their future) 
became a central ritual whereby the church pastor speaks truth by 
telling congregants about the causes of their sickness and instructing 
them about what types of sacrifices to ancestors are required. At the 
same time, propheting could entail advising church members to pur-
sue traditional biomedicine prescriptions.
An additional manifestation of embracing Christianity within the 
cultural particularities of poor Black folk is shown in the combination 
of the worshipping of Jesus and the veneration of African ancestors. 
Jesus is viewed as an ancestor, that is, one whose spirit is present 
and alive beyond the expiration of the body. At the same time, the 
doctrine of the trinity is not of central importance because children 
are not equal to their parents in most African cultures. Thus, Jesus 
could not possibly be equal to God. Just as Jesus assumed a central 
place within the belief, cosmology and adoration rituals of Mother 
Nku’s Christianity, so did veneration of African ancestors. The latter 
had passed over into the spirit realm and were, thus, closer to and in 
more direct communication with God. The living Christians among 
Nku’s adherents did not forget obligations and ritual symbolizations 
owed the ancestors because those recently dead acted as intercessors 
on behalf of the living with Jehovah or Thixo, the indigenous name 
for the Christian God for Xhosa-speaking people. Therefore, Jesus 
and the ancestors located themselves within a Christian and indig-
enous pantheon which proved essential to the rituals of healing and 
conversations between God and humanity.
The full-fledged and equal integration of both orthodox Christian 
doctrine and African traditions is important to clarify. It is not sim-
ple assimilation of a few customs into a dominant Christian doctrine. 
Nku’s religion carries the name Christian but it is not merely a carbon 
copy or an epiphenomenon of White missionary doctrine and prin-
ciples. On the contrary, I suggest that it should be understood to be 
a religion where neither African nor Christian orthodoxy dominates. 
Rather, it is a religion that emerged from a confluence of both tradi-
tions into its own AIC.
As the Union of South Africa became an apartheid state and the 
genocide of Black people more overt, Nku’s church grew rapidly and 
congregations spread all over South Africa and across its borders. Nku’s 
ministry expanded, while her church grew, through the establishment 
of schools for children and programs for youth and adults. People’s lives 
were transformed and this directly benefited the community. Nku’s 
ministry was subversive in that it functioned as a “hidden transcript,”
7 
which was a response to systems that dominated the poor. According to


--- PAGE 195 ---
Linda E. Thomas182
medical anthropologist Mamphele Ramphele, “apartheid” as a system 
“effect[ed] people’s sense of well being along a continuum.”8 Though 
there were a variety of responses to apartheid, the ministry of Nku was 
the medium through which poor people disempowered by a brutal 
state system “talked back” through voices and in rituals and with a the-
ology that denied the oppressor power and that was distinctly African 
and Initiated and Christian.
9 From this theology rose ritual practices 
and AICs as places of healing and hospitality.
Ritual Practices as Response to 
Apartheid
In addition Nku created successful practical strategies for survival for 
subalterns suffering within a world classifying them as bestial servants 
for White supremacist privileges. St. John’s Church became a shelter 
for the homeless, even though homes were no more than shacks that 
barely withstood the cold wet winds, especially in areas such as Cape 
Town, South Africa. Community members from far away distances lit-
erally interpreted St. John’s as a hospital for healing and many sought 
sanctuary there from sicknesses before and after visiting mainstream 
doctors. In fact, in my years of fieldwork at St. John’s, not one person 
interviewed ever stated that the church’s rituals of healing ever failed 
them. The unemployed also gravitated to the church because those 
without a livelihood perceived St. John’s as a rock in a weary land 
comprised of an always welcoming extended family atmosphere—a 
place where Black South Africans could come regardless of circum-
stance and, in many ways, exactly because of circumstance, not only 
to hear a message of human dignity and being made in divine like-
ness, but to be treated as such.
Likewise Black South Africans traveling from rural to urban areas 
utilized the church as a loving and familiar way station, a beacon of 
refuge and hope—a place where before and after facing the brutal 
realities of life within a nation ruled by White supremacy—Black folk 
could hear a different message and experience beauty in spite of the 
ugliness that governed the rest of their journey.
Nku did more than preach and more than welcome. The commu-
nity also built itself around extended emphasis on bodily rituals. The 
bodies of Black people afflicted with manifold illnesses, undoubtedly 
rooted in the stressful social situation in which they lived, came to 
St. John’s to be physically and immediately resurrected—in this life—
from the death-dealing system of racial discrimination, through the 
healing rituals and the community that Mother Nku provided.


--- PAGE 196 ---
Aesthetics of Religion in South Africa 183
Nku developed rituals around one of the most basic natural ele-
ments, water, as an all encompassing remedy for spiritual and material 
illness among poor Black South Africans. Nku situated her survival 
and resistance ministry at the micro-local level of individual heal-
ing. For her the weapons of faith were the rituals of healing. Rituals, 
again, by definition from my research and for purposes of this chapter 
are: repetitive acts that connect humanity with the sacred. Rituals of 
healing took on a strict regiment of purifications and spiritual disci-
pline for Black South African shack dwellers.
Everyday of the week she held Christian healing services. Members 
of the church and surrounding communities seeking relief from pol-
luted environments (whether polluted from the material effects of 
apartheid or from lack of spiritual connections to one’s ancestors, 
family, or community) came to her St. John’s Apostolic Faith Mission 
Church to undergo the rigorous regimen of water prescriptions in the 
form of drinking, bathing, vomiting, and enemas. Spiritual and reg-
ularized rituals became manifestations of faith.
The rituals at St. Johns are particularly and exactly located in the 
body and among the community. Embodied healing and physical 
ritual function to achieve two results. First, they honor the adher-
ents’ bodies, Black bodies, as they are. It reinforces the central tenet 
of the theology of beauty: that Black Africans are indeed made in 
the image of God, here, on this earth. Second, the rituals—because 
they are embodied—conflate and collapse orthodox Christianity’s 
incessant and permeating propensity to separate mind from body. 
At St. John’s, mind and body are one. There is no need to escape 
the body and every need to see and experience the unity of one’s 
self with one’s hands, intestines, shoulders, mouths and torsos. In 
the spirit of her theology of imago dei, the message is “I am, as a 
Black South African, here and now, created in the very living image 
of God.” With my hunger pangs, with my tired feet, with my eyes 
that have seen evil and ears that have heard ugly words—and now, 
too often, with the HIV virus attacking my cells daily, at St. John’s I 
hear that all of me, all of those things that I feel, taste and touch in 
my body, these things I am physically and viscerally experiencing as 
the living image of God.
The critical role of these rituals and specifically that they are 
embodied cannot be overstated. When Black South Africans forced 
to live within structural systems permeated by racism demonstrate 
through ritual that Black bodies are beautiful, it reinforces a frame-
work that says “I am worthy.” “I am valuable.” It counters the still 
prevalent dualism that stains orthodox Christianity and was (is) used


--- PAGE 197 ---
Linda E. Thomas184
to enforce racist practices. That is, Nku’s theology rejects any notion 
of platonic dualism between mind and body. It rejects the vastly 
promulgated and proselytized theology that souls are what “really” 
matter, that in the bye and bye, people are equal. Instead, and in 
severe opposition, the theology and rituals practiced at St. John’s 
claim that immediately and fully, Black South Africans in bodies, 
right now, are exactly equal, precisely beautiful, and unequivocally 
deserving of the rights and privileges afforded to their White coun-
terparts. Dualism does not fit. People are embodied; people are 
bodies, and bodies, as fully containing the image of God, matter 
most at St. John’s.
Despite the circumstances, despite the political, social, and eco-
nomic realities that send messages that Black bodies, Black persons, 
are somehow less than with imago dei a little less bright, St. John’s 
stands as a place alive with messages, ritual and social action that 
ensures survival and empowers resistance. St. John’s embodied ritu-
als and emphasis on fully visceral and specifically Black imago dei 
function as a powerful theology of beauty, life-giving and communi-
ty-building beauty in the midst of abject poverty, forceful discrimina-
tion, and ugliness that rears its head at every turn.
Augustine, in City of God, spoke about, hinted at, in his own lin-
gering yet vastly imperfect theology, and identified the complicated 
relationship of beauty in things labeled as ugly, or considered unwor-
thy, or called destructive. He wrote, “divine providence admonishes 
us not foolishly to vituperate things, but to investigate their utility 
with care; and, where our mental capacity or infirmity is at fault, 
to believe that there is a utility, though hidden, . . . which we all but 
failed to discover.”
10 Granted, he was talking to his peers of assumed 
privilege about how to look at those things that had not been consid-
ered beautiful. I use it here as a way of speaking about the theology 
embodied at St. John’s. If I were to rephrase Augustine, to fit the 
theology at St. John’s, it would say that “divine providence admon-
ishes us not foolishly to vituperate things—including ourselves—but 
to investigate our utility with care—and see and know deeply in the 
marrow of our bones that we are beautiful. We are valuable. We are 
dignified. Though our beauty seems hidden from too many in our 
racist surroundings, we will never cease knowing that we are living 
and breathing and moving as God’s image on this earth, in this place, 
and this discovery will cause us to survive and resist the ugliness with 
which we must live.” The press for indelible beauty, the ability to see 
it, feel it, taste it and hear it until we know it fully and it changes our 
world, is at the core of Nku’s theology.


--- PAGE 198 ---
Aesthetics of Religion in South Africa 185
Concluding Thoughts
I opened this chapter with a discussion of the Broadway play, “The 
Color Purple.” Although Broadway seems far from the lives of the 
poorest of poor in South Africa, the play is brilliant at communicat-
ing the wild and unruly confluence of simultaneously existing notions 
of beauty, dignity, depravity, terror and injustice that are timeless. 
“The Color Purple” is unrelenting in showing the complexity of vio-
lence, immorality, depravity, tenderness and beauty wrapped, rolled 
and exploding in the vivid experiences of lives. That confluence, 
this intersection, where life’s atrocities are rightly named but do not 
negate life’s beauty even in the midst of tremendous and life-stealing 
ugliness is not only the story of a play, not only the story of the AICs. 
It is, if I recall, the central story of the Christian heritage. To this end, 
I suggest that a theological aesthetic, whether translated through rit-
ual or in performance on stage, is core to the Christian tradition and 
made marvelously manifest in the lives and through the rituals among 
the people—the Black African people that comprise the community 
of St. John’s and who survive and resist any message other than that 
they are perfectly created in God’s image and absolutely beautiful.
Notes
 1. Andries Du Toit, “Chronic and Structural Poverty in South Africa: 
Challenges for Action and Research,” CCSR Working Paper no. 56 and 
PLAAS Chronic Poverty and Development Policy Series, no. 6, CCSR 
Working Paper no. 121 (Cape Town: Chronic Poverty Research Centre. 
University of the Western Cape, South Africa, 2005), 2.
 2. Ibid., 4.
 3. Ibid.
 4. Ibid.
 5. Ibid., 5.
 6. Linda Thomas, Under the Canopy: Ritual Process and Spiritual Resilience 
in South Africa (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1999).
 7. See James C. Scott’s, Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden 
Transcripts. ( N e w  H a v e n :  Y a l e  U n i v e r s i t y  P r e s s ,  1 9 9 2  [ 1 9 9 0 ] )  f o r  a  
detailed cross-cultural presentation about subalterns’ response to power 
and domination.
 8. Ramphele, August 12, 1992, personal communication.
 9. See bell hooks’ Talking Back: Thinking Feminist, Thinking Black (Boston: 
South End Press, 1989) for more detail about the ways that subordinates 
are empowered when they speak truth to authority.
10. St. Augustine, City of God , trans. M. Dods (Edinburgh, UK: T.&T. 
Clark, 1872), xi, 22.


--- PAGE 199 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 200 ---
10
Aesthetics in African Art:  
Implications for African 
Theology
Elias K. Bongmba
In this chapter I argue that to appreciate aesthetics in African art, 
o n e  n e e ds  t o  c o ns i d e r  th e  fun cti o n  o f  an  art  o b j e ct  in  a d di ti o n  t o  
theories of beauty. I also discuss the implications of this view on the 
construction of theological aesthetics.
The idea that aesthetics deals with beauty and knowledge is well 
known, but what is needed in my view is a broader perspective on aes-
thetics available if one takes art to include functionality. Mathew Kieran 
has argued a proper perspective on aesthetics ought to include the 
experience and articulation of judgments, evaluation, and appreciation 
of works of art including the opinions people form about the work.
1 
“We,” Kieran writes, “talk about, amongst other things, doing justice 
to a work [of art]; the vividness or richness of experience involved; the 
originality of a work; the imaginativeness of the artists; the expres-
siveness, beauty, or poignancy of a work; savoring or delighting in 
our experience of a work; and what we may learn from it.”
2 In other 
words, the notion of aesthetics is not limited to beauty alone. Works 
of art shape human experience, imaginations, emotions, their percep-
tion of the world, and their perception of other people. Kieran has 
also argued that one can understand aesthetics from within aesthetics 
or outside it; that is think of aesthetics as a process of articulating a 
systematic view of “things like the nature of imagination, emotions, 
artworks and how we engage in them.” He also refers to this perspec-
tive as an integration approach that brings together metaphysics, epis-
temology, semantics, and pre-theoretic phenomenology.
3 Aesthetics as 
a philosophy of art involves a triad: “(1) Creator and the conditions


--- PAGE 201 ---
Elias K. Bongmba188
of creation; (2) Nature and identity of the aesthetic art/object [and] 
(3) the appreciators, conditions of appreciation.”4 Aesthetic qualities 
are both objective and subjective. At the subjective level, judging an 
artwork beautiful could depend mainly on the subjective feelings that 
the work evokes in an observer although observers do not always have 
knowledge of art from different cultures.
My work in this chapter focuses on the first dimension of Kieran’s 
aesthetic triad—creators, and especially the conditions under which 
works of art are created. I further limit the focus of this chapter to 
the purpose for which certain works of art are created in order to 
argue that the function of a work of art cannot be ignored in aes-
thetic considerations. The idea is that in the African context where 
one could identify certain works as religious or ritual art, one would 
have to think about the function of that particular object, a process 
that would affect ones opinions about the beauty or the “charming” 
qualities of the object to its viewers.
5
Some studies of African art have overemphasized a one-dimen-
sional view that African art is mostly ritual and religious. I think 
Dr. K. C. Anyanwu overstates his case when he argues that what is 
significant about African art is not style but the meaning and the 
religious ideas that have influenced the production of art.
The metaphysical roles in African art come from myths which are the 
timeless sources of African thought. The ancestral world, for example 
establishes a link between the temporal and spiritual forces. . . . Religion, 
art and music are some of the mechanism for understanding and 
expressing the life-forces of the non-visible world. The artist re-creates 
the forces of the myths and society expresses them. His artistic works 
have to resemble the mythical forces.
6
This metaphysical and mystical interpretation of African art ignores 
the argument that Africans create art that may not have anything 
to do with the religious. Although I argue that the function of art, 
especially its religious function, gives us a richer perspective on aes-
thetics, seeing African art as merely religious is a limiting perspective 
that does not reflect the artistic tastes and transactions that go on in 
different African communities. It is important that the religious and 
nonreligious dimension of art be held together and in doing so, one 
should not dismiss the religious meaning and the power of an art 
object to deepen life in a profound manner. Paul Tillich said it well 
when he argued: “Art indicates what the character of the spiritual sit-
uation is; it does this more immediately and directly than do science


--- PAGE 202 ---
Aesthetics in African Art 189
and philosophy for it is less burdened by objective considerations. 
Its symbols have something of a revelatory character while scientific 
conceptualizations must suppress the symbolic in favor of objective 
adequacy.”
7
While one can compare ideas across cultures, it is also the case 
that artists and patrons of art in each community often invest objects 
with meanings about the past, present, and future activities of that 
community. For example, one cannot understand much of Yoruba art 
without taking into consideration its history, rituals, festivals, divi-
nation, and public manifestations that honor ancestors and divini-
ties.
8 In effect, ideas of beauty cannot be analyzed in isolation. Here 
while aesthetics must be understood as broadly as possible, and this 
includes style, decoration, and size, the function of the art remains 
crucial for understanding aspects of aesthetics that may not fit the 
norms of beauty in other communities, especially in the Western 
world. Therefore, an aesthetic quality such as beauty can be informed 
by context. In addition to the context, the process of making an art 
object also offers clues about aesthetic sensitivities in some African 
communities.
9
In general, when an object is called beautiful, it might be in refer-
ence to the appearance of the object. The beauty of the object results 
from the work of the artist who in addition to carving or sculpting 
the object, has worked to refine, polish, and shape the work to fit the 
viewer’s perspective on beauty or meet the criteria of proportionality. 
Others may say that something is beautiful because it evokes either a 
feeling of pleasure or pain. For some people beauty might reside in the 
realism of a work. In the case of a work of fiction, claiming that the 
work is pleasing might be a reference to the story line, its motif, themes, 
construction of characters, the events, or the language that the artist 
employs in telling the story. Thus, I may say the So Long a Letter by 
Mariama Bâ is a beautiful work. I imply that she has used the epistolary 
style of writing effectively to communicate a variety of themes such as 
death, polygamy, extended family relations, or the sustaining power of 
the Muslim faith in difficult circumstances.
Aesthetics is not a mere abstraction but rather points to a con-
crete work of art, and a particular reaction to the object. In his stud-
ies of aesthetics in the Guro and Atutu areas, Hans Himmerlheber 
found that clients sometimes rejected a mask if they thought that it 
was not beautiful.
10 If a client thought the work he or she commis-
sioned was not beautiful, the client would pay only part of the price 
on grounds that the finished work did not meet his or her expecta-
tions. People based their judgments on the “beauty of line and power


--- PAGE 203 ---
Elias K. Bongmba190
of expression.”11 In cases where a client commissioned an object to 
honor a relative, the client who found problems with the work always 
argued that the work did not conform to the likeness of the relative 
that is being honored.
Vandenhoute proposed a criterion of beauty that focuses on sym-
metry with the vertical axis, balance, “rhythm, and harmony between 
the various masses, surfaces, and lines.”
12 The view he has proposed 
reflects what some people mean when they describe art as making, 
decorating, or designing. Design is part of the artistic vision and cre-
ative process in the Equatorial region of Africa. Jan Vansina, a long 
time scholar of the Central African region has argued: “Among the 
Kuba . . . design is the essence of artistic activity; there is no Kuba term 
for art, but there is one for design beiin, and it seems crucial to their 
aesthetics.”
13 Aesthetics therefore involves creation, design as well as 
the instrumentality of the work. 14 The idea that a work is instrumen-
tal suggests artistic intention, but such a view of intention does not 
rule out the fact that an artist can also create work spontaneously.
15 
However, there are also times when the aesthetic quality of an object 
could indeed be the outcome of the accidental, or what Allen Roberts 
and Mary Nooter Roberts describe as the chancy aspect of aesthetic 
photographs out of which flows the concrete, solid, and the eternal as 
the case of the photograph of Amadou Bamba. Therefore, aesthetic 
quality can also grow out of artistic intentionality.
In a detailed interview with Yoruba artists, Robert Farris Thompson 
found that they employed specific vocabulary to articulate the aes-
thetics and criteria of excellence in sculpture.
16 He listed nineteen 
criteria among which was jijora, which refers to resemblance of the 
object to the subject, and artists told him that figures ought to look 
like somebody, even thought they do not have to be portraits of spe-
cific people. Barry Hallen, a philosopher and a student of Yoruba 
aesthetics, while agreeing with the methods used by Thompson, 
claimed that Thompson had exaggerated some of his proposals.
17 
From the Thompson study we know that Ifarahon refers to visibil-
ity and refers to a clear formation of the work from the beginning to 
the end. Didon refers to luminosity, a criteria which requires that the 
work should have a proper balance of light and shade. Gigun refers to 
the symmetrical balance of the work. Odo refers to the representation 
of the subject in the prime of his or her life, but one that also includes 
coolness. Tutu refers to absence of violence. In The Good, the Bad, and 
the Beautiful , Hallen criticizes the view that arts and crafts provide 
our only criteria for beauty at the expense of other cultural values.
18 
The Yoruba people use the idea of beauty when they talk about art


--- PAGE 204 ---
Aesthetics in African Art 191
but also use it in human relations: “In virtually every account of the 
term, however, ewa or beauty as a physical attribute was rated super-
ficial and unimportant by comparison with good moral character iwa 
rere, as a . . . form of inner beauty.”19 Wh e n  a e s th e ti c s  r e f e r s  t o  th e  
beauty of objects, it is recognized that artists and creators of art use 
devices such as color, newness, the artists’ finish, and other decorative 
devices to make the work appealing.
Aesthetic qualities are also found in works that some consider 
strange, ugly, frightening, repulsive, grotesque, or hidden.
20 These 
features depart from conventional views of aesthetics, which tend to 
focus on beauty. Art that has such characteristics may be disturbing, 
but it also has qualities that compel attention from observers and 
scholars.
21 Studying or reflecting on such art offers an opportunity to 
take in the message or the different aspects of the world, which that 
art proposes. In African art, some objects that are considered strange 
often have a deep meaning and reflect different aspects of human 
relations. What might be repulsive or “hidden” may hold meaning 
that brings the community together.
22 The “strangeness” of a work of 
art often invites observers and interpreters to ask questions about the 
object itself and the world represented by the object.
23
Functionality as a Marker of 
the Aesthetic
I have claimed that the function of a work of art contributes to its aes-
thetic dimensions. Even what some people may consider ugly works 
broaden our notion of aesthetics in different ways that are not subor-
dinate to beauty as we think of the aesthetic experience. Therefore, the 
instrumentality of art shapes its aesthetic qualities. Daniel Biebyuck 
has argued that the Lega people use the term bwami to describe a 
sculpture as “good” if that work fulfills its function.
24 There are sev-
eral reasons why works which some people might call ugly are created 
and considered beautiful.
First, some of these works underscore the authority of rulers and 
their disciplining power. Bangwa masks in Cameroon are examples 
of works that some people might consider grotesque, yet these works 
are beautiful because the mask’s function is to create fear and call 
attention to the power of the council or the chief to punish trans-
gressions.
25 In this case, Bangwa masks that do not look beautiful 
are very acceptable and appreciated by the community because they 
create fear and move the people in the community to be law abiding. 
Members of the community know that if they do not carry out their


--- PAGE 205 ---
Elias K. Bongmba192
obligations, they will be punished. The object itself may not inflict 
punishment, but the object sends a message that if people do not 
change their ways, they can expect retribution. In some communities 
people contend that the ultimate authority to discipline belongs to 
the ancestors who continue to influence the governance of the com-
munity. People hold festivals to honor the ancestors. These festivals 
which bring members of the community together and are often aes-
thetic performances whose importance lies not only in the materials 
that are used, but in the convergence of two worlds, the visible and 
the invisible world. The invisible world is the abode of God and 
ancestors. The ancestors maintain a jural relationship with the mem-
bers of the visible world. Masquerades that come out during festivals 
like the ngungun in Yoruba communities represent ancestors.
Some African communities use art objects to concretize the ven-
eration of their ancestors. In Wimbum society, the masks of the 
nwarong society (a closed society that serves as the judicial arm of 
village administration) represent ancestors and carry out punishments 
assessed on members of the community who have violated the ethical 
codes of the community.
26 The mbunwarong, a masked figure that 
wears a costume made of raffia fiber that covers the body from head 
to the legs often carries out punishments in the village. The mask in 
the collection of the nwarong society may not look appealing to the 
eye, but it performs an important function because it helps the com-
munity keep alive the memory of the dead ancestors. This purpose 
makes the object beautiful. Biebuyck points out that the Lega people 
call a mask kansusania ka muntu, what resembles a human being, or 
lukungu lwa wakule, the skull of a dead person. Some people are actu-
ally personal about it and call the mask figures, lukungu lwa tata, the 
skull of my father. Masks therefore link those who are alive to the dead, 
and subsequently generations of initiated relatives.
27 The lukwakongo 
masks are carved to represent, “the Great-Old-Organizers” those 
who should not be ridiculed; “the Great-Old-Ones-of-the-Truth” 
who brought goodness from afar; “the Bearded-Folk” a reference to 
a group where there is equality; or tumbukutu insects that look alike 
to emphasize “oneness and solidarity which guides them.”
28
Art energizes belief in the abiding presence of ancestors, its cultic 
attachments, and many other ideas that can be packed into the visual 
iconography of the mask or the masquerade dancer. These artistic 
manifestations allow communities to construct aesthetic perspec-
tive that offers a commentary on the past, present and the future.
29 
Writing about the survival of art, John Picton has argued: “Whether 
as material fact or as the memory of forms (material or ephemeral)


--- PAGE 206 ---
Aesthetics in African Art 193
that enables their reinvention, art works are possessed of the uncom-
fortable habit of surviving beyond, and without necessary reference 
to, the lifetimes of artists and patrons.”
30 They give images of human 
experience from the past and provide conceptual anchorage for recon-
figuring to today to expand possibilities for the future. In all of these 
cases, the aesthetics of power carried through in objects.
The Basinjon of the Banyang and the Ejagham people have eyes 
th a t  a r e  s u p p o s e d  t o  d e t e c t  wi t c h e s  ( i . e . ,  a n ti  s o c i al  p e o p l e  i n  th e  
community).
31 The basinjom ’s costume is made up of a large black 
gown. Its head and part of its body is constructed from a variety of 
materials such as a crocodile head, feathers, mirrors, knife, quills, raf-
fia, animal skins, etc.
32 The black gown of the basinjom signifies the 
anti witchcraft activities; the feathers make him a war bird with hot 
and dangerous forces, while the porcupine quills are counter thun-
der medicine. The headdress also has roots, which help activate pos-
session by basinjom.
33 The artwork that is part of the masquerade is 
intended to frighten people and awake a sense of combat with evil. Its 
aesthetic qualities cannot be judged mainly by how beautiful it looks, 
but also on how effective it communicates the idea of the eternal 
struggle between good and evil.
One also gathers perspective on the aesthetics of function from 
works of art used in healing and empowerment. The patrons and cre-
ators of the art point out that the objects embody the power of Gods, 
spirits, and ancestors. The aesthetic quality of such work includes what 
is invested in the work of art. From the conception of a work to the 
time it is finished, many people can be involved in the mobilization 
and investing of power in the work of art and these might include the 
artists, diviners, rulers, crafts and professional people such as black-
smiths, hunters, who make aesthetic decisions on the basis of the 
power that such a work is going to embody. People think that some-
times the spirit likes an object that is beautiful and good looking to 
the eyes.
34 However, in some cases like the minkisi objects of Kongo, 
the object is decorated to evoke fear, and awe. Wyatt MacGaffey has 
argued that the miniksi objects that were created in the 1800’s “are 
local habitations and embodiments of personalities from the land of 
the dead, through which the powers of such spirits are made available 
to the living.”
35 As objects, minkisi do not posses power, but they 
are carriers or “containers” and conveyors of power. They also con-
tain medicines; bilongo  and the Mangaaka nkisi could be described 
as a cosmogram that stands between life and death.
36 MacGaffey 
has argued that in Kongo, medicines are often taken from the earth, 
graves, gullies, and streams because these places are associated with


--- PAGE 207 ---
Elias K. Bongmba194
the world of the dead.37 The world of the dead is the abode of ances-
tors who maintain guardianship over their surviving relatives. 38 The 
dead can be contacted through the earth and therefore, the material 
from which minkisi is constructed include clays, stones and some-
times dirt from the grave. What is important here for our purpose 
is that the connection that Kongo thought makes with the spiritual 
realm, the world of the dead (ancestors), the living, the properties of 
contact and communication, the places of contact, and what seems 
to be the primary reason for such a connection is the acquisition and 
management of power.
39 In this respect, Luc de Heusch’s description 
of the nkisi as “spirits of the dead metonymically caught in a meta-
phorical trap” aptly conveys the desire of the living to appropriate and 
hold on to the powers of the dead through material and metaphorical 
representation.
40
These representations of the spirits and ancestors were misun-
derstood and attacked by colonials and missionaries. Both foreign 
agents of change fought to eradicate Kongo of objects that were 
charged with spiritual power because they thought those objects were 
fetishes. Many objects that survived these attacks were removed from 
their location so that MacGaffey describes the pieces he studied as 
“fragments of operation complexes reduced by conquest and loot-
ing . . . Thousands were burned in triumphal holocaust . . . The rituals 
for which such objects were part of the material infrastructure are no 
longer performed, even the vocabulary that described them is archaic 
and obscure.”
41 MacGaffey, in the tradition of Swedish Missionary 
K. E. Laman and his students, links nkisi, spirits and the world of 
the dead to the discourse on ancestors in the Central African Region 
and his exploration of Kongo thought highlights beliefs in ancestors 
whose representation in art make those objects serve as symbol of 
power for the community, regardless of how one rates those objects 
from a standard of beauty. Their purpose was to contain power. The 
minkisi were functional objects because the relatives of the deceased 
created them as spiritual aids to help them stay in touch with their 
relatives and awaken their power in time of stress and crisis. In a soci-
ety where there is preoccupation with the power of the dead, these 
objects served as a focusing device. The construction of these objects 
was an intentional spiritual praxis.
These material objects also reminded the people of the Lower Kongo 
that they had an obligation to stay in touch with ancestors because 
all people owe their existence to extra terrestrial powers. One has no 
choice but to maintain a connection with one’s mythic and historical 
roots through the ancestors and spirits. One’s relatives should be given


--- PAGE 208 ---
Aesthetics in African Art 195
a proper and decent burial, and all the mourning rites observed prop-
erly. If one does not do this, the dead can come back to punish them. 
This punishment can manifest itself in different forms of misfortunes. 
The Wimbum people have an expression for that. Misfortunes that 
come from the fact that one has failed to carry out his or her praxis to 
honor a dead relative are often diagnosed and reported by the expres-
sion “nkvusi shi war, ” an expression that simply means, the dead is 
aggrieved because he or she has not been treated well.
Carrying out obligations to one’s ancestors requires the mediation 
of spiritual experts who varied from place to place. Spiritual experts in 
Wimbum society include nga seng, who serve as diviners. The ritual 
experts in the Kongo and other areas are called nganga. These indi-
viduals are able to communicate with the world of the dead and bring 
messages for members of the community. The nganga has a variety of 
obligations, but in the case of the nkisi in the Kongo, the nganga was 
(and is) an initiated expert who was capable of communicating with 
the spiritual world. This person also had knowledge about the com-
position and construction of the nkisi, the medicines that would be 
needed and the rituals.
42 Heads of families or senior members of the 
household also preside over rituals, pour drops of wine on the ground, 
and ask the blessings of the ancestors. However, in serious matters that 
involve health, eminent threat to the community, special mediators are 
needed to bridge the world of the dead with the world of the living.
43
The aesthetics of artwork in Africa might also be appreciated when 
we understand the power evoked in the objects as political power 
given by the ancestors, for example, during rituals of installation. 
Eugenia Herbert has argued that during the installation of a chief 
in Eastern Bakongo, the new king wears a bracelet belonging to the 
former chief and secured from the corbeille des ancêtres (baskets of 
ancestral relics).
44 The new chief also takes the name of the chief 
whose bracelets he is wearing. Towards the end of the installation 
ceremony, the chief recites the “names of the ancestral bisimbi bi nsi  
and all the rivers that the ancestors had to cross before reaching the 
present locality.”
45 This investiture of the chief resembles “the ritual 
followed to create a charm, establishing communion between the liv-
ing and dead as the source of power that could then be ‘constrained 
to produce extraordinary effects, good or bad.’ ”
46
Implications for Theology
Our brief review of aesthetics from the functional view of art suggests 
some themes that could prove helpful in shaping theological aesthetics.


--- PAGE 209 ---
Elias K. Bongmba196
In other words, since the instrumentality of art brings new meaning 
because of the claim that every art object that fulfills its purpose is aes-
thetically appealing, theologians might explore these deeper meanings 
as they think of theology and aesthetics. In the rest of the chapter, I 
explore images and meanings that arise out of a broad interpretation 
of aesthetics in some African contexts. First, art objects that might not 
look appealing to the eyes, but speak about the power of God remind 
the human community that there is a divine being whose power and 
strength cannot be ignored. The aesthetics of power therefore points 
to that which stands beyond human beings. One way to look at the 
notion of power here is to eliminate its fetishized form that we find in 
the writings of earlier ethnographers and missionaries who were so 
fixated on the idea of life force.
47 An aesthetics that presupposes divine 
power offers observers new perspectives on divine power.
One might interpret the idea of power as used here in many ways. 
Divine power which art works capture in different ways gives peo-
ple something to lean on. Divine power is also used in the African 
context to overcome illness, which has generated various therapeutic 
traditions, faith, and spiritual healing practices. We have pointed out 
already that Minkisi objects may not appeal to people or be linked 
with aesthetics, but their creation is an evocation of divine power.
48 
An observer has pointed out in the New Yorker that the African art 
connoisseur in Paris may not be comfortable with Cheri Samba, but 
Samba’s work gets inspiration from human anxiety.
49 The people 
he paints are not ugly, nor are they strange looking, but rather they 
reflect a sense of disquiet about life.
A ‘mixed’ aesthetics that brings together the ugly and beautiful 
offers a commentary on the human condition. The makers of minkisi 
objects often call on ancestors to protect them and give them power 
to reverse the negative efforts of witches. Contemporary aesthetics 
in African art poin ts to a desire by members of the comm uni ty to 
overcome the powerlessness that has beseeched society and rendered 
people weak and helpless. The work of contemporary artists invites 
theologians to consider aesthetics that point to the ills and problems 
of society. Even if one were to ignore the ugly, strange, and obnox-
ious, in the pursuit of beauty in aesthetics, one ought to remember 
that beauty is not something to be observed, but experienced and 
lived not only as individuals but also as a community. Thus, the long 
disquiet reflected in artistic work points to new possibilities regarding 
the human condition. The aesthetics that reflect the human condi-
tion are also aesthetics of possibilities, alternatives, and dreams for 
better days expressing hope for a better future.


--- PAGE 210 ---
Aesthetics in African Art 197
The aesthetics of function tends to highlight performance. 
Whether one thinks of the Yoruba community with its Engugun fes-
tivals, or other festivals through out Africa, what one witnesses is the 
performance of faith. Such performance celebrates the human spirit; 
its creative genius and power may point to an ancestor, but it is power 
that is manifested in performance. The performance is not merely a 
celebration, but a communication that is not logo-centric. Art offers a 
medium of celebrating and communicating with the forces that have 
a purchase over human life and habitation. Such a visual communica-
tion creates a dialogue that cannot be uttered in words, but in acts of 
devotion, prostration before a representation or container of power.  
Herbert Marcuse has stated that art give human beings a way of say-
ing things that we cannot say with words.
50 Such acts of performance 
are directed to the spiritual being the work of art represents.
Susanne Blier explores the relationship between art and psycho-
therapy.51 Blier describes art works she studied in Africa as multi 
vocal objects that combine words, medicines, trance, and sensations 
to communicate. Their religious components include family inter-
ventions; they may describe individual and metaphoric journeys. Art 
also conveys aggressive actions in the context of difficulties. This is 
true of some of the bocio arts of Benin. This is possible because the 
works of art often are the embodiment of power. These works remind 
us of the power sculptures of Kongo.
52 These art objects are often 
used in contexts of healing and divination where people seek relief 
from difficulties. Blier has argued that most of the work she studied 
remains an enigma, not because people want to hide it, but because 
the works were tied to the innermost thoughts and fears of the peo-
ple. Furthermore, it was thought if some one knew how powers of 
the other person worked, they could have power over the person who 
commissioned such a work and could weaken it.
53
In that sense the aesthetics of healing and therapy also offer a 
commentary on the historical experience of the people. Historical 
events that have been traumatic are commemorated in art works. 
Blier argues that many of the bocio (“bundles of power”) arts deal 
with the devastation of slavery and the slave trade, depicting the vio-
lence of slavery and physical and psychological trauma it caused.
54 In 
this regard, the works are a response to the social problems of the 
time. They also speak to individual and social disengagement, a social 
world where slaves were chained, gagged, and brutalized by the plan-
tation economy and its demands for labor. However, Blier has argued: 
“Bocio arts, I maintain, were not merely intended to be reflections 
of violence and danger, but rather were thought to offer important


--- PAGE 211 ---
Elias K. Bongmba198
strategies for responding to the difficult social conditions in which 
people found themselves at the time.”55 By depicting these historical 
events, this art offers an invitation to resolve the past crisis.
Finally, theological aesthetics inspired by functional art, point to 
a different perspective on devotional life. The preparation, decora-
tion, and celebration of culture, belief, and power in artistic works 
also involve a life of devotion to ancestors. Festivals in this sense are 
celebrations, and time to worship and pay homage to spiritual pow-
ers. Celebrations are spiritual exercises that invite people to examine 
not only their lives, but also the lives of others in the community. 
They offer an opportunity for the community to come together and 
celebrate who they are, but also covenant to move into the future 
as a united people. Artists make aesthetic judgments about divina-
tion objects that reflect the aims and sometimes the specific methods 
employed in divination. Divination is a system of knowledge through 
which the diviner explores the social and psychosocial relationships, 
sometimes using ancient texts, or depending on revelatory knowl-
edge given by higher powers, to determine the cause of misfortune, 
or explore future possibilities. Some Yaka diviners use a slit-gong on 
which they have carved a human head. The diviner often taps on it and 
drinks from it during a divination séance to get strength and a new 
meaning. This drum, which in some cases is the image of the diviner, 
symbolizes his role as communicator of messages to people.
56
Rosalind Hackett points out diviners as artists can fill their work 
areas with images that may actually be frightening. These objects are 
used to impress the clients with the spiritual power of the diviner.
57 
The diviner, to invite Orunmila into the process and reveal the ori 
(head or psychological make up) of the person, uses the divination 
tapper or wand. The female wand represents the human race. She is 
often carved nude to reflect that divination is a solemn occasion.
58 
Yoruba diviners also use the agree ifa, a container where 16 palm 
nuts that are used in the divination are kept. The figures that are 
carved on it represent celebration of life and wishes for a successful 
divination. A priest often commissions it or a client may present it 
to the diviner as a gift.
59 The divination tray, opon, is carved with a 
depressed central area for the diviner to record the answers to the 
question that are posed in the divination session.
60 The opon is often 
elaborately decorated and has the face of Esu, because he is the medi-
ator between human beings, divinity, and the one who maintains a 
balance between forces of good and evil.
61 All sections of the tray are 
important and the priest praises all of them calling on its powers to


--- PAGE 212 ---
Aesthetics in African Art 199
be present in the session. The tray communicates the higher powers 
of Olódùmarè and the orishas.62 The motifs on the tray often signify 
the different powers that are invoked during the session.
These elaborate elements, artistic in nature, and having aesthetic 
value, communicate meaning and purpose through their construction 
and use. In this regard, as is the case with African art in more general 
terms, aesthetic value involves more than meets the eye; rather, the 
beauty of the object involves its use, the manner in which it occupies 
time and space, and the ways in which those functions speak to our 
needs and meaning.
Notes
 1. Matthew Kieran, “Introduction: A Conceptual Map of Issues in 
Aesthetics and the Philosophy of Art,” in Contemporary Debates in 
Aesthetics and the Philosophy of Art, editor, Matthew Kieran (Malden, 
MA: Blackwell, 2006), 1–8.
 2. Ibid., 1.
 3. Ibid., 3.
 4. Ibid., 6.
 5. H. Gene Blocker has employed the terms developmental and evolution-
ary to discus the distinctions between what he calls primitive aesthet-
ics and modern aesthetics because he thinks modern aesthetics evolves 
from the primitive. See H. Gene Blocker, The Aesthetics of Primitive Art 
(Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1992).
 6. E. A. Ruch and K. C. Anyanwu, African Philosophy: An Introduction to 
the Main Philosophical Trends in contemporary Africa (Rome: Catholic 
Book Agency, 1981), 271.
 7 . Paul Tillich, The Religious Situation, translated by H. Richard Niebuhr 
(New York: Henry Holt and company, 1932), 53–54.
 8. Henry John Drewal, John Pemberton III with Roland Abiodun, Yourba: 
Nine Centuries of African Art and Thought, editor, Allen Wardwell 
(New York: Center for African Art, 1989); Rowland Abiodun, Henry 
J. Drewal, and John Pemberton III, editors, The Yoruba Artist: New 
Theoretical Perspectives on African Arts (Washington, DC: Smithsonian 
Institution Press, 1994).
 9. See Allen F. Roberts and Mary Nooter Roberts with Gassia Armenian 
and Ousmane Gueye, A Saint in the City: Sufi Arts of Urban Senegal 
(Los Angeles: UCLA Fowler Museum of Cultural History, 2003).
10. Frank Willet, African Art (London: Thames and Hudson, 2002), 193; 
See Hans Himmelheber, Nigerkünstler (Stuttgart, 1935), for original 
discussion. My references are taken from Willet, 193.
11. Ibid., 193.


--- PAGE 213 ---
Elias K. Bongmba200
12. Willet, African Art , 194. See also Jan Vansina, Art History in Africa 
(London: Longman, 1984), 132.
13. Vansina, Art History in Africa , 123.
14. James Fernandez has pointed out that in some African communities, 
so m e  artists  w o r k  har d  t o  mak e  sur e  tha t  th e  surfa c e  o f  th e  o b j ect  is  
smooth and in the case of human images that the body parts show a 
balance. James Fernandez, “Principles of Opposition and Vitality in 
Fang Aesthetics,” in Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism , 25 (1966): 
53–64, 56.
15. Willet has argued that in a study done in Liberia, it was reported that 
some artists carve spontaneously, and try to represent what they have 
seen. See, Willet, African Art , 195. Fernandez has also argued that 
James Fernandez has pointed out that in some African communities, 
so m e  artists  w o r k  har d  t o  mak e  sur e  tha t  th e  surfa c e  o f  th e  o b j ect  is  
smooth and in the case of human images that the body parts show a bal-
ance, Fernandez, “Principles of Opposition,” 55.
16. Robert Farris Thompson, “Yoruba Artistic Criticism,” in The Traditional 
Artist in African Societies , editor, W. D’Azevodo (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1973): 19–61.
17. Barry Hallen, “The Art Historian as Conceptual Analyst,” Journal of 
Aesthetics and Art Criticism Vol. 37 (1979): 303–313.
18. Barry Hallen, The Good, the Bad, and the Beautiful: Discourse about Values 
in Yoruba culture (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000).
19. Ibid., 114–115.
20. Allen F. Roberts and Mary Nooter Roberts, with Gassia Armenian and 
Ousmane Gueye, A Saint in the City: Sufi Arts of Urban Senegal (Los 
Angeles: UCLA Fowler Museum of Cultural History, 2003), 47.
21. See Mary Price, The Photograph: A Strange Confined Space (Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 1994), 7.
22. Roberts and Roberts, A Saint in the City , 47.
23. An appreciation of the work of art also involves what Heidegger describes 
as the canceling power of art that refuses to be unveiled. The wisdom of 
hidden aesthetics sometimes involves understanding of power and the 
mysteries behind it that is veiled from the public.
24. Daniel Biebuyck, Tradition and Creativity in Tribal Art (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1969), 17.
25. R. Brain, Art and Society in Africa (London, 1980), 147–151.
26. M. D. W. Jeffreys, “The Wiya Tribe,” Part One, African Studies Vol. 21 
(1962): 83–104, 91.
27. Daniel Biebuyck, Lega Culture: Art, Initiation, and Moral Philosophy 
among a Central African People (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1973), 211.
28. Ibid., 212. Perhaps one thing that two different entities like ancestors 
and art share together is the fact that both are survivors. They have sur-
vived a long history, which has often been violent, brutal, and exploitive.


--- PAGE 214 ---
Aesthetics in African Art 201
See Johannes Fabian, Remembering the Present  (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1997).
29. See Allen Roberts and Mary Nooter Roberts, editors, Memory: Luba 
Arts and the Making of History (New York: Museum for African Art, 
1996).
30. John Picton, “Art, Identity, and Identification: A commentary on 
Yoruba Art Historical Studies,” in The Yoruba Artist: New Theoretical 
Perspectives on African Arts , Roland Abiodun, Henry J. Drewal, and 
John Pemberton III, editors  (Washington and London: Smithsonian 
Institution Press, 1994), 1–34, 1.
31. Rosalind Hackett, Art and Religion in Africa (London: Cassell, 1996), 
131. See Robert Farris Thompson, African Art in Motion (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1974), 209.
32. Hackett, Art and Religion in Africa , 131.
33. Ibid., 133.
34. Martha G. Anderson and Christine Muller Kreamer, in Wild Spirits, 
Strong Medicine: African Art and the Wilderness, editor. Enid Schildkrout 
(New York: Center for African Art, 1989), 58.
35. Wyatt MacGaffey, “Complexity, Astonishment and Power: The Visual 
Vocabulary of Kongo Minkisi,” in Journal of Southern African Studies 
Vol. 14, No. 2 (Special Issue on Culture and Consciousness in Southern 
Africa, January 1988): 188–203, 190; See also Wyatt MacGaffey, Art 
and Healing of the Bakongo, Commented by Themselves: Minkisi from 
the Laman Collection/Kikongo texts Translated and Edited by Wyatt 
MacGaffey (Stockhom: Folkens Museaum-Etnografiska; Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1991); Wyatt MacGaffey, Astonishment 
and Power, Introduction by Sylvia H. Williams and David C. Driskell 
(Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1993).
36. MacGaffey, Astonishment and Power , 44.
37. Ibid., 63.
38. Wyatt MacGaffey, “The Personhood of Ritual Objects: Kongo Minkisi,” 
Etnofoor Vol. 3, No. 1 (1990): 45–161, 60.
39. MacGaffey has argued that the people of Kongo did not construct mink-
isi as objects “for contemplation as art. Instead they were intended to 
create a visual effect in the context of ritual use, heightened by songs, 
drumming, dances, the distress of the occasion, and various devices con-
stituting to astonishment.” Astonishment and Power , 89.
40. Luc de Heusch, Why Marry Her? (London, 1971), 182.
41. MacGaffey, Astonishment and Power , 33.
42. Some of the writings of the students engaged by Swedish Missionary 
K. E. Laman, reported on the crucial role played by the ngagas as 
intermediaries between the spiritual world and the world of the living. 
There are times when the head of the family can actually call on the 
ancestors, especially at times when the family heads preside over family 
meetings, marriage proposals, or even at social drinking sessions.


--- PAGE 215 ---
Elias K. Bongmba202
43. In the Kongo texts, the writers made clear that the ngangas were the 
ones who owned minkisis, and used them to “minister” the powers of 
the minkisi to members of the community. It was thus important that 
the training of a nganga involved making a direct connection between 
that prospective nganga and the world of the dead from which he or she 
derived the powers they needed to serve, minister and give that power to 
people. This connection to the dead that I am extending here to include 
the ancestors meant that the nganga had to live a disciplined life and 
incorporate in his body vestments that would convey the aura and power 
of ancestors or the world of the dead. MacGaffey, Astonishment and 
Power, 50.
44. See Wyatt MacGaffey, Religion and Society in Central Africa: The Bakongo 
of Lower Zaïre (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986), 65.
45. Eugenia W. Herbert, Iron, Gender, and Power: Rituals of Transformation 
in African Societies (Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University 
Press, 1993), 136. See also MacGaffey, Religion and Society in Central 
Africa, 67. See also the mythic accounts of the founding of states in 
the region in Luc de Heusch, The Drunken King, or the Origin of the 
State, translated and annotated by Roy Willis (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1982).
46. Herbert, Iron, Gender, and Power, 136.
47. Placide Tempels, Bantu Philosophy (Paris: Présence Africaine, 1959).
48. See, Bogumil Jewsiewicki, Cheri Samba: The Hybridity of Art, con-
temporary African Art Series, #1, edited by Esther A. Dagan (Québec: 
Galarie Amrad African Art Publications, 1995).
49. Quoted in Jewsiewicki, Cheri Samba, 20.
50. Herbert Marcuse, The Aesthetic Dimension: Toward a Critique of Marxist 
Aesthetics (Boston: Beacon Press, 1978), 9.
51. Suzanne Preston Blier, African Vodun: Art, Psychology, and Power 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 14.
52. Robert Farris Thompson, “The Grand Detroit N’kondi.” Bulletin of the 
Detroit Institute of Arts Vol. 56, No. 4 (1978): 207–221; Wyatt MacGaffey, 
“Complexity, Astonishment, and Power: The Visual Vocabulary of Kongo 
Minkisi.” Journal of Southern African Studies Vol. 14 (1988): 188–203; 
Wyatt MacGaffey, Art and Healing of the Bakongo.
53. Blier, African Vodun, 21.
54. Ibid., 23–24.
55. Ibid., 27.
56. Hackett, Art and Religion in Africa , 121; see Renaat, Devisch, 
“Mediumistic Divination among the Northern Yaka of Zaire,” in African 
Divination Systems, 112–132, Philip Peek, editor (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1991).
57. Hackett, Art and Religion in Africa , 122.
58. Hackett, Rosalind Hackett, Art and Religion in Africa, 125.
59. Ibid.


--- PAGE 216 ---
Aesthetics in African Art 203
60. Henry John Drewal, John Pemberton III with Roland Abiodon, Yoruba: 
Nine Centuries of African Art and Thought (New York: The Center for 
African Art, 1989), 17.
61. Hackett, Art and Religion in Africa , 125; Roland Abiodon, “Ifa Art 
Objects: An Interpretation Based on Oral Traditions,” in Yoruba Oral 
Tradition: Poetry in Music, Dance and Drama , editor, Wande Abimbola 
(London: IAP., 1975), 421–558.
62. John Henry Drewal, “Introduction: Yoruba Art and Life as Journeys,” 
in The Yoruba Artists, editors, Roland Abiodon, Henry J. Drewal and 
John Pemberton III (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 
1994), 196.


--- PAGE 217 ---
This page intentionally left blank


--- PAGE 218 ---
Selected Bibliography
Abiodun, Rowland, Henry J. Drewal, and John Pemberton III, editors. The 
Yoruba Artist: New Theoretical Perspectives on African Arts  (Washington, 
DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1994).
Alexander, Valentina. “Breaking Every Fetter?” To What Extent Has the Black 
Led Church in Britain Developed a Theology of Liberation?  (Ph.D. disser-
tation, University of Warwick, 1997).
Anderson, Victor. Beyond Ontological Blackness (New York: Continuum, 
1995).
Antias, Floya. “Evaluating ‘Diaspora’: Beyond Ethnicity?” Sociology 32, No. 3 
(August 1998): 557–580.
Arthur, Linda B., editor. Religion, Dress and the Body  (New York: Berg, 
1999).
Aschenbrenner, Joyce. Katherine Dunham: Dancing a Life  (Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press, 2002).
Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin. The Empire Writes Back: 
Theory and Practice in Post-Colonial Literatures  (New York: Routledge, 
2002).
Austin-Broos, Diane J. Jamaica Genesis: Religion and the Politics of Moral 
Orders (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997).
Averill, Gage. A Day for the Hunter, a Day for the Prey: Popular Music and 
Power in Haiti (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997).
Baldwin, Lewis V . Towards the Beloved Community: Martin Luther King Jr. 
and South Africa  (Cleveland, OH: Pilgrim Press, 1995).
Barnet, Miguel. “La Regla de Ocha: The Religious System of Santería.” In 
Sacred Possessions: Vodou, Santería, Obeah, and the Caribbean , 79–100. 
Editors, Margarite Fernández Olmos and Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert 
(New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1997).
Bastide, Roger. The African Religions of Brazil (Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1978).
Beckford, Robert. Dread and Pentecostal: A Political Theology for the Black 
Church in Britain (London: SPCK, 2000).
———. God and the Gangs: An Urban Toolkit for Those Who Won’t Be Bought 
Out, Scared Out, or Sold Out  (London: DLT, 2004).
———. Jesus Dub: Theology, Music and Social Change  (London: Routledge, 
2006).


--- PAGE 219 ---
Selected Bibliography206
Benson, LeGrace. “Kiskeya-Lan Guinée-Eden: The Utopian Vision in 
Haitian Painting.” Callaloo  15, No. 3 (Summer 1992): 726–734.
Berger, John. Ways of Seeing (New York: Viking Press, 1973).
Biebuyck, Daniel. Tradition and Creativity in Tribal Art (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1969).
———. Lega Culture: Art, Initiation, and Moral Philosophy among a Central 
African People (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973).
Blier, Suzanne Preston. African Vodun: Art, Psychology, and Power (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1995).
Blocker, H. Gene. The Aesthetics of Primitive Art (Lanham, MD: University 
Press of America, 1992).
Bourdieu, Pierre. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984).
Brand, Dionne. Bread out of Stone: Recollections, Sex, Recognitions, Race, 
Dreaming, Politics (Toronto: Coach House Press, 1994).
Bredin, Hugh and Liberato Santoro-Brienza. Philosophies of Art and Beauty: 
Introducing Aesthetics (Edinburgh, UK: Edinburgh University Press, 
2000).
Brown, Diana. Umbanda Religion and Politics in Urban Brazil (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1994).
Bruzzi, Stella. Undressing Cinema: Clothing and Identity in the Movies  (New 
York and London: Routledge, 1997).
Bruzzi, Stella and Pamela Church Gibson, editors. Fashion Cultures: Theories, 
Histories and Analysis (London: Routledge, 2000).
Burdick, John. Looking for God in Brazil, the Progressive Catholic Church in 
Urban Brazil’s Religious Arena (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1993).
Butler, Anthea. Women in the Church of God in Christ: Making a Sanctified 
World (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007).
Calley, William. God’s People: West Indian Pentecostal Sects in England  
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1965).
Castronovo, Russ. Beautiful Democracy: Aesthetics and Anarchy in a Global 
Era (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007).
Cone, James, H. Black Theology & Black Power , 125–126 (San Francisco, 
CA: Harper & Row, 1989).
Cone, James, H. God of the Oppressed  (New York: Harper & Row, 1975).
———. A Black Theology of Liberation , Twentieth Anniversary Edition 
(Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1990).
Conner, Randy P. and David Hatfield Sparks. Queering Creole Spiritual 
Traditions: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Participation in 
African-Inspired Traditions in the Americas  (New York: Harrington Park 
Press, 2004).
Crawford, A. Elaine Brown. Hope in the Holler: A Womanist Theology  
(Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox 2002).
Danticat, Edwidge and Jonathan Demme. Island on Fire (New York: Kaliko 
Press, 1997).


--- PAGE 220 ---
Selected Bibliography 207
Danto, Arthur C. The Body/Body Problem: Selected Essays (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1999).
———. The Abuse of Beauty: Aesthetics and the Concept of Art  (Chicago: 
Open Court, 2003).
Davis, Angela. “Afro Images: Politics, Fashion and Nostalgia.” In Soul: Black 
Power, Politics and Pleasure . Editors, Monique Guillory and Richard C. 
Green (New York: New York University Press, 1998), 23–31.
Davis, Wade. Passage of Darkness: The Ethnobiology of the Haitian Zombie  
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1988).
Dayan, Joan. “Vodoun, or the Voice of the Gods.” In Sacred Possessions: 
Vodou, Santería, Obeah, and the Caribean , 13–36. Editors, Margarite 
Fernández Olmos and Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert (New Brunswick, NJ: 
Rutgers University Press, 1997).
de la Fuente, Alejandro. A Nation for All: Race, Inequality, and Politics in 
Twentieth-Century Cuba . (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press, 2001).
De La Torre, Miguel A. “Ochún: (N)Either the (M)Other of All Cubans (n)
or the Bleached Virgin,” in Journal of the American Academy of Religion  
69, No. 4 (December 2001): 837–861.
———. Santería: The Beliefs and Ritual of a Growing Religion in America  
(Grand Rapids, MI: W. B. Eerdmans, 2004).
———. “Rethinking Mulatez.” In Rethinking Latino(a) Religion and 
Identity. Editors, Miguel A. De La Torre and Gastón Espinosa (Cleveland, 
OH: Pilgrim Press, 2006): 158–175.
Deren, Maya. Divine Horsemen: The Living Gods of Haiti  (Kingston, NY: 
McPherson, 1953).
Diamond, Jared. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed  (New York: 
Viking, 2005).
Douglas, Kelly Brown. The Black Christ (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1994).
———. The Black Church and Sexuality  (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 
2003).
———. What’s Love Got to Do with It? (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 2005).
Drewal, Henry John and John Pemberton III with Roland Abiodon. 
Yoruba: Nine Centuries of African Art and Thought  (New York: Center 
for African Art, 1989).
Dyson, Michael Eric. The Michael Eric Dyson Reader  (New York: Basic 
Civitas Books, 2004).
Evans, Jr., James H. We Have Been Believers: An African American Systematic 
Theology (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1992).
Fabian, Johannes. Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes Its Object  
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1983).
———. Remembering the Present  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1997).
Fagan, Richard R., Richard A. Brody, and Thomas J. O’Leary. Cubans in 
Exile: Disaffection and the Revolution  (Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 1968).


--- PAGE 221 ---
Selected Bibliography208
Fanon, Frantz. Black Skin, White Masks  (New York: Grove Press, 1967).
Farley, Edward. Faith and Beauty: A Theological Aesthetic  (Burlington, VT: 
Ashgate, 2001).
Fernandez, James. “Principles of Opposition and Vitality in Fang Aesthetics,” 
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 25 (1966): 53–64.
Fishburn, Katherine . Richard Wright’s Hero: The Faces of a Rebel-Victim  
(Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1977).
Freire, Paulo. Pedagogy of the Oppressed  (New York: Continuum, 1981).
Galembo, Phyllis. Vodou: Visions and Voices of Haiti  (Berkeley: Ten Speed 
Press, 1998).
Gates, Jr., Henry Louis, editor. “Race,” Writing, and Difference  (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1986).
Geertz Clifford. “Ethos, World-view, and the Analysis of Sacred Symbols.” 
In The Interpretation of Cultures  (New York: Basic Books, 1973).
Gilroy, Paul. There Ain’t No Black in the Union Jack: The Cultural Politics of 
Race and Nation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991).
———. The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1993).
Goldschmidt, Henry and Elizabeth McAlister, editors. Race, Nation and 
Religion in the Americas  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004).
Gomez, Michael, editor. Diasporic Africa: A Reader (New York: New York 
University Press, 2006).
Gordon, Lewis, editor. Existence in Black: An Anthology of Black Existential 
Philosophy (New York: Routledge, 1997).
Grimes, Ronald L., editor. Readings in Ritual Studies  (Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1996).
Hackett, Rosalind. Art and Religion in Africa  (London: Cassell, 1996).
Hall, Stuart. “What Is the Black in Black Popular Culture?” In Black Popular 
Culture. Editor, Gina Dent (Seattle, WA: Bay Press, 1992), 21–36.
Hallen, Barry. “The Art Historian as Conceptual Analyst.” Journal of 
Aesthetics and Art Criticism 37 (1979): 303–313.
———. The Good, the Bad, and the Beautiful: Discourse about Values in 
Yoruba Culture (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000).
Hart, Stephen M. and Wen-chin Ouyang. A Companion to Magical Realism  
(Woodbridge, UK: Tamesis, 2005).
Herbert, Eugenia W. Iron, Gender, and Power: Rituals of Transformation 
in African Societies  (Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University 
Press, 1993).
Hood, Robert E. Must God Remain Greek: Afro-Cultures and God-Talk  
(Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1990).
hooks, bell. Reel to Real: Race, Sex, and Class at the Movies  (New York: 
Routledge, 1996).
———. Communion: The Female Search for Love (New York: HarperCollins, 
2002).
Hopkins, Dwight. Heart and Head: Black Theology, Past, Present, and Future 
(New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002).


--- PAGE 222 ---
Selected Bibliography 209
Hunter, Margaret L. Race, Gender, and the Politics of Skin Tone  (New York 
and London: Routledge, 2005).
Hurbon, Laënnec. “Vodou: A Faith for Individual, Family, and Community” 
from Dieu dans le vaudou Haitïen . Callaloo 15, No. 3 (Summer 1992): 
787–796.
Jalloh, Alusine and Stephen E. Maizlish, editors. The African Diaspora  
(College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press, 1996).
Jewell, Sue K. From Mammy to Miss America and Beyond: Cultural Images 
and the Shaping of US Social Policy  (London: Routledge, 1993).
Jewsiewicki, Bogumil. Cheri Samba: The Hybridity of Art , Contemporary 
African Art Series, #1. Editor, Esther A. Dagan (Québec: Galarie Amrad 
African Art, 1995).
Johns, Cheryl Bridges. Pentecostal Formation: A Pedagogy among the 
Oppressed (Sheffield, UK: Sheffield Academic Press, 1998).
Kennedy, J. “Haitian Art Inspired by Vodun.” American Visions  6, No. 3 
(June 1991): 14–18.
Kieran, Matthew. “Introduction: A Conceptual Map of Issues in Aesthetics 
and the Philosophy of Art.” In Contemporary Debates in Aesthetics and 
the Philosophy of Art . Editor, Matthew Kieran (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 
2006), 1–8.
Korem, Albin Kweku and Mawutodzi Kodzo Abissath. Traditonal Wisdom 
in African Proverbs  (Ghana: Publishing Trends, 2004).
Koser, Kahlid, editor. New African Diasporas  (New York: Routledge, 
2003).
Laguerre, Michel. Voodoo and Politics in Haiti (New York: St. Martins, 
1989).
Locke, Alain, editor. The New Negro (New York: Atheneum, 1986).
Lowenthal, Ira P. “Ritual Performance and Religious Experience: A Service 
for the Gods in Southern Haiti.” Journal of Anthropological Research  34, 
No. 3 (1978): 392–414.
Lynch, Gordon. Understanding Theology and Popular Culture  (London: 
Wiley-Blackwell, 2005).
———, editor. Between Sacred and Profane: Researching Theology and 
Popular Culture (London: I. B. Tauris, 2007).
MacGaffey, Wyatt. “Complexity, Astonishment and Power: The Visual 
Vocabulary of Kongo Minkisi.” Journal of Southern African Studies  14, 
No. 2. Special Issue on Culture and Consciousness in Southern Africa 
(January 1988): 188–203.
———. Astonishment and Power , introduction by Sylvia H. Williams and 
David C. Driskell (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1993).
MacRobert, Iain. Black Pentecostalism, its Origins, Functions and Theology  
(Ph.D. dissertation, University of Birmingham, 1989).
Marcuse, Herbert. The Aesthetic Dimension: Toward a Critique of Marxist 
Aesthetics  (Boston: Beacon Press, 1978).
Martin, F. David. “What Is Christian Painting?” Leonardo 10, No. 1 (Winter 
1977): 23–29.


--- PAGE 223 ---
Selected Bibliography210
Martin, Jr., James Alfred. Beauty and Holiness: The Dialogue between Aesthetics 
and Religion (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990).
McCarthy Brown, Karen. Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1991).
McCracken, G. Culture and Consumption (Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1990).
Mellor, Philip A. and Chris Shilling, Re-forming the Body: Religion, 
Community and Modernity (London: Sage, 1997).
Mercer, Kobena. Welcome to the Jungle: New Positions in Black Cultural 
Studies (London: Routlege, 1994).
Métraux, Alfred. Voodoo in Haiti, translated by Hugo Charteris (New York: 
Schocken, 1972).
Mohammed, Patricia. “The Sign of the Loa.” Small Axe (September 2005): 
124–149.
Moore, Carlos. Castro, the Blacks, and Africa  (Los Angeles: Center for Afro-
American Studies, University of California, 1988).
Moreau de St. Méry, Méderic. Description Topographique, physique, civile, 
et historique de la partie française de l’Isle de Saint - Domingue . Editors, 
Blanche Maurel and Etienne Taillemite (Paris, Société Française d’Histoire 
d’Outre Mer, 1984).
Morgan, David. Visual Piety: A History and Theory of Popular Religious 
Images (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998).
Morris, Gay. A Game for Dancers: Performing Modernism in the Postwar 
Years, 1945 –1960 (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2006).
Murphy, Joseph. Working the Spirit: Ceremonies of the African Diaspora.  
Boston: Beacon Press, 1994.
Nuttall, Sarah, editor. Beautiful Ugly: African and Diaspora Aesthetics  
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2006).
Oboe, Annalisa and Anna Scacchi, editors. Recharting the Black Atlantic: 
Modern Cultures, Local Communities, Global Connections  (New York: 
Routledge, 2008).
Ortiz, Renato. A Morte Branca do Feiticeiro Negro  (Petropolois Rio de 
Janeiro: Editora Vozes, 1978).
Palmie, Stephan. Africas of the Americas: Beyond the Search for Origins in the 
Study of Afro-Atlantic Religions  (Boston: Brill, 2008).
Paris, Peter J. The Spiritualities of African Peoples: The Search for a Common 
Moral Discourse (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1995).
Patterson, Tiffany Ruby and Robin D. G. Kelley, “Unfinished Migrations: 
Reflections on the African Diaspora and the Making of the Modern 
World,” African Studies Review  43, No. 1. Special Issue on the Diaspora 
(April 2000): 11–45.
Pérez Jr., Louis A. Cuba: Between Reform and Revolution (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1988).
Philips, Caryl. The European Tribe (London: Faber and Faber, 1987).
Pinn, Anthony B., editor. By These Hands: A Documentary History of African 
American Humanism (New York: New York University Press, 2001).


--- PAGE 224 ---
Selected Bibliography 211
———. African American Humanist Principles: Thinking and Living Like 
the Children of Nimrod (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004).
Pinn, Anthony and Dwight Hopkins, editors. Loving the Body: Black Religious 
Studies and the Erotic  (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004).
Price, Mary. The Photograph: A Strange Confined Space  (Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press, 1994).
Raboteau, Albert. Slave Religion  (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1978).
Rahner, Karl. Theological Investigations , translated by David Bourke 
(London: Darton, Longman & Todd, 1973).
———. Foundations of Christian Faith: Introduc tion to the Idea of 
Christianity , translated by William V. Dych (New York: Seabury, 1978).
Rampersad, Arnold, editor. Richard Wright: A Collection of Critical Essays  
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1995).
Reddie, Anthony G. Faith, Stories and the Experience of Black Elders (London: 
Jessica Kingsley, 2001).
———. Acting in Solidarity: Reflections in Critical Christianity  (London: 
DLT, 2005).
———. Black Theology in Transatlantic Dialogue: Inside Looking Out, 
Outside Looking In  (New York: Palgrave, 2006a).
———. Dramatizing Theologies: A Participative Approach to Black God-Talk  
(London: Equinox, 2006b).
Rigaud, Odette, Alfred Métraux, and Rhoda Métraux. “The Feasting of the 
Gods in Haitian Vodu.” Primitive Man 19, Nos. 1/2 (1946): 1–58.
Roberts, Allen F. and Mary Nooter Roberts, editors. Memory: Luba Arts and 
the Making of History  (New York: Museum for African Art, 1996).
Roberts, Allen F. and Mary Nooter Roberts with Gassia Armenian and 
Ousmane Gueye. A Saint in the City: Sufi Arts of Urban Senegal  (Los 
Angeles: UCLA Fowler Museum of Cultural History, 2003).
Rodman, Selden. Where Art Is Joy—Haitian Art: The First Forty Years (New 
York: Ruggles de Latour, 1988).
Russell, Candice and Axelle Liautaud. Allegories of Haitian Life from the 
Collection of Jonathan Demme  (Miami, FL: Bass Museum of Art, 2006).
Scott, James C. Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts  
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992).
Sewell, Toney. Black Masculinities and Schooling: How Black Boys Survive 
Modern Schooling  (London: Trenthan Books).
Shilling, Chris. The Body and Social Theory , Second Edition (London: Sage, 
1993/2003).
St. Augustine. City of God , translated by M. Dods (Edinburgh, UK: T.&T. 
Clark, 1872).
Steele, Valerie. “Anti Fashion: The 1970s.” Fashion Theory: The Journal of 
Dress, Body 1, No. 3 (1997): 279–296.
Stewart, Dianne M. Three Eyes for the Journey: African Dimensions of the 
Jamaican Religious Experience  (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2005).


--- PAGE 225 ---
Selected Bibliography212
Sturge, Mark. Look What the Lord Has Done! An Exploration of Black 
Christian Faith in Britain  (London: Scripture Union, 2005).
Thomas, Hugh. Cuba: The Pursuit of Freedom, Updated Edition (New York: 
Da Cap Press, 1998).
Thomas, Linda E. Under the Canopy: Ritual Process and Spiritual Resilience 
in South Africa (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1999).
Thompson, Robert Farris. “Yoruba Artistic Criticism.” In The Traditional 
Artist in African Societies . Editor, W. D’Azevodo (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1973), 19–50.
———. African Art in Motion  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1974).
———. “From the Isle Beneath the Sea: Haiti’s Africanizing Vodou Art.” In 
Sacred Arts of Haitian Vodou . Editor, Donald Cosentino (Los Angeles: 
UCLA Fowler Museum of Cultural History, 1995).
Tillich, Paul. The Religious Situation, translated by H. Richard Niebuhr 
(New York: Henry Holt, 1932).
Tomlin, Carol. Black Language and Style in Sacred and Secular Contexts  
(New York: Caribbean Diaspora Press, 1999).
Townes, Emile M., editor. Embracing the Spirit  (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis 
Books, 1997).
Turner, Bryan. The Body and Society  (Oxford: Blackwell, 1984).
Vansina, Jan. Art History in Africa  (London: Longman, 1984).
Werbner, Richard, editor. Memory and the Postcolony  (London: Zed Books, 
1998).
West, Cornel. Prophesy Deliverance: An Afro-American Revolutionary 
Christianity  (Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox, 1982).
———. Race Matters  (Boston: Beacon Press, 2001).
Wexler, Anna. “ ‘I Am Going to See Where My Oungan Is’: The Artistry 
of a Haitian Vodou Flagmaker.” In Sacred Possessions: Vodou, Santería, 
Obeah, and the Caribbean , 59–78. Editors, Margarite Fernández Olmos 
and Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University 
Press, 1997).
Willet, Frank. African Art (London: Thames and Hudson, 2002).
Williams, Delores. Sisters in the Wilderness: The Challenge of Womanist God-
Talk (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1993).
Williams, Simon J. and Gillian Bendelow. The Lived Body: Sociological Themes, 
Embodied Issues  (New York: Routledge, 1998).
Wimberly, Anne E. Streaty and Evelyn L. Parker, editors. In Search of Wisdom: 
Faith Formation in the Black Church  (Nashville, TN: Abingdon, 2002).
Woodson, Carter G. The Mis-Education of the Negro  (Washington, DC: 
Associated Publishers, 1933).
Wright, Richard. Eight Men (New York: HarperPerennial, 1989).
———. The Outsider, Library of America Edition (New York: HarperPerennial, 
1991).


--- PAGE 226 ---
Academy Award, 71, 72, 76
active radicalism, 137–8, 142, 
144, 149
aesthetics, 1–11, 13–15, 19, 24, 
25, 28, 53–5, 65, 66, 68, 91, 
122, 126, 142, 149, 161, 167, 
175–7, 179–81, 183, 185, 
187–91, 193, 195–200
definition of, 2
of jazz, 161
religious, 54
ritual, 66
theological, 28, 175, 187, 
195, 198
African American, 20, 21, 27, 
41, 127
Christians, 24, 27
Women, 10, 38, 39
African diaspora, 1–5, 7, 9, 11, 12, 
166, 178
African Initiated Churches (AIC), 
10, 177
AIC, 10, 177–9, 181
Agwe Tawoyo, 108
Ahmed, Aaqil, 141
Alexander, Valentina, 137–8
anachronism, 163
Angola, 5, 108
Anonymous Santería, 115
Anyanwu, Dr. K. C., 188
Apartheid, 162, 169, 177–8, 
180–3
Aphrodite, 113, 126
architecture, 6
Armstrong, Louis, 163
art, 7–10, 14, 42, 92–3, 97, 102, 
110, 139, 142, 156, 159–62, 
164–6, 179, 187–201
African, 10, 187–8, 191, 196, 
199, 201–2
Haitian, 91, 93
Yoruba, 189
Aschenbrenner, Joyce, 100
Ashé, 95, 115–16, 123, 128, 
130–1
Ashimolowo, Matthew, 165
Atibon Legba, 108
Auguste, Toussaint, 93–7, 100, 
109–10
see also Papa Zaca
Augustine, 184
Ayida Wedo, 108
Azaka Mede, 108
azeite de dendê, 54, 56, 57, 59, 64, 
66, 67
Bâ, Mariama, 189
see also So Long a Letter
Baartman, Sara, 85–6
see also Hottentot Venus
Bamba, Amadou, 190
Bassett, Angela, 72, 78
Bastide, Roger, 68
batáa, 123
Bazile, Clotaire, 91–3, 97
BBC, 140, 143–4
BBC 2, 141
BBC 4, 140
BBC Religious Education, 140
Black Britain Unit, 141
Index


--- PAGE 227 ---
Index214
beautiful, 25, 26, 29, 113, 143, 
176, 180, 183–5, 188–93, 196
“black is,” 25
beauty, 6, 7, 19, 30, 33, 34, 42, 45, 
59, 74, 77–8, 80, 85, 91–3, 
125, 131, 175–7, 179, 180, 
182–5, 187–91, 194, 196, 199
definition of, 176
of improvisation, 161
as liberation, 25–8
as a theological category, 1, 10
theories of, 187
white codes of, 77
Beavers, Louise, 71
Beckford, Robert, 10, 139, 144, 162
Bedwardism, 146
beiin, 190
Belafonte, Harry, 78
Bell, Catherine, 73
Bendelow, Gillian, 8
Benin, 55, 108, 197
Benson, LeGrace, 91
Berry, Halle, 72, 74, 76–80
Bible, 41, 157, 158, 161–7
Hebrew, 161
see also Holy Scripture
Biebyuck, Daniel, 191
Bigaud, Wilson, 92
Birt, Robert, 30
bisexual, 123, 167
bitch, 38, 39, 43, 44, 50
“bitchiness,” 38
last bit of, 38
Bizango, 106
black
Christian, 24, 29–32, 37, 39, 
136, 149, 155, 157–8, 165, 167
Christianity, 20, 31, 155, 165–6
ontologically, 20–1, 126
people, 21, 73, 75, 77, 139, 153, 
155–8, 160–4, 169, 171, 
180–2
preachers, 162
religion, 11, 15, 19, 23, 149, 155
theology, 10, 20–3, 30, 33, 84, 
162, 164–7, 171
Black Atlantic , 2, 146
see also Gilroy, Paul
black beans, 60, 64, 65, 67
Black bodies, 2, 4–9, 11, 23, 24, 
183, 184
construction of, 5, 6
female, 37, 71–87
as a matter of aesthetics, 2, 10
as a means of communication, 6
reified, 6
sexuality, 39–40, 42, 49–52, 
72–4
social system, 4, 6–7
as ugly, 6, 39
Black Britain Unit, 141
Black Church, 10, 20, 37, 39–43, 
46–51, 85, 143, 166, 171
black female spectatorship, 73, 75
see also hooks, bell
black labyrinth, 3, 4, 6, 9, 15
black suit, 135, 142–4, 146–9
black women, 5, 10, 21, 37–40, 42, 
43, 45–51, 71–7, 79, 80, 87
dark-skinned, 72, 74
light-skinned, 74
blackness, 7, 21, 33, 71, 86, 143–4, 
147, 156
Blakey, Art, 161
blanqueamiento, 118
Blier, Susanne, 197
blood, 10, 54, 55, 61–3, 66, 68, 69, 
85, 121, 126, 128
bodies, 5–13, 24, 37, 39, 42, 43, 45, 
46, 48–52, 65, 67, 71, 74, 83, 
93, 99, 104, 109, 114, 182–4
black, 2, 4–9, 11, 23, 24, 183, 184
human, 24
material, 6
social, 6
body, 4–14, 19, 23–6, 28–33, 
37–43, 45–50, 53, 57, 59, 
61–2, 65, 67–8, 71, 76, 82, 84, 
86, 93, 95, 99, 106, 109, 123, 
128, 146, 149, 169, 178, 181, 
183–4, 192–3, 200, 202
as metaphor, 4, 5, 9


--- PAGE 228 ---
Index 215
spiritualized, 46
as symbol, 4
Bongmba, Elias K., 10, 187
Bourdieu, Pierre, 65
Britain, 10, 135–6, 138–44, 148–9, 
154, 163, 169
see also United Kingdom
British Academy of Film and 
Television Award (BAFTA), 
140–1
Broos, Diane Austin, 144
Brosnan, Pierce, 8
Brown, Diana, 68
Brown, Karen McCarthy, 120, 
121, 130
Buddha, 63, 64
Burdick, John, 68
Butler, Anthea, 136
Butler, Judith, 14
bwami, 191
caboclos, 53, 57
Calley, William, 136
Cameroon, 191
Canada, 75
Candomblé, 55–8, 63, 69
Cannon, Katie, 38, 49
Caribbean, 1–3, 9, 10, 75, 83, 89, 
99, 120, 130, 135, 137, 138, 
144–6, 154–5, 168
African Caribbean, 135–8, 140, 
146–8, 154, 170
Afro-Caribbean, 10
Carroll, Diahnn, 72
Carter, Donald, 3
cartography, 1, 2, 4, 6
Castro, Fidel, 118
Castronovo, Russ, 7
Catholic, 55, 63, 92, 115, 129
Saints, 55, 92, 109
Centre d’Art in Port-au-Prince, 92, 
93, 97, 102, 105, 109
Changó, 124–5, 131
see also Xangô
chattel, 38, 43, 46, 47
slavery, 22, 37
Christology, 20, 21, 33, 136, 141
Black Theology, 21, 33
race-based, 21
Womanist, 21
chromolithographs, 92, 109
Chronic Poverty Research Centre at 
the University of the Western 
Cape, 178
civil rights movement, 74
Civil War, 77
classism, 21, 25, 39, 43
colonization, 3, 6, 9, 75, 122
Color Purple , The, 47, 175, 185
see also Walker, Alice
Coltrane, John, 162
Combs, Sean “Puffy,” 79
comida de santo, 65
“food of the saints”, 64, 65
complex subjectivity, quest for, 6, 
25, 26, 157
see also Pinn, Anthony
concubinage, 80, 83
Cone, James, 20–3, 33, 162, 171
Congo, 45, 55
corporality, 7
Crawford, Elaine, 154
Creole, 108, 120
Crosby, Bing, 163
Cruise, Tom, 78
Cuba, 114, 115, 117–19, 126, 
129, 130
Cuban Revolution, 118
cultural studies, 9
Dahomey, 108
Danbala, 107–8
Dandridge, Dorothy, 72, 78
Dandridge, Ruby, 71
Dash, Julie, 72, 84
see also Daughters of the Dust
Daughters of the Dust, 72, 84
see also Dash, Julie
Davis, Angela, 147
Dayan, Joan, 95
de Heusch, Luc, 194, 202
de Hoyos, Juan, 116


--- PAGE 229 ---
Index216
de Hoyos, Rodrigo, 116
De La Torre, Miguel, 10, 129–30
de St. Méry, Louis Méderic 
Moreau, 100
decorum, 38, 44
of decency, 48–50
dehumanization, 24, 38–9, 47, 
146, 157
dendezeiro, 56
Deren, Maya, 91, 97, 99–100, 
104–5, 107
determinism, 31
see also Black theology
dialectical spirituality, 153–71
Didon (luminosity), 190
divination, 104, 107, 189, 197–8
Dollar, Creflo, 165
Domond, Wilmino, 97–100
double consciousness , 84, 156–8
see also DuBois, W.E.B.
Douglas, Kelly Brown, 21, 24, 171
Douglas, Mary, 4
Douglass, Frederick, 27
drapo, 92, 97–100
dreadlocks, 84, 143–4
dress, 8, 43, 49, 95, 135–8, 
142–6, 149
see also dress style
dress style, 135–8, 143, 145
compensation, 136
paradox, 137
respect, 136–7
as signifying practice in 
documentary, 38
Du Toit, Andries, 177
dualism, 66, 74, 183–4
DuBois, W.E.B., 5, 8, 156–8
Duncan, Carol B., 10, 87
Dunham, Katherine, 100
Durkheim, Émile, 66
Dyson, Michael, 24, 34
Ejagham, 193
Ellington, Duke, 159
embodiment, 4, 23, 30, 72, 92–5, 
97, 180, 193, 197
Entralgo, José Elías, 118
Episcopal Cathedral of Sainte 
Trinité, 93
epistemology, 4, 7, 187
eschatology, 24, 155
esoteric, 158
Evans, James, 23
ewa, 191
exilic people, 155
Ezili Freda Daome, 108
Fabian, Johannes, 121
Fanon, Frantz, 5, 71, 75
Farley, Edward, 25–6
female pastors, 51
fertility, 59, 65, 95–7, 108
film, 8–10, 71–9, 81, 84–6, 
138–43, 148–9, 162–3
Fishburn, Katherine, 30
fle Ginen, 108
see also lwa
Fontaine, Joan, 78
Foreman, James, 27
Foucault, Michel, 4
Freire, Paulo, 48
frescoes, 92
Garveyism, 146
gay, 123, 167
gaze, 75, 84, 86, 104, 118–21
critical, 83
normative, 11
public, 166
Gede Nimbo, 108
Geertz, Clifford, 66
Ghana, 55
Gigun, 190
Gilroy, Paul, 2, 8, 169
see also Black Atlantic
God, 20–5, 27–31, 33, 41, 48–9, 
51–3, 57, 60, 63, 95, 114, 129, 
148, 156, 159–63, 165–7, 
175–6, 179–81, 183–5, 
192–3, 196
Black, 21, 141, 143, 147
Goldberg, Whoopi, 72, 77


--- PAGE 230 ---
Index 217
Gone with the Wind, 71–5, 77, 81, 84
see also McDaniel, Hattie
grotesque, 26, 191
habitus, 144
Hackett, Rosalind, 198
Haitian painters, 92–3, 97
Hale, Lindsay, 10, 53
Hallen, Barry, 190
Harrison, Hubert, 27
Hellenistic, 153
Herbert, Eugenia, 195
heterosexism, 21, 25
hidden eroticism, 145
High John the Conqueror, 120
Himmerlheber, Hans, 189
HIV, 183
Hobson, Janell, 86
Holliday, Billie, 72
Hollywood, 71–4, 76, 78, 81, 
85, 141
Holy Scripture, 158, 162
see also Bible; Word of God
Holy Spirit, 153, 165
Hood, Robert, 153
hooks, bell, 37, 73, 75–6, 86, 185
Hopkins, Dwight, 148
Hottentot Venus, 74, 86
see also Baartman, Sara
House of Father John, 57–65, 68
House of Saint Benedict, 58–9, 
62–4, 66
humanism, 19–35
humanist, 24, 27–33
Hunter, Margaret L., 78
Ifarahon (visibility), 190
imago dei, 179–80, 183–4
Imitation of Life, 85
immanence, 156, 160
improvisation, 157–9, 161–8
incarnation, 24, 162
intertextuality, 78
Jacobs, Harriet, 77
jazz, 120–1, 157–68, 170–1
Jean, Nehemy, 101–2, 104
Jesus, 20, 22, 29, 32, 75, 140–1, 
159, 161, 163–8, 171, 181
as jazz musician, 164
Jezebelle, 39, 49
jijora, 190
Jones, Lawrence, 155–6
Jurema, 53–5, 68
Jurgens, Kurt, 78
Kardec, Allen, 55
Kieran, Mathew, 187–8
King, Martin Luther Jr., 20, 
169, 178
Kingdom of God, 22, 159
Kuba, 190
Labalenn, 108
Laguerre, Michel, 106
Lakshmi, 126
Laman, K. E., 194, 201
Lasirenn, 108
Lawrence, Stephen, 147
Léandre, Jean, 105, 108
Lee, Spike, 76
Lega, 191–2
lesbian, 167
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 65
loa, 92, 105
Locke, Alain, 29
logo-centric, 139, 197
Luciana, Dona, 53–9, 62–6, 68
Luke 8: 40–8, 165–8
lwa, 10, 91–101, 103–9, 192
see also mystères
Lynch, Willie, 37–8, 47
MacGaffey, Wyatt, 193–4, 201
MacRobert, Iain, 136
Magic Realism, 154
Mama Lola, 120–1
Man Who Lived Underground, The , 
28–9
see also Wright, Richard
Marasa Dosou Dosa, 108
Marcuse, Herbert, 197


--- PAGE 231 ---
Index218
Martin, F. David, 110
materiality, 4, 7, 24
mbunwarong, 192
McDaniel, Hattie, 71–2, 74, 
77, 79
meaning, 3, 5–10, 20, 22–3, 25–6, 
29–31, 39, 45, 69, 109, 122, 
138–9, 142, 148–9, 162, 166, 
188, 191, 196, 198–9
fullness of, 26
meaning-making, 41, 73
metaphysical postulations, 161
Mineiro, José, 60–1, 67
miscegenation, 117–18
misogyny, 37, 39, 52, 145–6
Mohammed, Patricia, 92
Moltmann, Jürgen, 154
Monster’s Ball , 72–5, 77, 79–84
see also Thornton, Billy Bob
Morrison, Roy II, 24
mulatez, 118, 129–30
mulatto, 6, 60, 74, 85, 118
Murphy, Eddie, 72, 84–5
Muslim, 189
mystères, 91, 101
see also lwa
Nation of Islam (UK), 147
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored 
People (NAACP), 71
negritude, 117
Nelson, James, 23
Newton, Thandi, 78
ngungun, 192
Nicole Farhi suit, 147
Nigeria, 55, 108, 128
Nipe Bay, 116
Nku, Mokotuli, 179
Nku, Mother Christinah, 178
Nooter Roberts, Mary, 190
North America, 3, 10, 76, 
135, 148
Nuttall, Sarah, 6, 11–12, 14
nwarong society, 192
Obatalá, 128, 131
Ochún, 126–31
Odo, 190
Oggún, 124, 126, 131
Ogou Feray, 108
Ogum, 57, 60, 65
Olocun, 114, 128
Omolu, 53, 57
Orishas,114–15, 121–31
see also Orixás
Orixás, 55, 57, 60–8
see also Orishas
Ortiz, Renato, 66, 69
ounfó (temple), 95, 101, 105, 108
Oungan, 91, 104–8, 110
Papa Zaca, 93–7, 103
see also Auguste, Toussaint
Paravisini-Gebert, Lizabeth, 10, 91, 
110–11
passive radicalism, 137
see also Alexander, Valentina; 
dress style
patriarchy, 39–40, 47, 145–6
black female, 40
self-perpetuating, 48
Peter, Fry, 56
Peters, DeWitt, 109
Picton, John, 192
Pinn, Anthony, 1, 10, 15, 19, 
34, 52, 56, 115, 157, 
169–71
plaçage, 80, 83
Poitier, Sidney, 72
Pollard, Alton, 39–40
polygamy, 189
Pomba Giras, 61, 69
profanity, 45, 50
Raboteau, Albert, 153, 168
Rada, 103, 107–9
Ramphele, Mamphele, 182
Rastafarians, 143
Reddie, Anthony G., 10, 170–1
Redding, J. Saunders, 27


--- PAGE 232 ---
Index 219
redemption, 23, 33–4, 41, 83, 
139, 180
religion, 25–6, 34, 53, 55, 66, 
119–22, 126–30, 136, 138, 
141, 146, 149, 151, 155–6, 
168–9
African, 179, 181, 183, 185
Afrobrazilian, 57, 65–6, 68
anthropology of, 9
Haitian, 92
popular, 55
representation, 3, 7, 10, 74, 76, 
83–4, 91, 95, 97, 109–10, 117, 
155, 138–9, 190, 194, 197
respectability, 48–9
Rio de Janeiro, 55–6, 68–9
ritual, 8–10, 41, 53, 55–62, 66–7, 
71, 73, 79, 85, 91–4, 97–112, 
123, 154, 176–7, 181–5, 195
Roberts, Allen, 190, 199
Rodman, Selden, 92, 110–11
sacudimento, 59–60, 62, 67
salsa, 120–1
salvation, 10, 19, 21–33, 41, 50, 85
as a humanist, 30
as self-realization, 28
Samba, Cheri, 64, 196
Santería, 110–11, 115, 119, 122, 
125–30
Cuban, 10
Scarlett O’Hara, 77–80
see also Gone with the Wind
second sight, 158
see also DuBois, W.E.B.; double 
consciousness
self-realization, 27–33
sermonic moment, 41
serviteurs (believers), 91, 93, 95–6, 
101–4, 106, 109
sexism, 21, 25, 37–52, 146
sexuality, 13, 34, 39–42, 49–52, 
72–4, 86–7, 114, 141, 
145, 171
Shillings, Chris, 5
So Long a Letter , 189
see also Bâ, Mariama
soteriology, 19–21, 24, 27–33
Souls of Black Folk, The, 156, 169
see also DuBois, W.E.B.
South Africa, 10, 86, 169, 
176–85
South America, 1, 3, 9–11, 17
spectatorship, 71–5, 86
St. John’s Apostolic Faith Mission 
Church, 178–9, 183
Starr, Ringo, 160
stereotypes, 39–40, 43, 72–7, 84
stereotypical images, 74, 84, 109
as asexual, 74
as hypersexual, 72, 77, 86–7
see also representation
Stewart, Dianne M., 150, 153
Stickney, Phyllis Yvonne, 77
Sturge, Mark, 148
superiority, 7, 179
symbiotic convergence, 97
syncretism, 135
taboo, 41, 44, 46, 50, 65, 167
Taíno, 116–17, 129
taste, 50, 55, 65–6, 69, 145, 
183–4, 188
Tawoyo, Agwe, 108
theology, 9–10, 34, 150, 161, 168
Black, 10, 20–3, 30, 33–4, 162, 
164–71
liberation, 19–20, 137
political, 138
white, 169
Thixo (Jehovah), 181
Thomas, Linda E., 10, 178
Thompson, Robert Farris, 14, 111, 
190, 200–2, 212
Thornton, Billy Bob, 75, 77–8
see also Monster’s Ball
Tillich, Paul, 24, 188, 199, 212
Togo, 108
Trans Atlantic Slave Trade, 139
transcendence, 25, 156, 160


--- PAGE 233 ---
Index220
transgendered, 167
Turner, Bryan, 5, 13
Turner, Tina, 72
Tutu, 190
Tyson, Cicely, 72
Umbanda, 53–69, 206
see also White, Umbanda
United Kingdom, 10, 141, 165, 169
Vandenhoute, 190
Vansina, Jan, 190, 200
Velho, Gilberto, 56
Venus, 74, 86, 126
Vèvè, 92, 94, 96, 103–4
Victorian ethic, 49
Virgen de la Caridad del Cobre, La, 
115–20, 126, 129
as white, 117
whitening, 119
Vodou, 10, 91–112, 205–12
Walker, Alice, 27, 47–8, 52, 175
Washington, Denzel, 72
Web, Chic, 161
Wedo, Ayida, 108
West, Cornel, 11–12, 140, 
150–1, 212
Westfield, Nancy Lynne, 10, 37–8
Wexler, Anna, 91–3, 110, 212
White, 10, 71, 74, 115–17, 139, 
169, 179
bodies, 8–9
people, 60, 66, 76
superiority, 7
theology, 169
Umbanda, 55–69
Williams, Delores, 23, 38, 170
Williams, Simon, 8, 13, 14, 212
Wimbush, Vincent, 161, 170
Womanist Theology, 21, 168, 
170, 206
Women’s Day (service), 43–5, 50
Woodard, Alfre, 77
Word of Faith Movement in North 
America, 148
Word of God, 163–6
see also Bible; Holy Scripture
World War II, 135
Wright, Richard, 26–35, 208, 
211–12
as existentialist, 28
Xangô, 60, 65
see also Changó
Xhosa, 181
Yemayá, 114, 118, 128, 131

